"What is the matter? Has Mrs. Stanhope been talking to you?" asked Emma,
in a low tone, as she opened the door.

"No," said Fani, "it's not that"; and he drew her into the garden, to an
arbor in a far-away corner, and there he told her about the eighty marks
that were owing for the lost boat. Emma was greatly excited.

"We can never in the world get together so much as eighty marks! What
can we do?" she cried in a tone of anguish.

"I don't know. We can't ask Mrs. Stanhope for a lot of money like that,
after all that we have done to displease her. Can't you think of any
way? If I only knew some one to borrow of! Oh, don't you know of
anybody, Emma?"

Emma had sunk upon a bench, and her eyes looked as if they would start
out of her head; she was trying so hard to see some way out of the
dilemma.

Fred came running down the walk. He wanted to know what they were about
the night before, but they had no time to answer, for just then the bell
rang for breakfast.

The meal was not a merry one. The children were all embarrassed, and
they knew why; they were all conscious that they had not behaved well to
their hostess.

Mrs. Stanhope looked at them inquiringly, but said not a word. Aunt
Clarissa nervously buttered large slices of bread as fast as she could;
the dish was piled high with them, for no one ate much.

As Mrs. Stanhope left the table, she turned to Fani and said:--

"Go into the library and wait for me. I want to speak to you."

Fani grew white; Emma, red. "It's coming now," they said to themselves.

As Mrs. Stanhope opened the door to leave the room, she was knocked
against by a house-maid who was entering in great haste.

"Excuse me, madam," she said. "I was in such a hurry. Something else has
happened. A servant has just come from the Crown Prince to say that the
young gentleman for whom Master Oscar ordered a room there has not been
at home all night; and this morning the shoemaker told them at the hotel
that he was with the young man himself last evening, and saw him running
like a crazy fellow down towards the river."

It was now Oscar's turn to grow pale.

Aunt Clarissa sent the maid away, saying that she would speak to the
hotel servant herself. She was afraid that Lina would let out the secret
of Fred's untidy room if she were allowed to go on.

Mrs. Stanhope looked very serious.

"I don't understand all this," she said, turning to Clarissa; "but if
the young stranger has anything to do with Oscar, I will be responsible
for his bill at the hotel." And she left the room.

Emma instantly rushed to the school-room, seized her portfolio, and
began to write as fast as her pen could go.

     DEAR AUNTY,--For pity's sake, help me now! Something dreadful has
     happened. I will never make any plans again as long as I live, even
     if they would be sure to come out right. I will always do just as
     mamma bids me, and never suggest anything more to Fani. I gave him
     the book just to encourage him; but he said before he looked at it
     that what he cared for most was to be an artist. And there was
     something that he could do that would make Mrs. Stanhope willing to
     have him one, only he couldn't find any way to do it. So I found a
     way. I didn't forget that I promised mamma that I wouldn't make any
     plans; but I thought this was different. Fani knew what he wanted
     to do; only he couldn't see the way clear to do it, and I was just
     going to help him. Don't you see? And there was a dreadful thing
     that happened when we tried that way; but I can't write about it
     now, it is a long story. I'll tell you by and by. But the trouble
     now is, we have lost a boat in the river; it is a poor fisherman's,
     and we must pay him for it. You will understand that we do not dare
     to tell Mrs. Stanhope anything about it. We can't ask her for so
     much money. Fani says he would rather go to work in the factory.
     But you will help us, I know, dear aunty; you will not let us
     suffer. We want eighty marks. It is terrible. But it is worth that,
     for there were two oars and a pole besides the boat. I don't ask
     you to give it to me, but only to lend it. I will keep thinking day
     and night how I can earn enough to pay you. I have some things, you
     know; my godfather's present. In my drawer in the little
     writing-table at home are six silver spoons, and a beautiful
     pincushion, and two old Easter eggs with pictures on them cut out
     of paper: dragons spitting fire, and flowers, and the sun, moon,
     and stars. You can sell them for something, I am sure; and after
     this I will sell directly everything that I get and give you the
     money. And perhaps I shall contrive to think of some way to earn
     something too; if I can I will. Oh, dearest aunty, you will help
     us, I know, for you help everybody.

     Write as soon as you can and tell us to come home. How glad we
     shall be to get there! There we can tell you all our troubles. I
     wish we could go to-morrow, and get back to you and mamma. Write
     directly, dear aunty. I send you my love a thousand thousand times.

     Your loving niece,

     EMMA.

     P.S. Aunty, dear, I have thought of another way. In Cologne I saw a
     girl who went about in the street with a basket and sold roses. Now
     I think that if Mrs. Stanhope would let me take two roses from each
     bed in her garden I should get a basket full, and I could earn a
     lot of money, I am sure. Don't you think so? With a thousand
     kisses, Your niece,

     EMMA.

     P.S. I have thought this very moment of the nicest plan of all. In
     the vineyards here they put horrid looking figures, like men with
     red beards and arms stretched out, to frighten away the birds. If
     you will send me some red stuff and some yellow, I can make figures
     a great deal more frightful, and they will sell for a great deal.
     Perhaps in this way I can pay you half the money, and I'm sure I
     shall find something else to do by and by.

     I am again and always,

     Your loving niece,

     EMMA.

Fani had been sitting for some time in the library, awaiting with a
beating heart the coming of Mrs. Stanhope. When the door opened, he
sprang to his feet; he had learned that that was the proper thing to do
when a lady entered the room. Mrs. Stanhope took a seat on the sofa, and
motioned him to take a cricket and sit down by her.

"Now tell me all about it, Fani," she began. "Tell me the exact truth
about what happened yesterday. What made you think of going out on the
water, and how did you manage it? Tell me the whole story just as it
was. Keep nothing back."

Fani obeyed. He went way back to the plans which Emma and he had made
before he left home so that he might become an artist. How pleased he
had been to take drawing-lessons, and how they made him love drawing
more and more. How glad Emma had been at his progress, and how she had
urged him to tell Mrs. Stanhope how he felt about his future career. Now
came the most important point, and Fani related it very clearly. He
wished to make a picture of the old ruin, because if he got a prize for
it he thought Mrs. Stanhope would look more favorably on his adoption of
art as a business; and Emma had thought out a way of getting a good
view of it from the river. Then followed the mishap, which occurred
because Emma did not know the strength of the current, nor understand
how different the river was from the lake on which she had been in the
habit of rowing. Fani told the whole story faithfully. Mrs. Stanhope
listened in silence to the end, and then said briefly,--

"Very well; you may go, Fani."

In the hall behind one of the pillars stood Emma, impatient to hear the
result of the interview.

"Well? well?" she asked eagerly.

"Well; it's just as it was before; I don't know any more than I did."

"Did she scold you very hard? Did she say anything about me? For I was
the one to blame."

"No, indeed; Mrs. Stanhope never scolds; but she is very angry with me,
I know, for she did not speak to me when I had told her all about it.
Generally she talks a good deal to me about all sorts of things; even
when I have done something to displease her. I am sure there is no help
for us."

Emma sighed. She knew too well how much she was to blame for this
unfortunate state of things.

Three days passed. The house was more quiet than it had been before
since the children came. A cloud was over them all. No one laughed or
talked freely or cared for amusement. All seemed waiting for some
unpleasant thing that was going to happen.

Early in the morning of the fourth day, a letter was brought to Mrs.
Stanhope, containing an enclosure for the children. The letter was from
their mother. She expressed her gratitude to Mrs. Stanhope for all her
kindness, and for the pleasure the children had enjoyed at Rosemount.
Then followed apologies and regrets for the trouble and annoyance that
the visit must have caused Mrs. Stanhope. And Mrs. Stein closed by
saying that they had too long trespassed on the indulgence of their kind
hostess, and begged her to set a time when it would be convenient to her
for them to take their leave.

The enclosure for the children contained three letters from their aunt.
Emma tore hers open first. A banknote met her delighted eyes. She ran
out of the room, and called Fani. "She has saved us!" she cried. "Oh,
isn't aunty an angel from heaven!" Fani's face shone with pleasure and
surprise. Emma thrust the money into his hand.

"Take it, and run to the fisherman's. I must read my letter"; and she
ran off to the arbor.

After an affectionate greeting it ran thus;--

"It is a crying shame, my dear girl, that this delightful visit, full of
pleasures that may never fall to your lot again, should have been
spoiled by each of you three children, only because of your
disobedience. Especially you and Oscar. Your father and mother gave you
both particular warning against what you were not to do. You both set to
work to see how you could manage to obey in all the trivial details, and
yet carry out your own plans in essentials. You both knew very well what
you were about, and have well deserved the unpleasant consequences of
your actions. I trust that you have both received a lasting lesson. How
much worse the results might have been, dear Emma, we do not dare to
think. We can only guess, though you do not tell us that you had a very
narrow escape. We trust that you will show your gratitude to God for it
by never again straying into forbidden paths. I send you the money you
asked for, in order to spare Mrs. Stanhope any trouble about it. Fani
showed a proper sense of his own folly and of his obligations to her
when he said he would make any sacrifice rather than ask her for it. I
do not lend you the money. It is a gift. But do not run in debt again.
Another time I might not be able to help you. We shall all be glad to
see you at home again."

In her letter to Oscar, aunty wrote that he deserved a much worse
punishment than he had received, for his wilful misinterpretation of his
father's warning, obeying the letter, rather than the spirit, and for
his obstinacy about the motto. The letter then continued:--

"No notice from the police nor from the court of justice has been sent
to your father; but a complaint has been lodged against you from
another quarter. Only three days after he went from home, Feklitus came
back again, without bag or baggage, as if he had fled for his life. He
told a terrible tale of some scrape into which you had led him, and from
which he had got away safe only by his own most skilful management. On
the evening of that unlucky Festival he had scampered away from his
captors with all his might, flung himself into a railway carriage, and,
travelling all night, had not stopped till he reached home. Now you see,
dear Oscar, that you have something to answer for in this affair; for
even if Feklitus was unnecessarily frightened, it does not alter the
fact that you got him involved in a most unpleasant way, and his parents
are naturally very angry with you. You must at any rate take measures to
set Mrs. Bickel's mind at rest She told me yesterday that she had lost
her sleep and her appetite, from thinking about the beautiful leather
trunk, and the six new suits of clothes, which she has no doubt the
waiters at the Crown Prince are sharing among themselves. You must go to
the hotel, pack all the clothes carefully, lock the trunk, and send it
to him. Send the keys in a separate package, and then you will have
removed one cause of their not unreasonable displeasure."

With Fred, aunty pathetically condoled on the loss of his collection;
and then she added:--

"Yet you see, my dear Fred, you are to blame after all; for I told you
not to put your creatures where they would displease Mrs. Stanhope, if
she should see them. I could not specify every such place, but I trusted
to your commonsense to tell you that beetles and caterpillars do not
belong in a writing-desk! You are such an insatiable collector! You will
have to learn moderation. If you had only been satisfied with a
reasonable number of the finest specimens, you would not have needed so
many boxes; I am very glad that Fani hindered you from asking for them
in a house where so many kindnesses were being shown to all of you. It
ill becomes guests to make unreasonable demands. After all, dear Fred, I
hope you will be able to bring home a few treasures, notwithstanding
your great loss, and we will enjoy them together."

These letters were a great relief to all; but some uneasiness still
remained. They did not know yet how Mrs. Stanhope would treat their
several delinquencies, when she knew all about them, and, besides, they
were homesick.

"What about going home?" they asked each other; and none of the letters
had mentioned the subject. They were disappointed.

As to Fani, he began to wonder what Mrs. Stanhope's plans were for him.
When would she talk with him again? Would he have to go back to the
factory? She had never since that day talked with him as she used to do;
but often he was aware that she was looking at him, long and
thoughtfully.

In Elsli's heart, too, anxiety reigned supreme; not so much for herself
as for Fani. Mrs. Stanhope was already displeased with him; and when she
found out that she had been doing wrong too, Elsli could not but fear
that her displeasure would be so severe that they should both be sent
away.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE HAPPY END.


Elsli's bedroom opened into that of Aunt Clarissa. During this time of
worry and excitement, when every day so much happened that was new and
unexpected, Clarissa found it difficult to fulfil all her household
duties with her usual promptness and regularity, so it was often very
late before she could get to her room for the night, and she always
thought Elsli was fast asleep. One evening she was even later than
usual, and she had hardly seated herself to read her evening prayer when
she was surprised to hear Elsli calling her.

"I don't feel very well, Aunt Clarissa," said the child in a feeble
voice; and before she had finished speaking her kind friend was at her
bedside. Clarissa was startled to see her heavy eyes and feverish
cheeks.

"What ails you, my dear girl?" she asked, tenderly, stroking the hot
head with her cool hand, and trying to conceal the anxiety that she
felt.

"Not much, I think," answered Elsli, with a faint smile; "I haven't been
feeling very well for a week or two; I have had a good many dizzy turns
and I've been hot and restless. I've heard you come up to bed every
night though it was so late."

"Why didn't you speak to me, dear? I might have done something to make
you sleep."

"I didn't want to trouble you and it was really nothing. I had no pain,
only heat and restlessness. But to-night I thought I must call you,
because I feel very ill, and besides I have something that I must tell
you, you know, and you told me you would hear it when you could find a
quiet time. Can you spare the time to-night, though it is so late? I
think I could go to sleep better after I have told it. It has worried me
so long." Elsli spoke feebly but eagerly; and Aunt Clarissa, full of
anxious fear, could not but assent to her request, though she was almost
afraid to have her go on; for she saw that the little girl was really
very ill.

She sat down by the bedside holding Elsli's trembling hand in her own
and gently pressing it from time to time. Elsli began:--

"I want to tell you something that I ought to have spoken of long ago.
It was not right for me to go on as I have been doing without telling
you; and I am afraid Mrs. Stanhope will be very much displeased when she
knows about it"

