never before in my life so lonely. How chance seems to throw us together
so often!"

"And we've both profited by it. The coffee is boiling now, Mr. Scott.
I've a good German coffee pot and two cups that I took from the fallen.
God rest their souls, they'll need them no more, while we do."

"The battle goes on," said John, listening a moment at the window.

"Somewhere on the hundred mile line it has continued without a break of
an instant, and it may go on this way for a week or a month. Ah, it's a
fearful war, Mr. Scott, and we've seen only the beginning! But drink the
coffee now, while it's hot. And I've warmed too, some of the cold food
from the knapsacks. German sausage is good at any time."

"And just now it's heavenly. I'm glad we have such a plentiful supply of
sausage and bread, even if we did have to take it from the dead. I want
to tell you again how pleasant it is to see you here."

"I feel that way too. We're like comrades united. Now if we only had
your English friend Carstairs, your American friend Wharton, and Lannes
we'd be quite a family group."

"I fancy that we'll see Lannes before we do Carstairs and Wharton."

"I think so too. He'll certainly be hovering today somewhere over the
ground between the two armies--either to observe the Germans or more
likely to carry messages between the French generals. I tell you, Mr.
Scott, that Philip Lannes is perhaps the most wonderful young man in
Europe. In addition to his extraordinary ability in the air he has
courage, coolness, perception and quickness almost without equal.
There's something Napoleonic about him."

"You know he's descended from the family of the famous Marshal, Lannes,
not from Lannes himself, but from a close relative, and the blood's the
same. They say that blood will tell, and don't you think that the spirit
of the great Lannes may have reappeared in Philip?"

"It's altogether likely."

"I've been thinking a lot about Napoleon. There's a wonderful picture of
him as a young republican general in a room here. Perhaps it's the
conditions around us, but at times I am sure the heroic days of the
First Republic have returned to France. The spirit that animated Hoche
and Marceau and Kleber and Bonaparte, before he became spoiled, seems to
have descended upon the French. And there were Murat, Lannes and
Lefebvre, and Berthier and the others. Think of that wonderful crowd of
boys leading the republican armies to victories over all the kings! It
seems to me the most marvelous thing in the history of war, since the
Greeks turned back the Persians."

Weber refilled his coffee cup, drank a portion of it, and said:

"I have thought of it, Mr. Scott, I have thought of it more than once.
It may be that the Gallic fury has been aroused. It has seemed so to me
since the German armies were turned back from Paris. The French have
burned more gunpowder than any other nation in Europe, and they're a
fighting race. It would appear now that the Terrible Year, 1870, was
merely an aggregation of mistakes, and did not represent either the
wisdom or natural genius of the nation."

"That is, the French were then far below normal, as we would say, but
have now returned to their best, and that the two Kaisers made the
mistake of thinking the French in their lowest form were the French in
their usual form?"

"It may be so," said Weber, thoughtfully. "Nations reckon their strength
in peace, but only war itself discloses the fact. Evidently tremendous
miscalculations have been made by somebody."

"By somebody? By whom? That's why I'm against the Kaisers and all the
secret business of the military monarchies. War made over night by a
dozen men! a third of the world's population plunged into battle! and
the rest drawn into the suffering some way or other! I don't like a lot
of your European ways."

Weber shook his head.

"We've inherited kings," he said. "But how did you find this place?"

"Accident. Stumbled on it, and mighty grateful I was, too. It kept me
warm and dry after standing so long in the Marne I thought I was bound
to turn into a fish. Isolated little place, but the Germans have been
passing near. Before sleeping last night, I went out scouting and as I
stood behind a hedge I saw a lot of them. I recognized in a motor the
Very High Born, his High Mightiness, the owner of the earth, the Prince
of Auersperg."

Weber took another drink of coffee.

"An able man and one of our most bitter enemies," he said. "A foe of
democracy everywhere. I think he was to have been made governor of
Paris, and then Paris would have known that it had a governor. I've seen
him in Alsace, and I've heard a lot about him."

"But all that's off now. I fancy that the next governor of Paris, if it
should have a governor, will be a Frenchman. But the day is advancing,
Weber; what do you think we ought to do?"

"I've been thinking of your friend Lannes. I've an idea that he'll come
for you, if he finds an interval in his duties."

"But how could he possibly find me? Why, it's the old needle in the
haystack business."

"He couldn't unless we made some sort of signal."

"There's no signal that I can make."

"But there's one that I can. Look, Mr. Scott."

He unbuttoned his long French coat, and took from his breast a roll of
red, white and blue. He opened it and disclosed a French flag about four
feet long.

"If that were put in a conspicuous place," he said, "an aviator with
glasses could see it a long way, and he would come to find out what it
meant."

"The top of a tree is the place for it!" exclaimed John. "Now if you
only had around here a real tree, or two, in place of what we call
saplings in my country, we might do some fine signaling with the flag."

"We'll try it, but I think we should go a considerable distance from the
cottage. If Germans instead of French should come then we'd have a
better chance of escaping among the hedges and vineyards."

John agreed with him and they quickly made ready, each taking his
automatic and knapsack, and leaving the fire to die of itself on the
hearth.

"I'm telling that cottage good-bye with regret," said John, as they
walked away. "I spent some normal and peaceful hours there last night
and it's a neat little place. I hope its owners will be able to come
back to it. As soon as I open the stable door, in order that the horse
may go where he will, I'll be ready."

He gave the big animal a friendly pat as he left and Marne gazed after
him with envious sorrowful eyes.

They walked a full mile, keeping close to the Marne, where the trees and
bushes were thickest, and listened meanwhile to the fourth day's
swelling roar of the battle. Its long continuance had made it even more
depressing and terrifying than in its earlier stages. To John's mind, at
least, it took on the form of a cataclysm, of some huge paroxysm of the
earth. He ate to it, he slept to it, he woke to it, and now he was
walking to it. The illusion was deepened by the fact that no human being
save Weber was visible to him. The country between the two monstrous
battle lines was silent and deserted.

"Apparently," said Weber, "we're in no danger of human interference as
we walk here."

"Not unless a shell coming from a point fifteen miles or so beyond the
hills should drop on us, or we should be pierced by an arrow from one of
our Frenchmen in the clouds. But so far as I can see there's nothing
above us, although I can make out one or two aeroplanes far toward the
east."

"The air is heavy and cloudy and that's against them, but they'll be out
before long. You'll see. I think, Mr. Scott, that we'll find a good tree
in that little grove of beeches there."

"The tall one in the center. Yes, that'll suit us."

They inspected the tree and then made a long circuit about it, finding
nobody near. John, full of zeal and enthusiasm, volunteered to climb the
tree and fasten the flag to its topmost stem, and Weber, after some
claims on his own behalf, agreed. John was a good climber, alert, agile
and full of strength, and he went up the trunk like an expert. It was an
uncommonly tall tree for France, much more than a sapling, and when he
reached the last bough that would support him he found that he could see
over all the other trees and some of the low hills. At a little distance
ran the Marne, a silver sheet, and he thought he could discern faint
puffs of smoke on the hills beyond. No human being was in sight, but
although high in the tree he could still feel the vibrations of the air
beneath the throb of so many great guns. Several aeroplanes hovered at
points far distant, and he knew that others would be on the long battle
line.

Reaching as high as he could he tied the flag with a piece of twine that
Weber had given him--the Alsation seemed to have provided for
everything--and then watched it as it unfolded and fluttered in the
light breeze. He felt a certain pride, as he had done his part of the
task well. The flag waved above the green leaves and any watcher of the
skies could see it.

"How does it show?" he called to Weber.

"Well, indeed. You'd better climb down now. If the Germans come from the
air they'll get you there, and if they come on land they'll have you in
the tree. You'll be caught between air and earth."

"That being the case I'll come down at once," said John, and he
descended the tree rapidly. At Weber's advice they withdrew to a cluster
of vines growing near, where they would be well hidden, since their
signal was as likely to draw enemies as friends.

"I think Lannes will surely see that flag," said Weber.

"Why do you have such great confidence in his coming?" asked John.

"He inspires confidence, when you see him, and there's his reputation.
I've an idea that he'll be carrying dispatches between the two wings of
the French army, dispatches of vast importance, since the different
French forces have to cooperate now along a line of four or five score
miles. Of course the telephone and the telegraph are at work, too, but
the value of the aeroplane as a scout and dispatch bearer cannot be over
estimated."

"One is coming now," said John, "and I think it has been attracted by
our flag. I take it to be German."

"Then we'd better keep very close. Still, there's little chance of our
being seen here, and the aviators, even if they suspect a presence,
can't afford to descend, leave their planes and search for anybody."

"I agree with you there. One can remain here in comparative safety and
watch the results of our signal. That machine is coming fast and I'm
quite sure it's German."

"An armored machine with two men and a light rapid fire gun in it.
Beyond a doubt it will circle about our tree."

The plane was very near now, and assuredly it was German. John could
discern the Teutonic cast of their countenances, as the two men in it
leaned over and looked at the flag. They dropped lower and lower and
then flew in circles about the tree. John, despite his anxiety and
suspense, could not fail to notice the humorous phase of it. The plane
certainly could not effect a landing in the boughs, and if it descended
to the ground in order that one of their number might get out, climb the
tree and capture the flag, they would incur the danger of a sudden swoop
from French machines. Besides, the flag would be of no value to them,
unless they knew who put it there and why.

"The Germans, of course, see that it's a French flag," he said to
Weber. "I wonder what they're going to do."

"I think they'll have to leave it," said Weber, "because I can now see
other aeroplanes to the west, aeroplanes which may be French, and they
dare not linger too long."

"And our little flag may make a big disturbance in the heavens."

"So it seems."

The German plane made circle after circle around the tree, finally drew
off to some distance, and then, as it wavered back and forth, its
machine gun began to spit fire. Little boughs and leaves cut from the
tree fell to the ground, but the flag, untouched, fluttered defiantly in
the light breeze.

"They're trying to shoot it down," said John, "and with such an unsteady
gun platform they've missed every time."

"I doubt whether they'll continue firing," said Weber. "An aeroplane
doesn't carry any great amount of ammunition and they can't afford to
waste much."

"They're through now," said John. "See, they're flying away toward the
east, and unless my imagination deceives me, their machine actually
looks crestfallen, while our flag is snapping away in the wind, haughty
and defiant."

"A vivid fancy yours, Mr. Scott, but it's easy to imagine that German
machine looking cheap, because that's just the way the men on board it
must feel. Suppose we sit down here and take our ease. No flying man
can see through those vines over our heads, and we can watch in safety.
We're sure to draw other scouts of the air, while for us it's an
interesting and comparatively safe experience."

"Our flag is certainly an attraction," said John, making himself
comfortable on the ground. "There's a bird of passage now, coming down
from the north as swift as a swallow."

"It's a little monoplane," said Weber, "and it certainly resembles a
swallow, as it comes like a flash toward this tree. I thought at first
it might be Lannes in the _Arrow_, but the plane is too small, and it's
of German make."

"I fancy it won't linger long. This is not a healthy bit of space for
lone fellows in monoplanes."

The little plane slackened its speed, as it approached the tree, and
then sailed by it at a moderate rate. When it was opposite the flag a
spurt of flame came from the pistol of the man in it, and John actually
laughed.

"That was sheer spite," he said. "Did he think he could shoot our flag
away with a single bullet from a pistol when a machine gun has just
failed? That's right, turn about and make off as fast as you can, you
poor little mono!"

The monoplane also curved around the tree, but did not make a series of
circles. Instead, when its prow was turned northward it darted off again
in that direction, going even more swiftly than it had come, as if the
aviator were ashamed of himself and wished to get away as soon as
possible from the scene of his disgrace. Away and away it flew,
dwindling to a black speck and then to nothing.

John's shoulders shook, and Weber, looking at him, was forced to smile
too.

"Well, it was funny," he said. "Our flag is certainly making a stir in
the heavens."

"I wonder what will come next," said John. "It's like bait drawing birds
of prey."

The heavens were now beautifully clear, a vault of blue velvet, against
which anything would show. Far away the cannon groaned and thundered,
and the waves of air pulsed heavily, but John noticed neither now. His
whole attention was centered upon the flag, and what it might call from
the air.

"In such a brilliant atmosphere we can certainly see our visitors from
afar," he said.

"So we can," said Weber, "and lo! another appears out of the east!"

The dark speck showed on the horizon and grew fast, coming apparently
straight in their direction. John did not believe it had seen their flag
at first, owing to the great distance, but was either a messenger or a
scout. As it soon began to descend from its great height in the air,
although still preserving a straight course for the tree, he felt sure
that the flag had now come into its view. It grew very fast in size and
was outlined with startling clearness against the burning blue of the
sky.

The approaching machine consisted of two planes alike in shape and size,
superimposed and about six feet apart, the whole with a stabilizing tail
