
The next morning Mr. Morton was a passenger by the early stage for
Webbington, where he took the train for Boston. Thence he was to proceed
to New York by the steamboat train.

"Good-by, Mr. Morton," said Frank, waving his cap as the stage started.
"I hope you'll soon be back."

"I hope so, too; good-by."

Crack went the whip, round went the wheels. The horses started, and the
stage rumbled off, swaying this way and that, as if top-heavy.

Frank went slowly back to the house, feeling quite lonely. He had become
so accustomed to Mr. Morton's companionship that his departure left a
void which he hardly knew how to fill.

As he reflected upon Mr. Morton's story he began to feel an increased
uneasiness at the mortgage held by Squire Haynes upon his father's farm.
The time was very near at hand--only ten days off--when the mortgage
might be foreclosed, and but half the money was in readiness.

Perhaps, however, Squire Haynes had no intention of foreclosing. If so,
there was no occasion for apprehension. But about this he felt by no
means certain.

He finally determined, without consulting his mother, to make the squire
a visit and inquire frankly what he intended to do. The squire's answer
would regulate his future proceedings.

It was Frank's rule--and a very good one, too--to do at once whatever
needed to be done. He resolved to lose no time in making his call.

"Frank," said his mother, as he entered the house, "I want you to go
down to the store some time this forenoon, and get me half a dozen
pounds of sugar."

"Very well, mother, I'll go now. I suppose it won't make any difference
if I don't come back for an hour or two."

"No, that will be in time."

Mrs. Frost did not ask Frank where he was going. She had perfect faith
in him, and felt sure that he would never become involved in anything
discreditable.

Frank passed through the village without stopping at the store. He
deferred his mother's errand until his return. Passing up the village
street, he stopped before the fine house of Squire Haynes. Opening the
gate he walked up the graveled path and rang the bell.

A servant-girl came to the door.

"Is Squire Haynes at home?" inquired Frank.

"Yes, but he's eating breakfast."

"Will he be through soon?"

"Shure and I think so."

"Then I will step in and wait for him."

"Who shall I say it is?"

"Frank Frost."

Squire Haynes had just passed his cup for coffee when Bridget entered
and reported that Frank Frost was in the drawing-room and would like to
see him when he had finished his breakfast.

"Frank Frost!" repeated the squire, arching his eyebrows. "What does he
want, I wonder?"

"Shure he didn't say," said Bridget.

"Very well."

"He is captain of the boys' company, John, isn't he?" asked the squire.

"Yes," said John sulkily. "I wish him joy of his office. I wouldn't have
anything to do with such a crowd of ragamuffins."

Of course the reader understands that this was "sour grapes" on John's
part.

Finishing his breakfast leisurely, Squire Haynes went into the room
where Frank was sitting patiently awaiting him.

Frank rose as he entered.

"Good morning, Squire Haynes," he said, politely rising as he spoke.

"Good morning," said the squire coldly. "You are an early visitor."

If this was intended for a rebuff, Frank did not choose to take any
notice of it.

"I call on a little matter of business, Squire Haynes," continued Frank.

"Very well," said the squire, seating himself in a luxurious armchair,
"I am ready to attend to you."

"I believe you hold a mortgage on our farm."

Squire Haynes started. The thought of Frank's real business had not
occurred to him. He had hoped that nothing would have been said in
relation to the mortgage until he was at liberty to foreclose, as he
wished to take the Frosts unprepared. He now resolved, if possible, to
keep Frank in ignorance of his real purpose, that he might not think it
necessary to prepare for his attack.

"Yes," said he indifferently; "I hold quite a number of mortgages, and
one upon your father's farm among them."

"Isn't the time nearly run out?" asked Frank anxiously.

"I can look if you desire it," said the squire, in the same indifferent
tone.

"I should be glad if you would."

"May I ask why you are desirous of ascertaining the precise date?" asked
the squire. "Are you intending to pay off the mortgage?"

"No, sir," said Frank. "We are not prepared to do so at present."

Squire Haynes felt relieved. He feared for a moment that Mr. Frost had
secured the necessary sum, and that he would be defeated in his wicked
purpose.

He drew out a large number of papers, which he rather ostentatiously
scattered about the table, and finally came to the mortgage.

"The mortgage comes due on the first of July," he said.

"Will it be convenient for you to renew it, Squire Haynes?" asked Frank
anxiously. "Father being absent, it would be inconvenient for us to
obtain the amount necessary to cancel it. Of course, I shall be ready to
pay the interest promptly."

"Unless I should have sudden occasion for the money," said the squire,
"I will let it remain. I don't think you need feel any anxiety on the
subject."

With the intention of putting Frank off his guard, Squire Haynes assumed
a comparatively gracious tone. This, in the case of any other man, would
have completely reassured Frank. But he had a strong distrust of the
squire, since the revelation of his character made by his friend Mr.
Morton.

"Could you tell me positively?" he asked, still uneasy. "It is only ten
days now to the first of July, and that is little enough to raise the
money in."

"Don't trouble yourself," said the squire. "I said unless I had sudden
occasion for the money, because unforeseen circumstances might arise.
But as I have a considerable sum lying at the bank, I don't anticipate
anything of the kind."

"I suppose you will give me immediate notice, should it be necessary.
We can pay four hundred dollars now. So, if you please, the new mortgage
can be made out for half the present amount."

"Very well," said the squire carelessly. "Just as you please as to that.
Still, as you have always paid my interest regularly, I consider the
investment a good one, and have no objection to the whole remaining."

"Thank you, sir," said Frank, rising to go.

Frank took his hat, and, bowing to the squire, sought the front door.
His face wore a perplexed expression. He hardly knew what to think about
the interview he had just had.

"Squire Haynes talks fair enough," he soliloquized; "and, perhaps, he
means what he says. If it hadn't been for what Mr. Morton told me, I
should have confidence in him. But a man who will betray a trust is
capable of breaking his word to me. I think I'll look round a little,
and see if I can't provide for the worse in case it comes."

Just after Frank left the house, John entered his father's presence.

"What did Frank Frost want of you, father?" he asked.

"He came about the mortgage."

"Did he want to pay it?"

"No, he wants me to renew it."

"Of course you refused."

"Of course I did no such thing. Do you think I am a fool?"

"You don't mean to say that you agreed to renew it?" demanded John, in
angry amazement.

Squire Haynes rather enjoyed John's mystification.

"Come," said he, "I'm afraid you'll never make a lawyer if you're not
sharper than that comes to. Never reveal your plans to your adversary.
That's an important principle. If I had refused, he would have gone
to work, and in ten days between now and the first of July, he'd have
managed in some way to scrape together the eight hundred dollars. He's
got half of it now."

"What did you tell him, then?"

"I put him off by telling him not to trouble himself--that I would not
foreclose the mortgage unless I had unexpected occasion for the money."

"Yes, I see," said John, his face brightening at the anticipated
disaster to the Frosts. "You'll take care that there shall be some
sudden occasion."

"Yes," said the squire complacently. "I'll have a note come due, which I
had not thought about, or something of the kind."

"Oh, that'll be bully."

"Don't use such low words, John. I have repeatedly requested you to
be more careful about your language. By the way, your teacher told me
yesterday that you are not doing as well now as formerly."

"Oh, he's an old muff. Besides, he's got a spite against me. I should do
a good deal better at another school."

"We'll see about that. But I suspect he's partly right."

"Well, how can a feller study when he knows the teacher is determined to
be down upon him?"

"'Feller!' I am shocked at hearing you use that word. 'Down upon him,'
too!"

"Very well; let me go where I won't hear such language spoken."

It would have been well if Squire Haynes had been as much shocked by bad
actions as by low language.

This little disagreement over, they began again to anticipate with
pleasure the effect of the squire's premeditated blow upon the Frosts.

"We'll come up with 'em?" said John, with inward exultation.

Meanwhile, though the squire was entirely unconscious of it, there was a
sword hanging over his own head.



CHAPTER XXXI. SQUIRE HAYNES SPRINGS HIS TRAP

As intimated in the last chapter, Frank determined to see if he could
not raise the money necessary to pay off the mortgage in case it should
be necessary to do so.

Farmer Maynard was a man in very good circumstances. He owned an
excellent farm, which yielded more than enough to support his family.
Probably he had one or two thousand dollars laid aside.

"I think he will help me," Frank said to himself, "I'll go to him."

He went to the house, and was directed to the barn. There he found
the farmer engaged in mending a hoe-handle, which had been broken, by
splicing it.

He unfolded his business. The farmer listened attentively to his
statement.

"You say the squire as much as told you that he would renew the
mortgage?"

"Yes."

"Well, I wouldn't trouble myself then; I've no doubt he'll do it."

"He said, unless he should have some sudden occasion for the money."

"All right. He is a prudent man, and don't want to bind himself. That is
all. You know the most unlikely things may happen; but I don't believe
the squire'll want the money. He's got plenty in the bank."

"But if he should?"

"Then he'll wait, or take part. I suppose you can pay part."

"Yes, half."

"Then I guess there won't be any chance of anything going wrong."

"If there should," persisted Frank, "could you lend us four hundred
dollars to make up the amount?"

"I'd do it in a minute, Frank, but I hain't got the money by me. What
money I have got besides the farm is lent out in notes. Only last week
I let my brother-in-law have five hundred dollars, and that leaves me
pretty short."

"Perhaps somebody else will advance the money," said Frank, feeling a
little discouraged at the result of his first application.

"Yes, most likely. But I guess you won't need any assistance. I look
upon it as certain that the mortgage will be renewed. Next fall I shall
have the money, and if the squire wants to dispose of the mortgage, I
shall be ready to take it off his hands."

Frank tried to feel that he was foolish in apprehending trouble from
Squire Haynes, but he found it impossible to rid himself of a vague
feeling of uneasiness.

He made application to another farmer--an intimate friend of his
father's--but he had just purchased and paid for a five-acre lot
adjoining his farm, and that had stripped him of money. He, too,
bade Frank lay aside all anxiety, and assured him that his fears were
groundless.

With this Frank had to be content.

"Perhaps I am foolish," he said to himself. "I'll try to think no more
about it."

He accordingly returned to his usual work, and, not wishing to trouble
his mother to no purpose, resolved not to impart his fears to her.
Another ground of relief suggested itself to him. Mr. Morton would
probably be back on the 27th of June. Such, at least, was his
anticipation when he went away. There was reason to believe that he
would be both ready and willing to take up the mortgage, if needful.
This thought brought back Frank's cheerfulness.

It was somewhat dashed by the following letter which he received a day
or two later from his absent friend. It was dated New York, June 25,
1863. As will appear from its tenor, it prepared Frank for a further
delay in Mr. Morton's arrival.


"DEAR FRANK: I shall not be with you quite as soon as I intended. I
hope, however, to return a day or two afterward at latest. My business
is going on well, and I am assured of final success. Will you ask your
mother if she can accommodate an acquaintance of mine for a day or two?
I shall bring him with me from New York, and shall feel indebted for the
accommodation.

"Your true friend,

"HENRY MORTON."


Frank understood at once that the acquaintance referred to must be
the clerk, whose evidence was so important to Mr. Morton's case. Being
enjoined to secrecy, however, he, of course, felt that he was not at
liberty to mention this.

One day succeeded another until at length the morning of the thirtieth
of June dawned. Mr. Morton had not yet arrived; but, on the other hand,
nothing had been heard from Squire Haynes.

Frank began to breathe more freely. He persuaded himself that he had
been foolishly apprehensive. "The squire means to renew the mortgage,"
he said to himself hopefully.

He had a talk with his mother, and she agreed that it would be well to
pay the four hundred dollars they could spare, and have a new mortgage
made out for the balance. Frank accordingly rode over to Brandon in the
forenoon, and withdrew from the bank the entire sum there deposited to
his father's credit. This, with money which had been received from Mr.
Morton in payment of his board, made up the requisite amount.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, as Mrs. Frost was sewing at a front
window, she exclaimed to Frank, who was making a kite for his little
brother Charlie, "Frank, there's Squire Haynes coming up the road."

Frank's heart gave an anxious bound.

"Is he coming here?" he asked, with anxiety.

"Yes," said Mrs. Frost, after a moment's pause. Frank turned pale with
apprehension.

A moment afterward the huge knocker was heard to sound, and Mrs. Frost,
putting down her work, smoothed her apron and went to the door.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Frost," said the squire, lifting his hat.

"Good afternoon, Squire Haynes. Won't you walk in?"

"Thank you; I will intrude for a few minutes. How do you do?" he said,
nodding to Frank as he entered.

"Pretty well, thank you, sir," said Frank nervously.

The squire, knowing the odium which would attach to the course he had
settled upon, resolved to show the utmost politeness to the family he
was about to injure, and justify his action by the plea of necessity.

"Take a seat, Squire Haynes," said Mrs. Frost "You'll find this
rocking-chair more comfortable.'

"I am very well seated, thank you. I cannot stop long. I have merely
called on a matter of business."

"About the mortgage?" interrupted Frank, who could keep silence no
longer.

"Precisely so. I regret to say that I have urgent occasion for the
money, and shall be unable to renew it."

"We have got four hundred dollars," said Mrs. Frost, "which we are
intending to pay."

"I am sorry to say that this will not answer my purpose."

"Why did you not let us know before?" asked Frank abruptly.

"Frank!" said his mother reprovingly.

"It was only this morning that the necessity arose. I have a note due
which must be paid."

"We are not provided with the money, Squire Haynes," said Mrs. Frost.
"if, however, you will wait a few days, we can probably raise it among
our friends."
