
"Maud Mary Ibbetson, my particular friend--my _very_ particular
friend," I explained.

I spoke warmly, for at that moment the memory of Maud Mary seemed
adorable, and I longed to pour my complaints into her sympathetic ear.
Besides, I had another reason for regretting that she was not with me.
When we were together, it was she, as a rule, who had new and handsome
toys to exhibit, whilst I played the humbler part of admirer. But if
she had been with me, then, what would not have been my triumph in
displaying the Dutch fair! The longer I thought of her the faster my
tears fell, but they did not help me to think of anything definite to
ask for; and when Lady Elizabeth said, "would you like to go home, my
dear? or do you want me to ask your friend to stay with you?" I had
the grace to feel ashamed of my peevishness, and to thank my godmother
for her kindness, and to protest against wanting anything more. I only
added, amid my subsiding sobs, that "it did seem such a thing," when I
had got a Dutch fair to play at dolls in, that Joseph should be so
stupid, and that dear Maud Mary, who would have enjoyed it so much,
should not be able to see it.




CHAPTER III.

     "Nous aurons aussi la fete dans notre rue."--RUSSIAN
     PROVERB.


Next day, when our drill in the long corridor was over, Lady Elizabeth
told Joseph to bring his fortress, guns, and soldiers into the
library, and to play at the Thirty Years' War in the bay-window from a
large book with pictures of sieges and battles, which she lent him.

To me my godmother turned very kindly and said, "I have invited your
little friend Maud to come and stay here for a week. I hope she will
arrive to-day, so you had better prepare your dolls and your shops for
company."

Maud Mary coming! I danced for joy, and kissed my godmother, and
expressed my delight again and again. I should have liked to talk
about it to Joseph, but he had plunged into the Thirty Years' War, and
had no attention to give me.

It was a custom in the neighbourhood where my mother lived to call
people by double Christian names, John Thomas, William Edward, and so
forth; but my godmother never called Maud Mary anything but Maud.

It was possible that my darling friend might arrive by the twelve
o'clock train, and the carriage was sent to meet her, whilst I danced
up and down the big hall with impatience. When it came back without
her my disappointment knew no bounds. I felt sure that the Ibbetsons'
coachman had been unpunctual, or dear Maud Mary's nurse had been
cross, as usual, and had not tried to get her things packed. I rushed
into the library full of my forebodings, but my godmother only said,
"No grumbling, my dear!" and Joseph called out, "Oh, I say, Selina, I
wish you wouldn't swing the doors so: you've knocked down Wallenstein,
and he's fallen on the top of Gustavus Adolphus;" and I had to compose
myself as best I could till the five o'clock train.

Then she came. Darling Maud Mary!

Perhaps it was because I crushed her new feather in kissing her (and
Maud Mary was very particular about her clothes); perhaps it was
because she was tired with travelling, which I forgot; or perhaps it
was because she would rather have had tea first, that Maud Mary was
not quite so nice about the Dutch fair as I should have liked her to
be.

She said she rather wondered that Lady Elizabeth had not given me a
big dolls' house like hers instead; that she had come away in such a
hurry that she forgot to lock hers up, and she should not be the least
surprised if the kitten got into it and broke something, but "it did
seem rather odd" to be invited in such a very hurried way; that just
when she _was_ going to a big house to pay a grand visit, of course
the dressmaker "disappointed" Mrs. Ibbetson, but "that was the way
things always did happen;" that the last time Mr. Ibbetson was in
Paris he offered to bring her a dolls' railway train, with real
first-class carriages really stuffed, but she said she would rather
have a locket, and that was the very one which was hanging round her
neck, and which was much handsomer than Lucy Jane Smith's, which cost
five pounds in London.

Maud Mary's inattention to the fair and the dolls was so obvious that
I followed my godmother's advice, and "made the best of it" by saying,
"I'm afraid you're very much tired, darling?"

Maud Mary tossed her chin and frowned.

It was "enough to tire anybody," she said, to travel on that
particular line. The railway of which her papa was a director was very
differently managed.

I think my godmother's courtesy to us, and her thoughtful kindness,
had fixed her repeated hints about self-control and good manners
rather firmly in my head. I distinctly remember making an effort to
forget my toys and think of Maud Mary's comfort.

I said, "Will you come and take off your things, darling?" and she
said, "Yes, darling;" and then we had tea.

But next day, when she was quite rested, and had really nothing to
complain of, I did think she might have praised the Dutch fair.

She said it "seemed such a funny thing" to have to play in an old
garret; but she need not have wanted to alter the arrangement of all
the shops, and have everything her own way, as she always had at home,
because, if her dolls' house was hers, my Dutch fair was mine. I did
think, for a moment, of getting my godmother to speak to her, but I
knew it would be of no use to complain unless I had something to ask
for. When I came to think of it, I found that what I wanted was that
Maud Mary should let me manage my own toys and direct the game, and I
resolved to ask her myself.

"Look here, darling," said I, "when I come and play with you, I always
play dolls as you like, because the dolls' house is yours; I wish you
would play my game to-day, as the Dutch fair is mine."

Maud Mary flounced to her feet, and bridled with her wavy head, and
said she was sure she did not want to play if I didn't like her way of
playing; and as to my Dutch fair, her papa could buy her one any day
for her very own.

I was nettled, for Maud Mary was a little apt to flourish Mr.
Ibbetson's money in my face; but if her father was rich, my godmother
was a lady of rank, and I said that "my godmother, Lady Elizabeth,
said it was very vulgar to flounce and toss one's head if one was put
out."

Maud Mary crimsoned, and, exclaiming that she did not care what Lady
Elizabeth or Lady Anybody Else said, she whisked over three shops with
the ends of her sash, and kicked the wax off Josephine Esmeralda's
nose with the heel of her Balmoral boot.

I don't like confessing it, but I did push Maud Mary, and Maud Mary
slapped me.

And when we both looked up, my godmother was standing before us, with
her gold spectacles on her nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Elizabeth was very kind, and even then I knew that she was very
right.

When she said, "I have asked your friend for a week, and for that
week, my dear, she is your guest, and you must try to please, and
_make the best of it_," I not only did not dispute it; I felt a spirit
of self-suppression and hospitable pride awake within me to do as she
had said.

I think the hardest part of it was that, whatever I did and whatever I
gave up, Maud Mary recognized no effort on my part. What she got she
took as her due, and what she did not get she grumbled about.

I sometimes think that it was partly because, in all that long week,
she never ceased grumbling, that I did; I hope for life.

Only once I said, "O godmamma! how glad I shall be when I am alone
with Joseph again!" And with sudden remorse, I added, "But I beg your
pardon, that's grumbling; and you _have_ been so kind!"

Lady Elizabeth took off her eye-glasses, and held out her hands for
mine.

"Is it grumbling, little woman?" she said. "Well, I'm not sure."

"_I'm_ not sure," I said, smiling; "for you know I only said I should
be so _glad_ to be alone with Joseph, and to try to be good to him;
for he is a very kind boy, and if he is a little awkward with the
dolls, I mean to make the best of it. _One can't have everything_," I
added, laughing.

Lady Elizabeth drew my head towards her, and stroked and kissed it.

"GOD bless you, child," she said. "You _have_ inherited your
father's smile."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But, I say, Selina," whispered Joseph, when I went to look at his
fortress in the bay-window. "Do you suppose it's because he's dead
that she cried behind her spectacles when she said you had got his
smile?"




A HAPPY FAMILY.

CHAPTER I.

    "If solid happiness we prize,
    Within our breast this jewel lies.

       *       *       *       *       *

    From our own selves our joys must flow,
      And peace begins at home."

    COTTON.


The family--our family, not the Happy Family--consisted of me and my
brothers and sisters. I have a father and mother, of course.

I am the eldest, as I remind my brothers; and of the more worthy
gender, which my sisters sometimes forget. Though we live in the
village, my father is a gentleman, as I shall be when I am grown up. I
have told the village boys so more than once. One feels mean in
boasting that one is better born than they are; but if I did not tell
them, I am not sure that they would always know.

Our house is old, and we have a ghost--the ghost of my
great-great-great-great-great-aunt.

She "crossed her father's will," nurse says, and he threatened to flog
her with his dog-whip, and she ran away, and was never heard of more.
He would not let the pond be dragged, but he never went near it again;
and the villagers do not like to go near it now. They say you may meet
her there, after sunset, flying along the path among the trees, with
her hair half down, and a knot of ribbon fluttering from it, and
parted lips, and terror in her eyes.

The men of our family (my father's family, my mother is Irish) have
always had strong wills. I have a strong will myself.

People say I am like the picture of my great-grandfather (the
great-great-great-nephew of the ghost). He must have been a wonderful
old gentleman by all accounts. Sometimes nurse says to us, "Have your
own way, and you'll live the longer," and it always makes me think of
great-grandfather, who had so much of his own way, and lived to be
nearly a hundred.

I remember my father telling us how his sisters had to visit their old
granny for months at a time, and how he shut the shutters at three
o'clock on summer afternoons, and made them play dummy whist by candle
light.

"Didn't you and your brothers go?" asked Uncle Patrick, across the
dinner-table. My father laughed.

"Not we! My mother got us there once--but never again."

"And did your sisters like it?"

"Like it? They used to cry their hearts out. I really believe it
killed poor Jane. She was consumptive and chilly, but always craving
for fresh air; and granny never would have open windows, for fear of
draughts on his bald head; and yet the girls had no fires in their
room, because young people shouldn't be pampered."

"And ye never-r offer-r-ed--neither of ye--to go in the stead of
them?"

When Uncle Patrick rolls his R's in a discussion, my mother becomes
nervous.

"One can't expect boys to consider things," she said. "Boys will be
boys, you know."

"And what would you have 'em be?" said my father. Uncle Patrick turned
to my mother.

"Too true, Geraldine. Ye don't expect it. Worse luck! I assure ye, I'd
be aghast at the brutes we men can be, if I wasn't more amazed that
we're as good as we are, when the best and gentlest of your sex--the
moulders of our childhood, the desire of our manhood--demand so little
for all that you alone can give. There were conceivable uses in women
preferring the biggest brutes of barbarous times, but it's not so now;
and boys will be civilised boys, and men will be civilised men, sweet
sister, when you _do_ expect it, and when your grace and favours are
the rewards of nobleness, and not the easy prize of selfishness and
savagery."

My father spoke fairly.

"There's some truth in what you say, Pat."

"And small grace in my saying it. Forgive me, John."

That's the way Uncle Patrick flares up and cools down, like a straw
bonfire. But my father makes allowances for him; first, because he is
an Irishman, and, secondly, because he's a cripple.

       *       *       *       *       *

I love my mother dearly, and I can do anything I like with her. I
always could. When I was a baby, I would not go to sleep unless she
walked about with me, so (though walking was bad for her) I got my own
way, and had it afterwards.

With one exception. She would never tell me about my godfather. I
asked once, and she was so distressed that I was glad to promise never
to speak of him again. But I only thought of him the more, though all
I knew about him was his portrait--such a fine fellow--and that he
had the same swaggering, ridiculous name as mine.

How my father allowed me to be christened Bayard I cannot imagine. But
I was rather proud of it at one time--in the days when I wore long
curls, and was so accustomed to hearing myself called "a perfect
picture," and to having my little sayings quoted by my mother and her
friends, that it made me miserable if grown-up people took the liberty
of attending to anything but me. I remember wriggling myself off my
mother's knee when I wanted change, and how she gave me her watch to
keep me quiet, and stroked my curls, and called me her fair-haired
knight, and her little Bayard; though, remembering also, how
lingeringly I used just not to do her bidding, ate the sugar when she
wasn't looking, tried to bawl myself into fits, kicked the
nurse-girl's shins, and dared not go upstairs by myself after dark--I
must confess that a young chimpanzee would have as good claims as I
had to represent that model of self-conquest and true chivalry, "the
Knight without fear and without reproach."

However, the vanity of it did not last long. I wonder if that
grand-faced godfather of mine suffered as I suffered when he went to
school and said his name was Bayard? I owe a day in harvest to the
young wag who turned it into Backyard. I gave in my name as Backyard
to every subsequent inquirer, and Backyard I modestly remained.




CHAPTER II.

    "The lady with the gay macaw."

LONGFELLOW.


My sisters are much like other fellows' sisters, excepting Lettice.
That child is like no one but herself.

I used to tease the other girls for fun, but I teased Lettice on
principle--to knock the nonsense out of her. She was only eight, and
very small, but, from the top row of her tight little curls to the
rosettes on her best shoes, she seemed to me a mass of affectation.

Strangers always liked Lettice. I believe she was born with a company
voice in her mouth; and she would flit like a butterfly from one
grown-up person to another, chit-chattering, whilst some of us stood
pounding our knuckles in our pockets, and tying our legs into knots,
as we wished the drawing-room carpet would open and let us through
into the cellar to play at catacombs.

That was how Cocky came. Lettice's airs and graces bewitched the old
lady who called in the yellow chariot, and was so like a cockatoo
herself--a cockatoo in a citron velvet bonnet, with a bird of Paradise
feather. When that old lady put up her eye-glass, she would have
frightened a yard-dog; but Lettice stood on tip-toes and stroked the
feather, saying, "What a love-e-ly bird!" And next day came
Cocky--perch and all complete--_for the little girl who loves birds_.
Lettice was proud of Cocky, but Edward really loved him, and took
trouble with him.

Edward is a good boy. My mother called him after the Black Prince.

He and I disgraced ourselves in the eyes of the Cockatoo lady, and it
