
I couldn't keep the thoughts of Bob out of my mind.  Saturday being a
holiday, I had allowed him to go off to spend the afternoon as he
chose; and, as it was unusually warm, there was little doubt where and
how he was spending it.  He would strike a bee-line for that shady
mill-pond, and they would spend hours plashing in its cool and
delicious depths.

I looked at the clock; it was a few minutes past five, and Bob ought to
have been home long ago.  What made him so late?

My fear was growing more intense every minute.  The boy was in my mind
continually to the exclusion of everything else.  Despite all my
philosophy and rigid common-sense, the conviction was fastening on me
that something dreadful had befallen him.

And what was that something?  He had been drowned in the mill-pond.  I
glanced out of the window, half expecting to see a party bearing the
lifeless body homeward.  Thank Heaven, I was spared that woful sight,
but I discerned something else that sent a misgiving pang through me.

It was Mrs. Clarkson, our nearest neighbor, rapidly approaching, as if
the bearer of momentous tidings.

"She has come to tell me that Bob is drowned," I gasped, as my heart
almost ceased its beating.

I met her on the threshold, with a calmness of manner which belied the
tumult within.  Greeting her courteously, I invited her inside, stating
that my wife was absent.

"I thank you," she said, "but it is not worth while.  I thought I ought
to come over and tell you."

"Tell me what?" I inquired, swallowing the lump in my throat.

"Why, about the awful dream I had last night."

I was able to smile faintly, and was partly prepared for what was
coming.

"I am ready to hear it, Mrs. Clarkson."

"Why, you know it was Friday night, and I never had a dream on a Friday
night that didn't come true--never!  Where's Bob?" she abruptly asked,
peering around me, as if to learn whether he was in the hall.

"He's off somewhere at play."

"Oh, Mr. Havens, you'll never see him alive again!"

Although startled in spite of myself, I was indignant.

"Have you any positive knowledge, Mrs. Clarkson, on the matter?"

"Certainly I have; didn't I just tell you about my dream?"

"A fudge for your dream!" I exclaimed, impatiently; "I don't believe in
any such nonsense."

"I pity you," she said, though why I should be pitied on that account
is hard to understand.

"But what was your dream?"

"I saw your Bob brought home drowned.  Oh, I can see him now," she
added, speaking rapidly, and making a movement as if to wring her
hands; "his white face--his dripping hair and clothes--his half-closed
eyes--it was dreadful; it will break his mother's heart--"

"Mrs. Clarkson, did you come here to tell me _that_?"

"Why, of course I did; I felt it was my duty to prepare you--"

"Good day," I answered, sharply, closing the door and hastily entering
my study.

She had given me a terrible shock.  My feelings were in a tumult
difficult to describe.  My philosophy, my self-command, my hard sense
and scepticism were scattered to the winds, I had fought against the
awful fear, and was still fighting when my neighbor called; but her
visit had knocked every prop from beneath me.

She had hardly disappeared when I was hurrying through the woods by the
shortest route to the mill-pond.  I knew Bob had been there, and all
that I expected to find was his white, ghastly body in the cold, cruel
depths.

"Oh, my boy!" I wailed, "I am to blame for your death!  I never should
have permitted you to run into such danger.  I should have gone with
you and taught you to swim--I can never forgive myself for this--never,
never, never.  It will break your mother's heart--mine is already
broken--"

"_Pop, just watch me_!"

Surely that was the voice of my boy!  I turned my head like a flash,
and there he was, with his hands together over his head, and in the act
of diving into the mill-pond.  Down he went with a splash, his head
quickly reappearing, as he flirted the hair and water out of his eyes,
and struck out for the middle of the pond.

"What are you doing, Bob?"

"You just wait and see, pop."

And what did that young rascal do but swim straight across that pond
and then turn about and swim back again, without pausing for breath?
Not only that, but, when in the very deepest portion, he dove, floated
on his back, trod water, and kicked up his heels like a frisky colt.

"How's that, pop?  You didn't know I could swim, did you?" he asked, as
he came smilingly up the bank.

"I had no idea of such a thing," I replied, my whole being fluttering
with gratitude and delight; "I think I'll have to reward you for that."

And when he had donned his clothes, and we started homeward, I slipped
a twisted bank-bill into his hands.  I am really ashamed to tell its
denomination, and Bob and I never hinted anything about it to his
mother.

And now as to the question, Who shall explain it?  I think I can.  I
have a weakness for boiled beef and cabbage.  The meat is healthful
enough, but, as every one knows, or ought to know, cabbage, although
one of the most digestible kinds of food when raw, is just the opposite
in a boiled state.  I knew the consequences of eating it, but in the
absence of my good wife that day I disposed of so much that I deserved
the oppressive indigestion that followed.

That fact, I am convinced, fully explains the dreadful "presentiment"
which made me so miserable all the afternoon.

On our way home we passed the house of Mrs. Clarkson.  I could not
forbear stopping and ringing her bell.  She answered it in person.

"Mrs. Clarkson, Bob is on his way home from swimming, and I thought I
would let him hear about that wonderful dream--"

But the door was slammed in my face.

I said at the opening of this sketch that I "had" a boy named Bob.  God
be thanked, I have him yet, and no lustier, brighter, or more manly
youth ever lived, and my prayer is that he may be spared to soothe the
declining years of his father and mother, whose love for him is beyond
the power of words to tell.




A FOOL OR A GENIUS.

CHAPTER I.

Josiah Hunter sat on his porch one summer afternoon, smoking his pipe,
feeling dissatisfied, morose and sour on account of his only son Tim,
who, he was obliged to confess to himself, gave every indication of
proving a disappointment to him.

Mr. Hunter was owner of the famous Brereton Quarry & Stone Works,
located about a mile above the thriving village of Brereton, on the
eastern bank of the Castaran river, and at a somewhat greater distance
below the town of Denville.  The quarry was a valuable one and the
owner was in comfortable circumstances, with the prospect of acquiring
considerable more of a fortune out of the yield of excellent building
stone.  The quarry had been worked for something like ten years, and
the discovery that he had such a fine deposit on his small farm was in
the minds of his neighbors equivalent to the finding of a gold mine,
for as the excavation proceeded, the quality of the material improved
and Mr. Hunter refused an offer from a company which, but for the
stone, would have been a very liberal price for the whole farm.

Mr. Hunter had been a widower ever since his boy was three years old,
and the youth was now fourteen.  His sister Maggie was two years his
senior, and they were deeply attached to each other.  Maggie was a
daughter after her father's own heart,--one of those rare, sensible
girls who cannot be spoiled by indulgence, who was equally fond of her
parent and who stood unflinchingly by her brother in the little
differences between father and son, which, sad to say, were becoming
more frequent and serious with the passing weeks and months.  It is
probable that the affection of the parent for the daughter prevented
him from ever thinking of marrying again, for she was a model
housekeeper, and he could not bear the thought of seeing anyone come
into the family and usurp, even in a small degree, her functions and
place.

Mr. Hunter was getting on in years, and nothing was more natural than
that he should wish and plan that Tim should become his successor in
the development of the valuable quarry that was not likely to give out
for many a year to come.  But the boy showed no liking for the
business.  He was among the best scholars in the village school, fond
of play and so well advanced in his studies that his parent determined
to begin his practical business training in earnest.  He looked upon a
college education as a waste of so many years, taken from the most
precious part of a young man's life, and it must be said that Tim
himself showed no wish to attend any higher educational institution.

Tim had assisted about the quarry, more or less for several years.  Of
course he was too young to do much in the way of manual labor, but
there were many errands that he ran, beside helping to keep his
father's accounts.  He wrote an excellent hand, was quick in figures
and had such a command of language that all his parent had to do was to
tell him the substance of the letter he wished written, to have the boy
put it in courteous but pointed and clear form.  The elder had never
detected an error in the computations of the younger, who had no
trouble at all when the operations included difficult fractions.

All this was good in its way, but it could not be denied that Tim had
no liking for the business itself.  His father had told him repeatedly
that he must prepare himself for the active management of the stone
works, and that to do so required something more than quickness in
figures and skill in letter writing.  But it was in vain.  Tim was
never at the works unless by direct command of his parent, and seized
the first opportunity to get away.

"No person can succeed in a business which he dislikes," remarked Mr.
Hunter to Maggie who on this summer afternoon sat on the front porch,
plying her deft needle, while the waning twilight lasted, with Bridget
inside preparing the evening meal.

"I think that is true, father," was her gentle reply.

"And that boy hates the stone business and I can't understand why he
should."

"Isn't it also true, father, that one cannot control his likes and
dislikes?  Tim has told me he can't bear the thought of spending his
life in getting out great blocks of stone and trimming them into shape
for building.  He said he wished he could feel as you do, but there's
no use of his trying."

"Fudge!" was the impatient exclamation; "what business has a boy of his
years to talk or think about what sort of business he prefers?  It is
my place to select his future avocation and his to accept it without a
growl."

"He will do that, father."

"Of course he will," replied the parent with a compression of his thin
lips and a flash of his eyes; "when I yield to a boy fourteen years
old, it will be time to shift me off to the lunatic asylum."

"Why, then, are you displeased, since he will do what you wish and do
it without complaint?

"I am displeased because he is dissatisfied and has no heart in his
work.  He shows no interest in anything relating to the quarries and it
is becoming worse every day with him."

"Didn't he help this forenoon?"

"Yes, because I told him he must be on hand as soon as he was through
breakfast and not leave until he went to dinner."

"Did you say nothing about his working this afternoon?"

"No; I left that out on purpose to test him."

"What was the result?"

"I haven't seen hide or hair of him since; I suppose he is off in the
woods or up in his room, reading or figuring on some invention.  Do you
know where he is?"

"He has been in his room almost all the afternoon and is there now."

"Doing what?"

"I guess you have answered that question," replied Maggie laying aside
her sewing because of the increasing shadows, and looking across at her
father with a smile.

"That's what makes me lose all patience.  What earthly good is it for
him to sit in his room drawing figures of machines he dreams of making,
or scribbling over sheets of paper?  If this keeps up much longer, he
will take to writing poetry, and the next thing will be smoking
cigarettes and then his ruin will be complete."

Maggie's clear laughter rang out on the summer air.  She was always
overflowing with spirits and the picture drawn by her parent and the
look of profound disgust on his face as he uttered his scornful words
stirred her mirth beyond repression.

"What are you laughing at?" he demanded, turning toward her, though
without any anger in his tones, for he could never feel any emotion of
that nature toward such a daughter.

"It was the idea of Tim writing poetry or rhyme and smoking cigarettes.
I'll guarantee that he will never do either."

"Nor anything else, you may as well add."

"I'll guarantee that if he lives he will do a good many things that
will be better than getting out and trimming stone."

This was not the first time that Maggie had intimated the same faith,
without going into particulars or giving any idea upon what she based
that faith.  The parent looked sharply at her and asked:

"What do you mean?  Explain yourself."

But the daughter was not yet ready to do so.  She had her thoughts or
dreams or whatever they might be, but was not prepared as yet to share
them with her parent.  He was not in the mood, and for her to tell all
that was in her mind would be to provoke an outburst that would be
painful to the last degree.  She chose for the present to parry.

"How can I know, father, what ambition Tim has?  He is still young
enough to change that ambition, whatever it may be."

"And he's _got_ to change it, as sure as he lives!  I am tired of his
fooling; he is fourteen years old, big, strong, and healthy; if he
would take hold of the work and show some interest in it, he would be
able in a couple of years to take charge of the whole business and give
me a rest, but he is frittering away valuable time until I've made up
my mind to permit it no longer."

The parent knocked the bowl of his pipe against the column of the porch
and shook his head in a way that showed he meant every word he said.
Maggie was troubled, for she had feared an outbreak between him and
Tim, and it seemed to be impending.  She dreaded it more than death,
for any violence by her beloved parent toward her equally beloved
brother would break her heart.  That parent, naturally placid and
good-natured, had a frightful temper when it was aroused.  She could
never forget that day when in a quarrel with one of his employes, he
came within a hair of killing the man and for the time was a raging
tiger.

There was one appeal that Maggie knew had never failed her, though she
feared the day would come when even that would lose its power.  She
reserved it as the last recourse.  When she saw her father rise to his
feet, and in the gathering gloom noted the grim resolute expression on
his face, she knew the crisis had come.

"Tell him to come down-stairs; we may as well have this matter settled
here and now."

"Father," she said in a low voice of the sweetest tenderness, "you will
not forget what he did two years ago?"

The parent stood motionless, silent for a minute, and then gently
resumed his seat, adding a moment later,

"No; I can never forget that; never mind calling him just now."

And what it was that Tim Hunter did "two years ago" I must now tell you.




CHAPTER II.

Bear in mind that Tim Hunter was twelve years old at the time, being
the junior by two years of his sister Maggie.

On the day which I have in mind, he had spent the forenoon fishing, and
brought home a mess of trout for which he had whipped one of the
mountain brooks, and which furnished the family with the choicest sort
of a meal.  The father complimented him on his skill, for that was
before the parent's patience had been so sorely tried by the
indifference of the lad toward the vocation to which the elder meant he
should devote his life.  He left the lad at liberty to spend the rest
of the day as he chose, and, early in the afternoon, he proposed to his
sister that they should engage in that old game of "jackstones"  with
which I am sure you are familiar.

Years ago the country lads and lassies generally used little bits of
stones, instead of scraggly, jagged pieces of iron, with which they
amuse themselves in these days.  Tim had seen some of the improved
jackstones; and, borrowing one from a playmate, he made a clay mould
from it, into which he poured melted lead, repeating the operation
until he had five as pretty and symmetrically formed specimens as one
could wish.  It was with these in his hands, that he led the way to the
barn for a game between himself and sister.

The big, spacious structure was a favorite place for spending their
leisure hours.  The hard, seedy floor, with the arching rafters
overhead could not be improved for their purpose.  The shingles were so
far aloft that the shade within was cool on sultry summer days, and it
was the pleasantest kind of music to hear the rain drops patter on the
roof and the wind whistle around the eaves and corners.  The mow where
the hay was stored was to the left, as you entered the door, and under
that were the stalls where the horses munched their dinner and looked
solemnly through the opening over the mangers at the two children
engaged at play.  Between where they sat and the rafters, the space was
open.

Maggie took her seat in the middle of the floor, and her brother placed
himself opposite.  Before doing so, he stepped to the nearest stall and
picked up a block of wood six inches in diameter and two feet in
length.  This he laid on the floor and seated himself upon it, tossing
the jackstones to his sister to begin the game.

She was his superior, for her pretty taper fingers were more nimble
than his sturdy ones, and, unless she handicapped herself by certain
conditions, she invariably won in the contest of skill.  She tossed
them one after the other, then two or three or more at a time,
snatching up the others from the floor and going through the varied
performance with an easy perfection that was the wonder of Tim.  Once
or twice, she purposely missed some feat, but the alert lad was sure to
detect it, and declared he would not play unless she did her best, and,
under his watchful eye, she could not escape doing so.  As I have said,
the only way to equalize matters was for her to handicap herself, and
even then I am compelled to say she was more often winner than loser.

Sitting on the block of wood tipped up on one end, Tim kept his eyes on
the bits of metal, popping up in the air and softly dropping into the
extended palm, and wondered again why it was so hard for him to do that
which was so easy for her.  Finally she made a slip, which looked
honest, and resigned the stones to him.

Now, you know that in playing this game, you ought to sit on the floor
or ground; for if your perch is higher, you are compelled to stoop
further to snatch up the pieces and your position is so awkward that it
seriously interferes with your success.

The very first scramble Tim made at the stones on the floor was not
only a failure, but resulted in a splinter catching under the nail of
one of his fingers.  Maggie laughed.

"Why do you sit way up there?" she asked; "you can't do half as well as
when you are lower down like me."

"I guess you're right," he replied, as he pushed the block away and
imitated her.  "I 'spose I'll catch the splinters just the same."

"There's no need of it; you mustn't claw the stones, but move your hand
gently, just as I do.  Now, watch me."

"It's a pity that no one else in the world is half as smart as you,"
replied the brother with fine irony, but without ill nature.  "Ah,
wasn't that splendid?"
