the way to the stelling.

Alister was already on board, and the young officer was there to bid us
GOD speed, and Dennis was cheerful almost to noisiness.

But when the shores of British Guiana had become a muddy-looking horizon
line, I found him, with his cropped forehead pressed to the open
housewife, shedding bitter tears among the new needles and buttons.




CHAPTER XVII.

               "Zur tiefen Ruh, wie er sich auch gefunden.
                *      *      *      *      *      *
                Sein Geist ist's, der mich ruft."
                                         _Wallenstein's Tod_.


Not the least troublesome part of our enlarged kit was the collection of
gay-plumaged birds. Their preservation was by no means complete, and I
continued it at sea. But between climate and creatures, the
destructiveness of the tropics is distracting to the collector, and one
or two of my finest specimens fell into heaps of mangled feathers, dust,
and hideous larvae under my eyes. It was Dennis O'Moore's collection. He
and his engineer friend were both good shots, and they had made an
expedition on purpose to get these birds for Alister. There were some
most splendid specimens, and the grandest of all, to my thinking, was a
Roseate Spoonbill, a wading, fish-catching bird of all shades of rose,
from pale pink to crimson. Even his long horny legs were red. But he was
not a pleasant subject for my part of the work. He smelt like the
_Water-Lily_ at her worst, before we got rid of the fish cargo.

Knowing that he had got them for Alister, I was rather surprised one day
when Dennis began picking out some of the rarest birds and put them
aside. It was so unlike him to keep things for himself. But as he turned
over the specimens, he began to ask me about Cripple Charlie, whose
letter he had read. Meanwhile he kept selecting specimens, and then,
returning them to the main body again, "Ah, we mustn't be robbing
Alister, or he'll never die Provost of Aberdeen." In the end he had
gathered a very choice and gorgeous little lot, and then I discovered
their destination. "We'll get them set up when we get home," he said; "I
hope Charlie 'll like 'em. They'll put the old puffin's nose out of
joint, anyway, for as big as it is!"

Our ship was a steamship, a well-found vessel, and we made a good
passage. The first mate was an educated man, and fond of science. He
kept a meteorological log, and the pleasantest work we ever did was in
helping him to take observations. We became very much bitten with the
subject, and I bought three pickle-bottles from the cook, and filled
them with gulf-weed and other curiosities for Charlie, and stowed these
away with the birds.

Dennis found another letter from his father awaiting him at the Halifax
post-office. The squire had discovered his blunder, and sent the money,
and the way in which Dennis immediately began to plan purchases of all
sorts, from a birch-bark canoe to a bearskin rug, gave me a clue to the
fortunes of the O'Moores. I do not think he would have had enough left
to pay his passage if we had been delayed for long. But our old ship was
expected any hour, and when she came in we made our way to her at once,
and the upshot of it all was, that Dennis and I shipped in her for the
return voyage as passengers, and Alister as a seaman.

Nothing can make the North Atlantic a pleasant sea. Of the beauty and
variety of warmer waters we had nothing, but we had the excitement of
some rough weather, and a good deal of sociability and singing when it
was fair, and we were very glad to be with our old mates again, and yet
more glad that every knot on our course was a step nearer home. Dennis
and I were not idle because we were independent, and we enjoyed
ourselves thoroughly. As to Alister, there was no difficulty in seeing
how well he stood with the red-bearded captain, and how good a friend
his own energy and perseverance (with perhaps some touch of clannishness
to boot) had gained for him. Dennis and I always shared his watches, and
they were generally devoted to the discussing and re-discussing of our
prospects, interspersed with fragmentary French lessons.

From the day that Alister had heard Dennis chatter to the squaw, through
all our ups and downs, at sea and ashore, he had never flagged in his
persistent profiting by Dennis's offer to teach him to speak French. It
was not, perhaps, a very scholarly method which they pursued, but we had
no time for study, so Dennis started Alister every day with a new word
or sentence, and Alister hammered this into his head as he went about
his work, and recapitulated what he had learned before. By the time we
were on our homeward voyage, the sentences had become very complex, and
it seemed probable that Alister's ambition to take part in a "two-handed
crack" in French with his teacher, before the shamrock fell to pieces,
would be realized.

"What he has learnt is wonderful, I can tell ye," said Dennis to me,
"but his accent's horrid! And we'd get on faster than we do if he didn't
argue every step we go, though he doesn't know a word that I've not
taught him."

But far funnier than Alister's corrections of his teacher, was a curious
jealousy which the boatswain had of the Scotch lad's new accomplishment.
We could not quite make out the grounds of it, except that the boatswain
himself had learned one or two words of what he called _parly voo_ when
he was in service at the boys' school, and he was jealously careful of
the importance which his shreds and scraps of education gave him in the
eyes of the ordinary uneducated seaman. With Dennis and me he was
uniformly friendly, and he was a most entertaining companion.

Owing to head winds, our passage was longer than the average. A strange
thing happened towards the end of it. We had turned in for sleep one
night, when I woke to the consciousness that Dennis had got out of his
berth, and was climbing past mine, but I was so sleepy that I did not
speak, and was only sure that it was not a dream, when Alister and I
went on deck for the next watch, and found Dennis walking up and down in
the morning mist.

"Have you had no sleep?" I asked, for his face looked haggard.

"I couldn't. For dreaming," he said, awkwardly.

I laughed at him.

"What have you been dreaming about?"

"Don't laugh, Jack. I dreamt of Barney."

"Well, that's natural enough, Dennis. This end of the voyage must recall
the poor fellow."

"I wouldn't mind if it was a kindly dream. But I dreamed he'd an old
woman's bonnet on and a handkerchief tied over it. It haunts me."

"Go back to bed," I advised. "Perhaps you'll dream of him again looking
like himself, and that will put this out of your head."

Dennis took my advice, and I stood Alister's watch with him, and by and
by Dennis appeared on deck again looking more at ease.

"Did you dream of him again?" I asked. He nodded.

"I did--just his own dear self. But he was sitting alone on the edge of
some wharf gazing down into the water, and not a look could I get out of
him till I woke."

The following morning Dennis was still sound asleep when I rose and went
on deck. The coast of Ireland was just coming into sight through the
haze when he joined me, but before pointing it out to him, I felt
curious to know whether he had dreamed a third time of old Barney.

"Not I," said he; "all I dreamed of was a big rock standing up out of
the sea, and two children sitting on it had hold of each other's hands."

"Children you know?"

"Oh dear, no! Just a little barefoot brother and sister."

He seemed to wish to drop the subject, and at this moment a gleam of
sunshine lit up the distant coast-line with such ethereal tints, that I
did not wonder to see him spring upon the bulwarks and, catching a
ratlin with one hand, wave his cap above his head with the other,
crying, "GOD bless the Emerald Isle!"

We reached Liverpool about four o'clock in the afternoon, and as we drew
up alongside of the old wharf, my first thought was to look for Biddy
Macartney. Alister had to remain on board for a time, but Dennis came
willingly with me in search of the old woman and her coffee-barrow. At
last we betook ourselves to the dock-gatekeeper, to make inquiries, and
from him we heard a sad story. The old woman had "failed a deal of
late," he said. He "_had_ heard she wasn't right in her mind, but
whether they'd shifted her to a 'sylum or not, he couldn't say." If she
was at home, she was at an address which he gave us.

"Will you go, Dennis? I must. At once."

"Of course."

Biddy was at home, and never whilst I live can I forget the "home." Four
blocks of high houses enclosed a small court into which there was one
entrance, an archway through one of the buildings. All the houses opened
into the court. There were no back-doors, and no back premises whatever.
All the dirt and (as to washing) all the cleanliness of a crowded
community living in rooms in flats, the quarrelling and the love-making,
the old people's resting, and the children's playing;--from emptying a
slop-pail to getting a breath of evening air--this court was all there
was for it. I have since been told that if we had been dressed like
gentlemen, we should not have been safe in it, but I do not think we
should have met with any worse welcome if we had come on the same
errand--"to see old Biddy Macartney."

Roughly enough, it is true, we were directed to one of the houses, the
almost intolerable stench of which increased as we went up the stairs.
By the help of one inmate and another, we made our way to Biddy's door,
and then we found it locked.

"The missis 'll be out," said a deformed girl who was pulling herself
along by the balustrades. She was decent-looking and spoke civilly, so I
ventured to ask, "Do you mean that old Biddy is out?"

"Nay, not Biddy. The woman that sees to her. When she's got to go out
she locks t' old lass up to be safe," and volunteering no further help,
the girl rested for a minute against the wall, with her hand to her
side, and then dragged herself into one of the rooms, and shut the door
in our faces.

The court without and the houses within already resounded so to the
squalling of children, that I paid no attention to the fact that more of
this particular noise was coming up the stairs; but in another moment a
woman, shaking a screaming baby in her arms, and dragging two crying
children at her skirts, clenched her disengaged fist (it had a key in
it) close to our faces and said, "And which of you vagabones is t' old
lass's son?"

"Neither of us," said I, "but we want to see her, if we may. Are you the
woman who takes care of her?"

"I've plenty to do minding my own, I can tell ye," she grumbled, "but I
couldn't abear to see t' ould lass taken to a 'sylum. They're queer
places some on 'em, as I know. And as to t' House! there's a many folks
says, 'Well, if t' guardians won't give her no relief, let her go in.'
But she got hold on me one day, and she says, 'Sally, darling' (that's
t' ould lass's way, is calling ye Darling. It sounds soft, but she is
but an old Irish woman, as one may say), 'if ever,' she says, 'you hear
tell of their coming to fetch me, GOD bless ye,' she says, 'just give me
a look out of your eye, and I'm gone. I'll be no more trouble to any
one,' she says, 'and maybe I'll make it worth your while too.'"

At this point in her narrative the woman looked mysterious, nodded her
head, craned over the banisters to see that no one was near, slapped the
children and shook up the baby as a sort of mechanical protest against
the noise they were making (as to effects they only howled the louder),
and drawing nearer to us, spoke in lower tones:

"T' old lass has money, it's my belief, though she gives me nowt for her
lodging, and she spends nowt on herself. She's many a time fair clemmed,
I'll assure ye, till I can't abear to see it, and I give her the bit and
sup I might have had myself, for I'm not going to rob t' children
neither for her nor nobody. Ye see it's her son that's preying on her
mind. He wrote her a letter awhile ago, saying times was bad out yonder,
and he was fair heart-broke to be so far away from her, and she's been
queer ever since. She's wanted for everything herself, slaving and
saving to get enough to fetch him home. Where she hides it I know no
more nor you, but she wears a sight of old rags, one atop of another,
and pockets in all of 'em for aught I know--hold your din, ye unrewly
children!--there's folks coming. I'll let ye in. I lock t' old lass up
when I go out, for she might be wandering, and there's them hereabouts
that would reckon nought of putting her out of t' way and taking what
she's got, if they heard tell on't."

At last the door was unlocked, and we went in. And sitting on a low box,
dressed as before, even to the old coat and the spotted kerchief over
her bonnet, sat Biddy Macartney.

When she lifted her face, I saw that it was much wasted, and that her
fine eyes had got a restless uneasy look in them. Suddenly this ceased,
and they lit up with the old intelligence. For half an instant I
thought it was at the sight of me, but she did not even see me. It was
on Dennis O'Moore that her eyes were bent, and they never moved as she
struggled to her feet, and gazed anxiously at his face, his cap, and his
seafaring clothes, whilst, for his part, Dennis gazed almost as wildly
at her. At last she spoke:

"GOD save ye, squire! Has the old counthry come to this? Is the O'Moore
an alien, and all?"

"No, no. I'm the squire's son," said Dennis. "But tell me quick, woman,
what are you to Barney Barton?"

"Barney is it? Sure he was brother to me, as who knows better than your
honour?"

"Did _you_ live with us, too?"

"I did, acushla. In the heighth of ease and comfort, and done nothin'
for it. Wasn't I the big fool to be marryin' so early, not knowin' when
I was well off!"

"I know. Barney has told me. A Cork man, your husband, wasn't he? A
lazy, drunken, ill-natured rascal of a fellow."

"That's him, your honour!"

"Well, you're quit of him long since. And, as your son's in New York,
and all I have left of Barney is you ----"

"She doesn't hear you, Dennis."

I interrupted him, because in his impetuosity he had not noticed that
the wandering look had come back over the old woman's face, and that she
sat down on the box, and fumbled among her pockets for Micky's letter,
and then crouched weeping over it.

We stayed a long time with her, but she did not really revive. With
infinite patience and tenderness, Dennis knelt beside her, and listened
to her ramblings about Micky, and Micky's hardships, and Micky's
longings for home. Once or twice, I think, she was on the point of
telling about her savings, but she glanced uneasily round the room and
forbore. Dennis gave the other woman some money, and told her to give
Biddy a good meal--to have given money to her would have been
useless--and he tried hard to convince the old woman that Micky was
quite able to leave America if he wished. At last she seemed to take
this in, and it gave her, I fear, undue comfort, from the conviction
that, if this were so, he would soon be home.

After we left Biddy we went to seek decent lodgings for the night. For
Dennis was anxious to see her again in the morning, and of course I
stayed with him.

"Had you ever seen her before?" I asked, as we walked.

"Not to remember her. But, Jack, it wasn't Barney I saw in that first
dream. It was Bridget."

Dennis was full of plans for getting her home with him to Ireland; but
when we went back next day, we found a crowd round the archway that led
into the court. Prominent in the group was the woman who "cared for"
Biddy. Her baby was crying, her children were crying, and she was crying
too. And with every moment that passed the crowd grew larger and larger,
as few things but bad news can make a crowd grow.

We learnt it very quickly. Biddy had been so much cheered up by our
