Upstairs in their bedroom, with the gas turned on, it was easy enough to
feel courageous. Their spirits rose indeed at the prospect of such an
adventure. Nurse Warner, who came into the room a little later, looked
round at the four beds, turned out the gas, and departed without a
suspicion. She had not been gone five minutes when a surreptitious
dressing took place, and four figures in dark coats stole down the
stairs. Though the building of the College might be absolutely modern,
the garden was a relic of mediaeval days. It had formerly belonged to the
nunnery of St. Mary's, and had adjoined the Abbey. Parts of the
crumbling old wall were still left, and a flagged path led from a
sun-dial to some ruins. In the day-time it was a cheerful place, and a
blaze of color. The girls had never before seen it in its night aspect.
On this May evening it had a quiet beauty that was most impressive. The
full moon shone on the great dark pile of the Abbey towers and the beech
avenue beyond. There was just light enough in the garden to distinguish
bushes as heavy masses, and to trace the paths from the grass. The air
was sweet with the scent of flowers.

It is amazing how different conditions can alter a scene: at noon, with
the hum from the busy streets, it was commonplace enough; by moonlight
it became a mystic bower of enchantment. The girls walked along very
quietly, treading on the grass so as to make no noise. A slight mist was
rising from the ground near the Abbey; in the rays of the moon it
resembled a lake. Everything, indeed, was altered. The outline of the
sumach bush was like a crouching tiger; the laburnum tassels waved like
skeleton fingers. It seemed a witching, unreal world.

Four rather scared girls crept along, clasping hands for moral support.
Each secretly would have been relieved to abandon the quest, but did not
like to be the first to turn tail. They had determined to walk from the
sun-dial to the Abbey wall and back again. So far the garden, though
mysterious, showed no signs of anything supernatural. They began to
pluck up courage, and even to talk to one another in low whispers. At
the ruins they turned and looked back towards the sun-dial. The
moonlight streamed along the flagged path, and shimmered on the clumps
of early yellow lilies.

What was that, stealing from under the shelter of the hawthorn tree? The
girls gasped and almost stopped breathing.

[Illustration: A TALL FIGURE, CLOTHED IN SOME WHITE GARMENT, WAS GLIDING
TOWARDS THEM.]

A tall figure, clothed in some long white garment, was gliding towards
them. It kept in the shadow, and they could see no details, only a light
mass that was slowly and steadily advancing apparently straight to where
they were crouching beside the wall. Fil was trembling like a leaf, Nora
declared afterward that her hair stood on end, Ingred and Verity felt
shivers run down their spines. Nearer and nearer came the white figure.
Its approach was more than flesh and blood could stand. With a wild
shriek Fil dashed across the lawn, followed closely by Nora, Ingred, and
Verity.

"Girls!" cried a clear and well-known voice. "Girls! Stop! What are you
doing here?"

There was no mistaking the tone of command of the head-mistress. Four
amazed and crestfallen damsels halted and turned back, to find Miss
Burd, attired in a white dressing-gown, standing in the moonlight on the
grass.

"What is the meaning of this?" she asked. "And why aren't you all in
bed?"

It is always difficult to give explanations, and (to such a
matter-of-fact person as Miss Burd) it seemed particularly silly to have
to confess that they had come out ghost-hunting, and had mistaken her
for a spirit. She emptied the vials of her scorn upon their dejected
heads.

"Don't let me hear of any more nonsense of this sort!" she finished. "I
should have thought you were too intelligent to believe in such rubbish.
As for leaving your dormitory at this hour, you deserve to be locked in
the cycle-shed for the night. I shall, of course, report you to Mrs.
Best, and none of you will play tennis for a week, as a punishment."

Miss Burd, bristling with anger, swept the delinquents before her to the
door of the hostel, and watched them flee upstairs, then went to lay the
matter before Mrs. Best.

In Dormitory 2, four girls got into bed at topmost speed.

"Of all the ill-luck!" mourned Fil.

"I didn't know Miss Burd prowled about the garden in a dressing-gown,"
exclaimed Ingred.

"She _did_ look exactly like a ghost!" confirmed Verity.

"Tennis off for a whole week! Blossom will be furious! It's too
absolutely grizzly for anything!" groused Nora. "I wish the wretched old
ghost had been at Jericho before we went to look for it!"




CHAPTER XX

Under the Lanterns


It is an ill wind that blows nobody good, and though Nora, Fil, Ingred,
and Verity might chafe at being debarred from tennis for a whole week,
their adventure in the garden had given them an idea. How it exactly
originated could not be decided, for each fiercely claimed the full
credit for it. Its evolution, however, was somewhat as follows:

     Stage 1. How lovely the garden looked in the evening.

     Stage 2. Why should we not _all_ enjoy it some time?

     Stage 3. Miss Burd evidently does.

     Stage 4. And looked very fascinating in her white dressing-gown.

     Stage 5. It was exactly like a fancy dress.

     Stage 6. Why should not we all wear fancy dress?

     Stage 7. _Let us ask Miss Burd to let the hostel have a fancy-dress
     dance in the school garden._

Great minds generally think in company, and often hit upon the same
invention at the same moment, so perhaps all four girls had an equal
share in the brain-wave. They communicated it cautiously to companions,
and as it "caught on" they sounded Mrs. Best, and finding her favorably
disposed to the scheme, begged her to intercede for them with Miss Burd.
The head-mistress was wonderfully gracious about the matter, gave full
permission for the dance, promised to be present herself, and allowed
the invitation to be extended to any mistresses and seniors who would
care to join the party. It was quite a long time since the hostel had
had any particularly exciting doings, so that the girls flung themselves
into their preparation with much enthusiasm. Those who were lucky enough
already to possess fancy costumes, or who were able to borrow them, of
course scored, and the rest set to work to manufacture anything that
came to hand. It was to be in the nature of an impromptu affair, but a
few days' notice was given, and the girls were able to devote a Saturday
to the all-absorbing problem. Ingred, home for the week-end, enlisted
the help of Mother and Quenrede, and turned the bungalow almost upside
down in her quest for suitable accessories. She thought of a number of
characters she would have liked to impersonate, but was always balked by
the lack of some vital article of dress.

"It's no use!" she lamented. "I can't be 'Joan of Arc' without a suit of
armor, or 'Queen Elizabeth' when I haven't a flowered velvet robe! I'm
so tired of all the old things! It's too stale to twist some roses in my
hair for 'Summer,' and I've been a gipsy so often that everybody knows
my red handkerchief and gilt beads. I'd as soon be a Red Indian squaw!"

"And why shouldn't you be?" asked Quenrede. "It's a remarkably pretty
costume."

"Oh, I dare say, if I could beg, borrow, or steal it!"

"You've no need to do either, my dear. I've had a brain-wave, and we'll
fix it up for you at home. Yes, I mean it! Allow me to introduce myself:
'Miss Quenrede Saxon, Court Costumier. The very latest theatrical
productions.' I'll make you look so that your own mother will hardly
know you!"

"I'd like to puzzle them!" rejoiced Ingred. "Miss Burd said she should
have a parade, and hinted something about a prize. They always give
points to whoever has the best disguise. Masks are barred, but we may
paint our faces. I think I shall be rather choice as a squaw!"

"You ought to have me with you as your 'brave'!" chuckled Hereward.

"It's a 'Ladies Only' dance, so you can't be invited, my boy! There
won't be a solitary masculine individual present--even the gardener will
have gone home."

"You bet folks will peep in!"

"No, they won't. The premises are strictly private."

Quenrede was in some respects a clever and ingenious little person. She
was not much good at ordinary dressmaking, where fashion must be
followed, but she displayed great originality in her construction of
Ingred's fancy costume. There were two clean sacks in the house, and she
commandeered them. She cut one into a skirt and the other into a jumper,
stitched up the sides, and frayed out the bottoms to represent fringes.
Then she took her water-color paints, mixed them with Chinese white to
form a strong body color, and painted Indian patterns on both garments.
The head-dress she considered a triumph. She went to a neighboring
poultry farm, and boldly begged the tail feathers which had been plucked
the day before from some game fowls. These she glued round a cardboard
crown, and the effect was magnificent. A dress rehearsal was held, and
the family rejoiced over Ingred's most decidedly Wild West appearance.

"You have a pair of real moccasins that Uncle Ernest sent you for
bedroom slippers. I'll cut some strips of cloth into fringe for
leggings, and you can wear Athelstane's leather belt, and carry an axe
for a tomahawk," said Quenrede, surveying her work with critical
satisfaction. "Don't forget to paint your face!"

"I shan't show anyone my costume beforehand," chuckled Ingred. "I really
don't believe anyone will know me! What luck if I won a prize for the
best disguise!"

"Bet you anything you like you don't!" murmured Hereward.

"Why shouldn't I?"

"Because there may be others even better!"

"Well, of course, that's for Miss Burd to judge! But I think I've a
sporting chance, at any rate!"

The dance was to be held on Monday evening after supper, when it was
just beginning to grow dusk. The mistresses had taken the matter up
quite enthusiastically, and had stretched some wires across the garden,
and hung up Chinese lanterns. The hostel piano had been pulled close to
the window, so that the strains of music could float out into the
garden. At least fifteen seniors had accepted the invitation, and it was
rumored that Miss Burd had invited a few private friends. Supper was
held earlier than usual, so as to allow time for the all-important
operation of dressing, and the moment it was finished every inmate of
the hostel fled to her bedroom. Dormitory 2 was naturally a scene of
much confusion. The girls tried to put on their own costumes and help
each other at the same time. Fil, as a Dresden China Shepherdess, needed
much assistance in the settling of her panniers, and the arrangement of
her curls, which by special permission from Mrs. Best had been twisted
up in curl papers from four o'clock until the last available moment, and
came out, much to Fil's satisfaction, in quite creditable ringlets. The
effect was so altogether charming that her room-mates called a general
halt for admiration.

"You look like a mixture of Dolly Varden and Sweet Lavender, with a dash
of Maid Marian thrown in," decided Verity.

"I hope my hair'll keep in curl! There's rather a damp feeling in the
air," fluttered Fil anxiously.

"You could fly indoors, and give it a twist with the tongs, if it gets
very limp," suggested Nora.

Nora herself was going as a personification of "The Kitchen." Her skirt
was draped with dusters and dish-cloths, she wore a small dish-cover as
a hat, clothes-pegs were suspended round her neck as a necklace, and she
brandished a rolling-pin in her hand.

"I'm bound to be something comic," she assured the others. "I'd never
keep my face straight for a romantic character. I could no more live up
to Lady Jane Grey than I could fly! She's above me altogether!"

Verity, who had borrowed a Dutch costume slightly too small for her, was
trying to squeeze her proportions into the tight velvet bodice, and
looked dubiously at the sabots.

"I'll never be able to dance in those!" she decided. "I'll put them on
to start with, and then kick them off and slip on my sandals instead.
They're the most extraordinary clumpy things in the world, I feel like a
cat walking in walnut shells!"

Ingred's toilet progressed very favorably till it came to the stage of
coloring her face. She was not quite sure as to the best means of
obtaining a Red Indian complexion. First she tried rubbing it with soil
from the garden, but that was a painful process which almost scraped the
skin from her cheeks. So she washed her face and used cocoa. She mixed
it in a cup and dabbed it over, but it would not go on smoothly, and the
result was so patchy and hideous that once more she brought out her
sponge and wiped it off. At that point Verity came to the rescue,
smeared the poor cheeks (already sore through such ill-treatment) with
vanishing cream, then powdered on some dry cocoa, which certainly gave a
dusky and non-European aspect to her features, especially when combined
with the feather head-dress. Her dark hair, plaited in two long tails,
completed the illusion. The girls held a complacent review of their
toilets, then walked downstairs with caution, for Nora's dish-cover was
difficult to balance as a hat, and Verity's heels kept slipping out of
the sabots. Fil's ringlets, alas! were already beginning to untwist, and
Ingred's jumper, put on in too big a hurry, showed symptoms of splitting
down the seam. There was no time for repairs of any sort, however. They
were five minutes late, and the rest of the company were assembled on
the lawn. The boarders from the hostel, together with mistresses and
seniors who had come by invitation, made a total of more than fifty
persons, all in fancy dress.

These gay costumes were a pretty sight against the background of trees
and bushes and flower-beds. The sun had set, leaving a yellow glow in the
sky, and the Chinese lanterns were beginning to glow in the gathering
twilight. It was certainly a varied crowd; all centuries had met
together. A Japanese damsel walked arm-in-arm with a Lancashire witch;
an Italian peasant hob-a-nobbed with "The Queen of Sheba," a Spanish
lady was talking to "Old Mother Hubbard," while such characters as "A
Medicine Bottle," or "An Aeroplane" rubbed shoulders with an "Egyptian
Princess" or "Dick Whittington's Cat."

Miss Burd, garbed appropriately as Chaucer's Prioress, received the
company at the top of the sun-dial steps, looking, in the opinion of the
Foursome League, quite sufficiently like the ghost of yesterday to have
justified squeals had they met her alone. When the ceremony of
introduction was over, the guests dispersed about the lawn, Miss Perry
struck up a waltz on the piano, and the fun began. Dancing on the grass,
in the growing darkness, with the Chinese lanterns sending out a soft
but uncertain radiance overhead, was a new experience to most of the
school. It was difficult not to step on to the flower-beds, or to brush
against the bushes. Trailing garments were decidedly in the way, and
came to grief. There was a delirious sort of Eastern feeling about it--a
kind of combination of "The Thousand and One Nights" and the "Rubaiyat
of Omar Khayyam." The Abbey tower for once seemed out of place, and
ought to have changed miraculously into a pagoda or a minaret.

It was after the girls had been dancing for some little time that Ingred
first noticed a couple whom she did not remember to have seen before.
They followed persistently in her steps, and even gently bumped into her
once or twice, thus compelling her attention. She looked at them,
considerably mystified. One was attired in Early Victorian Costume, with
a crinoline, a little tippet, and a poke bonnet, from which peeped some
bewitching ringlets; the other, in a gorgeous Turkish costume, was
enveloped in a shimmering gauze veil.

"Who are those?" Ingred asked her partner.

But Verity could not tell.

In the twilight it was, of course, easy to make mistakes, but Ingred
began to have a strong suspicion that neither of the mysterious partners
belonged to the school. They were certainly not members of the Fifth or
Sixth. Perhaps some of the Juniors had forced themselves in? No, they
were too tall for Juniors.

"Perhaps they are ghosts!" shivered Verity.

"Ghosts don't bump into people. These are real substantial flesh and
blood!"

"It's so dark, we can hardly see."

"Well, I vote we keep close to them, and next time we get near a
lantern, we'll turn the tables and bump into them, and try to see who
they are."

It was easier said than done, however; the strangers seemed to have
changed their tactics, and instead of pursuing Ingred and Verity now
endeavored to avoid them. No "elusive Pimpernels" could have been more
difficult to follow. They would come quite close and then suddenly dodge
and glide away, only to reappear and repeat the same tantalizing
performance. Ingred and Verity began to get on their mettle. It was so
evidently done on purpose that they were fully determined to catch the
errant pair. After a long game at hide-and-seek they at last managed to
dance along side them, and laying violent hands upon them, to drag them
into the light of a lantern. As Ingred gazed for a moment in perplexity,
the Early Victorian lady gave a most un-Early Victorian wink inside the
poke bonnet.

"Hereward! How _dare_ you!" gasped his sister.

A firm hand drew her away from the light, and in the shelter of a laurel
bush, a voice, choking with laughter, proclaimed:

"Done you, old girl! Done you brown! What about that bet? I told you
you'd never know me!"

"You abominable young wretch," replied Ingred, laughing in spite of
herself. "How _did_ you manage it? And who is your friend?"

"Allow me to introduce Vashti, Queen of Persia!"

"Bunkum! It's a boy! I know it is!"

The explosive sounds issuing from under the shimmering veil of Queen
Vashti certainly sounded more masculine than feminine, and that Persian
princess confessed presently to the name of Franklin.

"He's a chum of mine," explained Hereward, "and he lives close by, so we
made it up to come together. His sister lent us the clothes and dressed
us. I say, your Prioress never found us out, did she? What about that
prize?"

"There isn't going to be a prize, and you certainly wouldn't have
deserved it! Look here, you'd better wangle yourselves off before it
gets about who you are. _I_ should get into a row, not you!"

"Would the Prioress kick up rough?"

"She'd probably think I'd planned the whole business, and encouraged you
to come."

"Even if we apologized?"

"She wouldn't accept an apology. If you want me to have any tennis next
week, you had better clear out."

"Just a round with you first, and Franklin can take your friend, or vice
versa if you prefer it!"

"You impudent boy! Certainly not. I daren't risk it. Look, Miss Strong
is bringing out the lamp, and putting it on the sun-dial, and I believe
Miss Perry is going to take a flashlight photo presently. If you want to
