orderly, and with good discretion, they entreated me to regard the
safety of mine own life, as well as the preservation of theirs; and that
I should not, through over-boldness, leave their widows and fatherless
children to give me bitter curses.

"Whereupon, seeking counsel of God, it pleased His Divine Majesty to move
my heart to prosecute that which I hope shall be to His glory and to the
contentation of every Christian mind."

He had two vessels--one of some burden, the other a pinnace of thirty
tons. The result of the counsel which he had sought was, that he made
over his own large vessel to such as wished to return, and himself,
"thinking it better to die with honour than to return with infamy," went
on with such volunteers as would follow him, in a poor leaky cutter, up
the sea now in commemoration of that adventure called Davis' Strait. He
ascended four degrees north of the furthest known point, among storms
and icebergs, when the long days and twilight nights alone saved him
from being destroyed, and, coasting back along the American shore, he
discovered Hudson Strait, supposed then to be the long desired entrance
into the Pacific. This exploit drew the attention of Walsingham, and by
him Davis was presented to Burleigh, "who was also pleased to show him
great encouragement." If either these statesmen or Elizabeth had been
twenty years younger, his name would have filled a larger space in
history than a small corner of the map of the world; but, if he was
employed at all in the last years of the century, no _vates sacer_ has
been found to celebrate his work, and no clew is left to guide us. He
disappears; a cloud falls over him. He is known to have commanded
trading vessels in the Eastern seas, and to have returned five times
from India. But the details are all lost, and accident has only parted
the clouds for a moment to show us the mournful setting with which he,
too, went down upon the sea.

In taking out Sir Edward Michellthorne to India, in 1604, he fell in
with a crew of Japanese, whose ship had been burnt, drifting at sea,
without provisions, in a leaky junk. He supposed them to be pirates, but
he did not choose to leave them to so wretched a death, and took them on
board; and in a few hours, watching their opportunity, they murdered
him.

As the fool dieth, so dieth the wise, and there is no difference; it was
the chance of the sea, and the ill reward of a humane action--a
melancholy end for such a man--like the end of a warrior, not dying
Epaminondas-like on the field of victory, but cut off in some poor brawl
or ambuscade. But so it was with all these men. They were cut off in the
flower of their days, and few of them laid their bones in the sepulchres
of their fathers. They knew the service which they had chosen, and they
did not ask the wages for which they had not laboured. Life with them
was no summer holiday, but a holy sacrifice offered up to duty, and
what their Master sent was welcome. Beautiful is old age--beautiful is
the slow-dropping mellow autumn of a rich, glorious summer. In the old
man, Nature has fulfilled her work; she loads him with her blessings;
she fills him with the fruits of a well-spent life; and, surrounded by
his children and his children's children, she rocks him softly away to a
grave, to which he is followed with blessings. God forbid we should not
call it beautiful. It is beautiful, but not the most beautiful. There is
another life, hard, rough, and thorny, trodden with bleeding feet and
aching brow; the life of which the cross is the symbol; a battle which
no peace follows, this side the grave; which the grave gapes to finish,
before the victory is won; and--strange that it should be so--this is
the highest life of man. Look back along the great names of history;
there is none whose life has been other than this. They to whom it has
been given to do the really highest work in this earth--whoever they
are, Jew or Gentile, Pagan or Christian, warriors, legislators,
philosophers, priests, poets, kings, slaves--one and all, their fate has
been the same--the same bitter cup has been given them to drink. And so
it was with the servants of England in the sixteenth century. Their
life was a long battle, either with the elements or with men; and it was
enough for them to fulfil their work, and to pass away in the hour when
God had nothing more to bid them do.

Froude: "Short Studies on Great Subjects."




THE SEA-KING'S BURIAL


    "My strength is failing fast,"
      Said the sea-king to his men;
    "I shall never sail the seas
      As a conqueror again.
    But while yet a drop remains
    Of the life-blood in my veins,
    Raise, O raise me from the bed;
    Put the crown upon my head;
    Put my good sword in my hand,
    And so lead me to the strand,
    Where my ship at anchor rides
            Steadily;
      If I cannot end my life
      In the crimsoned battle-strife,
    Let me die as I have lived,
            On the sea."

    They have raised King Balder up,
      Put his crown upon his head;
    They have sheathed his limbs in mail,
      And the purple o'er him spread;
    And amid the greeting rude
    Of a gathering multitude,
    Borne him slowly to the shore--
    All the energy of yore
    From his dim eyes flashing forth--
    Old sea-lion of the north--
    As he looked upon his ship
            Riding free,
      And on his forehead pale
      Felt the cold, refreshing gale,
    And heard the welcome sound
            Of the sea.

    They have borne him to the ship
      With a slow and solemn tread;
    They have placed him on the deck
      With his crown upon his head,
    Where he sat as on a throne;
    And have left him there alone,
    With his anchor ready weighed
    And his snowy sails displayed
    To the favouring wind, once more
    Blowing freshly from the shore;
    And have bidden him farewell
            Tenderly,
       Saying, "_King of mighty men,
       We shall meet thee yet again,
    In Valhalla, with the monarchs
            Of the sea_."

    Underneath him in the hold
      They have placed the lighted brand;
    And the fire was burning slow
      As the vessel from the land,
    Like a stag-hound from the slips,
    Darted forth from out the ships.
    There was music in her sail
    As it swelled before the gale,
    And a dashing at her prow
    As it cleft the waves below,
    And the good ship sped along,
            Scudding free;
      As on many a battle morn
      In her time she had been borne,
    To struggle and to conquer
            On the sea.

    And the king, with sudden strength,
      Started up and paced the deck,
    With his good sword for his staff
      And his robe around his neck:
    Once alone, he raised his hand
    To the people on the land;
    And with shout and joyous cry
    Once again they made reply,
    Till the loud, exulting cheer
    Sounded faintly on his ear;
    For the gale was o'er him blowing
            Fresh and free;
      And ere yet an hour had passed,
      He was driven before the blast,
    And a storm was on his path
            On the sea.

    "So blow, ye tempests, blow,
      And my spirit shall not quail:
    I have fought with many a foe,
      I have weathered many a gale;
    And in this hour of death,
    Ere I yield my fleeting breath--
    Ere the fire now burning slow
    Shall come rushing from below,
    And this worn and wasted frame
    Be devoted to the flame--
    I will raise my voice in triumph,
            Singing free;--
      To the great All-Father's home
      I am driving through the foam,
    I am sailing to Valhalla,
            O'er the sea.

    "So blow, ye stormy winds--
      And, ye flames, ascend on high;--
    In the easy, idle bed
      Let the slave and coward die!
    But give me the driving keel,
    Clang of shields and flashing steel;
    Happy, happy, thus I'd yield,
    On the deck or in the field,
    My last breath, shouting: 'On
            To victory.'
      But since this has been denied,
      They shall say that I have died
    Without flinching, like a monarch
            Of the sea."

    And Balder spoke no more,
      And no sound escaped his lip;--
    Neither recked he of the roar,
      The destruction of his ship,
    Nor the fleet sparks mounting high,
    Nor the glare upon the sky;
    Scarcely heard the billows dash,
    Nor the burning timber crash:
    Scarcely felt the scorching heat
    That was gathering at his feet,
    Nor the fierce flames mounting o'er him
            Greedily.
      But the life was in him yet,
      And the courage to forget
    All his pain, in his triumph
            On the sea.

    Once alone a cry arose,
      Half of anguish, half of pride,
    As he sprang upon his feet
      With the flames on every side.
    "I am coming!" said the king,
    "Where the swords and bucklers ring--
    Where the warrior lives again
    With the souls of mighty men--
    I am coming, great All-Father,
            Unto Thee!
      Unto Odin, unto Thor,
      And the strong, true hearts of yore--
    I am coming to Valhalla,
            O'er the sea."

Charles Mackay




Reading enables us to see with the keenest eyes, to hear with the finest
ears, and listen to the sweetest voices of all time.

Lowell




MY CASTLES IN SPAIN


I am the owner of great estates. Many of them lie in the west, but the
greater part in Spain.

You may see my western possessions any evening at sunset when their
spires and battlements flash against the horizon. But my finest castles
are in Spain. It is a country famously romantic, and my castles are all
of perfect proportions and appropriately set in the most picturesque
situations.

I have never been in Spain myself, but I have naturally conversed much
with travellers to that country; although, I must allow, without
deriving from them much substantial information about my property there.

The wisest of them told me that there were more holders of real estate
in Spain than in any other region he had ever heard of, and they are all
great proprietors.

Every one of them possesses a multitude of the stateliest castles. It is
remarkable that none of the proprietors have ever been to Spain to take
possession and report to the rest of us the state of our property there,
and it is not easy for me to say how I know so much about my castles in
Spain.

The sun always shines upon them. They stand lofty and fair in a
luminous, golden atmosphere, a little hazy and dreamy, perhaps, like the
Indian summer, but in which no gales blow and there are no tempests.

All the sublime mountains and beautiful valleys and soft landscapes that
I have not yet seen are to be found in the grounds.

I have often wondered how I should reach my castles. I have inquired
very particularly, but nobody seemed to know the way. It occurred to me
that Bourne, the millionaire, must have ascertained the safest and most
expeditious route to Spain; so I stole a few minutes one afternoon and
went into his office.

He was sitting at his desk, writing rapidly, and surrounded by files of
papers and patterns, specimens, boxes,--everything that covers the
tables of a great merchant.

"A moment, please, Mr. Bourne." He looked up hastily, and wished me
good-morning, which courtesy I attributed to Spanish sympathy.

"What is it, sir?" he asked blandly, but with wrinkled brow.

"Mr. Bourne, have you any castles in Spain?" said I, without preface. He
looked at me for a few moments, without speaking and without seeming to
see me. His brow gradually smoothed, and his eyes apparently looking
into the street were really, I have no doubt, feasting upon the Spanish
landscape.

"Too many, too many," said he, at length, musingly, shaking his head and
without addressing me.

He feared, I thought, that he had too much impracticable property
elsewhere to own so much in Spain: so I asked:--

"Will you tell me what you consider the shortest and safest route
thither, Mr. Bourne? for, of course, a man who drives such an immense
trade with all parts of the world will know all that I have come to
inquire."

"My dear sir," answered he, wearily, "I have been trying all my life to
discover it; but none of my ships have ever been there--none of my
captains have any report to make.

"They bring me, as they brought my father, gold-dust from Guinea, ivory,
pearls, and precious stones from every part of the earth; but not a
fruit, not a solitary flower, from one of my castles in Spain.

"I have sent clerks, agents, and travellers of all kinds, philosophers,
pleasure hunters, and invalids, in all sorts of ships, to all sorts of
places, but none of them ever saw or heard of my castles, except a young
poet, and he died in a madhouse."

"Mr. Bourne, will you take five thousand at ninety-seven?" hastily
demanded a man whom, as he entered, I recognized as a broker. "We'll
make a splendid thing of it."

Bourne nodded assent, and the broker disappeared.

"Happy man!" muttered the merchant, as the broker went out; "he has no
castles in Spain."

"I am sorry to have troubled you, Mr. Bourne," said I, retiring.

"I'm glad you came," returned he; "but, I assure you, had I known the
route you hoped to ascertain from me I should have sailed years and
years ago. People sail for the Northwest Passage, which is nothing when
you have found it. Why don't the English Admiralty fit out expeditions
to discover all our castles in Spain?"

Yet I dream my dreams and attend to my castles in Spain. I have so much
property there that I could not in conscience neglect it.

All the years of my youth and hopes of my manhood are stored away, like
precious stones, in the vaults; and I know that I shall find everything
elegant, beautiful, and convenient when I come into possession.

As the years go by, I am not conscious that my interest diminishes.

Shall I tell a secret? Shall I confess that sometimes when I have been
sitting reading to my Prue "Cymbeline," perhaps, or a "Canterbury Tale,"
I have seemed to see clearly before me the broad highway to my castles
in Spain, and, as she looked up from her work and smiled in sympathy, I
have even fancied that I was already there?

George William Curtis: "Prue and I."
(Adapted)




ALADDIN


    When I was a beggarly boy
