"I will soon set her mind at ease upon that point. I will take the
noon train home."

"A word about business before you go. I discharged Timmins about a
week ago, and I have kept his place for you."

"By gracious!" exclaimed Bobby, thrown completely out of his propriety
by this announcement.

"I think you will do better, in the long run, than you would to travel
about the country. I was talking with Ellen about it, and she says it
shall be so. Timmins's salary was five hundred dollars a year, and you
shall have the same."

"Five hundred dollars a year!" ejaculated Bobby, amazed at the
vastness of the sum.

"Very well for a boy of thirteen, Bobby."

"I was fourteen last Sunday, sir."

"I would not give any other boy so much; but you are worth it, and you
shall have it."

Probably Mr. Bayard's gratitude had something to do with this
munificent offer; but he knew that our hero possessed abilities and
energy far beyond his years. He further informed Bobby that he should
have a room at his house, and that Ellen was delighted with the
arrangement he proposed.

The gloomy, threatening clouds were all rolled back, and floods of
sunshine streamed in upon the soul of the little merchant; but in the
midst of his rejoicing he remembered that his own integrity had
carried him safely through the night of sorrow and doubt. He had been
true to himself, and now, in the hour of his great triumph, he
realized that, if he had been faithless to the light within him, his
laurel would have been a crown of thorns.

He was happy--very happy. What made him so? Not his dawning
prosperity; not the favor of Mr. Bayard; not the handsome salary he
was to receive; for all these things would have been but dross if he
had sacrificed his integrity, his love of truth and uprightness. He
had been true to himself, and unseen angels had held him up. He had
been faithful, and the consciousness of his fidelity to principle made
a heaven within his heart.

It was arranged that he should enter upon the duties of his new
situation on the following week. After settling with Mr. Bayard, he
found he had nearly seventy dollars in his possession; so that in a
pecuniary point of view, if in no other, his eastern excursion was
perfectly satisfactory.

By the noon train he departed for Riverdale, and in two hours more he
was folded to his mother's heart. Mrs. Bright wept for joy now, as she
had before wept in misery when she heard of her son's misfortune. It
took him all the afternoon to tell his exciting story to her, and she
was almost beside herself when Bobby told her about his new situation.

After tea he hastened over to Squire Lee's; and my young readers can
imagine what a warm reception he had from father and daughter. For the
third time that day he narrated his adventures in the east; and Annie
declared they were better than any novel she had ever read. Perhaps it
was because Bobby was the hero. It was nearly ten o'clock before he
finished his story; and when he left, the squire made him promise to
come over the next day.




CHAPTER XXI

IN WHICH BOBBY STEPS OFF THE STAGE, AND THE AUTHOR MUST FINISH "NOW OR
NEVER"


The few days which Bobby remained at home before entering upon the
duties of his new situation were agreeably filled up in calling upon
his many friends, and in visiting those pleasant spots in the woods
and by the river, which years of association had rendered dear to
him. His plans for the future, too, occupied some of his time, though,
inasmuch as his path of duty was already marked out, these plans were
but little more than a series of fond imaginings; in short, little
more than day dreams. I have before hinted that Bobby was addicted to
castle building, and I should pity the man or boy who was not--who had
no bright dream of future achievements, of future usefulness. "As a
man thinketh, so is he," the Psalmist tells us, and it was the pen of
inspiration which wrote it. What a man pictures as his ideal of that
which is desirable in this world and the world to come, he will
endeavor to attain. Even if it be no higher aim than the possession of
wealth or fame, it is good and worthy as far as it goes. It fires his
brain, it nerves his arm. It stimulates him to action, and action is
the soul of progress. We must all work; and this world were cold and
dull if it had no bright dreams to be realized. What Napoleon
dreamed, he labored to accomplish, and the monarchs of Europe trembled
before him. What Howard wished to be, he labored to be; his ideal was
beautiful and true, and he raised a throne which will endure through
eternity.

Bobby dreamed great things. That bright picture of the little black
house transformed into a white cottage, with green blinds, and
surrounded by a pretty fence, was the nearest object; and before
Mrs. Bright was aware that he was in earnest, the carpenters and the
painters were upon the spot.

"Now or never," replied Bobby to his mother's remonstrance. "This is
your home, and it shall be the pleasantest spot upon earth, if I can
make it so."

Then he had to dream about his business in Boston and I am not sure
but that he fancied himself a rich merchant, like Mr. Bayard, living
in an elegant house in Chestnut Street, and having clerks and porters
to do as he bade them. A great many young men dream such things, and
though they seem a little silly when spoken out loud, they are what
wood and water are to the steam engine--they are the mainspring of
action. Some are stupid enough to dream about these things, and spend
their time in idleness and dissipation, waiting for "the good time
coming." It will never come to them. They are more likely to die in
the almshouse or the state prison, than to ride in their carriages;
for constant exertion is the price of success.

Bobby enjoyed himself to the utmost of his capacity during these few
days of respite from labor. He spent a liberal share of his time at
Squire Lee's, where he was almost as much at home as in his mother's
house. Annie read Moore's Poems to him, till he began to have quite a
taste for poetry himself.

In connection with Tom Spicer's continued absence, which had to be
explained, Bobby's trials in the eastern country leaked out, and the
consequence was, that he became a lion in Riverdale. The minister
invited him to tea, as well as other prominent persons, for the sake
of hearing his story; but Bobby declined the polite invitations from
sheer bashfulness. He had not brass enough to make himself a hero;
besides, the remembrance of his journey was anything but pleasant to
him.

On Monday morning he took the early train for Boston, and assumed the
duties of his situation in Mr. Bayard's store. But as I have carried
my hero through the eventful period of his life, I cannot dwell upon
his subsequent career. He applied himself with all the energy of his
nature to the discharge of his duties. Early in the morning and late
in the evening he was at his post. Mr. Bigelow was his friend from the
first, and gave him all the instruction he required. His intelligence
and quick perception soon enabled him to master the details of the
business, and by the time he was fifteen, he was competent to perform
any service required of him.

By the advice of Mr. Bayard, he attended an evening school for six
months in the year, to acquire a knowledge of book keeping, and to
compensate for the opportunities of which he had been necessarily
deprived in his earlier youth. He took Dr. Franklin for his model, and
used all his spare time in reading good books, and in obtaining such
information and such mental culture as would fit him to be, not only a
good merchant, but a good and true man.

Every Saturday night he went home to Riverdale to spend the Sabbath
with his mother. The little black house no longer existed, for it had
become the little paradise of which he had dreamed, only that the
house seemed whiter, the blinds greener, and the fence more attractive
than his fancy had pictured them. His mother, after a couple of years,
at Bobby's earnest pleadings, ceased to close shoes and take in
washing; but she had enough and to spare, for her son's salary was now
six hundred dollars. His kind employer boarded him for nothing (much
against Bobby's will, I must say), so that every month he carried to
his mother thirty dollars, which more than paid her expenses.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight years have passed by since Bobby--we beg his pardon, he is now
Mr. Robert Bright--entered the store of Mr. Bayard. He has passed from
the boy to the man. Over the street door a new sign has taken the
place of the old one, and the passer-by reads,--

  BAYARD & BRIGHT,
  BOOKSELLERS AND PUBLISHERS.

The senior partner resorts to his counting room every morning from the
force of habit; but he takes no active part in the business.
Mr. Bright has frequent occasion to ask his advice, though everything
is directly managed by him; and the junior is accounted one of the
ablest, but at the same time one of the most honest, business men in
the city. His integrity has never been sacrificed, even to the
emergencies of trade. The man is what the boy was; and we can best sum
up the results of his life by saying that he has been true to himself,
true to his friends, and true to his God.

Mrs. Bright is still living at the little white cottage, happy in
herself and happy in her children. Bobby--we mean Mr. Bright--has
hardly missed going to Riverdale on a Saturday night since he left
home, eight years before. He has the same partiality for those famous
apple pies, and his mother would as soon think of being without bread
as being without apple pies when he comes home.

Of course Squire Lee and Annie were always glad to see him when he
came to Riverdale; and for two years it had been common talk in
Riverdale that our hero did not go home on Sunday evening when the
clock struck nine. But as this is a forbidden topic, we will ask the
reader to go with us to Mr. Bayard's house in Chestnut Street.

What! Annie Lee here?

No; but as you are here, allow me to introduce Mrs. Robert Bright.

They were married a few months before, and Mr. Bayard insisted that
the happy couple should make their home at his house.

But where is Ellen Bayard?

O, she is Mrs. Bigelow now, and her husband is at the head of a large
book establishment in New York.

Bobby's dream had been realized, and he was the happiest man in the
world--at least he thought so, which is just the same thing. He had
been successful in business; his wife--the friend and companion of his
youth, the brightest filament of the bright vision his fancy had
woven--had been won, and the future glowed with brilliant promises.

He had been successful; but neither nor all of the things we have
mentioned constituted his highest and truest success--not his business
prosperity, not the bright promise of wealth in store for him, not his
good name among men, not even the beautiful and loving wife who had
cast her lot with his to the end of time. These were successes, great
and worthy, but not the highest success.

He had made himself a man,--this was his real success,--a true, a
Christian man. He had lived a noble life. He had reared the lofty
structure of his manhood upon a solid foundation--principle. It is
the rock which the winds of temptation and the rains of selfishness
cannot move.

Robert Bright is happy because he is good. Tom Spicer, now in the
state prison, is unhappy,--not _because_ he is in the state
prison, but because the evil passions of his nature are at war with
the peace of his soul. He has fed the good that was within him upon
straw and husks, and starved it out. He is a body only; the soul is
dead in trespasses and sin. He loves no one, and no one loves him.

During the past summer, Mr. Bright and his lady took a journey "down
east." Annie insisted upon visiting the State Reform School; and her
husband drove through the forest by which he had made his escape on
that eventful night. Afterwards they called upon Sam Ray, who had been
"dead sure that Bobby would one day be a great man." He was about the
same person, and was astonished and delighted when our hero introduced
himself.

They spent a couple of hours in talking over the past, and at his
departure, Mr. Bright made him a handsome present in such a delicate
manner that he could not help accepting it.

Squire Lee is still as hale and hearty as ever, and is never so happy
as when Annie and her husband come to Riverdale to spend the
Sabbath. He is fully of the opinion that Mr. Bright is the greatest
man on the western continent, and he would not be in the least
surprised if he should be elected President of the United States one
of these days.

The little merchant is a great merchant now. But more than this, he
is a good man. He has formed his character, and he will probably die
as he has lived.

Reader, if you have any good work to do, do it now; for with you it
may be "NOW OR NEVER."






[Illustration: By England's Aid by G. A. Henty]

THE FAMOUS HENTY BOOKS

The Boys' Own Library

12mo, Cloth

G. A. Henty has long held the field as the most popular boys'
author. Age after age of heroic deeds has been the subject of his pen,
and the knights of old seem very real in his pages. Always wholesome
and manly, always heroic and of high ideals, his books are more than
popular wherever the English language is spoken.

Each volume is printed on excellent paper from new large-type plates,
bound in cloth, assorted colors, with an attractive ink and gold
stamp. _Price 75 Cents._

  _A Final Reckoning_
      A Tale of Bush Life in Australia

  _By England's Aid_
      The Freeing of the Netherlands

  _By Right of Conquest_
      A Tale of Cortez in Mexico

  _Bravest of the Brave_
      A Tale of Peterborough in Spain

  _By Pike and Dyke_
      The Rise of the Dutch Republic

  _By Sheer Pluck_
      A Tale of the Ashantee War

  _Bonnie Prince Charlie_
      A Tale of Fontenoy and Culloden

  _Captain Bayley's Heir_
      A Tale of the Gold Fields of California

  _Cat of Bubastes_
      A Story of Ancient Egypt

  _Cornet of Horse_
      A Tale of Marlborough's Wars

  _Facing Death_
      A Tale of the Coal Mines

  _Friends, though Divided_
      A Tale of the Civil War in England

  _For Name and Fame_
      A Tale of Afghan Warfare

  _For the Temple_
      A Tale of the Fall of Jerusalem

  _In Freedom's Cause_
      A Story of Wallace and Bruce

  _In the Reign of Terror_
      The Adventures of a Westminster Boy

  _In Times of Peril_
      A Tale of India

  _Jack Archer_
      A Tale of the Crimea

  _Lion of St. Mark_
      A Tale of Venice in the XIV. Century

  _Lion of the North_
      A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus

  _Maori and Settler_
      A Tale of the New Zealand War

  _Orange and Green_
      A Tale of the Boyne and Limerick

  _One of the 28th_
