It will be dangerous, indeed, for you to attempt to find your way
to the coast without escort. Therefore you had better come on with
me, and return under my protection to the coast."

"We should be glad of a stay with you in the mountains," Ned said.
"We feel so ignorant of everything European that we should be glad
to learn, from you, a little of the ways of our countrymen before
we venture down among them. What is the nearest town on the coast?"

"Arica," the captain said, "is the port from which we have come. It
is distant a hundred and thirty miles from here, and we have had
ten days' hard journeying through the forest."

For the next fortnight, the lads remained at the mines. These were
worked by the Spaniards entirely by slave labor Nominal wages were,
indeed, given to the unfortunates who labored there. But they were
as much slaves as if they had been sold. The Spaniards, indeed,
treated the whole of the natives in the provinces occupied by them
as creatures to be used mercilessly for labor, and as having no
more feeling than the lower animals. The number of these
unfortunates who perished in the mines, from hard work and cruel
treatment, is beyond all calculation. But it may be said that, of
the enormous treasures drawn by Spain from her South American
possessions, during the early days of her occupation, every
doubloon was watered with blood.

The boys, who had for nearly six months lived among the Indians,
and had seen their many fine qualities, were horrified at the
sights which they witnessed; and, several times, had the greatest
difficulty to restrain their feelings of indignation and horror.
They agreed, however, that it would be worse than useless to give
vent to such opinions. It would only draw upon them the suspicion
of the Spaniards, and would set the authorities at the mine and the
captain of the escort against them, and might prejudice the first
report that would be sent down to Arica, concerning them.

During the first few days of their stay, the boys acted their parts
with much internal amusement. They pretended to be absolutely
ignorant of civilized feeding, seized the meat raw and tore it with
their fingers, sat upon the ground in preference to chairs, and in
every way behaved as persons altogether ignorant of civilization.
Gradually, however, they permitted themselves to be taught, and
delighted their entertainers by their docility and willingness. The
Spaniards were, indeed, somewhat surprised by the whiteness of
their skin, where sheltered from the sun; and by the lightness of
their hair and eyes. The boys could hear many comments upon them,
and wondering remarks why they should be so much fairer than their
countrymen in general. As, however, it was clearly useless to ask
them, none of the Spaniards thought of doing so.

The end of the fortnight arrived and, under the charge of the
escort, the lads set out, together with twenty mules laden with
silver, for the coast. They had no longer any fear of the attacks
of the natives, or any trouble connected with their food supply; an
ample stock of provisions being carried upon spare mules. They
themselves were mounted, and greatly enjoyed the journey through
the magnificent forests.

They were, indeed, a little uneasy as to the examination which they
were sure to have to undergo at Arica, and which was likely to be
very much more severe and searching than that to which the
good-natured captain had subjected them. They longed to ask him
whether any news had been heard of the arrival of an English
squadron upon the western coast. But it was impossible to do this,
without giving rise to suspicion; and they had the consolation, at
least, of having heard no single word concerning their countrymen
uttered in the conversations at the mine. Had Captain Francis Drake
and his companions arrived upon the coast, it was almost certain
that their presence there would be the all-absorbing topic among
the Spanish colonists.

Upon their arrival at Arica, the boys were conducted at once to the
governor--a stern and haughty-looking Spaniard, who received the
account given by the captain with an air of incredulity.

"This is a strange tale, indeed," he said, "and passes all
probability. Why should these children have been kidnapped on the
eastern coast, and brought across the continent? It is more likely
that they belong to this side. However, they could not be
malefactors who have escaped into the forest, for their age forbids
any idea of that kind. They must have been stolen. But I do not
recall any such event as the carrying off of the sons of Spaniards,
here, for many years back.

"However, this can be inquired into when they learn to speak our
language well. In the meantime, they had better be assigned
quarters in the barracks. Let them be instructed in military
exercises, and in our language."

"And," said an ecclesiastic who was sitting at the table, "in our
holy religion; for methinks, stolen away as they were in their
youth, they can be no better than pagans."

Tom had difficulty in repressing a desire to glance at Ned, as
these words were spoken. But the eyes of the governor were fixed so
intently upon them, that he feared to exhibit any emotion,
whatever. He resolved mentally, however, that his progress in
Spanish should be exceedingly small; and that many months should
elapse, before he could possibly receive even rudimentary
instruction in religious matters.

The life in the barracks at Arica resembled, pretty closely, that
which they had led so long on board ship. The soldiers received
them with good feeling and camaraderie, and they were soon
completely at home with them. They practiced drill, the use of the
pike and rapier; taking very great care, in all these exercises, to
betray exceeding clumsiness. With the bow, alone, they were able to
show how expert they were.

Indeed, the Spaniards were, in no slight degree, astonished by the
extraordinary power and accuracy of their shooting. This Ned
accounted for, to them, by the long practice that he had had among
the Indians; declaring that, among the tribes beyond the mountains,
he was by no means an exceptionally good shot--which, indeed, was
true enough at short distances, for at these the Indians could
shoot with marvellous dexterity.

"By San Josef!" exclaimed one of the Spanish officers, after
watching the boys shooting at a target, two hundred yards distant,
with their powerful bows; "it reminds me of the way that those
accursed English archers draw their bows, and send their arrows
singing through the air. In faith, too, these men, with their blue
eyes and their light hair, remind one of these heretic dogs."

"Who are these English?" Ned asked, carelessly. "I have heard of no
such tribe. Do they live near the seacoast, or among the
mountains?"

"They are no tribe, but a white people, like ourselves," the
captain said. "Of course, you will not have heard of them. And,
fortunately, you are not likely ever to see them on this coast; but
if you had remained where you were born, on the other side, you
would have heard little else talked of than the doings of these
pirates and scoundrels; who scour the seas, defy the authority of
his sacred majesty, carry off our treasures under our noses, burn
our towns, and keep the whole coast in an uproar."

"But," said Ned, in assumed astonishment, "how is it that so great
a monarch as the King of Spain, and Emperor of the Indies, does not
annihilate these ferocious sea robbers? Surely so mighty a king
could have no difficulty in overcoming them."

"They live in an island," the officer said, "and are half fish,
half men."

"What monsters!" Ned exclaimed. "Half fish and half men! How then
do they walk?"

"Not really; but in their habits. They are born sailors, and are so
ferocious and bloodthirsty that, at sea, they overcome even the
soldiers of Spain; who are known," he said, drawing himself up, "to
be the bravest in the world. On land, however, we should teach them
a very different lesson; but on the sea it must be owned that,
somehow, we are less valiant than on shore."

Every day a priest came down to the barracks, and for an hour
endeavored to instill the elements of his religion into the minds
of the now civilized wild men. Ned, although progressing rapidly in
other branches of his Spanish education, appeared abnormally dull
to the explanations of the good father; while Tom's small stock of
Spanish was quite insufficient to enable him to comprehend more
than a word, here and there.

So matters might have remained, for months, had not an event
occurred which disclosed the true nationality of the lads. One day
the ordinarily placid blue sky was over-clouded. The wind rose
rapidly and, in a few hours, a tremendous storm was blowing on the
coast. Most of the vessels in the harbor succeeded in running into
shelter. But, later in the day, a cry arose that a ship had just
rounded the point of the bay, and that she would not be able to
make the port. The whole population speedily gathered upon the
mole, and the vessel, a small one employed in the coasting trade,
was seen struggling with the waves, which were rapidly bearing her
towards a reef, lying a quarter of a mile from the shore.

The sea was, at this time, running with tremendous force. The wind
was howling in a fierce gale, and when the vessel struck upon the
rocks, and her masts at once went by the board, all hope of safety
for the crew appeared at an end.

"Cannot a boat be launched," said Ned to the soldiers standing
round, "to effect the rescue of these poor fellows in that wreck?"

"Impossible!" they all said. "No boat could live in that sea."

After chatting for a time, Tom and Ned drew a little apart from the
rest of the crowd, and watched the ill-fated vessel.

"It is a rough sea, certainly," Ned said; "but it is all nonsense
to say that a boat could not live. Come along, Tom. Let us push
that shallop down. There is a sheltered spot behind that rock where
we may launch her, and methinks that our arms can row her out to
yonder ship."

Throwing off their doublets, the young men put their shoulders to
the boat, and soon forced it into the water. Then, taking their
seats and putting out the oars, they rowed round the corner of the
sheltering rock, and breasted the sea which was rolling in. A cry
of astonishment broke from the crowd on the mole as the boat made
its appearance, and the astonishment was heightened when it was
declared, by the soldiers, that the two men on board were the wild
men of the wood, as they were familiarly called among themselves.

It was a long struggle before the boys reached the wreck, and it
needed all their strength and seamanship to avoid being swamped by
the tremendous seas. At last, however, they neared it and, catching
a line thrown to them by the sailors, brought the boat up under the
lee of the ship; and as the captain, the four men who composed his
crew, and a passenger, leaped one by one from the ship into the
sea, they dragged them on board the boat, and then turned her head
to shore.




Chapter 15: The Prison of the Inquisition.



Among the spectators on the mole were the governor and other
principal officers of Arica.

"It seems almost like a miracle from heaven," the priest, who was
standing next the governor, exclaimed.

The governor was scowling angrily at the boat.

"If there be a miracle," he said, "good father, it is that our eyes
have been blinded so long. Think you, for a moment, that two lads
who have been brought up among the Indians, from their childhood,
could manage a boat in such a sea as this? Why, if their story were
true they could, neither of them, ever have handled an oar; and
these are sailors, skillful and daring beyond the common, and have
ventured a feat that none of our people here on shore were willing
to undertake. How they got here I know not, but assuredly they are
English sailors. This will account for their blue eyes and light
hair, which have so puzzled us; and for that ignorance of Spanish,
which they so craftily accounted for."

Although the assembled mass of people on the beach had not arrived
at the conclusions to which the governor had jumped, they were
filled with astonishment and admiration at the daring deed which
had been accomplished; and when the boat was safely brought round
behind the shelter of the rock, and its occupants landed on the
shore, loud cheers broke from the crowd; and the lads received a
perfect ovation, their comrades of the barracks being especially
enthusiastic. Presently the crowd were severed by two soldiers, who
made their way through it and, approaching Ned and Tom, said:

"We have the orders of the governor to bring you to him."

The lads supposed that the governor desired to thank them, for
saving the lives of the shipwrecked men; for in the excitement of
the rescue, the thought that they had exposed themselves by their
knowledge of seamanship had never crossed their minds. The crowd
followed tumultuously, expecting to hear a flattering tribute paid
to the young men who had behaved so well. But the aspect of the
governor as, surrounded by his officers, he stood in one of the
batteries on the mole, excited a vague feeling of astonishment and
surprise.

"You are two English seamen," he said, when the lads approached.
"It is useless lying any longer. Your knowledge of seamanship, and
your appearance, alike convict you."

For an instant the boys were too surprised to reply, and then Tom
said, boldly:

"We are, sir. We have done no wrong to any man, and we are not ashamed,
now, to say we are Englishmen. Under the same circumstances, I doubt
not that any Spaniard would have similarly tried to escape recognition.
But as chance has betrayed us, any further concealment were unnecessary."

"Take them to the guard house," the governor said, "and keep a
close watch over them. Later, I will interrogate them myself, in
the palace."

The feelings of the crowd, on hearing this unexpected colloquy,
were very mixed. In many, the admiration which the boys' conduct
had excited swallowed up all other feeling. But among the less
enthusiastic minds, a vague distrust and terror was at once excited
by the news that English sailors were among them. No Englishman had
ever been seen on that coast, and they had inflicted such terrible
losses, on the West Indian Islands and on the neighboring coast,
that it is no matter for surprise that their first appearance on
the western shores of South America was deemed an omen of terrible
import.

The news rapidly spread from mouth to mouth, and a large crowd
followed in the rear of the little party, and assembled around the
governor's house. The sailors who had been rescued had many friends
in the port, and these took up the cause of the boys, and shouted
that men who had done so gallant a deed should be pardoned,
whatever their offense Perhaps, on the whole, this party were in
the majority. But the sinister whisper that circulated among the
crowd, that they were spies who had been landed from English ships
on the coast, gradually cooled even the most enthusiastic of their
partisans; and what at one time appeared likely to become a
formidable popular movement, gradually calmed down, and the crowd
dispersed.

When brought before the governor, the boys affected no more
concealment; but the only point upon which they refused to give
information was respecting the ships on which they had sailed, and
the time at which they had been left upon the eastern coast of
America. Without absolutely affirming the fact, they led to the
belief that they had passed some years since they left their
vessels.

The governor presently gazed sharply upon them, and demanded:

"Are you the two whites who headed the negro revolt in Porto Rico,
and did so much damage to our possessions in that island?"

Ned would have hesitated as to the answer, but Tom at once said,
firmly:

"We are not those two white men, sir, but we know them well; and
they were two gallant and loyal Englishmen who, as we know, did
much to restrain the atrocities of the Indians. We saw them, when
they regained their ships."

It was lucky, indeed, that the governor did not put the question
separately, instead of saying, "Were you two the leaders?" for in
that case Ned would have been forced to acknowledge that he was one
of them.

The outspokenness of Tom's answer allayed the governor's
suspicions. A great portion of his questioning was directed to
discovering whether they really had crossed the continent; for he,
as well as the populace outside, had at first conceived the idea
that they might have been landed on the coast as spies. The fact,
however, that they were captured far up among the Cordilleras;
their dress and their appearance; and their knowledge of the native
tongues--which he tested by bringing in some natives, who entered
into conversation with them--convinced him that all this portion of
their story was true.

As he had no fear of their escaping he said that, at present, he
should not treat them as prisoners; and that their gallant conduct,
in rowing out to save the lives of Spaniards in danger, entitled
them to every good treatment; but that he must report their case to
the authorities at Lima, who would of course decide upon it.

The priest, however, urged upon the governor that he should
continue his instructions to them in the Catholic religion; and the
governor then pointed out to Ned, who alone was able to converse
fluently in Spanish, that they had now been so long separated from
their countrymen that they might, with advantage to themselves,
become naturalized as Spaniards; in which case he would push their
fortunes to the utmost and, with his report in their favor, they
might rise to positions of credit and honor; whereas, if they
insisted upon maintaining their nationality as Englishmen, it was
but too probable that the authorities at Lima would consider it
necessary to send them, as prisoners, to Spain. He said, however,
that he would not press them for an answer, at once.

Greatly rejoiced at finding that they were not, at present, to be
thrown into prison; but were to be allowed to continue their
independent life, in the barracks; the lads took their departure
from the governor's house, and were most cordially received by
their comrades.

For a short time everything went smoothly. The suspicion that they
were spies had now passed away, and the remembrance of their
courageous action made them popular among all classes in the town.
A cloud, however, began to gather slowly round them. Now that they
had declared their nationality, they felt that they could no longer
even pretend that it was likely that they might be induced to
forsake their religion; and they accordingly refused, positively,
to submit any longer to the teaching of the priests. Arguments were
spent upon them in vain and, after resorting to these, threats were
not obscurely uttered. They were told, and with truth that, only
two or three months before, six persons had been burned alive, at
Lima, for defying the authority of the church; and that, if they
persisted in their heretical opinions, a similar fate might fall
upon them.

English boys are accustomed to think with feelings of unmitigated
horror, and indignation, of the days of the Inquisition; and in
times like these, when a general toleration of religious opinion
prevails, it appears to us almost incredible that men should have
put others to death, in the name of religion. But it is only by
placing ourselves in the position of the persecutors, of the middle
ages, that we can see that what appears to us cruelty and
barbarity, of the worst kind, was really the result of a zeal; in
its way as earnest, if not as praiseworthy, as that which now
impels missionaries to go, with their lives in their hands, to
regions where little but a martyr's grave can be expected. Nowadays
we believe--at least all right-minded men believe--that there is
good in all creeds; and that it would be rash, indeed, to condemn
men who act up to the best of their lights, even though those
lights may not be our own.

In the middle ages there was no idea of tolerance such as this. Men
believed, fiercely and earnestly, that any deviation from the creed
to which they, themselves, belonged meant an eternity of
unhappiness. Such being the case, the more earnestly religious a
man was, the more he desired to save those around him from this
fate. The inquisitors, and those who supported them, cannot be
charged with wanton cruelty. They killed partly to save those who
defied the power of the church, and partly to prevent the spread of
