"Oh, you know that, do you?"

"Yes. Forty-five pounds of that money he put into the City Bank in my
mother's name. That forty-five pounds you can have back within an hour.
We shall then be in your debt five pounds, which I want you to let me
pay you back. I have just secured a very good situation as a governess,
and am to be in receipt of one hundred and twenty pounds a year. I can
pay you back the money in about a month's time out of my own salary."

"You are very conscientious," said Mr. Gering, with a slight sneer, "and
I shall be glad to have my money back. If that is all your business,
perhaps you will leave me."

"No, it is not all my business. I want you to forgive George,--not to
prosecute him,--not to give him up to the law."

"Ah! I thought that was coming. And why, pray, should I not prosecute
the young rascal? Don't you think he richly deserves punishment?"

"Honestly, I do."

When Effie said this, Mr. Gering's eyes twinkled for the first time.

"Eh, eh!" he exclaimed. "I am glad we're of one mind on that point. We
both doubtless believe that punishment would be good for him."

"We do."

"Then why deprive him of anything so beneficial?"

"Because of my mother."

"Your mother! Is there a mother in the case?"

"There is--a mother who lies now at the point of death. Let me tell you
her story."

"I haven't read my letters yet, Miss Staunton."

"Oh, never mind your letters! Let me tell you about my father and my
mother. Four months ago my father was alive. He was a country doctor. He
was very good, everyone loved him. He caught diphtheria, and died. My
mother has heart disease, and my father felt sure that the shock of
losing him would kill her. He loved her most tenderly. When he lay dying
he was certain that God would allow them both to leave the world
together. My mother was kneeling by his bedside; and George, my brother,
knelt there too. And my brother said. 'Don't take mother away, father;'
and then father said to mother, 'Stay with George.' At that moment
something strange must have happened--all my mother's great love seemed
suddenly directed into a new channel. Her love for George since that
moment has been the passion of her life. He was not strong-minded."

"No, indeed," interrupted Mr. Gering.

"No; and he yielded to temptation and got into trouble, and--and lost
money. But all the time my mother has been imagining that he is the best
and steadiest fellow in London. She lives in a sort of golden dream
about him. If she learns the truth she will certainly die, and George
will be lost. He will then, as he himself expresses it, 'go under'
forever. He won't be able to stand the thought that through his sin and
weakness he has killed his mother."

"I should hope not," interrupted Mr. Gering.

"Therefore I want you to forgive him--it is your duty."

"My duty, child! What right have you to come and talk to me about my
duty?"

"Every right, if I can only make you perform it."

"You are either impertinent or very brave, young lady. I was never
spoken to in this strain before."

"Well, you see, it is a matter of life and death," said Effie. "I can't
mince words when life and death hang in the balance."

"You're a queer girl--a queer girl; I don't know what to make of you.
'Pon my word, I'm sorry for that mother of yours--poor soul, poor soul!
It's a pity she didn't bring up her son as conscientiously as she did
her daughter. Now, you wouldn't have taken fifty pounds out of my till?"

"No," said Effie.

"I wish you were a boy--I'd give you that lad's place within an hour."

"Thank you, but I don't think I should care to have it. Will you come
now and do your duty?"

"Come! Where am I to come?"

"To see George."

"The rascal! Where is he?"

"I'll take you to him."

"Do you know that you are bullying me in the most shameful way, Miss
Staunton?"

"I know that you have a very kind heart," answered Effie.

At this moment the room door was opened, and Power came in again.

"Mr. Fortescue has called, sir."

"Tell Mr. Fortescue that I can't see him."

"And Ford has sent round about that shipping order. When can you give
him his answer?"

"Some time this afternoon."

"But they want it this morning."

"Well, they can't have it; I'm going out for a bit. Come along, Miss
Staunton; we can't let the grass grow under our feet."




CHAPTER XXIII.


There come moments in the lives of all of us when we feel as if a
restraining and powerful hand were pulling us up short. We have come to
a full stop; we cannot go back, and we do not know how to proceed. These
full stops in life's journey are generally awful places. We meet there,
as a rule, the devil and his angels--they tear us and rend us, they
shake us to our very depths with awful and overpowering temptation; if
we yield, it is all over with us, we rush at headlong speed downhill.

But, on the other hand, if in this pause we turn our back upon the
devil, good angels come in his place--they whisper of hope and a new
chance in life even for us.

When Effie left George on that miserable evening, and when Lawson
retired presently to his room, the young man found that he had come to
such a fearful place of trial as I have just described. He was pulled
up short, and the devil was tempting him. At one side was the devil, at
the other he saw the face of his mother. It was impossible for him to
lie down and sleep. He fought with the devil all night. In the morning
there was neither victory nor defeat, but the young, smooth face looked
haggard and gray, and the upright, well-knit figure was bowed.

Lawson came into the sitting room for a moment.

"I am sorry I can't stay with you, George," he said. "I am due at St.
Joseph's at nine o'clock. Have you made any plans for yourself?"

"No--at least, yes. I've had an awful night, Lawson, and there seems to
be but one end to it."

"What is that?"

"I must give myself up. I'm not the sort of fellow to play the hiding
game successfully. I'm safe to be caught sooner or later. I deserve
punishment, too--I've been doing badly for months. What I deserve, it
seems likely I'll have. In short, I think I'd better make a clean breast
of everything, and take my--my punishment like a man."

"Do sit down for a minute," said Lawson. "There's a good deal in what
you say, and if you had only yourself to consider, I'd counsel you to do
it--I would, truly; but there's your mother to be thought of."

"My mother! Don't you suppose I've been thinking of my mother all night?
It is the thought of my mother that maddens me--maddens me, I say. Look
here, Lawson, there's only one thing before me: I'll go first to mother
and tell her everything straight out, and then I'll give myself up."

"You will?" said Lawson, with a start of sudden admiration. "Upon my
word, George, old chap, I didn't think you had the grit in you--I
didn't, truly."

"Then you approve?"

"It is the only thing to be done; she must hear it, sooner or later, and
no one can tell it to her as you can."

"All right; I'll go to her before my courage fails me."

George left the room without even saying good-by to his friend.

When he left the house, he turned round and saw the man whom he had
noticed watching him the day before at Waterloo Station.

"I'll be ready for you soon, my friend, but not quite yet," muttered the
young man.

He walked quickly--the man followed him at a respectful distance.

George let himself into his mother's house with a latch-key. He ran up
to the little sitting room. Agnes was bending with red eyes over a
kettle which was boiling on the fire. She was making a cup of tea for
her mother, who had just awakened. Katie was cutting bread and butter,
and Phil and Marjory were standing by the window. Marjory was saying to
Phil, "I 'spect George will be turning the corner and coming home in a
minute."

"Hush!" whispered Phil: "hush, Marjory! George isn't coming back any
more."

At this moment the door was opened, and George came in. Marjory gave
Phil a scornful glance, and flew to her big brother. Katie flung down
the piece of bread she was buttering and Agnes turned from the fire.
George put out his hand to ward them all off.

"Where's mother?" he asked.

"She's awake, but she has been very ill," began Agnes. "Oh, George,
George, do be careful; where are you going?"

"To my mother," answered the young man. "Don't let anyone come with
me--I want to be alone with her."

He went straight into the bedroom as he spoke, and shut the door behind
him.

Mrs. Staunton was lying propped up high by pillows. The powerful opiate
had soothed her, but the image of George still filled all her horizon.
When she saw him come into the room, she smiled, and stretched out her
weak arms to clasp him. He came over, knelt by her, and, taking her hot
hands, covered his face with them.

"You've come back, my boy!" she said. "I'm not very well to-day, but
I'll soon be better. Why, what is it, George? What are you doing? You
are wetting my hands. You--you are crying? What is it, George?"

"I have come back to tell you something, mother. I'm not what you think
me--I'm a scoundrel, a rascal. I'm bad, I'm not good. I--I've been
deceiving you--I'm a thief."

"Hush!" interrupted Mrs. Staunton. "Come a little closer to me. You're
not well, my dear boy--let me put my arm round your neck. You're not
well, my own lad; but if you think----"

"I'm as bad as I can be, mother," said George, "but it isn't bodily
illness that ails me. I said I'd make a clean breast of it. It's the
only thing left for me to do."

A frightened look came into Mrs. Staunton's eyes for a moment, but then
they filled with satisfaction as they rested on the dark head close to
her own.

"Whatever you've done, you are my boy," she said.

"No, no; a thief isn't your boy," said George. "I tell you I'm a thief,"
he added fiercely, looking up at her with two bloodshot eyes. "You've
got to believe it. I'm a thief. I stole fifty pounds from Gering
yesterday--and I was bad before that. I won money at play--I've won and
lost, and I've lost and won. Once Lawson gave me two hundred and fifty
pounds to invest, and I stole it to pay a gambling debt, and Effie got
it back for me--she borrowed it for me. My father wouldn't have given
you to me if he had known that. I had it on my conscience when I was
kneeling by his deathbed, but I couldn't tell him then; and when he gave
you to me, I felt that I never could tell. Then we came to London, and I
began to deceive you. I told you a false story about that rise of
salary--I never had any rise; and I took your fifty pounds two days ago
out of the bank, and I stole money to pay it back again. That's your son
George, mother--your _true_ son in his _real_ colors. Now you know
everything."

George stepped a pace or two away from the bed as he spoke. He folded
his arms.

Mrs. Staunton was looking at him with a piteous, frightened expression
on her face. Suddenly she broke into a feeble and yet terrible laugh.

"My son George," she said. "That explains everything. My son
still--still my son!" She laughed again.

There came a knock at the outer door.

"Don't go, George!" said his mother.

"George, you're wanted," said Agnes. "Effie is here, and Mr.
Gering--they want to see you. Come at once."

"Mr. Gering!" exclaimed the mother. "He was the man you took the money
from. He's coming to--punish you, to--George, you're not to go. Stay
here with me. I'll hide you. You're not to go, George--I won't let you,
I won't let you!"

"Dear mother! dear, dearest mother! you must let me--I must take the
punishment. I've deserved it and I'm determined to go through with it.
Just say a wonderful thing to me before I go, and I'll be strong enough
to bear it--and to--to come back to you when it's over. Say you love me
still, mother."

"_Love_ you!" exclaimed Mrs. Staunton.

"Yes, mother, although I'm a thief."

"Bless the boy! that has nothing to do with it. You're my boy, whatever
you are."

"Then you do still love me?"

"Yes, yes, yes! Of course I love the lad!"

George went straight to the door and opened it. He walked straight into
the other room.

"I'm ready to take the punishment, sir," he said, going straight up to
Mr. Gering.

His manner and the look on his face amazed his late employer.

"Eh--eh--well, young sir," he said, backing a step or two. "And so you
confess that you robbed me?"

"I do."

"And you know what lies before you?"

"Yes."

"Have you been deceiving that mother of yours again?"

"No; I've been telling her the truth at last."

"Effie, Effie!" called Mrs. Staunton from the bedroom.

Effie ran to her mother.

"Do you know, young man," said Mr. Gering, "that you have got a very
remarkable sister?"

"Do you mean Effie? Oh, I always knew she was a girl in a thousand."

"A girl in _ten_ thousand, more like. Do you know, young rascal, that
she has been pleading with me for you, and--'pon my word, it's
true--melting my old heart till I don't know what I'm doing? In short,
I've made her a promise."

"A promise! Oh, sir, what?"

"A promise that I'll let you off--all but the moral punishment. That, of
course, you'll have to bear."

"Mr. Gering, is this true?"

"Yes, it's true. I'm doing it all on account of your sister. You may
come back to the office to-morrow, and consider that you've got a fresh
start. Now, for goodness' sake, don't keep me any longer. Open the door,
one of you children, can't you? I must hurry back to my work."

       *       *       *       *       *

That is the story, for George really did learn his lesson, and in his
case the new leaf was turned. He will carry the scars, however, of that
time of sin and suffering to his grave.

Effie kept her promise, and went as governess to little Freda Harvey for
