splendour, dancing on the slopes below.

"The smells have changed," screamed Mor. "Good hunting, Little Brother!
Where is thy answer?"

"Little Brother, good hunting!" whistled Chil the Kite and his mate,
swooping down together. The two baffed under Mowgli's nose so close that
a pinch of downy white feathers brushed away.

A light spring rain--elephant-rain they call it--drove across the Jungle
in a belt half a mile wide, left the new leaves wet and nodding behind,
and died out in a double rainbow and a light roll of thunder. The spring
hum broke out for a minute, and was silent, but all the Jungle Folk
seemed to be giving tongue at once. All except Mowgli.

"I have eaten good food," he said to himself. "I have drunk good
water. Nor does my throat burn and grow small, as it did when I bit the
blue-spotted root that Oo the Turtle said was clean food. But my stomach
is heavy, and I have given very bad talk to Bagheera and others, people
of the Jungle and my people. Now, too, I am hot and now I am cold, and
now I am neither hot nor cold, but angry with that which I cannot see.
Huhu! It is time to make a running! To-night I will cross the ranges;
yes, I will make a spring running to the Marshes of the North, and back
again. I have hunted too easily too long. The Four shall come with me,
for they grow as fat as white grubs."

He called, but never one of the Four answered. They were far beyond
earshot, singing over the spring songs--the Moon and Sambhur Songs--with
the wolves of the pack; for in the spring-time the Jungle People make
very little difference between the day and the night. He gave the sharp,
barking note, but his only answer was the mocking maiou of the little
spotted tree-cat winding in and out among the branches for early birds'
nests. At this he shook all over with rage, and half drew his knife.
Then he became very haughty, though there was no one to see him, and
stalked severely down the hillside, chin up and eyebrows down. But never
a single one of his people asked him a question, for they were all too
busy with their own affairs.

"Yes," said Mowgli to himself, though in his heart he knew that he had
no reason. "Let the Red Dhole come from the Dekkan, or the Red Flower
dance among the bamboos, and all the Jungle runs whining to Mowgli,
calling him great elephant-names. But now, because Eye-of-the-Spring is
red, and Mor, forsooth, must show his naked legs in some spring dance,
the Jungle goes mad as Tabaqui.... By the Bull that bought me! am I the
Master of the Jungle, or am I not? Be silent! What do ye here?"

A couple of young wolves of the Pack were cantering down a path, looking
for open ground in which to fight. (You will remember that the Law of
the Jungle forbids fighting where the Pack can see.) Their neck-bristles
were as stiff as wire, and they bayed furiously, crouching for the first
grapple. Mowgli leaped forward, caught one outstretched throat in either
hand, expecting to fling the creatures backward as he had often done in
games or Pack hunts. But he had never before interfered with a spring
fight. The two leaped forward and dashed him aside, and without word to
waste rolled over and over close locked.

Mowgli was on his feet almost before he fell, his knife and his white
teeth were bared, and at that minute he would have killed both for no
reason but that they were fighting when he wished them to be quiet,
although every wolf has full right under the Law to fight. He danced
round them with lowered shoulders and quivering hand, ready to send in
a double blow when the first flurry of the scuffle should be over;
but while he waited the strength seemed to ebb from his body, the
knife-point lowered, and he sheathed the knife and watched.

"I have surely eaten poison," he sighed at last. "Since I broke up the
Council with the Red Flower--since I killed Shere Khan--none of the Pack
could fling me aside. And these be only tail-wolves in the Pack, little
hunters! My strength is gone from me, and presently I shall die. Oh,
Mowgli, why dost thou not kill them both?"

The fight went on till one wolf ran away, and Mowgli was left alone on
the torn and bloody ground, looking now at his knife, and now at his
legs and arms, while the feeling of unhappiness he had never known
before covered him as water covers a log.

He killed early that evening and ate but little, so as to be in good
fettle for his spring running, and he ate alone because all the Jungle
People were away singing or fighting. It was a perfect white night,
as they call it. All green things seemed to have made a month's growth
since the morning. The branch that was yellow-leaved the day before
dripped sap when Mowgli broke it. The mosses curled deep and warm over
his feet, the young grass had no cutting edges, and all the voices of
the Jungle boomed like one deep harp-string touched by the moon--the
Moon of New Talk, who splashed her light full on rock and pool, slipped
it between trunk and creeper, and sifted it through a million leaves.
Forgetting his unhappiness, Mowgli sang aloud with pure delight as he
settled into his stride. It was more like flying than anything else, for
he had chosen the long downward slope that leads to the Northern Marshes
through the heart of the main Jungle, where the springy ground deadened
the fall of his feet. A man-taught man would have picked his way with
many stumbles through the cheating moonlight, but Mowgli's muscles,
trained by years of experience, bore him up as though he were a feather.
When a rotten log or a hidden stone turned under his foot he saved
himself, never checking his pace, without effort and without thought.
When he tired of ground-going he threw up his hands monkey-fashion to
the nearest creeper, and seemed to float rather than to climb up into
the thin branches, whence he would follow a tree-road till his mood
changed, and he shot downward in a long, leafy curve to the levels
again. There were still, hot hollows surrounded by wet rocks where he
could hardly breathe for the heavy scents of the night flowers and the
bloom along the creeper buds; dark avenues where the moonlight lay in
belts as regular as checkered marbles in a church aisle; thickets where
the wet young growth stood breast-high about him and threw its arms
round his waist; and hilltops crowned with broken rock, where he leaped
from stone to stone above the lairs of the frightened little foxes. He
would hear, very faint and far off, the chug-drug of a boar sharpening
his tusks on a bole; and would come across the great gray brute all
alone, scribing and rending the bark of a tall tree, his mouth dripping
with foam, and his eyes blazing like fire. Or he would turn aside to the
sound of clashing horns and hissing grunts, and dash past a couple of
furious sambhur, staggering to and fro with lowered heads, striped with
blood that showed black in the moonlight. Or at some rushing ford he
would hear Jacala the Crocodile bellowing like a bull, or disturb a
twined knot of the Poison People, but before they could strike he would
be away and across the glistening shingle, and deep in the Jungle again.

So he ran, sometimes shouting, sometimes singing to himself, the
happiest thing in all the Jungle that night, till the smell of the
flowers warned him that he was near the marshes, and those lay far
beyond his farthest hunting-grounds.

Here, again, a man-trained man would have sunk overhead in three
strides, but Mowgli's feet had eyes in them, and they passed him from
tussock to tussock and clump to quaking clump without asking help from
the eyes in his head. He ran out to the middle of the swamp, disturbing
the duck as he ran, and sat down on a moss-coated tree-trunk lapped in
the black water. The marsh was awake all round him, for in the spring
the Bird People sleep very lightly, and companies of them were coming
or going the night through. But no one took any notice of Mowgli sitting
among the tall reeds humming songs without words, and looking at the
soles of his hard brown feet in case of neglected thorns. All his
unhappiness seemed to have been left behind in his own Jungle, and he
was just beginning a full-throat song when it came back again--ten times
worse than before.

This time Mowgli was frightened. "It is here also!" he said half aloud.
"It has followed me," and he looked over his shoulder to see whether
the It were not standing behind him. "There is no one here." The night
noises of the marsh went on, but never a bird or beast spoke to him, and
the new feeling of misery grew.

"I have surely eaten poison," he said in an awe-stricken voice. "It must
be that carelessly I have eaten poison, and my strength is going from
me. I was afraid--and yet it was not _I_ that was afraid--Mowgli was
afraid when the two wolves fought. Akela, or even Phao, would have
silenced them; yet Mowgli was afraid. That is true sign I have eaten
poison.... But what do they care in the Jungle? They sing and howl and
fight, and run in companies under the moon, and I--Hai-mai!--I am dying
in the marshes, of that poison which I have eaten." He was so sorry for
himself that he nearly wept. "And after," he went on, "they will find
me lying in the black water. Nay, I will go back to my own Jungle, and I
will die upon the Council Rock, and Bagheera, whom I love, if he is not
screaming in the valley--Bagheera, perhaps, may watch by what is left
for a little, lest Chil use me as he used Akela."

A large, warm tear splashed down on his knee, and, miserable as he was,
Mowgli felt happy that he was so miserable, if you can understand
that upside-down sort of happiness. "As Chil the Kite used Akela," he
repeated, "on the night I saved the Pack from Red Dog." He was quiet
for a little, thinking of the last words of the Lone Wolf, which you,
of course, remember. "Now Akela said to me many foolish things before he
died, for when we die our stomachs change. He said... None the less, I
AM of the Jungle!"

In his excitement, as he remembered the fight on Waingunga bank, he
shouted the last words aloud, and a wild buffalo-cow among the reeds
sprang to her knees, snorting, "Man!"

"Uhh!" said Mysa the Wild Buffalo (Mowgli could hear him turn in his
wallow), "THAT is no man. It is only the hairless wolf of the Seeonee
Pack. On such nights runs he to and fro."

"Uhh!" said the cow, dropping her head again to graze, "I thought it was
Man."

"I say no. Oh, Mowgli, is it danger?" lowed Mysa.

"Oh, Mowgli, is it danger?" the boy called back mockingly. "That is all
Mysa thinks for: Is it danger? But for Mowgli, who goes to and fro in
the Jungle by night, watching, what do ye care?"

"How loud he cries!" said the cow. "Thus do they cry," Mysa answered
contemptuously, "who, having torn up the grass, know not how to eat it."

"For less than this," Mowgli groaned to himself, "for less than this even
last Rains I had pricked Mysa out of his wallow, and ridden him through
the swamp on a rush halter." He stretched a hand to break one of the
feathery reeds, but drew it back with a sigh. Mysa went on steadily
chewing the cud, and the long grass ripped where the cow grazed. "I will
not die HERE," he said angrily. "Mysa, who is of one blood with Jacala
and the pig, would see me. Let us go beyond the swamp and see what
comes. Never have I run such a spring running--hot and cold together.
Up, Mowgli!"

He could not resist the temptation of stealing across the reeds to Mysa
and pricking him with the point of his knife. The great dripping bull
broke out of his wallow like a shell exploding, while Mowgli laughed
till he sat down.

"Say now that the hairless wolf of the Seeonee Pack once herded thee,
Mysa," he called.

"Wolf! THOU?" the bull snorted, stamping in the mud. "All the jungle
knows thou wast a herder of tame cattle--such a man's brat as shouts in
the dust by the crops yonder. THOU of the Jungle! What hunter would have
crawled like a snake among the leeches, and for a muddy jest--a jackal's
jest--have shamed me before my cow? Come to firm ground, and I will--I
will..." Mysa frothed at the mouth, for Mysa has nearly the worst temper
of any one in the Jungle.

Mowgli watched him puff and blow with eyes that never changed. When
he could make himself heard through the pattering mud, he said: "What
Man-Pack lair here by the marshes, Mysa? This is new Jungle to me."

"Go north, then," roared the angry bull, for Mowgli had pricked him
rather sharply. "It was a naked cow-herd's jest. Go and tell them at the
village at the foot of the marsh."

"The Man-Pack do not love jungle-tales, nor do I think, Mysa, that a
scratch more or less on thy hide is any matter for a council. But I will
go and look at this village. Yes, I will go. Softly now. It is not every
night that the Master of the Jungle comes to herd thee."

He stepped out to the shivering ground on the edge of the marsh, well
knowing that Mysa would never charge over it and laughed, as he ran, to
think of the bull's anger.

"My strength is not altogether gone," he said. "It may be that the poison
is not to the bone. There is a star sitting low yonder." He looked at it
between his half-shut hands. "By the Bull that bought me, it is the Red
Flower--the Red Flower that I lay beside before--before I came even
to the first Seeonee Pack! Now that I have seen, I will finish the
running."

The marsh ended in a broad plain where a light twinkled. It was a long
time since Mowgli had concerned himself with the doings of men, but this
night the glimmer of the Red Flower drew him forward.

"I will look," said he, "as I did in the old days, and I will see how
far the Man-Pack has changed."

Forgetting that he was no longer in his own Jungle, where he could do
what he pleased, he trod carelessly through the dew-loaded grasses till
he came to the hut where the light stood. Three or four yelping dogs
gave tongue, for he was on the outskirts of a village.

"Ho!" said Mowgli, sitting down noiselessly, after sending back a deep
wolf-growl that silenced the curs. "What comes will come. Mowgli, what
hast thou to do any more with the lairs of the Man-Pack?" He rubbed his
mouth, remembering where a stone had struck it years ago when the other
Man-Pack had cast him out.

The door of the hut opened, and a woman stood peering out into the
darkness. A child cried, and the woman said over her shoulder, "Sleep.
It was but a jackal that waked the dogs. In a little time morning
comes."

Mowgli in the grass began to shake as though he had fever. He knew that
voice well, but to make sure he cried softly, surprised to find how
man's talk came back, "Messua! O Messua!"

"Who calls?" said the woman, a quiver in her voice.

"Hast thou forgotten?" said Mowgli. His throat was dry as he spoke.

"If it be THOU, what name did I give thee? Say!" She had half shut the
door, and her hand was clutching at her breast.

"Nathoo! Ohe, Nathoo!" said Mowgli, for, as you remember, that was the
name Messua gave him when he first came to the Man-Pack.

"Come, my son," she called, and Mowgli stepped into the light, and
looked full at Messua, the woman who had been good to him, and whose
life he had saved from the Man-Pack so long before. She was older,
and her hair was gray, but her eyes and her voice had not changed.
Woman-like, she expected to find Mowgli where she had left him, and her
eyes travelled upward in a puzzled way from his chest to his head, that
touched the top of the door.

"My son," she stammered; and then, sinking to his feet: "But it is no
longer my son. It is a Godling of the Woods! Ahai!"

As he stood in the red light of the oil-lamp, strong, tall, and
beautiful, his long black hair sweeping over his shoulders, the knife
swinging at his neck, and his head crowned with a wreath of white
jasmine, he might easily have been mistaken for some wild god of a
jungle legend. The child half asleep on a cot sprang up and shrieked
aloud with terror. Messua turned to soothe him, while Mowgli stood
still, looking in at the water-jars and the cooking-pots, the grain-bin,
and all the other human belongings that he found himself remembering so
well.

"What wilt thou eat or drink?" Messua murmured. "This is all thine. We
owe our lives to thee. But art thou him I called Nathoo, or a Godling,
indeed?"

"I am Nathoo," said Mowgli, "I am very far from my own place. I saw this
light, and came hither. I did not know thou wast here."

"After we came to Khanhiwara," Messua said timidly, "the English
would have helped us against those villagers that sought to burn us.
Rememberest thou?"

"Indeed, I have not forgotten."

"But when the English Law was made ready, we went to the village of
those evil people, and it was no more to be found."

"That also I remember," said Mowgli, with a quiver of his nostril.

"My man, therefore, took service in the fields, and at last--for,
indeed, he was a strong man--we held a little land here. It is not so
rich as the old village, but we do not need much--we two."

"Where is he the man that dug in the dirt when he was afraid on that
night?"

"He is dead--a year."

"And he?" Mowgli pointed to the child.

"My son that was born two Rains ago. If thou art a Godling, give him the
Favour of the Jungle, that he may be safe among thy--thy people, as we
were safe on that night."

She lifted up the child, who, forgetting his fright, reached out to play
with the knife that hung on Mowgli's chest, and Mowgli put the little
fingers aside very carefully.

"And if thou art Nathoo whom the tiger carried away," Messua went on,
choking, "he is then thy younger brother. Give him an elder brother's
blessing."

"Hai-mai! What do I know of the thing called a blessing? I am neither
a Godling nor his brother, and--O mother, mother, my heart is heavy in
me." He shivered as he set down the child.

"Like enough," said Messua, bustling among the cooking-pots. "This comes
of running about the marshes by night. Beyond question, the fever
had soaked thee to the marrow." Mowgli smiled a little at the idea of
anything in the Jungle hurting him. "I will make a fire, and thou shalt
drink warm milk. Put away the jasmine wreath: the smell is heavy in so
small a place."

Mowgli sat down, muttering, with his face in his hands. All manner of
strange feelings that he had never felt before were running over him,
exactly as though he had been poisoned, and he felt dizzy and a little
sick. He drank the warm milk in long gulps, Messua patting him on the
shoulder from time to time, not quite sure whether he were her son
Nathoo of the long ago days, or some wonderful Jungle being, but glad to
feel that he was at least flesh and blood.

"Son," she said at last,--her eyes were full of pride,--"have any told
thee that thou art beautiful beyond all men?"

"Hah?" said Mowgli, for naturally he had never heard anything of the
kind. Messua laughed softly and happily. The look in his face was enough
