One of the table-knives soon effected the work, and the coat was rolled
up as a pillow. Dan removed his boots, and Vincent, who was now beyond
even remonstrating, laid himself down on his cool bed.

"Now, Chloe," Miss Kingston said when they had left Vincent's room, "I
will leave him to your care. I am sure that you must be thoroughly
tired, for I don't suppose you have walked so many miles since you were
a girl."

"I is tired, missie: but I am ready to do anything you want."

"I only want you to attend to him, Chloe. First of all you had better
make some tea. You know what is a good thing to give for a fever, and if
you can find anything in the garden to make a drink of that sort, do;
but I hope he will doze off for some time. When you have done, you had
better get this place tidy a little; it is in a terrible litter.
Evidently no one has been in since they moved out."

The room, indeed, was strewed with litter of all sorts, rubbish not
worth taking away, old newspapers, and odds and ends of every
description. Lucy looked about among these for some time, and with an
exclamation of satisfaction at last picked up two crumpled envelopes.
They were both addressed "William Jenkins, Woodford, near Mount
Pleasant."

"That is just what I wanted," she said.

"What am you going to do, Miss Lucy?"

"I am going to Mount Pleasant," she said.

"Lor a marcy, dearie, you are not going to walk that distance! You must
have walked twelve miles already."

"I should, if it were twice as far, Chloe. There are some things we must
get. Don't look alarmed, I shall take Dan with me. Now, let me see. In
the first place there are lemons for making drink and linseed for
poultices, some meat for making broth, and some flour, and other things
for ourselves; we may have to stay here for some time. Tell me just what
you want and I will get it."

Chloe made out a list of necessaries.

"I shan't be gone long," the girl said. "If he asks after me or Dan,
tell him we are looking about the place to see what is useful. Don't let
him know I have gone to Mount Pleasant, it might worry him."

Dan at once agreed to accompany the girl to Mount Pleasant when he heard
that she was going to get things for his master. Looking about he found
an old basket and they started without delay by the one road from the
clearing which led, they had no doubt, to the town. It was about two
miles distant, and was really but a large village. A few Federal
soldiers from the camp hard by were lounging about the streets, but
these paid no attention to them. Lucy soon made her purchases, and then
went to the house that had been pointed out to her as being inhabited by
the doctor who attended to the needs of the people of Mount Pleasant and
the surrounding district. Fortunately he was at home. Lucy looked at him
closely as he entered the room and took his seat. He was a middle-aged
man with a shrewd face, and she at once felt that she might have
confidence in it.

"Doctor," she said, "I want you to come out to see someone who is very
ill."

"What is the matter with him? or is it him or her?"

"It is--it's----" and Lucy hesitated, "a hurt he has got."

"A wound, I suppose?" the doctor said quietly. "You may as well tell me
at once, as for me to find out when I get there; then I can take
whatever is required with me."

"Yes, sir. It is a wound," Lucy said. "His shoulder is broken, I
believe, by a pistol bullet."

"Umph!" the doctor said. "It might have been worse. Do not hesitate to
tell me all about it, young lady. I have had a vast number of cases on
hand since these troubles began. By the way, I do not know your face,
and I thought I knew everyone within fifteen miles around."

"I come from the other side of the Duck River. But at present he is
lying at a place called Woodford, but two miles from here."

"Oh, yes! I know it. But I thought it was empty. Let me see, a man named
Jenkins lived there. He was killed at the beginning of the troubles in a
fight near Murfreesboro. His widow moved in here; and she has married
again and gone five miles on the other side. I know she was trying to
sell the old place."

"We have not purchased it, sir; we have just squatted there. My friend
was taken so bad that we could go no further. We were trying, doctor, to
make our way further south."

"Your friend, whoever he is, did a very foolish thing to bring a young
lady like yourself on such a long journey. You are not a pair of runaway
lovers, are you?"

"No, indeed," Lucy said, flushing scarlet; "we have no idea of such a
thing. I was living alone, and the house was attacked by bushwhackers,
the band of a villain named Mullens."

"Oh! I saw all about that in the Nashville paper this morning. They were
attacked by a band of Confederate plunderers, it said."

"They were attacked by one man," the girl replied. "They were on the
point of murdering me when he arrived. He shot Mullens and four of his
band and the rest made off, but he got this wound. And as I knew the
villains would return again and burn the house and kill me, I and my old
nurse determined to go southward to join my friends in Georgia."

"Well, you can tell me more about it as we go," the doctor said. "I will
order my buggy round to the door, and drive you back. I will take my
instruments with me. It is no business of mine whether a sick man is a
Confederate or a Federal; all my business is to heal him."

"Thank you very much, doctor. While the horse is being put in I will go
down and tell the negro boy with me to go straight on with a basket of
things I have been buying."

"Where is he now?" the doctor asked.

"I think he is sitting down outside the door, sir."

"Then you needn't go down," the doctor said. "He can jump up behind and
go with us. He will get there all the quicker."

In five minutes they were driving down the village, with Dan in the back
seat. On the way the doctor obtained from Lucy a more detailed account
of their adventures.

"So he is one of those Confederate officers who broke prison at Elmira,"
he said. "I saw yesterday that one of his companions was captured."

"Was he, sir? How was that?"

"It seems that he had made his way down to Washington, and was staying
at one of the hotels there as a Mr. James of Baltimore. As he was going
through the streets he was suddenly attacked by a negro, who assaulted
him with such fury that he would have killed him had he not been dragged
off by passers-by. The black would have been very roughly treated, but
he denounced the man he had attacked as one of the Confederate officers
who had escaped from the prison. It seems that the negro had been a
slave of his who had been barbarously treated, and finally succeeded in
making his escape and reaching England, after which he went to Canada;
and now that it is safe for an escaped slave to live in the Northern
States without fear of arrest or ill-treatment, he had come down to
Washington with the intention of engaging as a teamster with one of the
Northern armies, in the hope, when he made his way to Richmond, of being
able to gain some news of his wife, whom his master had sold before he
ran away from him."

"It served the man right!" Lucy said indignantly. "It's a good thing
that the slaves should turn the table sometimes upon masters who
ill-treat them."

"You don't think my patient would ill-treat his slaves?" the doctor
asked with a little smile.

"I am sure he wouldn't," the girl said indignantly. "Why, the boy behind
you is one of his slaves, and I am sure he would give his life for his
master."

Dan had overheard the doctor's story and now exclaimed:

"No, sah. Massa Vincent de kindest ob masters. If all like him, de
slaves eberywhere contented and happy. What was de name of dat man, sah,
you was speaking of?"

"His name was Jackson," the doctor answered.

"I tought so," Dan exclaimed in excitement. "Massa never mentioned de
names ob de two officers who got out wid him, and it war too dark for me
to see their faces, but dat story made me tink it must be him. Bery bad
man dat; he libs close to us, and Massa Vincent one day pretty nigh kill
him because he beat dat bery man who has catched him now on de street ob
Washington. When dat man sell him wife Massa Vincent buy her so as to
prevent her falling into bad hands. She safe now wid his mother at de
Orangery--dat's the name of her plantation."

"My patient must be quite an interesting fellow, young lady," the doctor
said, with a rather slight twinkle of his eye. "A very knight-errant!
But there is the house now; we shall soon see all about him."

Taking with him the case of instruments and medicines he had brought,
the doctor entered Vincent's room. Lucy entered first; and although
surprised to see a stranger with her, Vincent saw by her face that there
was no cause for alarm.

"I have brought you a doctor," she said. "You could not go on as you
were, you know. So Dan and I have been to fetch one."

The doctor now advanced and took Vincent's hand.

"Feverish," he said, looking at his cheeks, which were now flushed. "You
have been doing too much, I fancy. Now let us look at this wound of
yours. Has your servant got any warm water?" he asked Lucy.

Lucy left the room, and returned in a minute with a kettleful of warm
water and a basin, which was among the purchases she had made at Mount
Pleasant.

"That is right," the doctor said, taking it from her. "Now we will cut
open the shirt-sleeve. I think, young lady, you had better leave us,
unless you are accustomed to the sight of wounds."

"I am not accustomed to them, sir; but as thousands of women have been
nursing the wounded in the hospitals, I suppose I can do so now."

Taking a knife from the case, the doctor cut open the shirt from the
neck to the elbow. The shoulder was terribly swollen and inflamed, and a
little exclamation of pain broke from Lucy.

"That is the effect of walking and inattention," the doctor said. "If I
could have taken him in hand within an hour of his being hit, the matter
would have been simple enough; but I cannot search for the ball, or in
fact do anything, till we have reduced the swelling. You must put warm
poultices on every half hour, and by to-morrow I hope the inflammation
will have subsided, and I can then see about the ball. It evidently is
somewhere there still, for there is no sign of its having made its exit
anywhere. In the meantime you must give him two tablespoonfuls of this
cooling draught every two hours, and to-night give him this sleeping
draught. I will be over to-morrow morning to see him. Do not be uneasy
about him; the wound itself is not serious, and when we have got rid of
the fever and inflammation I have no doubt we shall pull him round
before long."

"I know the wound is nothing," Vincent said; "I have told Miss Kingston
so all along. It is nothing at all to one I got at the first battle of
Bull Run, where I had three ribs badly broken by a shell. I was laid up
a long time over that business. Now I hope in a week I shall be fit to
travel."

The doctor shook his head. "Not as soon as that. Still we will hope it
will not be long. Now all you have to do is to lie quiet and not worry,
and to get to sleep as quick as you can. You must not let your patient
talk, Miss Kingston. It will be satisfactory to you, no doubt," he went
on, turning to Vincent, "to know that there is no fear whatever of your
being disturbed here. The road leads nowhere, and is entirely out of the
way of traffic. I should say you might be here six months without even a
chance of a visitor. Everyone knows the house is shut up, and as you
have no neighbor within half a mile no one is likely to call in. Even if
anyone did by accident come here you would be in no danger; we are all
one way of thinking about here."

"Shall we make some broth for him?" Lucy asked after they had left the
room.

"No; he had better take nothing whatever during the next twenty-four
hours except his medicine and cooling drinks. The great thing is to get
down the fever. We can soon build him up afterward."

By nightfall the exertions of Dan, Lucy, and Chloe had made the house
tidy. Beds of rushes and grass had been made in the room upstairs for
the women, and Dan had no occasion for one for himself, as he was going
to stop up with his master. He, however, brought a bundle of rushes into
the kitchen, and when it became dark threw himself down upon them for a
few hours' sleep, Lucy and her old nurse taking their place in Vincent's
room and promising to rouse Dan at twelve o'clock.

During the early part of the night Vincent was restless and uneasy, but
toward morning he became more quiet and dozed off, and had but just
awoke when the doctor drove up at ten o'clock. He found the inflammation
and swelling so much abated that he was able at once to probe for the
ball. Chloe was his assistant. Lucy felt that her nerves would not be
equal to it, and Dan's hand shook so that he could not hold the basin.
In a quarter of an hour, which seemed to Lucy to be an age, the doctor
came out of the room.

"There is the bullet, Miss Kingston."

"And is he much hurt, sir?"

"It is a nasty wound," the doctor replied. "The collar-bone is badly
broken, and I fancy the head of the bone of the upper arm, to put it in
language you will understand, is fractured; but of that I cannot be
quite sure. I will examine it again to-morrow, and will then bandage it
in its proper position. At present I have only put a bandage round the
arm and body to prevent movement. I should bathe it occasionally with
warm water, and you can give him a little weak broth to-day. I think, on
the whole, he is doing very well. The feeling that you are all for the
present safe from detection has had as much to do with the abatement of
the fever as my medicine."

The next morning the report was still satisfactory. The fever had almost
disappeared, and Vincent was in good spirits. The doctor applied the
splints to keep the shoulder up in its proper position, and then tightly
bandaged it.

"It depends upon yourself now," he said, "whether your shoulders are
both of the same width as before or not. If you will lie quiet, and give
the broken bones time to reunite, I think I can promise you that you
will be as straight as before; but if not--putting aside the chances of
inflammation--that shoulder will be lower than the other, and you will
never get your full strength in it again. Quiet and patience are the
only medicines you require, and as there can be no particular hurry for
you to get south, and as your company here is pleasant and you have two
good nurses, there is no excuse for your not being quiet and contented."

"Very well, doctor. I promise that, unless there is a risk of our being
discovered, I will be as patient as you can wish. As you say, I have
everything to make me contented and comfortable."

The doctor had a chat with Lucy, and agreed with her that perhaps it
would be better to inform the mistress of the house that there were
strangers there. Some of the people living along the road might notice
him going or coming, or see Dan on his way to market, and might learn
that the house was inhabited, and communicate the fact to their old
neighbor.

"I will see her myself, Miss Kingston, and tell her that I have sent a
patient of mine to take up his quarters here. I will say he is ready to
pay some small sum weekly as long as he occupies the house. I have no
doubt she would be willing enough to let you have it without that; for,
although I shall say nothing actually, I shall let her guess from my
manner that it is a wounded Confederate, and that will be enough for
her. Still I have no doubt that the idea of getting a few dollars for
the rent of an empty house will add to her patriotism. People of her
class are generally pretty close-fisted, and she will look upon this as
a little pocket-money. Good-by! I shall not call to-morrow, but will be
round next day again."

On his next visit the doctor told Lucy that he had arranged the matter
with her landlady, and that she was to pay a dollar a week as rent. "I
should not tell your patient about this," he said. "It will look to him
as if I considered his stay was likely to be a long one, and it might
fidget him."

"How long will it be, doctor, do you think?"

"That I cannot say. If all goes well, he ought in a month to be fairly
cured; but before starting upon a journey which will tax his strength, I
should say at least six weeks."

Ten days later Vincent was up, and able to get about. A pile of grass
had been heaped up by the door, so that he could sit down in the sun and
enjoy the air. Lucy was in high spirits, and flitted in and out of the
house, sometimes helping Chloe, at others talking to Vincent.

"What are you laughing at?" she asked as she came out suddenly on one of
these occasions.

"I was just thinking," he said, "that no stranger who dropped in upon us
would dream that we were not at home here. There is Dan tidying up the
garden; Chloe is quite at her ease in the kitchen, and you and I might
pass very well for brother and sister."

"I don't see any likeness between us--not a bit."

"No, there is no personal likeness; but I meant in age and that sort of
thing. I think, altogether, we have a very homelike look."

"The illusion would be very quickly dispelled if your stranger put his
head inside the door. Did anyone ever see such a bare place?"

"Anyhow, it's very comfortable," Vincent said, "though I grant that it
would be improved by a little furniture."

"By a great deal of furniture, you mean. Why, there isn't a chair in the
house, nor a carpet, nor a curtain, nor a cupboard, nor a bed; in fact
all there is is the rough dresser in the kitchen and that plank table,
and your bedstead. I really think that's all. Chloe has the kettle and
two cooking-pots, and there is the dish and six plates we bought."

"You bought, you mean," Vincent interrupted.

"We bought, sir; this is a joint expedition. Then there is the basin and
a pail. I think that is the total of our belongings."

"Well, you see, it shows how little one can be quite comfortable upon,"
Vincent said. "I wonder how long it will be before the doctor gives me
leave to move. It is all very well for me who am accustomed to
campaigning, but it is awfully rough for you."

"Don't you put your impatience down to my account, at any rate until you
begin to hear me grumble. It is just your own restlessness, when you
are pretending you are comfortable."

"I can assure you that I am not restless, and that I am in no hurry at
all to be off on my own account. I am perfectly contented with
everything. I never thought I was lazy before, but I feel as if I could
do with a great deal of this sort of thing. You will see that you will
become impatient for a move before I do."

"We shall see, sir. Anyhow, I am glad you have said that, because now,
whatever you may feel, you will keep your impatience to yourself."

Another four weeks passed by smoothly and pleasantly. Dan went into the
village once a week to do the shopping, and the doctor had reduced his
visits to the same number. He would have come oftener, for his visits to
the lonely cottage amused him; but he feared that his frequent passage
in his buggy might attract notice. So far, no one else had broken the
solitude of their lives. If the doctor's calls had been noticed, the
neighbors had not taken the trouble to see who had settled in Jenkins'
old place. His visits were very welcome, for he brought newspapers and
books, the former being also purchased by Dan whenever he went into the
village, and thus they learnt the course of events outside.

Since Antietam nothing had been done in Northern Virginia; but Burnside,
who had succeeded McClellan, was preparing another great army, which was
to march to Richmond and crush out the rebellion. Lee was standing on
the defensive. Along the whole line of the frontier, from New Orleans to
Tennessee, desultory fighting was going on, and in these conflicts the
Confederates had generally the worse of things, having there no generals
such as Lee, Jackson, and Longstreet, who had made the army of Virginia
almost invincible.

At the last of these visits the doctor told Vincent that he considered
he was nearly sufficiently restored in health to be able to start on
their journey.

"At one time I was almost afraid that your shoulder would never be quite
square again. However, as you can see for yourself, it has come out
quite right; and although I should not advise you to put any great
strain on your left arm, I believe that in a very short time it will be
as strong as the other."

"And now, doctor, how much am I in debt to you? Your kindness cannot be
repaid, but your medical bill I will discharge as soon as I get home. We
have not more than twenty dollars left, which is little enough for the
journey there is before us. You can rely that the instant I get to
Richmond I will send you the money. There is no great difficulty in
smuggling letters across the frontier."

"I am very pleased to have been able to be of service to you," the
doctor said. "I should not think of accepting payment for aid rendered
to an officer of our army; but it will give me real pleasure to receive
a letter saying you have reached home in safety. It is a duty to do all
we can for the brave men fighting for our cause. As I have told you, I
am not a very hot partisan, for I see faults on both sides. Still I
believe in the principle of our forefathers that each State has its own
government and is master of its own army, joining with the others for
such purposes as it may think fit. If I had been a fighting man, I
should certainly have joined the army of my State; but as it is, I hope
