
"Then run, at the top of your speed, down to the town; and buy a rope
strong enough to hold the weight of half a dozen men. I shall want a
hundred feet of it. Here is money."

The man shot away into the darkness and, in a little over a quarter of
an hour, was back again with the rope. Oswald took off his doublet.

"Wind it round and round me," he said. "Begin under the arms. Wind it
neatly, and closely, so that it will make no more show than necessary."

This was soon done, and then Oswald started on his way; and an hour
later entered the tavern, and took his seat with three or four of the
men from the hold, and called for wine for the party. He sat there for
some time, and then one said:

"It is half-past eight; we had best be going. At seven o'clock the
gates are shut; but they are opened, for those who belong to the hold,
till nine, after which none are admitted till morning, and any who come
in then are reported to Baird, and they are lucky if they get off with
half a dozen extra goes of sentry duty. Baird is a good master in many
things, but he is a bad man to deal with, when he is angry; and if
anyone was to be out a second time, and he did it too soon after the
first offence, he would have his skin nearly flayed off his back, with
a stirrup leather. There is no fooling with the Bairds."

Oswald arranged with Roger that, if the latter remained in the castle,
he should always come down half an hour before the garrison were
moving, as they might then exchange a word or two unseen; and
accordingly, he took his place at an angle of a building, where he
could keep his eye on the steps leading up to the battlements, on the
north side.

Presently he saw Roger descending. He waved his hand, and caught his
follower's eye; and the latter, on reaching the courtyard, at once
joined him.

"I have a rope, Roger," Oswald began, "that will reach from the turret
to the foot of the craig. I took it off during the night, and have just
hidden it away behind a pile of rubbish, in the stable. Are the girls
locked up?"

"Yes."

"Is there any getting the key?"

"No, William Baird himself keeps it."

"Then we must have something to force the door open, or to saw round
the lock."

"The door is studded with iron."

"Are the windows barred?"

"No; but they are mere loopholes, and there is no getting through
them."

"I suppose there are steps from their room on to the platform above?"

"No doubt. In fact, there are sure to be."

"I suppose that you will have no difficulty in silencing the priest?"

Roger smiled.

"No; I think I can answer for him."

"Could you speak to the girls through the keyhole, Roger?"

"There would be no difficulty about that, master. I have but to choose
a time when the priest is out."

"Then tell them that we are here, Roger, and they are to be ready to
escape, whenever we give the signal. Ask them if the trapdoor leading
on to the platform is fastened, and whether they can unfasten it. If
not, we must break it in, from above. We can get on to the top of the
turret, easily enough, by throwing the rope up with a hook attached.

"Of course, the two sentries must be first silenced. I would wait till
I, myself, should be on sentry there; but that might not occur for a
week, and you cannot prolong your stay here more than another day;
therefore, we will try it tonight. I have given the men with the horses
notice.

"Do you get the priest bound and gagged, by ten o'clock; everything
will be quiet by that time. I will come noiselessly up the steps. At
that hour, do you be at the door, and on the lookout for me. The
sentries will have to be silenced--that is the most difficult part of
the business."

"We can manage that," Roger said, confidently. "One blow with my
quarterstaff, on the back of the head under the steel cap, will do that
noiselessly enough."

"That would not do, Roger. The man would go down with such a crash,
that the fall of his armour on the flags would be heard all over the
castle. He must be gripped by the throat, so that he cannot holloa; and
then bound tightly, and gagged before he has time to get breath."

"I suppose that would be the best way," Roger said regretfully; "but I
should like to have struck two good blows; one for the sake of Dame
Armstrong, and one for Allan. However, your plan is the best. The only
difficulty will be the trapdoor."

"Well, we must look about today, and get a couple of bits of iron that
we can use as a prise. Still, I hope that it will not be needed. I saw
a bit of iron, in the stables, that I think I can bend into a hook for
the rope; and if I can't, I have no doubt that you can.

"That is all. You had better move away now. People will be stirring,
directly."

That night, at ten o'clock, when all in the hold had been asleep half
an hour, Oswald rose quietly from the rushes, on which he and a dozen
of his comrades were sleeping, and made his way noiselessly out of the
room; went into the stables and fetched the piece of iron, which he
had, during the day, placed so that he could feel it in the dark; took
the coil of rope in his hands, and ascended the steps. The top was but
some ten feet from the turret. He stood quiet, until he heard the
sentry moving away from him, then he mounted the last steps, and in a
moment reached the foot of the turret stairs. Roger was standing there.

"All right, master!" he whispered. "I took the priest by surprise, and
he was gagged before he knew what was happening. I tore the blanket up
into strips, and tied him down onto his pallet with them. He is safe
enough.

"Now for the sentries. I will take the one to the right, first. I will
go out and stand in the angle. It is a dark night, and there is no
chance of his seeing me. When you hear his walk cease, you will know
that I have got him. I have managed to bring up a rope, that I have cut
into handy lengths. Here are two of them.

"There, he has just turned, so I will go at once."

"How about the trapdoor?"

"It is all right, master. It is bolted on the inside. They have tried
the bolts, and find they can move them;" and with these words, he at
once stepped noiselessly out.

Oswald stood listening. Presently he heard the returning steps of the
sentry. They came close up to the turret, and then suddenly ceased.

He at once hurried round. The sentry hung limp in Roger's grasp. Oswald
bound his hands tightly, and twisted the rope three or four times round
his body, and securely knotted it. Then he tied the ankles tightly
together.

"I will lay him down," Roger whispered, when he had done so.

Oswald bent the man's legs and, trussing him up, fastened the rope from
the ankles to that which bound the wrists. Roger now relaxed his grip
of the man's throat, thrust a piece of wood between his teeth, and
fastened it, by a string going round the back of the head. He then took
off his steel cap, and laid it some distance away.

"That will do for him, master. I reckon that he will be an hour or two,
before he will get breath enough to holloa, even without that gag."

The other man was captured as silently as the former had been. When he
was bound, Roger said:

"Now for the hook, master."

"Here is the iron. It was too strong for me to bend."

Roger took it and, exerting his great strength, bent it across his
knee. Then he took the coil of rope, and tied a knot at the end, and
with some smaller cord lashed it securely along the whole length of the
hook.

"Now, Master, do you get on to my shoulders, and I think you will be
able to hook it to the battlements. It is not above twelve feet. If you
find that you cannot, step on my head."

"I am sure I can reach it without that, Roger."

And indeed, he found that he could do so easily; and having fixed it
firmly, he got hold of the rope, and hoisted himself to the top of the
turret. In a minute, Roger was beside him.

Feeling about, they soon discovered the trapdoor, on which Roger
knocked three times. Then they heard a grating sound below and,
shortly, one end of the heavy trapdoor was slightly raised. The two men
got their fingers under it, and pulled it up, and Janet and Jessie ran
out, both crying with joy and excitement.

"Hush!" Oswald whispered. "Do not utter a sound. There are sentries on
other parts of the walls, and the slightest noise might be heard.

"Now, we will knot this rope."

He and Roger set to work, and before long knots were tied, a foot
apart, along the whole length of the rope.

"I will take you down first, Jessie, for you are the lightest," Oswald
said.

"Now, Roger, tie us together."

One of the pieces of rope Roger had brought was passed round and round
them, tying them firmly, face to face.

"Now, Jessie, you had best take hold of the rope, too, and take as much
of your weight off me as you can. It is a long way down; and, though I
think that I could carry your weight that distance, it is best that you
should help me as much as you are able."

The rope was shifted to the outside of the turret. Roger, after fixing
it firmly, helped them over the battlements, holding Oswald by the
collar, until he had a firm grasp of the rope in his hands, and
obtained a hold with his feet.

"That is right, Jessie," he whispered, as the girl also took a firm
hold of the rope. "You are no weight, like that. Now, let the rope pass
gradually through your hands and, when I tell you, hold tight by one of
the knots."

After lowering himself forty feet, Oswald found that he was standing on
a ledge of rock, three inches wide, at the foot of the wall.

"Now, dear, it will be more difficult," he said. "You must use one of
your hands, to push yourself off from any rugged points. There are not
many of them. I had a look at the rock today, and its face is almost
smooth. I will do the best I can to keep you from it."

In another three minutes, they stood at the foot of the craig. Oswald
shook the rope violently, to let those above know that they were down.
Then he untied the cord that bound him to his cousin, who at once sat
down, sobbing hysterically. Oswald put his hand upon her shoulder.

"Steady, Jessie, steady. You have been brave and quiet, coming down.
The danger is over now, but we have a long walk and a longer ride
before us, and you will need all your strength."

In a very short time, Roger and Janet joined them. As soon as she was
untied, Janet threw her arms round Oswald's neck, and spoke for the
first time.

"Oh, Oswald, from what have you saved us! How brave and good of you to
risk so much!"

"Tut, tut, Janet, as if we should leave you here, in the hands of the
Bairds, without making an effort to free you! Now, come along, dear. Be
very careful how you walk, till we get down to the bottom. It is pretty
steep and, if you were to set a stone rolling, we might have them after
us, in no time. As it is, we shall only have an hour and a half start,
for the sentries will be relieved at midnight. However, by that time we
shall be on horseback, and of course they won't know which road we have
taken."

As soon as they came to level ground, they set off at a run. They were
but a mile from the village when they heard, on the still night air,
distant shouts, followed half a minute later by the winding of a horn;
then, almost immediately, a glimmering light appeared on the highest
turret of the hold, and this rapidly broadened out into a sheet of
flame.

"They have discovered our escape, by some misfortune or other," Oswald
exclaimed, "and they will be after us, before many minutes have passed.
You must run in earnest now, girls."

"Do you run on, Oswald," Janet said, "you and Roger. We will turn and
walk back. They will do us no harm."

Oswald thought of the murder of the girls' mother, and knew that, in
their fury at having been tricked, the Bairds were capable of anything.

"It is not to be thought of," he said. "Such a watch would henceforth
be kept that there would be no possibility, whatever, of effecting your
rescue. We must take our chance together.

"What think you had best be done, Roger?"

"In sooth, I know not. I am ready to do whatever you think best."

"We cannot hope to reach Parton, before they overtake us," Oswald said.
"Besides, the Bairds are sure to have many friends there, and the
lighted beacon will warn all the countryside that something unusual has
happened. No, we cannot think of going there."

"But you said that there were horses," Janet said.

"They are but a short distance on this side of the town. We could not
hope to get there before the Bairds; and, even if we did, it would be a
quarter of an hour before we could mount and be off."

"Could we not hide and get the horses after they have passed, master?"
Roger suggested.

"It would be useless, Roger. The road leads up and down this valley,
and there would be no possibility of riding the horses across the
hills, at night; so that we should have either to ride down through
Parton, or up past the Bairds' hold. No, the horses must be given up,
for the present. The only thing that I can see is to cross the Esk, and
to take refuge in the hills. I know not if there are any fords, or
where they are; but, were we to turn to the right, we should be getting
farther and farther away. The Esk is no great width, and we can carry
them across it, easily enough."

"The water will be dreadfully cold," Jessie said, with a shiver, for it
was now the beginning of April.

"Hush, Jessie!" her sister said. "What matters a little cold, when our
lives are at stake?"

"No, that is our only hope," Oswald said. "Quick, girls, there is no
time to lose."

The river was but some fifty yards from the road, and they ran down to
it.

"Now, girls," Oswald said when they reached it, "you must take off your
cloaks, and all upper garments. Were you to get these wet you would,
before morning, die of cold. Don't lose a moment. Undress under the
shelter of these bushes.

"Now, Roger, let us move a few yards away, and then take off our
doublets and shirts, and swim across, holding them above the water. By
the time that we are back, the girls will be ready."

"I will carry them across, master. It is of no use two of us going,
with so light a burden. I shall make nothing of it."

Oswald made no opposition and, a minute later, the shirts and doublets
were made into a bundle, and bound on Roger's head. He waded into the
water until it reached his chin, and then swam out. The distance to be
traversed was but some fifteen yards, and a few strokes of his brawny
arms brought him to the opposite bank. Having laid down his bundle
there, he swam quickly back again.

"Are you ready, girls?" Oswald asked.

"Yes," Janet replied, and two white figures came out from the bushes,
each carrying a bundle.

"Do you go into the bushes again, for a minute. We cannot take you and
the bundles over together; and it is better that you should stand here,
in dry things, than wait in wet ones, over there."

A minute sufficed to tie the bundles on the heads of the two men. They
soon swam across to the other side, left them there, and returned.

"The water is bitterly cold for the girls," Oswald said, as they swam
across together.

"It is, master, but they will only be in it for a minute, and they will
soon be warm again."

"Now, girls."

"We have just heard the sound of horses in the distance, Oswald," Janet
said.

He listened.

"Sound travels far, this still night," he said; "they can only just
have started. We shall be across long before they come along.

"Now, Jessie, we will take you first. The stream runs strongly, and it
were best that you went over separately. All you have to do is to put a
hand on a shoulder of each of us. Come along."

"I will carry her till we get into deep water," Roger said, catching
the girl up in his arms, and running into the stream.

Jessie gasped, as the water reached her.

"It will be over in a minute," Oswald said encouragingly. "Now, we are
going to swim. Put your hands upon our shoulders. That is right."

Striking out strongly, they easily carried her until she was in her
depth.

"Now, dear, get ashore, and stand behind those bushes, and take off
your wet things and put on your dry ones. We will have Janet across, in
no time."

The girl was carried across as easily as her sister had been.

"Here is your bundle, dear. Jessie has taken hers. Dress as quickly as
you can. Stoop down, as soon as you reach the bushes. They will be
here, directly."

Janet ran to the thicket, and Oswald and Roger threw themselves down
behind a great stone. Two minutes later, they could hear the thunder of
hoofs go along the road opposite, but could not make out the figures.

"How many are there of them, do you think, Roger?"

"A dozen or so, master."

"Yes, I should think you are right. However, it makes no difference;
were there ten times as many, they would not catch us, tonight."



Chapter 14: In Hiding.


The moment the horsemen had gone by, Oswald and Roger hastily dressed
again. It was three or four minutes before the girls joined them.

"We have been a long time, Oswald, but our fingers are so cold that we
could not tie the strings."

"You will soon be warm. Climbing the hill will set your blood in
motion."

There was no hurry now. They were safe until the morning.

"We will make up the hill until you are thoroughly warm, and then we
will discuss matters."

Before they were very far up the ascent, both girls declared that they
were comfortably warm again.

"Well, Roger, what do you think our best course will be? The Bairds
have, of course, sent horsemen along the other road. They will have
heard, from the priest, that we have but a few minutes' start; and will
know that we cannot have gone far. The party who passed us will
doubtless stop at Parton, the other at the next village higher up; and
they will be sure that either we concealed ourselves as they passed, or
have taken to the hills on one side or other of the valley. They will
naturally suppose that it is this side, as it would be madness for us
to plunge farther into the country to the west; and you may be sure
there will be scores of men out on these hills, tomorrow, searching for
us; and some of them may ride nearly to Hiniltie, to cut us off there
in case we escape the searchers on the hills.

"I think that the only plan will be to hide up for a couple of days, or
so; then to make our way down again to where the horses are, and then
make a dash through Parton."

"That would certainly be far the best way," Roger said; "but how are we
to manage for food for the ladies?"

"We will go on until we get to the top of the hill, Roger, and then
find a sheltered spot, where they can stop. It is of no use trying to
go on much farther, for the night is cloudy, and there are no stars to
be seen, and we should lose our way directly, for there is no wind that
would serve as a guide as to which way we were travelling. When we find
a good shelter, we must stop with them; and I will make my way down to
the place where the horses are, and warn the men as to what has
happened, and tell them to lie quiet till I come again. I will bring
back whatever food they may have with them, a big jug of water, and the
four horse cloths."

"I will go, master."

"I would rather go myself, Roger. I am accustomed to traverse the moors
at night, and am sure that I can find this place again, without
difficulty."

On nearing the top of the hill, they came upon a number of rough
stones.

"We cannot do better than stop here," Oswald said. "It will be bare on
the top of the hill. Now, Roger, help me to pile a few of these stones
together, so as to make a sort of shelter."

They set to work at once, Roger's strength enabling him to lift stones
that ordinary men could scarcely have moved. In a quarter of an hour a
