"So you and your sister Dora cannot leave home--that is the objection,
is it?" he repeated, slowly pulling his red moustache. "What do you call
home? The Old Doctor's House or Redcross?"

"Both," cried May quickly; "where father and mother and the rest of us
are, of course."

"But the rest of you are gone, and what if your father and mother were
to go too?"

"They won't, they never will," insisted May--"not until they come to
die. You were not meaning that? Oh! you could not be so cruel, so
barbarous," cried May, passionately, "when death is such a long way off,
I trust. I know that God is good whether we live or die, and that we
shall meet again in a better world. But we are not parted yet, and it is
not wrong to pray that we may be a long time together here on this very
earth, which we know so well, where we have been so happy. Why, father
and mother are not more than middle-aged--mother is not, and if father
is older, he is as strong and hale as anybody. Think how he was able to
give up his carriage and attend his patients on foot last autumn without
feeling it," urged the girl defiantly, in her passion of love and roused
dread, which she would not admit.

"Certainly," he strove to reassure her, feeling himself a savage for
frightening her by his inadvertence, "I never saw anybody wear so well
as Dr. Millar. He might be sixty or fifty--he may live to be a
hundred--I hope with all my heart he will; and I shall not be astonished
if I live to see it. As for Mrs. Millar, it is an insult to call her
middle-aged. It is something quite out of keeping to come across her
with such a tall daughter as you are."

"Yes, I am the tallest of the four," exclaimed May complacently,
diverted from the main topic, as he had intended her to be. "And I have
not done growing yet; my last summer's frock had to be let down half an
inch."

"Is it possible? What are we all coming to? You will soon have to stoop
to take my arm--if you ever condescend to take my arm."

"No," she denied encouragingly, "I am not so far above your shoulder
now," measuring the distance with a critical eye. "I shall not grow so
much as that comes to. You are bigger than father, and you would not
call him a little man; you are hardly even short."

"Thanks, you are too kind," said Tom Robinson, with the utmost gravity.
"But I say, Miss May, if I were you, I don't think I should do anything
to vex and thwart Dr. Millar, though he is so strong and active--long
may he continue so. You know how disappointed he would be if you were to
close your books."

"I am afraid he would," said May reluctantly. "I had almost forgotten
all about it for the last minute or two. But don't you think if you
spoke to him as I came to ask if you would," she continued unblushingly
and coaxingly, "if you were to try and show him--it would be so kind of
you--how comfortable and happy I should be with Phyllis Carey in your
shop--doing my best--indeed, I should try hard to please you and Miss
Franklin, all day--and getting home every evening--he might change his
mind?"

"No, he would not," said Tom with conviction; "and what is more, he
ought not. He would never cease to regret his shattered hopes for
you--which, remember, you would have shattered--and your spoilt life."

"But your life is not spoilt?" she said wistfully, unable to resign her
last hope.

"How can you tell?" he said, with a slight sharpness in his accent. Then
he added quickly, "No, for I am a born shopkeeper in another sense than
because I am one of a nation of shopkeepers."

He gave himself a reassuring shake, and resumed briskly--"I crave leave
to say, Miss May, that I actually enjoy making up accounts, turning over
samples, and giving orders. Sometimes I hit on a good idea which the
commercial world acknowledges, and then I am as proud as if I had
unearthed an ancient manuscript, or found the philosopher's stone. I
pulled a fellow through a difficulty the other day, and it felt like
taking part in an exciting fight. I have speculated occasionally when I
was fishing--paying myself a huge compliment, no doubt--whether old
Izaak Walton felt like me about trade."

"Was he in trade?" inquired May, with some surprise. "I know he wrote
_The Complete Angler_, and was a friend of Dr. Donne's and George
Herbert's, and is very much thought of to this day."

"Deservedly," said Tom Robinson emphatically. "Yes, I am proud to say,
he was a hosier to begin with, and a linen-draper to end
with--well-to-do in both lines. They say his first wife, whom he married
while he was still in business, was a niece of the Archbishop of
Canterbury of the day, and his second wife, whom he married after he had
retired to live on his earnings, was a half-sister of good Bishop Ken's;
but I do not pretend to vouch for the truth of these statements. Now,
about your father. I cannot do what you ask--I cannot in conscience.
Will you ever forgive me, 'little May'--that is what your father and
mother and your sisters call you sometimes to this day, ain't it? and it
is what I should have called you if I had been--your uncle say? Shall we
be no longer friends?" he demanded ruefully.

"Of course we shall," said May, with a suspicion of petulance. "You are
not bound to do what I bid you--I never thought that; and you are father
and mother's friend--how could I help being your friend?"

"Don't try to help it," he charged her.

Tom Robinson went farther than not feeling bound to do what May begged
of him, he was constrained to remonstrate in another quarter to prevent
trouble and disappointment to all concerned. He screwed up his courage,
and everybody knows he was a modest man, and called at the Old Doctor's
House for the express purpose. He had called seldom during the past
year--just often enough to keep up the form of visiting--to show that he
was not the surly boor, without self-respect or consideration for the
Millars, which he would have been if he had dropped all intercourse with
the family because one of them had refused to marry him. But though he
had begged for Dora's friendship when he could not have her love, and
had meant what he said, the wound was too recent for him to act as if
nothing had happened. In addition to the pain and self-consciousness,
there was a traditional atmosphere of agitation and alarm, a kind of
conventional awkwardness, together with an anxious countenance, and
protection sedulously afforded by the initiated and interested
spectators to Tom and Dora, which, like many other instances of
countenance and protection, went far towards doing the mischief they
were intended to prevent.

Tom saw through the punctilious feints and solemn stratagems clearly;
Dora did the same as plainly. Indeed the two would have been idiots if
they could have escaped from the discomfiting perception of the care
which was taken of them and their feelings, and the fact that every eye
was upon them.

The sole result was to render the couple more wretchedly uncomfortable
than if they had been set aside and sentenced to the company of each
other and of no one else for a bad five minutes every day of their
lives.

Another unhappy consequence of their being thus elaborately spared and
shielded was, that when by some unfortunate chance the tactics failed,
the couple felt as flurried and guilty as if they had contrived the
fruitless accident to serve their own nefarious ends.

Tom Robinson called on the Millars between four and five the day after
May had made her raid upon him, expecting to find what was left of the
family gathering together for afternoon tea. He had the ulterior design
of drawing May's father and mother apart, and letting them judge for
themselves the advisability of her going up at once to St. Ambrose's,
before her whole heart and mind were disastrously set against her
natural and honourable destiny. He was distinctly put out by finding
Dora alone. As for Dora, she told a faltering tale of her father's
having been called away to a poor patient who was a pensioner of her
mother's, and of Mrs. Millar's having walked over to Stokeleigh with
him to see what she could do for old Hannah Lightfoot; while May was
spending the afternoon with the Hewetts at the Rectory.

He hesitated whether to go or stay under the circumstances, but he hated
to beat an ignominious retreat, as if _he_ thought that _she_ thought he
could not be beside her for a quarter of an hour without making an ass
of himself again and pestering her. Why should he not accept the cup of
tea which she faintly offered from the hands that visibly trembled with
nervousness? When he came to consider it, why should he not transact his
business with Dora? She was as deeply interested as anybody, unless the
culprit herself; she probably knew better what May was foolishly
planning than either their father or mother did, and would convey to
them the necessary information.

As for Dora, she was thinking in a restless fever, "I hope--I hope he
does not see how much I mind being alone with him. It is just because I
am not used to it. How I wish somebody would come in,--not mother,
perhaps, for she would start and look put out herself, and sit down
without so much as getting rid of her sunshade; and, oh dear, not May,
for she would stare, and I do not know what on earth she would
think--some wild absurdity, I dare say; anyhow, she would look exactly
what she thought."

"Look here, Miss Dora," he said abruptly; "you don't think your sister
May ought to renounce the object of her education hitherto, and your
father's views for her, in order to do like Miss Phyllis Carey? You are
aware that May has become enamoured of Phyllis Carey's example, and is
bent on following in her footsteps; but it won't do, and I have told her
so. I trust nobody suspects me of encouraging young ladies to become
shop-women," he added, with a slightly foolish laugh, "as old actors
used to be accused of decoying young men of rank and fashion into going
on the stage, and recruiting sergeants of beguiling country bumpkins
into taking the king's shilling."

"Has May spoken to you about it?" cried Dora, startled out of her
engrossing private reflections. "What a child she is! I am sorry she has
troubled you; she ought not to have done that. I hope you will excuse
her."

"Don't speak of it," he said a little stiffly, as he put down his cup
and signified he would have no more tea.

"And you said no," remarked Dora, with an involuntary fall of her voice
reflecting the sinking of her heart. "Of course you could not do
otherwise. It was a foolish notion. I am afraid Phyllis Carey is enough
of a nuisance to Miss Franklin--and other people. It is hard that you
should be bothered by these girls. Only I suspect poor 'little May' will
be most dreadfully, unreasonably disappointed;" and there was an attempt
to smile and a quiver of the soft lips which she could not hide.

"I am not bothered, and I hate to disappoint your sister,--I trust you
understand that," he said quickly and earnestly. "But it would be
sacrificing her and overturning your father's arrangements for
her--disappointing what I am sure are among his dearest wishes."

She did not ask, like May, why he did not count himself sacrificed. She
only said shyly and wistfully, "I knew it was out of the question, but
if it had not been so, or if there had been any other way, it would have
been such a boon to poor May not to be torn from home." At the harrowing
picture thus conjured up her voice fairly shook, and the tears started
into her dovelike eyes.

"Home," he said impatiently, "is not everything; at least, not the home
from which every boy must go, as a matter of course. 'Torn from home' in
order to go to school! Surely the first part of the sentence is tall
language."

"It is neither too tall nor too strong where May is concerned," said
Dora, rousing herself to plead May's cause. "She has not been away from
home and from father--especially from mother, and one or other of the
rest of us, for longer than a week since she was born."

"Then the sooner she begins the better for her," he said brutally, as it
sounded to himself, to the loving, shrinking girl he was addressing.

"She has always been the little one, the pet," urged Dora; "she will not
know what to do without some of us to take care of her and be good to
her."

"But she must go away some day," he continued his remonstrance. "How old
is your sister?"

"She was seventeen last Christmas," Dora answered shamefacedly.

"Why, many a woman is married before she is May's age," he protested.
"Many a woman has left her native country, gone among strangers, and had
to maintain her independence and dignity unaided, by the time she was
seventeen. Queen Charlotte was not more than sixteen when she landed in
England and married George the Third."

Dora could not help laughing, as he meant her to do. "May and Queen
Charlotte! they are as far removed as fire and water. But," she answered
meekly, "I know the Princess Royal was no older when she went to Berlin;
and poor Marie Antoinette was a great deal younger, as May would have
reminded me if she had been here, in the old days when she travelled
from Vienna to Paris. But there--it is all so different. They were
princesses from whom a great deal is expected, and the Princess Royal
was the eldest instead of the youngest of the Queen's children."

"Does seniority make so great a difference?" he said, with an inflection
of his voice which she noticed, though he hastened to make her forget it
by speaking again gravely the next minute. "Should May not learn to
stand alone? Would it not be dwarfing and cramping her, all her life
probably, to give way to her now. Can it ever be too early to acquire
self-reliance, and is it not one of the most necessary lessons for a
responsible human being to learn? Besides, '_ce n'est que le premier pas
qui coute_.' It is only the first wrench which will hurt her. She will
find plenty of fresh interests and congenial occupations at St.
Ambrose's. In a week, a fortnight, she will not miss you too much."

Dora shook her head incredulously. It was little he knew of May, with
her fond family attachments, and her helplessness when left to herself
in common things.

"Follow my advice, Miss Dora," he said, rising to take his leave, "don't
aid and abet Miss May in seeking to shirk her obligations.
Unquestionably the one nearest to her at present is that she should go
to St. Ambrose's. Don't prevent her from beginning to think and act for
herself--not like a charming child, but in the light of her dawning
womanhood."

He gave a swift glance round him as he spoke, and a recollection which
had been in the background of both their thoughts during the whole of
the interview, flashed into the foreground. It was of that day a year
ago, a breezy spring day like this, when, as it seemed, there were the
same jonquils in the jar on the chimney-piece, and the same
cherry-blossom seen through the window against the blue sky, and he had
asked her with his heart on his lips, and the happiness of his life at
stake, to be his wife, and she had told him, with agitation and distress
almost equal to his, that he could never be anything to her. He caught
her half-averted eyes, and felt the whole scene was present with her as
with him once more, and the consciousness brought back all his old
shyness and reserve, and hurried his leave-taking. The slightest touch
to her hand, and he had bowed himself out and was gone.

"How silly he must think me," Dora reflected, walking up and down the
empty room in perturbation, "both about poor 'little May,' and about
remembering the last time we were alone together. I dare say he is
right about May, though men never do understand what girls feel. If she
should fall ill, and break her heart, and die of home-sickness--such
things have happened before now--I wonder what he would say then about
her learning to stand alone? Very likely he would assert that St.
Ambrose's is not St. Petersburg, or even Shetland or the Scilly Isles.
It is not far away, and if she were not well or happy, she could come
back in half a day, as the other girls could come down from London. But
then he would despise her, for as quiet and good-natured as he is, and
though people have said that he himself had no proper pride in
consenting to have a shop. And I don't think May could bear contempt
from anybody whom she had ever looked on as a friend. Men are hard--the
best of them are, and they don't understand. He is kind--I am sure he
means it all in kindness; but he is not yielding; he is as masterful as
when he dragged the dogs to the edge of the bank and let them drop into
the Dewes for their good. He will never be turned from what he thinks
right. I wish he had not guessed what I could not help remembering--he
was quick enough in doing that; and I could not tell him that I did not
imagine for a moment--I was not so foolish--that he was under the same
delusion he suffered from twelve months ago. If he had been oftener
here in the interval, and we had met and been together naturally as we
used to be, sometimes, I should have forgotten all about it, and so
would he, no doubt. But how could I help thinking of it when there has
always been such a point made of mother or some one else being present
when he called? I am certain it is quite unnecessary and a great
mistake. He will not speak to me again as he spoke that day. There is no
danger of his running away with me," Dora told herself with an unsteady
laugh. "I hope he is not under the impression that I did not think and
act for myself when I was forced to do it. Because, although they all
knew about it, and of course Annie and the others teased me about
'Robinson's,' and the colour of his hair, and his size, father and
