our Indian allies; and at the head of the street of Tacuba I placed two
heavy cannon with eight horse to guard them.  With eight other horse
and about one hundred foot, including twenty-five or more bowmen and
musketeers, and an innumerable host of our allies, I took up the line
of march along the other narrow street, intending to penetrate as far
as possible.  At its entrance I caused the cavalry to halt, and ordered
them by no means to pass from there, nor to come in my rear, unless I
first sent them orders to that effect; and then I alighted from my
{200} horse, and we came to an entrenchment that had been raised in
front of a bridge, which we carried by means of a small field-piece,
and the archers and musketeers, and then proceeded along the causeway,
which was broken in two or three places, where we encountered the
enemy.  So great was the number of our allies, who ascended the
terraces and other places, that it did not appear possible anything
could stop us.  When we had gained the two bridges, the entrenchments
and the causeways, our allies followed along the street without taking
any spoils; and I remained behind with about twenty Spanish soldiers on
a little island, for I saw that some of our Indians were getting into
trouble with the enemy; and in some instances they retreated until they
cast themselves into the water, and with our aid were enabled to return
to the attack.  Besides this, we were on the watch to prevent the enemy
from sallying forth out of the cross-streets in the rear of the
Spaniards, who had advanced on the main street and at this time sent us
word that they had made much progress, and were not far from the great
square of the market-place; adding, that they wished to push forward,
for they already heard the noise of the combat in which the Alguazil
mayor and Pedro de Alvarado were engaged on their side of the city.  I
answered them that they must by no means go forward without leaving the
bridges well filled up, so that, if it became necessary to beat a
retreat, the water might present no obstacle or impediment, for in this
consisted all the danger.  They sent to me a message in reply, the
amount of which was that the whole they had gained was in good
condition, and that I might go and see if it was not so.  But
suspecting that they had disregarded the orders and left the {201}
bridges imperfectly filled up, I went to the place and found they had
passed a breach in the road ten or twelve paces wide, and the water
that flowed through it was ten or twelve feet deep.  At the time the
troops had passed this ditch, thus formed, they had thrown in it wood
and reed-canes, and as they had crossed a few at a time and with great
circumspection, the wood and canes had not sunk beneath their weight;
and they were so intoxicated with the pleasure of victory that they
imagined it to be sufficiently firm.  At the moment I reached this
bridge of troubles, I discovered some Spaniards and many of our allies
flying back in great haste, and the enemy like dogs in pursuit of them;
and when I saw such a rout, I began to cry out, 'Hold, hold!' and on
approaching the water, I beheld it full of Spaniards and Indians in so
dense a mass that it seemed as if there was not room for a straw to
float.  The enemy charged on the fugitives so hotly, that in the
_melee_ they threw themselves into the water after them; and soon the
enemy's canoes came up by means of the canal and took the Spaniards
alive.

As this affair was so sudden, and I saw them killing our men, I
resolved to remain there and perish in the fight.  The way in which I
and those that were with me could do the most good was to give our
hands to some unfortunate Spaniards who were drowning, and draw them
out of the water; some came out wounded, others half-drowned, and
others without arms, whom I sent forward.  Already such multitudes of
the enemy pressed upon us, that they had completely surrounded me and
the twelve or fifteen men who were with me; and being deeply interested
in endeavoring to save those that were sinking, I did not observe nor
regard the danger to which I was exposed.  Several Indians {202} of the
enemy had already advanced to seize me and would have borne me off, had
it not been for a captain of fifty men whom I always had with me, and
also a youth of his company, to whom next to God, I owed my life; and
in saving mine, like a valiant man, he lost his own.[12]  In the
meantime the Spaniards who had fled before the enemy, pursued their
course along the causeway, and as it was small and narrow, and on the
same level as the water, which had been effected by those dogs on
purpose to annoy us; and as the road was crowded also with our allies
who had been routed, much delay was thereby occasioned, enabling the
enemy to come up on both sides of the water, and to take and destroy as
many as they pleased.  The captain who was with me, Antonio de
Quinones, said to me: 'Let us leave this place and save your life,
since you know that without you none of us can escape'; but he could
not induce me to go.  When he saw this, he seized me in his arms, that
he might force me away; and although I would have been better satisfied
to die than to live, yet by the importunity of this captain and of my
other companions, we began to retreat, making our way with our swords
and bucklers against the enemy, who pressed hard upon us.  At this
moment there came up a servant of mine and made a little room; but
presently he received a blow in his throat from a lance thrown from a
low terrace, that brought him to the ground.  While I was in the midst
of this conflict, sustaining the attacks of the enemy, and waiting for
the crowd on the narrow causeway, to reach a place of safety, one of my
servants brought {203} me a horse to ride on.  But the mud on the
causeway, occasioned by the coming and going of persons by water, was
so deep that no one could stand, especially with the jostling of the
people against one another in their effort to escape.

"I mounted the horse, but not to fight, as this was impossible on
horseback; but if it had been practicable I should have found on the
little island opposite the narrow causeway, the eight horsemen I had
left there, who were unable to do more than effect their return; which
indeed, was so dangerous that two mares, on which two of my servants
rode fell from the causeway into the water; one of them was killed by
the Indians, but the other was saved by some of the infantry.  Another
servant of mine Cristobal de Guzman, rode a horse that they gave him at
the little island to bring to me, on which I might make my escape; but
the enemy killed both him and the horse before they reached me; his
death spread sorrow through the whole camp, and even to this day his
loss is still mourned by those who knew him.  But after all our
troubles, by the blessing of God, those of us who survived, reached the
street of Tlacuba, which was very wide; and collecting the people, I
took my post with nine horsemen in the rear-guard.  The enemy pressed
forward with all the pride of victory, as if resolved that none should
escape with life; but falling back in the best manner I could, I sent
word to the treasurer and auditor to retreat to the public square in
good order.  I also sent similar orders to the two captains who had
entered the city by the street that led to the market-place, both of
whom had fought gallantly, and carried many entrenchments and bridges,
which they had caused to be well filled up, on account of {204} which
they were able to retire without loss.  Before the retreat of the
treasurer and auditor some of the enemy threw in their way two or three
heads of Christian men from the upper part of the entrenchment where
they were fighting, but it was not known whether they were persons
belonging to the camp of Pedro de Alvarado, or our own.  All being
assembled in the square, so large a multitude of the enemy charged upon
us from all directions that we had as much as we could do to keep them
back; and that, too, in places where, before this defeat, the enemy
would have fled before three horse and ten foot.  Immediately after, in
a lofty tower filled with their idols that stood near the square, they
burned perfumes and fumigated the air with certain gums peculiar to
this country, that greatly resembled _anime_, which they offer to their
idols in token of victory.  Although we endeavored to throw obstacles
in the way of the enemy, it was out of our power, as our people were
hurrying back to the camp.

"In this defeat thirty-five or forty Spaniards, and more than a
thousand of our allies, were slain by the enemy, besides more than
twenty Christians wounded, among whom was myself in the leg.  We lost
the small field-piece that we had taken with us, and many crossbows,
muskets and other arms.  Immediately after their victory in order to
strike terror into the Alguazil mayor and Pedro de Alvarado, the enemy
carried all the Spaniards, both living and dead, whom they had taken,
to the Tlaltelulco which is the market-place, and in some of the lofty
towers that are situated there they sacrificed them naked, opening
their breasts and taking out their hearts to offer them to the idols.
This was seen by the Spaniards of Alvarado's division from {205} where
they were fighting, and from the whiteness of the naked bodies which
they saw sacrificed they knew them to be Christians; but although they
suffered great sorrow and dismay at the sight, they effected a retreat
to their camp after having fought gallantly that day, and carried their
conquests almost to the market-place, which would have been taken if
God, on account of our sins, had not permitted so great a disaster.  We
returned to our camp, such was the grief we felt, somewhat earlier than
had been usual on other days; and in addition to our other losses, we
had been told that the brigantines had fallen into the hands of the
enemies, who attacked them in their canoes from the rear; but it
pleased God this was not true, although the brigantines and the canoes
of our allies had been seen in danger enough, and even a brigantine
came near being lost, the captain and the master of it being wounded,
the former of whom died eight days afterward."

This modest account of the brave soldier scarcely does justice to the
situation, his peril and his courage.  Therefore, I supplement it by
Helps' description of the same day of desperate fighting:

"The impatience of the soldiers grew to a great height, and was
supported in an official quarter--by no less a person than Alderete,
the King's Treasurer.  Cortes gave way against his own judgment to
their importunities.  There had all along been a reason for his
reluctance, which, probably, he did not communicate to his men; namely,
that he had not abandoned the hope that the enemy would still come to
terms.  'Finally,' he says, 'they pressed me so much that I gave way.'

"The attack was to be a general one, in which the {206} divisions of
Sandoval and Alvarado were to cooperate; but Cortes, with that
knowledge of character which belonged to him, particularly explained
that, though his general orders were for them to press into the
market-place, they were not obliged to gain a single difficult pass
which laid them open to defeat; 'for,' he says, 'I knew, from the men
they were, that they would advance to whatever spot I told them to
gain, even if they knew that it would cost them their lives.'

"On the appointed day, Cortes moved from his camp, supported by seven
brigantines, and by more than three thousand canoes filled with his
Indian allies.  When his soldiers reached the entrance of the city, he
divided them in the following manner.  There were three streets which
led to the market-place from the position which the Spaniards had
already gained.  Along the principal street, the King's Treasurer, with
seventy Spaniards, and fifteen or twenty thousand allies was to make
his way.  His rear was to be protected by a small guard of horsemen.

"The other streets were smaller, and led from the street of Tlacuba to
the market-place.  Along the broader of these two streets, Cortes sent
two of his principal captains, with eighty Spaniards and the thousand
Indians; he himself with eight horsemen, seventy-five foot-soldiers,
twenty-five musketeers, and an 'infinite number' of allies, was to
enter the narrower street.  At the entrance to the street of Tlacuba,
he left two large cannon with eight horsemen to guard them, and at the
entrance of his own street, he also left eight horsemen to protect the
rear.

"The Spaniards and their allies made their entrance into the city with
even more success and less embarrassment than on previous occasions.
Bridges and {207} barricades were gained, and the three main bodies of
the army moved forward into the heart of the city.  The ever-prudent
Cortes did not follow his division, but remained with a small
body-guard of twenty Spaniards in a little island formed by the
intersection of certain water streets, whence he encouraged the allies,
who were occasionally beaten back by the Mexicans, and where he could
protect his own troops against any sudden descent of the enemy from
certain side streets.

"He now received a message from these Spanish troops who had made a
rapid and successful advance into the heart of the town, informing him
that they were not far from the market-place, and that they wished to
have his permission to push forward, as they already heard the noise of
the combats which the Alguazil mayor and Pedro de Alvarado were waging
from their respective stations.  To this message Cortes returned for
answer that on no account should they move forward without first
filling up the apertures thoroughly.  They sent an answer back, stating
that they had made completely passable all the ground they had gained;
and that he might come and see whether it were not so.

"Cortes, like a wise commander, not inclined to admit anything as a
fact upon the statement of others which could be verified by personal
inspection, took them at their word, and did move on to see what sort
of a pathway they had made; when, to his dismay, he came in sight of a
breach in the causeway, of considerable magnitude, being ten or twelve
paces in width, and which, far from being filled up with solid
material, had been passed upon wood and reeds, which was entirely
insecure in case of retreat.  The Spaniards, 'intoxicated with
victory,' as their Commander {208} describes them, had rushed on,
imagining that they left behind them a sufficient pathway.

"There was now no time to remedy this lamentable error, for when Cortes
arrived near this 'bridge of affliction,' as he calls it, he saw many
of the Spaniards and the allies retreating toward it, and when he came
up close to it, he found the bridge-way broken down, and the whole
aperture so full of Spaniards and Indians, that there was not room for
a straw to float upon the surface of the water.  The peril was so
imminent that Cortes not only thought that the conquest of Mexico was
gone, but that the term of his life as well as that of his victories
had come; and he resolved to die there fighting.  All that he could do
at first was to help his men out of the water; and meanwhile, the
Mexicans charged upon them in such numbers, that he and his little
party were entirely surrounded.  The enemy seized upon his person, and
would have carried him off, but for the resolute bravery of some of his
guard, one of whom lost his life there in succoring his master.  The
greatest aid, however, that Cortes had at this moment of urgent peril,
was the cruel superstition of the Mexicans, which made them wish to
take the Malinche alive, and grudged the death of an enemy in any other
way than that of sacrifice to their detestable gods.  The captain of
the body-guard seized hold of Cortes, and insisted upon his retreating,
declaring that upon his life depended the lives of all of them.
Cortes, though at that moment he felt that he should have delighted
more in death than life, gave way to the importunity of his captain,
and of other Spaniards who were near, and commenced a retreat for his
life.  His flight was along a narrow causeway at the same level as the
water, an additional circumstance of danger, {209} which to use his
expression about them, those 'dogs' had contrived against the
Spaniards.  The Mexicans in their canoes approached the causeway on
both sides, and the slaughter they were thus enabled to commit, both
among the allies and the Spaniards, was very great.  Meanwhile, two or
three horses were sent to aid Cortes in his retreat, and a youth upon
one of them contrived to reach him, although the others were lost.  At
last he and a few of his men succeeded in fighting their way to the
broad street of Tlacuba, where, like a brave captain, instead of
continuing his flight, he and the few horsemen that were with him
turned around and formed a rear-guard to protect his retreating troops.
He also sent immediate orders to the King's Treasurer and the other
commanders to make good their escape; orders the force of which was
much heightened by the sight of two or three Spanish heads which the
Mexicans, who were fighting behind a barricade, threw amongst the
besiegers.

"We must now see how it fared with the other divisions.  Alvarado's men
had prospered in their attack, and were steadily advancing toward the
marketplace, when, all of a sudden, they found themselves encountered
by an immense body of Mexican troops, splendidly accoutred, who threw
before them five heads of Spaniards and kept shouting out, 'Thus we
will slay you, as we have slain Malinche and Sandoval, whose heads
these are.'  With these words they commenced an attack of such fury,
and came so close to hand with the Spaniards, that they could not use
their cross-bows, their muskets, or even their swords.  One thing,
however, was in their favor.  The difficulty of their retreat was
always greatly enhanced by the number of their allies; but on this
occasion, the {210} Tlascalans no sooner saw the bleeding heads and
heard the menacing words of the Mexicans, than they cleared themselves
off the causeway with all possible speed.

"The Spaniards, therefore, were able to retreat in good order; and
their dismay did not take the form of panic, even when they heard, from
the summit of the Temple, the tones of that awful drum, made from the
skin of serpents, which gave forth the most melancholy sound
imaginable, and which was audible at two or three leagues' distance.
This was the signal of sacrifice, and at that moment ten human hearts,
the hearts of their companions, were being offered up to the Mexican
deities.

"A more dangerous, though not more dreadful sound was now to be heard.
This was the blast of a horn sounded by no less a personage than the
Mexican King--which signified that his captains were to succeed or die.
The mad fury with which the Mexicans now rushed upon the Spaniards was
an 'awful thing' to see; and the historian, who was present at the
scene, writing in his old age, exclaims that, though he cannot describe
it, yet, when he comes to think of it, it is as if it were 'visibly'
before him, so deep was the impression it had made upon his mind.

"But the Spaniards were not raw troops; and terror however great, was
not able to overcome their sense of discipline and their duty to each
other as comrades.  It was in vain that the Mexicans rushed upon them
'as a conquered thing'; they reached their station, served their cannon
steadily--although they had to renew their artillery-men--and
maintained their ground.

"The appalling stratagem adopted by the Mexicans--of {211} throwing
down before one division of the Spanish army some of the heads of the
prisoners they had taken from another division, and shouting that these
were the heads of the principal commanders--was pursued with great
success.  They were thus enabled to discourage Sandoval, and to cause
him to retreat with loss toward his quarters.  They even tried with
success the same stratagem upon Cortes, throwing before his camp, to
which he had at last retreated, certain bleeding heads, which they
said, were those of 'Tonatiuh' (Alvarado), Sandoval, and the other
_teules_.  Then it was that Cortes felt more dismay than ever,
'though,' says the honest chronicler, who did not like the man, no
matter how much he admired the soldier, 'not in such a manner that
those who were with him should perceive in it much weakness.'

"After Sandoval had made good his retreat, he set off, accompanied by a
few horsemen, for the camp of Cortes, and had an interview with him, of
which the following account is given: 'O Senor Captain! what is this?'
exclaimed Sandoval; 'are these the great counsels, and artifices of war
which you have always been wont to show us?  How has this disaster
happened?'  Cortes replied, 'O Don Sandoval! my sins have permitted
this; but I am not so culpable in the business as they may make out,
for it is the fault of the Treasurer, Juan de Alderete, whom I charged
to fill up that difficult pass where they routed us; but he did not do
so, for he is not accustomed to wars, nor to be commanded by superior
officers.'  At this point of the conference, the Treasurer himself, who
had approached the captains in order to learn Sandoval's news,
exclaimed that it was Cortes himself who was to blame; that he had
encouraged his men to go {212} forward; that he had not charged them to
fill up the bridges and bad passes--if he had done so, he (the
Treasurer) and his company would have done it; and, moreover, that
Cortes had not cleared the causeway in time of his Indian allies.  Thus
