
But, although intensely still, there is no suggestion of death in such a
scene.  It is only that of slumber! for the ocean undulates even when at
rest, and sails flap gently even when there is no wind.  Besides this,
on the particular morning to which we call attention, a species of what
we may call "still life" was presented by a mighty iceberg--a peaked and
towering mountain of snowy white and emerald blue--which floated on the
sea not a quarter of a mile off on the starboard bow.  Real life also
was presented to the passengers of the noble bark which formed the
centre of this scene, in the form of gulls floating like great
snowflakes in the air, and flocks of active little divers rejoicing
unspeakably on the water.  The distant cries of these added to the
harmony of nature, and tended to draw the mind from mere abstract
contemplation to positive sympathy with the joys of other animals
besides one's-self.

The only discordant sounds that met the ears of those who voyaged in the
bark _Ocean Queen_ were the cacklings of a creature in the hen-coops
which had laid an egg, or thought it had done so, or wished to do so,
or, having been sea-sick up to that time, perhaps, endeavoured to revive
its spirits by recalling the fact that it once did so, and might perhaps
do so again!  By the way there was also one other discord, in the form
of a pugnacious baby, which whimpered continuously, and, from some
unaccountable cause, refused to be comforted.  But that was a discord
which, as in some musical chords, seemed rather to improve the harmony--
at least in its mother's ears.

The _Ocean Queen_ was an emigrant ship.  In her capacious hull, besides
other emigrants, there were upwards of seventy diamonds from the Beehive
in Spitalfields on their way to seek their fortunes in the lands that
are watered by such grand fresh-water seas as Lakes Superior and Huron
and Michigan and Ontario, and such rivers as the Ottawa and the Saint
Lawrence.

Robert Frog and Tim Lumpy were among those boys, so changed for the
better in a few months that, as the former remarked, "their own mothers
wouldn't know 'em," and not only improved in appearance, but in spirit,
ay, and even to some small extent in language--so great had been the
influence for good brought to bear on them by Christian women working
out of love to God and souls.

"Ain't it lovely?" said Tim.

"Splendacious!" replied Bob.

The reader will observe that we did not say the language had, at that
time, been _much_ improved! only to some small extent.

"I've seen pictur's of 'em, Bob," said Tim, leaning his arms on the
vessel's bulwarks as he gazed on the sleeping sea, "w'en a gen'l'man
came to George Yard with a magic lantern, but I never thought they was
so big, or that the holes in 'em was so blue."

"Nor I neither," said Bob.

They referred, of course, to the iceberg, the seams and especially the
caverns in which graduated from the lightest azure to the deepest
indigo.

"Why, I do believe," continued Bobby, as the haze grew a little thinner,
"that there's rivers of water runnin' down its sides, just like as if it
was a mountain o' loaf-sugar wi' the fire-brigade a-pumpin' on it.  An'
see, there's waterfalls too, bigger I do b'lieve than the one I once saw
at a pantomime."

"Ay, an' far prettier too," said Tim.

Bobby Frog did not quite see his way to assent to that.  The waterfalls
on the iceberg were bigger, he admitted, than those in the pantomime,
but then, there was not so much glare and glitter around them.

"An' I'm fond of glare an' glitter," he remarked, with a glance at his
friend.

"So am I, Bob, but--"

At that instant the dinner-bell rang, and the eyes of both glittered--
they almost glared--as they turned and made for the companion-hatch, Bob
exclaiming, "Ah, that's the thing that _I'm_ fond of; glare an'
glitter's all wery well in its way, but it can't 'old a candle to grub!"

Timothy Lumpy seemed to have no difference of opinion with his friend on
that point.  Indeed the other sixty-eight boys seemed to be marvellously
united in sentiment about it, for, without an exception, they responded
to that dinner-bell with a promptitude quite equal to that secured by
military discipline!  There was a rattling of feet on decks and
ladderways for a few seconds, and then all was quiet while a blessing
was asked on the meal.

For many years Miss Annie Macpherson has herself conducted parties of
such boys to Canada, but the party of which we write happened to be in
charge of a gentleman whom we will name the Guardian; he was there to
keep order, of course, but in truth this was not a difficult matter, for
the affections of the boys had been enlisted, and they had already
learned to practise self-restraint.

That same day a whale was seen.  It produced a sensation among the boys
that is not easily described.  Considerately, and as if on purpose, it
swam round the ship and displayed its gigantic proportions; then it
spouted as though to show what it could do in that line, and then, as if
to make the performance complete and reduce the Westminster Aquarium to
insignificance, it tossed its mighty tail on high, brought it down with
a clap like thunder, and finally dived into its native ocean followed by
a yell of joyful surprise from the rescued waifs and strays.

There were little boys, perhaps even big ones, in that band, who that
day received a lesson of faith from the whale.  It taught them that
pictures, even extravagant ones, represent great realities.  The whale
also taught them a lesson of error, as was proved by the remark of one
waif to a brother stray:--

"I say, Piggie, it ain't 'ard _now_, to b'lieve that the whale swallered
Jonah."

"You're right, Konky."

Strange interlacing of error with error traversed by truth in this
sublunary sphere!  Piggie was wrong in admitting that.  Konky was right,
for, as every one knows, or ought to know, it was not a whale at all
that swallowed Jonah, but a "great fish" which was "prepared" for the
purpose.

But the voyage of the _Ocean Queen_ was not entirely made up of calms,
and luminous fogs, and bergs, and whales, and food.  A volume would be
required to describe it all.  There was much foul weather as well as
fair, during which periods a certain proportion of the little flock,
being not very good sailors, sank to depths of misery which they had
never before experienced--not even in their tattered days--and even
those of them who had got their "sea-legs on," were not absolutely
happy.

"I say, Piggie," asked the waif before mentioned of his chum, (or
dosser), Konky, "'ow long d'ee think little Mouse will go on at his
present rate o' heavin'?"

"I can't say," answered the stray, with a serious air; "I ain't studied
the 'uman frame wery much, but I should say, 'e'll bust by to-morrow if
'e goes on like 'e's bin doin'."

A tremendous sound from little Mouse, who lay in a neighbouring bunk,
seemed to justify the prophecy.

But little Mouse did not "bust."  He survived that storm, and got his
sea-legs on before the next one.

The voyage, however, was on the whole propitious, and, what with
school-lessons and Bible-lessons and hymn-singing, and romping, and
games of various kinds instituted and engaged in by the Guardian, the
time passed profitably as well as pleasantly, so that there were,
perhaps, some feelings of regret when the voyage drew to an end, and
they came in sight of that Great Land which the Norsemen of old
discovered; which Columbus, re-discovering, introduced to the civilised
world, and which, we think, ought in justice to have been named
Columbia.

And now a new era of life began for those rescued waifs and strays--
those east-end diamonds from the great London fields.  Canada--with its
mighty lakes and splendid rivers, its great forests and rich lands, its
interesting past, prosperous present, and hopeful future--opened up to
view.  But there was a shadow on the prospect, not very extensive, it is
true, but dark enough to some of them just then, for here the hitherto
united band was to be gradually disunited and dispersed, and friendships
that had begun to ripen under the sunshine of Christian influence were
to be broken up, perhaps for ever.  The Guardian, too, had to be left
behind by each member as he was severed from his fellows and sent to a
new home among total strangers.

Still there were to set off against these things several points of
importance.  One of these was that the Guardian would not part with a
single boy until the character of his would-be employer was inquired
into, and his intention to deal kindly and fairly ascertained.  Another
point was, that each boy, when handed over to an employer, was not to be
left thereafter to care for himself, but his interests were to be
watched over and himself visited at intervals by an emissary from the
Beehive, so that he would not feel friendless or forsaken even though he
should have the misfortune to fall into bad hands.  The Guardian also
took care to point out that, amid all these leave-takings and partings,
there was One who would "never leave nor forsake" them, and to whom they
were indebted for the first helping hand, when they were in their rags
and misery, and forsaken of man.

At last the great gulf of Saint Lawrence was entered, and here the
vessel was beset with ice, so that she could not advance at a greater
rate than two or three miles an hour for a considerable distance.

Soon, however, those fields of frozen sea were passed, and the end of
the voyage drew near.  Then was there a marvellous outbreak of pens,
ink, and paper, for the juvenile flock was smitten with a sudden desire
to write home before going to the interior of the new land.

It was a sad truth that many of the poor boys had neither parent nor
relative to correspond with, but these were none the less eager in their
literary work, for had they not Miss Macpherson and the ladies of the
Home to write to?

Soon after that, the party landed at the far-famed city of Quebec, each
boy with his bag containing change of linen, and garments, a rug,
etcetera; and there, under a shed, thanks were rendered to God for a
happy voyage, and prayer offered for future guidance.

Then the Guardian commenced business.  He had momentous work to do.  The
Home of Industry and its work are well-known in Canada.  Dusty diamonds
sent out from the Beehive were by that time appreciated, and therefore
coveted; for the western land is vast, and the labourers are
comparatively few.  People were eager to get the boys, but the character
of intending employers had to be inquired into, and this involved care.
Then the suitability of boys to situations had to be considered.
However, this was finally got over, and a few of the reclaimed waifs
were left at Quebec.  This was the beginning of the dispersion.

"I don't like it at all," said Bobby Frog to his friend Tim Lumpy, that
evening in the sleeping car of the railway train that bore them onward
to Montreal; "they'll soon be partin' you an' me, an' that'll be worse
than wallerin' in the mud of Vitechapel."

Bobby said this with such an expression of serious anxiety that his
little friend was quite touched.

"I hope not, Bob," he replied.  "What d'ee say to axin' our Guardian to
put us both into the same sitivation?"

Bobby thought that this was not a bad idea, and as they rolled along
these two little waifs gravely discussed their future prospects.  It was
the same with many others of the band, though not a few were content to
gaze out of the carriage windows, pass a running commentary on the new
country, and leave their future entirely to their Guardian.  Soon,
however, the busy little tongues and brains ceased to work, and ere long
were steeped in slumber.

At midnight the train stopped, and great was the sighing and groaning,
and earnest were the requests to be let alone, for a batch of the boys
had to be dropped at a town by the way.  At last they were aroused, and
with their bags on their shoulders prepared to set off under a guide to
their various homes.  Soon the sleepiness wore off, and, when the train
was about to start, the reality of the parting seemed to strike home,
and the final handshakings and good wishes were earnest and hearty.

Thus, little by little, the band grew less and less.

Montreal swallowed up a good many.  While there the whole band went out
for a walk on the heights above the reservoir with their Guardian,
guided by a young Scotsman.

"That's a jolly-lookin' 'ouse, Tim," said Bob Frog to his friend.

The Scotsman overheard the remark.

"Yes," said he, "it is a nice house, and a good jolly man owns it.  He
began life as a poor boy.  And do you see that other villa--the white
one with the green veranda among the trees?  That was built by a man who
came out from England just as you have done, only without anybody to
take care of him; God however cared for him, and now you see his house.
He began life without a penny, but he had three qualities which will
make a man of any boy, no matter what circumstances he may be placed in.
He was truthful, thorough, and trustworthy.  Men knew that they might
believe what he said, be sure of the quality of what he did, and could
rely upon his promises.  There was another thing much in his favour, he
was a total abstainer.  Drink in this country ruins hundreds of men and
women, just as in England.  Shun drink, boys, as you would a serpent."

"I wouldn't shun a drink o' water just now if I could get it," whispered
Bobby to his friend, "for I'm uncommon thirsty."

At this point the whole band were permitted to disperse in the woods,
where they went about climbing and skipping like wild squirrels, for
these novel sights, and scents, and circumstances were overwhelmingly
delightful after the dirt and smoke of London.

When pretty well breathed--our waifs were grown too hardy by that time
to be easily exhausted--the Guardian got them to sit round him and sing
that sweet hymn:

"Shall we gather at the river?"

And tears bedewed many eyes, for they were reminded that there were yet
many partings in store before that gathering should take place.

And now the remnant of the band--still a goodly number--proceeded in the
direction of the far west.  All night they travelled, and reached
Belleville, where they were received joyfully in the large house
presented as a free gift to Miss Macpherson by the Council of the County
of Hastings.  It served as a "Distributing Home" and centre in Canada
for the little ones till they could be placed in suitable situations,
and to it they might be returned if necessary, or a change of employer
required it.  This Belleville Home was afterwards burned to the ground,
and rebuilt by sympathising Canadian friends.

But we may not pause long here.  The far west still lies before us.  Our
gradually diminishing band must push on.

"It's the sea!" exclaimed the boy who had been named little Mouse,
_alias_ Robbie Dell.

"No, it ain't," said Konky, who was a good deal older; "it's a lake."

"Ontario," said the Guardian, "one of the noble fresh-water seas of
Canada."

Onward, ever onward, is the watchword just now--dropping boys like
seed-corn as they go!  Woods and fields, and villas, and farms, and
waste-lands, and forests, and water, fly past in endless variety and
loveliness.

"A panoramy without no end!" exclaimed Tim Lumpy after one of his long
gazes of silent admiration.

"_Wot_ a diff'rence!" murmured Bobby Frog.  "Wouldn't mother an' daddy
an' Hetty like it, just!"

The city of Toronto came in sight.  The wise arrangements for washing in
Canadian railway-cars had been well used by the boys, and pocket-combs
also.  They looked clean and neat and wonderfully solemn as they landed
at the station.

But their fame had preceded them.  An earnest crowd came to see the
boys, among whom were some eager to appropriate.

"I'll take that lad," said one bluff farmer, stepping forward, and
pointing to a boy whose face had taken his fancy.

"And I want six boys for our village," said another.

"I want one to learn my business," said a third, "and I'll learn him as
my own son.  Here are my certificates of character from my clergyman and
the mayor of the place I belong to."

"I like the looks of that little fellow," said another, pointing to Bob
Frog, "and should like to have him."

"Does you, my tulip?" said Bobby, whose natural tendency to insolence
had not yet been subdued; "an' don't you vish you may get 'im!"

It is but justice to Bobby, however, to add, that this remark was made
entirely to himself.

To all these flattering offers the Guardian turned a deaf ear, until he
had passed through the crowd and marshalled his boys in an empty room of
the depot.  Then inquiries were made; the boys' characters and
capacities explained; suitability on both sides considered; the needs of
the soul as well as the body referred to and pressed; and, finally, the
party went on its way greatly reduced in numbers.

Thus they dwindled and travelled westward until only our friend Bobby,
Tim, Konky, and little Mouse remained with the Guardian, whose
affections seemed to intensify as fewer numbers were left on which they
might concentrate.

Soon the little Mouse was caught.  A huge backwoods farmer, who could
have almost put him in his coat-pocket, took a fancy to him.  The fancy
seemed to be mutual, for, after a tearful farewell to the Guardian, the
Mouse went off with the backwoodsman quite contentedly.

Then Konky was disposed of.  A hearty old lady with a pretty daughter
and a slim son went away with him in triumph, and the band was reduced
to two.

"I do believe," whispered Bob to Tim, "that he's goin' to let us stick
together after all."

"You are right, my dear boy," said the Guardian, who overheard the
remark.  "A family living a considerable distance off wishes to have two
boys.  I have reason to believe that they love the Lord Jesus, and will
treat you well.  So, as I knew you wished to be together, I have
arranged for your going to live with them."

As the journey drew to a close, the Guardian seemed to concentrate his
whole heart on the little waifs whom he had conducted so far, and he
gave them many words of counsel, besides praying with and for them.

At last, towards evening, the train rushed into a grand pine-wood.  It
soon rushed out of it again and entered a beautiful piece of country
which was diversified by lakelet and rivulet, hill and vale, with rich
meadow lands in the hollows, where cattle browsed or lay in the evening
sunshine.

The train drew up sharply at a small road-side station.  There was no
