And with that he turned on his heel.  I watched him through the window
as he left the shop.  He walked straight across the road and went in at
the public-house opposite.

And that glimpse was the last sight I had of Tom Drift for many, many
months.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

HOW I WAS KNOCKED DOWN BY AN AUCTIONEER, AND PICKED UP BY A COUNTRYMAN.

One day, about two years after my arrival at the pawnbroker's shop, an
unusual circumstance happened to break the monotony of my unruffled
existence.  This was nothing more nor less than a Clearance Sale.  I
must tell you how it happened.

For a week, every night, I saw my master poring over a big account-book
in his parlour, comparing the entries in it with those of his pawn-
tickets, and marking off on one list what articles had been pawned and
redeemed, and on another what had been pawned and still remained
unredeemed.  So lengthy and complicated a process was this that it
consumed the entire week.  The next week further indications of a coming
change manifested themselves.  A printer came to the office with a bill
for approval, worded as follows:--

  "Great Clearance Sale!  The entire valuable and miscellaneous
  unredeemed stock of a pawnbroker will be sold by auction at the
  Central Mart, on Monday next, by Mr Hammer.  Sale to commence at
  twelve o'clock precisely.  Catalogues will be ready on Saturday, and
  may be had on application."

Thus I, and one or two of my neighbours on the shelf, read as we peeped
through the crack at the printer's proof-sheet.

"`Entire valuable and miscellaneous unredeemed stock!' that's a good bit
of writing," observed a pair of silver sugar-tongs near me; "that means
you and me and the rest, Ticker.  Who'd have thought of us getting such
a grand name!"

"Well, it strikes me we, at least I, have been lying here idle long
enough," said I; "it's two years since I came here."

"Bless you, that's no time," said the tongs.  "I knew a salt-spoon lay
once ten years before he was put up--but then, you know, we silver
things are worth our money any time."

"Yes," said I, "we are."

The tongs laughed.  "You don't suppose I meant you when I talked of
silver things, do you?"

"Of course I am a silver watch."

"You're a bigger muff than I took you for," replied the aristocratic
tongs, turning his hall-mark towards me.  It was humiliating.  Of course
I ought to have known I was not solid silver, and had no claim to class
myself of the same metal as a genuine silver pair of tongs.

It was but one of many painful lessons I have had during my life not to
give myself airs beyond my station.

These solid silver goods certainly constituted the "upper ten thousand"
of our valuable and miscellaneous community.  When the time came for
cataloguing us all, they separated themselves from the rest of us, and
formed a distinct society, having their several names recorded in full
at the head of the list.

What a scene it was the day the catalogue came to our department!  I
suffered a further humiliation then by being almost entirely overlooked.
A great tray of silver watches lay on the bench, brought together from
all parts of the shop; and, to my horror, I found I was not among them.

"That's the lot," said the pawnbroker.

"Very good," said the auctioneer, who was making the catalogue; "shall
we take leather bags next?"

"As you please," said my master.

"Hold hard," said the auctioneer, hastily counting the watches on the
tray and comparing the number with a list he held in his hand, "there's
one short."

"Is there?  I don't know how that can be."

"You've got twenty-two down here and there's only twenty-one on the
tray."

The pawnbroker looked puzzled.

"Better call over the number," said the auctioneer.  So my master called
out the number attached to each watch, and the auctioneer ticked it off
on his list.  When the last had been called, he said,--

"Where's Number 2222?"

"Ah, to be sure, that's the one," said the pawnbroker, reaching up to
where I lay, and taking me down; "this one.  I'd forgotten all about
him."

Flattering, certainly! and still more so when the auctioneer, surveying
my tarnished and dingy appearance, said, "Well, he's not much of a show
after all.  You'd better rub him up a bit, or we shan't get him off hand
at all."

"Very good," said the pawnbroker, and I was handed over forthwith to an
assistant to be cleaned.  And much I needed it.  My skin was nearly as
black as a negro's, and my joints and muscles were perfectly clogged
with dust.  I had a regular watch's Turkish bath.  I was scrubbed and
powdered, my works were taken out and cleaned, my joints were oiled, my
face was washed, and my hands were polished.  Altogether I was
overhauled, and when I took my place on the tray with my twenty-one
companions I was altogether a new being, and by no means the least
presentable of the company.

How we quarrelled and wrangled, and shouldered one another on that tray!
There was such a Babel of voices (for each of us had been set going)
that scarcely any one could hear himself speak.  Nothing but
recriminations and vituperations rose on every hand.

"Get out of the way, ugly lever," snarled one monstrous hunter watch
near me, big enough for an ordinary clock.  "Who do you suppose wants
you?  Get out of the way, do you hear?"

"Where to?"  I inquired, not altogether liking to be so summarily
ordered about, and yet finding the excitement of a little quarrel
pleasant after two years' monotony.

"Anywhere, as long as you get out of my way.  Do you know I'm a hundred
years old?"

"Are you, though?" said I.  "People must have had bigger pockets in
those days than they have now!"

This I considered a very fair retort for his arrogance, and left him
snorting and croaking to himself, and bullying some other little
watches, whom, I suppose, he imagined would be more deferential to his
grey hairs than I was.

I was not destined, however, to be left in peace.

"Who are you?"  I heard a sharp voice say.  Looking round, I saw a
creature with a great eye in the middle of his face, and a long, lanky
hand spinning round and round over his visage.

"Who are _you_, rather?"  I replied.

It was evidently what he wanted, for he began at once: "I'm all the
latest improvements--compensation balance and jewelled in four holes;
perfect for time, beauty, and workmanship; sound, strong, and accurate;
with keyless action, and large full-dial second hand; air-tight, damp-
tight, and dust-tight; seven guineas net and five per cent, to
teetotalers.  There, what do you think of that?"

"I think," said I, with a laugh, in which a good many others joined,
"that if you're so tight as all that teetotalers had better do without
you."

It will be observed the scenes and company I had been in of late years
had tended to improve neither my temper nor my manners.

In this way we spent most of the day before the auction, and it was
quite a relief early next morning to find ourselves being removed to the
"Central Mart."

It was impossible, however, to resist the temptation of another quarrel
in our tray while we were waiting for the sale to begin.  The culprit in
this instance was a certain Queen Anne's shilling attached to the chain
of an insignificant-looking watch.

"What business has that ugly bit of tin here?" asked a burly hunter.

"Who calls me an ugly bit of tin?" squeaked out the coin.

"I do; there!" said the hunter; "now what have you got to say?"

"Only that you're a falsehood.  Why, you miserable, machine-made,
wheezing, old make-believe of a turnip--"

"Draw it mild, young fellow," said the hunter.

"Do you know that I was current coin of the realm before the tin mine
that supplied your carcass was so much as discovered?  I'm a Queen
Anne's shilling!"

"Are you, though?  And what good are you now, my ancient Bob?"

The shilling grew, so to speak, black in the face.

"I won't be called a Bob!  I'm not a Bob!  Who dares call me a Bob?"

"I do, Bob; there, Bob.  What do you think of that, Bob?  What's the use
of you, Bob, eh?  Can _you_ tell the time, Bob, eh, Bob, Bob, Bob?"

And we all took up the cry, and from that moment until the time of our
sale every sound, for us, was drowned in a ceaseless cry of "Bob!" in
the midst of which the unlucky Queen Anne's shilling crawled under his
watch, and devoutly wished he were as undoubtedly dead as the
illustrious royal lady whose image and superscription he had the
misfortune to bear.

In due time the sale began.  Among the earliest lots I recognised my
acquaintance the solid silver sugar-tongs, which went for very nearly
his full value, thus confirming me in my belief that, after all, there's
nothing like the genuine thing all the world over.

After the disposal of the silver goods--for which comparatively few
people bid, and that with little or no competition--the real excitement
of the auction began.

"I have here, ladies and gentlemen," said the auctioneer, "a remarkably
fine and superior lot of silver watches, all of which have been
carefully cleaned and kept in order, and which, I can safely say, are
equal to, if not better than, new.  In many cases the watches are
accompanied by chains of a very elegant and chaste description, which
appendages considerably enhance their value.  When I inform you that we
value the contents of this tray, at the very lowest, at L90, being an
average of L4 per watch, you will see I am not presenting to you any
ordinary lot of goods.  I will put up the watches singly in the order in
which they are described in the catalogue."

Some of the company looked as if they were not sure whether they ought
not to say "Hear, hear!" after this very elegant and polished speech,
but they restrained their admiration, and reserved their energies for
the bidding.

As I was last on the list I had full opportunity of noticing how my
fellows fared, and was specially curious to see how the three or four
watches whose acquaintance I had chanced to make went off.

The common-looking watch with the unlucky "Bob" attached to its chain
was knocked down for L3 5 shillings, which, on the whole, was a triumph
to the mortified coin, for it is certain without him the lot would not
have fetched nearly so much, and his triumph was further enhanced by the
fact that the hunter with whom he had had his altercation fetched only
L2 17 shillings 6 pence.  However, there was no time for jeers and
recriminations at present, we were all too deeply absorbed in watching
the fate of our fellows and speculating on our own.

The compensation balance, keyless, air-tight, seven-guinea grandee was
the next to be put up, and the first bid for him was L1 10s.

"That I should have lived to hear that!"  I heard the poor creature
gasp.

"And if he's a teetotaler," I murmured, by way of encouragement, "that
only means L1 8 shillings 6 pence!"

"Scoffer! be silent and leave me to my misery," said the keyless one, in
a solemn tone.

The bidding improved considerably.  He was run up to L2, L2 10
shillings, L3, L3 10 shillings, and finally to L4.

"Nothing more for this very magnificent watch?" said the auctioneer; "I
positively cannot let him go for a song."

No answer.

"I wish gentlemen would take the trouble to look at it," continued the
persevering official; "they could not fail to see it was worth twice the
money bid."

Still no answer.

"Did I understand you to bid four five, sir?" said the auctioneer to an
innocent-looking stripling near the door.  "Thank you."

The stripling, however, disclaimed the soft impeachment, and looked very
guilty as he did so.

"Well, there seems no help for it.  I wish I were down among you
gentlemen.  I'd take good care not to lose this chance."

No answer.

"Then I must knock it down.  Going, going, gone, sir; it's yours, and
dirt cheap, too."

All this was encouraging for me.  If a seven-guinea watch goes for four
pounds, for how much will a three-guinea one go?

This was a problem which I feebly endeavoured to solve as I lay waiting
my turn.

It came at last.  I felt myself lifted on high, and heard my merits
pronounced in the words of the catalogue.

"Lot 68.  London made, lever, open-face watch, capped and jewelled, in
very fine order."

"Look for yourselves, gentlemen."

The gentlemen did look for themselves, and complimented me by a
preliminary bid of 15 shillings.

The auctioneer laughed a pleasant laugh, as much as to say, "That is a
capital joke," and waited for the next bid.

It was not long in coming, and I advanced rapidly by half-crowns to
thirty shillings.  Here I made sure I should stop, for this was the
figure at which the pawnbroker himself had valued me.  But no; such are
the vagaries of an auction, I went on still, up to L2, and from that to
L2 10 shillings.  Surely there was some mistake.  I looked out to see
who they were who were thus bidding for me, and fancied I detected in
that scrutiny the secret of my unexpected value.

It was a countryman bidding--endeavouring in his downright way to become
my possessor, and wholly unconscious of the array of Jews against him,
who bid him up from half-crown to half-crown until I had nearly reached
my original value.

"Three pounds," at last said one of the Jews.

The countryman had evidently come to the end of his tether, and did not
answer the challenge.

"Three pounds," said the auctioneer; "you're not going to stop, sir?"

The countryman said nothing.
