midst of his men, lifted up his voice in thanksgiving to God for their
deliverance.

But when daylight came the full extent of their forlorn situation was
revealed.  The ship was a complete wreck; the boats were all gone, and
they found that the island on which they had been cast was only a few
square yards in extent--a mere sandbank, utterly destitute of shrub or
tree, and raised only a few feet above the level of the ocean.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE SANDBANK--THE WRECKED CREW MAKE THE BEST OF BAD CIRCUMSTANCES.

It will scarcely surprise the reader to be told that, after the first
emotions of thankfulness for deliverance from what had appeared to the
shipwrecked mariners to be inevitable death, a feeling amounting almost
to despair took possession of the whole party for a time.

The sandbank was so low that in stormy weather it was almost submerged.
It was a solitary coral reef in the midst of the boundless sea.  Not a
tree or bush grew upon it, and except at the point where the ship had
struck, there was scarcely a rock large enough to afford shelter to a
single man.  Without provisions, without sufficient shelter, without the
means of escape, and _almost_ without the hope of deliverance, it seemed
to them that nothing awaited them but the slow, lingering pains and
horrors of death by starvation.

As those facts forced themselves more and more powerfully home to the
apprehension of the crew,--while they cowered for shelter from the storm
under the lee of the rocky point, they gave expression to their feelings
in different ways.  Some sat down in dogged silence to await their fate;
others fell on their knees and cried aloud to God for mercy; while a few
kept up their own spirits and those of their companions by affecting a
cheerfulness which, however, in some cages, was a little forced.  Ailie
lay shivering in her father's arms, for she was drenched with salt water
and very cold.  Her eyes were closed, and she was very pale from
exposure and exhaustion, but her lips moved as if in prayer.

Captain Dunning looked anxiously at Dr Hopley, who crouched beside
them, and gazed earnestly in the child's face while he felt her pulse.

"It's almost too much for her, I fear," said the captain, in a
hesitating, husky voice.

The doctor did not answer for a minute or two, then he said, as if
muttering to himself rather than replying to the captain's remark, "If
we could only get her into dry clothes, or had a fire, or even a little
brandy, but--" He did not finish the sentence, and the captain's heart
sank within him, and his weather-beaten face grew pale as he thought of
the possibility of losing his darling child.

Glynn had been watching the doctor with intense eagerness, and with a
terrible feeling of dread fluttering about his heart.  When he heard the
last remark he leaped up and cried--"If brandy is all you want you shall
soon have it."  And running down to the edge of the water, he plunged in
and grasped the cable, intending to clamber into the ship, which had by
this time been driven higher on the rocks, and did not suffer so much
from the violence of the breakers.  At the same instant Phil Briant
sprang to his feet, rushed down after him, and before he had got a yard
from the shore, seized him by the collar, and dragged him out of the sea
high and dry on the land.

Glynn was so exasperated at this unceremonious and at the moment
unaccountable treatment, that he leaped up, and in the heat of the
moment prepared to deal the Irishman a blow that would very probably
have brought the experiences of the "ring" to his remembrance; but
Briant effectually checked him by putting both his own hands into his
pockets, thrusting forward his face as if to invite the blow, and
exclaiming--

"Och! now, hit fair, Glynn, darlint; put it right in betwane me two
eyes!"

Glynn laughed hysterically, in spite of himself.

"What mean you by stopping me?" he asked somewhat sternly.

"Shure, I mane that I'll go for the grog meself.  Ye've done more nor
yer share o' the work this mornin', an' it's but fair to give a poor
fellow a chance.  More be token, ye mustn't think that nobody can't do
nothin' but yeself.  It's Phil Briant that'll shin up a rope with any
white man in the world, or out of it."

"You're right, Phil," said Rokens, who had come to separate the
combatants.  "Go aboord, my lad, an' I'll engage to hold this here young
alligator fast till ye come back."

"You don't need to hold me, Tim," retorted Glynn, with a smile; "but
don't be long about it, Phil.  You know where the brandy is kept--look
alive."

Briant accomplished his mission successfully, and, despite the furious
waves, brought the brandy on shore in safety.  As he emerged like a
caricature of old Neptune dripping from the sea, it was observed that he
held a bundle in his powerful grasp.  It was also strapped to his
shoulders.

"Why, what have you got there?" inquired the doctor, as he staggered
under the shelter of the rocks.

"Arrah! give a dhrop to the child, an' don't be wastin' yer breath,"
replied Briant, as he undid the bundle.  "Sure I've brought a few
trifles for her outside as well as her in."  And he revealed to the glad
father a bundle of warm habiliments which he had collected in Ailie's
cabin, and kept dry by wrapping them in several layers of tarpaulin.

"God bless you, my man," said the captain, grasping the thoughtful
Irishman by the hand.  "Now, Ailie, my darling pet, look up, and swallow
a drop o' this.  Here's a capital rig-out o' dry clothes too."

A few sips of brandy soon restored the circulation which had well-nigh
been arrested, and when she had been clothed in the dry garments, Ailie
felt comparatively comfortable, and expressed her thanks to Phil Briant
with tears in her eyes.

A calm often succeeds a storm somewhat suddenly, especially in southern
latitudes.  Soon after daybreak the wind moderated, and before noon it
ceased entirely, though the sea kept breaking in huge rolling billows on
the sandbank for many hours afterwards.  The sun, too, came out hot and
brilliant, shedding a warm radiance over the little sea-girt spot as
well as over the hearts of the crew.

Human nature exhibits wonderful and sudden changes.  Men spring from the
depths of despair to the very summit, of light-hearted hope, and very
frequently, too, without a very obvious cause to account for the violent
change.  Before the day after the storm was far advanced, every one on
the sandbank seemed to be as joyous as though there was no danger of
starvation whatever.  There was, however, sufficient to produce the
change in the altered aspect of affairs.  For one thing, the warm sun
began to make them feel comfortable--and really it is wonderful how
ready men are to shut their eyes to the actual state of existing things
if they can only enjoy a little present comfort.  Then the ship was
driven so high up on the rocks as to be almost beyond the reach of the
waves, and she had not been dashed to pieces, as had at first been
deemed inevitable, so that the stores and provisions in her might be
secured, and the party be thus enabled to subsist on their ocean prison
until set free by some passing ship.

Under the happy influence of these improved circumstances every one went
about the work of rendering their island home more comfortable, in good,
almost in gleeful spirits.  Phil Briant indulged in jests which a few
hours ago would have been deemed profane, and Gurney actually
volunteered the song of the "man wot got his nose froze;" but every one
declined to listen to it, on the plea that it reminded them too forcibly
of the cold of the early morning.  Even the saturnine steward, Tarquin,
looked less ferocious than usual, and King Bumble became so loquacious
that he was ordered more than once to hold his tongue and to "shut up."

The work they had to do was indeed of no light nature.  They had to
travel to and fro between the ship and the rocks on the rope-cable, a
somewhat laborious achievement, in order to bring ashore such things as
they absolutely required.  A quantity of biscuit, tea, coffee, and sugar
were landed without receiving much damage, then a line was fastened to a
cask of salt beef, and this, with a few more provisions, was drawn
ashore the first day, and placed under the shelter of the largest rock
on the point.  On the following day it was resolved that a raft should
be constructed, and everything that could in any way prove useful be
brought to the sandbank and secured.  For Captain Dunning well knew that
another storm might arise as quickly as the former had done, and
although the ship at present lay in comparatively quiet water, the huge
billows that would be dashed against her in such circumstances would be
certain to break her up and scatter her cargo on the breast of the
all-devouring sea.

In the midst of all this activity and bustle there sat one useless and
silent, but exceedingly grave and uncommonly attentive spectator,
namely, Jacko the monkey.  That sly and sagacious individual, seeing
that no one intended to look after him, had during the whole of the
recent storm wisely looked after himself.  He had ensconced himself in a
snug and comparatively sheltered corner under the afterpart of the
weather-bulwarks.  But when he saw the men one by one leaving the ship,
and proceeding to the shore by means of the rope, he began to evince an
anxiety as to his own fate which had in it something absolutely human.
Jacko was the last man, so to speak, to leave the _Red Eric_.  Captain
Dunning, resolving, with the true spirit of a brave commander; to
reserve that honour to himself, had seen the last man, he thought, out
of the ship, and was two-thirds of the distance along the rope on his
way to land, when Jim Scroggles, who was _always_ either in or out of
the way at the most inopportune moments, came rushing up from below,
whither he had gone to secure a favourite brass _finger-ring_, and
scrambled over the side.

It would be difficult to say whether Jim's head, or feet, or legs, or
knees, or arms went over the side first,--they all got over somehow,
nobody knew how--and in the getting over his hat flew off and was lost
for ever.

Seeing this, and feeling, no doubt, the momentous truth of that
well-known adage "Now or never," Master Jacko uttered a shriek, bounded
from his position of fancied security, and seized Jim Scroggles firmly
by the hair, resolved apparently to live or perish along with him.  As
to simply clambering along that cable to the shore.  Jacko would have
thought no more of it than of eating his dinner.  Had he felt so
disposed he could have walked along it, or hopped along it, or thrown
somersaults along it.  But to proceed along it while it was at one
moment thirty feet above the sea, rigid as a bar of iron, and the next
moment several feet under the mad turmoil of the raging billows--this it
was that filled his little bosom with inexpressible horror, and induced
him to cling with a tight embrace to the hair of the head of his
bitterest enemy!

Having gained the shore, Jacko immediately took up his abode in the
warmest spot on that desolate sandbank, which was the centre of the mass
of cowering and shivering men who sought shelter under the lee of the
rocks, where he was all but squeezed to death, but where he felt
comparatively warm, nevertheless.  When the sun came out he perched
himself in a warm nook of the rock near to Ailie, and dried himself,
after which, as we have already hinted, he superintended the discharging
of the cargo and the arrangements made for a prolonged residence on the
sandbank.

"Och! but yer a queer cratur," remarked Briant, as he passed, chucking
the monkey under the chin.

"Oo-oo-oo-ee-o!" replied Jacko.

"Very thrue, no doubt--but I haven't time to spake to ye jist yet, lad,"
replied Briant, with a laugh, as he ran down to the beach and seized a
barrel which had just been hauled to the water's edge.

"What are you going to do with the wood, papa?" asked Ailie.

The captain had seized an axe at the moment, and began vigorously to cut
up a rough plank which had been driven ashore by the waves.

"I'm going to make a fire, my pet, to warm your cold toes."

"But my toes are not cold, papa; you've no idea how comfortable I am."

Ailie did indeed look comfortable at that moment, for she was lying on a
bed of dry sand, with a thick blanket spread over her.

"Well, then, it will do to warm Jacko's toes, if yours don't want it;
and besides, we all want a cup of tea after our exertions.  The first
step towards that end, you know, is to make a fire."

So saying, the captain piled up dry wood in front of the place where
Ailie lay, and in a short time had a capital fire blazing, and a large
tin kettle full of fresh water boiling thereon.

It may be as well to remark here that the water had been brought in a
small keg from the ship, for not a single drop of fresh water was found
on the sandbank after the most careful search.  Fortunately, however,
the water-tanks of the _Red Eric_ still contained a large supply.

During the course of that evening _a_ sort of shed or tent was
constructed out of canvas and a few boards placed against the rock.
This formed a comparatively comfortable shelter, and one end of it was
partitioned off for Ailie's special use.  No one was permitted to pass
the curtain that hung before the entrance to this little boudoir, except
the captain, who claimed a right to do what he pleased, and Glynn, who
was frequently invited to enter in order to assist its fair occupant in
her multifarious arrangements, and Jacko, who could not be kept out by
any means that had yet been hit upon, except by killing him; but as
Ailie objected to this, he was suffered to take up his abode there, and,
to do him justice, he behaved very well while domiciled in that place.

It is curious to note how speedily little children, and men too,
sometimes, contrive to forget the unpleasant or the sad, or, it may be,
the dangerous circumstances in which they may chance to be placed, while
engaged in the minute details incident to their peculiar position.
Ailie went about arranging her little nest under the rock with as much
zeal and cheerful interest as if she were "playing at houses" in her own
room at home.  She decided that one corner was peculiarly suited for her
bed, because there was a small rounded rock in it which looked like a
pillow; so Glynn was directed to spread the tarpaulin and the blankets
there.  Another corner exhibited a crevice in the rock, which seemed so
suitable for a kennel for Jacko that the arrangement was agreed to on
the spot.  We say agreed to, because Ailie suggested everything to
Glynn, and Glynn always agreed to everything that Ailie suggested, and
stood by with a hammer and nails and a few pieces of plank in his hands
ready to fulfil her bidding, no matter what it should be.  So Jacko was
sent for to be introduced to his new abode, but Jacko was not to be
found, for the very good reason that he had taken possession of the
identical crevice some time before, and at that moment was enjoying a
comfortable nap in its inmost recess.  Then Ailie caused Glynn to put up
a little shelf just over her head, which he did with considerable
difficulty, because it turned out that nails could not easily be driven
into the solid rock.  After that a small cave at the foot of the
apartment was cleaned out and Ailie's box placed there.  All this and
sundry other pieces of work were executed by the young sailor and his
little friend with an amount of cheerful pleasantry that showed they
had, in the engrossing interest of their pursuit, totally forgotten the
fact that they were cast away on a sandbank on which were neither food
nor water, nor wood, except what was to be found in the wrecked ship,
and around which for thousands of miles rolled the great billows of the
restless sea.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

LIFE ON THE SANDBANK--AILIE TAKES POSSESSION OF FAIRYLAND--GLYNN AND
BUMBLE ASTONISH THE LITTLE FISHES.

In order that the reader may form a just conception of the sandbank on
which the crew of the _Red Eric_ had been wrecked, we shall describe it
somewhat carefully.

It lay in the Southern Ocean, a little to the west of the longitude of
the Cape of Good Hope, and somewhere between 2000 and 3000 miles to the
south of it.  As has been already remarked, the bank at its highest
point was little more than a few feet above the level of the ocean, the
waves of which in stormy weather almost, and the spray of which
altogether, swept over it.  In length it was barely fifty yards, and in
breadth about forty.  Being part of a coral reef, the surface of it was
composed of the beautiful white sand that is formed from coral by the
dashing waves.  At one end of the bank--that on which the ship had
struck--the reef rose into a ridge of rock, which stood a few feet
higher than the level of the sand, and stretched out into the sea about
twenty yards, with its points projecting here and there above water.  On
the centre of the bank at its highest point one or two very small blades
of green substance were afterwards discovered.  So few were they,
however, and so delicate, that we feel justified in describing the spot
as being utterly destitute of verdure.  Ailie counted those green blades
many a time after they were discovered.  There were exactly thirty-five
of them; twenty-six were, comparatively speaking, large; seven were of
medium size, and two were extremely small--so small and thin that Ailie
wondered they did not die of sheer delicacy of constitution on such a
barren spot.  The greater part of the surface of the bank was covered
with the fine sand already referred to, but there were one or two spots
which were covered with variously-sized pebbles, and an immense number
of beautiful small shells.

On such a small and barren spot one would think there was little or
nothing to admire.  But this was not the case.  Those persons whose
thoughts are seldom allowed to fix attentively on any subject, are apt
to fall into the mistake of supposing that in this world there are a
great many absolutely uninteresting things.  Many things are, indeed,
uninteresting to individuals, but there does not exist a single thing
which has not a certain amount of interest to one or another cast of
mind, and which will not afford food for contemplation, and matter
fitted to call forth our admiration for its great and good Creator.

We know a valley so beautiful that it has been for generations past, and
will probably be for generations to come, the annual resort of hundreds
of admiring travellers.  The valley cannot be seen until you are almost
in it.  The country immediately around it is no way remarkable; it is
even tame.  Many people would exclaim at first sight in reference to it,
"How uninteresting."

It requires a close view, a minute inspection, to discover the beauties
that lie hidden there.

So was it with our sandbank.  Ailie's first thoughts were, "Oh! how
dreary; how desolate!" and in some respects she was right; but she dwelt
there long enough to discover things that charmed her eye and her
imagination, and caused her sometimes to feel as if she had been
transported to the realms of Fairyland.

We do not say, observe, that the crew of the _Red Eric_ were ever
blessed with such dreams.  Jim Scroggles, for instance, had no eye for
the minute beauties or wonders of creation.  Jim, according to his own
assertion, could see about as far through a millstone as most men.  He
could apostrophise his eye, on certain occasions, and tell it--as though
its own power of vision were an insufficient medium of information--that
"that _wos_ a stunnin' iceberg;" or that "that _wos_ a gale and a half,
fit to tear the masts out o' the ship a'most."  But for any less
majestic object in nature, Jim Scroggles had nothing to say either to
his eye, or his nose, or his shipmates.

As was Jim Scroggles, so were most of the other men.  Hence they
grumbled a good deal at their luckless condition.  But upon the whole
they were pretty cheerful--especially at meal-times--and, considering
their circumstances, they behaved very well.

Glynn Proctor was a notable exception to the prevailing rule of
indifference to small things.  By nature he was of a superior stamp of
mind to his comrades; besides, he had been better educated; and more
