marks their last resting-place, and records the fact of their cruel
murder by perhaps the worst king who ever sat upon the throne of
England.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

EDWARD OF LANCASTER, THE BOY WHOSE LIFE A ROBBER SAVED.

A terrible scene might have been witnessed near the small town of
Hexham, in Northumberland, one May afternoon in the year 1464.  A great
battle had just been fought and won.  Civil war, with all its hideous
accompaniments, had laid desolate those fair fields where once cattle
were wont to browse and peasants to follow their peaceful toil.  But now
all was confusion and tumult.  On the ground in heaps lay men and
horses, dead and dying--the vanquished were crying for mercy, the
victors were shouting for vengeance.  The country for miles round was
alive with fugitives and their pursuers.  Women, children, and old men,
as well as soldiers, joined in that panic flight; and shrieks, and
shouts, and groans told only too plainly of the slaughter and terror of
the pursuit.  To slaughter the victors added robbery and outrage.  Far
and wide they scoured the country in quest of victims and booty; houses
were burned, villages were desolated, fields were laid bare, nor till
night mercifully fell over the land did that scene of terror end.  War
is indeed a terrible scourge, and civil war the most terrible of all.

But while many of those who pursued did so in a blind thirst after
plunder and blood, there were others more determined in their going,
whose object was rather to capture than to slay, who passed without
heeding the common fugitives, and gave chase only to such parties as
seemed to be covering the flight of persons of distinction from the
scene of their disaster.  Of such parties one was known to contain the
King of England, nobles, and officers, whom the victors desired to make
captive and get into their power; while it was also rumoured that the
Queen herself, with her youthful son, was among the fugitives.  The
soldiers of the Duke of York would indeed have been elated, had they
succeeded in getting into their power the king and his son, whose throne
they had seized for their own leader, and so they followed hard after
the flying host in all directions.

That same evening, as the sun was sinking, and the distant sounds of
battle were growing faint in the air, a tall, stately woman, leading by
the hand a boy of scarcely six years, walked hastily in the direction of
a wood which skirted the banks of the River Tyne.  It was evident from
her dress and the jewels she wore that she was a lady of no ordinary
importance, and a certain imperious look in her worn face seemed to
suggest that she was one of those more used to ruling than obeying, to
receiving honour rather than rendering it.  The boy who accompanied her
was also richly dressed, and reflected in his handsome face the proud
nature of his mother, as this lady seemed to be.  Just at present,
however, his expression was one of terror.  He clung eagerly to the hand
of his protectress, and once and again cast a frightened look behind, as
if expecting to get sight of the pursuers, from whose clutches they were
even now seeking shelter.

"Mother," said the lad, as they entered the wood, and for the first time
abated somewhat of their hurried progress, "I am weary and hungry.  May
we not rest here awhile and eat something?"

"My child," said the lady, "there is naught here to eat, and we must go
farther ere we are safe from our cruel foes."

So they went on, deep into the gloomy shade of the wood, till they were
far beyond the sight of the outer world, and where the rays of the
setting sun scarce gave the feeblest light.

"Mother," said the boy presently, "this is an awful place; we shall die
here."

"Fear not, my child," replied the lady bravely.  "Heaven will protect us
when none else can."

"But do not robbers abound in these woods?  Have I not heard you say
so?"

"It is true; but they will not hurt thee or me.  Remember whose son thou
art."

"Ay, I am the king's son; but I would fain have a morsel to eat."

Just then there was a crackling among the underwood, and a sound of
voices approaching the spot.

The boy clutched his mother's hand and trembled.  She stood pale and
motionless.

The sound of feet grew nearer, and presently the voices of those who
spoke became distinguishable.

"Some will be sure to find their way to this wood," said one.

"I hope such as do may have full purses," said another.  "I have taken
nothing these three days."

"Ay, truly, and these wars have made folk so poor, they are not worth
robbing when we do find them."

"Soft! methought I heard a voice!" suddenly said one of the speakers.

The band halted and listened, and then, hearing nothing, pushed on.

"It's as likely as not we might fall in with royalty itself this night,
for I hear the king's rout has been complete at Hexham."

"And more than that, he has fled from the field in one direction, while
his queen and son have sought another!"

"Hist!" again cried he who had spoken before.  "I certainly heard a
voice.  This way, my men; follow me."

And advancing at as rapid a pace as the wooded ground allowed of, he
conducted them in the direction of the voices.  Suddenly they emerged
into a clearing, where confronted them the lady and her boy.

Loud laughed these greedy robbers, for they spied the jewels on the
lady's person and the rich robes on her and her son.

Like cowardly ruffians, as _they_ were, they rushed forward, heedless of
the sex or age of their victims, and threatening to slay them should
they resist, tore away jewels, and gold, and silk--all that was of
value, roughly handling the two in so doing, and meeting every attempt
to speak or resist with the menace of a drawn sword.

It was a rich plunder, for the lady's jewels were large and precious,
and, besides, she bore about her no small quantity of gold and other
treasure.  When they had taken all they could lay their wicked hands on,
the men fell to dividing among themselves their ill-gotten booty,
glorying as they did so in their crime, and laughing brutally at the
expense of their two defenceless victims.

As might be supposed, the task of dividing the spoil was one not quietly
accomplished.  The robbers began to argue as to the division, and from
arguing they went on to disputing, and from disputing they came to
fighting, in the midst of which the lady and her boy took an opportunity
to escape unobserved into the thicket, and hasten as best they might
from the reach of their plunderers.

Thus they fled, robbed and penniless, exposed to the cold evening air,
famishing for lack of food, smarting under insult and wrong, and not
knowing where next to turn for shelter or safety.

The courage of the lady, hitherto so conspicuous, now fairly gave way.
She sat down on the ground, and taking her boy to her arms, abandoned
herself to a flood of tears.  "My son," she cried, "better if we had
died by the sword of our enemies, than die a shameful death in these
woods!  Alas! was ever woman so miserable as I?"

"But, mother," said the boy, who now in turn took upon him the office of
comforter, "the robbers left us with our lives, and we shall surely find
some food here.  Cheer up, mother; did you not tell me God would take
care of us when no one else could?"

The mother's only answer was to take her boy in a closer embrace and
kiss him passionately.

Suddenly there appeared before them a man of fierce aspect, holding in
his hand a drawn sword.

Escape was impossible; robbed as they already were, they had nothing but
their lives to offer to this wild ruffian.  And would he scruple to
murder where he could not rob?

The courage of the lady, in this desperate case, returned as quickly as
it had lately deserted her.

A sudden resolution gleamed in her face; then, rising majestically to
her feet, and taking by the hand her trembling boy, she advanced proud
and stately towards the robber.  The man halted wonderingly.  There was
something in the imperious bearing of this tall, beautiful lady--
something in the appealing looks of the gallant boy--which for a moment
cowed his lawless resolve, and made him hesitate.

Noticing this, the lady advanced close to him, and said in clear,
majestic tones,--

"Behold, my friend, I commit to your care the safety of your king's
son!"

The man started back in astonishment, the sword dropped from his hand,
and a look, half of alarm, half of perplexity, took possession of his
face.

Then he fell on one knee, and respectfully bowed almost to the earth.

"Art thou, then, our good Queen Margaret?"

"I am she."

"And this youth, is he indeed our royal master's son?"

"Even so."

Once more the wild man bowed low.  Then the queen bade him arise, told
him how she and the young prince had come into the plight, and ended by
asking if he could give them food and shelter for a short time.

"All I have is your majesty's," said the man, "even my life.  I will at
once conduct you to my humble dwelling."  And he lifted the weary boy
tenderly in his arms, and led the queen to his cottage in the wood,
where they got both food and shelter, and every care and attention from
the robber's good wife.

"Mother," said the young prince that night, "thou saidst right, that
Heaven would protect us."

"Ay, my boy, and will still protect us!"

For some days they rested at the cottage, tended with endless care by
the loyal robber and his wife, until the pursuit from the battle of
Hexham was over.  Then, with the aid of her protector, the queen made
her way to the coast, where a vessel waited to convey her and the prince
to Flanders.  Thus, for a time they escaped from all their dangers.  Had
the young prince lived to become King of England, we may be sure that
the kind act of the robber would not have been suffered to die
unrewarded.  But, alas!  Edward of Lancaster was never King of England.

The Wars of the Roses, as we all know, resulted in the utter defeat of
the young prince's party.  He was thirteen years old when the rival
Houses of York and Lancaster fought their twelfth battle in the meadow
at Tewkesbury.  On that occasion Edward fought bravely in his own cause,
but he and his followers were completely routed by the troops of King
Edward the Fourth.  Flying from the field of battle, he was arrested and
brought before the young king.

"How dared you come here?" wrathfully inquired the usurper.

"To recover my father's crown and my own inheritance," boldly replied
the prince.

Whereat, the history says, Edward struck at him with his iron gauntlet,
and his attendants fell upon him and slew him with their swords.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

EDWARD THE SIXTH, THE GOOD KING OF ENGLAND.

It was a strange moment in the history of England when the great King
Henry the Eighth.  ("Bluff King Hal," as his subjects called him)
breathed his last.  However popular he may have been on account of his
courage and energy, he possessed vices which must always withhold from
him the name of a _good_ king, and which, in fact, rendered his reign a
continuous scene of cruelty and oppression.  People were sick of hearing
of the king and his wives--how he had beheaded one, and put away
another, and ill-treated another, for no reason at all but his own
selfish caprice.  And men trembled for their lives when they remembered
how Wolsey, and More, and Cromwell, and others had been sacrificed to
the whimsical temper of this tyrannical sovereign.  England, in fact,
was tired out when Henry the Eighth died.

It was, at any rate, a change for them to find that their new king was
in every respect the opposite of his father.  Instead of the burly, hot-
headed, self-willed, cruel Henry, they were now to be ruled by a frail,
delicate, mild boy of nine, inheriting neither his father's vices nor
his faults, and resembling him as little in mind as in body.  But the
chief difference of all was this--that this boy-king was _good_.

A _good_ King of England.  It was indeed and, alas! a novelty.  How
many, counting back to the day when the country first knew a ruler,
could be so described?  Had not the sceptre of England passed, almost
without exception, down a line of usurpers, murderers, robbers, and
butchers, and was it not a fact that the few kings who had not been
knaves had been merely fools?

But now England had a good king and a clever king, what might not be
expected of him?

On the day of his coronation all sorts of rumours were afloat respecting
young Edward.  Boy though he was, he was a scholar, and wrote letters in
Latin.  Young in years, he was mature in thought, he was a staunch
Protestant, an earnest Christian.  Tudor though he was, he loved peace,
and had no pleasure in the sufferings of others.  Was ever such a king?

"Alas," said some one, "that he is but a boy!"

The sight which presented itself within the walls of that gloomy
fortress, the Tower of London, on the day of Edward the Sixth's
proclamation, was an impressive one.  Amidst a crowd of bishops and
nobles, who bowed low as he advanced, the pale boy-king came forward to
receive the homage of his new subjects.

Surely, thought some, as they looked, that little head is not fitted to
the wearing of an irksome crown.  But, for the most part, the crowd
cheered, and shouted, "God save the king!" and not one was there who
found it in his heart to wish young Edward Tudor ill.

The papist ceremony which had always before accompanied the coronation
of English kings was now for the first time dispensed with.  With joy
the people heard good old Archbishop Cranmer urge the new king to see
God truly worshipped, according to the doctrines of the Reformed
religion; and with joy they heard the boy declare before them all his
intention to rule his country according to the rules of God's Word and
the Protestant faith.

Still, as we have said, many in the midst of their joy sighed as they
looked at the frail boy, and wondered how so young a head would bear up
amid all the perils and dangers of kingship; and well they might pity
him.

The reign of Edward the Sixth is chiefly a history of the acts of his
uncle, the Duke of Somerset, the Protector, and of the dissensions which
embittered the government of that nobleman, leading finally to his death
on the scaffold.  Of Edward himself we do not hear much.  We have
occasional glimpses of him at his studies, under tutors chosen and
superintended by Cranmer; but he does not seem to have taken much part--
how could a boy of his age be expected to do so?--in the active duty of
governing.

We know that such acts as the removal of popish restrictions from the
clergy and people, the publication of the Book of Common Prayer, and the
discouragement of all idolatrous and superstitious practices, had his
hearty sympathy.  In these and in such-like useful measures he
interested himself, but as for the troubles and commotions of his reign,
he had nothing to do with them.

His nobles, on the other hand, were by no means so passive.  They made
war in the king's name on Scotland, to capture a baby-wife for the poor
boy, who was scarcely in his teens; they--accused and impeached one
another; they brought their death warrants to Edward to sign, whether he
liked or no (and he never did like); they persecuted those who disagreed
with them; they goaded the common people into rebellion; they schemed
how they should make their own fortunes after the young invalid was
dead, and to that end worked upon his weakness and his timidity actually
to disinherit his own sisters.

In the midst of all this disturbance, and scheming, and distress, we can
picture the poor, confused, sickly boy seeking refuge in his books,
shrinking from the angry bustle of the court, and spending his days with
his grave tutors in quiet study.  Reluctantly, once and again, he was
forced to come out from his retreat to give the sanction of his
authority to some act of his ambitious nobles.  With what trembling hand
would he sign the death warrants they presented! with what weariness
would he listen to their wrangles and accusations! with what distress
would he hear discussions as to who was to wear that crown of his when
he himself should be in the grave!

That time was not long in coming.  He was not fifteen when an attack of
smallpox laid him on his deathbed; and while all the court was busy
plotting and counterplotting as to the disposal of the crown, the poor
boy-king lay there almost neglected, or watched only by those who waited
the moment of his death with impatience.  As the disease took deeper and
fatal hold of him, all forsook him save an incompetent quack nurse; and
how far she may have helped on the end no one can tell.

But for him death was only a happy release from a world of suffering.  A
few hours before his end he was heard to speak something; and those who
listened discovered that the boy, thinking himself alone, was praying.
One has recorded those closing words of that strange, sad life: "Lord,
deliver me out of this wretched and miserable life, and take me among
Thy chosen: howbeit not my will, but Thine be done.  Lord, I commit my
spirit to Thee.  O Lord, Thou knowest how happy it were for me to be
with Thee; yet, for the sake of Thy chosen, send me life and health,
that I may truly serve Thee.  O my Lord God, bless Thy people, and save
Thine inheritance.  O Lord God, save Thy chosen people of England.  O my
Lord God, defend this realm from papistry, and maintain Thy true
religion, that I and my people may praise Thy holy name, for Thy Son
Jesus Christ's sake."

And with these words on his lips, and these prayers for England in his
heart, the good young king died.  Who knows if by his piety and his
prayers he may not have brought more blessing to his country than many a
battle and many a law of less Godfearing monarchs?

What he would have done for England had he been spared to manhood, it is
not possible to say.  A diary which he kept during his life affords
abundant proof that even at his tender age he possessed not a little of
the sagacity and knowledge necessary to good kingship; and a manhood of
matured piety and wisdom might have materially altered the course of
events in the history of England of that time.

One boon at least he has left behind him, besides his unsullied name and
example.  Scattered about the counties of England are not a few schools
which bear his name.  It is possible that a good many of my readers are
to be found among the scholars of the Bluecoat School, and of the King
Edward Grammar Schools in various parts of the country.  They, at least,
will understand the gratitude which this generation owes to the good
young king who so materially advanced the learning of which he himself
was so fond, by the establishment of these schools.  He was one of the
few of his day who saw that the glory of a country consists not in its
armies and exchequers, but in the religious and moral enlightenment of
its people; and to that glory his own life was, and remains still, a
noble contribution.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

HENRY STUART, THE BOY WHOM A NATION LOVED.

In the courtyard of a Scottish castle, over which floated the royal
banner, a curious scene might have been witnessed one morning nearly
three centuries ago.  The central figures of the scene were a horse and
