be within twenty miles of them, but they had no means of knowing the
exact spot, and any footprints that had been made were now obliterated.
In these circumstances Captain Guy had to depend very much on his own
sagacity.

Clambering to the top of a hummock he observed a long stretch of level
floe to the northward.

"I think it likely," he remarked to Saunders, who had accompanied him,
"that they may have gone in that direction.  It seems an attractive road
among the chaos of ice-heaps."

"I'm no sure o' that," objected Saunders; "yonder's a pretty clear road
away to the west, maybe they took that."

"Perhaps they did, but as Fred said they had gone far out on the ice _to
the north_, I think it likely they've gone in _that_ direction."

"Maybe yer right sir, and maybe yer wrang," answered Saunders, as they
returned to the party.  As this was the second mate's method of
intimating that he _felt_ that he ought to give in (though he didn't
give in, and never would give in, _absolutely_), the captain felt more
confidence in his own opinion.

"Now, Meetuck, keep your eyes open," he added, as they resumed their
rapid march.

After journeying on for a considerable distance, the men were ordered to
spread out over the neighbouring ice-fields, in order to multiply the
chances of discovering tracks; but there seemed to be some irresistible
power of attraction which drew them gradually together again, however
earnestly they might try to keep separate.  In fact, they were beginning
to be affected by the long-continued march and the extremity of the
cold.

This last was so great that constant motion was absolutely necessary in
order to prevent them from freezing.  There was no time allowed for
rest--life and death were in the scale.  Their only hope lay in a
continuous and rapid advance, so as to reach the lost men ere they
should freeze or die of starvation.

"Holo! look 'eer!" shouted Meetuck, as he halted and went down on his
knees to examine some marks on the snow.

"These are tracks," cried Captain Guy eagerly.  "What think you,
Saunders?"

"They look like it."

"Follow them up, Meetuck.  Go in advance, my lad, and let the rest of
you scatter again."

In a few minutes there was a cry heard, and as the party hastened
towards the spot whence it came, they found Davie Summers pointing
eagerly to a little snow-hut in the midst of a group of bergs.

With hasty steps they advanced towards it and the captain, with a
terrible misgiving at heart, crept in.

"Ah, then, is it yerself, darlint?" were the first words that greeted
him.

A loud cheer from those without told that they heard and recognised the
words.  Immediately two of them crept in, and, striking a light, kindled
a lamp, which revealed the careworn forms of their lost comrades
stretched on the ground in their sleeping-bags.  They were almost
exhausted for want of food, but otherwise they were uninjured.

The first congratulations over, the rescue party immediately proceeded
to make arrangements for passing the night.  They were themselves little
better than those whom they had come to save, having performed an
uninterrupted march of eighteen hours without food or drink.

It was touching to see the tears of joy and gratitude that filled the
eyes of the poor fellows, who had given themselves up for lost as they
watched the movements of their comrades while they prepared food for
them; and the broken, fitful conversation was mingled strangely with
alternate touches of fun and deep feeling, indicating the conflicting
emotions that struggled in their breasts.

"I knowed ye would come, Captain; bless you, sir," said Amos Parr in an
unsteady voice.

"Come!  Av coorse ye knowed it," cried O'Riley energetically.  "Och, but
don't be long wid the mate, darlints, me stummik's shut up intirely."

"There won't be room for us all here, I'm afraid," remarked Bolton.

This was true.  The hut was constructed to hold six, and it was
impossible that ten could _sleep_ in it, although they managed to
squeeze in.

"Never mind that," cried the captain.  "Here, take a drop of soup;
gently, not too much at a time."

"Ah, then, it's cruel of ye, it is, to give me sich a small taste!"

It was necessary, however, to give men in their condition a "small
taste" at first, so O'Riley had to rest content.  Meanwhile the rescue
party supped heartily, and, after a little more food had been
administered to the half-starved men, preparations were made for
spending the night.  The tent was pitched, and the sleeping-bags spread
out on the snow, then Captain Guy offered up fervent thanks to God for
his protection thus far, and prayed shortly but earnestly for
deliverance from their dangerous situation, after which they all lay
down and slept soundly till morning--or at least as soundly as could be
expected with a temperature at 55 degrees below zero.

Next morning they prepared to set out on their return to the ship.  But
this was no easy task.  The exhausted men had to be wrapped up carefully
in their blankets, which were sewed closely round their limbs, then
packed in their sleeping-bags and covered completely up, only a small
hole being left opposite their mouths to breathe through, and after that
they were lashed side by side on the small sledge.  The larger sledge,
with the muskets, ammunition, and spare blankets, had to be abandoned.
Then the rescue party put their shoulders to the tracking-belts, and
away they went briskly over the floes.

But the drag was a fearfully heavy one for men who, besides having
walked so long and so far on the previous day, were, most of them, much
weakened by illness and very unfit for such laborious work.  The floes,
too, were so rugged that they had frequently to lift the heavy sledge
and its living load over deep rents and chasms which, in circumstances
less desperate, they would have scarcely ventured to do.  Work as they
would, however, they could not make more than a mile an hour, and night
overtook them ere they reached the level floes.  But it was of the
utmost importance that they should continue to advance, so they pushed
forward until a breeze sprang up that pierced them through and through.

Fortunately there was a bright moon in the sky, which enabled them to
pick their way among the hummocks.  Suddenly, without warning, the whole
party felt an alarming failure of their energies.  Captain Guy, who was
aware of the imminent danger of giving way to this feeling, cheered the
men to greater exertion by word and voice, but failed to rouse them.
They seemed like men walking in their sleep.

"Come, Saunders, cheer up, man," cried the captain, shaking the mate by
the arm; but Saunders stood still, swaying to and fro like a drunken
man.  Mizzle begged to be allowed to sleep, if it were only for two
minutes, and poor Davie Summers deliberately threw himself down on the
snow, from which, had he been left, he would never more have risen.

The case was now desperate.  In vain the captain shook and buffeted the
men.  They protested that they did not feel cold--"they were quite warm,
and only wanted a little sleep."  He saw that it was useless to contend
with them, so there was nothing left for it but to pitch the tent.

This was done as quickly as possible, though with much difficulty, and
the men were unlashed from the sledge and placed within it.  The others
then crowded in, and, falling down beside each other, were asleep in an
instant.  The excessive crowding of the little tent was an advantage at
this time, as it tended to increase their animal heat.  Captain Guy
allowed them to sleep only two hours, and then roused them in order to
continue the journey; but short though the period of rest was, it proved
sufficient to enable the men to pursue their journey with some degree of
spirit.  Still, it was evident that their energies had been overtaxed,
for when they neared the ship next day, Tom Singleton, who had been on
the lookout, and advanced to meet them, found that they were almost in a
state of stupor, and talked incoherently; sometimes giving utterance to
sentiments of the most absurd nature, with expressions of the utmost
gravity.

Meanwhile good news was brought them from the ship.  Two bears and a
walrus had been purchased from the Esquimaux, a party of whom--sleek,
fat, oily, good-humoured, and hairy--were encamped on the lee side of
the _Dolphin_, and busily engaged in their principal and favourite
occupation--eating!



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

WINTER ENDS--THE FIRST INSECT--PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE--NARROW
ESCAPE--CUTTING OUT--ONCE MORE AFLOAT--SHIP ON FIRE--CREW TAKE TO THE
BOATS.

Winter passed away, with its darkness and its frost, and, happily, with
its sorrows; and summer--bright, glowing summer--came at last to gladden
the heart of man and beast in the Polar regions.

We have purposely omitted to make mention of spring, for there is no
such season, properly so called, within the Arctic Circle.  Winter
usually terminates with a gushing thaw, and summer then begins with a
blaze of fervent heat.  Not that the heat is really so intense as
compared with that of southern climes, but the contrast is so great that
it _seems_ as though the torrid zones had rushed towards the Pole.

About the beginning of June there were indications of the coming heat.
Fresh water began to trickle from the rocks, and streamlets commenced to
run down the icebergs.  Soon everything became moist, and a marked
change took place in the appearance of the ice-belt, owing to the pools
that collected on it everywhere and overflowed.

Seals now became more numerous in the neighbourhood, and were frequently
killed near the _atluks_, or holes; so that fresh meat was secured in
abundance, and the scurvy received a decided check.  Reindeer, rabbits,
and ptarmigan, too, began to frequent the bay, so that the larder was
constantly full, and the mess-table presented a pleasing variety--rats
being no longer the solitary dish of fresh meat at every meal.  A few
small birds made their appearance from the southward, and these were
hailed as harbingers of the coming summer.

One day O'Riley sat on the taffrail, basking in the warm sun, and
drinking in health and gladness from its beams.  He had been ill, and
was now convalescent.  Buzzby stood beside him.

"I've bin thinkin'," said Buzzby, "that we don't half know the blessin's
that are given to us in this here world till we've had 'em taken away.
Look, now, how we're enjoyin' the sun an' the heat just as if it wos so
much gold!"

"Goold!" echoed O'Riley in a tone of contempt; "faix, I niver thought so
little o' goold before, let me tell ye.  Goold can buy many a thing, it
can, but it can't buy sunshine.  Hallo! what's this!"

O'Riley accompanied the question with a sudden snatch of his hand.

"Look here, Buzzby!  Have a care, now! jist watch the opening o' my
fist."

"Wot is it?" enquired Buzzby, approaching, and looking earnestly at his
comrade's clenched hand with some curiosity.

"There he comes!  Now, then; not so fast, ye spalpeen!"

As he spoke, a small fly, which had been captured, crept out from
between his fingers, and sought to escape.  It was the first that had
visited these frozen regions for many, many months, and the whole crew
were summoned on deck to meet it, as if it were an old and valued
friend.

"Let it go, poor thing?" cried half a dozen of the men, gazing at the
little prisoner with a degree of interest that cannot be thoroughly
understood by those who have not passed through experiences similar to
those of our Arctic voyagers.

"Ay, don't hurt it, poor thing!  You're squeezin' it too hard!" cried
Amos Parr.

"Squaazing it! no, then, I'm not.  Go, avic, an' me blessin' go wid ye."

The big, rough hand opened, and the tiny insect, spreading its gossamer
wings, buzzed away into the bright atmosphere, where it was soon lost to
view.

"Rig up the ice-saws, Mr Bolton, set all hands at them, and get out the
powder-canisters," cried Captain Guy, coming hastily on deck.

"Ay, ay, sir," responded the mate.  "All hands to the ice-saws!  Look
alive, boys!  Ho!  Mr Saunders! where's Mr Saunders?"

"Here I am," answered the worthy second mate in a quiet voice.

"Oh, you're there? get up some powder, Mr Saunders, and a few
canisters."

There was a heartiness in the tone and action with which these orders
were given and obeyed that proved they were possessed of more than
ordinary interest; as, indeed, they were, for the time had now come for
making preparations for cutting the ship out of winter-quarters, and
getting ready to take advantage of any favourable opening in the ice
that might occur.

"Do you hope to effect much?" enquired Captain Ellice of Captain Guy,
who stood at the gangway watching the men as they leaped over the side,
and began to cut holes with ice chisels preparatory to fixing the saws
and powder-canisters.

"Not much," replied the captain; "but a _little_ in these latitudes is
worth fighting hard for, as you are well aware.  Many a time have I seen
a ship's crew strain and heave on warps and cables for hours together,
and only gain a yard by all their efforts; but many a time, also, have I
seen a single yard of headway save a ship from destruction."

"True," rejoined Captain Ellice; "I have seen a little of it myself.
There is no spot on earth, I think, equal to the Polar regions for
bringing out into bold relief two great and _apparently_ antagonistic
truths--namely, man's urgent need of all his powers to accomplish the
work of his own deliverance, and man's utter helplessness and entire
dependence on the sovereign will of God."

"When shall we sink the canisters, sir?" asked Bolton, coming up and
touching his hat.

"In an hour, Mr Bolton; the tide will be full then, and we shall try
what effect a blast will have."

"My opeenion is," remarked Saunders, who passed at the moment with two
large bags of gunpowder under his arms, "that it'll have no effect at
a'.  It'll just loosen the ice roond the ship."

The captain smiled as he said: "_That_ is all the effect I hope for, Mr
Saunders.  Should the outward ice give way soon, we shall then be in a
better position to avail ourselves of it."

As Saunders predicted, the effect of powder and saws was merely to
loosen and rend the ice-tables, in which the _Dolphin_ was imbedded; but
deliverance was coming sooner than any of those on board expected.  That
night a storm arose, which, for intensity of violence, equalled, if it
did not surpass, the severest gales they had yet experienced.  It set
the great bergs of the Polar seas in motion, and these moving mountains
of ice slowly and majestically began their voyage to southern climes,
crashing through the floes, overturning the hummocks, and ripping up the
ice-tables with quiet, but irresistible momentum.  For two days the war
of ice continued to rage, and sometimes the contending forces, in the
shape of huge tongues and corners of bergs, were forced into the Bay of
Mercy, and threatening swift destruction to the little craft, which was
a mere atom that might have been crushed and sunk and scarcely missed in
such a wild scene.

At one time a table of ice was forced out of the water and reared up,
like a sloping wall of glass, close to the stern of the _Dolphin_, where
all the crew were assembled with ice-poles ready to do their utmost; but
their feeble efforts could have availed them nothing had the
slowly-moving mass continued its onward progress.

"Lower away the quarter-boat," cried the captain, as the sheet of ice
six feet thick came grinding down towards the starboard quarter.

Buzzby, Grim, and several others sprang to obey, but, before they could
let go the fall-tackles, the mass of ice rose suddenly high above the
deck, over which it projected several feet, and caught the boat.  In
another moment the timbers yielded; the thwarts sprang out or were
broken across, and slowly, yet forcibly, as a strong hand might crush an
egg-shell, the boat was squeezed flat against the ship's side.

"Shove, lads; if it comes on we're lost," cried the captain, seizing one
of the long poles with which the men were vainly straining every nerve
and muscle.  They might as well have tried to arrest the progress of a
berg.  On it came, and crushed in the starboard quarter bulwarks.
Providentially at that moment it grounded and remained fast; but the
projecting point that overhung them broke off and fell on the deck with
a crash that shook the good ship from stem to stern.  Several of the men
were thrown violently down, but none were seriously hurt in this
catastrophe.

When the storm ceased, the ice out in the strait was all in motion, and
that round the ship had loosened so much that it seemed as if the
_Dolphin_ might soon get out into open water and once more float upon
its natural element.  Every preparation, therefore, was made; the stores
were reshipped from Store Island; the sails were shaken out, and those
of them that had been taken down were bent on to the yards.  Tackle was
overhauled, and, in short, everything was done that was possible under
the circumstances.  But a week passed away ere they succeeded in finally
warping out of the bay into the open sea beyond.

It was a lovely morning when this happy event was accomplished.  Before
the tide was quite full, and while they were waiting until the command
to heave on the warps should be given, Captain Guy assembled the crew
for morning prayers in the cabin.  Having concluded, he said:

"My lads, through the great mercy of Heaven we have been all, except
one, spared through the trials and anxieties of a long and dreary
winter, and are now, I trust, about to make our escape from the ice that
has held us fast so long.  It becomes me at such a time to tell you
that, if I am spared to return home, I shall be able to report that
every man in this ship has done his duty.  You have never flinched in
the hour of danger, and never grumbled in the hour of trial.  Only one
man--our late brave and warm-hearted comrade, Joseph West--has fallen in
the struggle.  For the mercies that have never failed us, and for our
success in rescuing my gallant friend, Captain Ellice, we ought to feel
the deepest gratitude.  We have need, however, to pray for a blessing on
the labours that are yet before us, for you are well aware that we shall
probably have many a struggle with the ice before we are once more
afloat on blue water.  And now, lads, away with you on deck, and man the
capstan, for the tide is about full."

The capstan was manned, and the hawsers were hove taut.  Inch by inch
the tide rose, and the _Dolphin_ floated.  Then a lusty cheer was given,
and Amos Parr struck up one of those hearty songs intermingled with
"Ho!" and "Yo heave ho!" that seem to be the life and marrow of all
nautical exertion.  At last the good ship forged ahead, and, _boring_
through the loose ice, passed slowly out of the Bay of Mercy.

"Do you know I feel quite sad at quitting this dreary spot?" said Fred
to his father, as they stood gazing backward over the taffrail.  "I
could not have believed that I should have become so much attached to
it."

"We become attached to any spot, Fred, in which incidents have occurred
to call forth, frequently, our deeper feelings.  These rocks and stones
are intimately associated with many events that have caused you joy and
sorrow, hope and fear, pain and happiness.  Men cherish the memory of
such feelings, and love the spots of earth with which they are
associated."

"Ah, Father, yonder stands one stone, at least, that calls forth
feelings of sorrow."

Fred pointed, as he spoke, to Store Island, which was just passing out
of view.  On this lonely spot the men had raised a large stone over the
grave of Joseph West.  O'Riley, whose enthusiastic temperament had
caused him to mourn over his comrade more, perhaps, than any other man
in the ship, had carved the name and date of his death in rude
characters on the stone.  It was a conspicuous object on the low island,
and every eye in the _Dolphin_ was fixed on it as they passed.  Soon the
point of rock, that had sheltered them so long from many a westerly
gale, intervened and shut it out from view for ever.

A week of uninterrupted fair wind and weather had carried the _Dolphin_
far to the south of their dreary wintering-ground, and all was going
well, when the worst of all disasters befell the ship--she caught fire!
How it happened no one could tell.  The smoke was first seen rising
suddenly from the hold.  Instantly the alarm was spread.

"Firemen to your posts!" shouted the captain.  "Man the water-buckets;
steady, men, no hurry.  Keep order."

"Ay, ay, sir," was the short, prompt response, and the most perfect
order _was_ kept.  Every command was obeyed instantly, with a degree of
vigour that is seldom exhibited save in cases of life and death.

Buzzby was at the starboard, and Peter Grim at the larboard gangway,
while the men stood in two rows, extending from each to the main hatch,
up which ever-thickening clouds of dark smoke were rolling.  Bucket
after bucket of water was passed along and dashed into the hold, and
everything that could be done was done, but without effect.  The fire
increased.  Suddenly a long tongue of flame issued from the smoking
cavern, and lapped round the mast and rigging with greedy eagerness.

"There's no hope," said Captain Ellice in a low voice, laying his hand
gently on Captain Guy's shoulder.

The captain did not reply, but gazed with an expression of the deepest
regret, for one moment, at the work of destruction.

Next instant he sprang to the falls of the larboard quarterboat.

"Now, lads," he cried energetically, "get out the boats.  Bring up
provisions, Mr Bolton, and a couple of spare sails.  Mr Saunders, see
to the ammunition and muskets.  Quick, men.  The cabin will soon be too
