beginning to wonder whether all that was being said of me was true.

"Not likely," said Doubleday; "the fact is, I couldn't have believed it
of you if I hadn't seen it.  By the way, Wallop, is it true the Field-
Marshal was run in?"

"No, was he?" exclaimed Wallop, and Crow, and I, all in a breath.

"Well, I passed by Daly's this morning, and he told me he hadn't been
home all night, and he supposed he'd have to go and bail him out."

"What a game!" cried Wallop.

"You'd call it a game if you had to hand out forty shillings, or take a
week," replied Doubleday.  "A nice expensive game this of yours, Master
Batchelor.  It'll cost you more than all your eel-pies, and lobsters,
and flash toggery put together."

Fancy, reader, my amazement and horror at all this!  It might be a joke
to all the rest, but it was anything but a joke to me.  Instead of the
Field-Marshal it might have been I who was caught last night and locked
up in a police cell, and what then would have become of me?  My
"friends" would all have laughed at it as a joke; but to me, I knew full
well, it would have been disgrace and ruin!

I was in no humour to pursue the conversation, particularly as Jack
Smith entered at that moment, composed and solemn as ever, without even
a glance at me.

My only escape from wretched memories and uncomfortable reflections was
in hard work, and that day I worked desperately.  I was engaged in
checking some very elaborate accounts under Doubleday's direction the
whole day.  It was a task which Wallop, to whom it fell by rights,
shirked and passed on to me, greatly to my indignation, a week ago.  But
now it proved a very relief.  The harder I worked, the easier my mind
became, and the more difficult the work appeared, the more I rejoiced to
have the tackling of it.

Our firm had received over a large cargo of miscellaneous goods from
India, which they were about to trans-ship to South America; and what I
had to do was first of all to reduce the value of the goods as they
appeared in Indian currency to their exact English value, and after
adding certain charges and profits, invoice them again in Spanish money.

"A nice spicy little bit of conjuring," as Doubleday described it, who,
rackety fellow as he was, always warmed up to business difficulties.

He and I agreed to stay and finish the thing off after the others had
gone, an arrangement I was very glad for all reasons to fall in with.

We worked away hammer-and-tongs for two hours (for it was a very lengthy
and intricate operation), exchanging no words except such as had
reference to our common task.

At last it was completed.  The calculations and additions had all been
doubly checked, and the fair copies and their duplicates written out,
and then, for the first time, we were at leisure to think and speak of
other topics.

Few things tend to draw two fellows together like hard work in common,
and Doubleday and I, with the consciousness of our task well and
honestly accomplished, found ourselves on specially friendly terms with
one another.

Despite his extravagance and mischief, there had always been a good-
nature and a frankness about the head clerk which had made me like him
better than most of his companions either in or out of the office.
Although he had never been backward to lead others into trouble, he had
usually stopped short before any harm was done.  Even in the
persecutions of Jack Smith, many of which he had instigated himself,
there was never any of the spite on his side which characterised the
conduct of Crow, Wallop, and Harris.  And although he never professed to
admire my friend, he never denied him fair play when he was roused to
resistance.

"Well," said he, shutting up the inkpot, and throwing our rough copies
of the invoice into the waste-paper basket, "that's a good job done.
You're not a bad hand at a big grind, young Batchelor.  Crow or Wallop
would have left me to do it all by myself."

Of course I was pleased at the compliment.  I replied, "I rather enjoyed
it."

"Well, there's not another fellow in the office would do the same," said
he.

Wasn't there?  I thought I knew better.  "I think there's one other
fellow," I said, hesitatingly.  "Eh--oh, Bull's-eye!  Yes, you're right
there, and he'd have knocked it off smarter than you've done too, my
boy."  There was a pause after this.  We had both accidentally got on to
an awkward topic.  Doubleday was the first to speak.

"I say, Batchelor," he went on, quite nervously for him, "excuse my
saying it, but it's my opinion you're a bit of a fool, do you know!"

This unexpected announcement, coming from this unexpected quarter,
naturally astonished me.  "What do you mean?"

"Oh," said he, still rather embarrassed, "it's no concern of mine at
all, but when you came here about a year ago you were rather a nice
boy."

"Well," said I, not knowing exactly whether to be pleased or vexed.

"Well, you're not a nice boy now, you know!"  I said nothing.  I knew he
was right, and his abrupt words struck home harder than he thought for.
When Jack Smith, the night before, had called me a liar and a coward, I
had fired up angrily.  But when the rackety Doubleday now told me I
wasn't a nice boy, I somehow felt a sudden pang of shame and humility
that was quite new to me.

"I suppose you're going to flare up," continued Doubleday, noticing my
silence, "when you've pumped up the words.  I'll wait."

"No, no," said I, not looking up.  "Go on."

"It doesn't concern me a bit how you and your precious friend get on,"
pursued my companion, cutting a quill pen, "and I see you're not in the
same boat now by any means.  But that's no reason why you should make a
regular all-round ass of yourself in the way you're doing."

I looked up inquiringly.  "I don't quite understand," I said, meekly.

"Well, I suppose you don't exactly imagine you've anything to be proud
of over last night's performances?" said he.

"No, I was ashamed of myself for that," I said.

"Humph!  I suppose you'd come again to-night and do the same thing if I
asked you?"

I hesitated.  "I don't think--" I began, but there pulled up.  I knew
well enough I _would_ go if he asked me.

"Of course you would," said he; "you'd go anywhere.  Just because a
fellow a peg above you asks you, _you'll_ go and make a fool of yourself
and risk every chance you've got, because you've not the pluck to make
yourself disagreeable!"

How true it all was!  Yet why had I never seen it before?

"I'm afraid--I'm sure you're right," I said.

"I don't flatter myself," went on Doubleday, beginning on a new quill,
"I'm very particular.  I dare say I'm about as rackety a lot as any
you'd pick up near here.  But somehow I've no fancy for seeing a fellow
going to the dogs out of sheer folly.  It spoils my pleasure, in fact."

"I have been a fool, I know," I said.

"Of course you have, and so you will be unless you kick.  Well, I'm off
now," added he, taking up his hat.  "I dare say I've offended you, and
you'll call me an officious humbug.  I may be a fool for concerning
myself about a young muff like you; but anyhow I've told you what I
think of you.  So good-night, young un."

He left abruptly, before even I could say good-night, or thank him.

That night, as I walked home solitary, I felt more humble and less
satisfied with myself than I had done for many a month.

One good sign was that I was by no means disposed this time to launch
out into the extravagant resolutions to turn over a new leaf which had
marked my former repentances.  In fact, I said to myself, I won't
resolve to do anything; but, God helping me, do something I will.  And
the first thing to do would be to get back my old friend Smith.  For
since I lost him everything had gone wrong with me.

And yet, now, how was it possible for me even to speak to him?

In the midst of these reflections I reached Style Street, where I
suddenly became aware that something unusual was taking place.  A small
crowd was collected round the spot where Billy was usually in the habit
of pursuing his business, and loud voices proclaimed that the occasion
was one of anything but peace.

Curiosity tempted me to draw near, and a strange sight met my view as I
did so.  The central figures of the group were Billy and his "old gal,"
whom I recognised at once as the woman who had so vehemently ill-used
him in the court that memorable evening weeks ago.  She was a sad
spectacle, more than half drunk, with every trace of tenderness and
womanliness stamped out of her features.

If I had not recognised her by her appearance I should probably have
done so by her occupation at that moment, for she was engaged in
chastising her offspring with all the vehemence and all the cruelty of
her former performances.  But in the present case there was a
difference.  Billy, instead of taking his castigation meekly, as before,
was violently resisting by shout and kick the attentions of his
relative.  This it was which appeared to render the transaction so
particularly interesting to the onlookers.

"Go it, young bantam-cock," some one was crying as I approached, "let
her have it."

"Give it up, do you hear, or I'll murder you!" shrieked the woman.

Billy replied nothing, but continued fighting tooth and nail.  I never
saw a child of his age so desperately active.  He struggled not so much
to escape his mother's blows aimed at himself, as to elude the clutches
she made at a necktie he wore round his throat, which I at first glance
recognised as having formerly belonged to Jack Smith.

This article of toilet the woman seemed as determined on having as her
son was resolved on keeping.  She probably considered it of some value--
enough, at any rate, to pawn for drink; and Billy's violent refusal to
give it up only roused her the more to secure it.

It was a revolting spectacle to watch, this struggle between mother and
child.  The one sparing neither blow nor curse, the other silent and
active as a cat, watching every movement of his adversary, and ready for
the slightest chance of escape.  The crowd, careless of the rights of
the case, cheered on both, and only interfered when the woman, having
secured the boy in her grip, bade fair to bring the interesting
encounter to too abrupt an end.

I dared not interfere, even if I had been able, but was forced to stand
wedged up in the crowd to watch the issue of the struggle.  And it was
not long in coming.  Amid loud cheers from the onlookers, Billy
contrived for the seventh or eighth time to wriggle himself free from
the clutches of his well-nigh frantic assailant, dealing her at the same
time a blow on the arm with the blacking-brush he had all along retained
in his hand.  The surprise and pain of the blow, the jeers of the
bystanders, and the tipsy rage of the woman combined to drive her nearly
mad.  With a fearful yell and threat she literally flung herself in wild
fury upon her little victim.  But the wary Billy was too quick for her.
Stepping lightly aside, he eluded her reach, and left her to fall
forward with a heavy crash on the pavement amid the howls and cheers of
the brutal crowd.

Quick as thought the boy snatched up his box and brushes, and dived
head-first into the crowd just where I stood.  There was a cry of "Stop
him!"

"Fetch him back!" on all hands, and one young fellow near me actually
made a grab at the poor boy and caught him by the arm.  It was no time
for ceremony or parley.  It had been all I could do to stand still and
watch the sickening spectacle.  Now it should not be my fault if, just
to please a party of blackguards, the whole thing was to be repeated.

With an angry shout of "Let him go!"  I sprang at the fellow and struck
him full on the chest.  He dropped Billy as if he had been red-hot iron,
and turning with livid face to me, stared at me for a single moment, and
then tearing off his coat and clenching his fists rushed at me.

For all I know he might have annihilated me, but at that moment arose a
cry of "Police!" at the sound of which the crowd dispersed like beetles
before a candle, my antagonist being among the first to go, leaving me
and Billy alone on the scene, from which even the tipsy woman had
vanished.

It was not till the coast was all clear that Billy deposited his box or
noticed my presence.  The exciting scene which was just over seemed in
no way to have disturbed the young gentleman's equanimity.  He favoured
me with one of his most affable grins and saluted me with one of his
habitual somersaults as he said, "Shine 'e boots, master?  T'other bloke
he was 'ere at ten past seving."

"Hadn't you better go somewhere else?"  I said.  "Your mother will be
back after you."

"Well," said Billy, in his usual touchy way, "she ain't no concern of
yourn."

"Aren't you afraid of her hurting you?"

"'Urting me!" cried the boy, in tones of the utmost contempt, as if he
had not been half-murdered once a week for the last eight years.  "No
fear!  Ain't you funny?  But she ain't a-going to collar this 'ere
choker; not if I knows it!" said he, taking off his new article of
decoration with a flourish and holding it up.

The well-worn and used-up necktie did not certainly look worth the
battle that had been waged over it.

"Why are you so particular about this?"  I asked, half guessing
beforehand what the reply would be.

"Pertikler!" he cried, "why, that there bloke give me this 'ere!"

Nothing evidently could have been more conclusive to Billy's mind.  I
felt almost jealous to find how much truer Jack's new friend was than
his old one.

"Was he here long this evening?"  I asked, presently.

"Yaas; he was jawing nigh on half a' hour, he was, while I gi'en him a
shine.  But, bless you, them boots of his is pretty nigh 'andy wore out,
and I tell him so.  `Never mind, Billy,' says he; `I'll be getting a new
pair soon when I've got the money saved,' says he.  `I mean to get a
good strong pair,' says he, `double-soled and plates on the 'eels, my
boy,' he says, `and you shall polish them up every night for me.'  `That
I _will_,' says I.  Bless you, governor, that there bloke'll 'ave the
shiniest pair of boots in town."

It was a sight to see the little grimy face glow as he expatiated on the
grateful theme.

"I suppose he didn't--did he say anything about me?"  I asked,
hesitatingly.

"Yaas," said Billy.  "Says I to him, `So t'other bloke,' (meaning you),
`has lagged off,' I says.  `Yes,' says he, `we don't live together no
more?' says he.  `I know all about it,' says I; `I seen the animal,'
(meaning you), says I, `o' Toosday.'  `Did you?' says he.  `Yaas,' I
says, `and nice and boozy he was,' I says, `at eleving o'clock o'
night,' I says.  `Did he say anything about me?' he says; and I told
him, and he says he must go off, he says, 'cos he didn't want to be
'ere, he says, when you come.  He do talk beautiful, he does."

I went on my lonely way more humbled than ever, but more determined, if
possible, to recover my lost friend; yet thinking little or nothing of
the greater and ever-present Friend against whom I had sinned so
grievously.

But it was not to be for many days yet.

Smith always avoided me at the office in the same marked way, so that it
was utterly impossible to make any advances to a reconciliation.  The
idea of writing to him occurred to me more than once, but the thought
that he might throw my letter into the fire unread deterred me.  No, the
only thing was to bear my humiliation and wait for a chance.

Doubleday's lecture had wrought a considerable change in my habits.
Although I found it impossible all at once to give up consorting with
"the usual lot," especially those of them (now not a few), to whom I
owed money, I was yet a good deal more chary of my complaisance, and
less influenced by their example in ordinary matters.  I succeeded,
greatly to my own satisfaction and much to every one else's surprise, in
making myself distinctly disagreeable on more than one occasion, which
Doubleday looked upon as a very healthy sign, and which, though it
involved me in a good deal of persecution at the time, did not seriously
affect my position as a member of their honourable society.

How I wished I might once more call Jack Smith my friend, and cast off
once for all these other shallow acquaintances!

During these wretched weeks Billy became my chief comforter, for he of
all people was the only one I could talk to about Jack.

I always arranged my walks by Style Street so as to pass his "place of
business" after the time when I knew Jack would have left, and then
eagerly drank in all the news I could hear of my lost friend.

One evening, a week after the adventure with Billy and his mother just
recorded, the boy greeted me with most extraordinary and mysterious
demonstrations of importance and glee.  He walked at least half a dozen
times round his box on his hands before he would say a word, and then
indulged in such a series of winks and grimaces as almost drove me into
impatience.

"Whatever's the matter with you?"  I asked, when this performance had
been going on for some time "Oh my!--ain't it a game?" he chuckled.

"What's a game?"  I demanded.

"Why--oh, ain't you a flat, though?--why, them there boots!"

"What boots?  Why can't you talk sense?"

"Why, that there bloke's boots.  When I was a-shinin' of 'em, if the
sole of one on 'em don't come clean off!" he cried, with a grin.

"I don't see anything so very amusing in that," I replied.

"He's gone off to get 'em sewed on," continued the boy, beaming all
over; "and he's a-coming back this way to show me.  Bless you, they'll
never sew that there sole on.  The upper wouldn't hold it--you see if it
does."

"He will have to get a new pair," I said.

"Why, he ain't _got_ the browns.  He's a-saving up, but it'll be a month
afore he's got the brass."

Here Billy positively laughed, so that I felt strongly inclined to give
him a box on the ear for his levity.

"And it's been a-rainin' all day," continued he, jocularly "and the
streets is all one marsh of muck."

"Poor fellow!" said I.  "I wish I could lend him a pair of mine."

"Ga on!" cried Billy, scornfully, dropping on his knees before his box.

"I say, guv'nor," said he, in a sudden mysterious tone, "can you keep it
mum?"

"Yes--what?"  I asked.

He looked carefully up the street and then down, and then all round.  No
one was near.  He moved so as to let the light of a neighbouring lamp-
post shine full on the pavement, as with jubilant face he lifted up his
box and disclosed--a pair of new double-soled lace boots!

"Them's for _him_," he said, in an excited whisper.

"For him?  Why, Billy, wherever did they come from?"

His grimy face turned up to mine all aglow with pride and triumph as he
answered, "Stole 'em!"



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

HOW I FOUND THAT HOPE DEFERRED MAKES THE HEART SICK.

The reader may picture my horror and astonishment on discovering Billy's
secret.  And the strangest part of it was that the graceless youth
appeared to be utterly unconscious that he had done anything wrong.  On
the contrary, his jubilant face and triumphant voice showed plainly that
he considered he had done a fine--a splendid thing.

I endeavoured to reason with him; he flared up as if I were trying to
defraud Jack Smith of his new boots.  I warned him of the punishment
that would follow if he were caught.  He gloried in the risk he ran.  I
told him it was wicked to steal--even for other persons.  He retorted,
"It wasn't no concern of mine."

Altogether it seemed hopeless to disenchant him with his exploit, and I
therefore left him, wholly at a loss to make out this strange puzzle of
a boy.

I was still more perplexed when, next morning, Jack Smith appeared at
the office wearing the identical new pair of boots which had been the
cause of all my horror!

I waited impatiently for the hours to pass, when I should be at liberty
to pay my usual visit to Billy.

He was sitting there grimly, unlike his usual manner, evidently
expecting me.

"Well," said I, "what have you done with those boots?"

"'Tain't no concern of yourn!"

"But he was wearing them to-day."

"In course he was!" said Billy, brightening a little.

"Did you tell him you had--had stolen them?"

"Yaas," replied the boy, gruffly.

"And he took them?" said I, in astonishment.

"Ain't you saw them on 'im?" demanded he, evidently disliking this
catechism.

"Billy," said I, "I can't understand it."

"You ain't no call to!" was the polite reply; "'tain't no concern or
yourn."

"It is my concern if other people are robbed," I said.  "Don't you know,
if I chose, I could fetch a policeman and get you locked up?"

"In course you could!  Why don't yer?"

Was there ever such a hopeless young scamp?

"Whose shop did you take them from?"  I asked.

"Trotter's, aside of our court.  Go and tell him!" replied he,
scornfully.

"How would you like any one to steal away one of your brushes?"

"I'd give 'em a topper!"

"But that's just what you've done to Trotter," I argued.

"Well, why don't you fetch him to give me a topper?" he replied.

I gave it up.  There was no arguing with a boy like this.  If there had
been, there would have been no further opportunity that night, for as I
stood by, puzzling in my mind what to say to bring home to the graceless
youth a sense of his iniquity, he began picking up his brushes and
shouldering his box.

"Where are you going so early?"  I asked.

"Don't you like to know?" retorted he.

"Yes, I would."

"Well, if you must know, I'm a-going to the racket school!"

"The what?"  I exclaimed.

"Racket school."

"Oh! ragged school, you mean.  Where is it?  I didn't know you went.
They ought to teach you better there than to steal, Billy," I said.

"Oh!" replied the boy, with a touch of scorn in his voice, "that there
bloke's a-going to learn me, not you!"

"What! does Smith teach at the ragged school, then?"

"In course he do!  Do you suppose I'd go else?"

And off he trotted, leaving me utterly bewildered.

Jack Smith teaching in a ragged school!  Jack Smith wearing a pair of
boots that he knew were stolen!  What could I think?

At any rate, I was resolved to be no party to Billy's dishonesty.  At
any cost, since I had not the heart to deliver up the culprit to
justice, I must see that the victim was repaid.  He might never have
noticed the theft; but whether or no, I should have no rest till his
loss had been made good.

It was no time to mince matters.  My own funds, as the reader knows,
were in a bad state.  I owed far more than I could save in half a year.
But I had still my uncle's half-sovereign in my pocket, which I had
hitherto, despite all my difficulties, kept untouched.  An emergency had
now arisen, thought I, when surely I should be justified in using it.
As long as I remained a party to Billy's dishonesty I was, I felt,
little better than a thief myself, and that I could not endure, however
bad in other respects I might have been.

I went straight to Trotter's shop.  A jovial, red-faced woman stood at
the door, just about to shut up for the night.

"I want to see Mr Trotter," said I.

"Mrs Trotter, you mean, I suppose?" said the woman.  "I'm the lady."

"Can I speak to you for a minute?"  I said.

"Yes--half an hour if you like.  What is it?"

"It's something private."

"Bless us, are you going to offer to marry me, or what?" exclaimed she;
"come, what is it?"

"Have you--that is, did you--the fact is, I don't know whether you
happen to have missed a pair of boots," I said, falteringly.

She made a grab at my arm.

"So you're the thief, are you?  A nice trade you've started at, young
master, so I can tell you!"

"Oh," I cried, in the utmost alarm and terror, "you're quite wrong, you
are indeed.  I never touched them--I only--I--I know who did, that's
all."

Mrs Trotter still held me fast.

"Oh, you know who did, do you?"

"Yes--he's a--" I was going to say "shoeblack," but I stopped myself in
time, and said, "a little boy."

She released her grasp, greatly to my relief, and waited for me to go
on.

"And I really don't think he knows any better," said I, recovering my
confidence.

"Well," she said, eyeing me sharply.

"Well," I said, "I know the proper thing would be to give him up to the
police."

"That's what I'd do to you in a minute, if you'd stolen them," she said.

"I've rather an interest in the little boy," I said nervously, "and I
thought if you wouldn't mind telling me what the boots came to, I'd ask
you to let me pay for them.  I don't think he'll do it again."

"Well, it's a very queer thing," said the woman; "what a popular young
thief your friend must be!  Why, I had a young gentleman here yesterday
