broken--articles of little value, strewed by the wanton hand of the
ruthless robber.  Here a petate, or a palm hat--there a broken olla; a
stringless bandolon, the fragments of a guitar crushed under the angry
heel, or some flimsy articles of female dress cuffed into the dust;
leaves of torn books--_misas_, or lives of the _Santisima Maria_--the
labours of some zealous padre; old paintings of the saints, Guadalupe,
Remedios, and Dolores--of the Nino of Guatepec--rudely torn from the
walls and perforated by the sacrilegious bayonet, flung into the road,
kicked from foot to foot--the dishonoured _penates_ of a conquered
people.

A painful presentiment began to harass me.  Wild stories had lately
circulated through the army--stories of the misconduct of straggling
parties of our soldiers in the back-country.  These had stolen from
camp, or gone out under the pretext of "beef-hunting."

Hitherto I had felt no apprehension, not believing that any small party
would carry their foraging to so distant a point as the house of our
friends.  I knew that any detachment, commanded by an officer, would act
in a proper manner; and, indeed, any respectable body of American
soldiers, without an officer.  But in all armies, in war-time, there are
robbers, who have thrown themselves into the ranks for no other purpose
than to take advantage of the licence of a stolen foray.

We were within less than a league of Don Cosme's rancho, and still the
evidence of ruin and plunder continued--the evidence, too, of a
retaliatory vengeance; for on entering a glade, the mutilated body of a
soldier lay across the path.  He was upon his back, with open eyes
glaring upon the moon.  His tongue and heart were cut out, and his left
arm had been struck off at the elbow-joint.  Not ten steps beyond this
we passed another one, similarly disfigured.  We were now on the neutral
ground.

As we entered the forest my forebodings became painfully oppressive.  I
imparted them to Clayley.  My friend had been occupied with similar
thoughts.

"It is just possible," said he, "that nobody has found the way.  By
heavens!" he added, with an earnestness unusual in his manner, "I have
been far more uneasy about the other side--those half-brigands and that
villain Dubrosc."

"On! on!"  I ejaculated, digging the spurs into the flanks of my horse,
who sprang forward at a gallop.

I could say no more.  Clayley had given utterance to my very thoughts,
and a painful feeling shot through my heart.

My companions dashed after me, and we pressed through the trees at a
reckless pace.

We entered an opening.  Raoul, who was then riding in the advance,
suddenly checked his horse, waving on us to halt.  We did so.

"What is it, Raoul?"  I asked in a whisper.

"Something entered the thicket, Captain."

"At what point?"

"There, to the left;" and the Frenchman pointed in this direction.  "I
did not see it well; it might have been a stray animal."

"I seed it, Cap'n," said Lincoln, closing up; "it wur a mustang."

"Mounted, think you?"

"I ain't confident; I only seed its hips.  We were a-gwine too fast to
get a good sight on the critter; but it wur a mustang--I seed that cl'ar
as daylight."

I sat for a moment, hesitating.

"I kin tell yer whether it wur mounted, Cap'n," continued the hunter,
"if yer'll let me slide down and take a squint at the critter's tracks."

"It is out of our way.  Perhaps you had better," I added, after a little
reflection.  "Raoul, you and Chane dismount and go with the sergeant.
Hold their horses, Jack."

"If yer'll not object, Cap'n," said Lincoln, addressing me in a whisper,
"I'd rayther go 'ithout kump'ny.  Thar ain't two men I'd like, in a
tight fix, better'n Rowl and Chane; but I hev done a smart chance o'
trackin' in my time, an' I allers gets along better when I'm by myself."

"Very well, Sergeant; as you wish it, go alone.  We shall wait for you."

The hunter dismounted, and having carefully examined his rifle, strode
off in a direction nearly opposite to that where the object had been
seen.

I was about to call after him, impatient to continue our journey; but,
reflecting a moment, I concluded it was better to leave him to his
"instincts".  In five minutes he had disappeared, having entered the
chaparral.

We sat in our saddles for half an hour, not without feelings of
impatience.  I was beginning to fear that some accident had happened to
our comrade, when we heard the faint crack of a rifle, but in a
direction _nearly opposite to that which Lincoln had taken_.

"It's the sergeant's rifle, Captain," said Chane.

"Forward!"  I shouted; and we dashed into the thicket in the direction
whence the report came.

We had ridden about a hundred yards through the chaparral, when we met
Lincoln coming up, with his rifle shouldered.

"Well?"  I asked.

"'Twur mounted, Cap'n--'tain't now."

"What do you mean, Sergeant?"

"That the mustang hed a yeller-belly on his back, and that he hain't got
ne'er a one now, as I knows on.  He got cl'ar away from me--that is, the
mustang.  The yeller-belly didn't."

"What! you haven't--?"

"But I hev, Cap'n.  I had good, soun' reason."

"What reason?"  I demanded.

"In the first place, the feller wur a gurillye; and in the next, he wur
an outpost picket."

"How know you this?"

"Wal, Cap'n, I struck his trail on the edge of the thicket.  I knowed he
hedn't kum fur, as I looked out for sign whar we crossed the crik
bottom, an' seed none.  I tuk the back track, an' soon come up with him
under a big button-wood.  He had been thar some time, for the ground wur
stamped like a bullock-pen."

"Well?" said I, impatient to hear the result.

"I follered him up till I seed him leanin' for'ard on his horse, clost
to the track we oughter take.  From this I suspicioned him; but, gettin'
a leetle closter, I seed his gun an' fixin's strapped to the saddle.  So
I tuk a sight, and whumelled him.  The darned mustang got away with his
traps.  This hyur's the only thing worth takin' from his carcage: it
wudn't do much harm to a grizzly b'ar."

"Good heaven!"  I exclaimed, grasping the glittering object which the
hunter held towards me; "what have you done?"

It was a silver-handled stiletto.  I recognised the weapon.  I had given
it to the boy Narcisso.

"No harm, I reckin, Cap'n?"

"The man--the Mexican?  How did he look?--what like?"  I demanded
anxiously.

"Like?" repeated the hunter.  "Why, Cap'n, I 'ud call him as ugly a
skunk as yer kin skeer up any whar--'ceptin' it mout be among the Digger
Injuns; but yer kin see for yurself--he's clost by."

I leaped from my horse, and followed Lincoln through the bushes.  Twenty
paces brought us to the object of our search, upon the border of a small
glade.  The body lay upon its back, where it had been flung by the
rearing mustang.  The moon was shining full upon the face.  I stooped
down to examine it.  A single glance was sufficient.  I had never seen
the features before.  They were coarse and swart, and the long black
locks were matted and woolly.  He was a zambo; and, from the
half-military equipments that clung around his body, I saw that he had
been a guerillero.  Lincoln was right.

"Wal, Cap'n," said he, after I had concluded my examination of the
corpse, "ain't he a picter?"

"You think he was waiting for us?"

"For us or some other game--that's sartin."

"There's a road branches off here to Medellin," said Raoul, coming up.

"It could not have been for us: they had no knowledge of our intention
to come out."

"Possibly enough, Captain," remarked Clayley in a whisper to me.  "That
villain would naturally expect us to return here.  He will have learned
all that has passed: Narcisso's escape--our visits.  You know he would
watch night and day to trap either of us."

"Oh, heavens!"  I exclaimed, as the memory of this man came over me;
"why did I not bring more men?  Clayley, we must go on now.  Slowly,
Raoul--slowly, and with caution--do you hear."

The Frenchman struck into the path that led to the rancho, and rode
silently forward.  We followed in single file, Lincoln keeping a
look-out some paces in the rear.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

CAPTURED BY GUERILLEROS.

We emerged from the forest and entered the fields.  All silent.  No sign
or sound of a suspicion.  The house still standing and safe.

"The guerillero must have been waiting for someone whom he expected by
the Medellin road.  Ride on, Raoul!"

"Captain," said the man in a whisper, and halting at the end of the
_guardaraya_ (enclosure).

"Well?"

"Someone passed out at the other end."

"Some of the domestics, no doubt.  You may ride on, and--never mind; I
will take the advance myself."

I brushed past, and kept up the guardaraya.  In a few minutes we had
reached the lower end of the pond, where we halted.  Here we dismounted;
and, leaving the men, Clayley and I stole cautiously forward.  We could
see no one, though everything about the house looked as usual.

"Are they abed, think you?" asked Clayley.

"No, it is too early--perhaps below, at supper."

"Heaven send! we shall be most happy to join them.  I am as hungry as a
wolf."

We approached the house.  Still all silent.

"Where are the dogs?"

We entered.

"Strange!--no one stirring.  Ha! the furniture gone!"

We passed into the porch in the rear, and approached the stairway.

"Let us go below--can you see any light?"

I stooped and looked down.  I could neither hear nor see any signs of
life.  I turned, and was gazing up at my friend in wonderment, when my
eye was attracted by a strange movement upon the low branches of the
olive-trees.  The next moment a dozen forms dropped to the ground; and,
before we could draw sword or pistol, myself and comrade were bound hand
and foot and flung upon our backs.

At the same instant we heard a scuffle down by the pond.  Two or three
shots were fired; and a few minutes after a crowd of men came up,
bringing with them Chane, Lincoln, and Raoul as prisoners.

We were all dragged out into the open ground in front of the rancho,
where our horses were also brought and picketed.

Here we lay upon our backs, a dozen guerilleros remaining to guard us.
The others went back among the olives, where we could hear them
laughing, talking, and yelling.  We could see nothing of their
movements, as we were tightly bound, and as helpless as if under the
influence of nightmare.

As we lay, Lincoln was a little in front of me.  I could perceive that
they had doubly bound him in consequence of the fierce resistance he had
made.  He had killed one of the guerilleros.  He was banded and strapped
all over, like a mummy, and he lay gnashing his teeth and foaming with
fury.  Raoul and the Irishman appeared to take things more easily, or
rather more recklessly.

"I wonder if they are going to hang us to-night, or keep us till
morning?  What do you think, Chane?" asked the Frenchman, laughing as he
spoke.

"Be the crass! they'll lose no time--ye may depind on that same.
There's not an ounce av tinder mercy in their black hearts; yez may
swear till that, from the way this eel-skin cuts."

"I wonder, Murt," said Raoul, speaking from sheer recklessness, "if
Saint Patrick couldn't help us a bit.  You have him round your neck,
haven't you?"

"Be the powers, Rowl! though ye be only jokin', I've a good mind to thry
his holiness upon thim.  I've got both him and the mother undher me
jacket, av I could only rache thim."

"Good!" cried the other.  "Do!"

"It's aisy for ye to say `Do', when I can't budge so much as my little
finger."

"Never mind.  I'll arrange that," answered Raoul.  "_Hola, Senor_!"
shouted he to one of the guerilleros.

"_Quien_?"  (Who?) said the man, approaching.

"_Usted su mismo_," (Yourself), replied Raoul.

"_Que cosa_?"  (What is it?)

"This gentleman," said Raoul, still speaking in Spanish, and nodding
towards Chane, "has a pocket full of money."

A hint upon that head was sufficient; and the guerilleros, who,
strangely enough, seemed to have overlooked this part of their duty,
immediately commenced rifling our pockets, ripping them open with their
long knives.  They were not a great deal the richer for their pains, our
joint purse yielding about twenty dollars.  Upon Chane there was no
money found; and the man whom Raoul had deceived repaid the latter by a
curse and a couple of kicks.

The saint, however, turned up, attached to the Irishman's neck by a
leathern string; and along with him a small crucifix, and a pewter image
of the Virgin Mary.

This appeared to please the guerilleros; and one of them, bending over
the Irishman, slackened his fastenings a little--still, however, leaving
him bound.

"Thank yer honner," said Chane; "that's dacent of ye.  That's what
Misther O'Connell wud call _amaylioration_.  I'm a hape aysier now."

"_Mucho bueno_," said the man, nodding and laughing.

"Och, be my sowl, yes!--_mucho bueno_.  But I'd have no objecshun if yer
honner wud make it _mucho bettero_.  Couldn't ye just take a little turn
aff me wrist here?--it cuts like a rayzyer."

I could not restrain myself from laughing, in which Clayley and Raoul
joined me; and we formed a chorus that seemed to astonish our captors.
Lincoln alone preserved his sullenness.  He had not spoken a word.

Little Jack had been placed upon the ground near the hunter.  He was but
loosely tied, our captors not thinking it worth while to trouble
themselves about so diminutive a subject.  I had noticed him wriggling
about, and using all his Indian craft to undo his fastenings; but he
appeared not to have succeeded, as he now lay perfectly still again.

While the guerilleros were occupied with Chane and his saints, I
observed the boy roll himself over and over, until he lay close up
against the hunter.  One of the guerilleros, noticing this, picked Jack
up by the waistbelt, and, holding him at arm's length, shouted out:

"_Mira, camarados! qui briboncito_!"  (Look, comrades! what a little
rascal!)

Amidst the laughing of the guerilleros, Jack was swung out, and fell in
a bed of shrubs and flowers, where we saw no more of him.  As he was
bound, we concluded that he could not help himself, and was lying where
he had been thrown.

My attention was called away from this incident by an exclamation of
Chane.

"Och! blood, turf, and murther!  If there isn't that Frinch scoundhrel
Dubrosc!"

I looked up.  The man was standing over us.

"Ah, Monsieur le Capitaine!" cried he, in a sneering voice, "_comment
vous portez-vous_?  You came up dove-hunting--_eh_?  The birds, you see,
are not in the cot."

Had there been only a thread around my body, I could not have moved at
that moment.  I felt cold and rigid as marble.  A thousand agonising
thoughts crowded upon me at once--my doubts, my fears on _her_ account,
drowning all ideas of personal danger.  I could have died at that
moment, and without a groan, to have ensured her safety.

There was something so fiendish in the character of this man--a polished
brutality, too--that caused me to fear the worst.

"Oh, heaven!"  I muttered, "in the power of such a man!"

"Ho!" cried Dubrosc, advancing a pace or two, and seizing my horse by
the bridle, "a splendid mount!  An Arab, as I live!  Look here, Yanez!"
he continued, addressing a guerillero who accompanied him, "I claim
this, if you have no objection."

"Take him," said the other, who was evidently the leader of the party.

"Thank you.  And you, Monsieur le Capitaine," he added ironically,
turning to me, "thank you for this handsome present.  He will just
replace my brave mustang, for whose loss I expect I am indebted to you,
you great brute!--_sacre_!"

The last words were addressed to Lincoln; and, as though maddened by the
memory of La Virgen, he approached the latter, and kicked him fiercely
in the side.

The wanton foot had scarcely touched his ribs, when the hunter sprang
up, as if by galvanic action, _the thongs flying from his body_ in fifty
spiral fragments.  With a bound he leaped to his rifle; and, clutching
it--he knew it was empty--struck the astonished Frenchman a blow upon
the head.  The latter fell heavily to the earth.  In an instant a dozen
knives and swords were aimed at the hunter's throat.  Sweeping his rifle
