
"Lick," said Percy, when he had gone, "how much grub have we got in the
room?"

"What are you talking about?  You aren't hungry surely, after that go-in
at the shop?"

"Have we got enough for two days?"

The party opened their eyes, and began to suspect the drift of the
inquiry.

"No; but Maynard owes us a loaf, and Spanker some butter, and those kids
in Reynolds' study half a tongue."

"All right; go out and get it all in, sharp.  Scrape up all you can."

"What, are we going to have a blockade?"

"Rather.  You don't suppose we're going to cave in to Clapperton, do
you?"

"But we shan't want enough for two days, shall we?"

"Shan't we, that's all!  To-morrow's exeat day, and no school.  Next
day's Sunday, and next day exeat doesn't end till twelve.  We may have
to stick out three days."

"Whew! we _shall_ want a lot of grub," said Cash.

"You young pig; that's all you think about.  You'll have to go on jolly
short rations, I can promise you.  Do you know what we're going to do?"

No one had an idea what they were going to do.

"Do you know those four Classic kids," said Percy, "my younger brother
and his lot?  They've not been quite such cads lately as they used to
be, have they?"

"They've been a bit more civil," said Cottle.  "I suppose that's because
of the shop."

"What about them?" asked Ramshaw.

"Why, I fancy if we asked them, they might come over and back us up.  Of
course they'd have to bring their own grub; and we'd kick them out if
they weren't civil.  What do you say?"

"Rather a lark," said Lickford.

"All serene.  I'll go and see about it.  Keep it dark, whatever you do,
and mind you scrape up all the grub that's owing us.  There's no time to
lose, I say; Clapperton expects us in half an hour.  Wire in!"

By the end of half an hour the larder had been fairly well replenished.
Lickford and Cash had gone round on a general raid; recovering by force,
where persuasion failed, their outstanding loans, and in other cases
borrowing additional supplies in the same genial manner.  Among other
booty, they secured a tin of pressed beef from Spanker, who had to be
clouted on the head before he would "lend it," and some sardines from
another boy, who was thankful to find any one to take them off his hands
at any price.

Cottle and Ramshaw, acting on sealed orders from their leader, had been
round borrowing a screw-driver and screws, a few yards of rope, and
other material of war, among which was a squirt belonging to Reynolds,
who had been pleased to "swap" it for a couple of Greek stamps which
Cottle had to dispose of.

Many were the fears lest not only should Percy fail to secure the
services of the Classic juniors, but should himself be too late to take
part in the siege.  However, much to their relief, this was not so; as
presently he came over arm in arm with Wally (who carried a parcel under
his arm), followed at a respectful distance by D'Arcy, Ashby, and Fisher
minor, the bulkiness of whose pockets gave promise of a further addition
to the sinews of war.

By general consent the visitors slipped in, not in a body, but casually
one by one, and so escaped special observation.  As soon as they were
all assembled, Percy gave the order to screw up, and pile on the
barricades.

_Wally_, who was disposed to be patronising, snuffed up somewhat at his
brother's calm assumption of the command.

"Why didn't you say you wanted screws?" said he; "we've got one or two
long ones.  That's not the way to stick it in, young Lickford; make the
hole more sideways.  Here, I'll do it for you."

"I'll tell you what," said D'Arcy, "you chaps had better begin to move
up the bed against the door, in case they come before we're fast in.
Fire away.  Stick it close up, and young Lickford can stand on to it to
put in the screw."

"Come on, Cash; stick these parcels out of the way," said Ashby, handing
out the provender; "they'll be better in the cupboard.  Mind how you put
them in."

"You've got a knife, Cottle," said Fisher minor.  "Cut these bits of
wood into wedges to go under the door.  They'll make it pretty secure."

In this manner the Classic auxiliaries coolly took charge of the
arrangements before ever their hosts had time to realise that they had
been relegated to a back seat.

However, just now there was no time for arguing questions of precedence
and authority.  The enemy might be upon them at any moment, and they had
a lot to do before their outworks could be said to be in a proper state
of defence.

The screws in the door were driven hard home into the wainscot; the
wedges underneath were tightly fixed.  The bed, with bedding complete,
was drawn against the entry.  A second line of defence was thrown up of
chairs, chest of drawers, book-case, and wash-stand.  Beyond that were
stacked against the wall cricket bats, stumps, boxing-gloves, and other
dangerous-looking implements, for use in a last emergency.  At Percy's
suggestion, and under Wally's direction, an additional loophole was
bored in the panel of the door (in flagrant forgetfulness of the rights
of School property), through which, as well as through the ventilating
holes above, the enemy might be reconnoitred and operated on.

These preliminaries being complete, and Fisher minor having been perched
on the table (which was on the bed), with his eye to the loophole, the
company, to pass the time, resolved itself into a committee on the
School shop, and waited anxiously for the attack.

Percy was specially anxious, for he had enlisted his four recruits on
the distinct understanding there would be a row, and all the blame would
fall on his head if by any ill-luck the evening passed off quietly.

Already the Classic juniors were beginning to get impatient, and hinting
that they saw no fun in the proceeding so far, when Fisher minor
scrambled down from his perch and cried:

"Sh!--here comes somebody."

"About time," said Wally, taking possession of the squirt.

As he spoke, the footsteps halted at the door, and the handle turned.

"Lie low, you chaps," whispered Percy.  "Don't let them know you're here
to begin with.  Hullo! who's that?"

"Let me in!" cried Gamble, outside.

"Can't; we're busy," replied Lickford.

"We've got a committee meeting, and you'd better cut," cried Percy.

"Do you hear?" replied the ambassador; "let me in."

"There's plenty of room in your own study, ain't there?  Why don't you
go there?  We don't want you here."

"Cut your sticks, and learn your rotten Modern lessons," shouted Wally,
who began to be tired of being a listener.

Luckily, Cottle knocked over one of the chairs at this juncture, which
served to conceal the voice of the speaker from the ears outside.

"All right," said Gamble; "you'll catch it.  Clapperton sent me to tell
you if you don't come to his room directly, he'll come and fetch you
himself.  There!"

"Good evening," cried Ramshaw.  "Our love to them all at home."

D'Arcy, meanwhile, had mounted the bed, and by means of a pea-shooter
materially assisted in the departure of the discomfited envoy.

"Now we're getting livery," said Wally, proceeding to load his squirt
out of the jug.  "Better light the candle, one of you, and have some
light on the subject."

A terrible discovery ensued.  Neither candle nor matches could be found!
In a quarter of an hour daylight would depart, and after that--well,
the prospect was not brilliant, at any rate.  However, there was no time
to do anything but recriminate, which the company industriously did
until the sentinel again gave the signal to stand by.

"Look here," said Percy, "we'd better keep him jawing as long as he'll
stand it, and not let fly till he begins to get violent--eh?"

"All serene," said Wally; "that won't be long."

"No; and he'll bring the whole kit of prefects with him.  What a high
old time there'll be!" chuckled D'Arcy.

"There's one lucky thing," said Cash.  "Forder and his dame have gone
out for the evening; so we shan't hurt _their_ feelings."

"Look out--it's Clapperton," whispered the sentinel.

Clapperton tried the door, and on finding it fast, gave it a kick.

"Hello! who's there?"

"Open the door; let me in!"

"Who is it? that young cad Gamble again?" cried Percy, with a wink; the
company generally.

"No.  Do you hear?  Let me in!"

"Say what your name is.  How do we know you aren't a Classic cad?  Oh!
ow!"

This last interjection was in answer to a fraternal kick from behind.

"You know who I am," replied Clapperton.  "Let me in!"

"Very sorry, Corder, we can't let you in.  Clapperton says we're to cut
you, because you played a jolly sight too well last week."

"It's not Corder, it's me--Clapperton."

"Go on! no larks, whoever you are.  Clapperton's got something better to
do than go to tea-parties in fags' rooms.  Go and tell that to the
Clap-- Oh! ow!  I mean, try it on next door!"

"I tell you what," said Clapperton, whose temper, none of the best, was
rapidly evaporating, "if you young cads don't open the door instantly,
I'll break it open."

"If you do, we'll tell Clapperton.  He'll welt you for it.  _He_ won't
let you spoil our new paint, not if he knows it.  Good old Clappy?"

A thundering kick was the only reply, which shook the plaster of the
walls, and nearly sent Fisher minor headlong with terror off his perch.

This was getting serious.  But in Percy's judgment the time was not even
yet ripe for extreme measures.  The assailant might be given a little
rope yet.

He took it, and worked himself into a childish passion against the
refractory door, encouraged by the friendly gibes of the besieged.  "Go
it!"

"Two to one on his boots!"

"Keep your temper!"

"Come in!"  "Stick to it!"  "One more and you'll do it!" and so on.

It was hardly likely that the spectacle of the captain of the house in a
towering rage, toying to kick his way into a fag's room, would long be
allowed to continue unheeded by the rest of the inhabitants of Forder's,
and in a very short time new voices without apprised the beleaguered
garrison that the enemy was sitting down in force.

Brinkman's voice could be heard demanding admission, and presently
Dangle's; while a _posse_ of mercenary middle-boys relieved Clapperton
of the kicking.  The stout old door held out bravely and defied all
their efforts.

Presently a pause was made, and Dangle's voice outside was heard
demanding a parley.

"Young Wheatfield," he said, "it will be wiser for you to open the door
at once.  If you don't it will be broken open, and you needn't expect to
get off easy then.  Take my advice, and don't be a fool."

"Thanks awfully," said Percy.  "I and my chaps are just going to sit
down to tea.  Wish you could join us, whoever you are.  We've got as
much right to have tea in our study as you have in yours.  That's right!
Kick away!  Never mind the varnish!  Somebody tapping at the study
door."

"It's no good wasting time over young asses like them," Brinkman was
heard to say.

"I don't mean to go now," said Clapperton.  "They shall have such a
hiding, all of them, as they won't forget in a hurry."

"It's funny how when we seniors strike against the School it's so noble,
and when these juniors strike against us it's so inexcusable," said
Fullerton.  "Strikes always did puzzle me."

"If, instead of talking rubbish, you'd go and fetch Robert with a
crowbar to smash open the door," said Clapperton, "you'd be more use."

It was getting quite dark in the room by this time, but Wally could be
heard refilling his squirt at the jug, "I mean to start now," said he.

Percy came beside him.

"All serene," said he; "but why use water when there's ink?"

"My eye!  I never thought of that.  Rather!  I say, old man, while I
remember it, I'll write home this week.  Don't you fag, good old Percy."

"Oh no, it's my turn."

"Oh, let me.  Is that the ink-pot?  Hold it tight while I get a good go
at it."

"Suppose we tickle them up with the pea-shooter first," suggested
Lickford.  "Mind how you go over the chairs, Cash," added he, as that
hero in the dark got entangled in the second line of fortifications.

"All serene--wire away!  Young Ashby, you'd better mix up some soap and
coal-dust in the water for use when the ink's done."

By this time the attack without had redoubled, and Cash, mounting up to
the loophole, began to operate on the besiegers with his pea-shooter.
He had to guess where to shoot, for though the gas was alight in the
passage, he was unable for anatomical reasons to look and shoot through
the same hole at the same time.  However, he had the satisfaction of
feeling sure his fire was taking effect, by the aggravated exclamations
of the besiegers, who vowed terrific vengeance for this fresh insult.
In due time the marksman fell short of ammunition and was carefully
helped down from his post in the dark, while Wally and Percy, gingerly
carrying the squirt, ascended in his place.

"Hand up the basin," said Wally, "and get another lot of water ready."

"I say," said Fisher minor, who was always being seized by heroic
impulses, "if you could let me down out of the window by the rope, I'd
be able to get a candle."

"Good old `How now!' awfully good notion," said Wally.  "You chaps see
to that, while my young brother and I work the squirt.  Don't tell
anybody what's up, young Fisher, and get back as soon as you can."

So, while the squirt was carefully being levelled in the face of the
enemy, Fisher minor, with the end of the rope round his waist, was
swinging precariously in mid-air out of the window, heartily repenting,
until his feet touched _terra firma_, of his rash and desperate
undertaking.

Before he was safe, the great attack had been delivered through the
loophole.  The kickers had receded from the door a pace or two in order
to get up impetus for a combined onslaught, and Clapperton with a poker
in his hand was advancing to annihilate the lock, when Percy, who was
reconnoitring from the ventilating holes, gave the signal to have at
them.

Whereupon Wally let fly with all his might, and converted half of the
enemy, their captain included, into Ethiopians.

The effect was instantaneous.  The four-footed kick did not come off.
Clapperton's poker fell with a clatter on the floor, and a howl went up
which electrified both besiegers and besieged.

"Look alive now!" said Wally.  "Let 'em have the water!  Keep it up!"

For five minutes an almost uninterrupted flow of coloured water poured
through the loophole and kept the enemy at bay.  But even a jugful will
not last for ever, and presently the squirt gave a dismal groan on the
bottom of the basin.

Almost at the same moment an ominous crack proclaimed that the good old
door was giving way by degrees under the now renewed attack of the
besiegers.

"They'll have it, after all," said Percy.

"Tell you what!  Suppose we slip out by the window, and you chaps come
and have supper in our room.  Rather a lark, eh?  It's getting a bit
slow here.  Nice sell for them too.  Besides, they can't get at you over
on our side."

This hospitable invitation fitted in with the humour of the company
generally, particularly as every moment the door gave a more doubtful
sound than before.

In three minutes the whole party was on the grass below, where Fisher
minor, returning breathless, with a candle and matches, encountered
them.

"Come on, you chaps," said Wally.  "I'd give sixpence to see how they
look when they find we've gone--ha! ha!"

They salved their honour with a keen sense of the humour of the
situation, and followed their host across the Green in the dark, not at
all sorry to have a harbour of refuge in sight, though very loth to
admit that this rearward movement was a retreat.

At the door of Wakefield's, to their consternation, they met Ranger.

"What on earth are all you youngsters up to at this hour?"

"It's all right," said Wally.  "The shop committee, you know.  We're
going to talk things over in my room.  Come on, you Modern kids.  We'll
make an exception for you this once, and let you into Wakefield's; won't
we, Ranger?  But it mustn't occur again."

Yet another peril awaited them before they were safe in port.  This time
it was Mr Stratton on the stairs.

"Ah, here you are--all of you," said he.  "I came to look for you.  I
want to hear how the shop is doing."

