
Meanwhile Glyn had reached the door of the lecture-room, hurried in,
mounted the stairs, entered the room he shared with Singh, and selecting
the key of the drawers, opened the one at the bottom, to find flannel
trousers, Eton suit, and a carelessly folded overcoat.

"It is not here," he said.  "What an untidy chap he is with his togs,
and how he gets them mixed!  Don't want to brag; but I believe I could
get anything out of my drawers with my eyes shut.  Well, I suppose it
was because of dad.  He always used to say that a soldier's traps should
be neatly packed together in the smallest space.  Perhaps it's in the
next drawer," he continued, as he thrust in and locked the one at the
bottom.  "No; he said it would be in the trunk," and changing the key,
he went to the corner of the little room, knelt down, thrust the key
into the lock, and threw open the lid.

"Why, it isn't here at the top," he said to himself.  "Oh, I am not
going to turn over all his things."

An ejaculation behind him made him spring to his feet, to find himself
face to face with Morris, book in hand, the pair sharing the
astonishment due to the sudden encounter.

"You here, Severn!" cried Morris, flushing up with anger, Glyn felt, for
it was out of hours for being in the dormitory.

"Yes, sir.  I was getting something from his box for Singh."

"Oh," said Morris, recovering himself.  "Young Burton told me he was
here in his room."

"He was coming, sir; but I came for him," cried Glyn, into whose brain
now flashed a memory of a late conversation and dispute with his
companion.

"I suppose you know," said Morris coldly, "that one of the Doctor's
rules is that the pupils should only retire to their dormitories at
certain times."

"Yes, sir, but--"

"That will do," said Morris, turning to go; and his cold, stern manner
stung the boy, whose mind was now flooded with the recollection of all
that Singh had told him, and a feeling of resentment sprang up within
his breast.

"I shouldn't have come, sir, if Singh had not asked me."

"That will do, sir," said Morris, affecting the Doctor's sternest
manner.  "You know you have no business to be here, and I shall feel it
my duty to report the matter to the Principal."

Glyn was silent for a few moments, and then he started, for he saw that
Morris was evidently waiting for him to leave the room; so, going down
on one knee quickly, he locked up the trunk, with a feeling of
resentment growing stronger within him, and as he rose and faced the
master again his mind was made up.  His father had told him more than
once that he looked to him to use his common-sense and do the best he
could in any emergency on behalf of Singh, and for the moment, as he
stood facing Morris, he asked himself whether he ought not to write to
his father.  The next moment he was speaking.  "I beg your pardon, sir."

"That will do, Mr Severn," said Morris coldly.  "I am not in the humour
to hear any excuses."

"I was not going to make excuses, sir," said the lad, "but to say a word
or two about Singh, who is to me as a brother."

"What do you mean, sir?" said Morris sternly.  "I mean, sir, that
knowing how good and generous he is, and ready to do anything
charitable, still I do not think that he ought to be imposed upon and
induced again and again to lend money to a stranger."

Morris stared at him wildly.

"And above all, sir, there is that belt of his, which it has always been
understood between us should be kept perfectly private on account of its
value.  It ought not to have been taken to Professor Barclay's
lodgings."

"Mr Severn--" began Morris, and then he stopped, unable for a few
moments to utter a word.  Then, in quite an agitated tone, he exclaimed:
"Singh has told you of all this?"

"Of course, sir.  We never keep anything from each other, though I
didn't know he was going to take it till afterwards; and I feel quite
sure that the Doctor will be very angry when he knows."

"When he knows!" cried Morris.  "Mr Severn, you are never going to tell
him this?"

"What do you think, sir?  Singh is in my charge--by my father's orders."

"But, Mr Severn," cried Morris, "I--I am very sorry that I had occasion
to speak so angrily to you; but I--I felt it my duty, and--yes, under
the circumstances, I must confess that it was a mistake on my part to
take your schoolfellow there.  And those emerald clasps--yes, I see
perfectly clearly now that it ought not to have been done.  I should
never have dreamt of such a thing had not the Professor, who has been a
most unfortunate man, felt so deeply interested in the inscription."

"Yes, sir; I know all about that," said Glyn coldly; "and Singh told me
that this Professor Barclay wanted the belt left with him."

"Yes," cried Morris; "but it was not done, and I strongly commended
Singh for his firmness in refusing."

"Yes, sir, I know that too," said Glyn; "and Singh must not go to this
man's apartments again."

"My dear young friend," cried Morris, whose brow was damp with
perspiration, "I quite agree with you there.  It was rather thoughtless
on my part--a slip such as we are all liable to make.  I was led away by
the literary part of the question, and I somehow thought that it would
be to the advantage of our young fellow--student if he learned from a
good authority a little more about the inscription upon those stones."

"Yes, sir; there was no harm in that," said Glyn quietly.

"No, Severn, not the slightest, and as soon as I found the Professor
making such a request--one that he certainly ought not to have made--I
repented very bitterly of that which I felt to be a gross error on my
part.  There," he continued, with a half-laugh, "you see I can speak
frankly when I have made a mistake.  I hope you will always do the same.
But, of course, you do not think it in the slightest degree necessary
that you should make any report about this to the Doctor?"

"What do you think, sir?" said Glyn coldly.

Morris uttered a gasp, and, looking wildly in the young speaker's eyes,
he felt behind him till one hand touched a chair-back, and then he sank
down speechless, to seek for his pocket-handkerchief and wipe his wet
brow.

"What do I think?" he said, at last, with a groan.  "I think it means
ruin for me.  Mr Severn, I have apologised for speaking so sharply to
you, and now I must humble myself to you.  If you report this to the
Doctor only one thing can follow.  I shall have lost his confidence for
ever, and he will tell me at once to send in my resignation.  Mr
Severn, you and your young companion don't know what it is to be poor.
The loss of my post here under such circumstances, due to a weak desire
to help a fellow-master in distress, would be quite sufficient to injure
me dreadfully.  If I have sinned I am bitterly punished for what I have
done.  This is a humiliation, a cruel humiliation, such as you can
hardly realise."

"Please don't say any more, sir," said Glyn quickly.  "This hurts me
almost as much as it does you.  What I have said was on behalf of Singh,
and I shall certainly not say a word to the Doctor, for I know that now
you will help me in watching over my father's ward."

"Mr Severn," began Morris, "I--I--Oh, I cannot speak.  Try and realise
what I feel.  But tell me once more, so that I may go away at rest: this
is to be a private matter between us two?"

"Yes, sir, of course," cried Glyn earnestly, and they separated.

"Well, where is it?" said Singh, a few minutes later.

"I couldn't find it," was Glyn's reply.  "Here you had better take your
keys."



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE PROFESSOR'S GRATITUDE.

There was a great talk at the Doctor's establishment about the event of
the season, an event that filled the boys' brains, seniors and juniors,
for weeks before it took place, and brought forth a rebuke from the
Doctor one morning at breakfast, for the masters were reporting that the
papers sent in by the boys were very much wanting in merit.  There was a
report, too, going about that Monsieur Brohanne had been seen walking up
and down the class-room tearing his hair--a most serious matter in his
case, for it was exceedingly short.

Matters had come to such a pitch that the Doctor sternly gave quite a
little lecture upon the duty of every pupil to do his very best, whether
at work or play, saying that a boy who could not give his mind to
working could not devote it to playing well.  And if in future, he said,
his pupils did not work hard, he should be obliged to make them suffer
the contumely of sending in word that they would not be able to meet
Strongley School in the annual cricket-match.

"I regret it very much, young gentlemen," said the Doctor; "but if you
will disgrace your _alma mater_ by idleness, I have no other
alternative.  Duty and pleasure must go hand in hand."

The boys groaned that morning, and broke up into little knots after
breakfast to discuss the matter.  Little jealousies were forgotten, and
Slegge declared it was too bad of the Doctor, who seemed to be blaming
them, the seniors, for the failings of those lazy little beggars the
juniors, just when their picked eleven had arrived at such perfection,
through his batting, Glyn's bowling, and the Nigger's wicket-keeping,
that success was certain.

There was gloom in every face save one, and that appertained to Morris,
who watched his opportunity, button-holed Glyn and Singh, and led them
off into the solitude of the lecture-hall.

"Good news!" he said.  "Splendid news!  Gentlemen, this is entirely a
private matter between us three, and I know you will be ready to
rejoice."

"What, have you got some fine appointment, Mr Morris?" cried Glyn, who
had grown to be on quite friendly terms with the master in a very short
time of late, Morris making a point of treating him always with genuine
respect, and aiding him in every way possible--coaching him, in fact,
with his mathematics, in which, truth to tell, Glyn did not shine.

"No," cried Morris, in answer to the lad's question; "it is better than
that.  Somebody else has."

"You mean Professor Barclay?" said Singh.

"Yes, sir; I mean Professor Barclay.  I have had a letter from him this
morning telling me of his success, and that he leaves for India
directly, to take up some post in connection with the Sanskrit college."

"I am very glad," said Singh, "for he must have been dreadfully poor."

"Sadly so," said Morris.

"I am glad too," said Glyn; "very."

"You don't know what a relief it is to me," continued Morris
confidentially.

"Is he coming down to see you before he goes?" said Glyn.

"Oh no.  He writes word that he is staying at apartments in London in
the neighbourhood of the East India Docks until the great Indiaman
sails, and desires his most respectful compliments to you both, and
above all he begs me to tell you, Mr Singh, that the feelings of
gratitude within his breast will never expire.  While, as now he is
entering upon a career of prosperity, many weeks will not elapse before
he sends something, upon receipt of which he hopes you will return to
him certain little memoranda that you hold, signed by his name."

"Ha, ha!" laughed Singh, "he'll wait a long time.  Why, I burned them
all directly after he gave them to me.  Are you going to write to him,
Mr Morris?"

"Yes; I must reply to his letter."

"Then, please tell him from me that I wish him all success in my
beautiful country, and that he is never to trouble himself any more
about the memoranda."

"For you have burned them?" said Morris.

"Yes, of course."



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

SOMEBODY IS UNTRUSTWORTHY.

The boys did their best to worthily earn their cricket-match, and it
came off some weeks after in due time.

The morning broke gloriously; four wagonettes came round to the door
after a very early breakfast, and the masters followed in an open
carriage with the Doctor, Wrench closing the door of each vehicle, and
confiding to each party as it started that he wished it had been his
luck to go as well; but he was going to enjoy himself that day by having
a regular good polish at the Doctor's plate.

Strongley was reached in good time, the wickets were pitched, and the
enemy, as the boys called them, made such a poor score in their innings
that they had to follow on to another failure, the result being that the
Doctor's pupils beat them in one innings, and drove back to Plymborough
cheering madly.

As it happened, during the return, Glyn and Singh were separated; Glyn
being in the first wagonette and reaching Plymborough a good half-hour
before the last one, in which Singh rode.

Hurrying up to his room for a good wash and change, to get it over
before Singh returned, the first thing that caught the boy's eyes was
Singh's little bunch of keys hanging from the lock of the bullock-trunk
in the corner.

Glyn was in such high spirits that the sight of the bunch set him
laughing.

"Well, of all the untrustworthy fellows I ever knew," he said, "poor old
Singh's about the worst."

Crossing to the trunk, he raised the lid, which yielded easily to his
hand, banged it down again, turned the key, and put the bunch in the
pocket of his flannel trousers ready to transfer to his ordinary
garments when he dressed.

He had just finished when a burst of cheering and the rattle of wheels
announced the coming of the last wagonette; and soon after, tired and
hungry, Singh came up, to help fill the corridor with a chorus of
chattering, and then hurriedly went on for his change of dress.

Then followed the supper the Doctor gave them, and, later on, the bell
for prayers and rest.

"Hope you haven't lost your keys," said Glyn, as they began to undress,
utterly wearied out.

"Lost my keys!  Why should I lose my keys?" said Singh with a yawn.
"Here they are!  No, they are not!  I left them in my flannels."

"Nice fellow you are to take care of your things!" said Glyn, as his
companion limped across the room to where he had thrown his dusty and
green-marked cricketing suit--anyhow--upon a chair.

"Oh, murder!" he said.  "I am so stiff.  I can hardly move, and my right
hand feels all bruised and strained; but I say, Glynny, I hardly missed
a ball; and didn't I play old gooseberry with some of their stumps?"

"Yes, we must have rather astonished them," cried Glyn.  "They haven't
had such a licking as that for a long time."

"Here, I say," cried Singh, "you have been up to some games," and he
fumbled in vain in his flannels-pockets.  "I say, you shouldn't do this,
Glynny.  The key of my India trunk is one of the bunch, and you know I
don't like any games played with that."

"I haven't played any games," said Glyn quietly.

"Now, no nonsense," cried Singh pettishly.  "You have got my keys."

"Oh yes, I have got them," cried Glyn.  "Here they are.  Catch!"

The bunch went flying through the air, and with one quick snap of the
hand Singh caught them and laid them down sharply on the dressing-table
with a bang.

"I don't like it," he said angrily, for he was very tired.  "You
shouldn't take my keys."

"Yes, I should," said Glyn quietly.

"I tell you you shouldn't."

"Then you oughtn't to leave them stuck in your box, as if to invite all
the servants to come and have a rummage, when you go out to a
cricket-match."

"I say, I didn't do that, did I?  I had them in my pocket just before I
started."

"If you did, how could I have them in mine when you came back?"

"Why, I--I am certain--" began Singh; and then, "Oh!"

"`Oh,' indeed!" cried Glyn.  "But how did it happen?"

"I was just getting in the wagonette, when I thought it would be good
fun to have one of those red Indian silk handkerchiefs to tie to a stump
and use as a flag."

"Yes; as you did."

"Well, there were six of them in my big box, and I ran up to get one."

"And then left the keys in the box?"

"Well, I suppose I did, in the hurry and confusion.  Oh, Glynny, what a
beast I am!  I wish I hadn't such a brute of a temper.  It makes me
flare up all at once and say such nasty things; and you are always as
