with the older girls scattered all over the country, and Evie no longer
at hand to soothe and lighten every trouble.  Her thoughts went back to
her first coming to Hurst Manor eighteen months before, and dwelt sadly
on her own ambitious hopes.  It had all seemed so easy, so certain; she
had planned her career with such happy assurance, with never a thought
but that success and distinction lay waiting for her grasp; and it had
all ended in this--that she was returning home, enfeebled in health,
foiled in ambition, with the bitter weight on her conscience that her
self-will had inflicted a life-long injury on the kindest of friends.

"I have failed!" sighed Rhoda humbly to herself.  "But why?  I never
meant to do wrong.  I intended only to work hard and get on.  Surely,
surely, there was nothing wicked in that?  It can't be possible to be
too industrious, and yet Evie evidently thought something was wrong, and
the Vicar...  What can it have been?  I wish, I wish I knew!  I'm tired
of going my own way, for it leads to nothing but misery and
disappointment.  I should like to find out the secret of being happy and
contented like other people."  Her eyes filled with tears, those blue
eyes which had been so full of confidence, and she clasped her fingers
upon the counterpane.  The roll of the organ sounded through the house,
and the girls' clear voices singing a familiar tune.  She listened
unthinkingly, until suddenly one verse struck sharply on her ear, and
startled her into vivid attention:--

  "The trivial round, the common task, Will furnish all we ought to ask;
  Room to deny ourselves, a road To bring us daily nearer God."

She had heard those words a hundred times before, had repeated them at
her mother's knee, had sung them in church, not once, but many times,
yet it seemed that until that moment no conception of their meaning had
penetrated to her brain.  What was it, which was all we ought to ask?
"_Room to deny ourselves_!"--to put ourselves last--to be careless of
our own position?  And this path of self-denial was the road that led to
God Himself?  Was this what Evie had meant when she spoke of the secret
which each one must find out for herself?  Was this the explanation of
the contentment which the Vicar had found in his ill-paying parish?
"_Room to deny oneself_!"  Oh, but this had been far, far from her own
ambitions.  She had asked for room to distinguish herself, to shine
among her fellows, to be first and foremost, praised and applauded.  Her
own advancement had been the one absorbing aim in life, and to gratify
it she had been willing to see others fail, and to congratulate herself
in the face of their distress.  Never once in all the miseries of
disappointment which she had undergone had it occurred to her that the
explanation of her difficulties lay in the _motive_ underlying her
efforts--the point of view from which she had started.  Other girls had
worked as hard as herself, but with some definite and worthy aim, such
as to help their parents, or to fit themselves for work in life.  Rhoda
was honest, even when honesty was to her own hurt, and she acknowledged
it had been far otherwise in her case when she had failed in her
examination, it had not been deficiency in knowledge which she had
deplored, but the certificate, the star to her name, the outward and
visible signs of success.  When she realised the hopelessness of seeing
her name on the Record Wall, loss of honour and glory had been her
regret, not sorrow for the thought that she had passed through school
and failed to leave behind a tradition of well-doing whereby future
scholars might be strengthened and encouraged!

Rhoda hid her face in the pillow and lay still, communing with her own
heart.  How bitter they are, these moments of self-revelation!  How
mysterious is the way in which the veil seems suddenly to lift and show
us the true figure, instead of the mythical vision which we have
cherished in our thoughts!  They come suddenly at the most unexpected
moments, roused by apparently the most trivial of causes, so that the
friend by our side has no idea of the crisis through which we are
passing.

Rhoda Chester never forgot that last morning at school; she could never
hear that hymn sung without a thrill of painful remembrance.  When the
years had passed and she had daughters of her own, the sound of the
familiar words would still bring a flush to her cheeks, but no human
friend ever knew all that it meant to her.  Rhoda learnt her lesson none
the less surely for keeping silence concerning it.

A few hours later the travellers were ready to depart, and Evie was
carried down the staircase into the hall.

Mrs Chester had promised that everything that wealth could secure
should be done for the comfort of her guest, and royally did she keep
her promise.  If she had been a Princess of the Blood, Evie declared she
could not have had a more luxuriously comfortable journey.  An ambulance
drove up to the door to convey the little party to the station, and
inside sat a surgical nurse, ready to give her skilled attention to any
need that might arise.  The girls flocked in hall and doorway to wave
farewells, edging to the front to cry "Come back soon!" in confident
treble, and then retiring to the background to gulp back the tears which
rose at the sight of the thin little face, which told such a pathetic
story of suffering.  Not a single tear did Evie see, however, nor any
face that was not wreathed in smiles, and when the strains of "For she's
a jolly good fellow" followed the ambulance down the drive, she laughed
merrily, and waved her handkerchief out of the window, never suspecting
with what swelling throats many of the singers joined in the strain.

Rhoda laughed too, but she did not wave her handkerchief.  Curiously
enough, it never occurred to her to think that she herself was included
in that farewell demonstration, or to resent the apparent indifference
with which she had been allowed to depart.  Her own special friends had
embraced her warmly enough, but even they had given the lion's share of
attention to Evie, while the majority of the girls had no eyes nor
attention for anyone else.  The Rhoda of six months or a year ago would
have bitterly resented such a slight, but to-day she found no reason to
blame others for following her own example.

Evie was the supreme consideration, and the girl was so entirely
absorbed in looking after her comfort that she had forgotten all about
her own poor little importance.  Love is the gentlest as well as the
cleverest of schoolmasters, and teaches his lessons so subtly that we
are unconscious of our progress, until, lo! the hill difficulty is
overcome, and we find ourselves erect on the wide, breezy plain.

At the station a saloon carriage was waiting labelled "Engaged," inside
which were all manner of provisions for the comfort of the journey.
Hot-water bottles, cushions, rugs, piles of papers and magazines, and a
hamper of dainty eatables from the Chase Evie was wrapped in Mrs
Chester's sable cloak and banked up with cushions by the window, so that
she might look out and be amused by the sight of the Christmas traffic
at the various stations.  She stared about her with the enjoyment of a
convalescent who has had more than enough of her own society, and the
lingerers on the platform stared back at the pretty, fragile-looking
invalid who was travelling in such pomp and circumstance.

"They think I am a princess!" cried Evie.  "I _hope_ they think I am a
princess!" and she laid her little head against the cushions, and
sniffed at a big silver-mounted bottle of smelling salts with an air of
languid complacency which vastly amused her companions.  Presently nurse
lighted an Etna and warmed some cups of soup, while one good thing after
another came out of the hamper to add to the feast; then followed a
stoppage, with the arrival of obsequious porters with fresh foot-
warmers; then, dusk closing in over the wintry landscape, the lighting
of electric lamps, and the refreshing cup of tea.  It was Evie's first
experience of luxurious travelling, and she told herself with a sigh
that it was very, very comfortable.  Much more comfortable than
shivering in a draughty third class carriage, and changing three times
over to wait in still more draughty stations!

With the arrival at Erley Chase came more pleasant surprises, for she
was not carried upstairs, but into a room on the ground floor, which was
ordinarily used as Mrs Chester's boudoir, and had been transformed into
the most cheerful and delightful of bedrooms.  There was really little
to distinguish it from a sitting-room, except the bed with its silken
cover, and even this was hidden behind a screen in the daytime.  A couch
was drawn up before the fire, and over it lay the daintiest pink silk
dressing-gown that was ever seen, with the warmest of linings inside,
and trimmed without with a profusion of those airy frills and laces dear
to the feminine heart.

"For me?" gasped Evie, staring at its splendour with big, astonished
eyes.  A glow of colour came into her cheeks as she turned it over and
over to inspect its intricacies.  "I should think I _would_ come in to
dinner just, with such a gown to wear!" she cried laughingly.  "I am
longing to put it on and see what it feels like to be a fashionable
lady."

She would not acknowledge that she was tired, but even after an hour's
sleep she still looked so fragile that the two members of the household
who had not seen her before were deeply impressed with the change which
had taken place since their last meeting.  Very charming did she look
when the sofa was wheeled into the dining-room, and she lay in her
pretty pink fineries the centre of attraction and attention; but the
flush of excitement soon faded, and the dark eyes looked pathetic in
spite of their smiles.  Rhoda watched the faces of father and mother,
and her heart sank as she saw the elder man knit his brow, and the
younger look away quickly and bite his lip under his moustache as if the
sight were too painful to be endured.  Beyond a few loving words at
greeting, neither had manifested any concern about herself, and once
again she had not noticed the omission.

"I've had such a happy day.  I feel like a princess--such a spoiled
princess!" said Evie, when she went to bed that night; but there were
sad days in store for the poor little princess from which all the care
and love of her friends could not save her.

When the decree went forth that she should make her first attempt to
walk, Rhoda clapped her hands with joy, and could not understand the
reason of the quick, grave glance which the nurse cast upon her.  She
and her mother had decided that the attempt must be made in the drawing-
room after tea, and nurse made no objection, hoping, perhaps, that the
presence of onlookers would give her patient extra strength for the
ordeal.  She knew what it meant if the others did not; but, alas! they
all learned soon enough, as, at the first slight movement, Evie's white
face turned grey, and she groaned in mingled anguish and dismay.

"I can't!" she cried; "Oh, I can't!  It is like knives going through me!
I can't move!"

"Ah, but you must, my dear.  It has to be done; and the braver you are,
the sooner it will be over.  You are bound to suffer the first few
times, but it would be ten times worse to allow the joint to stiffen.
Now be brave, and try to take just two steps with me!  I will support
you on one side, and--" Nurse looked round questioningly--"Mr Harold
will take the other.  You can lean all your weight on us.  We won't let
you fall."

Harold stepped forward without a word and put his strong arm under hers,
and, as he did so, Evie raised her eyes to his with a look which those
who saw it never forgot--a look such as might have been given by an
animal caught in a snare from which it was powerless to escape.  Rhoda
told herself savagely that Harold was a brute to persist in the face of
that dumb appeal, but he did not quail even when the sob rose to a cry,
and a trembling plea for mercy.  The two steps were taken, and
henceforth, for weeks to come, the nightmare of repeated effort weighed
upon the spirits of the household.  At eleven o'clock, after tea, after
dinner--three times a day--was the inexorable programme repeated, in
spite of prayers and protestations.  Mrs Chester's theory was that it
was brutal to torture the child, and that if she were to be lame, for
pity's sake let her be lame in peace.  Rhoda suffered agonies of remorse
and passionate revolts against the mystery of pain, but the nurse and
her assistant never showed a sign of wavering.  As a rule, Evie made a
gallant attempt to control her sufferings, but there were occasions when
even her fortitude gave was, as, on one afternoon, when, after taking a
certain number of steps, she was informed that still more must be
attempted.  She was powerless in the hands that held her, but when she
collapsed into helpless sobbings on the sofa, Rhoda turned on her
brother with furious indignation:

"You are a _brute_, Harold!  You have no heart!  How dare you do it--how
_dare_ you make her suffer so!"

He did not answer, but turned his head aside, and stared steadily out of
the window.  Rhoda glared at him with smarting eyes, and suddenly saw
something which put a check on her excitement.  Harold's profile was
turned toward her, and the light showed great drops of moisture standing
upon the brow, and rolling slowly down the cheek.  She realised, with a
pang, that once again she had been too quick in her judgment.  In spite
of his firmness, Harold had suffered more than she, more than her
mother--ay, perhaps, more than Evie herself!



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL.

Despite the painful incidents of Evie's convalescence, Christmas was a
happy season at Erley Chase, for it had always been a tradition of the
household to make much of this festival, and Mrs Chester could not
bring herself to change her habits as the years advanced.  Every twenty-
sixth of December Mr Chester would say solemnly, "This is the last
time!  I cannot let you wear yourself out like this.  When Christmas
cards have to be sent off by the hundred, and presents by the score, it
is time to call a halt, for what has been a pleasure becomes a burden.
Next year you drop these outside people, and think only of our immediate
circle," and Mrs Chester would murmur meekly, "Yes, dear; of course.
Just as you wish," and begin laying in stores for next Christmas at her
first visit to the January sales.  There was a cupboard in one of the
spare rooms which was dedicated entirely to the keeping of presents, and
into it went all manner of nick-nacks which were picked up during the
year--bazaar gleanings, in the shape of cushions, cosies, and table-
cloths, relics of travel, and a hundred and one articles useful and
ornamental, which had been bought because they were so cheap, and it
really seemed wicked to leave them lying on the shop counter!  When a
need arose, as when a birthday was suddenly remembered the day before it
fell due, or an anniversary suggested the propriety of a little
offering, it was the easiest thing in the world to poke about in the
cupboard until a suitable gift was discovered.

Laura Everett was much amused by this novel way of apportioning
presents, which was so strangely different from that practised at her
own home.  When she was wheeled into the morning-room a few days before
Christmas, it was to find a small bazaar of fancy articles spread on
tables and sofas, while Mrs Chester sat checking off the names written
on a long sheet of paper, and Rhoda cried out: "Here's a yellow silk
cushion.  Whom do we know who has got a complexion that can bear being
set off against a background of sulphur yellow?" ...  "Here's a gorgeous
table centre, quite beautifully worked.  Whom do we know who is old-
fashioned enough to use table centres still?" ...  "Here's a piece of
Turkish embroidery, which would be the very thing to cover that shabby
old sofa at the Vicarage; it was absolutely in holes the last time I saw
it."

"Turkish embroidery--Mrs Mason.  Thank goodness, that's one thing
settled!  Wrap it up at once, Rhoda dear.  It will be one thing less to
do," cried Mrs Chester in a tone of relief, while Evie held up her
hands in astonishment.

"Of all the extraordinary ways of giving presents!  To have a room full
of things and then to puzzle as to whom you can give them!  This is
indeed a new experience for me.  When we talk over our presents at home
it is to wonder how in the world we can contrive to buy twenty things
for nineteen shillings.  Such a wholesale way of managing things I never
imagined in my wildest moments."

She gave a little sigh of envy as she looked at the lavish profusion
which lay around; yet, after all, there was a pleasure in contriving
those simple gifts--in putting in delicate stitches to add to the value
of cheap materials, a triumph in manufacturing something out of nothing,
which Rhoda and her mother could never enjoy!  She was not at all sure
that that old home fashion was not the sweeter after all.

While the apportioning of gifts was going on in the morning-room, the
cook and her kitchen maids were busy at work in the great nagged
kitchen, manufacturing all sorts of dainties to be packed away in the
hampers ranged in readiness along the walls.  It was a sight to see the
good things laid out on the tables, and Evie was carried down on her
chair to admire and praise with the rest, and to watch the interesting
process of packing.  Far and wide these hampers went, carrying good
cheer into many a home where otherwise there would have been scanty
provisions for the day of rejoicing, and bringing unexpected gleams of
sunshine to many an anxious heart.  Needless to say, one of the best was
addressed to a country parsonage especially dear to Evie's heart, and
was accompanied by a parcel of presents, which had not been lightly
bought, but worked by loving fingers during long hours of convalescence.

Christmas Day itself was a busy occasion, when the home party had little
leisure to think of themselves, so unending was the stream of pensioners
which came up to the Chase to receive their gifts, and to be fed and
warmed in the gaily-decorated rooms.  Dinner was served early, so that
the servants might be free to have their festivities in the evening, and
at nine o'clock all the employees on the estate came up, dressed in
their best, and danced with the servants in the hall.  Mr and Mrs
Chester, with Harold and Rhoda, honoured the assembly by joining in the
first dance, and Evie sat in her wheeled chair, looking on and trying to
keep a smiling face, the while she fought one of the mental battles
which seemed to meet her on every step of the road to recovery.  She had
been so much occupied grieving over the serious financial loss which her
inability to work would involve, that she had taken little thought of
the pleasures from which she was debarred; but, after all, she was but a
girl, and a girl with a keen capacity for enjoyment, and it was a very
keen pang which went through her heart as she listened to the seductive
strains of the band, and watched the couples glide slowly by.  The dark
brows twitched as if in pain, and she drew aside the folds of the pink
tea-gown to cast a longing glance at the little useless feet stretched
before her.  A sudden remembrance arose of the day when Rhoda protested
in dismay at the thought of wearing the ugly regulation school shoes,
and of her own confession of love for pretty slippers, of the
satisfaction with which she had donned the same on Thursday evenings,
and danced about the hall as blithely as any one of her pupils.  Those
days were over--for ever over; she would never again know the joy of any
rapid, exhilarating motion.  She lifted her hand to wipe away a tear,
hoping to escape observation the while, but, to her dismay, Harold stood
by her side, and his eyes met hers with an expression of pained
understanding.  Any reference to her infirmity seemed to distress him so
acutely that the first instinct was to comfort him instead of herself,
and she smiled through her tears, saying in the sweetest tones of her
always sweet voice:

"Don't, please!  Don't look so sorry!  It was babyish of me, but just
for one moment--I was so fond of dancing, you know, and I had never
realised before--"

"Just so.  You realise fresh losses every day.  I know what you must
feel.  You have not been babyish at all, but most brave and heroic."

Evie sighed.  "It's nice to be praised, but I feel as if I don't deserve
it.  I am not in the least brave at heart...  Sometimes I almost dread
getting strong, for then I shall have to face so much...  I'm conceited,
too, for I hate the idea of limping, and being stiff and ungraceful.  I
thought I did not care for appearance, but I did--oh, a great deal!  It
is a humiliating discovery, and I am trying hard to cure myself, but
pride dies slowly!  There was a girl at school who was lame.  I used to
be so sorry for her, and yet, compared with other misfortunes, it is a
very little thing.  I can still move about and use my faculties.  It is
not so bad, after all!"

"Yes," said Harold, unexpectedly.  "It _is_ very bad.  It is a mistake
to pretend to yourself that it is only a small trial, for it's not true,
and the pretence is sure to break down some day, and leave you where you
were.  It is a great affliction for people to be crippled, even when
they are old and have lost their energy; but for a girl like you it is
ten times worse.  Don't be too hard on yourself, and expect resignation
to come all at once.  I believe the best plan is to face it fully, and
to say to yourself, `It's a big test--one of the biggest I could have to
bear.  I shall feel the pinch not to-day only, but to-morrow, and the
next year, and as long as I live.  It is going to take a big effort to
save myself from growing bitter and discouraged, but it's worth
