        "This is one of the many popular stories written by
        this well-known author, whose name on the title-page
        of a book makes it a welcome arrival to most of the
        young people who read. The moral is always good, the
        influence in the right direction, and the characters
        so portrayed that the right is always rewarded and the
        wrong fails to prosper."--_Dubuque, Iowa, Herald._

_The Adventures of David Vane and David Crane._

        A strong, homely, humorous story of the everyday life
        of American country-bred boys, by one who is
        acknowledged to be the best living storyteller in his
        peculiar vein.

       *       *       *       *       *

        _For sale by all booksellers, or sent, postpaid, on receipt of
        price, by_
        LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO.
        BOSTON



The Tide-Mill Stories

By J. T. TROWBRIDGE

       *       *       *       *       *

_Six Volumes. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, $1.25_

       *       *       *       *       *

=Phil and His Friends.=

        The hero is the son of a man who from drink got into
        debt, and, after having given a paper to a creditor
        authorizing him to keep the son as a security for his
        claim, ran away, leaving poor Phil a bond slave. The
        story involves a great many unexpected incidents, some
        of which are painful and some comic. Phil manfully
        works for a year cancelling his father's debt, and
        then escapes. The characters are strongly drawn, and
        the story is absorbingly interesting.


=The Tinkham Brothers' Tide-Mill.=

        "'The Tinkham Brothers' were the devoted sons of an
        invalid mother. The story tells how they purchased a
        tide-mill, which afterwards, by the ill-will and
        obstinacy of neighbors, became a source of much
        trouble to them. It tells also how, by discretion and
        the exercise of a peaceable spirit, they at last
        overcame all difficulties."--_Christian Observer,
        Louisville, Ky._


=The Satin-wood Box.=

        "Mr. Trowbridge has always a purpose in his writings,
        and this time he has undertaken to show how very near
        an innocent boy can come to the guilty edge and yet be
        able by fortunate circumstances to rid himself of all
        suspicion of evil. There is something winsome about
        the hero; but he has a singular way of falling into
        bad luck, although the careful reader will never feel
        the least disposed to doubt his honesty."--_Syracuse
        Standard._


=The Little Master.=

        This is the story of a schoolmaster, his trials,
        disappointments, and final victory. It will recall to
        many a man his experience in teaching pupils, and in
        managing their opinionated and self-willed parents.
        The story has the charm which is always found in Mr.
        Trowbridge's works.

        "Many a teacher could profit by reading of this plucky
        little schoolmaster."--_Journal of Education._


=His One Fault.=

        "As for the hero of this story 'His One Fault' was
        absent-mindedness. He forgot to lock his uncle's
        stable door, and the horse was stolen. In seeking to
        recover the stolen horse, he unintentionally stole
        another. In trying to restore the wrong horse to his
        rightful owner, he was himself arrested. After no end
        of comic and dolorous adventures, he surmounted all
        his misfortunes by downright pluck and genuine good
        feeling. It is a noble contribution to juvenile
        literature."--_Woman's Journal._


=Peter Budstone.=

        "Mr. J. T. Trowbridge's 'Peter Budstone' is another of
        those altogether good and wholesome books for boys of
        which it is hardly possible to speak too highly. This
        author shows us convincingly how juvenile reading may
        be made vivacious and interesting, and yet teach sound
        and clean lessons. 'Peter Budstone' shows forcibly the
        folly and crime of 'hazing.' It is the story of a
        noble young fellow whose reason is irreparably
        overthrown by the savage treatment he received from
        some of his associates at college. It is a powerful
        little book, and we wish every schoolboy and college
        youth could read it."--_Philadelphia American._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Illustrated Catalogue sent free on application._

       *       *       *       *       *

        Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co., Boston




The Silver Medal Stories

By J. T. TROWBRIDGE

       *       *       *       *       *

_Six Volumes. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, $1.25_

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Silver Medal=, AND OTHER STORIES.

        There were some schoolboys who had turned
        housebreakers, and among their plunder was a silver
        medal that had been given to one John Harris by the
        Humane Society for rescuing from drowning a certain
        Benton Barry. Now Benton Barry was one of the wretched
        housebreakers. This is the summary of the opening
        chapter. The story is intensely interesting in its
        serious as well as its humorous parts.


=His Own Master.=

        "This is a book after the typical boy's own heart. Its
        hero is a plucky young fellow, who, seeing no chance
        for himself at home, determines to make his own way in
        the world.... He sets out accordingly, trudges to the
        far West, and finds the road to fortune an
        unpleasantly rough one."--_Philadelphia Inquirer._


=Bound in Honor.=

        This story is of a lad, who, though not guilty of any
        bad action, has been an eye-witness of the conduct of
        his comrades, and felt "Bound in Honor" not to tell.

        "A capital book in all respects, overflowing with all
        sorts of fun and adventure; just the sort of book, in
        short, that the young folks will be anxious to read
        and re-read with as much continuous interest as the
        most favored of their storybooks."--_Philadelphia
        Leader._


=The Pocket Rifle.=

        "A boy's story which will be read with avidity, as it
        ought to be, it is so brightly and frankly written,
        and with such evident knowledge of the temperaments
        and habits, the friendships and enmities of
        schoolboys."--_New York Mail._

        "This is a capital story for boys. It teaches honesty,
        integrity, and friendship, and how best they can be
        promoted. It shows the danger of hasty judgment and
        circumstantial evidence; that right-doing pays, and
        dishonesty never."--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._


=The Jolly Rover.=

        "This book will help to neutralize the ill effects of
        any poison which children may have swallowed in the
        way of sham-adventurous stories and wildly fictitious
        tales. 'The Jolly Rover' runs away from home, and
        meets life as it is, till he is glad enough to seek
        again his father's house. Mr. Trowbridge has the power
        of making an instructive story absorbing in its
        interest, and of covering a moral so that it is easy
        to take."--_Christian Intelligencer._


=Young Joe=, AND OTHER BOYS.

        "Young Joe," who lived at Bass Cove, where he shot
        wild ducks, took some to town for sale, and attracted
        the attention of a portly gentleman fond of shooting.
        This gentleman went duck shooting with Joe, and their
        adventures were more amusing to the boy than to the
        amateur sportsman.

        There are thirteen other short stories in the book
        which will be sure to please the young folks.

       *       *       *       *       *

        _Complete Illustrated Catalogue sent free on application._

       *       *       *       *       *

        Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co., Boston




_PHILLIPS EXETER SERIES_

By A. T. DUDLEY

 Cloth, 12mo  Illustrated by Charles Copeland  Price per volume, =$1.25=

       *       *       *       *       *

=FOLLOWING THE BALL=

Here is an up-to-date story presenting American boarding-school life
and modern athletics. Football is an important feature, but it is a
story of character formation in which athletics play an important
part.

        "Mingled with the story of football is another and
        higher endeavor, giving the book the best of moral
        tone."--_Chicago Record-Herald._


=MAKING THE NINE=

The life presented is that of a real school, interesting, diversified,
and full of striking incidents. The athletics are technically correct,
while the characters are true and consistent types of American boyhood
and youth.

        "The story is healthful, for, while it exalts
        athletics, it does not overlook the fact that studious
        habits and noble character are imperative needs for
        those who would win success in life."--_Herald and
        Presbyter, Cincinnati._


=IN THE LINE=

Tells how a stalwart young student won his position as guard, and made
equally marked progress in the formation of character.

        "The book gives boys an interesting story, much
        football information, and many lessons in true
        manliness."--_Watchman, Boston._


=WITH MASK AND MITT=

While appealing to the natural normal tastes of boys for fun and
interest in the baseball, the book, without preaching, lays emphasis
on the building up of character.

        "No normal boy who is interested in our great national
        game can fail to find interest and profit, too, in
        this lively boarding-school story."--_Interior,
        Chicago._


[Illustration: THE GREAT YEAR]

=THE GREAT YEAR=

Three manly comrades, captains respectively of the baseball, football,
and track teams, help each other to achieve a "great year" of triple
victory over their traditional rival.

        "It is a fine, inspiring story for manly boys."--_N.
        Y. Christian Advocate._

       *       *       *       *       *

        For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price
        by the Publishers,

        LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




THE BOY CRAFTSMAN

=Practical and Profitable Ideas for a Boy's Leisure Hours=

By A. NEELY HALL


Illustrated with over 400 diagrams and working drawings 8vo Price,
$2.00

[Illustration: The Boy Craftsman]

Every real boy wishes to design and make things, but the questions of
materials and tools are often hard to pet around. Nearly all books on
the subject call for a greater outlay of money than is within the
means of many boys, or their parents wish to expend in such ways. In
this book a number of chapters give suggestions for carrying on a
small business that will bring a boy in money with which to buy tools
and materials necessary for making apparatus and articles described in
other chapters, while the ideas are so practical that many an
industrious boy can learn what he is best fitted for in his life work.
No work of its class is so completely up-to-date or so worthy in point
of thoroughness and avoidance of danger. The drawings are profuse and
excellent, and every feature of the book is first-class. It tells how
to make a boy's workshop, how to handle tools, and what can be made
with them; how to start a printing shop and conduct an amateur
newspaper, how to make photographs, build a log cabin, a canvas canoe,
a gymnasium, a miniature theatre, and many other things dear to the
soul of youth.

        We cannot imagine a more delightful present for a boy
        than this book.--_Churchman, N. Y._

        Every boy should have this book. It's a practical
        book--it gets right next to the boy's heart and stays
        there. He will have it near him all the time, and on
        every page there is a lesson or something that will
        stand the boy in good need. Beyond a doubt in its line
        this is one of the cleverest books on the
        market.--_Providence News._

        If a boy has any sort of a mechanical turn of mind,
        his parents should see that he has this book.--_Boston
        Journal._

        This is a book that will do boys good.--_Buffalo
        Express._

        The boy who will not find this book a mine of joy and
        profit must be queerly constituted.--_Pittsburgh
        Gazette._

        Will be a delight to the boy mechanic.--_Watchman,
        Boston._

        An admirable book to give a boy.--_Newark News._

        This book is the best yet offered for its large number
        of practical and profitable ideas.--_Milwaukee Free
        Press._

        Parents ought to know of this book.--_New York Globe._

       *       *       *       *       *

        For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of
        price by the publishers,

        LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




_Making of Our Nation Series_

_By WILLIAM C. SPRAGUE_

        Large 12mo, Cloth      Illustrated by A. B. Shute
        Price per volume, $1.50

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Boy Courier of Napoleon=

=A Story of the Louisiana Purchase=

[Illustration: THE BOY COURIER OF NAPOLEON]

William C. Sprague, the notably successful editor of "The American
Boy," has given for the first time the history of the Louisiana
Purchase in entertaining story form. The hero is introduced as a
French drummer boy in the great battle of Hohenlinden. He serves as a
valet to Napoleon and later is sent with secret messages to the French
in San Domingo and in Louisiana. After exciting adventures he
accomplishes his mission and is present at the lowering of the Spanish
flag, and later at that of the French and the raising of the Stars and
Stripes.

        "All boys and girls of our country who read this book
        will be delighted with it, as well as benefited by the
        historical knowledge contained in its
        pages."--_Louisville, Ky., Times._

        "An excellent book for boys, containing just enough
        history to make them hunger for more. No praise of
        this book can be too high."--_Town Topics, Cleveland,
        O._

        "This book is one to fascinate every intelligent
        American boy."--_Buffalo Times._


=The Boy Pathfinder=

=A Story of the Oregon Trail=
