        5. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS UNDER FIRE; or, The Dash
        for the Besieged Kam Shau Mission.

        6. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS IN THE WARDROOM; or,
        Winning Their Commissions as Line Officers.

        7. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS WITH THE ADRIATIC
        CHASERS; or, Blocking the Path of the Undersea
        Raiders.

        8. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS ON SKY PATROL; or,
        Fighting the Hun from Above the Clouds.




THE BOYS OF THE ARMY SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

These stimulating stories are among the best of their class that have
ever been written. They breathe the life and spirit of our army of
today, and in which Uncle Sam's Boys fought with a courage and devotion
excelled by none in the world war. There is no better way to instil
patriotism in the coming generation than by placing in the hands of
juvenile readers books in which a romantic atmosphere is thrown around
the boys of the army with thrilling plots that boys love. The books of
this series tell in story form the life of a soldier from the rookie
stage until he has qualified for an officer's commission, and, among
other things, present a true picture of the desperate days in fighting
the Huns.

        1. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS IN THE RANKS; or, Two
        Recruits in the United States Army.

        2. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS ON FIELD DUTY; or, Winning
        Corporals' Chevrons.

        3. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS AS SERGEANTS; or, Handling
        Their First Real Commands.

        4. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS IN THE PHILIPPINES; or,
        Following the Flag Against the Moros.

        5. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS ON THEIR METTLE; or, A
        Chance to Win Officers' Commissions.

        6. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS AS LIEUTENANTS; or, Serving
        Old Glory as Line Officers.

        7. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS WITH PERSHING; or, Dick
        Prescott at Grips with the Boche.

        8. UNCLE SAM'S BOYS SMASH THE GERMANS; or,
        Helping the Allies Wind Up the Great World War.




DAVE DARRIN SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

No more efficient officers ever paced the deck of a man-o'-war than Dave
Darrin and Dan Dalzell. The last two volumes chronicle the experiences
of Dave and Dan in the great war.

        1. DAVE DARRIN AT VERA CRUZ; or, Fighting With
        the U. S. Navy in Mexico.

        2. DAVE DARRIN ON MEDITERRANEAN SERVICE; or,
        With Dan Dalzell on European Duty.

        3. DAVE DARRIN'S SOUTH AMERICAN CRUISE; or, Two
        Innocent Young Naval Tools of an Infamous
        Conspiracy.

        4. DAVE DARRIN ON THE ASIATIC STATION; or,
        Winning Lieutenants' Commissions on the
        Admiral's Flagship.

        5. DAVE DARRIN AND THE GERMAN SUBMARINES; or,
        Making a Clean-up of the Hun Sea Monsters.

        6. DAVE DARRIN AFTER THE MINE LAYERS; or,
        Hitting the Enemy a Hard Naval Blow.




THE CONQUEST OF THE UNITED STATES SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

If the United States had not entered the war many things might have
happened to America. No liberty-loving American boy can afford to miss
reading these books.

        1. THE INVASION OF THE UNITED STATES; or, Uncle
        Sam's Boys at the Capture of Boston.

        2. IN THE BATTLE FOR NEW YORK; or, Uncle Sam's
        Boys in the Desperate Struggle for the
        Metropolis.

        3. AT THE DEFENSE OF PITTSBURGH; or, The
        Struggle to Save America's "Fighting Steel"
        Supply.

        4. MAKING THE LAST STAND FOR OLD GLORY; or,
        Uncle Sam's Boys in the Last Frantic Drive.




THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Bright and sparkling as the waters over which the Motor Boat Boys sail.
Once cast off for a cruise with these hardy young fresh-water navigators
the reader will not ask to be "put ashore" until the home port has
finally been made. Manliness and pluck are reflected on every page; the
plots are ingenious, the action swift, and the interest always tense.
There is neither a yawn in a paragraph nor a dull moment in a chapter in
this stirring series. No boy or girl will willingly lay down a volume of
it until "the end." The stories also embody much useful information
about the operation and handling of small power boats.

        1. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OF THE KENNEBEC; or, The
        Secret of Smugglers' Island.

        2. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT NANTUCKET; or, The
        Mystery of the Dunstan Heir.

        3. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB OFF LONG ISLAND; or, A
        Daring Marine Game at Racing Speed.

        4. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AND THE WIRELESS; or,
        The Dot, Dash and Dare Cruise.

        5. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB IN FLORIDA; or, Laying
        the Ghost of Alligator Swamp.

        6. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB AT THE GOLDEN GATE; or,
        A Thrilling Capture in the Great Fog.

        7. THE MOTOR BOAT CLUB ON THE GREAT LAKES; or,
        The Flying Dutchman of the Big Fresh Water.




THE SUBMARINE BOYS SERIES

By VICTOR G. DURHAM

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

A voyage in an undersea boat! What boy has not done so time and again in
his youthful dreams? The Submarine Boys did it in reality, diving into
the dark depths of the sea, then, like Father Neptune, rising dripping
from the deep to sunlight and safety. Yet it was not all easy sailing
for the Submarine Boys, for these hardy young "undersea pirates"
experienced a full measure of excitement and had their share of thrills,
as all who sail under the surface of the seas are certain to do. The
author knows undersea boats, and the reader who voyages with him may
look forward to an instructive as well as lively cruise.

        1. THE SUBMARINE BOYS ON DUTY; or, Life on a
        Diving Torpedo Boat.

        2. THE SUBMARINE BOYS' TRIAL TRIP; or, "Making
        Good" as Young Experts.

        3. THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE MIDDIES; or, The
        Prize Detail at Annapolis.

        4. THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SPIES; or,
        Dodging the Sharks of the Deep.

        5. THE SUBMARINE BOYS' LIGHTNING CRUISE; or,
        The Young Kings of the Deep.

        6. THE SUBMARINE BOYS FOR THE FLAG; or, Deeding
        Their Lives to Uncle Sam.

        7. THE SUBMARINE BOYS AND THE SMUGGLERS; or,
        Breaking Up the New Jersey Customs Frauds.

        8. THE SUBMARINE BOYS' SECRET MISSION; or,
        Beating an Ambassador's Game.




THE PONY RIDER BOYS SERIES

By FRANK GEE PATCHIN

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

This unusual and popular series tells vividly the story of four
adventure-loving lads, who, with their guardian, spent their summer
vacations in the saddle in search of recreation and healthful adventure.
Long journeys over mountain, through the fastness of primitive forest
and across burning desert, lead them into the wild places of their
native land as well as into many strange and exciting experiences. There
is not a dull moment in the series.

        1. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE ROCKIES; or, The
        Secret of the Lost Claim.

        2. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN TEXAS; or, The Veiled
        Riddle of the Plains.

        3. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN MONTANA; or, The
        Mystery of the Old Custer Trail.

        4. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE OZARKS; or, The
        Secret of Ruby Mountain.

        5. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE ALKALI; or,
        Finding a Key to the Desert Maze.

        6. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN NEW MEXICO; or, The
        End of the Silver Trail.

        7. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN THE GRAND CANYON; or,
        The Mystery of Bright Angel Gulch.

        8. THE PONY RIDER BOYS WITH THE TEXAS RANGERS;
        or, On the Trail of the Border Bandits.

        9. THE PONY RIDER BOYS ON THE BLUE RIDGE; or, A
        Lucky Find in the Carolina Mountains.

        10. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN NEW ENGLAND; or, An
        Exciting Quest in the Maine Wilderness.

        11. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN LOUISIANA; or,
        Following the Game Trails in the Canebrake.

        12. THE PONY RIDER BOYS IN ALASKA; or, The Gold
        Diggers of Taku Pass.




THE CIRCUS BOYS SERIES

By EDGAR B. P. DARLINGTON

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

No call to the heart of the youth of America finds a readier response
than the call of the billowing canvas, the big red wagons, the crash of
the circus band and the trill of the ringmaster's whistle. It is a call
that captures the imagination of old and young alike, and so do the
books of this series capture and enthrall the reader, for they were
written by one who, besides wielding a master pen, has followed the
sawdust trail from coast to coast, who knows the circus people and the
sturdy manliness of those who do and dare for the entertainment of
millions of circus-goers when the grass is green. Mr. Darlington paints
a true picture of the circus life.

        1. THE CIRCUS BOYS ON THE FLYING RINGS; or,
        Making the Start in the Sawdust Life.

        2. THE CIRCUS BOYS ACROSS THE CONTINENT; or,
        Winning New Laurels on the Tanbark.

        3. THE CIRCUS BOYS IN DIXIE LAND; or, Winning
        the Plaudits of the Sunny South.

        4. THE CIRCUS BOYS ON THE MISSISSIPPI; or,
        Afloat with the Big Show on the Big River.

        5. THE CIRCUS BOYS ON THE PLAINS; or, The Young
        Advance Agents Ahead of the Show.




BOOKS FOR GIRLS




THE MADGE MORTON SERIES

By AMY D. V. CHALMERS

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

The heroines of these stories are four girls, who with enthusiasm for
outdoor life, transformed a dilapidated canal boat into a pretty
floating summer home. They christened the craft "The Merry Maid" and
launched it on the shore of Chesapeake Bay. The stories are full of fun
and adventure, with not a dull moment anywhere.


        1. MADGE MORTON--CAPTAIN OF THE MERRY MAID.
        2. MADGE MORTON'S SECRET.
        3. MADGE MORTON'S TRUST.
        4. MADGE MORTON'S VICTORY.




THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS SERIES

By JANET ALDRIDGE

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Four clever girls go hiking around the country and meet with many
thrilling and provoking adventures. These stories pulsate with the
atmosphere of outdoor life.

        1. THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS UNDER CANVAS; or, Fun
        and Frolic in the Summer Camp.

        2. THE MEADOW-BROOK GIRLS ACROSS COUNTRY; or,
