rest of them are waiting and there seems to be nothing better that we
can do."

Fortunately Bob was not sensitive enough to be hurt by the thrust.

"I'll be right along," agreed he, "as soon as I have locked up here."

On reaching the veranda he found his class assembled and the first
comment to reach his ears was:

"No news from O'Connel, eh?"

"No, Dick."

"What in thunder do you suppose has become of him?"

Bob put his finger to his lips and taking the hint the boy abandoned
the subject, inquiring instead:

"Isn't it a bore to have to listen in at just such a time every day
whether it is convenient or not--I mean when you are in charge of a
station."

"Sometimes it is," Bob responded. "Still, it is your job and you
expect to put it first and fit your own affairs in around it. Besides,
you get used to the regularity of the hours and soon do not notice the
monotony of the rules. You can readily understand why, at all official
radio stations, somebody must always be on the watch for S O S calls.
On shipboard there are three classes of wireless stations: those
having continual service with an operator who always has his ear to
the receiver while the ship is in motion; those where the office is
open only at stated hours and an operator listening merely for a
limited time; and those whose operators have no fixed time beyond
listening in the first ten minutes of each hour."

"The ship decides which kind of station it will have, I suppose,"
Nancy remarked.

"Indeed it doesn't," Bob contradicted, with a shake of his head. "The
government saves the vessel that trouble. It defines exactly the sort
of station when it issues the license. Uncle Sam also bestows on each
of these stations a name or combination of letters by which it shall
be known and under which it is officially listed. Each country has a
prescribed number of such letters allotted for its use at the
International Convention at Berne, and our nation is authorized to use
groups beginning with N and W; also triple groups of KIA to KZZ. You
will find all these call letters in a book that contains the wireless
telegraph stations of the world, a volume issued by the international
publication office at Berne."

"Can any one get one?" inquired Walter.

"Certainly, if he has the price," smiled the older brother. "I guess
you do not need one, though. A local call book would answer most
purposes. It would hardly be necessary for you to call any foreign
offices, and I even doubt if you would need to summon Sayville,
Tuckerton, New Brunswick, Marion, or Annapolis."

"Those are our trans-Atlantic stations, aren't they?" asked Dick.

"Some of them," Bob said. "We have others, though, that can talk with
Europe. There is one at San Diego; Pearl Harbor in Hawaii; and Cavite
in the Philippines. There are also Marconi stations at Kahuka and
Bolinas. In addition to these, the government has a number of
high-power stations scattered throughout the country. Arlington,
Virginia----"

"Sends out the time," put in Walter with disconcerting promptness.

"It sure does, sonny."

"How many foreign countries can talk with us?" inquired Nancy.

"A short time ago there were eight that could talk direct. One is at
Funabashi, Japan; one at Carnarvon, Wales; two in France, one at
Nantes and one at Lyons; Rome, Italy, has one; Germany has one at
Nauen and one at Eilvese, Hanover; and Norway has one at Stavanger.
Then in Canada there are two transatlantic stations."

"Glace Bay!" piped the incorrigible Walter.

Bob patted his head with a mock fatherly gesture.

"Very good, son," said he, at which everybody laughed.

"These stations," he went on, "are all equipped with very high power,
varying in wave length anywhere from 17,600 to 6,000 meters. Most of
our stations are pretty powerful, anyway. Pearl Harbor, for instance,
has a 13,000 wave length; Cavite 12,000; Sayville, 11,600; Tuckerton,
owned by a French company, about 8,700; New Brunswick, New Jersey,
13,600; Marion, Massachusetts, 14,400; and Annapolis, 17,600. Only a
few foreign stations can match these in range. Carnarvon has two wave
lengths: 14,000 and 11,500; Lyons, 15,500; Nantes, 10,000; Rome,
11,500; Nauen, 12,550; Eilvese (Hanover), 15,000 and 9,600; and
Stavanger, Norway, 9,600. There are many, however, that vary from
7,000 to 4,000 and can transmit messages by relaying them."

"I wish my set could send farther," Dick murmured regretfully.

"It sends as far as the law allows. We must therefore abide by Uncle
Sam's judgment and be content. The scale is very carefully planned and
the classifications made most intelligently, I think. Amateurs are
limited to about a 200-meter wave length; low-power stations come next
and are grouped under 1,600 meters. Of these the 750 wave is reserved
for government stations such as radio compass stations, etc.; 600
meters is the commercial tune for large merchant ships; 476 that of
submarines, aircraft, and small war vessels; and 300 meters is the
commercial tune for small vessels. After that we pass into the higher
group, all of which come under the head of medium-power stations.
These range from 4,000 to 1,800 meters and first on the list are the
government ships which have continuous waves and a length of from
3,000 to 4,000 meters. Following them come the experimental and
miscellaneous stations with a 3,000 to 2,000-meter range; and after
them the 1,800-meter class which is the commercial tune for continuous
waves."

"And the high-power stations are the last, I suppose," put in Dick.

"Yes, those designed for trans-oceanic service. These range from
20,000 to 6,000 meters. The distinctions are, you see, quite
positively made and everybody must keep within his assigned
pigeon-hole."

"I reckon I'll keep in mine," announced Dick.

"I should advise it if you want smooth sailing," retorted Bob. "You
will hardly----" but the sentence was never finished for a maid
approached Mr. Crowninshield at the moment and whispered:

"The telephone, sir; New York is speaking."

"New York, Dad!" exclaimed Dick excitedly. "It may be Lyman or Dacie."

"More likely it is the office," replied his mother.

"Some business matter, I fancy," said Mr. Crowninshield as he rose.
"I'm sorry to interrupt the lesson."

"I was just about through, sir."

"I'll be back in a moment probably."

"Poor father always has telephone calls," lamented Nancy
sympathetically. "If he ever starts out to play golf somebody is sure
to want him. Sometimes I wish that New York office was in the bottom
of the sea."

"I guess you'd have precious little bread and butter if it was,"
announced Dick with brotherly sarcasm.

"Certainly you wouldn't be able to provide me with any," Nancy flashed
back with a teasing laugh.

"Children!" interposed Mrs. Crowninshield.

"Here's Dad! Well, Pater, what was it?" asked Dick. Then on observing
his father was unwontedly excited he repeated, "What's up, Dad?"

"It was Lyman," Mr. Crowninshield answered. "The New York police have
run down two men and Mr. Lyman wants Bob to come over and see if he
can identify either of them as the one who kidnapped Lola."

"You could identify him, couldn't you, Bob?" Walter put in.

"Of course I could. Didn't the chap come into the station to get water
for his machine?" was the instant reply. "I talked with him quite a
bit while he was fixing up his engine. He seemed in a powerful rush to
be off and wasn't overgracious."

"But could Bob leave now, Archibald?" questioned his wife. "Isn't
there the possibility of news from Mr. O'Connel?"

"Jove! I had forgotten that."

"Maybe O'Connel won't call; he didn't to-day, you know," Nancy said.

"It seems to me Bob ought to go and land those chaps if there is a
chance of doing it," Dick declared. "He would not need to be gone more
than one night, would he?"

"No. Nevertheless, he would miss the morning wireless," returned Mr.
Crowninshield. "Should there be important news we should not get it."

"It is a pity you boys can't take a message," Nancy remarked, turning
toward her brother and Walter. "If you only had your Morse code
learned you might be quite some good to us now."

"I wish I had whooped up on it faster," bewailed Dick, with engaging
candor. "I'm an awful rotter--plain lazy, I guess."

"Well, I don't know but we'd better let Bob go, all things
considered," observed Mr. Crowninshield, who had been quietly thinking
the matter over.

"I say Bob goes, too," reiterated Dick. "It is worth something to put
such fellows as those dog thieves behind the bars."

"You can connect with the Fall River boat or one passing through the
Canal and be in New York in the morning, Bob," the elder man asserted.
"Lyman will meet you, hustle things along, and send you home on the
noon train. With Dick's racing car to pick you up somewhere along the
line there is no reason why we should not have you back here before
another morning. You've no time to spare, though, for lingering and
discussing wireless and its wonders. Trot along and pack up your duds
and get some luncheon. I'll call up Wheeler and have him ready to
carry you to the train. Do not bother your head about connections; I
will look up everything and tell you exactly what to do."

In a flurry of anticipation off hastened Bob.

"Gee! Isn't it the limit that we haven't brains enough to get
O'Connel?" murmured Dick to Walter in a disgusted whisper. "I ought to
have duffed in harder on the blamed code. But I thought there was no
hurry. We seemed to have all summer to learn it."

"Maybe he won't call," His Highness suggested hopefully.

"I hope to blazes he doesn't," was the retort. "I'd feel cheap as dirt
to have that ticker go clicking out a message and I not be able to get
a word of it."




CHAPTER XIX

WALTER STEPS INTO THE BREACH


With Bob gone and radio lessons suspended the following morning seemed
to both Dick and Walter an unwontedly quiet one. Moreover with a
scorching sun high in the heaven, no breeze, and a dead low tide most
of the activities to which the boys might have resorted were out of
the question.

"Think of the sailing breeze we've seen blowing lots of mornings when
we couldn't go out," grumbled Dick. "Isn't it infernal luck?"

"Why don't you take your car and go for a spin," Nancy suggested.

"Wheeler has it, silly. He's meeting Bob."

"I couldn't go motoring anyway," put in Walter. "I've got the dogs to
chase round."

"You're not going out with them now," objected Dick.

"Not quite yet. I had them out before breakfast."

"What do you say we go over and fool round with the radio a while?"
Dick yawned. "We've nothing better to do."

"All right. We can at least listen in for a spell. We've got that
far."

"You boys better not go getting that wireless all out of order while
Bob is away," cautioned Nancy. "He'd be ripping mad to get home and
find it out of commission. Father wouldn't like it, either."

"Oh, we're not going to hurt the precious radio," sniffed Dick. "Don't
you think we know anything?"

"Not much," fluted Nancy as she flounced away.

"At least she does not flatter us," grinned His Highness, quite
unruffled by the girl's frankness.

"Oh, sisters never think a fellow knows anything, especially when
they're older," Dick grumbled, as he unlocked the door of the low
building and met the blast of close, stifling air that came out.
"Scott! The place is like an oven, isn't it? Open a window, can't
you?" he continued.

"Sure! There is some heat, I'll say. Just as well we dropped round if
only to air the place out," Walter replied.

Together they switched on the current, regulated amplifier, detector,
and tuner, and each with a head receiver tight to his ears sat down.

"Whee, but it is thick, to-day!" shouted Dick. "Run the tune up, kid,
and see if we get anything."

"It is always bad a day like this," called Walter. "Besides, everybody
seems to be butting in in the morning. Infernal, isn't it?"

"Let her go up to O'Connel's pitch. It can't do any harm."

"It isn't time for him to call, is it?"

"Pretty near."

"But what good would it do even if we did get his signal?"

"We should at least know he had something to say to us."

"I should consider that a negative satisfaction," Walter replied. "It
would just be an aggravation. However, here she goes! As you say, it
can harm nobody to get the right meter."

"There's that old commercial station up the Cape," announced Dick,
presently. "That fellow is always on the job at this hour."

"Probably he has to be, poor soul," Walter returned. "We'll get rid of
him in a minute. _What was that?_"

"It is some one on our line. That's the _Siren's_ call. It's O'Connel!
Jove! What are you doing, man? What are you going to do?" asked Dick
excitedly as he saw Walter's hand go out.

"Paper! Pencil! Hurry, can't you?" gasped Walter.

"Do you mean----"

"Let's both take it down in dots and dashes. Between us we may be able
to make some sense out of it afterward. Quick!"

Clearly and evenly the message ticked itself off. Then there was
silence.

"Get any of it?" Walter demanded, breathlessly tossing the receiver
aside and shutting off the current.

"About two words. He went so fast----Did you get anything?"

"Oh, I've got something; but whether it will make any sense remains to
be seen," said His Highness eagerly. "Where is the key! Toss it
over."

[Illustration: Clearly and evenly the message ticked itself off. Then
there was silence. _Page_ 240.]

"Here we go. Dot, dash,----"

"That's the letter A, you squarehead! I know what that first part is;
it is always the same and we needn't fuss to translate it. _Aboard
yacht Siren._ I don't care, either, where she is. What we want to get
at is what she wants to say."

"But how can we tell where all that stuff leaves off?"

"I mean to tell," declared Walter with determination.

"But there is punctuation and other rubbish mixed in with the
letters."

"No matter. Have a little patience, man!"

Nevertheless, in spite of all the patience and perseverance the boys
could muster the magic message remained an enigma and at the end of an
hour both were obliged to admit themselves beaten.

"It is worse than getting no message at all," lamented Walter.

"It certainly does not do us much good," assented Dick.

"Do you suppose your father knows anything about the Morse code?"

"Dad? Good heavens, no! Still we might take the thing up to the house
and show it to him."

"I don't imagine it is right, do you?" speculated Walter. "No doubt we
missed some of it or made mistakes. Still, what we contrived to write
agrees fairly well, so some of it must be correct. Let's take it to
your father. What do you say?"

"I feel like such a boob not to be able to make it out," Dick
answered with evident reluctance at confessing himself floored.

"But we'll have to tell him O'Connel called. We've got to do that
anyhow; so he may as well know the rest of it," Walter persisted.

"All right. We'll hunt him up. I warn you, though, that he will josh
us most unmercifully. He'll pitch into me, too, and ask me why I
haven't learned my Morse International before this. See if he
doesn't."

"It is one thing to learn the code out of a book and quite another to
be smart enough to read it or take it down," Walter maintained
stoutly. "Nobody ought to expect you to be able to get a message the
way Bob does. Why, he has been at the job years!"

"I know he has," Dick responded, slightly comforted. "Still, Dad will
rag me, just the same. See if he doesn't!"

Locking the door and pausing to gain courage they set out over the
lawn. Then suddenly, midway across the grass, His Highness came to a
stop.

"Mr. Burns!" he cried, wheeling round. "Why didn't I think of him
before?"

"What on earth are you talking about?" asked Dick, astounded by his
companion's strange conduct.

"Mr. Burns!" repeated Walter. "Come along. Can't one of the chauffeurs
take us down there?"

"For mercy's sake who is Mr. Burns, and why do you want to go and see
him hot off the bat?"

"Mr. Burns, the telegraph operator," Walter contrived to stammer. "He
must know Morse International. He has to know both the Morse American
which telegraph operators use on land, and the other code, I'm pretty
sure."

"But maybe what we've got down doesn't make sense," objected Dick.
"You've a husky nerve to go toting that scrawl of ours to a
professional."

"I don't care," grinned Walter. "I'm not afraid of Mr. Burns. He's
driven me out of the station too many times when I was a kid. I will
own, however, that I have more respect for him since I've learned what
it means to run a telegraph."

"He may drive you out of the station this time," Dick ventured with a
grimace.
