"You," said the Eagle; "Why I carried you up."

"Nothing to do with it," said the Wren.

"Then let's try it over," said the Eagle.

"No, no," said the Wren, "one try was agreed on, and it's settled now, I
was higher than you."

And they have been disputing over it ever since. The lawyers take the
Wren's side and the soldiers take the Eagle's side.

The peasants in Europe sometimes speak of the Eagle as "the King of the
Birds," but they always call the Wren the "Little King." And that is why
we call our gold-crowned Wrens, Kinglets, or Kingwrens and I suppose
that is why they wear a crown of gold.


TALE 100

The Snowstorm

It was at the great winter Carnival of Montreal not long ago. Looking
out of a window on a stormy day were five children of different races:
an Eskimo, a Dane, a Russian, an Indian, and a Yankee. The managers of
the Carnival had brought the first four with their parents; but the
Yankee was the son of a rich visitor.

"Look," cried the little Eskimo from Alaska, as he pointed to the
driving snow. "Look at the ivory chips falling! El Sol is surely carving
a big Walrus tusk into a fine dagger for himself. See how he whittles,
and sends the white dust flying."

Of course he didn't say "El Sol," but used the Eskimo name for him.

Then the Dane said: "No, that isn't what makes it. That is Mother Earth
getting ready for sleep. Those are the goose feathers of her feather
bed, shaken up by her servants before she lies down and is covered with
her white mantle."

The little Indian, with his eyes fixed on the storm, shook his head
gravely and said: "My father taught me that these are the ashes from
Nana-bo-jou's pipe; he has finished his smoke and is wrapping his
blanket about him to rest. And my father always spake true."

"Nay, you are all wrong," said the little Russian. "My grandmother told
me that it is Mother Carey. She is out riding in her strongest, freshest
steed, the White Wind. He has not been out all summer; he is full of
strength and fury; he spumes and rages. The air is filled with the foam
from his bridle, and froth from his shoulders, as she rides him, and
spurs him, and rides him. I love to see it, and know that she is filling
the air with strength and with messages. They carry me back to my own
dear homeland. It thrills me with joy to see the whiteness."

But the Yankee boy said: "Why, it's just snowing."


TALE 101

The Fairy Lamps

There was once a little barelegged, brown-limbed boy who spent all his
time in the woods. He loved the woods and all that was in them. He used
to look, not at the flowers, but deep down into them, and not at the
singing bird, but into its eyes, to its little heart; and so he got an
insight better than most others, and he quite gave up collecting birds'
eggs.

But the woods were full of mysteries. He used to hear little bursts of
song, and when he came to the place he could find no bird there. Noises
and movements would just escape him. In the woods he saw strange tracks,
and one day, at length, he saw a wonderful bird making these very
tracks. He had never seen the bird before, and would have thought it a
great rarity had he not seen its tracks everywhere. So he learned that
the woods were full of beautiful creatures that were skillful and quick
to avoid him.

One day, as he passed by a spot for the hundredth time, he found a
bird's nest. It must have been there for long, and yet he had not seen
it; and so he learned how blind he was, and he exclaimed: "Oh, if only I
could see, then I might understand these things! If only I knew! If I
could see but for once, how many there are, and how near! If only every
bird would wear over its nest this evening a little lamp to show me!"

The sun was down now; but all at once there was a soft light on the
path, and in the middle of it the brown boy saw a Little Brown Lady in a
long robe, and in her hand a rod.

She smiled pleasantly and said: "Little boy, I am the Fairy of this
Woods. I have been watching you for long. I like you. You seem to be
different from other boys. Your request shall be granted."

Then she faded away. But at once the whole landscape twinkled over with
wonderful little lamps--long lamps, short lamps, red, blue, and green,
high and low, doubles, singles, and groups; wherever he looked were
lamps--twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, here and everywhere, until the forest
shone like the starry sky. He ran to the nearest, yes, a nest; and here
and there, each different kind of lamp stood for another kind of nest. A
beautiful purple blaze in a low tangle caught his eye. He ran to it, and
found a nest he had never seen before. It was full of purple eggs, and
there was the rare bird he had seen but once. It was chanting the weird
song he had often heard, but never traced. But the eggs were the
marvelous things. His old egg-collecting instinct broke out. He reached
forth to clutch the wonderful prize, and--in an instant all the lights
went out. There was nothing but the black woods about him. Then on the
pathway shone again the soft light. It grew brighter, till in the
middle of it he saw the Little Brown Lady--the Fairy of the Woods. But
she was not smiling now. Her face was stern and sad, as she said: "I
fear I set you over-high. I thought you better than the rest. Keep this
in mind:

        "Who reverence not the
         lamp of life can never
         see its light."

Then she faded from his view, and he never saw the lamps again.


TALE 102

The Sweetest Sad Song in the Woods

Once a great American poet was asked which he thought was the sweetest
voice in the woods. He said: "The sweetest sound in Nature is the
calling of the Screech Owl."

Sometimes, though rarely, it does screech, but the sound it most often
makes is the soft mournful song that it sings in the woods at night,
especially in the autumn nights.

It seems to be moaning a lament for the falling leaves, a sad good-bye
to the dear dying summer.

Last autumn one sat above my head in the dark October woods, and put his
little soul into a song that seemed to be

        Ohhhh! Ohhhh!
        The leaves are falling:
        Ohhhh! Ohhhh!
        A sad voice calling;
        Ohhhh! Ohhhh!
        The Woodbirds flying;
        Ohhhh! Ohhhh!
        Sweet summer's dying,
        Dying, Dying.

[Illustration: The Lament of the Owl.

Notation by Ann Seton]

A mist came into my eyes as I listened, and yet I thanked him. "Dear
voice in the trees, you have said the things I felt, and could not say;
but voicing my sadness you have given it wings to fly away."


TALE 103

Springtime, or the Wedding of Maka Ina and El Sol

Oh, that was a stirring, glowing time! All the air, and the underwood
seemed throbbed with pleasant murmuring voices. The streams were
laughing, the deep pools smiling, as pussy-willows scattered catkins on
them from above. The oak trees and the birches put on little
glad-hangers, like pennants on a gala ship. The pine trees set up their
green candles, one on every big tip-twig. The dandelions made haste to
glint the early fields with gold. The song toads and the peepers sang in
volleys; the blackbirds wheeled their myriad cohorts in the air, a guard
of honour in review. The woodwale drummed. The redbud draped its naked
limbs in early festal bloom; and Rumour the pretty liar smiled and
spread the news.

All life was smiling with the frank unselfish smile, that tells of
pleasure in another's joy.

The love of love is wider than the world. And one who did not know their
speech could yet have read in their reflected joy a magnitude of joyful
happening, could guess that over two beings of the highest rank, the
highest rank of happiness impended.

Yes, all the living world stood still at gaze: the story of the
bridegroom, the gracious beauty of the bride were sung, for the wedding
day had come. And Mother Carey, she was there, for were they not her
peers? And the Evil One--he came, but slunk away, for the blessing of
the one Great Oversoul was on them.

Oh, virile, radiant one, El Sol! Oh, Maka Ina! bounteous mother earth,
the day of joining hand in hand passed by. The joy is with us yet;
renewed each year, when March is three weeks gone. Look, then, ye
wanderers in the woods! Seek in the skies, seek in the growing green,
but find it mostly in your souls, and _sing_!


TALE 104

Running the Council

Every good Woodcrafter should know the way of the Council Ring.

Select some quiet level place out of doors; in the woods if possible,
for it is so much better if surrounded by trees.

Make a circle of low seats; the circle should be not less than 12 feet
or more than 20 feet across, depending somewhat on the number to take
part.

In the middle prepare for a small fire. At one side is a special seat
for the Chief; this is called the Council Rock.

On very important occasions take white sand or lime, and draw a circle
around the fire. Then from that draw the four lamps and the twelve laws
as in Tale 105.

When all is ready with the Guide on the Council Rock, and the Scouts in
their seats, the Guide stands up and says: "Give ear my friends, we are
about to hold a council. I appoint such a one, Keeper of the fire and
so-and-so, Keeper of the tally. Now let the Fire-keeper light the fire."

Next the Tally-keeper calls the roll. After which the business part of
the Council is carried on exactly the same as any ordinary meeting,
except that instead of addressing the "Chairman," they say, "O Chief";
instead of "yes" they say "ho," instead of "no" they say "wah."

The order of doings in Council is:--

        Opening and fire-lighting
        Roll Call
        Reading and accepting tally of last Council
        Reports of Scouts (things observed or done)
        Left-over business
        New business
        Honours
        Honourable mention
        (For the good of the Tribe) Complaints and suggestions.
          (_Here business ends and entertainment begins._)
        Challenges
        Games, contests, etc.
        Close by singing Omaha Prayer (Tale 108)


TALE 105

The Sandpainting of the Fire

[Illustration: The Sandpainting of the Fire]

When I was staying among the Navaho Indians, I met John Wetherall, the
trader. He had spent half his life among them, and knew more of their
ways than any other white man that I met. He told me that part of the
education of Navaho priest was knowing the fifty sandpaintings of his
tribe. A sandpainting is a design made on the ground or floor with dry
sands of different colours--black, white, gray, yellow, red, etc. It
looks like a rug or a blanket on the ground, and is made up of many
curious marks which stand for some man, place, thing, or idea. Thus, the
first sandpainting is a map of the world as the Navaho knew it, with
rivers and hills that are important in their history. These
sandpaintings cannot be moved; a careless touch spoils them, and a gust
of wind can wipe them out. They endure only in the hearts and memories
of the people who love them.

In the Woodcraft Camp there is but one sandpainting that is much used;
that is, the Sandpainting of the Fourfold Fire. When I make it in camp,
I use only white sand or powdered lime; but indoors, or on paper, I use
yellow (or orange) and white.

This is the story of the sandpainting. The fire is the symbol of the
Great Spirit; around that we draw a great circle, as in the diagram.

At each of the four sides we light another fire; these four are called
Fortitude, Beauty, Truth, and Love, and come from the Fire through
Spirit, Body, Mind, and Service.

Then from each of these we draw three golden rays. These stand for the
twelve laws of Woodcraft, and they are named in this way:

        Be Brave, Be Silent and Obey;
        Be Clean, Be Strong, Protect Wild Life alway;
        Speak True, Be Reverent, Play Fair as you Strive!
        Be Kind; Be Helpful; Glad you are alive.

And the final painting is as in the drawing. Of course the names are not
written on the real thing though the Woodcraft scout should know them.


TALE 106

The Woodcraft Kalendar

[Illustration: The Woodcraft Kalendar]

The Woodcraft Kalendar is founded on the Indian way of noting the
months. Our own ancestors called them "Moons" much as the Indians did.
Our word "month" was once written "moneth" or "monath" which meant a
"moon or moon's time of lasting." The usual names for the moons to-day
are Latin, but we find we get closer to nature if we call them by
their Woodcraft names, and use the little symbols of the Woodcraft
Kalendar.


TALE 107

Climbing the Mountain

Afar in our dry southwestern country is an Indian village; and in the
offing is a high mountain, towering up out of the desert. It is
considered a great feat to climb this mountain, so that all the boys of
the village were eager to attempt it. One day the Chief said: "Now boys,
you you may all go to-day and try to climb the mountain. Start right
after breakfast, and go each of you as far as you can. Then when you are
tired, come back: but let each one bring me a twig from the place where
he turned."

Away they went full of hope, each feeling that he surely could reach the
top.

But soon a fat, pudgy boy came slowly back, and in his hand he held out
to the Chief a leaf of cactus.

The Chief smiled and said: "My boy, you did not reach the foot of the
mountain; you did not even get across the desert."
