day un night tell 'e all done gone. Wun-a tam come fer B'er Rabbit fer
kill 'e gran'mammy, B'er Wolf, 'e go bisitin' 'im. 'E say:--

"'B'er Rabbit, I is bin-a feel honkry troo un troo. Less we kill-a you'
gran'mammy.'

"B'er Rabbit lif' up 'e head high; 'e lahff. 'E shekky one year, 'e
shed-a one eye. 'E say:--

"'Eh-eh, B'er Wolf, you t'ink I gwan kill-a me gran'mammy? Oh, no, B'er
Wolf! Me no kin do dat.'

"Dis mek B'er Wolf wuss mad den 'e is bin befo'. 'E fair teer de yet'
wit' 'e claw; 'e yowl sem lak Injun mans. 'E say 'e gwan make B'er
Rabbit kill 'e gran'mammy nohow.

"B'er Rabbit say 'e gwan see 'im 'bout dis. 'E tek 'e gran'mammy by da
han'; 'e lead um way off in da woods; 'e hide um in da top one big
cocoanut tree: 'e tell um fer stay deer."

The mention of a cocoanut tree caused the little boy to glance
incredulously at Uncle Remus, who made prompt and characteristic
reply:--

"Dat's it, honey; dat's it, sho'. In dem days en in dem countries dey
wuz plenty er cocoanut trees. Less we all set back yer en give Brer Jack
a livin' chance."

"'E hide 'e gran'mammy in top cocoanut tree," continued Daddy Jack, "un
'e gi' um lilly bahskit wit' cord tie on um. In de day-mawnin', B'er
Rabbit, 'e is bin go at da foot da tree. 'E make 'e v'ice fine: 'e
holler:--

"'_Granny!--Granny!--O Granny! Jutta cord-la!_'

"Wun 'e granny yeddy dis, 'e let bahskit down wit' da cord, un B'er
Rabbit 'e fill um wit' bittle un somet'ing t'eat. Ebry day dey is bin-a
do dis t'ing; ebry day B'er Rabbit is come fer feed 'e granny.

"B'er Wolf 'e watch, 'e lissun; 'e sneak up, 'e creep up, 'e do lissun.
Bumbye, 'e do yeddy B'er Rabbit call; 'e see da bahskit swing down, 'e
see um go back. Wun B'er Rabbit bin-a go 'way fum dey-dey, B'er Wolf, 'e
come by da root da tree. 'E holler; 'e do say:--

"'_Granny!--Granny!--O Granny! Shoot-a cord-la!_'

"Da ole Granny Rabbit lissun; 'e bin lissun well. 'E say:--

"'Ki! how come dis? Me son is no talky lak dis. 'E no shoot-a da cord
lak dat.'

"W'en B'er Rabbit come back da granny is bin-a tell um 'bout somet'ing
come-a holler shoot-a da cord-la, un B'er Rabbit, 'e lahff tel 'e is kin
lahff no mo'. B'er Wolf, 'e hidin' close; 'e yed B'er Rabbit crackin' 'e
joke; 'e is git bery mad.

"Wun B'er Rabbit is gone 'way, B'er Wolf bin-a come back. 'E stan' by da
tree root; 'e holler:--

"'_Granny!--Granny!--O Granny! Jutta cord-la!_'

"Granny Rabbit hol' 'e head 'pon one side; 'e lissun good. 'E say:

"'I bery sorry, me son, you bin hab so bad col'. You' v'ice bin-a soun'
rough, me son.'

"Dun Granny Rabbit is bin peep down; 'e bin say:--

"'Hi! B'er Wolf! Go 'way fum dey-dey. You no is bin fool-a me lak dis.
Go 'way, B'er Wolf!'

"B'er Wolf, 'e come bery mad; 'e grin tell 'e tush bin shiuen. 'E go in
da swamp; 'e scratch 'e head; 'e t'ink. Bumbye, 'e go bisitin' one
Blacksmit', un 'e ahx 'im how kin 'e do fer make 'e v'ce come fine lak
B'er Rabbit v'ice. Da Blacksmit', 'e say:--

"'Come, B'er Wolf; I run dis red-hot poker in you' t'roat, 'e mekky you
talk easy.'

"B'er Wolf say, 'Well, I lak you for mekky me v'ice fine.'

"Dun da Blacksmit' run da red-hot poker in B'er Wolf t'roat, un 'e hu't
um so bad, 'tiss-a bin long tam befo' B'er Wolf kin tekky da long walk
by da cocoanut tree. Bumbye 'e git so 'e kin come by, un wun 'e git
dey-dey, 'e holler:--

"'_Granny!--Granny!--O Granny! Jutta cord-la!_'

"Da v'ice soun' so nice un fine da' Granny Rabbit is bin t'ink 'e B'er
Rabbit v'ice, un 'e is bin-a let da bahskit down. B'er Wolf, 'e shekky
da cord lak 'e is put some bittle in da bahskit, un dun 'e is bin-a git
in 'ese'f. B'er Wolf, 'e keep still. Da Granny Rabbit pull on da cord;
'e do say:--

"'Ki! 'e come he'ffy; 'e he'ffy fer true. Me son, 'e love 'e Granny
heap.'

"B'er Wolf, 'e do grin; 'e grin, un 'e keep still. Da Granny Rabbit
pull; 'e do pull ha'd. 'E pull tel 'e is git B'er Wolf mos' by da top,
un dun 'e stop fer res'. B'er Wolf look-a down, 'e head swim; 'e look
up, 'e mout' water; 'e look-a down 'g'in, 'e see B'er Rabbit. 'E git
skeer, 'e juk on da rope. B'er Rabbit, 'e do holler:--

"'_Granny!--Granny!--O Granny! Cutta cord-la!_'

"Da Granny Rabbit cut da cord, un B'er Wolf is fall down un broke 'e
neck."




XLI

AUNT TEMPY'S STORY


The little boy observed that Aunt Tempy was very much interested in
Daddy Jack's story. She made no remarks while the old African was
telling it, but she was busily engaged in measuring imaginary quilt
patterns on her apron with her thumb and forefinger,--a sure sign that
her interest had been aroused. When Daddy Jack had concluded--when, with
a swift, sweeping gesture of his wrinkled hand, he cut the cord and
allowed Brother Wolf to perish ignominiously--Aunt Tempy drew a long
breath, and said:--

"Dat ar tale come 'cross me des like a dream. Hit put me in mine er one
w'at I year w'en I wuz little bit er gal. Look like I kin see myse'f
right now, settin' flat down on de h'ath lis'nin' at ole Unk Monk. You
know'd ole Unk Monk, Brer Remus. You bleeze ter know'd 'im. Up dar in
Ferginny. I 'clar' ter goodness, it make me feel right foolish. Brer
Remus, I des know you know'd Unk Monk."

For the first time in many a day the little boy saw Uncle Remus in a
serious mood. He leaned forward in his chair, shook his head sadly, as
he gazed into the fire.

"Ah, Lord, Sis Tempy!" he exclaimed sorrowfully, "don't less we all go
foolin' 'roun' 'mungs' dem ole times. De bes' kinder bread gits sour.
W'at's yistiddy wid us wuz 'fo' de worl' begun wid dish yer chile. Dat's
de way I looks at it."

"Dat's de Lord's trufe, Brer Remus," exclaimed Aunt Tempy with unction,
"un I mighty glad you call me ter myse'f. Little mo' un I'd er sot right
yer un 'a' gone 'way back to Ferginny, un all on 'count er dat ar tale
w'at I year long time ago."

"What tale was that, Aunt Tempy?" asked the little boy.

"Eh-eh, honey!" replied Aunt Tempy, with a display of genuine
bashfulness; "eh-eh, honey! I 'fraid you all 'll set up dar un laugh me
outer de house. I ain't dast ter tell no tale 'long side er Brer Remus
un Daddy Jack yer. I 'fraid I git it all mix up."

The child manifested such genuine disappointment that Aunt Tempy
relented a little.

"Ef you all laugh, now," she said, with a threatening air, "I'm des
gwine ter pick up en git right out er dish yer place. Dey ain't ter be
no laughin', 'kaze de tale w'at I year in Ferginny ain't no laughin'
tale."

With this understanding Aunt Tempy adjusted her head-handkerchief,
looked around rather sheepishly, as Uncle Remus declared afterwards in
confidence to the little boy, and began:--

"Well, den, in de times w'en Brer Rabbit un Brer Fox live in de same
settlement wid one er 'n'er, de season's tuck'n come wrong. De wedder
got hot un den a long dry drouth sot in, un it seem like dat de nat'al
leaf on de trees wuz gwine ter tu'n ter powder."

Aunt Tempy emphasized her statements by little backward and forward
movements of her head, and the little boy would have laughed, but a
warning glance from Uncle Remus prevented him.

"De leaf on de trees look like dey gwine ter tu'n ter powder, un de
groun' look like it done bin cookt. All de truck w'at de creeturs plant
wuz all parched up, un dey wa'n't no crops made nowhars. Dey dunner w'at
ter do. Dey run dis a-way, dey run dat a-way; yit w'en dey quit runnin'
dey dunner whar dey bread comin' frun. Dis de way it look ter Brer Fox,
un so one day w'en he got a mighty hankerin' atter sumpin' sorter joosy,
he meet Brer Rabbit in de lane, un he ax um, sezee:--

"'Brer Rabbit, whar'bouts our bread comin' frun?'

"Brer Rabbit, he bow, he did, un answer, sezee:--

"'Look like it mought be comin' frun nowhar,' sezee."

"You see dat, honey!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, condescending to give the
story the benefit of his patronage; "You see dat! Brer Rabbit wuz allus
a-waitin' a chance fer ter crack he jokes."

"Yas, Lord!" Aunt Tempy continued, with considerable more animation; "he
joke, un joke, but bimeby, he ain't feel like no mo' jokin', un den he
up'n say, sezee, dat him un Brer Fox better start out'n take der
fammerlies wid um ter town un swap um off for some fresh-groun' meal; un
Brer Fox say, sezee, dat dat look mighty fa'r un squar', un den dey
tuck'n make dey 'greements.

"Brer Fox wuz ter s'ply de waggin un team, un he promise dat he gwine
ter ketch he fammerly un tie um hard un fast wid a red twine string.
Brer Rabbit he say, sezee, dat he gwine ter ketch he fammerly un tie um
all, un meet Brer Fox at de fork er de road.

"Sho' 'nuff, soon in de mawnin', w'en Brer Fox draw up wid he waggin, he
holler 'Wo!' un Brer Rabbit he tuck'n holler back, 'Wo yo'se'f!' un den
Brer Fox know dey 'uz all dar. Brer Fox, he tuck'n sot up on de seat, un
all er he fammerly, dey wuz a-layin' under de seat. Brer Rabbit, he
tuck'n put all he fammerly in de behime een' er de waggin, un he say,
sezee, dat he 'speck he better set back dar twel dey git sorter usen ter
dey surrounderlings, un den Brer Fox crack he whip, un off dey wen' toze
town. Brer Fox, he holler ev'y once in a w'ile, sezee:--

"'No noddin' back dar, Brer Rabbit!'

"Brer Rabbit he holler back, sezee:--

"'Brer Fox, you miss de ruts en de rocks, un I'll miss de noddin'.'

"But all dat time, bless yo' soul! Brer Rabbit wuz settin' dar ontyin'
he ole 'oman un he childun, w'ich dey wuz sev'm uv um. W'en he git um
all ontie, Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n h'ist hisse'f on de seat 'long er Brer
Fox, un dey sot dar un talk un laugh 'bout de all-sorts er times dey
gwine ter have w'en dey git de co'n meal. Brer Fox sez, sezee, he gwine
ter bake hoecake; Brer Rabbit sez, sezee, he gwine ter make ashcake.

"Des 'bout dis time one er Brer Rabbit's childun raise hisse'f up easy
un hop out de waggin. Miss Fox, she sing out:--

    "'_One frun sev'm
    Don't leave 'lev'm._'

"Brer Fox hunch he ole 'oman wid he foot fer ter make 'er keep still.
Bimeby 'n'er little Rabbit pop up un hop out. Miss Fox say, se' she:--

    "'_One frun six
    Leaves me less kicks._'

"Brer Fox go on talkin' ter Brer Rabbit, un Brer Rabbit go on talkin'
ter Brer Fox, un 't wa'n't so mighty long 'fo' all Brer Rabbit fammerly
done pop up un dive out de waggin, un ev'y time one 'ud go Miss Fox she
'ud fit it like she did de yuthers."

"What did she say, Aunt Tempy?" asked the little boy, who was interested
in the rhymes.

"Des lemme see--

    "'_One frun five
    Leaves four alive_;

    "'_One frun four
    Leaves th'ee un no mo'_;

    "'_One frun th'ee
    Leaves two ter go free_;

    "'_One frun one,
    Un all done gone_.'"

"What did Brother Rabbit do then?" inquired the little boy.

"Better ax w'at Brer Fox do," replied Aunt Tempy, pleased with the
effect of her rhymes. "Brer Fox look 'roun' atter w'ile, un w'en he see
dat all Brer Rabbit fammerly done gone, he lean back un holler 'Wo!' un
den he say, sezee:--

"'In de name er goodness, Brer Rabbit! whar all yo' folks?'

"Brer Rabbit look 'roun', un den he make like he cryin'. He des fa'rly
boo-hoo'd, un he say, sezee:--

"'Dar now, Brer Fox! I des know'd dat ef I put my po' little childuns
in dar wid yo' folks dey'd git e't up. I des know'd it!'

"Ole Miss Fox, she des vow she ain't totch Brer Rabbit fammerly. But
Brer Fox, he bin wantin' a piece un um all de way, un he begrudge um so
dat he git mighty mad wid he ole 'oman un de childuns, un he say,
sezee:--

"'You kin des make de most er dat, 'kaze I'm a-gwine ter bid you good
riddance dis ve'y day'; un, sho' nuff, Brer Fox tuck'n tuck he whole
fammerly ter town un trade um off fer co'n.

"Brer Rabbit wuz wid 'em, des ez big ez life un twice ez natchul. Dey
start back, dey did, un w'en dey git four er five mile out er town, hit
come 'cross Brer Fox min' dat he done come away un lef' a plug er
terbacker in de sto', en he say he bleeze ter go back atter it.

"Brer Rabbit, he say, sezee, dat he'll stay en take keer er de waggin,
w'ile Brer Fox kin run back un git he terbacker. Soon ez Brer Fox git
out er sight, Brer Rabbit laid de hosses under line un lash un drove de
waggin home, un put de hosses in he own stable, un de co'n in de
smoke-house, un de waggin in de barn, un den he put some co'n in he
pocket, un cut de hosses tails off, un went back up de road twel he come
ter a quog-mire, un in dat he stick de tails un wait fer Brer Fox.

"Atter w'ile yer he come, un den Brer Rabbit gun ter holler un pull at
de tails. He say, sezee:--

"'Run yer, Brer Fox! run yer! Youer des in time ef you ain't too late.
Run yer, Brer Fox! run yer!'

"Brer Fox, he run'd en juk Brer Rabbit away, un say, sezee:--

"'Git out de way, Brer Rabbit! You too little! Git out de way, un let a
man ketch holt.'

"Brer Fox tuck holt," continued Aunt Tempy, endeavoring to keep from
laughing, "un he fetch'd one big pull, un I let you know dat 'uz de
onliest pull he make, 'kaze de tails come out un he tu'n a back
summerset. He jump up, he did, en 'gun ter grabble in de quog-mire des
ez hard ez he kin.

"Brer Rabbit, he stan' by, un drop some co'n in onbeknowns' ter Brer
Fox, un dis make 'im grabble wuss un wuss, un he grabble so hard un he
grabble so long dat 't wa'n't long 'fo' he fall down dead, un so dat 'uz
de las' er ole Brer Fox in dat day un time."

As Aunt Tempy paused, Uncle Remus adjusted his spectacles and looked at
her admiringly. Then he laughed heartily.

"I declar', Sis Tempy," he said, after a while, "you gives tongue same
ez a lawyer. You'll hatter jine in wid us some mo'."

Aunt Tempy closed her eyes and dropped her head on one side.

"Don't git me started, Brer Remus," she said, after a pause; "'kaze ef
you does you'll hatter set up yer long pas' yo' bedtime."

"I b'leeve you, Sis Tempy, dat I does!" exclaimed the old man, with the
air of one who has made a pleasing discovery.




XLII

THE FIRE-TEST


"We er sorter bin a-waitin' fer Sis Tempy," Uncle Remus remarked when
the little boy made his appearance the next night; "but somehow er n'er
look lak she fear'd she hatter up en tell some mo' tales. En yit maybe
she bin strucken down wid some kinder ailment. Dey ain't no countin' on
deze yer fat folks. Dey er up one minnit en down de nex'; en w'at make
it dat a-way I be bless ef I know, 'kaze w'en folks is big en fat look
lak dey oughter be weller dan deze yer long hongry kinder folks.

"Yit all de same, Brer Jack done come," continued Uncle Remus, "en we
ull des slam de do' shet, en ef Sis Tempy come she'll des hatter hol'
'er han's 'fo' 'er face en holler out:--

    "'_Lucky de Linktum, chucky de chin,
    Open de do' en let me in!_'

"Oh, you kin laugh ef you wanter, but I boun' you ef Sis Tempy wuz ter
come dar en say de wuds w'at I say, de button on dat ar do' 'ud des
nat'ally twis' hitse'f off but w'at 't would let 'er in. Now, I boun'
you dat!"

Whatever doubts the child may have had he kept to himself, for
experience had taught him that it was useless to irritate the old man by
disputing with him. What effect the child's silence may have had in this
instance it is impossible to say, for just then Aunt Tempy came in
laughing.

"You all kin des say w'at you please," she exclaimed, as she took her
seat, "but dat ar _Shucky Cordy_ in de tale w'at Daddy Jack done tole,
bin runnin' 'roun' in my min' en zoonin 'in my years all de time."

"Yer too!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, with emphasis. "Dat's me up en down.
Look lak dat ar cricket over dar in de cornder done tuck it up, en now
he gwine, '_Shucky-cordy! Shucky-cordy!_'"

"Shuh-shuh!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, with vehement contempt, "'e _jutta
cord-la!_ 'E no 'shucky-cordy' no'n 't all."

"Well, well, Brer Jack," said Uncle Remus, soothingly, "in deze low
groun's er sorrer, you des got ter lean back en make 'lowances fer all
sorts er folks. You got ter 'low fer dem dat knows too much same ez dem
w'at knows too little. A heap er sayin's en a heap er doin's in dis
roun' worl' got ter be tuck on trus'. You got yo' sayin's, I got mine;
you got yo' knowin's, en I got mine. Man come 'long en ax me how does de
wum git in de scaly-bark.[49] I tell 'im right up en down, I dunno, sir.
N'er man come 'long en ax me who raise de row 'twix' de buzzud en de
bee-martin.[50] I tell 'im I dunno, sir. Yit, 'kaze I dunno," continued
Uncle Remus, "dat don't hender um. Dar dey is, spite er dat,--wum in de
scaly-bark, bee-martin atter de buzzud."

"Dat's so," exclaimed Aunt Tempy, "dat's de Lord's trufe!"

"Dat ar pullin' at de string," Uncle Remus went on, "en dat ar hollerin'
'bout shucky-cordy"--

"_Jutta cord-la!_" said Daddy Jack, fiercely.

"'Bout de watsizname," said Uncle Remus, with a lenient and forgiving
smile,--"all dish yer hollerin' en gwine on 'bout de watsizname put me
in min' er one time w'en Brer Rabbit wuz gwine off fum home fer ter git
a mess er green truck.

"W'en Brer Rabbit git ready fer ter go, he call all he chilluns up, en
he tell um dat w'en he go out dey mus' fas'n de do' on de inside, en dey
mus'n' tu'n nobody in, nohow, 'kaze Brer Fox en Brer Wolf bin layin'
'roun' waitin' chance fer ter nab um. En he tuck'n tole um dat w'en he
come back, he'd rap at de do' en sing:

    "'_I'll stay w'en you away,
    'Kaze no gol' will pay toll!_'

"De little Rabs, dey hilt up der ban's en promise dat dey won't open de
do' fer nobody 'ceppin' dey daddy, en wid dat, Brer Rabbit he tuck'n put
out, he did, at a han'-gallop, huntin' sump'n' n'er ter eat. But all dis
time, Brer Wolf bin hidin' out behime de house, en he year eve'y wud dat
pass, en ole Brer Rabbit wa'n't mo'n out'n sight 'fo' Brer Wolf went ter
de do', en he knock, he did,--_blip, blip, blip!_

"Little Rab holler out, 'Who dat?'

"Brer Wolf he sing:--

    "'_I'll stay w'en you away,
    'Kaze no gol' will pay toll!_'

"De little Rabs dey laugh fit ter kill deyse'f, en dey up'n 'low:--

"'Go 'way, Mr. Wolf, go 'way! You ain't none er we-all daddy!'

"Ole Brer Wolf he slunk off, he did, but eve'y time he thunk er dem
plump little Rabs, he des git mo' hongry dan befo', en 't wa'n't long
'fo' he 'uz back at de do'--_blap, blap, blap!_

"Little Rab holler: 'Who dat?'

"Brer Wolf, he up'n sing:--

    "'_I'll stay w'en you away,
    'Kaze no gol' will pay toll!_'

"De little Rabs dey laugh en roll on de flo', en dey up'n 'low:--

"'Go 'way, Mr. Wolf! We-all daddy ain't got no bad col' lak dat.'

"Brer Wolf slunk off, but bimeby he come back, en dis time he try mighty
hard fer ter talk fine. He knock at de do'--_blam, blam, blam!_

