and as a rule deficient in lodging accommodation conforming to the
English standard. Amongst such possible alternative places the
following may be named (in order of position from N.W. to S.E.) as
accessible by railway:--

VIZEU (pop. 7000; hotels, _Mabilia_, _Cadite_), on a branch of the Beira
Alta Railway 31m. from Santa Comba Dao Junction, which itself is 88m.
from Oporto.

MANGUALDE (pop. 3000), on the Beira Alta Railway, 115m. from Oporto, and
49m. from Pampilhosa Junction.

PLASENCIA (pop. 6000; hotel, _F. de Eusebio Sierra_), 6m. N. of the
station of that name on the Lisbon and Madrid Railway.

NAVALMORAL (pop. 3300, buffet), a station on the Lisbon and Madrid
Railway about 8m. W. of the central line of eclipse.

URDA, a small station on the Madrid and Ciudad Real Railway, crossed by
the central line. The nearest accommodation would seem to be at Ciudad
Real (pop. 14,000; hotel, _Baltasar Garcia_), 33m. to the S.

ALCAZAR DE SAN JUAN Junction (pop. 8400; good buffet; hotel, _Casa
Briseno_). Alcazar is 92m. S. of Madrid; the central line crosses the
railway about 15m. to the S. of the town.

TOBARRA (pop. 7500), a station on the Chinchilla and Cartagena Railway,
212m. S. of Madrid, and 115m. N. of Cartagena, lies about 6m. S. of the
central line.

NOVELDA (pop. 8000), a station on the Alicante and Madrid Railway, in a
beautiful valley about 20m. N. of Alicante.

In addition to the above places it must not be forgotten that both
Oporto at one end of the zone of totality and Alicante at the other are
within the track of the shadow, but the question of the meteorological
conditions of the atmosphere at these places (on the seaboard as they
virtually are) has to be considered.

A traveller from England to Portugal or Spain by sea has the following
choice of routes:--

1. _Southampton to Oporto_, fortnightly, on Fridays, by the steamers of
the "Royal Mail Steam Packet Co." Fare, first-class return, about L11.
Time, about 54h. The return tickets are conveniently grouped in various
ways, _e.g._ Southampton to Oporto, and back from Vigo or Lisbon; or
Southampton to Lisbon and back, or back from Vigo (_but not back from
Oporto_). Where the booking is to Vigo, or Lisbon, of course the local
railway fares have to be paid in addition. Lisbon is 209m. S. of Oporto;
Vigo, 110m. N. of Oporto. One objection to making any use of Vigo is the
extra Custom-house formalities which have to be gone through on the
frontier, and Spanish Custom-house officials are specially
objectionable.

2. _Liverpool_ to _Corunna_, _Carril_, _Vigo_ and _Oporto_, fortnightly,
on Thursdays, by the steamers of the "Pacific Steam Navigation Co."
Fares, to the Spanish ports, first-class single, L6, 10s., return, L9,
15s.; second-class single, L4. To the Portuguese ports, first-class
single, L8, return, L12; second-class single, L5. Time, about 4 to 5
days. This does not mean that the steamers are very slow, but they call
also at La Rochelle, in France.

3. _London_ (Irongate Wharf) to _Oporto_, at intervals of 3 weeks, on
Thursdays, by the steamers of the "General Steam Navigation Co." Fares,
first-class single, L4 (no return tickets issued; no second-class). The
steamers of this line are inferior to all the others.

4. _London_ (Tilbury) to _Gibraltar_, weekly, on Thursdays, by the
"P. & O." steamers. Fares, first-class single, L10, return, L16. Time, 4
to 5 days.

5. _London_ (Tilbury) and _Plymouth_ to _Gibraltar_, fortnightly, on
Fridays, by the steamers of the "Orient Co." Fares and time the same as
the "P. & O."

Travellers journeying to Oporto from England will probably not attempt
to do any more local sight-seeing than what can be readily accomplished
by simple railway trips in Portugal to or from Lisbon; but travellers
landing at Gibraltar will have it within their power to visit some of
the important towns of Southern Spain, such as Granada, Seville,
Cordova, Toledo, Cadiz, Malaga, &c.

An Eclipse excursionist who finds himself at Gibraltar, and who wishes
to avoid as much as possible land travelling in Spain by going on to
Alicante and stationing himself in that neighbourhood, must take
shipping locally at Gibraltar. There are Spanish steamer services from
Gibraltar, and Malaga, to Alicante.

An overland traveller to Spain (it is presumed that none such will go as
far as Portugal) has the choice of two routes to eclipse stations in
Spain, both starting from Paris:--(1) _via_ Bordeaux, Hendaye, Vittoria,
Burgos and Medina del Campo, to Madrid, and thence either W. to Talavera
(84m. from Madrid), or S. towards Alcazar de San Juan (92m. from
Madrid); (2) _via_ Lyons, Perpignan, Barcelona and Valencia to Alicante.
The character of the train service on the second of these routes is
almost prohibitive, so that it is almost a question of _via_ Madrid or
not at all.

The foregoing paragraphs will furnish the reader with an outline of the
whole problem of how to reach from England a suitable eclipse station in
the Peninsula. This outline will pave the way for further details as to
land journeys, which will be exhibited somewhat in the order of relative
complexity and expense, beginning with the simplest.


                            VIGO TO OPORTO.

Chief stations and distances from Vigo:--Redondela (8m.), Guillarey
Junct. (24m.), Tuy (26m.), Vianna (57m.), Famalicao Junct. (88m.),
Oporto (108m.).

VIGO (pop. 17,000; hotel, _Continental_) is an important commercial
centre with fine scenery all round. REDONDELA is one of the prettiest
towns in Spain, especially as viewed from the railway viaducts. At
GUILLAREY carriages may have to be changed for TUY, the last station in
Spain and a Custom-house. There is a fine cathedral at Tuy. The boundary
is formed by the river Minho, spanned by a magnificent bridge 400 yards
long, railway above and carriage road underneath. Crossing it the train
enters the Portuguese town of VALENCA, where there is a strong fortress
and a custom-house. VIANNA (pop. 7000; hotel, _Central_). The river Lima
is here spanned by a double bridge (rail and road) 700 ft. long. From
FAMALICAO there is a loop line to Oporto running round the coast and
15m. longer than the main line. ERMEZINDE is the junction with the
Spanish line to Barca d'Alva, Salamanca and France.


                      OPORTO TO OVAR AND LISBON.

From Oporto to Lisbon by the direct line it is 211m. Fares--first,
single, L1, 11s.; second, single, L1, 3s. But forwards from Pampilhosa
(66m.) there is a loop line to Lisbon, running along the coast, and 25m.
longer than the direct line. If it is proposed to visit some of the
sights which will be mentioned presently, the coast line must be taken.

Chief stations between Oporto and Lisbon by the coast line:--Ovar (23m.),
Pampilhosa Junct. (66m.), Figueira da Foz (92m.), Leiria (132m.), Torres
Vedras (192m.), Lisbon, Rocio station, (236m.).

OPORTO (pop. 120,000; hotels, _Grande Hotel do Porto_, _Hotel de Paris_)
is a busy commercial city with much English colouring; _e.g._ church,
hospital, doctor, club, and full modern facilities for locomotion by
tramways, cabs and excursion carriages. The chief sights are:--(1)
Cathedral, (2) Bishop's Palace, (3) Church of St. Francisco, (4) Palacio
da Bolsa, (5) Museu Portuense, (6) Museu Industrial, (7) Crystal Palace
and Gardens, (8) Bridge of Don Luiz I., and (9) Convent immortalised by
Wellington in 1809 when he made his celebrated "Passage of the Douro."
The port for Oporto where the steamers from England load and discharge
is Leixoes, about 4m. to the W., with a service of trains and trams into
the city.

OVAR.--This town being the nearest eclipse centre to England may be
expected to draw many travellers in 1900. Being only 22m. or 11/2 hours
from Oporto, a day trip may be made thither from Oporto, and this will
suit the convenience of those who prefer for lodgings a large city to a
small provincial town. A train from Oporto at 7 a.m. returning at 7.45
p.m. will suffice for the requirements of all who will go armed only
with small instruments.

PAMPILHOSA JUNCTION (Good Hotel).--Within 10m. to the N.-E. of this
station is the first of the special sights which can be seen in
connection with the Oporto-Lisbon railway. Take the train from
Pampilhosa to Luzo (6m.), omnibus thence (1/2 hour) to Busaco (Good
Hotel), and see the battlefield, the site of one of Wellington's least
successful victories. The panoramic views in all directions are superb.
The famous convent is now a Government School of Forestry. After seeing
Busaco progress may be made to FIGUEIRA DA FOZ (38m. from Luzo--Good
Hotel), where the tourist may pass the night, unless he prefers to stay
at Pampilhosa. Figueira is a seaside bathing-place of repute on a branch
line.

LEIRIA (pop. 3000, _Novo Hotel_).--Stay here two nights in order to have
the whole of the intervening day available for a circular tour by road
to the Dominican Monastery at Batalha (7m.), and to the Cistercian
Monastery at Alcobaca (13m. from Batalha, and also 13m. from Leiria).
The Batalha Monastery (built 1388-1515) is by common consent the finest
piece of architecture in Portugal. The Alcobaca Monastery, the largest
in the world, is of earlier date (1148-1222). The ch., 360 ft. long, is
the most interesting example of early Christian art in Portugal, whilst
the cloisters are reputed to be amongst the finest in Europe.
Refreshments must be taken by the traveller, for none can be procured
during the drive. Vallado is really the nearest station to Alcobaca
(3m.), but there is no sleeping accommodation there.

LISBON (pop. 250,000; hotels--_Braganza_, _Avenida_, and some adjoining
the railway station) owing to its great length from E. to W., and narrow
breadth from N. to S., is a less easy city to find one's way in than
many other cities. This difficulty is aggravated by the want of leading
thoroughfares and an efficient system of street naming and numbering.
The sights are the usual ones of every large Continental city, such as
churches, museums, and picture galleries; _e.g._ the Church of San
Roque, the Church of San Vincente with its remarkable Royal Mortuary
Chapel, the church and convent at Belem, and the gardens of the Escola
Polytechnica. But a day should certainly be set apart for a trip to
Cintra (17m. by rail, trains about every hour). The town (pop. 5000,
hotel--_Lawrence's_) is 1800 ft. above the sea. See the Royal or Moorish
Palace in the town, the beautiful Pena Palace and grounds, and the
gardens of Sir F. Cook at _Villa Montserrate_ (3m). These last are open
daily to visitors who write their names at the entrance lodge. About 15
miles from Cintra is Mafra, with a palace, convent, and church of
wonderful magnificence. An Eclipse excursionist planning a time-table
for sight-seeing between Oporto and Lisbon inclusive, and with the
intention of returning to England from Lisbon, must remember that the
Royal Mail Company's boats only sail fortnightly (on Tuesdays or
Wednesdays) from Lisbon. The boats anchor in the river, and are reached
by a steam tender.


                           OPORTO TO PARIS.

This route for getting from or to possible eclipse stations in Northern
Spain or Portugal is set out on the supposition that a certain number of
Eclipse excursionists may wish to combine the Paris Exhibition with the
eclipse. There is an International Express from Oporto (and Lisbon)
every Tuesday and Friday, which does the journey to Paris in 40 hours,
but no one travelling for pleasure would use this train, especially as
much of the best scenery is traversed by night.

The journey should therefore be performed in sections, which may be made
up as follows:--

                                         Miles.
Oporto to Salamanca _via_ Pampilhosa        269
Salamanca to Burgos                         150
Burgos to Biarritz                          186
Biarritz to Paris                           493

Use should be made as far as possible of the International Express.
Where this is not done, and ordinary trains have to be taken, the delays
are interminable and the combinations most exasperating to an
Englishman. The hotel accommodation in all the smaller towns of Spain is
so universally bad that it is not easy to suggest what otherwise would
seem obvious, namely, how best to subdivide, at any rate, the first
three of the above sections.

The International Express has a connection with Lisbon, the main train
being made up or divided as the case may be at Pampilhosa Junction.


                    LISBON TO TALAVERA AND MADRID.

Observers who think they will be able to do better as regards a clear
sky inland in Spain than near either the coast of Portugal or that of
Spain will still find in many cases that Lisbon is their most convenient
port for landing.

The chief stations on this route are:--Entroncamento Junction (67m.),
Marvao (149m.), Valencia de Alcantara (159m.), *Plasencia (256m.),
*Navalmoral (287m.), *Talavera de la Reina (328m.), Madrid, Delicias
Stat. (412m.). The places marked (*) are all within the shadow track of
the eclipse.

ENTRONCAMENTO (Good Buffet) is the junction station for the lines N. to
Oporto and S.-E. to Badajos and most trains wait here: 8m. beyond, the
Tagus is crossed by a fine bridge commanding good views.

MARVAO (Custom-house) is the last station in Portugal but the actual
frontier is 6m. further on. VALENCIA DE ALCANTARA (Custom-house) is the
first station in Spain. During the next 50m. the railway passes through
much wild mountain scenery.

PLASENCIA, NAVALMORAL, and TALAVERA as eclipse stations have been
mentioned on a previous page. Many celebrated struggles during the
Peninsular War took place in this part of Spain, notably at Talavera in
1809 and at Almaraz in 1812.

MADRID (pop. 470,000; _Hotel de Paris_, _Hotel de la Paix_).


GIBRALTAR TO MADRID (WITH EXCURSIONS, ON THE WAY, TO GRANADA AND
SEVILLE).

From Algeciras (opposite Gibraltar) there runs every Wednesday an
International Express train to Madrid and Paris. The eclipse central
line crosses this route about 15m. S. of Alcazar de San Juan Junction
(pop. 8400; Good Buffet, Hotel, _Casa Briseno_) which is 368m. N. of
Algeciras and 93m. S. of Madrid.

The chief stations between Algeciras and Madrid are:--Bobadilla Junct.
(110m.), Cordova (185m.), Alcazar de San Juan (369m.), Aranjuez (430m.),
and Madrid (461m.).

Bobadilla is a double junction. A line runs thence E. to Granada
(75m.), and W. to Seville (104m.). A traveller visiting Granada must
return to Bobadilla to get to Seville, but from Seville he can rejoin
the main line at Cordova 75m. N. of Bobadilla, and avoid Bobadilla. From
Seville to Cordova is 81m.

Algeciras is reached from Gibraltar by a local steamer. About one hour
is allowed to make the connection with the train. Eclipse travellers
going to this part of Spain who wish to take advantage of their
proximity to Granada and Seville will find the following time-table
usefully suggestive:--

May 16, W.    Gibraltar to Granada, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
 "  17, T.    At Granada.
 "  18, F.    At Granada.
 "  19, S.    Granada to Seville, 7 a.m. to 6 p.m.
 "  20, Sun.  At Seville.
 "  21, M.    At Seville.
 "  22, Tu.   Seville to Cordova, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
 "  23, W.    At Cordova.
 "  24, T.    Cordova to Alcazar, 2 a.m. to 3 p.m.
 "  25, F.    At Alcazar.
 "  26, S.    At Alcazar.
 "  27, Sun.  At Alcazar.
 "  28, M.    Eclipse day.

Corresponding to the above International train there is an express from
Paris on Mondays reaching Algeciras on Wednesdays. This, of course,
might suit the convenience of Eclipse travellers proposing to go to
Spain _via_ France, and perhaps return _via_ Gibraltar. The time
occupied by the International train between Paris and Algeciras and
_vice versa_ is about 49 hours.


                          LONDON TO ALICANTE.

The central line of the eclipse quits Spain at Cape Santa Pola about
10m. S. of Alicante (pop. 40,000): it crosses the line of the Alicante
and Madrid railway at Novelda (pop. 8000) a station about 20m. inland
from Alicante.

Alicante may be reached from England as follows:--(1) All sea, _via_
Gibraltar and Malaga; (2) all land, _via_ Paris, Biarritz and Madrid
(1077m.), or Paris, Lyons and Perpignan (1126m.); or (3) part land and
part sea, _via_ Paris and Marseilles, and thence by steamer to Barcelona
and Valencia.

As regards the two land routes there is not very much to choose except
that the Biarritz-Madrid route is somewhat shorter and much quicker than
the Perpignan-Barcelona route. As regards the two sea routes both are
probably bad from the standpoint of comfort, the steamers in which the
voyage would have to be completed being Spanish coasting vessels, but it
is difficult to obtain particulars of them in England.

The following are some of the chief places between Paris and Alicante on
the Perpignan route:--Dijon (195m.), Lyons (318m.), Avignon (461m.),
Nimes (490m.), Perpignan (623m.), Spanish frontier at Port Bou (650m.),
Barcelona (758m.), Tarragona (825m.), Valencia (997m.), Alicante
(1126m.). The journey from Paris to Barcelona is accomplished in 23h. by
the International Express: the remaining 368 miles take 27 hours owing
to the bad connections of the trains.

Madrid is 285m. from Alicante, the journey occupying about 29h.


                 USEFUL BOOKS FOR PORTUGAL AND SPAIN.

As the result of much inquiry and research, the following may be
suggested:--


                             GUIDE-BOOKS.

_Handbook for Spain_, 2 vols. 20_s._ (J. Murray.)

_Handbook to Spain and Portugal_, Dr. Charnock. 7_s._ 6_d._ (W. J.
Adams.)

_Guide to Spain and Portugal_, O'Shea and Lomas. 15_s._ (A. & C. Black.)

_Handbook for Portugal._ 12_s._ (J. Murray.)


                             DICTIONARIES.

JAeSCHKE, R. _English-Spanish Conversation Dictionary._ 3_s._ 6_d._
(Nutt.)

CASTRO DE LA FAYETTE. _Novo Diccionario Inglez-Portugueze._ 2 vols.
6_s._


                      GRAMMARS AND PHRASE BOOKS.

D'ORSEY, Rev. A. J. D. _Colloquial Portuguese._ 3_s._ 6_d._ (Kegan
