us. He loves Fiordelisa so much that he will not be easily pacified. I
feel sure he will defy us!' Meanwhile the King was waiting in a splendid
room with diamond walls, so clear that he could see the Fairy and
Turritella as they stood whispering together, and he was very much
puzzled.

'Who can have betrayed us?' he said to himself. 'How comes our enemy
here? She must be plotting to prevent our marriage. Why doesn't my
lovely Fiordelisa make haste and come hack to me?'

But it was worse than anything he had imagined when the Fairy Mazilla
entered, leading Turritella by the hand, and said to him--

'King Charming, here is the Princess Turritella to whom you have
plighted your faith. Let us have the wedding at once.'

'I!' cried the King. 'I marry that little creature! What do you take me
for? I have promised her nothing!'

'Say no more. Have you no respect for a Fairy?' cried she angrily.

'Yes, madam,' answered the King, 'I am prepared to respect you as much
as a Fairy can be respected, if you will give me back my Princess.'

'Am I not here?' interrupted Turritella. 'Here is the ring you gave me.
With whom did you talk at the little window, if it was not with me?'

'What!' cried the King angrily, 'have I been altogether deceived and
deluded? Where is my chariot? Not another moment will I stay here.'

'Oho,' said the Fairy, 'not so fast.' And she touched his feet, which
instantly became as firmly fixed to the floor as if they had been nailed
there.

'Oh! do whatever you like with me,' said the King; 'you may turn me to
stone, but I will marry no one but Fiordelisa.'

And not another word would he say, though the Fairy scolded and
threatened, and Turritella wept and raged for twenty days and twenty
nights. At last the Fairy Mazilla said furiously (for she was quite
tired out by his obstinacy), 'Choose whether you will marry my
goddaughter, or do penance seven years for breaking your word to her.'

And then the King cried gaily: 'Pray do whatever you like with me, as
long as you deliver me from this ugly scold!'

'Scold!' cried Turritella angrily. 'Who are you, I should like to know,
that you dare to call me a scold? A miserable King who breaks his word,
and goes about in a chariot drawn by croaking frogs out of a marsh!'

'Let us have no more of these insults,' cried the Fairy. 'Fly from that
window, ungrateful King, and for seven years be a Blue Bird.' As she
spoke the King's face altered, his arms turned to wings, his feet to
little crooked black claws. In a moment he had a slender body like a
bird, covered with shining blue feathers, his beak was like ivory, his
eyes were bright as stars, and a crown of white feathers adorned his
head.

As soon as the transformation was complete the King uttered a dolorous
cry and fled through the open window, pursued by the mocking laughter
of Turritella and the Fairy Mazilla. He flew on until he reached the
thickest part of the wood, and there, perched upon a cypress tree, he
bewailed his miserable fate. 'Alas! in seven years who knows what may
happen to my darling Fiordelisa!' he said. 'Her cruel stepmother may
have married her to someone else before I am myself again, and then what
good will life be to me?'

In the meantime the Fairy Mazilla had sent Turritella back to the Queen,
who was all anxiety to know how the wedding, had gone off. But when her
daughter arrived and told her all that had happened she was terribly
angry, and of course all her wrath fell upon Fiordelisa. 'She shall have
cause to repent that the King admires her,' said the Queen, nodding her
head meaningly, and then she and Turritella went up to the little room
in the tower where the Princess was imprisoned. Fiordelisa was immensely
surprised to see that Turritella was wearing a royal mantle and a
diamond crown, and her heart sank when the Queen said: 'My daughter
is come to show you some of her wedding presents, for she is King
Charming's bride, and they are the happiest pair in the world, he loves
her to distraction.' All this time Turritella was spreading out lace,
and jewels, and rich brocades, and ribbons before Fiordelisa's unwilling
eyes, and taking good care to display King Charming's ring, which she
wore upon her thumb. The Princess recognised it as soon as her eyes fell
upon it, and after that she could no longer doubt that he had indeed
married Turritella. In despair she cried, 'Take away these miserable
gauds! what pleasure has a wretched captive in the sight of them?' and
then she fell insensible upon the floor, and the cruel Queen laughed
maliciously, and went away with Turritella, leaving her there without
comfort or aid. That night the Queen said to the King, that his daughter
was so infatuated with King Charming, in spite of his never having shown
any preference for her, that it was just as well she should stay in the
tower until she came to her senses. To which he answered that it was her
affair, and she could give what orders she pleased about the Princess.

When the unhappy Fiordelisa recovered, and remembered all she had just
heard, she began to cry bitterly, believing that King Charming was lost
to her for ever, and all night long she sat at her open window sighing
and lamenting; but when it was dawn she crept away into the darkest
corner of her little room and sat there, too unhappy to care about
anything. As soon as night came again she once more leaned out into the
darkness and bewailed her miserable lot.

Now it happened that King Charming, or rather the Blue Bird, had been
flying round the palace in the hope of seeing his beloved Princess,
but had not dared to go too near the windows for fear of being seen
and recognised by Turritella. When night fell he had not succeeded in
discovering where Fiordelisa was imprisoned, and, weary and sad, he
perched upon a branch of a tall fir tree which grew close to the tower,
and began to sing himself to sleep. But soon the sound of a soft voice
lamenting attracted his attention, and listening intently he heard it
say--

'Ah! cruel Queen! what have I ever done to be imprisoned like this? And
was I not unhappy enough before, that you must needs come and taunt me
with the happiness your daughter is enjoying now she is King Charming's
bride?'

The Blue Bird, greatly surprised, waited impatiently for the dawn, and
the moment it was light flew off to see who it could have been who
spoke thus. But he found the window shut, and could see no one. The next
night, however, he was on the watch, and by the clear moonlight he saw
that the sorrowful lady at the window was Fiordelisa herself.

'My Princess! have I found you at last?' said he, alighting close to
her.

'Who is speaking to me?' cried the Princess in great surprise.

'Only a moment since you mentioned my name, and now you do not know me,
Fiordelisa,' said he sadly. 'But no wonder, since I am nothing but a
Blue Bird, and must remain one for seven years.'

'What! Little Blue Bird, are you really the powerful King Charming?'
said the Princess, caressing him.

'It is too true,' he answered. 'For being faithful to you I am thus
punished. But believe me, if it were for twice as long I would bear it
joyfully rather than give you up.'

'Oh! what are you telling me?' cried the Princess. 'Has not your bride,
Turritella, just visited me, wearing the royal mantle and the diamond
crown you gave her? I cannot be mistaken, for I saw your ring upon her
thumb.'

Then the Blue Bird was furiously angry, and told the Princess all that
had happened, how he had been deceived into carrying off Turritella, and
how, for refusing to marry her, the Fairy Mazilla had condemned him to
be a Blue Bird for seven years.

The Princess was very happy when she heard how faithful her lover
was, and would never have tired of hearing his loving speeches and
explanations, but too soon the sun rose, and they had to part lest the
Blue Bird should be discovered. After promising to come again to the
Princess's window as soon as it was dark, he flew away, and hid himself
in a little hole in the fir-tree, while Fiordelisa remained devoured by
anxiety lest he should be caught in a trap, or eaten up by an eagle.

But the Blue Bird did not long stay in his hiding-place. He flew away,
and away, until he came to his own palace, and got into it through a
broken window, and there he found the cabinet where his jewels were
kept, and chose out a splendid diamond ring as a present for the
Princess. By the time he got back, Fiordelisa was sitting waiting for
him by the open window, and when he gave her the ring, she scolded him
gently for having run such a risk to get it for her.

'Promise me that you will wear it always!' said the Blue Bird. And the
Princess promised on condition that he should come and see her in
the day as well as by night. They talked all night long, and the next
morning the Blue Bird flew off to his kingdom, and crept into his palace
through the broken window, and chose from his treasures two bracelets,
each cut out of a single emerald. When he presented them to the
Princess, she shook her head at him reproachfully, saying--

'Do you think I love you so little that I need all these gifts to remind
me of you?'

And he answered--

'No, my Princess; but I love you so much that I feel I cannot express
it, try as I may. I only bring you these worthless trifles to show that
I have not ceased to think of you, though I have been obliged to leave
you for a time.' The following night he gave Fiordelisa a watch set in a
single pearl. The Princess laughed a little when she saw it, and said--

'You may well give me a watch, for since I have known you I have lost
the power of measuring time. The hours you spend with me pass like
minutes, and the hours that I drag through without you seem years to
me.'

'Ah, Princess, they cannot seem so long to you as they do to me!'
he answered. Day by day he brought more beautiful things for the
Princess--diamonds, and rubies, and opals; and at night she decked
herself with them to please him, but by day she hid them in her straw
mattress. When the sun shone the Blue Bird, hidden in the tall fir-tree,
sang to her so sweetly that all the passersby wondered, and said that
the wood was inhabited by a spirit. And so two years slipped away, and
still the Princess was a prisoner, and Turritella was not married. The
Queen had offered her hand to all the neighbouring Princes, but they
always answered that they would marry Fiordelisa with pleasure, but
not Turritella on any account. This displeased the Queen terribly.
'Fiordelisa must be in league with them, to annoy me!' she said. 'Let us
go and accuse her of it.'

So she and Turritella went up into the tower. Now it happened that it
was nearly midnight, and Fiordelisa, all decked with jewels, was sitting
at the window with the Blue Bird, and as the Queen paused outside the
door to listen she heard the Princess and her lover singing together a
little song he had just taught her. These were the words:--

     'Oh! what a luckless pair are we,
     One in a prison, and one in a tree.
     All our trouble and anguish came
     From our faithfulness spoiling our enemies' game.
     But vainly they practice their cruel arts,
     For nought can sever our two fond hearts.'

They sound melancholy perhaps, but the two voices sang them gaily
enough, and the Queen burst open the door, crying, 'Ah! my Turritella,
there is some treachery going on here!'

As soon as she saw her, Fiordelisa, with great presence of mind, hastily
shut her little window, that the Blue Bird might have time to escape,
and then turned to meet the Queen, who overwhelmed her with a torrent of
reproaches.

'Your intrigues are discovered, Madam,' she said furiously; 'and you
need not hope that your high rank will save you from the punishment you
deserve.'

'And with whom do you accuse me of intriguing, Madam?' said the
Princess. 'Have I not been your prisoner these two years, and who have I
seen except the gaolers sent by you?'

While she spoke the Queen and Turritella were looking at her in the
greatest surprise, perfectly dazzled by her beauty and the splendour of
her jewels, and the Queen said:

'If one may ask, Madam, where did you get all these diamonds? Perhaps
you mean to tell me that you have discovered a mine of them in the
tower!'

'I certainly did find them here,' answered the Princess.

'And pray,' said the Queen, her wrath increasing every moment, 'for
whose admiration are you decked out like this, since I have often seen
you not half as fine on the most important occasions at Court?'

'For my own,' answered Fiordelisa. 'You must admit that I have had
plenty of time on my hands, so you cannot be surprised at my spending
some of it in making myself smart.'

'That's all very fine,' said the Queen suspiciously. 'I think I will
look about, and see for myself.'

So she and Turritella began to search every corner of the little room,
and when they came to the straw mattress out fell such a quantity of
pearls, diamonds, rubies, opals, emeralds, and sapphires, that they were
amazed, and could not tell what to think. But the Queen resolved to hide
somewhere a packet of false letters to prove that the Princess had been
conspiring with the King's enemies, and she chose the chimney as a good
place. Fortunately for Fiordelisa this was exactly where the Blue Bird
had perched himself, to keep an eye upon her proceedings, and try to
avert danger from his beloved Princess, and now he cried:

'Beware, Fiordelisa! Your false enemy is plotting against you.'

This strange voice so frightened the Queen that she took the letter and
went away hastily with Turritella, and they held a council to try and
devise some means of finding out what Fairy or Enchanter was favouring
the Princess. At last they sent one of the Queen's maids to wait upon
Fiordelisa, and told her to pretend to be quite stupid, and to see and
hear nothing, while she was really to watch the Princess day and night,
and keep the Queen informed of all her doings.

Poor Fiordelisa, who guessed she was sent as a spy, was in despair, and
cried bitterly that she dared not see her dear Blue Bird for fear that
some evil might happen to him if he were discovered.

The days were so long, and the nights so dull, but for a whole month she
never went near her little window lest he should fly to her as he used
to do.

However, at last the spy, who had never taken her eyes off the Princess
day or night, was so overcome with weariness that she fell into a deep
sleep, and as son as the Princess saw that, she flew to open her window
and cried softly:

     'Blue Bird, blue as the sky,
     Fly to me now, there's nobody by.'

And the Blue Bird, who had never ceased to flutter round within sight
and hearing of her prison, came in an instant. They had so much to say,
and were so overjoyed to meet once more, that it scarcely seemed to them
five minutes before the sun rose, and the Blue Bird had to fly away.

But the next night the spy slept as soundly as before, so that the Blue
Bird came, and he and the Princess began to think they were perfectly
safe, and to make all sorts of plans for being happy as they were before
the Queen's visit. But, alas! the third night the spy was not quite so
sleepy, and when the Princess opened her window and cried as usual:

     'Blue Bird, blue as the sky,
     Fly to me now, there's nobody nigh,'

she was wide awake in a moment, though she was sly enough to keep
her eyes shut at first. But presently she heard voices, and peeping
cautiously, she saw by the moonlight the most lovely blue bird in the
world, who was talking to the Princess, while she stroked and caressed
it fondly.

The spy did not lose a single word of the conversation, and as soon as
the day dawned, and the Blue Bird had reluctantly said good-bye to the
Princess, she rushed off to the Queen, and told her all she had seen and
heard.

Then the Queen sent for Turritella, and they talked it over, and very
soon came to the conclusion than this Blue Bird was no other than King
Charming himself.

'Ah! that insolent Princess!' cried the Queen. 'To think that when
we supposed her to be so miserable, she was all the while as happy as
possible with that false King. But I know how we can avenge ourselves!'

So the spy was ordered to go back and pretend to sleep as soundly as
ever, and indeed she went to bed earlier than usual, and snored as
naturally as possible, and the poor Princess ran to the window and
cried:

     'Blue Bird, blue as the sky,
     Fly to me now, there's nobody by!'

But no bird came. All night long she called, and waited, and listened,
but still there was no answer, for the cruel Queen had caused the
fir tree to be hung all over with knives, swords, razors, shears,
bill-hooks, and sickles, so that when the Blue Bird heard the Princess
call, and flew towards her, his wings were cut, and his little black
feet clipped off, and all pierced and stabbed in twenty places, he fell
back bleeding into his hiding place in the tree, and lay there groaning
and despairing, for he thought the Princess must have been persuaded to
betray him, to regain her liberty.

'Ah! Fiordelisa, can you indeed be so lovely and so faithless?' he
sighed, 'then I may as well die at once!' And he turned over on his side
and began to die. But it happened that his friend the Enchanter had been
very much alarmed at seeing the Frog chariot come back to him without
King Charming, and had been round the world eight times seeking him,
but without success. At the very moment when the King gave himself up
to despair, he was passing through the wood for the eighth time, and
called, as he had done all over the world:

'Charming! King Charming! Are you here?'

The King at once recognised his friend's voice, and answered very
faintly:

'I am here.'

The Enchanter looked all round him, but could see nothing, and then the
King said again:

'I am a Blue Bird.'

Then the Enchanter found him in an instant, and seeing his pitiable
condition, ran hither and thither without a word, until he had collected
a handful of magic herbs, with which, and a few incantations, he
speedily made the King whole and sound again.

'Now,' said he, 'let me hear all about it. There must be a Princess at
the bottom of this.'

'There are two!' answered King Charming, with a wry smile.

And then he told the whole story, accusing Fiordelisa of having betrayed
the secret of his visits to make her peace with the Queen, and indeed
saying a great many hard things about her fickleness and her deceitful
beauty, and so on. The Enchanter quite agreed with him, and even went
further, declaring that all Princesses were alike, except perhaps in
the matter of beauty, and advised him to have done with Fiordelisa, and
forget all about her. But, somehow or other, this advice did not quite
please the King.

'What is to be done next?' said the Enchanter, 'since you still have
five years to remain a Blue Bird.'

'Take me to your palace,' answered the King; 'there you can at least
keep me in a cage safe from cats and swords.'

'Well, that will be the best thing to do for the present,' said his
friend. 'But I am not an Enchanter for nothing. I'm sure to have a
brilliant idea for you before long.'

In the meantime Fiordelisa, quite in despair, sat at her window day and
night calling her dear Blue Bird in vain, and imagining over and over
again all the terrible things that could have happened to him, until
she grew quite pale and thin. As for the Queen and Turritella, they
were triumphant; but their triumph was short, for the King, Fiordelisa's
father, fell ill and died, and all the people rebelled against the Queen
and Turritella, and came in a body to the palace demanding Fiordelisa.

The Queen came out upon the balcony with threats and haughty words, so
that at last they lost their patience, and broke open the doors of the
palace, one of which fell back upon the Queen and killed her. Turritella
fled to the Fairy Mazilla, and all the nobles of the kingdom fetched the
Princess Fiordelisa from her prison in the tower, and made her Queen.
Very soon, with all the care and attention they bestowed upon her,
she recovered from the effects of her long captivity and looked more
beautiful than ever, and was able to take counsel with her courtiers,
and arrange for the governing of her kingdom during her absence. And
then, taking a bagful of jewels, she set out all alone to look for the
Blue Bird, without telling anyone where she was going.

Meanwhile, the Enchanter was taking care of King Charming, but as his
power was not great enough to counteract the Fairy Mazilla's, he at last
resolved to go and see if he could make any kind of terms with her for
his friend; for you see, Fairies and Enchanters are cousins in a sort
of way, after all; and after knowing one another for five or six
hundred years and falling out, and making it up again pretty often, they
understand one another well enough. So the Fairy Mazilla received him
