feed. Your father is in a good club, I know, but that won't keep the
horses, and they'll be eating their heads off all this time; I'll come
at noon and hear what she says," and without waiting for Harry's thanks
he was gone.

At noon I think he went and saw Polly, for he and Harry came to the
stable together, harnessed Hotspur, and took him out.

For a week or more he came for Hotspur, and when Harry thanked him or
said anything about his kindness, he laughed it off, saying it was all
good luck for him, for his horses were wanting a little rest which they
would not otherwise have had.

Jerry grew better steadily, but the doctor said that he must never go
back to the cab work again if he wished to be an old man. The children
had many consultations together about what father and mother would do,
and how they could help to earn money.

One afternoon Hotspur was brought in very wet and dirty.

"The streets are nothing but slush," said the governor; "it will give
you a good warming, my boy, to get him clean and dry."

"All right, governor," said Harry, "I shall not leave him till he is;
you know I have been trained by my father."

"I wish all the boys had been trained like you," said the governor.

While Harry was sponging off the mud from Hotspur's body and legs Dolly
came in, looking very full of something.

"Who lives at Fairstowe, Harry? Mother has got a letter from Fairstowe;
she seemed so glad, and ran upstairs to father with it."

"Don't you know? Why, it is the name of Mrs. Fowler's place--mother's
old mistress, you know--the lady that father met last summer, who sent
you and me five shillings each."

"Oh! Mrs. Fowler. Of course, I know all about her. I wonder what she is
writing to mother about."

"Mother wrote to her last week," said Harry; "you know she told father
if ever he gave up the cab work she would like to know. I wonder what
she says; run in and see, Dolly."

Harry scrubbed away at Hotspur with a huish! huish! like any old
hostler. In a few minutes Dolly came dancing into the stable.

"Oh! Harry, there never was anything so beautiful; Mrs. Fowler says we
are all to go and live near her. There is a cottage now empty that
will just suit us, with a garden and a henhouse, and apple-trees, and
everything! and her coachman is going away in the spring, and then she
will want father in his place; and there are good families round, where
you can get a place in the garden or the stable, or as a page-boy;
and there's a good school for me; and mother is laughing and crying by
turns, and father does look so happy!"

"That's uncommon jolly," said Harry, "and just the right thing, I should
say; it will suit father and mother both; but I don't intend to be a
page-boy with tight clothes and rows of buttons. I'll be a groom or a
gardener."

It was quickly settled that as soon as Jerry was well enough they should
remove to the country, and that the cab and horses should be sold as
soon as possible.

This was heavy news for me, for I was not young now, and could not look
for any improvement in my condition. Since I left Birtwick I had never
been so happy as with my dear master Jerry; but three years of cab work,
even under the best conditions, will tell on one's strength, and I felt
that I was not the horse that I had been.

Grant said at once that he would take Hotspur, and there were men on the
stand who would have bought me; but Jerry said I should not go to cab
work again with just anybody, and the governor promised to find a place
for me where I should be comfortable.

The day came for going away. Jerry had not been allowed to go out yet,
and I never saw him after that New Year's eve. Polly and the children
came to bid me good-by. "Poor old Jack! dear old Jack! I wish we could
take you with us," she said, and then laying her hand on my mane she put
her face close to my neck and kissed me. Dolly was crying and kissed
me too. Harry stroked me a great deal, but said nothing, only he seemed
very sad, and so I was led away to my new place.




Part IV




46 Jakes and the Lady


I was sold to a corn dealer and baker, whom Jerry knew, and with him he
thought I should have good food and fair work. In the first he was quite
right, and if my master had always been on the premises I do not think
I should have been overloaded, but there was a foreman who was always
hurrying and driving every one, and frequently when I had quite a full
load he would order something else to be taken on. My carter, whose name
was Jakes, often said it was more than I ought to take, but the other
always overruled him. "'Twas no use going twice when once would do, and
he chose to get business forward."

Jakes, like the other carters, always had the check-rein up, which
prevented me from drawing easily, and by the time I had been there three
or four months I found the work telling very much on my strength.

One day I was loaded more than usual, and part of the road was a steep
uphill. I used all my strength, but I could not get on, and was obliged
continually to stop. This did not please my driver, and he laid his whip
on badly. "Get on, you lazy fellow," he said, "or I'll make you."

Again I started the heavy load, and struggled on a few yards; again the
whip came down, and again I struggled forward. The pain of that great
cart whip was sharp, but my mind was hurt quite as much as my poor
sides. To be punished and abused when I was doing my very best was
so hard it took the heart out of me. A third time he was flogging me
cruelly, when a lady stepped quickly up to him, and said in a sweet,
earnest voice:

"Oh! pray do not whip your good horse any more; I am sure he is doing
all he can, and the road is very steep; I am sure he is doing his best."

"If doing his best won't get this load up he must do something more than
his best; that's all I know, ma'am," said Jakes.

"But is it not a heavy load?" she said.

"Yes, yes, too heavy," he said; "but that's not my fault; the foreman
came just as we were starting, and would have three hundredweight more
put on to save him trouble, and I must get on with it as well as I can."

He was raising the whip again, when the lady said:

"Pray, stop; I think I can help you if you will let me."

The man laughed.

"You see," she said, "you do not give him a fair chance; he cannot use
all his power with his head held back as it is with that check-rein; if
you would take it off I am sure he would do better--do try it," she said
persuasively, "I should be very glad if you would."

"Well, well," said Jakes, with a short laugh, "anything to please a
lady, of course. How far would you wish it down, ma'am?"

"Quite down, give him his head altogether."

The rein was taken off, and in a moment I put my head down to my very
knees. What a comfort it was! Then I tossed it up and down several times
to get the aching stiffness out of my neck.

"Poor fellow! that is what you wanted," said she, patting and stroking
me with her gentle hand; "and now if you will speak kindly to him and
lead him on I believe he will be able to do better."

Jakes took the rein. "Come on, Blackie." I put down my head, and threw
my whole weight against the collar; I spared no strength; the load
moved on, and I pulled it steadily up the hill, and then stopped to take
breath.

The lady had walked along the footpath, and now came across into the
road. She stroked and patted my neck, as I had not been patted for many
a long day.

"You see he was quite willing when you gave him the chance; I am sure he
is a fine-tempered creature, and I dare say has known better days. You
won't put that rein on again, will you?" for he was just going to hitch
it up on the old plan.

"Well, ma'am, I can't deny that having his head has helped him up the
hill, and I'll remember it another time, and thank you, ma'am; but if
he went without a check-rein I should be the laughing-stock of all the
carters; it is the fashion, you see."

"Is it not better," she said, "to lead a good fashion than to follow a
bad one? A great many gentlemen do not use check-reins now; our carriage
horses have not worn them for fifteen years, and work with much less
fatigue than those who have them; besides," she added in a very serious
voice, "we have no right to distress any of God's creatures without a
very good reason; we call them dumb animals, and so they are, for they
cannot tell us how they feel, but they do not suffer less because they
have no words. But I must not detain you now; I thank you for trying
my plan with your good horse, and I am sure you will find it far better
than the whip. Good-day," and with another soft pat on my neck she
stepped lightly across the path, and I saw her no more.

"That was a real lady, I'll be bound for it," said Jakes to himself;
"she spoke just as polite as if I was a gentleman, and I'll try her
plan, uphill, at any rate;" and I must do him the justice to say that
he let my rein out several holes, and going uphill after that, he always
gave me my head; but the heavy loads went on. Good feed and fair rest
will keep up one's strength under full work, but no horse can stand
against overloading; and I was getting so thoroughly pulled down from
this cause that a younger horse was bought in my place. I may as well
mention here what I suffered at this time from another cause. I had
heard horses speak of it, but had never myself had experience of the
evil; this was a badly-lighted stable; there was only one very small
window at the end, and the consequence was that the stalls were almost
dark.

Besides the depressing effect this had on my spirits, it very much
weakened my sight, and when I was suddenly brought out of the darkness
into the glare of daylight it was very painful to my eyes. Several times
I stumbled over the threshold, and could scarcely see where I was going.

I believe, had I stayed there very long, I should have become purblind,
and that would have been a great misfortune, for I have heard men say
that a stone-blind horse was safer to drive than one which had imperfect
sight, as it generally makes them very timid. However, I escaped without
any permanent injury to my sight, and was sold to a large cab owner.




47 Hard Times


My new master I shall never forget; he had black eyes and a hooked nose,
his mouth was as full of teeth as a bull-dog's, and his voice was as
harsh as the grinding of cart wheels over graveled stones. His name was
Nicholas Skinner, and I believe he was the man that poor Seedy Sam drove
for.

I have heard men say that seeing is believing; but I should say that
feeling is believing; for much as I had seen before, I never knew till
now the utter misery of a cab-horse's life.

Skinner had a low set of cabs and a low set of drivers; he was hard on
the men, and the men were hard on the horses. In this place we had no
Sunday rest, and it was in the heat of summer.

Sometimes on a Sunday morning a party of fast men would hire the cab for
the day; four of them inside and another with the driver, and I had to
take them ten or fifteen miles out into the country, and back again;
never would any of them get down to walk up a hill, let it be ever
so steep, or the day ever so hot--unless, indeed, when the driver was
afraid I should not manage it, and sometimes I was so fevered and worn
that I could hardly touch my food. How I used to long for the nice bran
mash with niter in it that Jerry used to give us on Saturday nights in
hot weather, that used to cool us down and make us so comfortable.
Then we had two nights and a whole day for unbroken rest, and on Monday
morning we were as fresh as young horses again; but here there was no
rest, and my driver was just as hard as his master. He had a cruel whip
with something so sharp at the end that it sometimes drew blood, and he
would even whip me under the belly, and flip the lash out at my head.
Indignities like these took the heart out of me terribly, but still I
did my best and never hung back; for, as poor Ginger said, it was no
use; men are the strongest.

My life was now so utterly wretched that I wished I might, like Ginger,
drop down dead at my work and be out of my misery, and one day my wish
very nearly came to pass.

I went on the stand at eight in the morning, and had done a good share
of work, when we had to take a fare to the railway. A long train was
just expected in, so my driver pulled up at the back of some of the
outside cabs to take the chance of a return fare. It was a very heavy
train, and as all the cabs were soon engaged ours was called for. There
was a party of four; a noisy, blustering man with a lady, a little boy
and a young girl, and a great deal of luggage. The lady and the boy got
into the cab, and while the man ordered about the luggage the young girl
came and looked at me.

"Papa," she said, "I am sure this poor horse cannot take us and all our
luggage so far, he is so very weak and worn up. Do look at him."

"Oh! he's all right, miss," said my driver, "he's strong enough."

The porter, who was pulling about some heavy boxes, suggested to the
gentleman, as there was so much luggage, whether he would not take a
second cab.

"Can your horse do it, or can't he?" said the blustering man.

"Oh! he can do it all right, sir; send up the boxes, porter; he could
take more than that;" and he helped to haul up a box so heavy that I
could feel the springs go down.

"Papa, papa, do take a second cab," said the young girl in a beseeching
tone. "I am sure we are wrong, I am sure it is very cruel."

"Nonsense, Grace, get in at once, and don't make all this fuss; a pretty
thing it would be if a man of business had to examine every cab-horse
before he hired it--the man knows his own business of course; there, get
in and hold your tongue!"

My gentle friend had to obey, and box after box was dragged up and
lodged on the top of the cab or settled by the side of the driver. At
last all was ready, and with his usual jerk at the rein and slash of the
whip he drove out of the station.

The load was very heavy and I had had neither food nor rest since
morning; but I did my best, as I always had done, in spite of cruelty
and injustice.

I got along fairly till we came to Ludgate Hill; but there the heavy
load and my own exhaustion were too much. I was struggling to keep on,
goaded by constant chucks of the rein and use of the whip, when in a
single moment--I cannot tell how--my feet slipped from under me, and I
fell heavily to the ground on my side; the suddenness and the force
with which I fell seemed to beat all the breath out of my body. I lay
perfectly still; indeed, I had no power to move, and I thought now I was
going to die. I heard a sort of confusion round me, loud, angry voices,
and the getting down of the luggage, but it was all like a dream. I
thought I heard that sweet, pitiful voice saying, "Oh! that poor horse!
it is all our fault." Some one came and loosened the throat strap of
my bridle, and undid the traces which kept the collar so tight upon me.
Some one said, "He's dead, he'll never get up again." Then I could hear
a policeman giving orders, but I did not even open my eyes; I could only
draw a gasping breath now and then. Some cold water was thrown over
my head, and some cordial was poured into my mouth, and something was
covered over me. I cannot tell how long I lay there, but I found my life
coming back, and a kind-voiced man was patting me and encouraging me to
rise. After some more cordial had been given me, and after one or two
attempts, I staggered to my feet, and was gently led to some stables
