sleep, and put the knapsack under their heads for a pillow.

Suddenly, about midnight, the fox gave a low whine, and drew nearer to
his bedfellow. 'Cousin,' he whispered very low, 'there is someone coming
who will take the knapsack away from me. Look over there!' And the boy,
peeping through the bushes, saw a man.

'Oh, I don't think he will rob us!' said the boy; and when the man drew
near, he told them his story, which so much interested the stranger that
he asked leave to travel with them, as he might be of some use. So when
the sun rose they set out again, the fox in front as before, the man and
boy following.

After some hours they reached the castle of the Sister of the Sun, who
kept the golden hens among her treasures. They halted before the gate
and took counsel as to which of them should go in and see the lady
herself.

'I think it would be best for me to enter and steal the hens,' said the
fox; but this did not please the boy at all.

'No, it is my business, so it is right that I should go,' answered he.

'You will find it a very difficult matter to get hold of the hens,'
replied the fox.

'Oh, nothing is likely to happen to me,' returned the boy.

'Well, go then,' said the fox, 'but be careful not to make any mistake.
Steal only the hen which has the feather missing from her tail, and
leave the others alone.'

The man listened, but did not interfere, and the boy entered the court
of the palace.

He soon spied the three hens strutting proudly about, though they were
really anxiously wondering if there were not some grains lying on the
ground that they might be glad to eat. And as the last one passed by
him, he saw she had one feather missing from her tail.

At this sight the youth darted forward and seized the hen by the neck
so that she could not struggle. Then, tucking her comfortably under his
arm, he made straight for the gate. Unluckily, just as he was about
to go through it he looked back and caught a glimpse of wonderful
splendours from an open door of the palace. 'After all, there is no
hurry,' he said to himself; 'I may as well see something now I AM here,'
and turned back, forgetting all about the hen, which escaped from under
his arm, and ran to join her sisters.

He was so much fascinated by the sight of all the beautiful things which
peeped through the door that he scarcely noticed that he had lost the
prize he had won; and he did not remember there was such a thing as a
hen in the world when he beheld the Sister of the Sun sleeping on a bed
before him.

For some time he stood staring; then he came to himself with a start,
and feeling that he had no business there, softly stole away, and was
fortunate enough to recapture the hen, which he took with him to the
gate. On the threshold he stopped again. 'Why should I not look at the
Sister of the Sun?' he thought to himself; 'she is asleep, and will
never know.' And he turned back for the second time and entered the
chamber, while the hen wriggled herself free as before. When he had
gazed his fill he went out into the courtyard and picked up his hen who
was seeking for corn.

As he drew near the gate he paused. 'Why did I not give her a kiss?'
he said to himself; 'I shall never kiss any woman so beautiful.' And he
wrung his hands with regret, so that the hen fell to the ground and ran
away.

'But I can do it still!' he cried with delight, and he rushed back to
the chamber and kissed the sleeping maiden on the forehead. But, alas!
when he came out again he found that the hen had grown so shy that she
would not let him come near her. And, worse than that, her sisters began
to cluck so loud that the Sister of the Sun was awakened by the noise.
She jumped up in haste from her bed, and going to the door she said to
the boy:

'You shall never, never, have my hen till you bring me back my sister
who was carried off by a giant to his castle, which is a long way off.'

Slowly and sadly the youth left the palace and told his story to his
friends, who were waiting outside the gate, how he had actually held the
hen three times in his arms and had lost her.

'I knew that we should not get off so easily,' said the fox, shaking
his head; 'but there is no more time to waste. Let us set off at once in
search of the sister. Luckily, I know the way.'

They walked on for many days, till at length the fox, who, as usual, was
going first, stopped suddenly.

'The giant's castle is not far now,' he said, 'but when we reach it you
two must remain outside while I go and fetch the princess. Directly I
bring her out you must both catch hold of her tight, and get away
as fast as you can; while I return to the castle and talk to the
giants--for there are many of them--so that they may not notice the
escape of the princess.'

A few minutes later they arrived at the castle, and the fox, who had
often been there before, slipped in without difficulty. There were
several giants, both young and old, in the hall, and they were all
dancing round the princess. As soon as they saw the fox they cried out:
'Come and dance too, old fox; it is a long time since we have seen you.'

So the fox stood up, and did his steps with the best of them; but after
a while he stopped and said:

'I know a charming new dance that I should like to show you; but it can
only be done by two people. If the princess will honour me for a few
minutes, you will soon see how it is done.'

'Ah, that is delightful; we want something new,' answered they, and
placed the princess between the outstretched arms of the fox. In one
instant he had knocked over the great stand of lights that lighted
the hall, and in the darkness had borne the princess to the gate. His
comrades seized hold of her, as they had been bidden, and the fox was
back again in the hall before anyone had missed him. He found the giants
busy trying to kindle a fire and get some light; but after a bit someone
cried out:

'Where is the princess?'

'Here, in my arms,' replied the fox. 'Don't be afraid; she is quite
safe.' And he waited until he thought that his comrades had gained a
good start, and put at least five or six mountains between themselves
and the giants. Then he sprang through the door, calling, as he went:
'The maiden is here; take her if you can!'

At these words the giants understood that their prize had escaped, and
they ran after the fox as fast as their great legs could carry them,
thinking that they should soon come up with the fox, who they supposed
had the princess on his back. The fox, on his side, was far too clever
to choose the same path that his friends had taken, but would in and out
of the forest, till at last even HE was tired out, and fell fast asleep
under a tree. Indeed, he was so exhausted with his day's work that he
never heard the approach of the giants, and their hands were already
stretched out to seize his tail when his eyes opened, and with a
tremendous bound he was once more beyond their reach. All the rest of
the night the fox ran and ran; but when bright red spread over the
east, he stopped and waited till the giants were close upon him. Then he
turned, and said quietly: 'Look, there is the Sister of the Sun!'

The giants raised their eyes all at once, and were instantly turned into
pillars of stone. The fox then made each pillar a low bow, and set off
to join his friends.

He knew a great many short cuts across the hills, so it was not long
before he came up with them, and all four travelled night and day till
they reached the castle of the Sister of the Sun. What joy and feasting
there was throughout the palace at the sight of the princess whom they
had mourned as dead! and they could not make enough of the boy who had
gone through such dangers in order to rescue her. The golden hen was
given to him at once, and, more than that, the Sister of the Sun told
him that, in a little time, when he was a few years older, she would
herself pay a visit to his home and become his wife. The boy could
hardly believe his ears when he heard what was in store for him, for his
was the most beautiful princess in all the world; and however thick the
darkness might be, it fled away at once from the light of a star on her
forehead.

So the boy set forth on his journey home, with his friends for company;
his heart full of gladness when he thought of the promise of the
princess. But, one by one, his comrades dropped off at the places where
they had first met him, and he was quite alone when he reached his
native town and the gates of the palace. With the golden hen under his
arm he presented himself before the king, and told his adventures, and
how he was going to have for a wife a princess so wonderful and unlike
all other princesses, that the star on her forehead could turn night
into day. The king listened silently, and when the boy had done, he said
quietly: 'If I find that your story is not true I will have you thrown
into a cask of pitch.'

'It is true--every word of it,' answered the boy; and went on to tell
that the day and even the hour were fixed when his bride was to come and
seek him.

But as the time drew near, and nothing was heard of the princess, the
youth became anxious and uneasy, especially when it came to his ears
that the great cask was being filled with pitch, and that sticks were
laid underneath to make a fire to boil it with. All day long the boy
stood at the window, looking over the sea by which the princess must
travel; but there were no signs of her, not even the tiniest white sail.
And, as he stood, soldiers came and laid hands on him, and led him up
to the cask, where a big fire was blazing, and the horrid black pitch
boiling and bubbling over the sides. He looked and shuddered, but there
was no escape; so he shut his eyes to avoid seeing.

The word was given for him to mount the steps which led to the top of
the cask, when, suddenly, some men were seen running with all their
might, crying as they went that a large ship with its sails spread was
making straight for the city. No one knew what the ship was, or whence
it came; but the king declared that he would not have the boy burned
before its arrival, there would always be time enough for that.

At length the vessel was safe in port, and a whisper went through the
watching crowd that on board was the Sister of the Sun, who had come to
marry the young peasant as she had promised. In a few moments more she
had landed, and desired to be shown the way to the cottage which her
bridegroom had so often described to her; and whither he had been led
back by the king's order at the first sign of the ship.

'Don't you know me?' asked the Sister of the Sun, bending over him where
he lay, almost driven out of his senses with terror.

'No, no; I don't know you,' answered the youth, without raising his
eyes.

'Kiss me,' said the Sister of the Sun; and the youth obeyed her, but
still without looking up.

'Don't you know me NOW?' asked she.

'No, I don't know you--I don't know you,' he replied, with the manner of
a man whom fear had driven mad.

At this the Sister of the Sun grew rather frightened, and beginning at
the beginning, she told him the story of his meeting with her, and
how she had come a long way in order to marry him. And just as she had
finished in walked the king, to see if what the boy had said was really
true. But hardly had he opened the door of the cottage when he was
almost blinded by the light that filled it; and he remembered what
he had been told about the star on the forehead of the princess. He
staggered back as if he had been struck, then a curious feeling took
hold of him, which he had never felt before, and falling on his knees
before the Sister of the Sun, he implored her to give up all thought of
the peasant boy, and to share his throne. But she laughed, and said she
had a finer throne of her own, if she wanted to sit on it, and that she
was free to please herself, and would have no husband but the boy whom
she would never have seen except for the king himself.

'I shall marry him to-morrow,' ended she; and ordered the preparations
to be set on foot at once.

When the next day came, however, the bridegroom's father informed the
princess that, by the law of the land, the marriage must take place in
the presence of the king; but he hoped his majesty would not long
delay his arrival. An hour or two passed, and everyone was waiting
and watching, when at last the sound of trumpets was heard and a grand
procession was seen marching up the street. A chair covered with velvet
had been made ready for the king, and he took his seat upon it, and,
looking round upon the assembled company, he said:

'I have no wish to forbid this marriage; but, before I can allow it to
be celebrated, the bridegroom must prove himself worthy of such a bride
by fulfilling three tasks. And the first is that in a single day he must
cut down every tree in an entire forest.

The youth stood aghast as the king's words. He had never cut down a tree
in his life, and had not the least idea how to begin. And as for a
whole forest--! But the princess saw what was passing in his mind, and
whispered to him:

'Don't be afraid. In my ship you will find an axe, which you must carry
off to the forest. When you have cut down one tree with it just say:
"So let the forest fall," and in an instant all the trees will be on the
ground. But pick up three chips of the tree you felled, and put them in
your pocket.'

And the young man did exactly as he was bid, and soon returned with the
three chips safe in his coat.

The following morning the princess declared that she had been thinking
about the matter, and that, as she was not a subject of the king, she
saw no reason why she should be bound by his laws; and she meant to be
married that very day. But the bridegroom's father told her that it was
all very well for her to talk like that, but it was quite different for
his son, who would pay with his head for any disobedience to the king's
commands. However, in consideration of what the youth had done the day
before, he hoped his majesty's heart might be softened, especially as
he had sent a message that they might expect him at once. With this the
bridal pair had to be content, and be as patient as they could till the
king's arrival.

He did not keep them long, but they saw by his face that nothing good
awaited them.

'The marriage cannot take place,' he said shortly, 'till the youth has
joined to their roots all the trees he cut down yesterday.'

This sounded much more difficult than what he had done before, and he
turned in despair to the Sister of the Sun.

'It is all right,' she whispered encouragingly. 'Take this water and
sprinkle it on one of the fallen trees, and say to it: "So let all the
trees of the forest stand upright," and in a moment they will be erect
again.'

And the young man did what he was told, and left the forest looking
exactly as it had done before.

Now, surely, thought the princess, there was no longer any need to put
off the wedding; and she gave orders that all should be ready for the
following day. But again the old man interfered, and declared that
without the king's permission no marriage could take place. For
the third time his majesty was sent for, and for the third time he
proclaimed that he could not give his consent until the bridegroom
should have slain a serpent which dwelt in a broad river that flowed at
the back of the castle. Everyone knew stories of this terrible serpent,
though no one had actually seen it; but from time to time a child
strayed from home and never came back, and then mothers would forbid the
other children to go near the river, which had juicy fruits and lovely
flowers growing along its banks.

So no wonder the youth trembled and turned pale when he heard what lay
before him.

'You will succeed in this also,' whispered the Sister of the Sun,
pressing his hand, 'for in my ship is a magic sword which will cut
through everything. Go down to the river and unfasten a boat which lies
moored there, and throw the chips into the water. When the serpent
rears up its body you will cut off its three heads with one blow of your
sword. Then take the tip of each tongue and go with it to-morrow morning
into the king's kitchen. If the king himself should enter, just say to
him: "Here are three gifts I offer you in return for the services you
demanded of me!" and throw the tips of the serpent's tongues at him, and
hasten to the ship as fast as your legs will carry you. But be sure you
take great care never to look behind you.'

The young man did exactly what the princess had told him. The three
chips which he flung into the river became a boat, and, as he steered
across the stream, the serpent put up its head and hissed loudly. The
youth had his sword ready, and in another second the three heads were
bobbing on the water. Guiding his boat till he was beside them, he
stooped down and snipped off the ends of the tongues, and then rowed
back to the other bank. Next morning he carried them into the royal
kitchen, and when the king entered, as was his custom, to see what he
was going to have for dinner, the bridegroom flung them in his face,
saying: 'Here is a gift for you in return for the services you asked of
me.' And, opening the kitchen door, he fled to the ship. Unluckily
he missed the way, and in his excitement ran backwards and forwards,
without knowing whither he was going. At last, in despair, he looked
round, and saw to his amazement that both the city and palace had
vanished completely. Then he turned his eyes in the other direction,
and, far, far away, he caught sight of the ship with her sails spread,
and a fair wind behind her.

This dreadful spectacle seemed to take away his senses, and all day
long he wandered about, without knowing where he was going, till, in
the evening, he noticed some smoke from a little hut of turf near by. He
went straight up to it and cried: 'O mother, let me come in for pity's
sake!' The old woman who lived in the hut beckoned to him to enter, and
hardly was he inside when he cried again: 'O mother, can you tell me
anything of the Sister of the Sun?'

