beard and that will soon make it grow again.'

'Dame, did I not give you all you asked for--nay, even more?'

'Truly, truly, your majesty. Many thanks for the cows.'

'Well, where is the gold from the sun and the silver from the moon that
you promised me?'

'Ah, your majesty, they have been scattered day and night upon the sea,
except when the sky was overcast,' slyly answered Maie.

'I'll teach you!' roared the sea-king; and with that he gave the fiddle
such a 'puff' that it sent the old woman up like a sky-rocket on to her
island. There Prince lay, as famished as ever, gnawing the carcase of
a crow. There sat Matte in his ragged grey jacket, quite alone, on the
steps of the old hut, mending a net.

'Heavens, mother,' said he, 'where are you coming from at such a
whirlwind pace, and what makes you in such a dripping condition?'

Maie looked around her amazed, and said, 'Where is our two-storey
house?'

'What house?' asked her husband.

'Our big house, and the flower garden, and the men and the maids, and
the thirty beautiful cows, and the steamer, and everything else?'

'You are talking nonsense, mother,' said he. 'The students have quite
turned your head, for you sang silly songs last evening while we were
rowing, and then you could not sleep till early morning. We had stormy
weather during the night, and when it was past I did not wish to waken
you, so rowed out alone to rescue the net.'

'But I've seen Ahti,' rejoined Maie.

'You've been lying in bed, dreaming foolish fancies, mother, and then in
your sleep you walked into the water.'

'But there is the fiddle,' said Maie.

'A fine fiddle! It is only an old stick. No, no, old woman, another time
we will be more careful. Good luck never attends fishing on a Sunday.'

From Z. Topelius.




The Raspberry Worm


'Phew!' cried Lisa.

'Ugh!' cried Aina.

'What now?' cried the big sister.

'A worm!' cried Lisa.

'On the raspberry!' cried Aina.

'Kill it!' cried Otto.

'What a fuss over a poor little worm!' said the big sister scornfully.

'Yes, when we had cleaned the raspberries so carefully,' said Lisa.

'It crept out from that very large one,' put in Aina.

'And supposing someone had eaten the raspberry,' said Lisa.

'Then they would have eaten the worm, too,' said Aina.

'Well, what harm?' said Otto.

'Eat a worm!' cried Lisa.

'And kill him with one bite!' murmured Aina.

'Just think of it!' said Otto laughing.

'Now it is crawling on the table,' cried Aina again.

'Blow it away!' said the big sister.

'Tramp on it!' laughed Otto.

But Lisa took a raspberry leaf, swept the worm carefully on to the
leaf and carried it out into the yard. Then Aina noticed that a sparrow
sitting on the fence was just ready to pounce on the poor little worm,
so she took up the leaf, carried it out into the wood and hid it under a
raspberry bush where the greedy sparrow could not find it. Yes, and
what more is there to tell about a raspberry worm? Who would give three
straws for such a miserable little thing? Yes, but who would not like
to live in such a pretty home as it lives in; in such a fresh fragrant
dark-red cottage, far away in the quiet wood among flowers and green
leaves!

Now it was just dinner time, so they all had a dinner of raspberries
and cream. 'Be careful with the sugar, Otto,' said the big sister; but
Otto's plate was like a snowdrift in winter, with just a little red
under the snow.

Soon after dinner the big sister said: 'Now we have eaten up the
raspberries and we have none left to make preserve for the winter; it
would be fine if we could get two baskets full of berries, then we could
clean them this evening, and to-morrow we could cook them in the big
preserving pan, and then we should have raspberry jam to eat on our
bread!'

'Come, let us go to the wood and pick,' said Lisa.

'Yes, let us,' said Aina. 'You take the yellow basket and I will take
the green one.'

'Don't get lost, and come back safely in the evening,' said the big
sister.

'Greetings to the raspberry worm,' said Otto, mockingly. 'Next time I
meet him I shall do him the honour of eating him up.'

So Aina and Lisa went off to the wood. Ah! how delightful it was there,
how beautiful! It was certainly tiresome sometimes climbing over the
fallen trees, and getting caught in the branches, and waging war with
the juniper bushes and the midges, but what did that matter? The girls
climbed well in their short dresses, and soon they were deep in the
wood.

There were plenty of bilberries and elder berries, but no raspberries.
They wandered on and on, and at last they came... No, it could not be
true!... they came to a large raspberry wood. The wood had been on fire
once, and now raspberry bushes had grown up, and there were raspberry
bushes and raspberry bushes as far as the eye could see. Every bush was
weighted to the ground with the largest, dark red, ripe raspberries,
such a wealth of berries as two little berry pickers had never found
before!

Lisa picked, Aina picked. Lisa ate, Aina ate, and in a little while
their baskets were full.

'Now we shall go home,' said Aina. 'No, let us gather a few more,' said
Lisa. So they put the baskets down on the ground and began to fill their
pinafores, and it was not long before their pinafores were full, too.

'Now we shall go home,' said Lina. 'Yes, now we shall go home,' said
Aina. Both girls took a basket in one hand and held up her apron in the
other and then turned to go home. But that was easier said than done.
They had never been so far in the great wood before, they could not find
any road nor path, and soon the girls noticed that they had lost their
way.

The worst of it was that the shadows of the tress were becoming so long
in the evening sunlight, the birds were beginning to fly home, and the
day was closing in. At last the sun went down behind the pine tops, and
it was cool and dusky in the great wood.

The girls became anxious but went steadily on, expecting that the wood
would soon end, and that they would see the smoke from the chimneys of
their home.

After they had wandered on for a long time it began to grow dark. At
last they reached a great plain overgrown with bushes, and when they
looked around them, they saw, as much as they could in the darkness,
that they were among the same beautiful raspberry bushes from which they
had picked their baskets and their aprons full. Then they were so tired
that they sat down on a stone and began to cry.

'I am so hungry,' said Lisa.

'Yes,' said Aina, 'if we had only two good meat sandwiches now.'

As she said that, she felt something in her hand, and when she looked
down, she saw a large sandwich of bread and chicken, and at the same
time Lisa said: 'How very queer! I have a sandwich in my hand.'

'And I, too,' said Aina. 'Will you dare to eat it?'

'Of course I will,' said Lisa. 'Ah, if we only had a good glass of milk
now!'

Just as she said that she felt a large glass of milk between her
fingers, and at the same time Aina cried out, 'Lisa! Lisa! I have a
glass of milk in my hand! Isn't it queer?'

The girls, however, were very hungry, so they ate and drank with a good
appetite. When they had finished Aina yawned, stretched out her arms and
said: 'Oh, if only we had a nice soft bed to sleep on now!'

Scarcely had she spoken before she felt a nice soft bed by her side, and
there beside Lisa was one too. This seemed to the girls more and more
wonderful, but tired and sleepy as they were, they thought no more about
it, but crept into the little beds, drew the coverlets over their heads
and were soon asleep.

When they awoke the sun was high in the heavens, the wood was beautiful
in the summer morning, and the birds were flying about in the branches
and the tree tops.

At first the girls were filled with wonder when they saw that they had
slept in the wood among the raspberry bushes. They looked at each other,
they looked at their beds, which were of the finest flax covered over
with leaves and moss. At last Lisa said: 'Are you awake, Aina?'

'Yes,' said Aina.

'But I am still dreaming,' said Lisa.

'No,' said Aina, 'but there is certainly some good fairy living among
these raspberry bushes. Ah, if we had only a hot cup of coffee now, and
a nice piece of white bread to dip into it!'

Scarcely had she finished speaking when she saw beside her a little
silver tray with a gilt coffee-pot, two cups of rare porcelain, a sugar
basin of fine crystal, silver sugar tongs, and some good fresh white
bread. The girls poured out the beautiful coffee, put in the cream and
sugar, and tasted it; never in their lives had they drunk such beautiful
coffee.

'Now I should like to know very much who has given us all this,' said
Lisa gratefully.

'I have, my little girls,' said a voice just then from the bushes.

The children looked round wonderingly, and saw a little kind-looking old
man, in a white coat and a red cap, limping out from among the bushes,
for he was lame in his left foot; neither Lisa nor Aina could utter a
word, they were so filled with surprise.

'Don't be afraid, little girls,' he said smiling kindly at them; he
could not laugh properly because his mouth was crooked. 'Welcome to my
kingdom! Have you slept well and eaten well and drunk well?' he asked.

'Yes, indeed we have,' said both the girls, 'but tell us...' and they
wanted to ask who the old man was, but were afraid to.

'I will tell you who I am,' said the old man; 'I am the raspberry king,
who reigns over all this kingdom of raspberry bushes, and I have lived
here for more than a thousand years. But the great spirit who rules over
the woods, and the sea, and the sky, did not want me to become proud of
my royal power and my long life. Therefore he decreed that one day in
every hundred years I should change into a little raspberry worm, and
live in that weak and helpless form from sunrise to sunset. During that
time my life is dependent on the little worm's life, so that a bird can
eat me, a child can pick me with the berries and trample under foot my
thousand years of life. Now yesterday was just my transformation day,
and I was taken with the raspberry and would have been trampled to death
if you had not saved my life. Until sunset I lay helpless in the grass,
and when I was swept away from your table I twisted one of my feet, and
my mouth became crooked with terror; but when evening came and I could
take my own form again, I looked for you to thank you and reward you.
Then I found you both here in my kingdom, and tried to meet you both as
well as I could without frightening you. Now I will send a bird from my
wood to show you the way home. Good-bye, little children, thank you
for your kind hearts; the raspberry king can show that he is not
ungrateful.' The children shook hands with the old man and thanked him,
feeling very glad that they had saved the little raspberry worm. They
were just going when the old man turned round, smiled mischievously with
his crooked mouth, and said: 'Greetings to Otto from me, and tell him
when I meet him again I shall do him the honour of eating him up.'

'Oh, please don't do that,' cried both the girls, very frightened.

'Well, for your sake I will forgive him,' said the old man, 'I am not
revengeful. Greetings to Otto and tell him that he may expect a gift
from me, too. Good-bye.'

The two girls, light of heart, now took their berries and ran off
through the wood after the bird; and soon it began to get lighter in the
wood and they wondered how they could have lost their way yesterday, it
seemed so easy and plain now.

One can imagine what joy there was when the two reached home. Everyone
had been looking for them, and the big sister had not been able to
sleep, for she thought the wolves had eaten them up.

Otto met them; he had a basket in his hand and said: 'Look, here is
something that an old man has just left for you.'

When the girls looked into the basket they saw a pair of most beautiful
bracelets of precious stones, dark red, and made in the shape of a ripe
raspberry and with an inscription: 'To Lisa and Aina'; beside them there
was a diamond breast pin in the shape of a raspberry worm: on it was
inscribed 'Otto, never destroy the helpless!'

Otto felt rather ashamed: he quite understood what it meant, but he
thought that the old man's revenge was a noble one.

The raspberry king had also remembered the big sister, for when she went
in to set the table for dinner, she found eleven big baskets of most
beautiful raspberries, and no one knew how they had come there, but
everyone guessed.

And so there was such a jam-making as had never been seen before, and if
you like to go and help in it, you might perhaps get a little, for they
must surely be making jam still to this very day.

From Z. Topelius.




The Stones of Plouhinec


Perhaps some of you may have read a book called 'Kenneth; or the
Rear-Guard of the Grand Army' of Napoleon. If so, you will remember how
the two Scotch children found in Russia were taken care of by the
French soldiers and prevented as far as possible from suffering from the
horrors of the terrible Retreat. One of the soldiers, a Breton, often
tried to make them forget how cold and hungry they were by telling
them tales of his native country, Brittany, which is full of wonderful
things. The best and warmest place round the camp fire was always
given to the children, but even so the bitter frost would cause them to
shiver. It was then that the Breton would begin: 'Plouhinec is a small
town near Hennebonne by the sea,' and would continue until Kenneth or
Effie would interrupt him with an eager question. Then he forgot how his
mother had told him the tale, and was obliged to begin all over again,
so the story lasted a long while, and by the time it was ended the
children were ready to be rolled up in what ever coverings could be
found, and go to sleep. It is this story that I am going to tell to you.

Plouhinec is a small town near Hennebonne by the sea. Around it
stretches a desolate moor, where no corn can be grown, and the grass is
so coarse that no beast grows fat on it. Here and there are scattered
groves of fir trees, and small pebbles are so thick on the ground that
you might almost take it for a beach. On the further side, the fairies,
or korigans, as the people called them, had set up long long ago two
rows of huge stones; indeed, so tall and heavy were they, that it seemed
as if all the fairies in the world could not have placed them upright.

Not far off them this great stone avenue, and on the banks of the little
river Intel, there lived a man named Marzinne and his sister Rozennik.
They always had enough black bread to eat, and wooden shoes or sabots
to wear, and a pig to fatten, so the neighbours thought them quite rich;
and what was still better, they thought themselves rich also.

Rozennik was a pretty girl, who knew how to make the best of everything,
and she could, if she wished, have chosen a husband from the young men
of Plouhinec, but she cared for none of them except Bernez, whom she had
played with all her life, and Bernez, though he worked hard, was so very
very poor that Marzinne told him roughly he must look elsewhere for a
wife. But whatever Marzinne might say Rozennik smiled and nodded to
him as before, and would often turn her head as she passed, and sing
snatches of old songs over her shoulder.

Christmas Eve had come, and all the men who worked under Marzinne or on
the farms round about were gathered in the large kitchen to eat the
soup flavoured with honey followed by rich puddings, to which they were
always invited on this particular night. In the middle of the table was
a large wooden bowl, with wooden spoons placed in a circle round it, so
that each might dip in his turn. The benches were filled, and Marzinne
was about to give the signal, when the door was suddenly thrown open,
and an old man came in, wishing the guests a good appetite for their
supper. There was a pause, and some of the faces looked a little
frightened; for the new-comer was well known to them as a beggar, who
was also said to be a wizard who cast spells over the cattle, and caused
the corn to grow black, and old people to die, of what, nobody knew.
Still, it was Christmas Eve, and besides it was as well not to offend
him, so the farmer invited him in, and gave him a seat at the table and
a wooden spoon like the rest.

There was not much talk after the beggar's entrance, and everyone was
glad when the meal came to an end, and the beggar asked if he might
sleep in the stable, as he should die of cold if he were left outside.
Rather unwillingly Marzinne gave him leave, and bade Bernez take the
