been her worst enemy.

"I will carry you to my room, in the first place," said her companion.
"You must remain in concealment for a day or two, as Peg will,
undoubtedly, be on the lookout for you, and we want to avoid all
trouble."

Ida was delighted with her escape, and, with the hope of soon seeing
her friends in New York, She put implicit faith in her guide, and was
willing to submit to any conditions which he might impose.

On emerging into the street, her companion summoned a cab. He had
reasons for not wishing to encounter any one whom he knew.

At length they reached his lodgings.

They were furnished more richly than any room Ida had yet seen; and
formed, indeed, a luxurious contrast to the dark and scantily-furnished
apartment which she had occupied for the last fortnight.

"Well, are you glad to get away from Peg?" asked John Somerville, giving
Ida a seat at the fire.

"Oh, _so_ glad!" said Ida.

"And you wouldn't care about going back?"

The child shuddered.

"I suppose," said she, "that Peg will be very angry. She would beat me,
if she should get me back again."

"But she sha'n't. I will take good care of that."

Ida looked her gratitude. Her heart went out to those who appeared to
deal kindly with her, and she felt very grateful to her companion for
his instrumentality in effecting her deliverance from Peg.

"Now," said Somerville, "perhaps you will be willing to tell me what it
was you were required to do."

"Yes," said Ida; "but she must never know that I told. It was to pass
bad money."

"Ha!" exclaimed her companion. "Do you mean bad bills, or spurious
coin?"

"It was silver dollars."

"Does she do much in that way?"

"A good deal. She goes out every day to buy things with the money."

"I am glad to learn this," said John Somerville, thoughtfully.

"Ida," said he, after a pause, "I am going out for a time. You will find
books on the table, and can amuse yourself by reading; I won't make you
sew, as Peg did," he said, smiling.

Ida laughed.

"Oh, yes," said she, "I like reading. I shall amuse myself very well."

Mr. Somerville went out, and Ida, as he recommended, read awhile. Then,
growing tired, she went to the window and looked out. A carriage was
passing slowly, on account of a press of carriages. Ida saw a face that
she knew. Forgetting her bonnet in her sudden joy, she ran down the
stairs, into the street, and up to the carriage window.

"O Jack!" she exclaimed; "have you come for me?"

It was Mrs. Clifton's carriage, returning from Peg's lodgings.

"Why, it's Ida!" exclaimed Jack, almost springing through the window of
the carriage. "Where did you come from, and where have you been all the
time?"

He opened the door of the carriage, and drew Ida in.

Till then she had not seen the lady who sat at Jack's side.

"My child, my child! Thank God, you are restored to me," exclaimed Mrs.
Clifton.

She drew the astonished child to her bosom. Ida looked up into her face.
Was it Nature that prompted her to return the lady's embrace?

"My God, I thank thee!" murmured Mrs. Clifton; "for this, my child, was
lost and is found."

"Ida," said Jack, "this lady is your mother."

"My mother!" said the child, bewildered. "Have I two mothers?"

"Yes, but this is your real mother. You were brought to our house when
you were an infant, and we have always taken care of you; but this lady
is your real mother."

Ida hardly knew whether to feel glad or sorry.

"And you are not my brother?"

"You shall still consider him your brother, Ida," said Mrs. Clifton.
"Heaven forbid that I should wean your heart from the friends who have
cared so kindly for you! You shall keep all your old friends, and love
them as dearly as ever. You will only have one friend the more."

"Where are we going?" asked Ida, suddenly.

"We are going home."

"What will the gentleman say?"

"What gentleman?"

"The one that took me away from Peg's. Why, there he is now!"

Mrs. Clifton followed the direction of Ida's finger, as she pointed to a
gentleman passing.

"Is he the one?"

"Yes, mamma," said Ida, shyly.

Mrs. Clifton pressed Ida to her breast. It was the first time she had
ever been called mamma. It made her realize, more fully, her present
happiness.

Arrived at the house, Jack's bashfulness returned. He hung back, and
hesitated about going in.

Mrs. Clifton observed this.

"Jack," said she, "this house is to be your home while you remain in
Philadelphia. Come in, and Thomas shall go for your baggage."

"Perhaps I had better go with him," said Jack. "Uncle Abel will be glad
to know that Ida is found."

"Very well; only return soon."

"Well!" thought Jack, as he re-entered the carriage, and gave the
direction to the coachman; "won't Uncle Abel be a little surprised when
he sees me coming home in such style!"



CHAPTER XXVI. "NEVER TOO LATE TO MEND."



MEANWHILE, Peg was passing her time wearily enough in prison. It was
certainly provoking to be deprived of her freedom just when she was
likely to make it most profitable. After some reflection, she determined
to send for Mrs. Clifton, and reveal to her all she knew, trusting to
her generosity for a recompense.

To one of the officers of the prison she communicated the intelligence
that she had an important revelation to make to Mrs. Clifton, and
absolutely refused to make it unless the lady would visit her in prison.

Scarcely had Mrs. Clifton returned home, after recovering her child,
than the bell rang, and a stranger was introduced.

"Is this Mrs. Clifton?" he inquired.

"It is."

"Then I have a message for you."

The lady inclined her head.

"You must know, madam, that I am one of the officers connected with the
City Prison. A woman was placed in confinement this morning, who says
she has a most important communication to make to you, but declines to
make it except to you in person."

"Can you bring her here, sir?"

"That is impossible. We will give you every facility, however, for
visiting her in prison."

"It must be Peg," whispered Ida; "the woman that carried me off."

Such a request Mrs. Clifton could not refuse. She at once made ready to
accompany the officer. She resolved to carry Ida with her, fearful that,
unless she kept her in her immediate presence, she might disappear again
as before.

As Jack had not yet returned, a hack was summoned, and they proceeded
at once to the prison. Ida shuddered as she passed beneath the gloomy
portal which shut out hope and the world from so many.

"This way, madam!"

They followed the officer through a gloomy corridor, until they came to
the cell in which Peg was confined.

The tenant of the cell looked surprised to find Mrs. Clifton accompanied
by Ida.

"How do you do, Ida?" she said, smiling grimly; "you see I've moved.
Just tell your mother she can sit down on the bed. I'm sorry I haven't
any rocking-chair or sofa to offer you."

"O Peg," said Ida, her tender heart melted by the woman's misfortunes;
"how sorry I am to find you here!"

"Are you sorry?" asked Peg, looking at her in surprise.

"You haven't much cause to be. I've been your worst enemy, or one of the
worst."

"I can't help it," said the child, her face beaming with a divine
compassion; "it must be so sad to be shut up here, and not be able to go
out into the bright sunshine. I do pity you."

Peg's heart was not wholly hardened. Few are. But it was long since it
had been touched as it was now by this great pity on the part of one she
had injured.

"You're a good girl, Ida," she said; "and I'm sorry I've injured you. I
didn't think I should ever ask forgiveness of anybody; but I do ask your
forgiveness."

The child rose, and advancing towards Peg, took her large hand in (sic)
her's and said, "I forgive you, Peg."

"From your heart?"

"With all my heart."

"Thank you, child. I feel better now. There have been times when I
thought I should like to lead a better life."

"It is not too late now, Peg."

Peg shook her head.

"Who will trust me after I have come from here?"

"I will," said Mrs. Clifton, speaking for the first time.

"You will?"

"Yes."

"And yet you have much to forgive. But it was not my plan to steal your
daughter from you. I was poor, and money tempted me."

"Who could have had an interest in doing me this cruel wrong?"

"One whom you know well,--Mr. John Somerville."

"Surely, you are wrong!" exclaimed Mrs. Clifton, in unbounded
astonishment. "It cannot be. What object could he have had?"

"Can you think of none?" queried Peg, looking at her shrewdly.

Mrs. Clifton changed color. "Perhaps so," she said. "Go on."

Peg told the whole story, so circumstantially, that there was no room
left for doubt.

"I did not believe him capable of such wickedness," she ejaculated. "It
was a base, unmanly revenge. How could you lend yourself to it?"

"How could I?" repeated Peg. "Madam, you are rich. You have always had
whatever wealth could procure. How can you understand the temptations
of the poor? When want and hunger stare us in the face, we have not the
strength to resist that you have in your luxurious homes."

"Pardon me," said Mrs. Clifton, touched by these words, half bitter,
half pathetic; "let me, at any rate, thank you for the service you have
done me now. When you are released from your confinement, come to me.
If you wish to change your mode of life and live honestly henceforth, I
will give you the chance."

"You will!" said Peg, eagerly.

"I will."

"After all the injury I have done you, you will trust me still?"

"Who am I that I should condemn you? Yes, I will trust you, and forgive
you."

"I never expected to hear such words," said Peg, her heart softened, and
her arid eyes moistened by unwonted emotion, "least of all from you. I
should like to ask one thing."

"What is it?"

"Will you let her come and see me sometimes?" she pointed to Ida as
she spoke; "it will remind me that this is not all a dream--these words
which you have spoken."

"She shall come," said Mrs. Clifton, "and I will come too, sometimes."

"Thank you," said Peg.

They left the prison behind them, and returned home.

"Mr. Somerville is in the drawing-room," said the servant. "He wishes to
see you."

Mrs. Clifton's face flushed.

"I will go down," she said. "Ida, you will remain here."

She descended to the drawing-room, and met the man who had injured her.
He had come with the resolve to stake his all upon a single cast. His
fortunes were desperate. Through the mother's love for the daughter whom
she had mourned so long, whom, as he believed he had it in his power
to restore to her, he hoped to obtain her consent to a marriage, which
would retrieve his fortunes, and gratify his ambition.

Mrs. Clifton seated herself quietly. She did not, as usual, offer him
her hand. Full of his own plans, he did not notice this omission.

"How long is it since Ida was lost?" inquired Somerville.
