with the same skill that he had started it. He immediately sprung
down, examined the fire, and several points of the man, when finding
everything right, he opened his knee-caps and let cinders and ashes
drop out.

'How kin yeou dew that?' inquired Ethan Hopkins, peering over his
shoulder.

'What's to hinder?'

'How kin he work his legs, if they're holler that way and let the fire
down 'em?'

'They ain't hollow. Don't you see they are very large, and there is
plenty of room for the leg-rods, besides leaving a place for the draft
and ashes?'

'Wal, I swan, if that ain't rather queer. And you made it all out of
your head naow?' asked the Yankee, looking at the diminutive inventor
before him.

'No, I had to use a good deal of iron,' was the reply of the
youngster, with a quizzical smile.

'You mean you got up the thing yourself?' 'Yes, sir,' was the quiet
but proud reply of the boy.

'Jingo and Jerusalem! but your daddy must be fond of you!' exclaimed
the enthusiastic New Englander, scanning him admiringly from head to
foot.

'I haven't any father.'

'Your mother then.'

'I don't know about that.'

'Say, you, can't yer tell a feller 'bout it?'

'Not now; I haven't time.'

As the steam horse was to rest for the present, he was 'put up.' The
engineer opened several cavities in his legs and breast, and different
parts of his body, and examined the machinery, carefully oiling the
various portions, and when he had completed, he drew a large oil skin
from the wagon, which, being spread out, covered both it and the steam
man himself.



                        CHAPTER III. A GENIUS.

HAVING PROGRESSED thus far in our story, or properly having began in
the middle, it is now necessary that we should turn back to the proper
starting point.

Several years since a widow woman resided in the outskirts of St.
Louis, whose name was Brainerd. Her husband had been a mechanic, noted
for his ingenuity, but was killed some five years before by the
explosion of a steam boiler. He left behind him a son, hump-backed,
dwarfed, but with an amiable disposition that made him a favorite with
all with whom he came in contact.

If nature afflicts in one direction she frequently makes amends in
another direction, and this dwarf, small and misshapen as he was, was
gifted with a most wonderful mind. His mechanical ingenuity bordered
on the marvelous. When he went to school, he was a general favorite
with teachers and pupils. The former loved him for his sweetness of
disposition, and his remarkable proficiency in all studies, while the
latter based their affection chiefly upon the fact that he never
refused to assist any of them at their tasks, while with the
pocket-knife which he carried he constructed toys which were their
delight. Some of these were so curious and amusing that, had they
been securer by letters patent, they would have brought a competency
to him and his widowed mother.

But Johnny never thought of patenting them, although the principal
support of himself and mother came from one or two patents, which his
father had secured upon inventions, not near the equal of his.

There seemed no limit to his inventive powers. He made a locomotive
and then a steamboat, perfect in every part, even to the minutest,
using nothing but his knife, hammer, and a small chisel. He
constructed a clock with his jack-knife, which kept perfect time, and
the articles which he made were wonderfully stared at at fairs, and in
show windows, while Johnny modestly pegged away at some new idea. He
became a master of the art of telegraphy without assistance from any
one using merely a common school philosophy with which to acquire the
alphabet. He then made a couple of batteries, ran a line from his
window to a neighbor's, insulating it by means of the necks of some
bottles, taught the other boy the alphabet, and thus they amused
themselves sending messages back and forth.

Thus matters progressed until he was fifteen years of age, when he
came home one day, and lay down on the settee by his mother, and gave
a great sigh.

'What is the matter?' she inquired. 'I want to make something.'

'Why, then, don't you make it?'

'Because I don't know what it shall be; I've fixed up everything I can
think of.'

'And you are like Alexander, sighing for more worlds to conquer. Is
that it?'

'Not exactly, for there is plenty for one to do, if I could only find
out what it is.'

'Have you ever made a balloon?' The boy laughed.

'You were asking for the cat the other day, and wondering what had
become of her. I didn't tell you that the last I saw of her was
through the telescope, she being about two miles up in the clouds, and
going about fifty miles an hour.'

'I thought you looked as though you knew something about her,' replied
the mother, trying to speak reprovingly, and yet smiling in spite of
herself.

'Can't you tell me something to make?' finally asked the boy.

'Yes; there is something I have often thought of, and wonder why it
was not made long ago; but you are not smart enough to do it, Johnny.'

'Maybe not; but tell me what it is.'

'It is a man that shall go by steam!' The boy lay still several
minutes without speaking a word and then sprung up. 'By George! I'll
do it!' And he started out of the room, and was not seen again until
night. His mother felt no anxiety. She was pleased; for, when her boy
was at work, he was happy, and she knew that he had enough now, to
keep him engaged for months to come.

So it proved. He spent several weeks in thought, before he made the
first effort toward constructing his greatest success of all. He then
enlarged his workshop, and so arranged it, that he would not be in
danger of being seen by any curious eyes. He wanted no disturbance
while engaged upon this scheme.

From a neighboring foundry, whose proprietor took great interest in
the boy, he secured all that he needed. He was allowed full liberty to
make what castings he chose, and to construct whatever he wished. And
so he began his work.

The great point was to obtain the peculiar motion of a man walking.
This secured, the man himself could be easily made, and dressed up in
any style required. Finally the boy believed that he had hit upon the
true scheme.

So he plied harder than ever, scarcely pausing to take his meals.
Finally he got the machine together, fired up, and with feelings
somewhat akin to those, of Sir Isaac Newton, when demonstrating the
truth or falsity of some of his greatest discoveries, he watched the
result.

Soon the legs begin moving up and down, but never a step did they
advance! The power was there, sufficient to run a saw-mill, every
thing seemed to work, but the thing wouldn't go!

The boy was not ready to despair. He seated himself on the bench
beside the machine, and keeping up a moderate supply of steam,
throwing in bits of wood, and letting in water, when necessary, he
carefully watched the movement for several hours.

Occasionally, Johnny walked slowly back and forth, and with his eyes
upon the 'stately stepping,' endeavored to discover the precise nature
of that which was lacking in his machine.

At length it came to him. He saw from the first that it was not merely
required that the steam man should lift up its feet and put them down
again, but there must be a powerful forward impulse at the same
moment. This was the single remaining difficulty to be overcome. It
required two weeks before Johnny Brainerd succeeded. But it all came
clear and unmistakable at last, and in this simple manner:

(Ah! but we cannot be so unjust to the plodding genius as to divulge
his secret. Our readers must be content to await the time when the
young man sees fit to reveal it himself.)

When the rough figure was fairly in working order, the inventor
removed everything from around it, so that it stood alone in the
center of his shop. Then he carefully let on steam.

Before he could shut it off, the steam man walked clean through the
side of his shop, and fetched up against the corner of the house, with
a violence that shook it to its foundation. In considerable
trepidation, the youngster dashed forward, shut off steam, and turned
it round. As it was too cumbersome for him to manage in any other way,
he very cautiously let on steam again, and persuaded it to walk back
into the shop, passing through the same orifice through which it had
emerged, and came very nigh going out on the opposite side again.

The great thing was now accomplished, and the boy devoted himself to
bringing it as near perfection as possible. The principal thing to be
feared was its getting out of order, since the slightest
disarrangement would be sufficient to stop the progress of the man.

Johnny therefore made it of gigantic size, the body and limbs being no
more than 'Shells,' used as a sort of screen to conceal the working of
the engine. This was carefully painted in the manner mentioned in
another place, and the machinery was made as strong and durable as it
was possible for it to be. It was so constructed as to withstand the
severe jolting to which it necessarily would be subjected, and finally
was brought as nearly perfect as it was possible to bring a thing not
possessing human intelligence.

By suspending the machine so that Its feet were clear of the floor,
Johnny Brainerd ascertained that under favorable circumstances It
could run very nearly sixty miles an hour. It could easily do that,
and draw a car connected to it on the railroad, while on a common road
it could make thirty miles, the highest rate at which he believed it
possible for a wagon to be drawn upon land with any degree of safety.

It was the boy's intention to run at twenty miles an hour, while where
everything was safe, he would demonstrate the power of the invention
by occasionally making nearly double that.

As it was, he rightly calculated that when it came forth, it would
make a great sensation throughout the entire United States.



               CHAPTER IV. THE TRAPPER AND THE ARTISAN.

'HELLO, YOUNKER! what in thunder yer tryin' to make?'

Johnny Brainerd paused and looked up, not a little startled by the
strange voice and the rather singular figure which stood before him.
It was a hunter in half civilized costume, his pants tucked into his
immense boot tops, with revolvers and rifles at his waist, and a
general negligent air, which showed that he was at home in whatever
part of the world he chose to wander.

He stood with his hand in his pocket, chewing his quid, and
complacently viewing the operations of the boy, who was not a little
surprised to understand how he obtained entrance into his shop.

'Stopped at the house to ax whar old Washoe Pete keeps his hotel,'
replied the stranger, rightly surmising the query which was agitating
him, 'and I cotched a glimpse of yer old machine. Thought I'd come in
and see what in blazes it war. Looks to me like a man that's gwine to
run by steam.'

'That's just what it is,' replied the boy, seeing there was no use in
attempting to conceal the truth from the man.

'Will it do it?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Don't think you mean to lie, younker, but I don't believe any such
stuff as that.'

'It don't make any difference to me whether you believe me or not,'
was the quiet reply of the boy; 'but if you will come inside and shut
the door, and let me fasten it, so that there will be no danger of our
being disturbed, I will soon show you.'

These two personages, so unlike in almost every respect, had taken
quite a fancy to each other. The strong, hardy, bronzed trapper,
powerful in all that goes to make up the physical man, looked upon the
pale, sweet-faced boy, with his misshapen body, as an affectionate
father would look upon an afflicted child.

On the other hand, the brusque, outspoken manner of the hunter pleased
the appreciative mind of the boy, who saw much to admire, both in his
appearance and manner.

'I don't s'pose yer know me,' said the stranger, as he stepped inside
and allowed the boy to secure the door behind him.

'I never saw you before.'

'I am Baldy Bicknell, though I ginerally go by the name of 'Baldy.''

'That's rather an odd name.'

'Yas; that's the reason.'

As he spoke, the stranger removed his hat and displayed his
clean-shaven pate.

'Yer don't understand that, eh? That 'ere means I had my ha'r lifted
ten years ago. The Sioux war the skunks that done it. After they took
my top-knot off.  It had grow'd on ag'in and that's why they call me
Baldy.'

In the mean time the door had been closed, and all secured. The hat of
the steam man emptied its smoke and steam into a section of
stove-pipe, which led into the chimney, so that no suspicion of
anything unusual could disturb the passers-by in the street.

'You see it won't do to let him walk here, for when I tried it first,
he went straight through the side of the house; but you can tell by
the way in which he moves his legs, whether he is able to walk or
not.'

'That's the way we ginerally gits the p'ints of an animal,' returned
Baldy, with great complaisance, as he seated himself upon a bench to
watch the performance.

It required the boy but a short time to generate a sufficient quantity
of steam to set the legs going at a terrific rate, varying the
proceedings by letting some of the vapor through the whistle which
composed the steam man's nose.

Baldy Bicknell stood for some minutes with a surprise too great to
allow him to speak. Wonderful as was the mechanism, yet the boy who
had constructed it was still more worthy of wonder. When the steam had
given out, the hunter placed his big hand upon the head of the little
fellow, and said:

'You'se a mighty smart chap, that be you. Did anybody help you make
that?'

'No; I believe not.'

'What'll you take for it?'

'I never thought of selling it.'

'Wal, think of it now.'

'What do you want to do with it?

'Thar's three of us goin' out to hunt fur gold, and that's jist the
thing to keep the Injins back an' scart. I've been out thar afore, and
know what's the matter with the darned skunks. So, tell me how much
money will buy it.'

'I would rather not sell it, said Johnny, after a few minutes' further
thought.' It has taken me a great while to finish it, and I would
rather not part with it, for the present, at least.'

'But, skin me, younker, I want to buy it! I'll give you a thousand
dollars fur it, slap down.'

Although much less than the machine was really worth, yet it was a
large offer, and the boy hesitated for a moment. But it was only for a
moment, when he decidedly shook his head.

'I wish you wouldn't ask me, for I don't want to sell it, until I have
had it some time. Besides, it isn't finished yet.'

'It ain't,' exclaimed Baldy, in surprise. 'Why, it works, what more do
you want?'

'I've got to make a wagon to run behind it.'

'That's it, eh? I thought you war goin' to ride on its back. How much
will it draw?'

'As much as four horses, and as fast as they can run.'

The hunter was half wild with excitement. The boy's delight was never
equal to one-half of his.

'Skulp me ag'in, ef that don't beat all! It's jest the thing for the
West; we'll walk through the Injins in the tallest kind of style, and
skear 'em beautiful. How long afore you'll have it done?'

'It will take a month longer, at least.'

Baldy stood a few minutes in thought.

'See here, younker, we're on our way to the 'diggin's,' and spect to be
thar all summer. Ef the red-skins git any ways troublesome, I'm comin'
back arter this y'ar covey. Ef yer don't want to sell him, yer
needn't. Ef I bought him, it ain't likely I'd run him long afore I'd
bust his b'iler, or blow my own head off.'

'Just what I thought when you were trying to persuade me to sell it,'
interrupted the boy.

'Then, if he got the cramp in any of his legs, I wouldn't know how to
tie it up ag'in, and thar we'd be.'

'I am glad to see you take such a sensible view of it,' smiled Johnny.

'So, I'm goin' on West, as I said, with two fools besides myself, and
we're goin' to stay thar till yer get this old thing finished; and
then I'm comin' after you to take a ride out thar.'

'That would suit me very well,' replied the boy, his face lighting up
with more pleasure than he had shown. 'I would be very glad to make a
trip on the prairies.'

'Wal, look fur me in about six weeks.'

And with this parting, the hunter was let out the door, and
disappeared, while Johnny resumed his work.

That day saw the steam man completed, so far as it was possible. He
was painted up, and every improvement made that the extraordinarily
keen mind of the boy could suggest. When he stood one side, and
witnessed the noiseless but powerful workings of the enormous legs, he
could not see that anything more could be desired.

It now remained for him to complete the wagon, and he began at once.

It would have been a much easier matter for him to have secured an
ordinary carriage or wagon, and alter it to suit himself; but this was
not in accordance with the genius of the boy. No contrivance could
really suit him unless he made it himself. He had his own ideas, which
no one else could work out to his satisfaction.

It is unnecessary to say that the vehicle was made very strong and
durable.

This was the first great requisite. In some respects it resembled the
ordinary express wagons, except that it was considerably smaller.

It had heavy springs, and a canvas covering, with sufficient, as we
have shown in another place, to cover the man also, when necessary.

This was arranged to carry the wood, a reserve of water, and the
necessary tools to repair it, when any portion of the machinery should
become disarranged.

English coal could be carried to last for two days, and enough wood to
keep steam going for twenty-four hours. When the reserve tank in the
bottom of the wagon was also filled, the water would last nearly as
long.

When these contingencies were all provided against, the six weeks
mentioned by the hunter were gone, and Johnny Brainerd found himself
rather longing for his presence again.
