
"But what shall I do to-night?"

"I'll tell you. Come home with me. The folks will take you in, and the
horse can be put up in the barn."

Harry hesitated

"I suppose they will feel anxious about me over at Pentland. They won't
know what has become of me."

"You can start early in the morning--as early as you like."

"Perhaps it will be better," said Harry, after a pause.

"It won't trouble your family too much, will it?"

"Not a bit," answered the boy, heartily. "Very likely they won't know
till morning," he added, laughing. "They go to bed early, and I told
them they needn't wait up for me."

"I am very much obliged to you," said Harry. "I will accept your kind
invitation. As I've got a horse, we may as well ride. I'll untie him,
and you jump into the buggy."

"All right," said the boy, well pleased.

"You may drive, for you know the way better than I."

"Where did this horse come from?"

"From the stable in Pentland."

"Perhaps they will think you have run away with it."

"I hope not."

"What is your name?"

"Harry Walton. What is yours?"

"Jefferson Selden. The boys usually call me Jeff."

"Is that your dog?"

"Yes. He's a fine fellow."

"I didn't think so when he was threatening to bite me," said Harry
laughing.

"I used to be afraid of dogs," said Jeff; "but I got cured of it after
a while. When I go out at night, I generally take Caesar with me. If you
had had him, you would have been a match for the robber."

"He had a pistol."

"Caesar would have had him down before he could use it."

"I wish he had been with me, then."

They had, by this time, come in sight of Jeff's house. It was a square
farmhouse, with a barn in the rear.

"We'll go right out to the barn," said Jeff, "and put up the horse. Then
we'll come back to the house and go to bed."

There was a little difficulty in unharnessing the horse, on account of
the absence of light; but at last, by a combined effort, it was done,
and the buggy was drawn into the barn and the doors shut.

"There, all will be safe till to-morrow morning," said Jeff. "Now we'll
go into the house."

He entered by the back shed door, and Harry followed him. They went into
the broad, low kitchen, with its ample fireplace, in which a few embers
were glowing. By these Jeff lighted a candle, and asked Harry if he
would have anything to eat.

"No, thank you," said Harry. "I ate a hearty supper at Carmansville."

"Then we'll go upstairs to bed. I sleep in a small room over the shed.
You won't mind sleeping with me?"

"I should like your company," said Harry, who was attracted to his
good-natured companion.

"Then come up. I guess we'll find the bed wide enough."

He led the way up a narrow staircase, into a room low studded, and very
plainly but comfortably furnished.

"The folks will be surprised to see you here in the morning," said Jeff.

"I may be gone before they are up."

"I guess not. Father'll be up by five o'clock, and I think that'll be as
early as you'll want to be stirring."





CHAPTER XXXIII. THE REWARD OF FIDELITY


"Where am I?" asked Harry, the next morning, as he sat up in bed and
stared around him.

"Don't you remember?" asked Jeff, smiling.

Jeff was standing by the bedside, already dressed.

"Yes; I remember now," said Harry, slowly. "What time is it?"

"Seven o'clock."

"Seven o'clock! I meant to be dressed at six."

"That is the time I got up," said Jeff.

"Why didn't you wake me up?"

"You looked so comfortable that I thought it was a pity to wake you. You
must have felt tired."

"I think it was the cold that made me sleepy. I got chilled through
when I lay on the ground there, tied hand and foot. But I must get up in
hurry now."

He jumped out of bed, and hurried on his clothes.

"Now," said Jeff, "come down into the kitchen, and mother'll give you
some breakfast."

"I am giving you a great deal of trouble, I am afraid," said Harry.

"No, you're not. It's no trouble at all. The rest of the family have
eaten breakfast, but I waited for you. I've been up an hour, and feel as
hungry as a wolf. So come down, and we'll see who'll eat the most."

"I can do my part," said Harry. "I've got a good appetite, though I've
been up a food deal less than an hour."

"Take your overcoat alone," said Jeff; "or will you come up and get
after breakfast?"

"I'll take it down with me. It isn't my coat, you know. Mine was a much
better one. I wish I had it back."

Jeff, meanwhile, had taken up the coat.

"There's something in the pocket," he said. "What is it?"

"I didn't put anything in."

Harry thrust his hand into the side pocket for the first time, and drew
out a shabby leather wallet.

"Perhaps there's money in it," Jeff suggested.

The same thought had occurred to Harry. He hastily opened it, and his
eyes opened wide with astonishment as he drew out a thick roll of bills.

"By hokey!" said Jeff, "you're in luck. The robber took your pocketbook,
and left his own. Maybe there's as much as you lost. Count it."

This Harry eagerly proceeded to do.

"Three--eight--eleven--thirteen--twenty," he repeated, aloud. He
continued his count, which resulted in showing that the wallet contained
ninety-seven dollars.

"Ninety-seven dollars!" exclaimed Jeff. "How much did you lose?"

"Forty dollars."

"Then you've made just fifty-seven dollars. Bully for you!"

"But I've exchanged a good overcoat for a poor one."

"There can't be more than seventeen dollars difference."

"Not so much."

"Then you're forty dollars better off, at any rate."

"But I don't know as I can claim this money," said Harry, doubtfully.
"It isn't mine."

"He won't be likely to call for it. When he does, and returns you the
money and the coat, it will be time to think about it."

"I will ask Professor Henderson about that. At any rate I've got my
money back, that's one good thing."

This timely discovery made Harry decidedly cheerful, and, if anything,
sharpened his appetite for breakfast.

Now Mr. Selden had gone out to oversee some farm work; but Mrs. Selden
received out hero very kindly, and made him feel that he was heartily
welcome to that she could offer. She had many questions to ask about the
bold robber who had waylaid him, and expressed the hope that he had left
the neighborhood.

"Perhaps he'll come back for his wallet, Harry," said Jeff. "You'd
better look out for him."

"I shall take care how I carry much money about with me, after this,"
said Harry. "That was what got me into a scrape yesterday."

"He wouldn't make out much if he tried to rob me," said Jeff. "I haven't
got money enough about me to pay the board of a full-grown fly for
twenty-four hours."

"You don't look as if your poverty troubled you much," said his mother.

"I don't have any board bills to pay," said Jeff, "so I can get along."

"I should think you would feel nervous about riding to Pentland
alone," said Mrs. Selden, "for fear of meeting the man who robbed you
yesterday."

"I do dread it a little," said Harry, "having so much money about me.
Besides this ninety-seven dollars, I've got a hundred and fifty dollars
belonging to my employer."

"Suppose I go with you to protect you," said Jeff.

"I wish you would."

"I don't think Jefferson would make a very efficient protector," said
his mother.

"You don't know how brave I am, mother," said Jeff, in the tone of an
injured hero.

"No, I don't," said his mother, smiling. "I believe there was a time
when you were not very heroic in the company of dogs."

"That's long ago, mother. I've got over it now."

"If you would like to ride over with your friend, you may do so. But how
will you get back?"

"Major Pinkham will be up there this afternoon. I can wait, and ride
home with him."

"Very well; I have no objection."

The two boys rode off together. Harry was glad to have a companion who
knew the road well, for he did not care to be lost again till he had
delivered up the money which he had in charge. There was no opportunity
to test Jeff's courage, for the highwayman did not make his appearance.
Indeed, it was not till the next morning that he discovered the serious
blunder he had made in leaving his own wallet behind, and, though he was
angry and disgusted, prudential considerations prevented his going
back. He was forced to the unpleasant conviction that he had overreached
himself, and that his intended victim had come out best in the
"exchange" which "was no robbery." I may as well add here that, though
he deserved to be caught, he was not, and Harry has never, to this day,
set eyes either upon him or upon the coat.

When Harry arrived at Pentland, he found that no little anxiety had been
felt about him.

"Has Harry come yet?" asked the sick man, at ten o'clock the evening
previous.

"No, he hasn't," answered the nurse.

"It's strange what keeps him."

"Did he have any money of yours with him?"

"Yes, I believe he had."

"Oh!" ejaculated Mrs. Chase, significantly.

"What do you mean by that?"

"I didn't say anything, did I?"

"I am afraid he may have been attacked and robbed on the road."

Mrs. Chase coughed.

"Don't you think so?"

"I'll tell you what I think, professor," said the nurse, proceeding
to speak plainly, "I don't think you'll ever see anything of that boy
ag'in."

"Why not?"

"It ain't safe to trust boys with money," she answered, sententiously.

"Oh, I'm not afraid of his honesty."

"You don't say! Maybe you haven't seen as much of boys as I have."

"I was once a boy myself," said the professor, smiling.

"Oh, you--that's different."

"Why is it different? I wasn't any better than boys generally."

"I don't know anything about that; but you mark my words--as like as not
he's run away with your money. How much did he have?"

"I can't say exactly. Over a hundred dollars, I believe."

"Then he won't come back," said Mrs. Chase, decidedly.

Here the conference closed, as it was necessary for Mr. Henderson to
take medicine.

"Has the boy returned?" asked the professor, the next morning.

"You don't expect him--do you?"

"Certainly I expect him."

"Well, he ain't come, and I guess he won't come."

"I am sure that boy is honest," said Professor Henderson to himself. "If
he isn't, I'll never trust a boy again."

Mrs. Chase was going downstairs with her patient's breakfast dishes,
when she was nearly run into by our hero, who had just returned, and was
eager to report to his employer.

"Do be keerful," she expostulated, when, to her surprise, she recognized
Harry.

So he had come back, after all, and falsified her prediction. Such is
human nature, that for an instant she was disappointed.

"Here's pretty work," she said, "stayin' out all night, and worryin' the
professor out of his wits."

"I couldn't help it, Mrs. Chase."

"Why couldn't you help it, I'd like to know?"

"I'll tell you afterwards. I must go up now, and see the professor."

Mrs. Chase was so curious that she returned, with the dishes, to hear
Harry's statement.

"Good morning," said Harry, entering the chamber.

"I'm sorry to have been so long away, but I couldn't help it. I hope you
haven't worried much about my absence."

"I knew you would come back, but Mrs. Chase had her doubts," said
Professor Henderson, pleasantly. "Now tell me what it was that detained
you?"

"A highwayman," said Harry.

"A highwayman!" exclaimed both in concert.

"Yes, I'll tell you all about it. But first, I'll say that he stole only
my money, and didn't suspect that I had a hundred and fifty dollars of
yours with me. That's all safe. Here it is. I think you had better take
care of that yourself, sir, hereafter."

The professor glanced significantly at Mr. Chase, as much as to say,
"You see how unjust your suspicions were. I am right, after all."

"Tell us all about it, Harry."

Our hero obeyed instructions; but it is not necessary to repeat a
familiar tale.

"Massy sakes!" ejaculated Betsy Chase. "Who ever heerd the like?"

"I congratulate you, Harry, on coming off with such flying colors. I
will, at my own expense, provide you with a new overcoat, as a reward
for bringing home my money safe. You shall not lose anything by your
fidelity."





CHAPTER XXXIV. IN DIFFICULTY


We must now transfer the scene to the Walton homestead.

It looks very much the same as on the day when the reader was first
introduced to it. There is not a single article of new furniture, nor
is any of the family any better dressed. Poverty reigns with undisputed
sway. Mr. Walton is reading a borrowed newspaper by the light of
a candle--for it is evening--while Mrs. Walton is engaged in her
