but did not by any means induce the belief that he was a hero.  This look
was, however, the indication of that spirit which gave him the
pre-eminence among the crew of desperadoes who called him captain.  He
was a lion-like villain; totally devoid of personal fear, and utterly
reckless of consequences, and, therefore, a terror to his men, who
individually hated him, but unitedly felt it to be their advantage to
have him at their head.

But my thoughts soon reverted to the dear companions whom I had left on
shore, and as I turned towards the Coral Island, which was now far away
to leeward, I sighed deeply, and the tears rolled slowly down my cheeks
as I thought that I might never see them more.

"So you're blubbering, are you, you obstinate whelp?" said the deep voice
of the captain, as he came up and gave me a box on the ear that nearly
felled me to the deck.  "I don't allow any such weakness aboard o' this
ship.  So clap a stopper on your eyes or I'll give you something to cry
for."

I flushed with indignation at this rough and cruel treatment, but felt
that giving way to anger would only make matters worse, so I made no
reply, but took out my handkerchief and dried my eyes.

"I thought you were made of better stuff," continued the captain,
angrily; "I'd rather have a mad bull-dog aboard than a water-eyed puppy.
But I'll cure you, lad, or introduce you to the sharks before long.  Now
go below, and stay there till I call you."

As I walked forward to obey, my eye fell on a small keg standing by the
side of the main-mast, on which the word _gunpowder_ was written in
pencil.  It immediately flashed across me that, as we were beating up
against the wind, anything floating in the sea would be driven on the
reef encircling the Coral Island.  I also recollected--for thought is
more rapid than the lightning--that my old companions had a pistol.
Without a moment's hesitation, therefore, I lifted the keg from the deck
and tossed it into the sea!  An exclamation of surprise burst from the
captain and some of the men who witnessed this act of mine.

Striding up to me, and uttering fearful imprecations, the captain raised
his hand to strike me, while he shouted, "Boy! whelp! what mean you by
that?"

"If you lower your hand," said I, in a loud voice, while I felt the blood
rush to my temples, "I'll tell you.  Until you do so I'm dumb!"

The captain stepped back and regarded me with a look of amazement.

"Now," continued I, "I threw that keg into the sea because the wind and
waves will carry it to my friends on the Coral Island, who happen to have
a pistol, but no powder.  I hope that it will reach them soon, and my
only regret is that the keg was not a bigger one.  Moreover, pirate, you
said just now that you thought I was made of better stuff!  I don't know
what stuff I am made of,--I never thought much about that subject; but
I'm quite certain of this, that I am made of such stuff as the like of
you shall never tame, though you should do your worst."

To my surprise the captain, instead of flying into a rage, smiled, and,
thrusting his hand into the voluminous shawl that encircled his waist,
turned on his heel and walked aft, while I went below.

Here, instead of being rudely handled, as I had expected, the men
received me with a shout of laughter, and one of them, patting me on the
back, said, "Well done, lad! you're a brick, and I have no doubt will
turn out a rare cove.  Bloody Bill, there, was just such a fellow as you
are, and he's now the biggest cut-throat of us all."

"Take a can of beer, lad," cried another, "and wet your whistle after
that speech o' your'n to the captain.  If any one o' us had made it,
youngster, he would have had no whistle to wet by this time."

"Stop your clapper, Jack," vociferated a third; "give the boy a junck o'
meat.  Don't you see he's a'most goin' to kick the bucket?"

"And no wonder," said the first speaker, with an oath, "after the tumble
you gave him into the boat.  I guess it would have broke _your_ neck if
you had got it."

I did indeed feel somewhat faint; which was owing, doubtless, to the
combined effects of ill-usage and hunger; for it will be recollected that
I had dived out of the cave that morning before breakfast, and it was now
near mid-day.  I therefore gladly accepted a plate of boiled pork and a
yam, which were handed to me by one of the men from the locker on which
some of the crew were seated eating their dinner.  But I must add that
the zest with which I ate my meal was much abated in consequence of the
frightful oaths and the terrible language that flowed from the lips of
these godless men, even in the midst of their hilarity and good-humour.
The man who had been alluded to as Bloody Bill was seated near me, and I
could not help wondering at the moody silence he maintained among his
comrades.  He did indeed reply to their questions in a careless, off-hand
tone, but he never volunteered a remark.  The only difference between him
and the others was his taciturnity and his size, for he was nearly, if
not quite, as large a man as the captain.

During the remainder of the afternoon I was left to my own reflections,
which were anything but agreeable, for I could not banish from my mind
the threat about the thumb-screws, of the nature and use of which I had a
vague but terrible conception.  I was still meditating on my unhappy fate
when, just after night-fall, one of the watch on deck called down the
hatchway,--

"Hallo there! one o' you, tumble up and light the cabin lamp, and send
that boy aft to the captain--sharp!"

"Now then, do you hear, youngster? the captain wants you.  Look alive,"
said Bloody Bill, raising his huge frame from the locker on which he had
been asleep for the last two hours.  He sprang up the ladder and I
instantly followed him, and, going aft, was shown into the cabin by one
of the men, who closed the door after me.

A small silver lamp which hung from a beam threw a dim soft light over
the cabin, which was a small apartment, and comfortably but plainly
finished.  Seated on a camp-stool at the table, and busily engaged in
examining a chart of the Pacific, was the captain, who looked up as I
entered, and, in a quiet voice, bade me be seated, while he threw down
his pencil, and, rising from the table, stretched himself on a sofa at
the upper end of the cabin.

"Boy," said he, looking me full in the face, "what is your name?"

"Ralph Rover," I replied.

"Where did you come from, and how came you to be on that island?  How
many companions had you on it?  Answer me, now, and mind you tell no
lies."

"I never tell lies," said I, firmly.

The captain received this reply with a cold sarcastic smile, and bade me
answer his questions.

I then told him the history of myself and my companions from the time we
sailed till the day of his visit to the island, taking care, however, to
make no mention of the Diamond Cave.  After I had concluded, he was
silent for a few minutes; then, looking up, he said--"Boy, I believe
you."

I was surprised at this remark, for I could not imagine why he should not
believe me.  However, I made no reply.

"And what," continued the captain, "makes you think that this schooner is
a pirate?"

"The black flag," said I, "showed me what you are; and if any further
proof were wanting I have had it in the brutal treatment I have received
at your hands."

The captain frowned as I spoke, but subduing his anger he continued--"Boy,
you are too bold.  I admit that we treated you roughly, but that was
because you made us lose time and gave us a good deal of trouble.  As to
the black flag, that is merely a joke that my fellows play off upon
people sometimes in order to frighten them.  It is their humour, and does
no harm.  I am no pirate, boy, but a lawful trader,--a rough one, I grant
you, but one can't help that in these seas, where there are so many
pirates on the water and such murderous blackguards on the land.  I carry
on a trade in sandal-wood with the Feejee Islands; and if you choose,
Ralph, to behave yourself and be a good boy, I'll take you along with me
and give you a good share of the profits.  You see I'm in want of an
honest boy like you, to look after the cabin and keep the log, and
superintend the traffic on shore sometimes.  What say you, Ralph, would
you like to become a sandal-wood trader?"

I was much surprised by this explanation, and a good deal relieved to
find that the vessel, after all, was not a pirate; but instead of
replying I said, "If it be as you state, then why did you take me from my
island, and why do you not now take me back?"

The captain smiled as he replied, "I took you off in anger, boy, and I'm
sorry for it.  I would even now take you back, but we are too far away
from it.  See, there it is," he added, laying his finger on the chart,
"and we are now here,--fifty miles at least.  It would not be fair to my
men to put about now, for they have all an interest in the trade."

I could make no reply to this; so, after a little more conversation, I
agreed to become one of the crew, at least until we could reach some
civilized island where I might be put ashore.  The captain assented to
this proposition, and after thanking him for the promise, I left the
cabin and went on deck with feelings that ought to have been lighter, but
which were, I could not tell why, marvellously heavy and uncomfortable
still.




CHAPTER XXIII.


Bloody Bill--Dark surmises--A strange sail, and a strange crew, and a
still stranger cargo--New reasons for favouring missionaries--A murderous
massacre, and thoughts thereon.

Three weeks after the conversation narrated in the last chapter, I was
standing on the quarter-deck of the schooner watching the gambols of a
shoal of porpoises that swam round us.  It was a dead calm.  One of those
still, hot, sweltering days, so common in the Pacific, when Nature seems
to have gone to sleep, and the only thing in water or in air that proves
her still alive, is her long, deep breathing, in the swell of the mighty
sea.  No cloud floated in the deep blue above; no ripple broke the
reflected blue below.  The sun shone fiercely in the sky, and a ball of
fire blazed, with almost equal power, from out the bosom of the water.  So
intensely still was it, and so perfectly transparent was the surface of
the deep, that had it not been for the long swell already alluded to, we
might have believed the surrounding universe to be a huge blue liquid
ball, and our little ship the one solitary material speck in all
creation, floating in the midst of it.

No sound broke on our ears save the soft puff now and then of a porpoise,
the slow creak of the masts, as we swayed gently on the swell, the patter
of the reef-points, and the occasional flap of the hanging sails.  An
awning covered the fore and after parts of the schooner, under which the
men composing the watch on deck lolled in sleepy indolence, overcome with
excessive heat.  Bloody Bill, as the men invariably called him, was
standing at the tiller, but his post for the present was a sinecure, and
he whiled away the time by alternately gazing in dreamy abstraction at
the compass in the binnacle, and by walking to the taffrail in order to
spit into the sea.  In one of these turns he came near to where I was
standing, and, leaning over the side, looked long and earnestly down into
the blue wave.

This man, although he was always taciturn and often surly, was the only
human being on board with whom I had the slightest desire to become
better acquainted.  The other men, seeing that I did not relish their
company, and knowing that I was a protege of the captain, treated me with
total indifference.  Bloody Bill, it is true, did the same; but as this
was his conduct towards every one else, it was not peculiar in reference
to me.  Once or twice I tried to draw him into conversation, but he
always turned away after a few cold monosyllables.  As he now leaned over
the taffrail close beside me, I said to him,--

"Bill, why is it that you are so gloomy?  Why do you never speak to any
one?"

Bill smiled slightly as he replied, "Why, I s'pose it's because I haint
got nothin' to say!"

"That's strange," said I, musingly; "you look like a man that could
think, and such men can usually speak."

"So they can, youngster," rejoined Bill, somewhat sternly; "and I could
speak too if I had a mind to, but what's the use o' speakin' here!  The
men only open their mouths to curse and swear, an' they seem to find it
entertaining; but I don't, so I hold my tongue."

"Well, Bill, that's true, and I would rather not hear you speak at all
than hear you speak like the other men; but _I_ don't swear, Bill, so you
might talk to me sometimes, I think.  Besides, I'm weary of spending day
after day in this way, without a single soul to say a pleasant word to.
I've been used to friendly conversation, Bill, and I really would take it
kind if you would talk with me a little now and then."

Bill looked at me in surprise, and I thought I observed a sad expression
pass across his sun-burnt face.

"An' where have you been used to friendly conversation," said Bill,
looking down again into the sea; "not on that Coral Island, I take it?"

"Yes, indeed," said I energetically; "I have spent many of the happiest
months in my life on that Coral Island;" and without waiting to be
further questioned, I launched out into a glowing account of the happy
life that Jack and Peterkin and I had spent together, and related
minutely every circumstance that befell us while on the island.

"Boy, boy," said Bill, in a voice so deep that it startled me, "this is
no place for you."

"That's true," said I; "I'm of little use on board, and I don't like my
comrades; but I can't help it, and at anyrate I hope to be free again
soon."

"Free?" said Bill, looking at me in surprise.

"Yes, free," returned I; "the captain said he would put me ashore after
this trip was over."

"_This trip_!  Hark'ee, boy," said Bill, lowering his voice, "what said
the captain to you the day you came aboard?"

"He said that he was a trader in sandal-wood and no pirate, and told me
that if I would join him for this trip he would give me a good share of
the profits or put me on shore in some civilized island if I chose."

Bill's brows lowered savagely as he muttered, "Ay, he said truth when he
told you he was a sandal-wood trader, but he lied when--"

"Sail ho!" shouted the look-out at the masthead.

"Where, away?" cried Bill, springing to the tiller; while the men,
startled by the sudden cry jumped up and gazed round the horizon.

"On the starboard quarter, hull down, sir," answered the look-out.

At this moment the captain came on deck, and mounting into the rigging,
surveyed the sail through the glass.  Then sweeping his eye round the
horizon he gazed steadily at a particular point.

"Take in top-sails," shouted the captain, swinging himself down on the
deck by the main-back stay.

"Take in top-sails," roared the first mate.

"Ay, ay, sir-r-r," answered the men as they sprang into the rigging and
went aloft like cats.

Instantly all was bustle on board the hitherto quiet schooner.  The top-
sails were taken in and stowed, the men stood by the sheets and halyards,
and the captain gazed anxiously at the breeze which was now rushing
towards us like a sheet of dark blue.  In a few seconds it struck us.  The
schooner trembled as if in surprise at the sudden onset, while she fell
away, then bending gracefully to the wind, as though in acknowledgment of
her subjection, she cut through the waves with her sharp prow like a
dolphin, while Bill directed her course towards the strange sail.

In half an hour we neared her sufficiently to make out that she was a
schooner, and, from the clumsy appearance of her masts and sails we
judged her to be a trader.  She evidently did not like our appearance,
for, the instant the breeze reached her, she crowded all sail and showed
us her stern.  As the breeze had moderated a little our top-sails were
again shaken out, and it soon became evident,--despite the proverb, "A
stern chase is a long one," that we doubled her speed and would overhaul
her speedily.  When within a mile we hoisted British colours, but
receiving no acknowledgment, the captain ordered a shot to be fired
across her bows.  In a moment, to my surprise, a large portion of the
bottom of the boat amidships was removed, and in the hole thus exposed
appeared an immense brass gun.  It worked on a swivel and was elevated by
means of machinery.  It was quickly loaded and fired.  The heavy ball
struck the water a few yards ahead of the chase, and, ricochetting into
the air, plunged into the sea a mile beyond it.

This produced the desired effect.  The strange vessel backed her
top-sails and hove-to, while we ranged up and lay-to, about a hundred
yards off.

"Lower the boat," cried the captain.

In a second the boat was lowered and manned by a part of the crew, who
were all armed with cutlasses and pistols.  As the captain passed me to
get into it, he said, "jump into the stern sheets, Ralph, I may want
you."  I obeyed, and in ten minutes more we were standing on the
stranger's deck.  We were all much surprised at the sight that met our
