"We can't leave the city without money."

"That's true," returned her husband, rather taken aback by what was
undeniably true.

"We must sell the ring, or raise money on it, in New York."

"I don't know but you are right. The trouble is, there are not many
places where they will buy so expensive an article. Besides, they will
be apt to ask impertinent questions."

"You might go to a pawnbroker's."

"And get fleeced. If I got a quarter of the value from a pawnbroker, I
should be lucky."

"We must do something with it," said Mrs. Montgomery, decidedly.

"Right, my dear. We must get the sinews of war somewhere. Richard will
never be himself again till his pocketbook is lined with greenbacks. At
present, who steals my purse steals trash."

"Suppose you try Tiffany's?"

"The ring has already been offered there. They might remember it."

"If they do, say that he is your son."

"A good thought," answered the husband. "I will act upon it. But, on the
whole, I'll doff this disguise, and assume my ordinary garments. This
time, my dear, I shall not need your assistance."

"Well, the sooner it's done the better. That's all I have to say."

"As soon as possible."

Mr. Montgomery returned to his lodgings in Amity street, and, taking
off his clerical garb, appeared in the garb in which we first made his
acquaintance. The change was very speedily effected.

"Wish me good luck, Mrs. M.," he said, as he opened the door. "I am
going to make another attempt."

"Good luck to you, Tony! Come back soon."

"As soon as my business is completed. If I get the money, we will leave
for Philadelphia this evening. You may as well be packing up."

"I am afraid the landlady won't let us carry away our baggage unless we
pay our bill."

"Never mind! Pack it up, and we'll run our chance."

Felix Montgomery left the house with the ring carefully deposited in
his vest pocket. To judge from his air of easy indifference, he
might readily have been taken for a substantial citizen in excellent
circumstances; but then appearances are oftentimes deceitful, and they
were especially so in the present instance.

He made his way quickly to Broadway, and thence to Tiffany's, at that
time not so far uptown as at present. He entered the store with a
nonchalant air, and, advancing to the counter, accosted the same clerk
to whom Paul had shown the ring earlier in the day.

"I have a valuable ring which I would like to sell," he said. "Will you
tell me its value?"

The clerk no sooner took it in his hand than he recognized it.

"I have seen that ring before," he said, looking at Mr. Montgomery
keenly.

"Yes," said the latter, composedly; "this morning, wasn't it?"

"Yes."

"My boy brought it in here. I ought not to have sent him, for he came
very near losing it on the way home. I thought it best to come with it
myself."

This was said so quietly that it was hard to doubt the statement, or
would have been if information had not been brought to the store that
the ring had been stolen.

"Yes, boys are careless," assented the clerk, not caring to arouse Mr.
Montgomery's suspicions. "You wish to sell the ring, I suppose."

"Yes," answered the other; "I don't like to carry a ring of so great
value. Several times I have come near having it stolen. Will you buy
it?"

"I am not authorized to make the purchase," said the clerk. "I will
refer the matter to Mr. Tiffany."

"Very well," said Mr. Montgomery. "I am willing to accept whatever he
may pronounce a fair price."

"No doubt," thought the clerk.

He carried the ring to his employer, and quickly explained the
circumstances.

"The man is doubtless a thief. He must be arrested," said the jeweler.

"If I go for an officer, he will take alarm."

"Invite him to come into the back part of the shop, and I will protract
the negotiation while you summon a policeman."

The clerk returned, and at his invitation Mr. Montgomery walked to
the lower end of the store, where he was introduced to the head of the
establishment. Sharp though he was, he suspected no plot.

"You are the owner of this ring?" asked Mr. Tiffany.

"Yes, sir," said the adventurer. "It has been in our family for a long
time."

"But you wish to sell it now?"

"Yes; I have come near losing it several times, and prefer to dispose of
it. What is its value?"

"That requires some consideration. I will examine it closely."

Mr. Montgomery stood with his back to the entrance, waiting patiently,
while the jeweler appeared to be engaged in a close examination of the
ring. He congratulated himself that no questions had been asked which
it might have been difficult for him to answer. He made up his mind
that after due examination Mr. Tiffany would make an offer, which he
determined in advance to accept, whatever it might be, since he would
consider himself fortunate to dispose of it at even two-thirds of its
value.

Meanwhile the clerk quietly slipped out of the store, and at a short
distance encountered a policeman, upon whom he called for assistance.
At the same moment Paul and Mr. Preston came up. Our hero, on being
released from arrest, had sought Mr. Preston, and the latter obligingly
agreed to go with him to Tiffany's, and certify to his honesty, that, if
the ring should be brought there, it might be retained for him. Paul did
not recognize the clerk, but the latter at once remembered him.

"Are you not the boy that brought a diamond ring into our store this
morning?" he asked.

"Into Tiffany's?"

"Yes."

"Have you seen anything of it?" asked our hero, eagerly. "I am the one
who brought it in."

"A man just brought it into the store," said the clerk.

"Is he there now?"

"He is talking with Mr. Tiffany. I came out for a policeman. He will be
arrested at once."

"Good!" ejaculated Paul; "I am in luck. I thought I should never see the
ring again. What sort of a man is he?"

From the description, Paul judged that it was Felix Montgomery himself,
and, remembering what a trick the adventurer had played upon him at
Lovejoy's Hotel, he felt no little satisfaction in the thought that the
trapper was himself trapped at last.

"I'll go along with you," he said. "I want to see that man arrested."

"You had better stay outside just at first, until we have secured him."

Meanwhile Mr. Tiffany, after a prolonged examination, said: "The ring is
worth two hundred and fifty dollars."

"That will be satisfactory," said Mr. Montgomery, promptly.

"Shall I give you a check for the amount?" asked the jeweler.

"I should prefer the money, as I am a stranger in the city, and not
known at the banks."

"I can make the check payable to bearer, and then you will have no
difficulty in getting it cashed."

While this conversation was going on, the clerk entered the store with
the policeman, but Mr. Montgomery's back was turned, and he was not
aware of the fact till the officer tapped him on the shoulder, saying:
"You are my prisoner."

"What does this mean? There is some mistake," said the adventurer,
wheeling round with a start.

"No mistake at all. You must come with me."

"What have I done? You take me for some one else."

"You have stolen a diamond ring."

"Who says so?" demanded the adventurer, boldly. "It is true I brought
one here to sell, but it has belonged to me for years."

"You are mistaken, Mr. Montgomery," said Paul, who had come up
unperceived. "You stole that ring from me this morning, after dosing me
with chloroform at Lovejoy's Hotel."

"It is a lie," said the adventurer, boldly. "That boy is my son. He is
in league with his mother to rob me. She sent him here this morning
unknown to me. Finding it out, I took the ring from him, and brought it
here myself."

Paul was certainly surprised at being claimed as a son by the man who
had swindled him, and answered: "I never saw you before this morning. I
have no father living."

"I will guarantee this boy's truth and honesty," said Mr. Preston,
speaking for the first time. "I believe you know me, Mr. Tiffany."

"I need no other assurance," said the jeweler, bowing. "Officer, you may
remove your prisoner."

"The game is up," said the adventurer, finding no further chance for
deception. "I played for high stakes, and I have lost the game. I have
one favor to ask. Will some one let my wife know where I am?"

"Give me her address," said Paul, "and I will let her know."

"No. ---- Amity street. Ask her to come to the station-house to see me."

"I will go at once."

"Thank you," said Mr. Montgomery; "as I am not to have the ring, I don't
know that I am sorry it has fallen into your hands. One piece of advice
I will venture to offer you, my lad," he added, smiling. "Beware of any
jewelers hailing from Syracuse. They will cheat you, if you give them a
chance."

"I will be on my guard," said Paul. "Can I do anything more for you?"

"Nothing, thank you. I have a fast friend at my side, who will look
after me."

The officer smiled grimly at the jest, and the two left the store arm in
arm.

"Do you still wish to sell this ring?" asked Mr. Tiffany, addressing
Paul.

"Yes, sir."

"I renew my offer of this morning. I will give you two hundred and fifty
dollars."

"I shall be glad to accept it."

The sale was quickly effected, and Paul left the store with what seemed
to him a fortune in his pocket.

"Be careful not to lose your money," said Mr Preston.

"I should like to place a hundred and fifty dollars in your hands," said
Paul, turning to Mr. Preston.

"I will willingly take care of it for you, and allow you interest upon
it."

The transfer was made, and, carefully depositing the balance of the
money in his pocketbook, our hero took leave of his friend and sought
the house in Amity street.



CHAPTER XXV

PAUL'S FINAL SUCCESS

Mrs. Montgomery impatiently awaited the return of her husband. Meanwhile
she commenced packing the single trunk which answered both for her
husband and herself. She was getting tired of New York, and anxious to
leave for Philadelphia, being fearful lest certain little transactions
in which she and her husband had taken part should become known to the
police.

She had nearly completed her packing when Paul rang the doorbell.

The summons was answered by the landlady in person.

"Is Mrs. Montgomery at home?" asked Paul.

"No such lady lives here," was the answer.

It occurred to Paul as very possible that Mr. Montgomery might pass
under a variety of names. He accordingly said, "Perhaps I have got the
name wrong. The lady I mean is tall. I come with a message from her
husband, who is a stout man with black hair and whiskers. He gave me
this number."

"Perhaps you mean Mr. Grimsby. He and his wife live here."

"Probably that is the name," said Paul.

"I will give Mrs. Grimsby your message," returned the landlady, whose
curiosity was excited to learn something further about her boarders.

"Thank you," said Paul; "but it is necessary for me to see the lady
myself."

"Well, you can follow me, then," said the landlady, rather ungraciously.

She led the way upstairs, and knocked at the door of Mrs. Grimsby, or
as we will still call her, Mrs. Montgomery, since that name is more
familiar to the reader, and she was as much entitled to the one as the
other.

Mrs. Montgomery opened the door, and regarded our hero suspiciously, for
her mode of life had taught her suspicion of strangers.

"Here's a boy that wants to see you," said the landlady.

"I come with a message from your husband," said Paul.

Mrs. Montgomery remembered Paul as the boy who was the real owner of the
diamond ring, and she eyed him with increased suspicion.

"Did my husband send you? When did you see him."

"Just now, at Tiffany's," answered Paul, significantly.

"What is his message?" asked Mrs. Montgomery, beginning to feel uneasy.

Paul glanced at the landlady, who, in the hope of gratifying her
curiosity, maintained her stand by his side.

"The message is private," he said.

"I suppose that means that I am in the way," remarked the landlady,
sharply. "I don't want to pry into anybody's secrets. Thank Heaven, I
haven't got any secrets of my own."

"Walk in, young man," said Mrs. Montgomery.

