'"Perhaps you are right," continued Izouf, "for the two ladies took our
hands and danced with us till we were quite exhausted, and when at last
we sat down a second time to table we drank more wine than was good for
us. Indeed, our heads grew so confused, that when the men jumped up
and threatened to kill us, we could make no resistance and suffered
ourselves to be robbed of everything we had about us, including the
most precious possession of all, the two talismans of the daughters of
Siroco."

'Not knowing what else to do, we all three returned to Constantinople
to ask the advice of Sumi, and found that she was already aware of
our misfortunes, having read about them in the book of Moizes. The
kind-hearted creature wept bitterly at our story, but, being poor
herself, could give us little help. At last I proposed that every
morning we should sell the silver watch into which Argentine was
changed, as it would return to Sumi every evening unless it was wound
up with the silver key--which was not at all likely. Sumi consented,
but only on the condition that we would never sell the watch without
ascertaining the house where it was to be found, so that she might also
take Aurora thither, and thus Argentine would not be alone if by any
chance she was wound up at the mystic hour. For some weeks now we have
lived by this means, and the two daughters of Siroco have never failed
to return to Sumi each night. Yesterday Izouf sold the silver watch to
this young man, and in the evening placed the gold watch on the steps
by order of Sumi, just before his customer entered the house; from which
both watches came back early this morning.'

'If I had only known!' cried Neangir. 'If I had had more presence of
mind, I should have seen the lovely Argentine, and if her portrait is so
fair, what must the original be!'

'It was not your fault,' replied the Cadi, 'you are no magician; and who
could guess that the watch must be wound at such an hour? But I shall
give orders that the merchant is to hand it over to you, and this
evening you will certainly not forget.'

'It is impossible to let you have it to-day,' answered Izouf, 'for it is
already sold.'

'If that is so,' said the Cadi, 'you must return the three gold pieces
which the young man paid.'

The Jew, delighted to get off so easily, put his hand in his pocket,
when Neangir stopped him.

'No, no,' he exclaimed, 'it is not money I want, but the adorable
Argentine; without her everything is valueless.'

'My dear Cadi,' said the Bassa, 'he is right. The treasure that my son
has lost is absolutely priceless.'

'My lord,' replied the Cadi, 'your wisdom is greater than mine. Give
judgment I pray you in the matter.'

So the Bassa desired them all to accompany him to his house, and
commanded his slaves not to lose sight of the three Jewish brothers.

When they arrived at the door of his dwelling, he noticed two women
sitting on a bench close by, thickly veiled and beautifully dressed.
Their wide satin trousers were embroidered in silver, and their muslin
robes were of the finest texture. In the hand of one was a bag of pink
silk tied with green ribbons, containing something that seemed to move.

At the approach of the Bassa both ladies rose, and came towards him.
Then the one who held the bag addressed him saying, 'Noble lord, buy, I
pray you, this bag, without asking to see what it contains.'

'How much do you want for it?' asked the Bassa.

'Three hundred sequins,' replied the unknown.

At these words the Bassa laughed contemptuously, and passed on without
speaking.

'You will not repent of your bargain,' went on the woman. 'Perhaps if we
come back to-morrow you will be glad to give us the four hundred sequins
we shall then ask. And the next day the price will be five hundred.'

'Come away,' said her companion, taking hold of her sleeve. 'Do not
let us stay here any longer. It may cry, and then our secret will be
discovered.' And so saying, the two young women disappeared.

The Jews were left in the front hall under the care of the slaves,
and Neangir and Sumi followed the Bassa inside the house, which was
magnificently furnished. At one end of a large, brilliantly-lighted
room a lady of about thirty-five years old reclined on a couch, still
beautiful in spite of the sad expression of her face.

'Incomparable Zambac,' said the Bassa, going up to her, 'give me your
thanks, for here is the lost son for whom you have shed so many tears,'
but before his mother could clasp him in her arms Neangir had flung
himself at her feet.

'Let the whole house rejoice with me,' continued the Bassa, 'and let
my two sons Ibrahim and Hassan be told, that they may embrace their
brother.'

'Alas! my lord!' said Zambac, 'do you forget that this is the hour when
Hassan weeps on his hand, and Ibrahim gathers up his coral beads?'

'Let the command of the Prophet be obeyed,' replied the Bassa; 'then we
will wait till the evening.'

'Forgive me, noble lord,' interrupted Sumi, 'but what is this mystery?
With the help of the Book of Spells perhaps I may be of some use in the
matter.'

'Sumi,' answered the Bassa, 'I owe you already the happiness of my life;
come with me then, and the sight of my unhappy sons will tell you of our
trouble better than any words of mine.'

The Bassa rose from his divan and drew aside the hangings leading to
a large hall, closely followed by Neangir and Sumi. There they saw two
young men, one about seventeen, and the other nineteen years of age.
The younger was seated before a table, his forehead resting on his right
hand, which he was watering with his tears. He raised his head for a
moment when his father entered, and Neangir and Sumi both saw that this
hand was of ebony.

The other young man was occupied busily in collecting coral beads which
were scattered all over the floor of the room, and as he picked them up
he placed them on the same table where his brother was sitting. He had
already gathered together ninety-eight beads, and thought they were all
there, when they suddenly rolled off the table and he had to begin his
work over again.

'Do you see,' whispered the Bassa, 'for three hours daily one collects
these coral beads, and for the same space of time the other laments over
his hand which has become black, and I am wholly ignorant what is the
cause of either misfortune.'

'Do not let us stay here,' said Sumi, 'our presence must add to their
grief. But permit me to fetch the Book of Spells, which I feel sure will
tell us not only the cause of their malady but also its cure.'

The Bassa readily agreed to Sumi's proposal, but Neangir objected
strongly. 'If Sumi leaves us,' he said to his father, 'I shall not see
my beloved Argentine when she returns to-night with the fair Aurora. And
life is an eternity till I behold her.'

'Be comforted,' replied Sumi. 'I will be back before sunset; and I leave
you my adored Izaf as a pledge.'

Scarcely had the Jewess left Neangir, when the old female slave entered
the hall where the three Jews still remained carefully guarded, followed
by a man whose splendid dress prevented Neangir from recognising at
first as the person in whose house he had dined two days before. But the
woman he knew at once to be the nurse of Zelida.

He started eagerly forward, but before he had time to speak the slave
turned to the soldier she was conducting. 'My lord,' she said, 'those
are the men; I have tracked them from the house of the Cadi to this
palace. They are the same; I am not mistaken, strike and avenge
yourself.'

As he listened the face of the stranger grew scarlet with anger. He
drew his sword and in another moment would have rushed on the Jews, when
Neangir and the slaves of the Bassa seized hold of him.

'What are you doing?' cried Neangir. 'How dare you attack those whom the
Bassa has taken under his protection?'

'Ah, my son,' replied the soldier, 'the Bassa would withdraw his
protection if he knew that these wretches have robbed me of all I have
dearest in the world. He knows them as little as he knows you.'

'But he knows me very well,' replied Neangir, 'for he has recognised me
as his son. Come with me now into his presence.'

The stranger bowed and passed through the curtain held back by Neangir,
whose surprise was great at seeing his father spring forward and clasp
the soldier in his arms.

'What! is it you, my dear Siroco?' cried he. 'I believed you had been
slain in that awful battle when the followers of the Prophet were put to
flight. But why do your eyes kindle with the flames they shot forth on
that fearful day? Calm yourself and tell me what I can do to help you.
See, I have found my son, let that be a good omen for your happiness
also.'

'I did not guess,' answered Siroco, 'that the son you have so long
mourned had come back to you. Some days since the Prophet appeared to
me in a dream, floating in a circle of light, and he said to me, "Go
to-morrow at sunset to the Galata Gate, and there you will find a young
man whom you must bring home with you. He is the second son of your old
friend the Bassa of the Sea, and that you may make no mistake, put your
fingers in his turban and you will feel the plaque on which my name is
engraved in seven different languages."'

'I did as I was bid,' went on Siroco, 'and so charmed was I with his
face and manner that I caused him to fall in love with Argentine, whose
portrait I gave him. But at the moment when I was rejoicing in the
happiness before me, and looking forward to the pleasure of restoring
you your son, some drops of the elixir of love were spilt on the table,
and caused a thick vapour to arise, which hid everything. When it had
cleared away he was gone. This morning my old slave informed me that she
had discovered the traitors who had stolen my daughters from me, and I
hastened hither to avenge them. But I place myself in your hands, and
will follow your counsel.'

'Fate will favour us, I am sure,' said the Bassa, 'for this very night I
expect to secure both the silver and the gold watch. So send at once and
pray Zelida to join us.'

A rustling of silken stuffs drew their eyes to the door, and Ibrahim and
Hassan, whose daily penance had by this time been performed, entered
to embrace their brother. Neangir and Hassan, who had also drunk of the
elixir of love, could think of nothing but the beautiful ladies who had
captured their hearts, while the spirits of Ibrahim had been cheered by
the news that the daughter of Moizes hoped to find in the Book of Spells
some charm to deliver him from collecting the magic beads.

It was some hours later that Sumi returned, bringing with her the sacred
book.

'See,' she said, beckoning to Hassan, 'your destiny is written here.'
And Hassan stooped and read these words in Hebrew. 'His right hand has
become black as ebony from touching the fat of an impure animal, and
will remain so till the last of its race is drowned in the sea.'

'Alas!' sighed the unfortunate youth. 'It now comes back to my memory.
One day the slave of Zambac was making a cake. She warned me not to
touch, as the cake was mixed with lard, but I did not heed her, and in
an instant my hand became the ebony that it now is.'

'Holy dervish!' exclaimed the Bassa, 'how true were your words! My son
has neglected the advice you gave him on presenting him the bracelet,
and he has been severely punished. But tell me, O wise Sumi, where I can
find the last of the accursed race who has brought this doom on my son?'

'It is written here,' replied Sumi, turning over some leaves. 'The
little black pig is in the pink bag carried by the two Circassians.'

When he read this the Bassa sank on his cushions in despair.

'Ah,' he said, 'that is the bag that was offered me this morning for
three hundred sequins. Those must be the women who caused Izif and
Izouf to dance, and took from them the two talismans of the daughters of
Siroco. They only can break the spell that has been cast on us. Let them
be found and I will gladly give them the half of my possessions. Idiot
that I was to send them away!'

While the Bassa was bewailing his folly, Ibrahim in his turn had opened
the book, and blushed deeply as he read the words: 'The chaplet of beads
has been defiled by the game of "Odd and Even." Its owner has tried to
cheat by concealing one of the numbers. Let the faithless Moslem seek
for ever the missing bead.'

'O heaven,' cried Ibrahim, 'that unhappy day rises up before me. I had
cut the thread of the chaplet, while playing with Aurora. Holding the
ninety-nine beads in my hand she guessed "Odd," and in order that she
might lose I let one bead fall from my hand. Since then I have sought it
daily, but it never has been found.'

'Holy dervish!' cried the Bassa, 'how true were your words! From the
time that the sacred chaplet was no longer complete, my son has borne
the penalty. But may not the Book of Spells teach us how to deliver
Ibrahim also?'

'Listen,' said Sumi, 'this is what I find: "The coral bead lies in the
fifth fold of the dress of yellow brocade."' 'Ah, what good fortune!'
exclaimed the Bassa; 'we shall shortly see the beautiful Aurora, and
Ibrahim shall at once search in the fifth fold of her yellow brocade.
For it is she no doubt of whom the book speaks.'

As the Jewess closed the Book of Moizes, Zelida appeared, accompanied
by a whole train of slaves and her old nurse. At her entrance Hassan,
beside himself with joy, flung himself on his knees and kissed her hand.

'My lord,' he said to the Bassa, 'pardon me these transports. No elixir
of love was needed to inflame my heart! Let the marriage rite make us
speedily one.'

'My son, are you mad?' asked the Bassa. 'As long as the misfortunes of
your brothers last, shall you alone be happy? And whoever heard of a
bridegroom with a black hand? Wait yet a little longer, till the black
pig is drowned in the sea.'

'Yes! dear Hassan,' said Zelida, 'our happiness will be increased
tenfold when my sisters have regained their proper shapes. And here is
the elixir which I have brought with me, so that their joy may equal
ours.' And she held out the flask to the Bassa, who had it closed in his
presence.

Zambac was filled with joy at the sight of Zelida, and embraced her
with delight. Then she led the way into the garden, and invited all her
friends to seat themselves under the thick overhanging branches of
a splendid jessamine tree. No sooner, however, were they comfortably
settled, than they were astonished to hear a man's voice, speaking
angrily on the other side of the wall.

'Ungrateful girls!' it said, 'is this the way you treat me? Let me hide
myself for ever! This cave is no longer dark enough or deep enough for
me.'

A burst of laughter was the only answer, and the voice continued, 'What
have I done to earn such contempt? Was this what you promised me when
I managed to get for you the talismans of beauty? Is this the reward I
have a right to expect when I have bestowed on you the little black pig,
who is certain to bring you good luck?'

At these words the curiosity of the listeners passed all bounds, and the
Bassa commanded his slaves instantly to tear down the wall. It was done,
but the man was nowhere to be seen, and there were only two girls of
extraordinary beauty, who seemed quite at their ease, and came dancing
gaily on to the terrace. With them was an old slave in whom the Bassa
recognised Gouloucou, the former guardian of Neangir.

Gouloucou shrank with fear when he saw the Bassa, as he expected nothing
less than death at his hands for allowing Neangir to be snatched away.
But the Bassa made him signs of forgiveness, and asked him how he had
escaped death when he had thrown himself from the cliff. Gouloucou
explained that he had been picked up by a dervish who had cured his
wounds, and had then given him as slave to the two young ladies now
before the company, and in their service he had remained ever since.

'But,' said the Bassa, 'where is the little black pig of which the voice
spoke just now?'

'My lord,' answered one of the ladies, 'when at your command the wall
was thrown down, the man whom you heard speaking was so frightened at
the noise that he caught up the pig and ran away.'

'Let him be pursued instantly,' cried the Bassa; but the ladies smiled.

'Do not be alarmed, my lord,' said one, 'he is sure to return. Only give
orders that the entrance to the cave shall be guarded, so that when he
is once in he shall not get out again.'

By this time night was falling and they all went back to the palace,
where coffee and fruits were served in a splendid gallery, near the
women's apartments. The Bassa then ordered the three Jews to be brought
before him, so that he might see whether these were the two damsels who
had forced them to dance at the inn, but to his great vexation it was
found that when their guards had gone to knock down the wall the Jews
had escaped.

At this news the Jewess Sumi turned pale, but glancing at the Book of
Spells her face brightened, and she said half aloud, 'There is no cause
for disquiet; they will capture the dervish,' while Hassan lamented
loudly that as soon as fortune appeared on one side she fled on the
other!

On hearing this reflection one of the Bassa's pages broke into a laugh.
'This fortune comes to us dancing my lord,' said he, 'and the other
leaves us on crutches. Do not be afraid. She will not go very far.'

The Bassa, shocked at his impertinent interference, desired him to leave
the room and not to come back till he was sent for.

'My lord shall be obeyed,' said the page, 'but when I return, it shall
be in such good company that you will welcome me gladly.' So saying, he
went out.

When they were alone, Neangir turned to the fair strangers and implored
their help. 'My brothers and myself,' he cried, 'are filled with love
for three peerless maidens, two of whom are under a cruel spell. If
their fate happened to be in your hands, would you not do all in your
power to restore them to happiness and liberty?'

But the young man's appeal only stirred the two ladies to anger. 'What,'
exclaimed one, 'are the sorrows of lovers to us? Fate has deprived us of
our lovers, and if it depends on us the whole world shall suffer as much
as we do!'

This unexpected reply was heard with amazement by all present, and the
Bassa entreated the speaker to tell them her story. Having obtained
permission of her sister, she began:


