Dame Agatha did not, as Aline had somewhat hoped, say a word to
persuade Sir Ralph to keep Albert longer at home. She looked wistfully
at the lad as the knight told her of the invitation that had come, and
at his hearty pleasure thereat, but she only said: "I am sorely
unwilling to part with you, Albert, but I know that it is best for you
to be entering the world, and that I could not expect to have you many
months longer. Your father and I were agreeing on that yesterday. A
knight cannot remain by a fireside, and it is a comfort to me that this
first absence of yours should be with the good Flemish merchant, and I
like much also his wife and daughter, who were most kind to us when we
tarried with them in London when your father was away. I would far
rather you were with him, than in the train of some lord, bound for the
wars. I am glad, too, that your good friend Edgar is going with you.
Altogether, it is better than anything I had thought of, and though I
cannot part with you without a sigh, I can feel that the parting might
well have been much more painful. What say you, Aline?"

"I knew, as you say, mother, that it was certain that Albert would have
to leave us, but I did not think that it would be so soon. It is very
hateful, and I shall miss him dreadfully."

"Yes, my dear, but you must remember it was so I felt the many times
that your father went to the war. It is so with the wife of every
knight and noble in the land. And not only these, but also the wives of
the men-at-arms and archers, and it will be yours when you too have a
lord. Men risk their lives in battle; women stay at home and mind their
castles. We each have our tasks. You know the lines that the priest
John Ball used, they say, as a text for his harangues to the crowds,
_When Adam delved and Eve span_. You see, one did the rough part of the
toil, the other sat at home and did what was needful there, and so it
has been ever since. You know how you shared our feelings of delight
that your brother had grown stronger, and would be able to take his own
part, as his fathers had done before him, to become a brave and valiant
knight, and assuredly it is not for you to repine now that a fair
opportunity offers for him to prepare for his career."

"I was wrong, mother," Aline said, penitently. "I was very cross and
ill-behaved, but it came suddenly upon me, and it seemed to me hard
that Albert and Edgar should both seem delighted at what pained me so
much. Forgive me, Albert."

"There is nothing to forgive, dear. Of course I understand your feeling
that it will be hard for us to part, when we have been so much
together. I shall be very sorry to leave you, but I am sure you will
agree with me that it is less hard to do so now than it would have been
if I had been going to be shut up in a convent to prepare for entering
the Church, as we once thought would be the case."

"I should think so," the girl said. "This will be nothing to it. Then
you would have been going out of our lives; now we shall have an
interest in all you do, and you will often be coming back to us; there
will be that to look forward to. Well, you won't hear me say another
word of grumbling until you have gone. And when are you to go?"

"To-morrow or next day," her father said. "Mynheer Van Voorden says, 'I
am about to start,' which may mean three days or six. It will need a
whole day for your mother and the maids to see to Albert's clothes, and
that all is decent and in order. To-day is Monday, and I think that if
we say that Albert will arrive there on Thursday by noon it will do
very well. Will you be ready by that time, Edgar?"

"Easily enough, Sir Ralph; for, indeed, as we have no maid, my clothes
need but little preparation. I wear them until they are worn out, and
then get new ones; and I doubt not that I shall be able to replenish my
wardrobe to-morrow at Dartford."

Well pleased to find that Albert was to accompany him, Edgar rode home.
As he passed in at the gates, Hal Carter ran up to him. "Master tells
me that you are going away, Master Edgar. Are you going to take me with
you?"

"Not this time, Hal. I am going to Flanders as a guest of a Flemish
gentleman, and I could not therefore take a man-at-arms with me;
besides, as you know naught of the language, you would be altogether
useless there. But do not think that I shall not fulfil my promise.
This is but a short absence, and when I return I shall enter the train
of some warlike knight or other, and then you shall go with me, never
fear."

"Thank you, sir. 'Tis strange to me to be pent up here; not that I have
aught in the world to complain of; your father is most kind to me, and
I do hope that I am of some use to him."

"Yes, my father has told me several times how useful you were to him in
washing out his apparatus and cleaning his crucibles and getting his
fires going in readiness. He wonders now how he got on so long without
a helper, and will be sorry when the time comes for you to go with me.
Indeed he said, but two days ago, that when you went he should
certainly look for someone to fill your place."

"So long as he feels that, Master Edgar, I shall be willing enough to
stay, but it seemed to me that I was doing but small service in return
for meat and drink and shelter. I should feel that I was getting fat
and lazy, were it not that I swing a battle-axe every day for an hour,
as you bade me."

"Look through your apparel, Edgar," his father said that evening, "and
see what you lack. To-morrow morning I will give you moneys wherewith
you can repair deficiencies. The suits you got in London will suffice
you for the present, but as winter approaches you must get yourself
cloth garments, and these can be purchased more cheaply in Flanders
than here. Of course, I know not how long your stay there may be; that
must depend upon your host. It would be well if, at the end of a month,
you should speak about returning, then you will see by his manner
whether he really wishes you to make a longer stay or not. Methinks,
however, that it is likely he will like you to stay with him until the
spring if there is no matter of importance for which you would wish to
return. I am sure that he feels very earnestly how much he owes to you,
and is desirous of doing you real service; and to my thinking he can do
it in no better manner than by giving you six months in Flanders."

Accordingly, three days later, the two friends again rode to London.
Each was followed by a man on horseback leading a sumpter-horse
carrying the baggage; and Hal Carter was much pleased when he was told
that he was to perform this service. Both, for the convenience of
carriage, wore their body-armour and arm-pieces, the helmets and
greaves being carried with their baggage. On their arrival they were
most cordially received by Van Voorden and his family, and found that
they were to start on Saturday. On the following morning the lads went
to the Tower to pay their respects to the king.

"Be sure you do not neglect that," Sir Ralph had said; "the king is
mightily well disposed to you, as I told you. I had related to him in
full the affairs in which you took part in London, and on my return
after the fight here, I, of course, told him the incidents of the
battle, and he said, 'If all my knights had borne themselves as well as
your son and his friend, I should not have been in so sore a strait. I
should be glad to have them about my person now; but I can well
understand that you wish your son to make a name for himself as a
valiant knight, and that for a time I must curb my desire.'"

The king received them very graciously. "Sir Ralph and you did good
work in dispersing that Kentish rabble, and doing with one blow what it
has taken six weeks to accomplish in Essex and Hertford. So you are
going to Flanders? You will see there what has come of allowing the
rabble to get the mastery. But of a truth the knaves of Ghent and
Bruges are of very different mettle to those here, and fight as stoutly
as many men-at-arms."

"'Tis true, your Majesty," Edgar said, "but not because they are
stouter men, for those we defeated so easily down in Kent are of the
same mettle as our archers and men-at-arms who fought so stoutly at
Cressy and Poictiers, but they have no leading and no discipline. They
know, too, that against mail-clad men they are powerless; but if they
were freemen, and called out on your Majesty's service, they would
fight as well as did their forefathers."

"You are in favour, then, of granting them freedom?"

"It seems to me that it would strengthen your Majesty's power, and
would add considerably to the force that you could put in the field,
and would make the people happier and more contented. Living down among
them as we do, one cannot but see that 'tis hard on men that they may
not go to open market, but must work for such wages as their lords may
choose to give them, and be viewed as men of no account, whereas they
are as strong and able to work as others."

"You may be right," the young king said, "but you see, my councillors
think otherwise, and I am not yet rightly my own master. In one matter,
however, I can have my way, and that is in dispensing honours. You know
what I said to you before you went hence, that, young as you were, I
would fain knight you for the valiant work that you had done. Since
then you have done me good service, as well as the realm, by having,
with Sir Ralph De Courcy and Sir Robert Gaiton, defeated a great body
of the Kentish rebels, who were the worst and most violent of all,
though there were with you but fifty men-at-arms. This is truly
knightly service, and their defeat drove all rioters in that part to
their homes, whereas, had they not been so beaten, there might have
been much more trouble, and many worthy men might have been slain by
them.

[Illustration: EDGAR AND ALBERT ARE KNIGHTED BY KING RICHARD.]

"Moreover, as you are going to Flanders with our good friend Mynheer
Van Voorden, who is in a way charged with a mission from us, it is well
that you should travel as knights. It will give you more influence, and
may aid him to further my object. Therefore, I am sure, that all here
who know how stoutly you have wielded your swords, and how you gave aid
and rescue to the worshipful Mynheer Van Voorden and his family, to
stout Sir Robert Gaiton, Dame De Courcy and her daughter, and how you
bore yourselves in the fight down in Kent, will agree with me that you
have right well won the honour."

Then, drawing his sword, he touched each slightly on the shoulder:

"Rise, Sir Albert De Courcy, and Sir Edgar Ormskirk."

As the lads rose they were warmly congratulated by several of the
nobles and knights standing round.

"I will not detain you," the king said, a short time later. "Doubtless
you have many preparations to make for your voyage. I hope that things
will fare well with you in Flanders. Bear in mind that if you draw
sword for Mynheer Van Voorden you are doing it for England."




CHAPTER XII

THE TROUBLES IN FLANDERS


On re-entering the city gates they first went to an armourer's, where
they purchased and buckled on some gilded spurs.

"Truly, Albert, I can scarce believe our good fortune," Edgar said, as
they left the shop. "It seems marvellous that though we have not served
as esquires, we should yet at seventeen be dubbed knights by the king."

"You have well deserved it, Edgar; as for me, I have but done my best
to second you."

"And a very good best it was, Albert," Edgar laughed. "'Tis true that
in the skirmish outside Aldersgate I might have managed by myself, but
in the Fleming's affair and in the Tower I should have fared hardly
indeed had it not been for your help. I fancy that we have the Fleming
to thank for this good fortune. You see he had already told the king
that we were to accompany him, and perhaps he may have pointed out to
him that it might be to the advantage of his mission that we should be
made knights. He has great influence with the Court, seeing that he has
frequently supplied the royal needs with money. First let us visit our
good friend Sir Robert Gaiton."

The knight received them most warmly. "I heard from Van Voorden that
you were going to Flanders with him. You are like to see stirring
events, for Ghent has long been in insurrection against the Count of
Flanders, and things are likely to come to a head erelong. Ah, and what
do I see--gold spurs! Then the king has knighted you. That is well,
indeed, and I congratulate you most heartily. I tell you that I felt
some shame that I, who had not even drawn a sword, should have been
knighted, while you two, who had fought like paladins, had not yet your
spurs, and I was glad that I had an opportunity, down in Kent, of
showing that I was not a mere carpet knight."

"'Tis for that affair that the king said he knighted us, Sir Robert,"
Edgar said. "The other matters were private ventures, though against
the king's enemies; but that was a battle in the field, and the success
put an end to rioting down there."

"I shall not forget my promise about the knightly armour," the merchant
said, "but methinks that it were best to wait for a while. The armour
the Fleming bought you is as good as could be made, but doubtless you
will outgrow it, so it would be best for me to delay for two or three
years. It is not likely that you will have much to do with courtly
ceremonies before then, and when you get to twenty, by which time you
will have your full height, if not your full width, I will furnish you
with suits with which you could ride with Richard when surrounded by
his proudest nobles and best knights."

"We thank you, indeed, Sir Robert, and it would be much better so. The
first shine is not off our armour at present, and it would be cumbrous
to carry a second suit with us, therefore we would much rather that you
postponed your gift."

He now went with them into the ladies' room. "Dame and daughter," he
said, "I have to present to you Sir Edgar Ormskirk and Sir Albert De
Courcy, whom his Majesty has been pleased this morning to raise to the
honour of knighthood, which has been well won by their own merits and
bravery."

The dame gave an exclamation of pleasure and her daughter clapped her
hands.

"'Tis well deserved, indeed," the former exclaimed, "and I wish them
all good fortune with their new dignity. How much we owe them, Robert."

"That do we," the merchant said, heartily.

"I am pleased," the girl said, coming forward and frankly shaking hands
with both.

"I can scarce credit our good fortune, Mistress Ursula," Albert said.
"'Tis but a few months since I deemed that I was unfit for martial
exercise, and that there was naught for me but to enter the Church, and
now, thanks entirely to Edgar and to good luck, I am already a knight;
'tis well-nigh past belief. That meeting with you and your father was
the beginning of our great fortune."

"That was a terrible night," the girl said, with a little shudder at
the recollection. "Heaven surely sent you to our aid."

While they were talking, Sir Robert said a word apart to his wife, and
left the room. He presently returned with a small coffer, which he
handed to her.

"It seems to me, young knights," she said, "that your equipment is
incomplete without a knightly chain. My husband, I know, is going to
give you armour for war; it is for us to give you an ornament for
Court. These are the work of Genoese goldsmiths, and I now, in the name
of my daughter and myself, and as a small token of the gratitude that
we owe you, bestow these upon you."

So saying she placed round their necks two heavy gold chains of the
finest workmanship. Both expressed their thanks in suitable terms.

"When do you sail?" the merchant asked Edgar.

"To-morrow morning," he replied, "and the ship will unmoor at noon. We
will come to say farewell to you in the morning."

Mynheer Van Voorden and his family were no less delighted than Sir
Robert Gaiton at the honour that had befallen them.

"Methinks, Mynheer," Edgar said, "that 'tis to you that we in part owe
the honour the king has bestowed on us, for he said that as you had a
mission from him it would be well that we should have the rank of
knighthood."

"I may have said as much to the king," Van Voorden admitted, "but it
was not until Richard had himself said that he intended at the first
opportunity to knight you both. On that I spoke, and pointed out that
the presence of two English knights with me would add weight to my
words. On which he gladly assented, saying that it had before been his
intention to do so ere you left London, had not Sir Ralph said it would
be better for you to earn it in the field; but as, since that time, you
had fought in a stiff battle, and done good service to the realm by
putting down the insurgents in Kent, who had been the foremost in the
troubles here, he would do so at once.

"I think now that it were well you should each take a man-at-arms with
you--a knight should not ride unattended. When we get across there I
will hire two Flemings, who speak English, to ride with your men. You
will need them to interpret for you, and they can aid your men to look
after your horses and armour. If the two fellows here start at once for
your homes, the others can be back in the morning."

"One of them is the man I should take with me," Edgar said. "I promised
him that he should ride behind me as soon as occasion offered. He has
no horse, but I doubt not that I shall be able to purchase one out
there."

"I will see to that," Van Voorden said, "and to his armour. Do not
trouble yourself about it in any way. And now about your man, Sir
Albert?"

"I will ask my father to choose a good fellow for me, and one who has
armour and a horse."

"Then it were best to lose no time. There is pen and parchment on that
table. Doubtless you will both wish to write to tell your fathers of
the honour that the king has bestowed upon you."

Both at once sat down and wrote a short letter. Edgar, after telling
his father that he had been knighted, said:

"_Mynheer Van Voorden says it will be as well if we each take a
man-at-arms with us, so I shall, with your permission, take Hal Carter,
as I had arranged with you to do so when I went to the wars. He is a
stout fellow, and will, I am sure, be a faithful one. I hope that you
will find no difficulty in replacing him._"

Sir Ralph himself arrived at the house the next morning. "I could not
let you go without coming to congratulate you both on the honour that
has befallen you. It might have been well that it should have come a
little later, but doubtless it will be of advantage to you in Flanders,
and should there be fighting between Ghent and the earl you will be
more free to choose your own place in battle, and to perform such
journeys and adventures as may seem good to you as knights, than you
would be as private gentlemen, or esquires, following no leader, and
having no rank or standing save that of gentlemen who have come over as
friends of Mynheer Van Voorden.

"Your mother is greatly pleased, and as for Aline, she would fain have
ridden hither with me, but as I intend to return this afternoon, and as
she saw you both but two days since, I thought it best that she should
stay at home. I have brought up with me John Lance. I thought that he
was the one who would suit you best. In some respects the other is the
more experienced and might be of more value were you going on a
campaign, but he is somewhat given to the ale-jug, so I thought it best
to bring Lance, who is a stout fellow, and can wield his sword well. He
is civil and well-spoken, and as I have told him he is to obey your
orders just the same as if they were mine, I believe that you will have
little trouble with him. His arms and armour are in good condition, and
he has been furnished with a fresh suit out of the chest.

"I saw your father, Edgar, late yesterday evening. I myself took over
your letter to him. He said that whatever a man's calling may be, it is
well that he should go into it with all his heart, and that since you
have taken to arms, it is well indeed that you should so soon have
distinguished yourself as to be deemed worthy of knighthood. He said
that he would get another to take the place of the man you keep with
you, and he wishes you God-speed in Flanders."

At eleven o'clock, Van Voorden, his wife and daughter, mounted,
together with Edgar, Albert, and their two men-at-arms; both the latter
were in body armour, with steel caps; the Fleming had secured a strong
and serviceable horse for Hal. His own servants had gone on an hour
before with three carts carrying the baggage; Sir Ralph accompanied
them across London Bridge to Rotherhithe, where the barque was lying
alongside a wharf. The horses were first taken on board, and placed in
