
All the dwellers in the city were united in enmity to the palace. It
swarmed with evil spirits, they said, whereas the evil spirits were in
the city, unsuspected.  One consequence of their presence was that,
when the rumour came that a great army was on the march against
Gwyntystorm, instead of rushing to their defences, to make new gates,
free portcullises and drawbridges, and bar the river, each band flew
first to their treasures, burying them in their cellars and gardens,
and hiding them behind stones in their chimneys; and, next to
rebellion, signing an invitation to His Majesty of Borsagrass to enter
at their open gates, destroy their king, and annex their country to his
own.

The straits of isolation were soon found in the palace: its invalids
were requiring stronger food, and what was to be done? For if the
butchers sent meat to the palace, was it not likely enough to be
poisoned?  Curdie said to Derba he would think of some plan before
morning.

But that same night, as soon as it was dark, Lina came to her master,
and let him understand she wanted to go out.  He unlocked a little
private postern for her, left it so that she could push it open when
she returned, and told the crocodile to stretch himself across it
inside.  Before midnight she came back with a young deer.

Early the next morning the legserpent crept out of the wine cellar,
through the broken door behind, shot into the river, and soon appeared
in the kitchen with a splendid sturgeon.  Every night Lina went out
hunting, and every morning Legserpent went out fishing, and both
invalids and household had plenty to eat.  As to news, the page, in
plain clothes, would now and then venture out into the market place,
and gather some.

One night he came back with the report that the army of the king of
Borsagrass had crossed the border.  Two days after, he brought the news
that the enemy was now but twenty miles from Gwyntystorm.

The colonel of the guard rose, and began furbishing his armour--but
gave it over to the page, and staggered across to the barracks, which
were in the next street.  The sentry took him for a ghost or worse, ran
into the guardroom, bolted the door, and stopped his ears.  The poor
colonel, who was yet hardly able to stand, crawled back despairing.

For Curdie, he had already, as soon as the first rumour reached him,
resolved, if no other instructions came, and the king continued unable
to give orders, to call Lina and the creatures, and march to meet the
enemy.  If he died, he died for the right, and there was a right end of
it.  He had no preparations to make, except a good sleep.

He asked the king to let the housemaid take his place by His Majesty
that night, and went and lay down on the floor of the corridor, no
farther off than a whisper would reach from the door of the chamber.
There, with an old mantle of the king's thrown over him, he was soon
fast asleep.

Somewhere about the middle of the night, he woke suddenly, started to
his feet, and rubbed his eyes.  He could not tell what had waked him.
But could he be awake, or was he not dreaming?  The curtain of the
king's door, a dull red ever before, was glowing a gorgeous, a radiant
purple; and the crown wrought upon it in silks and gems was flashing as
if it burned!  What could it mean?  Was the king's chamber on fire?  He
darted to the door and lifted the curtain. Glorious terrible sight!

A long and broad marble table, that stood at one end of the room, had
been drawn into the middle of it, and thereon burned a great fire, of a
sort that Curdie knew--a fire of glowing, flaming roses, red and white.
In the midst of the roses lay the king, moaning, but motionless.  Every
rose that fell from the table to the floor, someone, whom Curdie could
not plainly see for the brightness, lifted and laid burning upon the
king's face, until at length his face too was covered with the live
roses, and he lay all within the fire, moaning still, with now and then
a shuddering sob.

And the shape that Curdie saw and could not see, wept over the king as
he lay in the fire, and often she hid her face in handfuls of her
shadowy hair, and from her hair the water of her weeping dropped like
sunset rain in the light of the roses.  At last she lifted a great
armful of her hair, and shook it over the fire, and the drops fell from
it in showers, and they did not hiss in the flames, but there arose
instead as it were the sound of running brooks.

And the glow of the red fire died away, and the glow of the white fire
grew grey, and the light was gone, and on the table all was
black--except the face of the king, which shone from under the burnt
roses like a diamond in the ashes of a furnace.

Then Curdie, no longer dazzled, saw and knew the old princess.  The
room was lighted with the splendour of her face, of her blue eyes, of
her sapphire crown.  Her golden hair went streaming out from her
through the air till it went off in mist and light.  She was large and
strong as a Titaness.  She stooped over the table-altar, put her mighty
arms under the living sacrifice, lifted the king, as if he were but a
little child, to her bosom, walked with him up the floor, and laid him
in his bed.  Then darkness fell.

The miner boy turned silent away, and laid himself down again in the
corridor.  An absolute joy filled his heart, his bosom, his head, his
whole body.  All was safe; all was well.  With the helve of his mattock
tight in his grasp, he sank into a dreamless sleep.



CHAPTER 32

The King's Army

He woke like a giant refreshed with wine.

When he went into the king's chamber, the housemaid sat where he had
left her, and everything in the room was as it had been the night
before, save that a heavenly odour of roses filled the air of it.  He
went up to the bed.  The king opened his eyes, and the soul of perfect
health shone out of them.  Nor was Curdie amazed in his delight.

'Is it not time to rise, Curdie?' said the king.

'It is, Your Majesty.  Today we must be doing,' answered Curdie.

'What must we be doing today, Curdie?'

'Fighting, sire.'

'Then fetch me my armour--that of plated steel, in the chest there.
You will find the underclothing with it.'

As he spoke, he reached out his hand for his sword, which hung in the
bed before him, drew it, and examined the blade.

'A little rusty!' he said, 'but the edge is there.  We shall polish it
ourselves today--not on the wheel.  Curdie, my son, I wake from a
troubled dream.  A glorious torture has ended it, and I live.  I know
now well how things are, but you shall explain them to me as I get on
my armour.  No, I need no bath.  I am clean.  Call the colonel of the
guard.'

In complete steel the old man stepped into the chamber.  He knew it
not, but the old princess had passed through his room in the night.

'Why, Sir Bronzebeard!' said the king, 'you are dressed before me! You
need no valet, old man, when there is battle in the wind!'

'Battle, sire!' returned the colonel.  'Where then are our soldiers?'

'Why, there and here,' answered the king, pointing to the colonel
first, and then to himself.  'Where else, man?  The enemy will be upon
us ere sunset, if we be not upon him ere noon.  What other thing was in
your brave brain when you donned your armour, friend?'

'Your Majesty's orders, sire,' answered Sir Bronzebeard.

The king smiled and turned to Curdie.

'And what was in yours, Curdie, for your first word was of battle?'

'See, Your Majesty,' answered Curdie; 'I have polished my mattock. If
Your Majesty had not taken the command, I would have met the enemy at
the head of my beasts, and died in comfort, or done better.'

'Brave boy!' said the king.  'He who takes his life in his hand is the
only soldier.  You shall head your beasts today.  Sir Bronzebeard, will
you die with me if need be?'

'Seven times, my king,' said the colonel.

'Then shall we win this battle!' said the king.  'Curdie, go and bind
securely the six, that we lose not their guards.  Can you find me a
horse, think you, Sir Bronzebeard?  Alas! they told me my white charger
was dead.'

'I will go and fright the varletry with my presence, and secure, I
trust, a horse for Your Majesty, and one for myself.'

'And look you, brother!' said the king; 'bring one for my miner boy
too, and a sober old charger for the princess, for she too must go to
the battle, and conquer with us.'

'Pardon me, sire,' said Curdie; 'a miner can fight best on foot. I
might smite my horse dead under me with a missed blow.  And besides
that, I must be near to my beasts.'

'As you will,' said the king.  'Three horses then, Sir Bronzebeard.'

The colonel departed, doubting sorely in his heart how to accoutre and
lead from the barrack stables three horses, in the teeth of his
revolted regiment.

In the hall he met the housemaid.

'Can you lead a horse?' he asked.

'Yes, sir.'

'Are you willing to die for the king?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Can you do as you are bid?'

'I can keep on trying, sir.'

'Come then.  Were I not a man I would be a woman such as you.'

When they entered the barrack yard, the soldiers scattered like autumn
leaves before a blast of winter.  They went into the stable
unchallenged--and lo! in a stall, before the colonel's eyes, stood the
king's white charger, with the royal saddle and bridle hung high beside
him!

'Traitorous thieves!' muttered the old man in his beard, and went along
the stalls, looking for his own black charger.  Having found him, he
returned to saddle first the king's.  But the maid had already the
saddle upon him, and so girt that the colonel could thrust no finger
tip between girth and skin.  He left her to finish what she had so well
begun, and went and made ready his own.  He then chose for the princess
a great red horse, twenty years old, which he knew to possess every
equine virtue.  This and his own he led to the palace, and the maid led
the king's.

The king and Curdie stood in the court, the king in full armour of
silvered steel, with a circlet of rubies and diamonds round his helmet.
He almost leaped for joy when he saw his great white charger come in,
gentle as a child to the hand of the housemaid. But when the horse saw
his master in his armour, he reared and bounded in jubilation, yet did
not break from the hand that held him.  Then out came the princess
attired and ready, with a hunting knife her father had given her by her
side.  They brought her mother's saddle, splendent with gems and gold,
set it on the great red horse, and lifted her to it.  But the saddle
was so big, and the horse so tall, that the child found no comfort in
them.

'Please, King Papa,' she said, 'can I not have my white pony?'

'I did not think of him, little one,' said the king.  'Where is he?'

'In the stable,' answered the maid.  'I found him half starved, the
only horse within the gates, the day after the servants were driven
out.  He has been well fed since.'

'Go and fetch him,' said the king.

As the maid appeared with the pony, from a side door came Lina and the
forty-nine, following Curdie.

'I will go with Curdie and the Uglies,' cried the princess; and as soon
as she was mounted she got into the middle of the pack.

So out they set, the strangest force that ever went against an enemy.
The king in silver armour sat stately on his white steed, with the
stones flashing on his helmet; beside him the grim old colonel, armed
in steel, rode his black charger; behind the king, a little to the
right, Curdie walked afoot, his mattock shining in the sun; Lina
followed at his heel; behind her came the wonderful company of Uglies;
in the midst of them rode the gracious little Irene, dressed in blue,
and mounted on the prettiest of white ponies; behind the colonel, a
little to the left, walked the page, armed in a breastplate, headpiece,
and trooper's sword he had found in the palace, all much too big for
him, and carrying a huge brass trumpet which he did his best to blow;
and the king smiled and seemed pleased with his music, although it was
but the grunt of a brazen unrest.  Alongside the beasts walked Derba
carrying Barbara--their refuge the mountains, should the cause of the
king be lost; as soon as they were over the river they turned aside to
ascend the Cliff, and there awaited the forging of the day's history.
Then first Curdie saw that the housemaid, whom they had all forgotten,
was following, mounted on the great red horse, and seated in the royal
saddle.

Many were the eyes unfriendly of women that had stared at them from
door and window as they passed through the city; and low laughter and
mockery and evil words from the lips of children had rippled about
their ears; but the men were all gone to welcome the enemy, the
butchers the first, the king's guard the last.  And now on the heels of
the king's army rushed out the women and children also, to gather
flowers and branches, wherewith to welcome their conquerors.

About a mile down the river, Curdie, happening to look behind him, saw
the maid, whom he had supposed gone with Derba, still following on the
great red horse.  The same moment the king, a few paces in front of
him, caught sight of the enemy's tents, pitched where, the cliffs
receding, the bank of the river widened to a little plain.



CHAPTER 33

The Battle

He commanded the page to blow his trumpet; and, in the strength of the
moment, the youth uttered a right warlike defiance.

But the butchers and the guard, who had gone over armed to the enemy,
thinking that the king had come to make his peace also, and that it
might thereafter go hard with them, rushed at once to make short work
with him, and both secure and commend themselves.  The butchers came on
first--for the guards had slackened their saddle girths--brandishing
their knives, and talking to their dogs. Curdie and the page, with Lina
and her pack, bounded to meet them. Curdie struck down the foremost
with his mattock.  The page, finding his sword too much for him, threw
it away and seized the butcher's knife, which as he rose he plunged
into the foremost dog. Lina rushed raging and gnashing among them.  She
would not look at a dog so long as there was a butcher on his legs, and
she never stopped to kill a butcher, only with one grind of her jaws
crushed a leg of him.  When they were all down, then indeed she flashed
among the dogs.

Meantime the king and the colonel had spurred toward the advancing
guard.  The king clove the major through skull and collar bone, and the
colonel stabbed the captain in the throat.  Then a fierce combat
commenced--two against many.  But the butchers and their dogs quickly
disposed of, up came Curdie and his beasts.  The horses of the guard,
struck with terror, turned in spite of the spur, and fled in confusion.

Thereupon the forces of Borsagrass, which could see little of the
affair, but correctly imagined a small determined body in front of
them, hastened to the attack.  No sooner did their first advancing wave
appear through the foam of the retreating one, than the king and the
colonel and the page, Curdie and the beasts, went charging upon them.
Their attack, especially the rush of the Uglies, threw the first line
into great confusion, but the second came up quickly; the beasts could
not be everywhere, there were thousands to one against them, and the
