
'Perhaps they're only in Northumberland and Durham,' said Jane
soothingly.  It was almost impossible to believe that it could
really hurt people much to be scalped so far away as that.

'Don't you believe it!' said Anthea.  'The Sammyadd said we'd let
ourselves in for a nice thing.  That means they'll come HERE.  And
suppose they scalped the Lamb!'

'Perhaps the scalping would come right again at sunset,' said Jane;
but she did not speak so hopefully as usual.

'Not it!' said Anthea.  'The things that grow out of the wishes
don't go.  Look at the fifteen shillings!  Pussy, I'm going to
break something, and you must let me have every penny of money
you've got.  The Indians will come HERE, don't you see?  That
spiteful Psammead as good as said so.  You see what my plan is?
Come on!'

Jane did not see at all.  But she followed her sister meekly into
their mother's bedroom.

Anthea lifted down the heavy water-jug - it had a pattern of storks
and long grasses on it, which Anthea never forgot.  She carried it
into the dressing-room, and carefully emptied the water out of it
into the bath.  Then she took the jug back into the bedroom and
dropped it on the floor.  You know how a jug always breaks if you
happen to drop it by accident.  If you happen to drop it on
purpose, it is quite different.  Anthea dropped that jug three
times, and it was as unbroken as ever.  So at last she had to take
her father's boot-tree and break the jug with that in cold blood.
It was heartless work.

Next she broke open the missionary-box with the poker.  Jane told
her that it was wrong, of course, but Anthea shut her lips very
tight and then said:

'Don't be silly - it's a matter of life and death.'

There was not very much in the missionary-box - only
seven-and-fourpence - but the girls between them had nearly four
shillings.  This made over eleven shillings, as you will easily
see.

Anthea tied up the money in a corner of her pocket-handkerchief.
'Come on, Jane!' she said, and ran down to the farm.  She knew that
the farmer was going into Rochester that afternoon.  In fact it had
been arranged that he was to take the four children with him.  They
had planned this in the happy hour when they believed that they
were going to get that hundred pounds, in two-shilling pieces, out
of the Psammead.  They had arranged to pay the farmer two shillings
each for the ride.  Now Anthea hastily explained to him that they
could not go, but would he take Martha and the Baby instead?  He
agreed, but he was not pleased to get only half-a-crown instead of
eight shillings.

Then the girls ran home again.  Anthea was agitated, but not
flurried.  When she came to think it over afterwards, she could not
help seeing that she had acted with the most far-seeing
promptitude, just like a born general.  She fetched a little box
from her corner drawer, and went to find Martha, who was laying the
cloth and not in the best of tempers.

'Look here,' said Anthea.  'I've broken the toilet-jug in mother's
room.'

'Just like you - always up to some mischief,' said Martha, dumping
down a salt-cellar with a bang.

'Don't be cross, Martha dear,' said Anthea.  'I've got enough money
to pay for a new one - if only you'll be a dear and go and buy it
for us.  Your cousins keep a china-shop, don't they?  And I would
like you to get it to-day, in case mother comes home to-morrow.
You know she said she might, perhaps.'

'But you're all going into town yourselves,' said Martha.

'We can't afford to, if we get the new jug,' said Anthea; 'but
we'll pay for you to go, if you'll take the Lamb.  And I say,
Martha, look here - I'll give you my Liberty box, if you'll go.
Look, it's most awfully pretty - all inlaid with real silver and
ivory and ebony like King Solomon's temple.'

'I see,' said Martha; 'no, I don't want your box, miss.  What you
want is to get the precious Lamb off your hands for the afternoon.
Don't you go for to think I don't see through you!'

This was so true that Anthea longed to deny it at once - Martha had
no business to know so much.  But she held her tongue.

Martha set down the bread with a bang that made it jump off its
trencher.

'I DO want the jug got,' said Anthea softly.  'You WILL go, won't
you?'

'Well, just for this once, I don't mind; but mind you don't get
into none of your outrageous mischief while I'm gone - that's all!'

'He's going earlier than he thought,' said Anthea eagerly.  'You'd
better hurry and get dressed.  Do put on that lovely purple frock,
Martha, and the hat with the pink cornflowers, and the yellow-lace
collar.  Jane'll finish laying the cloth, and I'll wash the Lamb
and get him ready.'

As she washed the unwilling Lamb, and hurried him into his best
clothes, Anthea peeped out of the window from time to time; so far
all was well - she could see no Red Indians.  When with a rush and
a scurry and some deepening of the damask of Martha's complexion
she and the Lamb had been got off, Anthea drew a deep breath.

'HE'S safe!' she said, and, to jane's horror, flung herself down on
the floor and burst into floods of tears.  Jane did not understand
at all how a person could be so brave and like a general, and then
suddenly give way and go flat like an air-balloon when you prick
it.  It is better not to go flat, of course, but you will observe
that Anthea did not give way till her aim was accomplished.  She
had got the dear Lamb out of danger - she felt certain the Red
Indians would be round the White House or nowhere - the farmer's
cart would not come back till after sunset, so she could afford to
cry a little.  It was partly with joy that she cried, because she
had done what she meant to do.  She cried for about three minutes,
while Jane hugged her miserably and said at five-second intervals,
'Don't cry, Panther dear!'

Then she jumped up, rubbed her eyes hard with the corner of her
pinafore, so that they kept red for the rest of the day, and
started to tell the boys.  But just at that moment cook rang the
dinner-bell, and nothing could be said till they had all been
helped to minced beef.  Then cook left the room, and Anthea told
her tale.  But it is a mistake to tell a thrilling tale when people
are eating minced beef and boiled potatoes.  There seemed somehow
to be something about the food that made the idea of Red Indians
seem flat and unbelievable.  The boys actually laughed, and called
Anthea a little silly.

'Why,' said Cyril, 'I'm almost sure it was before I said that, that
Jane said she wished it would be a fine day.'

'It wasn't,' said Jane briefly.

'Why, if it was Indians,' Cyril went on - 'salt, please, and
mustard - I must have something to make this mush go down - if it
was Indians, they'd have been infesting the place long before this
- you know they would.  I believe it's the fine day.'

'Then why did the Sammyadd say we'd let ourselves in for a nice
thing?' asked Anthea.  She was feeling very cross.  She knew she
had acted with nobility and discretion, and after that it was very
hard to be called a little silly, especially when she had the
weight of a burglared missionary-box and about seven-and-fourpence,
mostly in coppers, lying like lead upon her conscience.

There was a silence, during which cook took away the mincy plates
and brought in the treacle-pudding.  As soon as she had retired,
Cyril began again.

'Of course I don't mean to say,' he admitted, 'that it wasn't a
good thing to get Martha and the Lamb out of the light for the
afternoon; but as for Red Indians - why, you know jolly well the
wishes always come that very minute.  If there was going to be Red
Indians, they'd be here now.'

'I expect they are,' said Anthea; 'they're lurking amid the
undergrowth, for anything you know.  I do think you're most beastly
unkind.'

'Indians almost always DO lurk, really, though, don't they?' put in
Jane, anxious for peace.

No, they don't,' said Cyril tartly.  'And I'm not unkind, I'm only
truthful.  And I say it was utter rot breaking the water-jug; and
as for the missionary-box, I believe it's a treason-crime, and I
shouldn't wonder if you could be hanged for it, if any of us was to
split -'

'Shut up, can't you?' said Robert; but Cyril couldn't.  You see, he
felt in his heart that if there SHOULD be Indians they would be
entirely his own fault, so he did not wish to believe in them.  And
trying not to believe things when in your heart you are almost sure
they are true, is as bad for the temper as anything I know.

'It's simply idiotic,' he said, 'talking about Indians, when you
can see for yourselves that it's Jane who's got her wish.  Look
what a fine day it is - OH - '

He had turned towards the window to point out the fineness of the
day - the others turned too - and a frozen silence caught at Cyril,
and none of the others felt at all like breaking it.  For there,
peering round the corner of the window, among the red leaves of the
Virginia creeper, was a face - a brown face, with a long nose and
a tight mouth and very bright eyes.  And the face was painted in
coloured patches.  It had long black hair, and in the hair were
feathers!

Every child's mouth in the room opened, and stayed open.  The
treacle-pudding was growing white and cold on their plates.  No one
could move.

Suddenly the feathered head was cautiously withdrawn, and the spell
was broken.  I am sorry to say that Anthea's first words were very
like a girl.

'There, now!' she said.  'I told you so!'

Treacle-pudding had now definitely ceased to charm.  Hastily
wrapping their portions in a Spectator of the week before the week
before last, they hid them behind the crinkled-paper
stove-ornament, and fled upstairs to reconnoitre and to hold a
hurried council.

'Pax,' said Cyril handsomely when they reached their mother's
bedroom.  'Panther, I'm sorry if I was a brute.'

'All right,' said Anthea, 'but you see now!'

No further trace of Indians, however, could be discerned from the
windows.

'Well,' said Robert, 'what are we to do?'

'The only thing I can think of,' said Anthea, who was now generally
admitted to be the heroine of the day, 'is - if we dressed up as
like Indians as we can, and looked out of the windows, or even went
out.  They might think we were the powerful leaders of a large
neighbouring tribe, and - and not do anything to us, you know, for
fear of awful vengeance.'

'But Eliza, and the cook?' said Jane.

'You forget - they can't notice anything,' said Robert.  'They
wouldn't notice anything out of the way, even if they were scalped
or roasted at a slow fire.'

'But would they come right at sunset?'

'Of course.  You can't be really scalped or burned to death without
noticing it, and you'd be sure to notice it next day, even if it
escaped your attention at the time,' said Cyril.  'I think Anthea's
right, but we shall want a most awful lot of feathers.'

'I'll go down to the hen-house,' said Robert.  'There's one of the
turkeys in there - it's not very well.  I could cut its feathers
without it minding much.  It's very bad - doesn't seem to care what
happens to it.  Get me the cutting-out scissors.'

Earnest reconnoitring convinced them all that no Indians were in
the poultry-yard.  Robert went.  In five minutes he came back -
pale, but with many feathers.

'Look here,' he said, 'this is jolly serious.  I cut off the
feathers, and when I turned to come out there was an Indian
squinting at me from under the old hen-coop.  I just brandished the
feathers and yelled, and got away before he could get the coop off
the top of himself.  Panther, get the coloured blankets off our
beds, and look slippy, can't you?'

It is wonderful how like an Indian you can make yourselves with
blankets and feathers and coloured scarves.  Of course none of the
children happened to have long black hair, but there was a lot of
black calico that had been got to cover school-books with.  They
cut strips of this into a sort of fine fringe, and fastened it
round their heads with the amber-coloured ribbons off the girls'
Sunday dresses.  Then they stuck turkeys' feathers in the ribbons.
The calico looked very like long black hair, especially when the
strips began to curl up a bit.

'But our faces,' said Anthea, 'they're not at all the right colour.
We're all rather pale, and I'm sure I don't know why, but Cyril is
the colour of putty.'

'I'm not,' said Cyril.

'The real Indians outside seem to be brownish,' said Robert
hastily.  'I think we ought to be really RED - it's sort of
superior to have a red skin, if you are one.'

The red ochre cook used for the kitchen bricks seemed to be about
the reddest thing in the house.  The children mixed some in a
saucer with milk, as they had seen cook do for the kitchen floor.
Then they carefully painted each other's faces and hands with it,
till they were quite as red as any Red Indian need be - if not
redder.

They knew at once that they must look very terrible when they met
Eliza in the passage, and she screamed aloud.  This unsolicited
testimonial pleased them very much.  Hastily telling her not to be
a goose, and that it was only a game, the four blanketed,
feathered, really and truly Redskins went boldly out to meet the
foe.  I say boldly.  That is because I wish to be polite.  At any
rate, they went.

Along the hedge dividing the wilderness from the garden was a row
of dark heads, all highly feathered.

'It's our only chance,' whispered Anthea.  'Much better than to
wait for their blood-freezing attack.  We must pretend like mad.
Like that game of cards where you pretend you've got aces when you
haven't.  Fluffing they call it, I think.  Now then.  Whoop!'

With four wild war-whoops - or as near them as English children
could be expected to go without any previous practice - they rushed
through the gate and struck four warlike attitudes in face of the
line of Red Indians.  These were all about the same height, and
that height was Cyril's.

'I hope to goodness they can talk English,' said Cyril through his
attitude.

Anthea knew they could, though she never knew how she came to know
it.  She had a white towel tied to a walking-stick.  This was a
flag of truce, and she waved it, in the hope that the Indians would
know what it was.  Apparently they did - for one who was browner
than the others stepped forward.

'Ye seek a pow-wow?' he said in excellent English.  'I am Golden
Eagle, of the mighty tribe of Rock-dwellers.'
'And I,' said Anthea, with a sudden inspiration, 'am the Black
Panther - chief of the - the - the - Mazawattee tribe.  My brothers
- I don't mean - yes, I do - the tribe - I mean the Mazawattees -
are in ambush below the brow of yonder hill.'

'And what mighty warriors be these?' asked Golden Eagle, turning to
the others.

Cyril said he was the great chief Squirrel, of the Moning Congo
tribe, and, seeing that Jane was sucking her thumb and could
evidently think of no name for herself, he added, 'This great
warrior is Wild Cat - Pussy Ferox we call it in this land - leader
of the vast Phiteezi tribe.'

And thou, valorous Redskin?' Golden Eagle inquired suddenly of
Robert, who, taken unawares, could only reply that he was Bobs,
leader of the Cape Mounted Police.

'And now,' said Black Panther, 'our tribes, if we just whistle them
up, will far outnumber your puny forces; so resistance is useless.
Return, therefore, to your own land, O brother, and smoke pipes of
peace in your wampums with your squaws and your medicine-men, and
dress yourselves in the gayest wigwams, and eat happily of the
