every day.'

'No more do we,' said H. O., 'but we shall to-morrow.'

I thought of all the things we had bought with our half-sovereign--the
rabbit and the sweets and the almonds and raisins and figs and the
coconut: and I thought of the nasty mutton and things, and while I was
thinking about it all Alice said--

'Let's ask the poor Indian to come to dinner with _us_ to-morrow.' I
should have said it myself if she had given me time.

We got the little ones to go to bed by promising to put a note on their
dressing-table saying what had happened, so that they might know the
first thing in the morning, or in the middle of the night if they
happened to wake up, and then we elders arranged everything.

I waited by the back door, and when the Uncle was beginning to go Dicky
was to drop a marble down between the banisters for a signal, so that I
could run round and meet the Uncle as he came out.

This seems like deceit, but if you are a thoughtful and considerate boy
you will understand that we could not go down and say to the Uncle in
the hall under Father's eye, 'Father has given you a beastly, nasty
dinner, but if you will come to dinner with us tomorrow, we will show
you our idea of good things to eat.' You will see, if you think it over,
that this would not have been at all polite to Father.

So when the Uncle left, Father saw him to the door and let him out, and
then went back to the study, looking very sad, Dora says.

As the poor Indian came down our steps he saw me there at the gate.

I did not mind his being poor, and I said, 'Good evening, Uncle,' just
as politely as though he had been about to ascend into one of the gilded
chariots of the rich and affluent, instead of having to walk to the
station a quarter of a mile in the mud, unless he had the money for a
tram fare.

'Good evening, Uncle.' I said it again, for he stood staring at me.
I don't suppose he was used to politeness from boys--some boys are
anything but--especially to the Aged Poor.

So I said, 'Good evening, Uncle,' yet once again. Then he said--

'Time you were in bed, young man. Eh!--what?'

Then I saw I must speak plainly with him, man to man. So I did. I said--

'You've been dining with my Father, and we couldn't help hearing you
say the dinner was shocking. So we thought as you're an Indian, perhaps
you're very poor'--I didn't like to tell him we had heard the dreadful
truth from his own lips, so I went on, 'because of "Lo, the poor
Indian"--you know--and you can't get a good dinner every day. And we are
very sorry if you're poor; and won't you come and have dinner with
us to-morrow--with us children, I mean? It's a very, very good
dinner--rabbit, and hardbake, and coconut--and you needn't mind us
knowing you're poor, because we know honourable poverty is no disgrace,
and--' I could have gone on much longer, but he interrupted me to
say--'Upon my word! And what's your name, eh?'

'Oswald Bastable,' I said; and I do hope you people who are reading this
story have not guessed before that I was Oswald all the time.

'Oswald Bastable, eh? Bless my soul!' said the poor Indian. 'Yes, I'll
dine with you, Mr Oswald Bastable, with all the pleasure in life. Very
kind and cordial invitation, I'm sure. Good night, sir. At one o'clock,
I presume?'

'Yes, at one,' I said. 'Good night, sir.'

Then I went in and told the others, and we wrote a paper and put it on
the boy's dressing-table, and it said--

'The poor Indian is coming at one. He seemed very grateful to me for my
kindness.'

We did not tell Father that the Uncle was coming to dinner with us,
for the polite reason that I have explained before. But we had to tell
Eliza; so we said a friend was coming to dinner and we wanted everything
very nice. I think she thought it was Albert-next-door, but she was in
a good temper that day, and she agreed to cook the rabbit and to make a
pudding with currants in it. And when one o'clock came the Indian Uncle
came too. I let him in and helped him off with his greatcoat, which was
all furry inside, and took him straight to the nursery. We were to have
dinner there as usual, for we had decided from the first that he would
enjoy himself more if he was not made a stranger of. We agreed to treat
him as one of ourselves, because if we were too polite, he might think
it was our pride because he was poor.

He shook hands with us all and asked our ages, and what schools we went
to, and shook his head when we said we were having a holiday just now. I
felt rather uncomfortable--I always do when they talk about schools--and
I couldn't think of anything to say to show him we meant to treat him
as one of ourselves. I did ask if he played cricket. He said he had not
played lately. And then no one said anything till dinner came in. We had
all washed our faces and hands and brushed our hair before he came in,
and we all looked very nice, especially Oswald, who had had his hair
cut that very morning. When Eliza had brought in the rabbit and gone
out again, we looked at each other in silent despair, like in books.
It seemed as if it were going to be just a dull dinner like the one the
poor Indian had had the night before; only, of course, the things to
eat would be nicer. Dicky kicked Oswald under the table to make him say
something--and he had his new boots on, too!--but Oswald did not kick
back; then the Uncle asked--

'Do you carve, sir, or shall I?'

Suddenly Alice said--

'Would you like grown-up dinner, Uncle, or play-dinner?'

He did not hesitate a moment, but said, 'Play-dinner, by all means.
Eh!--what?' and then we knew it was all right.

So we at once showed the Uncle how to be a dauntless hunter. The rabbit
was the deer we had slain in the green forest with our trusty yew bows,
and we toasted the joints of it, when the Uncle had carved it, on bits
of firewood sharpened to a point. The Uncle's piece got a little burnt,
but he said it was delicious, and he said game was always nicer when you
had killed it yourself. When Eliza had taken away the rabbit bones and
brought in the pudding, we waited till she had gone out and shut the
door, and then we put the dish down on the floor and slew the pudding in
the dish in the good old-fashioned way. It was a wild boar at bay, and
very hard indeed to kill, even with forks. The Uncle was very fierce
indeed with the pudding, and jumped and howled when he speared it, but
when it came to his turn to be helped, he said, 'No, thank you; think of
my liver. Eh!--what?'

But he had some almonds and raisins--when we had climbed to the top of
the chest of drawers to pluck them from the boughs of the great trees;
and he had a fig from the cargo that the rich merchants brought in their
ship--the long drawer was the ship--and the rest of us had the sweets
and the coconut. It was a very glorious and beautiful feast, and when it
was over we said we hoped it was better than the dinner last night. And
he said:

'I never enjoyed a dinner more.' He was too polite to say what he really
thought about Father's dinner. And we saw that though he might be poor,
he was a true gentleman.

He smoked a cigar while we finished up what there was left to eat, and
told us about tiger shooting and about elephants. We asked him about
wigwams, and wampum, and mocassins, and beavers, but he did not seem
to know, or else he was shy about talking of the wonders of his native
land.

We liked him very much indeed, and when he was going at last, Alice
nudged me, and I said--'There's one and threepence farthing left out
of our half-sovereign. Will you take it, please, because we do like you
very much indeed, and we don't want it, really; and we would rather you
had it.' And I put the money into his hand.

'I'll take the threepenny-bit,' he said, turning the money over and
looking at it, 'but I couldn't rob you of the rest. By the way, where
did you get the money for this most royal spread--half a sovereign you
said--eh, what?'

We told him all about the different ways we had looked for treasure, and
when we had been telling some time he sat down, to listen better and at
last we told him how Alice had played at divining-rod, and how it really
had found a half-sovereign.

Then he said he would like to see her do it again. But we explained that
the rod would only show gold and silver, and that we were quite sure
there was no more gold in the house, because we happened to have looked
very carefully.

'Well, silver, then,' said he; 'let's hide the plate-basket, and little
Alice shall make the divining-rod find it. Eh!--what?'

'There isn't any silver in the plate-basket now,' Dora said. 'Eliza
asked me to borrow the silver spoons and forks for your dinner last
night from Albert-next-door's Mother. Father never notices, but she
thought it would be nicer for you. Our own silver went to have the dents
taken out; and I don't think Father could afford to pay the man for
doing it, for the silver hasn't come back.'

'Bless my soul!' said the Uncle again, looking at the hole in the big
chair that we burnt when we had Guy Fawkes' Day indoors. 'And how much
pocket-money do you get? Eh!--what?'

'We don't have any now,' said Alice; 'but indeed we don't want the other
shilling. We'd much rather you had it, wouldn't we?'

And the rest of us said, 'Yes.' The Uncle wouldn't take it, but he asked
a lot of questions, and at last he went away. And when he went he said--

'Well, youngsters, I've enjoyed myself very much. I shan't forget your
kind hospitality. Perhaps the poor Indian may be in a position to ask
you all to dinner some day.'

Oswald said if he ever could we should like to come very much, but he
was not to trouble to get such a nice dinner as ours, because we could
do very well with cold mutton and rice pudding. We do not like these
things, but Oswald knows how to behave. Then the poor Indian went away.

We had not got any treasure by this party, but we had had a very good
time, and I am sure the Uncle enjoyed himself.

We were so sorry he was gone that we could none of us eat much tea;
but we did not mind, because we had pleased the poor Indian and enjoyed
ourselves too. Besides, as Dora said, 'A contented mind is a continual
feast,' so it did not matter about not wanting tea.

Only H. O. did not seem to think a continual feast was a contented mind,
and Eliza gave him a powder in what was left of the red-currant jelly
Father had for the nasty dinner.

But the rest of us were quite well, and I think it must have been the
coconut with H. O. We hoped nothing had disagreed with the Uncle, but we
never knew.



CHAPTER 16. THE END OF THE TREASURE-SEEKING

Now it is coming near the end of our treasure-seeking, and the end was
so wonderful that now nothing is like it used to be. It is like as
if our fortunes had been in an earthquake, and after those, you know,
everything comes out wrong-way up.

The day after the Uncle speared the pudding with us opened in gloom and
sadness. But you never know. It was destined to be a day when things
happened. Yet no sign of this appeared in the early morning. Then all
was misery and upsetness. None of us felt quite well; I don't know why:
and Father had one of his awful colds, so Dora persuaded him not to go
to London, but to stay cosy and warm in the study, and she made him some
gruel. She makes it better than Eliza does; Eliza's gruel is all little
lumps, and when you suck them it is dry oatmeal inside.

We kept as quiet as we could, and I made H. O. do some lessons, like the
G. B. had advised us to. But it was very dull. There are some days
when you seem to have got to the end of all the things that could ever
possibly happen to you, and you feel you will spend all the rest of your
life doing dull things just the same way. Days like this are generally
wet days. But, as I said, you never know.

Then Dicky said if things went on like this he should run away to sea,
and Alice said she thought it would be rather nice to go into a convent.
H. O. was a little disagreeable because of the powder Eliza had given
him, so he tried to read two books at once, one with each eye, just
because Noel wanted one of the books, which was very selfish of him, so
it only made his headache worse. H. O. is getting old enough to learn by
experience that it is wrong to be selfish, and when he complained about
his head Oswald told him whose fault it was, because I am older than
he is, and it is my duty to show him where he is wrong. But he began to
cry, and then Oswald had to cheer him up because of Father wanting to be
quiet. So Oswald said--

'They'll eat H. O. if you don't look out!' And Dora said Oswald was too
bad.

Of course Oswald was not going to interfere again, so he went to look
out of the window and see the trams go by, and by and by H. O. came and
looked out too, and Oswald, who knows when to be generous and forgiving,
gave him a piece of blue pencil and two nibs, as good as new, to keep.

As they were looking out at the rain splashing on the stones in the
street they saw a four-wheeled cab come lumbering up from the way the
station is. Oswald called out--

'Here comes the coach of the Fairy Godmother. It'll stop here, you see
if it doesn't!'

So they all came to the window to look. Oswald had only said that about
stopping and he was stricken with wonder and amaze when the cab really
did stop. It had boxes on the top and knobby parcels sticking out of
the window, and it was something like going away to the seaside and
something like the gentleman who takes things about in a carriage with
the wooden shutters up, to sell to the drapers' shops. The cabman got
down, and some one inside handed out ever so many parcels of different
shapes and sizes, and the cabman stood holding them in his arms and
grinning over them.

Dora said, 'It is a pity some one doesn't tell him this isn't the
house.' And then from inside the cab some one put out a foot feeling for
the step, like a tortoise's foot coming out from under his shell
when you are holding him off the ground, and then a leg came and more
parcels, and then Noel cried--

'It's the poor Indian!'

And it was.

Eliza opened the door, and we were all leaning over the banisters.
Father heard the noise of parcels and boxes in the hall, and he came out
without remembering how bad his cold was. If you do that yourself when
you have a cold they call you careless and naughty. Then we heard the
poor Indian say to Father--

'I say, Dick, I dined with your kids yesterday--as I daresay they've
told you. Jolliest little cubs I ever saw! Why didn't you let me see
them the other night? The eldest is the image of poor Janey--and as to
young Oswald, he's a man! If he's not a man, I'm a nigger! Eh!--what?
And Dick, I say, I shouldn't wonder if I could find a friend to put a
bit into that business of yours--eh?'

Then he and Father went into the study and the door was shut--and we
went down and looked at the parcels. Some were done up in old, dirty
newspapers, and tied with bits of rag, and some were in brown paper and
string from the shops, and there were boxes. We wondered if the Uncle
had come to stay and this was his luggage, or whether it was to sell.
Some of it smelt of spices, like merchandise--and one bundle Alice felt
certain was a bale. We heard a hand on the knob of the study door after
a bit, and Alice said--

'Fly!' and we all got away but H. O., and the Uncle caught him by the
leg as he was trying to get upstairs after us.

