to Mark and shook him warmly by the hand.

"My son has told me everything, Mr. Thorndyke," he said, "and I cannot
thank you sufficiently for the noble part you took in rescuing him from
the terrible effects of his folly. I have been down here twice this
afternoon, for I felt that I could not rest until I had shaken you by
the hand. It is not the question of money so much, though that would
have been a serious loss to me, but it is the saving of my son's life,
and the saving of the honor of our name."

"I am glad indeed to have been of service, Mr. Cotter, and I trust that
you have consented to forgive the folly that he has committed, and which
I feel sure will never be repeated."

"Yes. It was a heavy blow to me, Mr. Thorndyke, when Philip told me; but
as he has sworn most solemnly never to touch a card again, and as I feel
sure that the lesson cannot but be a useful one to him all his life, I
have agreed to say no more about it, and let the matter drop altogether.
He has been fortunate to have escaped so easily. He has told me of the
noble offer you made to pay his losses if you should not be able to
prove that he was being cheated."

"I was not committing myself heavily," Mark said with a smile. "I had
seen enough to be absolutely certain, and was sure that I should be able
to bring it home to them."

"But it was at a considerable risk to yourself, Mr. Thorndyke. As it
was, you had a narrow escape of being shot."

"Not a very narrow escape," Mark replied. "With so many men standing
round him and their attention called to him, it was certain that he
would be seized before he could take aim at me. I had pistols in my
pocket, and was prepared to fire in an instant, but I saw at once that
there was no occasion for that."

"But I cannot imagine how you should have detected the cheating," the
banker said. "You are younger than my son, and he said that you told
him that you had only recently come up to London. It is astonishing that
while experienced players should never have noticed that anything was
wrong you should have discovered it."

"The explanation is simple, Mr. Cotter. I have no inclination for play
myself, but I happened a short time since to fall in with a man who was
well acquainted with all the various methods of card sharping. I thought
that a knowledge of that might some day be useful, and I got him to
put me up to a number of the tricks of card sharpers both at home and
abroad. Having these fresh in my mind, and seeing that your son was
playing with a man whose reputation I knew to be bad, I naturally
concentrated my attention upon him, and was not long in discovering that
he had a confederate standing behind your son's chair. Being a stranger
in the place, I could not denounce him, but the next night I set two
friends to watch that method of cheating, while I kept my eyes fixed on
Emerson's hands. As I anticipated, there was nothing suspicious about
his movements so long as play was comparatively low, for the advantage
that he gained from his confederate enabled him to be sure of winning in
the long run; it was only in the last game, which was a high one, that,
as he knew that your son had a strong hand, he was tempted to stock
his hand with false cards; and watching closely, I had no difficulty in
detecting his method."

"Well, sir, you have, at any rate, laid us both under the deepest
obligation. Is there any possible way in which we can show our
gratitude?"

Mark thought for a moment.

"In one way you might do me a favor, Mr. Cotter. A ward of my father's,
who will inherit some property when she comes of age, is at present
finishing her education in town, and is living with a lady who has
been her friend and companion since childhood. I have a good many
acquaintances, but they are all bachelors; and having been living down
at my father's place, near Reigate, for so many years, the ladies have
no acquaintances in London. They live at Islington, and their life is
a very dull one. I am anxious, for several reasons, that the young lady
should have the advantage of going somewhat into society. Hitherto I
have had no means of introducing her. If it is not too much to ask, Mr.
Cotter, I should be extremely glad and obliged if Mrs. Cotter would call
on them and give them an introduction into society. The lady with my
father's ward is the widow of a captain in the Indian Army, and is in
all ways a very charming person, and has been at the head of my father's
establishment for the last twelve years."

"With the greatest pleasure in the world, Mr. Thorndyke. I am only sorry
that it is so slight a thing that you ask of me. I have thought it
but right to tell my wife what has passed, and I had difficulty in
persuading her not to come with me this evening to also express her
gratitude to you. She will be pleased indeed to call upon your friends
at once, and I am sure she will do so tomorrow. I was going to ask you
to dine with us, and I hope that you will do so. We shall have no one
else, and I hope that you will be able to arrange to meet your friends
at our house a few days later."

The next morning Mark called on Mrs. Cunningham.

"I think you will have a visitor today," he said. "It has happened that
I have been able to do a service to the son of Mr. Cotter, a wealthy
banker. I am going to dine there this evening. He asked me about my
friends in London, and I mentioned that my only lady friends were you
and Millicent. He asked a few questions as to where you were living, and
so on, and said that his wife would have much pleasure in calling and
introducing Millicent into society. As your life is very dull here, and
it is clearly very desirable that Millicent should go into society, I
gladly accepted the offer, and I believe that she will call today."

"That will be very nice indeed, Mark. Millicent is not complaining, but
she must have felt it very dull. I have even felt it so myself after the
cheerful society we had at home."

"I don't know that I shall like it," Millicent said doubtfully.

"Oh, yes, you will, Millicent; and besides, it will be good for you. It
is not natural for a girl of your age to be here without friends, and I
shall be very glad to know that you are going to mix a little with other
people."

Mrs. Cotter called that afternoon, and three days later Mark met Mrs.
Cunningham and Millicent at a dinner party at the banker's, and Mrs.
Cotter introduced them very warmly to several of her friends, with the
result that in a very short time they were frequently invited out, while
they became very intimate with the banker and his wife, and often spent
the day there.




CHAPTER XIV.


Some little time after this Mark was intrusted by his chief with the
work of discovering a man who had committed a very atrocious murder, and
was, it was tolerably certain, hiding in the slums of Westminster. It
was the first business of the kind that had been confided to him, and he
was exceedingly anxious to carry it out successfully. He dressed himself
as a street hawker, and took a small lodging in one of the lanes, being
away the greater portion of the day ostensibly on his business, and
of an evening dropped into some of the worst public houses in the
neighborhood. He was at first viewed with some suspicion, but it was not
long before he became popular. He let it be understood that he had got
into trouble down in the country, and that he was quite ready to take
part in any job that promised to be profitable. But he principally
owed his popularity to the fact that the bully of the locality picked
a quarrel with him, and, to the astonishment of those present, Mark
invited him to go outside.

"You had better make it up with him, mate," a man sitting by his side
whispered. "He was in the prize ring at one time, and thrashed big Mike
Hartley at Kennington. He had to give it up owing to having fought a
cross. He would kill you in five minutes."

"I will chance that," Mark said quietly, as he moved towards the door.
"I don't think that he is stronger than I am, and I can use my fists a
bit, too."

By the time they had taken off their upper garments a crowd had
assembled. The news that a hawker was going to stand up against
Black Jim circulated rapidly, and caused intense excitement. To the
astonishment of the spectators, the bully from the first had not a
shadow of a chance, and at the end of the third round was carried away
senseless, while the hawker had not received a scratch. A few days later
Mark, who, on the strength of his prowess, had had two or three hints
that he could be put up to a good thing if he was inclined to join, was
going down to Westminster when two men stopped and looked after him.

"I tell you, Emerson, that is the fellow. I could swear to him anywhere.
What he is got up like that for I cannot tell you, but I should not be
surprised if he is one of that Bow Street gang. He called himself Mark
Thorndyke, and Chetwynd said that he was a gentleman of property; but
that might have been part of the plant to catch us. I have never been
able to understand how a raw countryman could have caught you palming
that card. I believe that fellow is a Bow Street runner; if so, it is
rum if we cannot manage to get even with him before we go. It seemed
to me that luck had deserted us altogether; but this looks as if it was
going to turn again. Let's go after him."

Keeping some fifty yards behind him, they watched Mark to his lodgings,
waited until he came out again, and followed him to a public house.

"He is acting as a detective, sure enough," Emerson said. "The question
is, what are we to do next?"

In half an hour Mark came out again. Several people nodded to him as he
passed them, but they saw a big man, who happened to be standing under
a lamp, turn his back suddenly as Mark approached him, and, after he had
passed, stand scowling after him, and muttering deep curses. Flash
at once went up to him. "Do you know who that fellow is, my man?" The
fellow turned savagely upon him.

"I don't know who he is; but what is that to you?"

"He is not a friend of ours," Flash said quietly; "quite the contrary.
We have known him when he was not got up like this, and we are rather
curious to know what he is doing here."

"Do you mean that?"

"I do; I owe the fellow a grudge."

"So do I," the man growled. "Just step up this next turning; there won't
be anyone about there. Now, then, what do yer want to know?"

"I want to know who he is."

"Well, he calls himself a hawker; but my idea of him is he is one of the
fancy, perhaps a west countryman, who is keeping dark here till he can
get a match on. I have been a prize fighter myself, but he knocked me
out in three rounds the other day."

"Well, the last time I saw him," Flash said, "he was dressed as a swell.
My idea of him is, he is a Bow Street runner, and he is got up like this
to lay his hands on some of the fellows down here."

"You don't mean it!" the man said with a deep oath. "Then I can tell you
he has come to the wrong shop. I have only got to whisper it about, and
his life would not be worth an hour's purchase. I had meant to stick
a knife in him on the first opportunity, but this will save me the
trouble."

"Well, you can have your revenge and five guineas besides," Flash said.
"But we must be there at the time. I should like him to know that I was
at the bottom of his being caught."

They stood talking together for a few minutes, and then separated, Flash
and his companion going back to a quiet lodging they had taken until
they could finish their arrangements for disposing of their furniture
and belongings before going abroad, while at the same time they finished
plucking a country greenhorn they had met at a coffee house. Two days
later, wrapped up in great coats, and with rough caps pulled down over
their eyes, they entered the thieves' resort half an hour before Mark's
usual time of getting there. A larger number of men than usual were
assembled, and among them was Black Jim. The men were all talking
excitedly, and were evidently furious at the news that the pugilist had
just told them.

"Those are the gents that have given me the office," he said, as Flash
and his companion entered. "They can tell yer he is one of that cursed
Bow Street lot."

"That is right enough, my men," Flash said. "He and four of his mates
broke into a place where we were having a bit of play, three weeks
since, marched us all away to Bow Street, and shut the place up. I don't
know what he is down here for, but you may be sure that it's for no good
to some of you. We owe him a heavy one ourselves. He came spying on us
dressed up as a swell and spoilt our game, and got the darbies put on
us, and we have sworn to get even with him."

"You will get even, don't you fear," one of the men growled, "and more
than even, strike me blind if you don't."

"Look here, lads," Flash said. "There is one thing I say--don't use your
knives on him; remember he is a runner, and no doubt his chief knows all
that he is doing, and no doubt ordered him to come here. There will be
a big search, you may be sure, when he don't turn up to make his report.
So don't let's have any bloodshed. Let the thing be done quietly."

"We can chuck his body into the river," one said.

"Yes, but if it is picked up with half a dozen holes in it, you may be
sure that they will be down here, and like enough every man who has used
this place will be arrested; you know that when there are twenty men in
a job the chances are that one will slip his neck out of the halter by
turning King's evidence."

An angry growl went round the room.

"Well, you know well enough it is so, it is always the case; besides, we
ought to give him a little time to prepare himself. My idea is that the
best plan will be to bind and gag him first, then we can hold a little
court over him, and let him know what is coming. An hour later, when the
place gets a bit quiet, we can carry him down to the river--it is not
above fifty yards away--tie a heavy weight round his neck, cut his cords
the last thing, and chuck him over; if his body is found, it will be
thought it is that of some chap tired of life who took pains to drown
himself pretty quickly, and there won't be any fuss over him, and there
will be nothing to come upon any of you fellows for."

There was a general murmur of assent. Several of those present had
already committed themselves to some extent with the supposed hawker,
and were as eager as Flash himself that he should be killed; still,
all felt that it was as well that it should be managed with the least
possible risk of discovery, for while an ordinary man could be put
out of the way without any trouble arising, the fact that he was a Bow
Street runner added enormously to the risk of the discovery of his fate.

There was a little talk, and then two of the men went out and brought
back a couple of strong ropes. A few minutes after their return Mark
Thorndyke came in. He paused as he entered the room, in surprise at the
silence that reigned, for he was accustomed to be greeted with friendly
exclamations. However, as he walked in the door closed, and then
suddenly, with shouts of "Down with the spy!" the men sprang from their
seats and made a sudden rush at him. For a minute the struggle was
tremendous; man after man went down under Mark's blows, others clung
onto him from behind, a rope was passed round his legs and pulled, and
he fell down with a crash, bringing down five or six of his assailants;
a minute later he was gagged and bound.

While the struggle was going on no one noticed that a Lascar's face was
pressed against the window; it disappeared as soon as Mark fell, and
ten minutes later a dark faced sailor ran into Gibbons'; it was a quiet
evening at Ingleston's, and Gibbons, after smoking a pipe with half a
dozen of the pugilists, had just returned.

"Hallo," he said, as he opened the door, "what the deuce do you want?"

The man was for a moment too breathless to answer.

"You know Mr. Thorndyke," he said at last, in very fair English.

"Yes, I know him. Well, what of him?"

"He has been attacked by a number of thieves in a public house near the
river, at Westminster, and he will be murdered unless you go with others
to help him."

"What the deuce was he doing there?" Gibbons muttered, and then, seizing
his cap, said to the Lascar,

"Come along with me; it aint likely that we shall be in time, but we
will try, anyhow."

He ran to Ingleston's.

"Come along, Ingleston," he exclaimed, "and all of you. You all know
Mr. Thorndyke. This man says he has been attacked by a gang down at
Westminster, and will be murdered. I am afraid we shan't be in time, but
it is worth trying."

The prize fighters all leaped to their feet. Mark had sparred with
several of them, and, being open handed and friendly, was generally
liked. In a moment, headed by Ingleston and Gibbons, they started at the
top of their speed, and in less than a quarter of an hour were at bank
side.

"That is the house," the sailor said, pointing to the public, where a
red blind had been lowered at the window, and two men lounged outside
the door to tell any chance customer that might come along he was not
wanted there at present.

Inside a mock trial had been going on, and Mark had been sentenced to
death as a spy, not a voice being raised in his defense. As soon as he
had been lifted up and seated so that he could see the faces of those
present, he recognized the two gamblers, and saw at once that his fate
was sealed; even had they not been there the chance of escape would have
been small. The fact that one of the detectives had been caught under
circumstances when there was but slight chance of its ever being known
how he came to his end, was in itself sufficient to doom him. Several
of the men present had taken him into their confidence, and he had
encouraged them to do so, not that he wanted to entrap them, or that he
intended to do so, but in order to obtain a clew through them as to the
hiding place of the man he was in search of.

The savage exultation on the faces of the two gamblers, however, was
sufficient to extinguish any ray of hope. He felt sure at once that they
had been the authors of his seizure, and that no thought of mercy would
enter the minds of these two scoundrels whose plans he had frustrated,
whose position he had demolished, and to whom he had caused the loss of
a large sum of money. Neither Flash nor Emerson would have taken share
in a crime known to so many had they not been on the point of leaving
England. Their names were known to no one there, and even should some of
these afterwards peach they would at least be safe. Mark had been asked
whether he could deny that he was a member of the detective force, and
had shaken his head. Even if he had told a lie, which he would not do,
the lie would have been a useless one. No one would have believed it,
for the two gamblers would have been witnesses that he was so.

He had been placed in one corner of the room, so that what light there
was would not fall on his face, and had anyone entered they would not
have noticed that he was gagged. One, indeed, had suggested that it
would be better to lay him under one of the benches, but Black Jim said,
with a brutal laugh:

"No, no; it is better that we should keep sight of him, and if anyone
asks a question of course we can say that the gentleman has the
toothache."

Presently Flash spoke to the ruffian in a low voice.

"Yes, I think you are right," he replied. "Look here," he went on,
raising his voice. "There is no occasion to have such a lot in this
business; Jake Watson, Bill the Tinker, and me are quite enough to carry
him to his bed. I reckon the rest had better make themselves scarce when
the times comes, go home, and keep their mouths shut. I need not say
that anyone who lets his tongue wag about it is likely to come to a
worse end than this bloodhound. We will have another glass of grog
before you turn out; the streets won't be quiet for another hour
yet, and there is another guinea of this worthy hawker's to be spent.
Summers, make another big bowl of punch. Don't put so much water in it
as you did in the last."

The landlord, a notorious ruffian, was just coming into the room with a
huge bowl when there was the sound of a scuffle outside.

"You had better see what is up," Black Jim said, and two of the men
nearest the door unbarred and opened it. As they did so there was a
rush, and eight powerful men ran in, knocking to the floor those who had
opened the door. The rest sprang to their feet; Gibbons looked round,
and as his eye fell upon Mark, who had, the moment the men inside rose,
got into a standing position, Gibbons launched himself towards him,
striking four of the ruffians who endeavored to stop him to the ground
with his crushing blows.

"This way," he shouted to his friends. "Ingleston and Tring, do you keep
the door."

The moment the six men had closed round Mark, one of them, taking
out his knife, cut the cords, removed the bandage from his mouth, and
extricated the gag. The name of the two prize fighters had created
something like a panic among the crowd, which had increased when one of
them shouted, "It is Charley Gibbons."

Flash and Emerson sprang to their feet with the rest, and the latter
shouted, "Go at them, men; there are only eight of them, and we are
twenty. Knife them, or you will all hang for this job."

The knowledge of their danger was evident to all the men, and, nerved by
desperation, they rushed at the prize fighters; but the eight were now
nine, and each of them in a fray of this kind was equal to half a dozen
ordinary men. Scarce a word was spoken, but the sound of crushing blows
and scuffling, and an occasional, oath, made a confused din in the half
lighted room. Mark burst his way through his assailants to the spot
where Flash and Emerson were standing, somewhat in the rear of the
crowd, for they had been sitting at the other end of the room. Flash had
a pistol in his hand, but the man who was standing in front of him was
struck with such violence that he fell backwards, knocking Emerson
to the ground and almost upsetting Flash, and before the latter could
steady himself Mark struck him with all his force under the chin. A
moment later the landlord blew out the two candles, and in the darkness
the ruffians made a dash for the door, carried Tring and Ingleston off
their feet, and rushed out into the lane.

"If the man who blew those candles out don't light them again at once,"
Gibbons shouted, "I, Charley Gibbons, tell him that I will smash him and
burn this place over his head; he had best be quick about it."

The landlord, cowed with the threat, soon returned with a candle from
the kitchen, and lit those that he had extinguished.

"Well, Mr. Thorndyke, we just arrived in time, I fancy," Gibbons said.

"You have saved my life, Gibbons--you and the others. How you got to
know that I was here I cannot imagine. I would have been a dead man
in another half hour if you had not arrived. I thank you all from the
bottom of my heart."

"That is all right, sir," Gibbons said. "It is a pleasure to give such
