
'It wasn't us, indeed it wasn't,' said Anthea, earnestly; 'it was the
bird.'

The man said well, then, they must keep their bird very quiet.
'Disturbing every one like this,' he said.

'It won't do it again,' said Robert, glancing imploringly at the golden
bird; 'I'm sure it won't.'

'You have my leave to depart,' said the Phoenix gently.

'Well, he is a beauty, and no mistake,' said the attendant, 'only I'd
cover him up during the acts. It upsets the performance.'

And he went.

'Don't speak again, there's a dear,' said Anthea; 'you wouldn't like to
interfere with your own temple, would you?'

So now the Phoenix was quiet, but it kept whispering to the children. It
wanted to know why there was no altar, no fire, no incense, and became
so excited and fretful and tiresome that four at least of the party of
five wished deeply that it had been left at home.

What happened next was entirely the fault of the Phoenix. It was not
in the least the fault of the theatre people, and no one could ever
understand afterwards how it did happen. No one, that is, except the
guilty bird itself and the four children. The Phoenix was balancing
itself on the gilt back of the chair, swaying backwards and forwards and
up and down, as you may see your own domestic parrot do. I mean the grey
one with the red tail. All eyes were on the stage, where the lobster
was delighting the audience with that gem of a song, 'If you can't walk
straight, walk sideways!' when the Phoenix murmured warmly--

'No altar, no fire, no incense!' and then, before any of the children
could even begin to think of stopping it, it spread its bright wings and
swept round the theatre, brushing its gleaming feathers against delicate
hangings and gilded woodwork.

It seemed to have made but one circular wing-sweep, such as you may see
a gull make over grey water on a stormy day. Next moment it was perched
again on the chair-back--and all round the theatre, where it had passed,
little sparks shone like tinsel seeds, then little smoke wreaths curled
up like growing plants--little flames opened like flower-buds. People
whispered--then people shrieked.

'Fire! Fire!' The curtain went down--the lights went up.

'Fire!' cried every one, and made for the doors.

'A magnificent idea!' said the Phoenix, complacently. 'An enormous
altar--fire supplied free of charge. Doesn't the incense smell
delicious?'

The only smell was the stifling smell of smoke, of burning silk, or
scorching varnish.

The little flames had opened now into great flame-flowers. The people in
the theatre were shouting and pressing towards the doors.

'Oh, how COULD you!' cried Jane. 'Let's get out.'

'Father said stay here,' said Anthea, very pale, and trying to speak in
her ordinary voice.

'He didn't mean stay and be roasted,' said Robert. 'No boys on burning
decks for me, thank you.'

'Not much,' said Cyril, and he opened the door of the box.

But a fierce waft of smoke and hot air made him shut it again. It was
not possible to get out that way.

They looked over the front of the box. Could they climb down?

It would be possible, certainly; but would they be much better off?

'Look at the people,' moaned Anthea; 'we couldn't get through.'

And, indeed, the crowd round the doors looked as thick as flies in the
jam-making season.

'I wish we'd never seen the Phoenix,' cried Jane.

Even at that awful moment Robert looked round to see if the bird
had overheard a speech which, however natural, was hardly polite or
grateful.

The Phoenix was gone.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'I've read about fires in papers; I'm sure it's
all right. Let's wait here, as father said.'

'We can't do anything else,' said Anthea bitterly.

'Look here,' said Robert, 'I'm NOT frightened--no, I'm not. The Phoenix
has never been a skunk yet, and I'm certain it'll see us through
somehow. I believe in the Phoenix!'

'The Phoenix thanks you, O Robert,' said a golden voice at his feet, and
there was the Phoenix itself, on the Wishing Carpet.

'Quick!' it said. 'Stand on those portions of the carpet which are truly
antique and authentic--and--'

A sudden jet of flame stopped its words. Alas! the Phoenix had
unconsciously warmed to its subject, and in the unintentional heat of
the moment had set fire to the paraffin with which that morning the
children had anointed the carpet. It burned merrily. The children tried
in vain to stamp it out. They had to stand back and let it burn itself
out. When the paraffin had burned away it was found that it had taken
with it all the darns of Scotch heather-mixture fingering. Only the
fabric of the old carpet was left--and that was full of holes.

'Come,' said the Phoenix, 'I'm cool now.'

The four children got on to what was left of the carpet. Very careful
they were not to leave a leg or a hand hanging over one of the holes. It
was very hot--the theatre was a pit of fire. Every one else had got out.

Jane had to sit on Anthea's lap.

'Home!' said Cyril, and instantly the cool draught from under the
nursery door played upon their legs as they sat. They were all on
the carpet still, and the carpet was lying in its proper place on the
nursery floor, as calm and unmoved as though it had never been to the
theatre or taken part in a fire in its life.

Four long breaths of deep relief were instantly breathed. The draught
which they had never liked before was for the moment quite pleasant. And
they were safe. And every one else was safe. The theatre had been quite
empty when they left. Every one was sure of that.

They presently found themselves all talking at once. Somehow none of
their adventures had given them so much to talk about. None other had
seemed so real.

'Did you notice--?' they said, and 'Do you remember--?'

When suddenly Anthea's face turned pale under the dirt which it had
collected on it during the fire.

'Oh,' she cried, 'mother and father! Oh, how awful! They'll think we're
burned to cinders. Oh, let's go this minute and tell them we aren't.'

'We should only miss them,' said the sensible Cyril.

'Well--YOU go then,' said Anthea, 'or I will. Only do wash your face
first. Mother will be sure to think you are burnt to a cinder if she
sees you as black as that, and she'll faint or be ill or something. Oh,
I wish we'd never got to know that Phoenix.'

'Hush!' said Robert; 'it's no use being rude to the bird. I suppose it
can't help its nature. Perhaps we'd better wash too. Now I come to think
of it my hands are rather--'

No one had noticed the Phoenix since it had bidden them to step on the
carpet. And no one noticed that no one had noticed.

All were partially clean, and Cyril was just plunging into his
great-coat to go and look for his parents--he, and not unjustly, called
it looking for a needle in a bundle of hay--when the sound of father's
latchkey in the front door sent every one bounding up the stairs.

'Are you all safe?' cried mother's voice; 'are you all safe?' and the
next moment she was kneeling on the linoleum of the hall, trying to
kiss four damp children at once, and laughing and crying by turns, while
father stood looking on and saying he was blessed or something.

'But how did you guess we'd come home,' said Cyril, later, when every
one was calm enough for talking.

'Well, it was rather a rum thing. We heard the Garrick was on fire, and
of course we went straight there,' said father, briskly. 'We couldn't
find you, of course--and we couldn't get in--but the firemen told
us every one was safely out. And then I heard a voice at my ear say,
"Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane"--and something touched me on the
shoulder. It was a great yellow pigeon, and it got in the way of my
seeing who'd spoken. It fluttered off, and then some one said in the
other ear, "They're safe at home"; and when I turned again, to see who
it was speaking, hanged if there wasn't that confounded pigeon on my
other shoulder. Dazed by the fire, I suppose. Your mother said it was
the voice of--'

'I said it was the bird that spoke,' said mother, 'and so it was. Or at
least I thought so then. It wasn't a pigeon. It was an orange-coloured
cockatoo. I don't care who it was that spoke. It was true and you're
safe.'

Mother began to cry again, and father said bed was a good place after
the pleasures of the stage.

So every one went there.

Robert had a talk to the Phoenix that night.

'Oh, very well,' said the bird, when Robert had said what he felt,
'didn't you know that I had power over fire? Do not distress yourself.
I, like my high priests in Lombard Street, can undo the work of flames.
Kindly open the casement.'

It flew out.

That was why the papers said next day that the fire at the theatre had
done less damage than had been anticipated. As a matter of fact it had
done none, for the Phoenix spent the night in putting things straight.
How the management accounted for this, and how many of the theatre
officials still believe that they were mad on that night will never be
known.


Next day mother saw the burnt holes in the carpet.

'It caught where it was paraffiny,' said Anthea.

'I must get rid of that carpet at once,' said mother.

But what the children said in sad whispers to each other, as they
pondered over last night's events, was--

'We must get rid of that Phoenix.'



CHAPTER 12. THE END OF THE END


'Egg, toast, tea, milk, tea-cup and saucer, egg-spoon, knife,
butter--that's all, I think,' remarked Anthea, as she put the last
touches to mother's breakfast-tray, and went, very carefully up the
stairs, feeling for every step with her toes, and holding on to the tray
with all her fingers. She crept into mother's room and set the tray on a
chair. Then she pulled one of the blinds up very softly.

'Is your head better, mammy dear?' she asked, in the soft little voice
that she kept expressly for mother's headaches. 'I've brought your
brekkie, and I've put the little cloth with clover-leaves on it, the one
I made you.'

'That's very nice,' said mother sleepily.

Anthea knew exactly what to do for mothers with headaches who had
breakfast in bed. She fetched warm water and put just enough eau de
Cologne in it, and bathed mother's face and hands with the sweet-scented
water. Then mother was able to think about breakfast.

'But what's the matter with my girl?' she asked, when her eyes got used
to the light.

'Oh, I'm so sorry you're ill,' Anthea said. 'It's that horrible fire and
you being so frightened. Father said so. And we all feel as if it was
our faults. I can't explain, but--'

'It wasn't your fault a bit, you darling goosie,' mother said. 'How
could it be?'

'That's just what I can't tell you,' said Anthea. 'I haven't got
a futile brain like you and father, to think of ways of explaining
everything.'

Mother laughed.

'My futile brain--or did you mean fertile?--anyway, it feels very stiff
and sore this morning--but I shall be quite all right by and by. And
don't be a silly little pet girl. The fire wasn't your faults. No; I
don't want the egg, dear. I'll go to sleep again, I think. Don't you
worry. And tell cook not to bother me about meals. You can order what
you like for lunch.'

Anthea closed the door very mousily, and instantly went downstairs and
ordered what she liked for lunch. She ordered a pair of turkeys, a large
plum-pudding, cheese-cakes, and almonds and raisins.

Cook told her to go along, do. And she might as well not have ordered
anything, for when lunch came it was just hashed mutton and semolina
pudding, and cook had forgotten the sippets for the mutton hash and the
semolina pudding was burnt.

When Anthea rejoined the others she found them all plunged in the gloom
where she was herself. For every one knew that the days of the carpet
were now numbered. Indeed, so worn was it that you could almost have
numbered its threads.

So that now, after nearly a month of magic happenings, the time was at
hand when life would have to go on in the dull, ordinary way and Jane,
Robert, Anthea, and Cyril would be just in the same position as the
other children who live in Camden Town, the children whom these four had
so often pitied, and perhaps a little despised.

'We shall be just like them,' Cyril said.

'Except,' said Robert, 'that we shall have more things to remember and
be sorry we haven't got.'

'Mother's going to send away the carpet as soon as she's well enough to
see about that coconut matting. Fancy us with coconut-matting--us! And
we've walked under live coconut-trees on the island where you can't have
whooping-cough.'

'Pretty island,' said the Lamb; 'paint-box sands and sea all shiny
sparkly.'

His brothers and sisters had often wondered whether he remembered that
island. Now they knew that he did.

'Yes,' said Cyril; 'no more cheap return trips by carpet for us--that's
a dead cert.'

They were all talking about the carpet, but what they were all thinking
about was the Phoenix.

The golden bird had been so kind, so friendly, so polite, so
instructive--and now it had set fire to a theatre and made mother ill.

Nobody blamed the bird. It had acted in a perfectly natural manner. But
every one saw that it must not be asked to prolong its visit. Indeed, in
plain English it must be asked to go!

The four children felt like base spies and treacherous friends; and each
in its mind was saying who ought not to be the one to tell the Phoenix
that there could no longer be a place for it in that happy home in
Camden Town. Each child was quite sure that one of them ought to speak
out in a fair and manly way, but nobody wanted to be the one.

They could not talk the whole thing over as they would have liked to do,
because the Phoenix itself was in the cupboard, among the blackbeetles
and the odd shoes and the broken chessmen.

But Anthea tried.

'It's very horrid. I do hate thinking things about people, and not being
able to say the things you're thinking because of the way they would
feel when they thought what things you were thinking, and wondered
what they'd done to make you think things like that, and why you were
thinking them.'

Anthea was so anxious that the Phoenix should not understand what she
said that she made a speech completely baffling to all. It was not till
she pointed to the cupboard in which all believed the Phoenix to be that
Cyril understood.

'Yes,' he said, while Jane and Robert were trying to tell each other how
deeply they didn't understand what Anthea were saying; 'but after recent
eventfulnesses a new leaf has to be turned over, and, after all,
mother is more important than the feelings of any of the lower forms of
creation, however unnatural.'

'How beautifully you do do it,' said Anthea, absently beginning to build
a card-house for the Lamb--'mixing up what you're saying, I mean. We
ought to practise doing it so as to be ready for mysterious occasions.
We're talking about THAT,' she said to Jane and Robert, frowning, and
nodding towards the cupboard where the Phoenix was. Then Robert and Jane
understood, and each opened its mouth to speak.

'Wait a minute,' said Anthea quickly; 'the game is to twist up what you
want to say so that no one can understand what you're saying except the
people you want to understand it, and sometimes not them.'

'The ancient philosophers,' said a golden voice, 'Well understood the
art of which you speak.'

Of course it was the Phoenix, who had not been in the cupboard at all,
but had been cocking a golden eye at them from the cornice during the
whole conversation.

'Pretty dickie!' remarked the Lamb. 'CANARY dickie!'

'Poor misguided infant,' said the Phoenix.

There was a painful pause; the four could not but think it likely that
the Phoenix had understood their very veiled allusions, accompanied as
they had been by gestures indicating the cupboard. For the Phoenix was
not wanting in intelligence.

'We were just saying--' Cyril began, and I hope he was not going to
say anything but the truth. Whatever it was he did not say it, for the
Phoenix interrupted him, and all breathed more freely as it spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'that you have some tidings of a fatal nature to
communicate to our degraded black brothers who run to and fro for ever
yonder.' It pointed a claw at the cupboard, where the blackbeetles
lived.

'Canary TALK,' said the Lamb joyously; 'go and show mammy.'

He wriggled off Anthea's lap.

'Mammy's asleep,' said Jane, hastily. 'Come and be wild beasts in a cage
under the table.'

But the Lamb caught his feet and hands, and even his head, so often and
so deeply in the holes of the carpet that the cage, or table, had to be
moved on to the linoleum, and the carpet lay bare to sight with all its
horrid holes.

'Ah,' said the bird, 'it isn't long for this world.'

'No,' said Robert; 'everything comes to an end. It's awful.'

'Sometimes the end is peace,' remarked the Phoenix. 'I imagine that
unless it comes soon the end of your carpet will be pieces.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, respectfully kicking what was left of the carpet. The
movement of its bright colours caught the eye of the Lamb, who went down
on all fours instantly and began to pull at the red and blue threads.

