and make sure."

So she jumped up and ran through the passage to the outer entrance, and
they all followed after her and grouped themselves on a ledge of the
mountain-side. Sure enough, dark clouds had filled the sky and a slow,
drizzling rain had set in.

"It can't last for long," said Shaggy, looking upward, "and when it
stops we shall lose the sweet little fairy we have learned to love.
Alas," he continued, after a moment, "the clouds are already breaking
in the west, and--see!--isn't that the Rainbow coming?"

Betsy didn't look at the sky; she looked at Polychrome, whose happy,
smiling face surely foretold the coming of her father to take her to
the Cloud Palaces. A moment later a gleam of sunshine flooded the
mountain and a gorgeous Rainbow appeared.

With a cry of gladness Polychrome sprang upon a point of rock and held
out her arms. Straightway the Rainbow descended until its end was at
her very feet, when with a graceful leap she sprang upon it and was at
once clasped in the arms of her radiant sisters, the Daughters of the
Rainbow. But Polychrome released herself to lean over the edge of the
glowing arch and nod, and smile and throw a dozen kisses to her late
comrades.

"Good-bye!" she called, and they all shouted "Good-bye!" in return and
waved their hands to their pretty friend.

Slowly the magnificent bow lifted and melted into the sky, until the
eyes of the earnest watchers saw only fleecy clouds flitting across the
blue.

"I'm dreadful sorry to see Polychrome go," said Betsy, who felt like
crying; "but I s'pose she'll be a good deal happier with her sisters in
the sky palaces."

"To be sure," returned Shaggy, nodding gravely. "It's her home, you
know, and those poor wanderers who, like ourselves, have no home, can
realize what that means to her."

"Once," said Betsy, "I, too, had a home. Now, I've only--only--dear old
Hank!"

She twined her arms around her shaggy friend who was not human, and he
said: "Hee-haw!" in a tone that showed he understood her mood. And the
shaggy friend who was human stroked the child's head tenderly and said:
"You're wrong about that, Betsy, dear. I will never desert you."

"Nor I!" exclaimed Shaggy's brother, in earnest tones.

The little girl looked up at them gratefully, and her eyes smiled
through their tears.

"All right," she said. "It's raining again, so let's go back into the
cavern."

Rather soberly, for all loved Polychrome and would miss her, they
reentered the dominions of the Nome King.




Chapter Twenty-Four

Dorothy is Delighted


"Well," said Queen Ann, when all were again seated in Kaliko's royal
cavern, "I wonder what we shall do next. If I could find my way back to
Oogaboo I'd take my army home at once, for I'm sick and tired of these
dreadful hardships."

"Don't you want to conquer the world?" asked Betsy.

"No; I've changed my mind about that," admitted the Queen. "The world
is too big for one person to conquer and I was happier with my own
people in Oogaboo. I wish--Oh, how earnestly I wish--that I was back
there this minute!"

"So do I!" yelled every officer in a fervent tone.

Now, it is time for the reader to know that in the far-away Land of Oz
the lovely Ruler, Ozma, had been following the adventures of her Shaggy
Man, and Tik-Tok, and all the others they had met. Day by day Ozma,
with the wonderful Wizard of Oz seated beside her, had gazed upon a
Magic Picture in a radium frame, which occupied one side of the Ruler's
cosy boudoir in the palace of the Emerald City. The singular thing
about this Magic Picture was that it showed whatever scene Ozma wished
to see, with the figures all in motion, just as it was taking place. So
Ozma and the Wizard had watched every action of the adventurers from
the time Shaggy had met shipwrecked Betsy and Hank in the Rose Kingdom,
at which time the Rose Princess, a distant cousin of Ozma, had been
exiled by her heartless subjects.

When Ann and her people so earnestly wished to return to Oogaboo, Ozma
was sorry for them and remembered that Oogaboo was a corner of the Land
of Oz. She turned to her attendant and asked:

"Can not your magic take these unhappy people to their old home,
Wizard?"

"It can, Your Highness," replied the little Wizard.

"I think the poor Queen has suffered enough in her misguided effort to
conquer the world," said Ozma, smiling at the absurdity of the
undertaking, "so no doubt she will hereafter be contented in her own
little Kingdom. Please send her there, Wizard, and with her the
officers and Files."

"How about the Rose Princess?" asked the Wizard.

"Send her to Oogaboo with Files," answered Ozma. "They have become such
good friends that I am sure it would make them unhappy to separate
them."

"Very well," said the Wizard, and without any fuss or mystery whatever
he performed a magical rite that was simple and effective. Therefore
those seated in the Nome King's cavern were both startled and amazed
when all the people of Oogaboo suddenly disappeared from the room, and
with them the Rose Princess. At first they could not understand it at
all; but presently Shaggy suspected the truth, and believing that Ozma
was now taking an interest in the party he drew from his pocket a tiny
instrument which he placed against his ear.

Ozma, observing this action in her Magic Picture, at once caught up a
similar instrument from a table beside her and held it to her own ear.
The two instruments recorded the same delicate vibrations of sound and
formed a wireless telephone, an invention of the Wizard. Those
separated by any distance were thus enabled to converse together with
perfect ease and without any wire connection.

"Do you hear me, Shaggy Man?" asked Ozma.

"Yes, Your Highness," he replied.

"I have sent the people of Oogaboo back to their own little valley,"
announced the Ruler of Oz; "so do not worry over their disappearance."

"That was very kind of you," said Shaggy. "But Your Highness must
permit me to report that my own mission here is now ended. I have found
my lost brother, and he is now beside me, freed from the enchantment of
ugliness which Ruggedo cast upon him. Tik-Tok has served me and my
comrades faithfully, as you requested him to do, and I hope you will
now transport the Clockwork Man back to your fairyland of Oz."

"I will do that," replied Ozma. "But how about yourself, Shaggy?"

"I have been very happy in Oz," he said, "but my duty to others forces
me to exile myself from that delightful land. I must take care of my
new-found brother, for one thing, and I have a new comrade in a dear
little girl named Betsy Bobbin, who has no home to go to, and no other
friends but me and a small donkey named Hank. I have promised Betsy
never to desert her as long as she needs a friend, and so I must give
up the delights of the Land of Oz forever."

He said this with a sigh of regret, and Ozma made no reply but laid the
tiny instrument on her table, thus cutting off all further
communication with the Shaggy Man. But the lovely Ruler of Oz still
watched her magic picture, with a thoughtful expression upon her face,
and the little Wizard of Oz watched Ozma and smiled softly to himself.

In the cavern of the Nome King Shaggy replaced the wireless telephone
in his pocket and turning to Betsy said in as cheerful a voice as he
could muster:

"Well, little comrade, what shall we do next?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," she answered with a puzzled face. "I'm kind
of sorry our adventures are over, for I enjoyed them, and now that
Queen Ann and her people are gone, and Polychrome is gone, and--dear
me!--where's Tik-Tok, Shaggy?"

"He also has disappeared," said Shaggy, looking around the cavern and
nodding wisely. "By this time he is in Ozma's palace in the Land of Oz,
which is his home."

"Isn't it your home, too?" asked Betsy.

"It used to be, my dear; but now my home is wherever you and my brother
are. We are wanderers, you know, but if we stick together I am sure we
shall have a good time."

"Then," said the girl, "let us get out of this stuffy, underground
cavern and go in search of new adventures. I'm sure it has stopped
raining."

"I'm ready," said Shaggy, and then they bade good-bye to King Kaliko,
and thanked him for his assistance, and went out to the mouth of the
passage.

The sky was now clear and a brilliant blue in color; the sun shone
brightly and even this rugged, rocky country seemed delightful after
their confinement underground. There were but four of them now--Betsy
and Hank, and Shaggy and his brother--and the little party made their
way down the mountain and followed a faint path that led toward the
southwest.

During this time Ozma had been holding a conference with the Wizard,
and later with Tik-Tok, whom the magic of the Wizard had quickly
transported to Ozma's palace. Tik-Tok had only words of praise for
Betsy Bobbin, "who," he said, "is al-most as nice as Dor-o-thy
her-self."

"Let us send for Dorothy," said Ozma, and summoning her favorite maid,
who was named Jellia Jamb, she asked her to request Princess Dorothy to
attend her at once. So a few moments later Dorothy entered Ozma's room
and greeted her and the Wizard and Tik-Tok with the same gentle smile
and simple manner that had won for the little girl the love of everyone
she met.

"Did you want to see me, Ozma?" she asked.

"Yes, dear. I am puzzled how to act, and I want your advice."

"I don't b'lieve it's worth much," replied Dorothy, "but I'll do the
best I can. What is it all about, Ozma?"

"You all know," said the girl Ruler, addressing her three friends,
"what a serious thing it is to admit any mortals into this fairyland of
Oz. It is true I have invited several mortals to make their home here,
and all of them have proved true and loyal subjects. Indeed, no one of
you three was a native of Oz. Dorothy and the Wizard came here from the
United States, and Tik-Tok came from the Land of Ev. But of course he
is not a mortal. Shaggy is another American, and he is the cause of all
my worry, for our dear Shaggy will not return here and desert the new
friends he has found in his recent adventures, because he believes they
need his services."

"Shaggy Man was always kind-hearted," remarked Dorothy. "But who are
these new friends he has found?"

"One is his brother, who for many years has been a prisoner of the Nome
King, our old enemy Ruggedo. This brother seems a kindly, honest
fellow, but he has done nothing to entitle him to a home in the Land of
Oz."

"Who else?" asked Dorothy.

"I have told you about Betsy Bobbin, the little girl who was
shipwrecked--in much the same way you once were--and has since been
following the Shaggy Man in his search for his lost brother. You
remember her, do you not?"

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I've often watched her and Hank in the
Magic Picture, you know. She's a dear little girl, and old Hank is a
darling! Where are they now?"

"Look and see," replied Ozma with a smile at her friend's enthusiasm.

Dorothy turned to the Picture, which showed Betsy and Hank, with Shaggy
and his brother, trudging along the rocky paths of a barren country.

"Seems to me," she said, musingly, "that they're a good way from any
place to sleep, or any nice things to eat."

"You are right," said Tik-Tok. "I have been in that coun-try, and it is
a wil-der-ness."

"It is the country of the nomes," explained the Wizard, "who are so
mischievous that no one cares to live near them. I'm afraid Shaggy and
his friends will endure many hardships before they get out of that
rocky place, unless--"

He turned to Ozma and smiled.

"Unless I ask you to transport them all here?" she asked.

"Yes, your Highness."

"Could your magic do that?" inquired Dorothy.

"I think so," said the Wizard.

"Well," said Dorothy, "as far as Betsy and Hank are concerned, I'd like
to have them here in Oz. It would be such fun to have a girl playmate
of my own age, you see. And Hank is such a dear little mule!"

Ozma laughed at the wistful expression in the girl's eyes, and then she
drew Dorothy to her and kissed her.

"Am I not your friend and playmate?" she asked.

Dorothy flushed.

"You know how dearly I love you, Ozma!" she cried. "But you're so busy
ruling all this Land of Oz that we can't always be together."

"I know, dear. My first duty is to my subjects, and I think it would be
a delight to us all to have Betsy with us. There's a pretty suite of
rooms just opposite your own where she can live, and I'll build a
golden stall for Hank in the stable where the Sawhorse lives. Then
we'll introduce the mule to the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, and
I'm sure they will soon become firm friends. But I cannot very well
admit Betsy and Hank into Oz unless I also admit Shaggy's brother."

"And, unless you admit Shaggy's brother, you will keep out poor Shaggy,
whom we are all very fond of," said the Wizard.

"Well, why not ad-mit him?" demanded Tik-Tok.

"The Land of Oz is not a refuge for all mortals in distress," explained
Ozma. "I do not wish to be unkind to Shaggy Man, but his brother has no
claim on me."

"The Land of Oz isn't crowded," suggested Dorothy.

"Then you advise me to admit Shaggy's brother?" inquired Ozma.

"Well, we can't afford to lose our Shaggy Man, can we?"

"No, indeed!" returned Ozma. "What do you say, Wizard?"

"I'm getting my magic ready to transport them all."

"And you, Tik-Tok?"

"Shag-gy's broth-er is a good fel-low, and we can't spare Shag-gy."

"So, then; the question is settled," decided Ozma. "Perform your magic,
Wizard!"

He did so, placing a silver plate upon a small standard and pouring
upon the plate a small quantity of pink powder which was contained in a
crystal vial. Then he muttered a rather difficult incantation which the
sorceress Glinda the Good had taught him, and it all ended in a puff of
perfumed smoke from the silver plate. This smoke was so pungent that it
made both Ozma and Dorothy rub their eyes for a moment.

"You must pardon these disagreeable fumes," said the Wizard. "I assure
you the smoke is a very necessary part of my wizardry."

