helpless, he was compelled to watch the Marquis de Montcalm march to what
he felt was going to be a French triumph.

Swarms of Indian scouts and skirmishers preceded the army and Canadian
axmen cut a way for the artillery, but to Robert's great amazement these
operations lasted only a short time. Almost before he could realize it they
had emerged from the deep woods and he looked again upon the vast, shining
reaches of Lake Ontario. Then he learned for the first time that Montcalm's
army had come mostly in boats and in detachments, and was now united for
attack. As he had surmised, Oswego, which the English and Americans had
intended to be a great stronghold and rallying place in the west, was the
menaced position.

Robert from a hill saw three forts before the French force, the largest
standing upon a plateau of considerable elevation on the east bank of the
river, which there flowed into the lake. It was shaped like a star, and the
fortifications consisted of trunks of trees, sharpened at the ends, driven
deep into the ground, and set as close together as possible. On the west
side of the river was another fort of stone and clay, and four hundred
yards beyond it was an unfinished stockade, so weak that its own garrison
had named it in derision Rascal Fort. Some flat boats and canoes lay in the
lake, and it was a man in one of these canoes who had been the first to
learn of the approach of Montcalm's army, so slender had been the
precautions taken by the officers in command of the forts.

"We have come upon them almost as if we had dropped from the clouds," said
Langlade, exultingly, to Robert. "When they thought the Marquis de Montcalm
was in Montreal, lo! he was here! It is the French who are the great
leaders, the great soldiers and the great nation! Think you we would allow
ourselves to be surprised as Oswego has been?"

Robert made no reply. His heart sank like a plummet in a pool. Already he
heard the crackling fire of musketry from the Indians who, sheltered in the
edge of the forest, were sending bullets against the stout logs of Fort
Ontario, but which could offer small resistance to cannon. And while the
sharpshooting went on, the French officers were planting the batteries, one
of four guns directly on the strand. The work was continued at a great pace
all through the night, and when Robert awoke from an uneasy sleep, in the
morning, he saw that the French had mounted twenty heavy cannon, which soon
poured showers of balls and grape and canister upon the log fort. He also
saw St. Luc among the guns directing their fire, while Tandakora's Indians
kept up an incessant and joyous yelling.

The defenders of the stockade maintained a fire from rifles and several
small cannon, but it did little harm in the attacking army and Robert was
soldier enough to know that the log walls could not hold. While St. Luc
sent in the fire from the batteries faster and faster, a formidable force
of Canadians and Indians led by Rigaud, one of the best of Montcalm's
lieutenants, crossed the river, the men wading in the water up to their
waists, but holding their rifles over their heads.

Tandakora was in this band, shouting savagely, and so was Langlade, but
Robert and the other prisoners, left under guard on the hill, saw
everything distinctly. They had no hope whatever that the chief fort, or
any of the forts, could hold out. Fragments of the logs were already flying
in the air as the stream of cannon balls beat upon them. The garrison made
a desperate resistance, but the cramped place was crowded with
women--settlers' wives--as well as men, the commander was killed, and at
last the white flag was hoisted on all the forts.

Then the Indians, intoxicated with triumph and the strong liquors they had
seized, rushed in and began to ply the tomahawk. Montcalm, horrified, used
every effort to stop the incipient butchery, and St. Luc, Bourlamaque and,
in truth, all of his lieutenants, seconded him gallantly. Tandakora and his
men were compelled to return their tomahawks to their belts, and then the
French army was drawn around the captives, who numbered hundreds and
hundreds.

It was another French and Indian victory like that over Braddock, though it
was not marked by the destruction of an army, and Robert's heart sank lower
and lower. He knew that it would be appalling news to Boston, to Albany and
to New York. The Marquis de Montcalm had justified the reputation that
preceded him. He had struck suddenly with lightning swiftness and with
terrible effect. Not only this blow, but its guarantee of others to come,
filled Robert's heart with fear for the future.

The sun sank upon a rejoicing army. The Indians were still yelling and
dancing, and, though they were no longer allowed to sink their tomahawks in
the heads of their defenseless foes, they made imaginary strokes with them,
and shouted ferociously as they leaped and capered.

Robert was on the strand near the shore of the lake, and wearied by his
long day of watching that which he wished least in the world to see, he sat
down on a sand heap, and put his head in his hands. Peculiarly sensitive to
atmosphere and surroundings, he was, for the moment, almost without hope.
But he knew, even when he was in despair, that his courage would come back.
It was one of the qualities of a temperament such as his that while he
might be in the depths at one hour he would be on the heights at the next.

Several of the Indians, apparently those who had got at the liquor, were
careering up and down the sands, showing every sign of the blood madness
that often comes in the moment of triumph upon savage minds. Robert raised
his face from his hands and looked to see if Tandakora was among them, but
he caught no glimpse of the gigantic Ojibway. The French soldiers who were
guarding the prisoners gazed curiously at the demoniac figures. They were
of the battalions Bearn and Guienne and they had come newly from France.
Plunged suddenly into the wilderness, such sights as they now beheld
filled them with amazement, and often created a certain apprehension. They
were not so sure that their wild allies were just the kind of allies they
wanted.

The sun set lower upon the savage scene, casting a dark glow over the
ruined forts, the troops, the leaping savages and the huddled prisoners.
One of the Indians danced and bounded more wildly than all the rest. He was
tall, but slim, apparently youthful, and he wore nothing except breech
cloth, leggings and moccasins, his naked body a miracle of savage painting.
Robert by and by watched him alone, fascinated by his extraordinary agility
and untiring enthusiasm. His figure seemed to shoot up in the air on
springs, and, with a glittering tomahawk, he slew and scalped an imaginary
foe over and over again, and every time the blade struck in the air he let
forth a shout that would have done credit to old Stentor himself. He ranged
up and down the beach, and presently, when he was close to Robert, he grew
more violent than ever, as if he were worked by some powerful mechanism
that would not let him rest. He had all the appearance of one who had gone
quite mad, and as he bounded near them, his tomahawk circling about his
head, the French guards shrank back, awed, and, at the same time, not
wishing to have any conflict with their red allies, who must be handled
with the greatest care.

The man paused a moment before the young prisoner, whirled his tomahawk
about his head and uttered a ferocious shout. Robert looked straight into
the burning eyes, started violently and then became outwardly calm, though
every nerve and muscle in him was keyed to the utmost tension. "To the
lake!" exclaimed the Indian under his breath and then he danced toward the
water.

Robert did not know at first what the words meant, and he waited in
indecision, but he saw that the care of the guards, owing to the confusion,
the fact that the battle was over, and the rejoicing for victory, was
relaxed. It would seem, too, that escape at such a time and place was
impossible, and that circumstance increased their inattention.

The youth watched the dancing warrior, who was now moving toward the water,
over which the darkness of night had spread. But the lake was groaning with
a wind from the north, and several canoes near the beach were bobbing up
and down. The dancer paused a moment at the very edge of the water, and
looked back at Robert. Then he advanced into the waves themselves.

All the young prisoner's indecision departed in a flash. The signal was
complete and he understood. He sprang violently against the French soldier
who stood nearest him and knocked him to the ground. Then with three or
four bounds he was at the water's edge, leaping into the canoe, just as
Tayoga settled himself into place there, and, seizing a paddle, pushed away
with powerful shoves.

Robert nearly upset the canoe, but the Onondaga quickly made it regain its
balance, and then they were out on the lake under the kindly veil of the
night. The fugitive said nothing, he knew it was no time to speak, because
Tayoga's powerful back was bending with his mighty efforts and the bullets
were pattering in the water behind them. It was luck that the canoe was a
large one, partaking more of the nature of a boat, as Robert could remain
concealed on the bottom without tipping it over, while the Onondaga
continued to put all his nervous power and skill into his strokes. It was
equally fortunate, also, that the night had come and that the dusk was
thick, as it distracted yet further the hasty aim of the French and Indians
on shore. One bullet from a French rifle grazed Robert's shoulder, another
was deflected from Tayoga's paddle without striking it from his hand, but
in a few minutes they were beyond the range of those who stood on the bank,
although lead continued to fall in the water behind them.

"Now you can rise, Dagaeoga," said the Onondaga, "and use the extra paddle
that I took the precaution to stow in the boat. Do not think because you
are an escaped prisoner that you are to rest in idleness and luxury, doing
no work while I do it all."

"God bless you, Tayoga!" exclaimed Robert, in the fullness of his emotion.
"I'll work a week without stopping if you say so. I'm so glad to see you
that I'll do anything you say, and ask no questions. But I want to tell you
you're the most wonderful dancer and jumper in America!"

"I danced and jumped so well, Dagaeoga, because your need made me do so.
Necessity gives a wonderful spring to the muscles. Behold how long and
strong you sweep with the paddle because the bullets of the enemy impel
you."

"Which way are we going, Tayoga? What is your plan?"

"Our aim at this moment, Dagaeoga, is the middle of the lake, because the
sons of Onontio and the warriors of Tandakora are all along the beach, and
would be waiting for us with rifle and tomahawk should we seek to land.
This is but a small boat in which we sit and it could not resist the waves
of a great storm, but at present it is far safer for us than any land near
by."

"Of course you're right, Tayoga, you always are, but we're in the thick of
the darkness now, so you rest awhile and let me do the paddling alone."

"It is a good thought, Dagaeoga, but keep straight in the direction we are
going. See that you do not paddle unconsciously in a curve. We shall
certainly be pursued, and although our foes cannot see us well in the dark,
some out of their number are likely to blunder upon us. If it comes to a
battle you will notice that I have an extra rifle and pistol for you lying
in the bottom of the canoe, and that I am something more than a supple
dancer and leaper."

"You not only think of everything, Tayoga, but you also do it, which is
better. I shall take care to keep dead ahead."

Robert in his turn bent forward and plied the paddle. He was not only
fresh, but the wonderful thrill of escape gave him a strength far beyond
the normal, and the great canoe fairly danced over the waters toward the
dusky deeps of the lake, while the Onondaga crouched at the other end of
the canoe, rifle in hand, intently watching the heavy pall of dusk behind
them.

Their situation was still dangerous in the extreme, but the soul of Tayoga
swelled with triumph. Tandakora, the Ojibway, had rejoiced because he had
expected a great taking of scalps, but the purer spirit of the Onondaga
soared into the heights because he had saved his comrade of a thousand
dangers. He still saw faintly through the darkness the campfires of the
victorious French and Indian army, and he heard the swish of paddles, but
he did not yet discern any pursuing canoe. He detached his eyes for a
moment from the bank of dusk in front of him, and looked up at the skies.
The clouds and vapors kept him from seeing the great star upon which his
patron saint, Tododaho, sat, but he knew that he was there, and that he was
watching over him. He could not have achieved so much in the face of
uttermost peril and then fail in the lesser danger.

The canoe glided swiftly on toward the wider reaches of the lake, and the
Onondaga never relaxed his watchfulness, for an instant. He was poised in
the canoe, every nerve and muscle ready to leap in a second into activity,
while his ears were strained for the sounds of paddles or oars. Now he
relied, as often before, more upon hearing than sight. Presently a sound
came, and it was that of oars. A boat parted the wall of dusk and he saw
that it contained both French and Indians, eight in all, the warriors
uttering a shout as they beheld the fugitive canoe.

"Keep steadily on, Dagaeoga," said the Onondaga. "I have my long barreled
rifle, and it will carry much farther than those of the foe. In another
minute it will tell them they had best stop, and if they will not obey its
voice then I will repeat the command with your rifle."

Robert heard the sharp report of Tayoga's weapon, and then a cry from the
pursuing boat, saying the bullet had found its mark.

"They still come, though in a hesitating manner," said Tayoga, "and I must
even give them a second notice."

Now Robert heard the crack of the other rifle, and the answering cry,
signifying that its bullet, too, had sped home.

"They stop now," said Tayoga. "They heed the double command." He rapidly
reloaded the rifles, and Robert, who saw an uncommonly thick bank of dusk
ahead, paddled directly into the heart of it. They paused there a few
moments and neither saw nor heard any pursuers. Tayoga put down the rifles,
now ready again for his deadly aim, and the two kept for a long time a
straight course toward the center of the lake.




CHAPTER X


THE FLIGHT OF THE TWO

Tayoga, into whose hands Robert had entrusted himself with the uttermost
faith, at last said stop, and drawing the paddles into the canoe they took
long, deep breaths of relief. Around them was a world of waters, silver
under the moon and stars now piercing the dusk, and the Onondaga could see
the vast star on which sat the mighty chieftain who had gone away four
hundred years ago to eternal life.

"O Tododaho," he murmured, "thou hast guarded us well."

"Where do you think we are, Tayoga?" asked Robert.

"Perhaps twenty miles from land," replied the Onondaga, "and the farther
the better."

"True, Tayoga. Never before did I see a big lake look so kindly. If it
didn't require so much effort I'd like to go to the very center of it and
stay there for a week."

"Even as it is, Dagaeoga, we will wait here a while and take the long rest
we need."

"And while we're doing nothing but swing in our great canoe, Tayoga, I want
to thank you for all you've done for me. I'd been a prisoner much longer
than I wished."

"It but repays my debt, Dagaeoga. You will recall that you helped to save
me from the hands of Tandakora when he was going to burn me at the stake.
My imprisonment was short, but I have been in the forest the whole winter
and spring seeking to take you from Langlade."

"All of which goes to show, Tayoga, that we must allow only one of us to be
captured at a time. The other must go free in order to rescue the one
taken."

Although Robert's tone was light, his feeling was far from frivolous, but
he had been at extreme tension so long that he was compelled to seek
relief.

"How did you manage it, Tayoga?" he asked.

"In the confusion of the attack on the forts and the rejoicing that
followed it was easy," replied the Onondaga. "When so many others were
dancing and leaping it attracted no attention for me to dance and leap
also, and I selected, without interference, the boat, the extra paddle,
weapons and ammunition that I wished. Areskoui and Tododaho did the rest.
Do you feel stronger now, Dagaeoga?"

"Aye, I'm still able to handle the paddle. I suppose we'd better seek a
landing. We can't stay out in the lake forever. Tayoga, you've taken the
part of Providence itself. Now did it occur to you in your infinite wisdom,
while you were storing paddles, weapons and ammunition in this boat, to
store food also?"

The Onondaga's smile was wide and satisfying.

"I thought of that, too, Dagaeoga," he replied, "because I knew our
journey, if we should be so fortunate as to have a journey, would take us
out on the lake, and I knew, also, that no matter how many hardships and
dangers Dagaeoga might pass through, the time would come when he would be
hungry. It is always so with Dagaeoga."
