
Harry reentered the room, and in their eagerness all of the officers
followed.  Then a simultaneous "Ah!" of dismay burst from them all.
There was nothing on the table.  The plan was gone.  They looked at one
another, and in the eyes of every one apprehension was growing.

"The window is partly open," said the general, affecting a laugh,
although it had an uneasy note, "and of course it has blown off the
table.  We'll surely find it behind the sofa or a chair."

They searched the room eagerly, going over every inch of space, every
possible hiding place, but the plan was not there.

"Perhaps it's in the court," said the general.  "It might have
fluttered out there.  Raise the sash higher, Kenton.  Let nobody make
any noise. We must be as quiet as possible about this.  Luckily there's
enough moonlight now for us to find even a small scrap of paper in the
court."

They stole through the window silently, one by one, and searched every
inch of the court's space.  But nothing was in it, save the grass and
the flowers and the rosebushes that belonged there.  They returned to
the room, and once more looked at one another in dismay.

"Shut the window entirely and lock the door, Kenton," said the general.

Harry did so.  Then the general looked at them all, and his face was
set and very firm.

"We must all be searched," he said.  "I know that every one of you is
the soul of honor.  I know that not one of you has concealed about his
person this document which has suddenly become so valuable.  I know
that not one of you would smuggle through to the enemy such a plan at
any price, no matter how large.  Nevertheless we must know beyond the
shadow of a doubt that none of us has the map.  And I insist, too, that
I be searched first.  Bathurst, Colton, begin!"

They examined one another carefully in turn.  Every pocket or possible
place of concealment was searched.  Harry was the last and when they
were done with him the general heaved a huge sigh of relief.

"We know positively that we are not guilty," he said.  "We knew it
before, but now we've proved it.  That is off our minds, but the
mystery of the missing map remains.  What a strange combination of
circumstances. I think, gentlemen, that we had best say nothing about
it to outsiders. It's certainly to the interest of every one of us not
to do so.  It's also to the interest of all of us to watch the best we
can for a solution.  You're young, Kenton, but from what I hear of you
you're able to keep your own counsel."

"You can trust me, sir," said Harry.

"I know it, and now unlock the door.  We've held ourselves prisoners
long enough, and they'll be wondering about us in the ballroom."

Harry turned the key promptly enough and he was glad to escape from the
room.  He felt that he had left behind a sinister atmosphere.  He had
not mentioned to the older men the faint shadow that he thought he had
seen crossing the courtyard.  But then it was only fancy, nothing more,
an idle figment of the brain!  There was the music now, softer and more
tempting than ever, an irresistible call to flying feet, and another
dance with Rosamond Lawrence was due.

"I thought you weren't coming, Lieutenant Kenton," she said.  "Some one
said that you had gone into the smoking-room and that you were talking
war with middle-aged generals and colonels."

"But I escaped as soon as I could, Miss Rosamond," he said--he was
thinking of the locked door and the universal search.

"Well, you came just in time.  The band is beginning and I was about to
give your dance to that good-looking Lieutenant Dalton."

"You wouldn't treat me like that!  Throw over your cousin in such a
manner!  I can't think it!"

"No, I wouldn't!"

Then the full swell of the music caught them both, and they glided
away, as light and swift as the melody that bore them on.




CHAPTER XI

A VAIN PURSUIT


Youth was strong in Harry, and, while he danced and the music played,
he forgot all about the incident in the smoking-room.  With him it was
just one pretty girl after another.  He had heart enough for them all,
and only one who was so young and who had been so long on battlefields
could well understand what a keen, even poignant, pleasure it was to be
with them.

Those were the days when a ball lasted long.  Pleasures did not come
often, but when they came they were to be enjoyed to the full.  But as
the morning hours grew the manner of the older people became slightly
feverish and unnatural.  They were pursuing pleasure and forgetfulness
with so much zeal and energy that it bore the aspect of force rather
than spontaneity.  Harry noticed it and divined the cause.  Beneath his
high spirits he now felt it himself.  It was that looming shadow in the
North and that other in that far Southwest hovering over lost
Vicksburg. Serious men and serious women could not keep these shadows
from their eyes long.

The incident of the smoking-room and the missing map came back to him
with renewed force.  It could not have walked away.  They had searched
the room and the court so thoroughly that they would have found it, had
it been there.  The disappearance of a document, which men of authority
and knowledge had built up almost unconsciously, puzzled and alarmed
him.

It was almost day when he and Dalton left.  They paid their respects to
Mr. and Mrs. Curtis, and said many good-bys to "the girls they left
behind them."  Then they went out into the street, and inhaled great
draughts of the cool night air.

"A splendid night," said Dalton.

"Yes, truly," said Harry.

"I hope you didn't propose to more than six girls."

"To none.  But I love them all together."

"I'm glad to hear it, because you're entirely too young to marry, and
your occupation is precarious."

"You needn't be so preachy.  You're not more'n a hundred years old
yourself."

"But I'm two months older than you are and often two months makes a
vast difference, particularly in our cases.  I notice about you, Harry,
at times, a certain juvenility which I feel it my duty to repress."

"Don't do it, George.  Let's enjoy it while we can, because as you say
my occupation is precarious and yours is the same."

They stopped at the corner of the iron fence enclosing the Curtis home,
in which many lights were still shining.  It was near a dark alley
opening on the street and running by this side of the house.

"I'm going to see what's behind Mr. Curtis's house," said Harry.

Dalton stared at him.

"What's got into your head, Harry!" he exclaimed.  "Do you mean to be a
burglar prowling about the home of the man who has entertained you?"

Harry hesitated.  He was sorry that Dalton was with him.  Then he could
have gone on without question, but he must make some excuse to Dalton.

"George," he said at last, "will you swear to keep a secret, a most
important one which I am pledged to tell to nobody, but which I must
confide in you in order to give a good reason for what I am about to
do."

"If you are pledged to keep such a secret," replied Dalton, "then don't
explain it to me.  Your word is good enough, Harry.  Go ahead and do
what you want to do.  I'll ask nothing about any of your actions, no
matter how strange it may look."

"You're a man in a million, George.  Come on, your confidence is going
to be tested.  Besides, you'll run the danger of being shot."

But Dalton followed him fearlessly as he led the way down the alley.
Richmond was not lighted then, save along the main streets, and a few
steps took them into the full dark.  The brilliant windows threw bright
bands across the lines, but they themselves were in darkness.

The alley ran through the next street and so did the Curtis grounds.
They were as extensive in the rear of the house as in front, and
contained small pines carefully trimmed, banks of roses and two grape
arbors.  Harry could hear no sound of any one stirring among them, but
people, obviously the cooks and other servants, were talking in the big
kitchen at the rear of the house.

The street itself running in the rear of the building was as well
lighted as it was in front, but Harry saw no one in it save a member of
the city police, who seemed to be keeping a good watch.  But as he did
not wish to be observed by the man he waited a little while in the
mouth of the alley, until he had moved on and was out of sight.

"Now, George," he said, "you and I are going to do a little scouting.
You know I'm descended from the greatest natural scout and trailer ever
known in the West, one whose senses were preternaturally acute, one who
could almost track a bird in the air by its flight."

"Yes, I've heard of the renowned Henry Ware, and I know that you've
inherited a lot of his skill and intuition.  Go ahead.  I promised that
I would help you and ask no questions.  I keep my word."

Harry climbed silently over the low fence, and Dalton followed in the
same manner.  The light from the street and house did not penetrate the
pines and rosebushes, where Harry quickly found a refuge, Dalton as
usual following him.

"What next?" whispered Dalton.

"Now, I do my trailing and scouting, and you help me all you can,
George, but be sure you don't make any noise.  There's enough moonlight
filtering through the pines to show the ground to me, but not enough to
disclose us to anybody twenty feet away."

He dropped to his hands and knees, and, crawling back and forth, began
to examine every inch of ground with minute care, while Dalton stared
at him in amazement.

"I'd help," whispered Dalton, "if I only knew what you were doing."

"Suppose, George, that somebody wanted to see the Curtis house, and yet
not be seen, wanted to observe as well as he could, without detection,
what was going on there.  He'd watch his chance, jump over the fence as
we have done and enter this group of pines.  He could ask no finer
point of observation.  We are perfectly hidden and yet we can see the
whole rear of the house and one side of it."

"So we can.  I infer that you are looking for some one who you think
has been acting as a spy."

"Ah! here we are.  The earth is a bit soft by this pine, and I see the
trace of a footstep!  And here is another trace, close by it,
undoubtedly the imprint of the other foot.  It's as plain as day."

Dalton knelt, looked at the traces, and shook his head.  "I can't make
out any of them," he said.  "I see nothing but a slight displacement of
the grass caused by the wind."

"That's because you haven't my keen eye, an inherited and natural
ability as a trailer, although you may beat me out of sight in other
things. The shape of these traces indicates that they were made by
human feet, and their closeness together shows that the man stood
looking at the house.  If he had been walking along they would be much
wider apart."

He examined the traces again with long and minute care.

"The toes point toward the house, consequently he was looking at it,"
he said.  "He was a heavy man, and he stood here a long time, not
moving from his tracks.  That's why he left these traces, which are so
clear and evident to me, George, although they're hidden from a blind
man like you."

"Well, what of it?"

"Nothing much to you, but a lot to me."

He rose to his feet and examined the boughs of the pine.

"As I thought," he whispered with great satisfaction.  "Despite his
courage and power over himself, both of which were very great, he
became a little excited.  Doubtless he saw something that stirred him
deeply."

"What under the stars are you talking about, Harry?"

"See, he broke off three twigs of the pine.  Just snapped them in two
with nervous fingers.  Here are pieces lying on the ground.  Now, a man
does that sort of thing almost unconsciously.  He will not reach up for
the twig or down for it, but he breaks it because it presents itself to
him at the corner of his eye.  This man was six feet in height or more
and built very powerfully.  I think I know him!  Yes, I'm sure I know
him!  Nor is it at all strange that he should be here."

"Shall we make a thorough search for him among the pines?  You say he's
tall and built powerfully.  But maybe the two of us could master him,
and if not we could call for help."

"Too late, George.  He left a long time ago, and he took with him what
he wanted.  We needn't look any farther."

"Lead on, then, King of Trailers and Master of Secrets!  If the mighty
Caliph, Haroun al Kenton, wishes to prowl in these grounds, seeking the
heart of some great conspiracy, it is not for his loyal vizier, the
Sheikh Ul Dalton to ask him questions."

"I'm not certain that a vizier is a sheikh."

"Nor am I, but I'm certain that I want to go home and go to bed.
Vikings of the land like ourselves can't stand much luxury.  It weakens
the tissues, made strong on the march and in the fields."

They left the grounds silently and unobserved and soon were in their
own quarters, where they slept nearly the whole day.  Then they spent
three or four days more in the social affairs which were such a keen
pleasure to them after such a long deprivation.  But wherever they
went, and they were in demand everywhere, Harry was always looking for
somebody, a man, tall, heavy and broad shouldered, not a man who would
come into a room where he was, or who would join a company of people
that he had joined, but one who would hang upon the outskirts, and hide
behind the corners of buildings or trees.  He did not see the shadow,
but once or twice he felt that it was there.

The officer, Bathurst, told him one night that some important papers
had been stolen from the White House of the Confederacy itself.

"They pertain to our army," said Bathurst, "and they will be of value
to the enemy, if they reach him."

"I'm quite certain that the most daring and dangerous of all northern
spies is in Richmond," said Harry.

Then he told Bathurst of Shepard and of the trails that he had seen
among the pines behind Curtis's house.

"Do you think this man got our map?" asked Bathurst.

"It may have been so.  Perhaps he was hidden in the court and when he
saw us go out, leaving the map on the table, he slipped in at the
window and seized it."

"But the court was enclosed.  He would have had to go with the paper
through the house itself."

"That's where my theory fails.  I can provide for his taking the paper,
but I can't provide for his escape."

"I'll tell the General about it.  I think you're right, Harry.  I've
heard of Shepard myself, and he's worth ten thousand men to the
Yankees. It's more than that.  At such a critical stage of our affairs
he might ruin us.  We'll make a general search for him.  We'll rake the
city with a fine tooth comb."

The search was made everywhere.  Soldiers pried in every possible
place, but they found nobody who could not give an adequate account of
his presence in Richmond.  Harry felt sure nevertheless that Shepard
was somewhere in the capital, protected by his infinite daring and
resource, and they received the startling news the next day after the
search that a messenger sent northward with dispatches for Lee had been
attacked only a short distance from the city.  He had been struck from
behind, and did not see his assailant, but the wound in the head--the
man had been found unconscious--and the missing dispatches were
sufficient proof.

A night later precious documents were purloined from the office of the
Secretary of War and a list of important earthworks on the North and
South Carolina coast disappeared from the office of the Secretary of
the Navy.  Alarm spread through all the departments of the Confederacy.
Some one, spy and burglar too, had come into the very capital, and he
was having uncommon success.

Harry had not the least doubt that it was Shepard, and he was filled
with an ambition to capture this man, whom he really liked.  If Shepard
were caught he would certainly be hanged, but then a spy must take his
chances.

They heard meanwhile that General Lee had gone to a former camp of his
on the Opequan, but that later in response to maneuvers by General
Meade, he moved to a position near Front Royal.  No orders came for
Harry or Dalton to rejoin him, and, as a period of inactivity seemed to
be at hand, they were glad to remain a while longer in Richmond.  They
still stayed with the Lanhams, who refused to take any pay, although
the two young officers, chipping together, bought for Mrs. Lanham a
little watch which had just come through the blockade from England.

Thus their days lengthened in Richmond, and, despite the shadow of the
spy and his doings which was over Harry, they were still very pleasant.
The members of the Mosaic Club, although older men, made much of them,
and Harry and Dalton, being youths of sprighty wit, were able to hold
their own in such company.  The time had now passed into August, and
