--Contributed by Lyndwode, Pereira, Ottawa, Can.



** How to Make an Egg-Beater [291]

There is no reason why any cook or housewife should be without
this eggbeater, as it can be made quickly in any size. All that is
needed is an ordinary can with a tight-fitting cover-a
baking-powder can will do. Cut a round piece of wood 3 in. longer
than the length of the can. Cut a neat hole in the cover of the
can to allow the stick to pass through, and at one end of the
stick fasten, by means of a flatheaded tack, a piece of tin, cut
round, through which several holes have been punched. Secure
another piece of heavier tin of the same size, and make

[Illustration: Made Like a Churn]

a hole in the center to pass the stick through. Put a small nail 2
in. above the end of the dasher, which allows the second tin to
pass up and down in the opposite direction to the dasher. This
beater will do the work in less time than the regular kitchen
utensil.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond, Cal.



** Cart Without an Axle [291]

The boy who has a couple of cart wheels is not always lucky enough
to have an axle of the proper length to fit the wheels. In such a
case the cart can be constructed as shown in the illustration.
This cart has no axle, each wheel being attached with a short pin
for an axle, on the side and at the lower edge of the box. The
outer end of the pin is carried on a piece of wood extending the
full length of the box and

[Illustration: Wheels Fastened to the Box]

supported by crosspieces nailed to the ends, as shown.
--Contributed by Thos. De Loof, Grand Rapids, Mich.



** An Illuminated Target [291]

My youthful nephews some time ago were presented with an air rifle
and it worked so well that it became necessary for me to construct
a target that would allow the fun to be carried on at night.

I reversed a door gong, screwed it on the inside of a store box,
and fitted two candles on the inside to illuminate the bullseye.
The candles, of course, were below the level of the bullseye. The
position of the candles and gong are shown in Fig. 1. At night the
illuminated interior of the bell could be

[Illustration: FIG. 1;   FIG. 2;  Target for Night Shooting]

plainly seen as shown in Fig. 2.
--Contributed by James M. Kane, Doylestown, Pa.



** Sawing Sheet Metal [291]

Sheet metal placed between two boards in the jaws of a vise and
clamped tightly, can be sawed easily with a hacksaw.

*8 Feed Box for Chickens [292]

The sketch shows the construction of a feed box designed to
prevent the scattering of feed and give the coward

[Illustration: Chicken Feed Box]

rooster as much chance to fatten as the game cock. The base may be
made of a 1/2-in. board, 1 ft. wide and 3 ft. long, although any
of the dimensions may be varied to suit special requirements. The
ends are semi-circular pieces with a notch, 1/4 in. deep and 3 in.
wide, cut in the center of the rounding edge. The ends are
connected together with a piece of wood set in the notches. The
strip of wood is 1/4 in. thick, 2 in. wide and as long as the box.
Notches 1/8 in. wide and 1/8 in. deep are cut on the under side of
this piece of wood, 1-1/2 in. apart. Heavy pieces of wire are bent
in the form of a semi-circle, as shown. The wires are set in the
1/8-in. notches cut on the under side of the top piece of wood.
The ends of the wires are set in holes in wood pieces joining the
bases of the end pieces. The baseboard and top are separable.
--Contributed by Maurice Baudier, New Orleans, La.



** A Book Rest [292]

A book that does not open flat is rather inconvenient to write in
when one of its sides is in the position shown in Fig. 2. A
wedge-shaped piece of

[Illustration: Book Back Holders]

metal, stone or wood, as shown in Fig. 1, will, when placed as in
Fig. 3, raise the sloping half to the level of the other pages.
Cover the block with rubber, wide rubber bands or felt, to prevent
its scratching the desk top. The block can also be used as a
paperweight.



** Window Shelf for Flower Pots [292]

On the ledge formed by the top part of the lower sash of the
window I fitted a board 7 in. wide into each side of the casing,
by cutting away the ends. I placed a small bracket at each end of
the shelf, so that it would fit solidly against the lower window
sash to support the weight of the plants.

[Illustration: Shelf in Window]

One of the brackets I nailed to the shelf and the other I held in
place with a hinge, the reason being that if both were solid, the
shelf could not be put on the window, as one end must be dropped
in place before the other. Such a shelf will hold all the plants a
person can put on it. When not in use, it can be removed without
marring the casing.
--Contributed by G. A. Wood, West Union, Ia.



** Magnet for the Work Basket [292]

Tie a ribbon or strong string to the work basket and fasten a
large magnet to the other end. Needles, scissors, etc., can be
picked up without any trouble. This device is very convenient for
invalids.
--Contributed by Nellie Conlon, Worcester, Mass.



** Knife Made from a Hack-Saw Blade [293]

A very serviceable knife with excellent cutting qualities can be
made easily from a discarded hack-saw blade. The dimensions given
in the sketch make a knife of convenient size.

The saw teeth are ground off on an emery wheel or grindstone to a
smooth edge parallel with the back edge. For the handle, take two
pieces of hard wood, dressing one surface of each piece, and cut a
groove as wide and thick as the saw blade. Place the blade in the
groove and glue the two dressed sides of the wood together. After
the glue has dried, the blade can be pulled out of the groove and
the wood shaped to any desired form. A small wood-screw is put
through one side of the handle to prevent the blade from sliding.
After completing the

[Illustration: Details of Handle]

handle, the blade is put back into the groove and sharpened to a
cutting edge.
--Contributed by H. A. Hutchins, Cleveland, Ohio.



** Killing Mice and Rats [293]

A simple and inexpensive means for killing mice and rats is to
leave yeast cakes lying around where they can eat them.
--Contributed by Maud McKee, Erie, Pa.



** Roller Coaster Illusion Traveling Up an Incline [293]

A toy car with a paddle wheel and a shaft on both ends traveling
upward on a chute in which water is flowing down, is shown in the
accompanying sketch. The paddle wheels travel in a reverse
direction causing the ends of the axles to roll on the edge of the
chute, thus carrying the car up the incline. If a rack is used on
each side of the chute and a small pinion on the

[Illustration: Car Travels Uphill]

ends of the axles, a positive upward movement of the car will be
obtained.
--Contributed by W. S. Jacobs, Malden; Mass.



** Block for Planing Octagonal Wood Pieces [293]

The little device shown in the illustration will be found very
useful in any workshop. Two or three of them will be necessary for
planing long pieces. Each one is made of a hardwood block, 1 in.
square and 4 in. long. A notch is cut in one side, as shown in
Fig. 1, so a piece of wood which has been planed square will fit
in it. Put a screw in the end of each piece and fasten it down to
the bench. If desired, a tenon may be made on the bottom of each
block, as shown in Fig. 2, to fit a mortise cut in the bench.
Place the blocks far enough apart so the board to be planed will
rest firmly in the notches.

[Illustration: The Notch Holds the Wood]

Plane the board square first and then place it in the notches and
plane the corners down to the proper dimensions.
--Contributed by Willie Woolsen, Cape May Point, N.J.



** A Letter Holder of Pierced Metal [294]

The letter holder shown in the illustration will be found
convenient for holding out-going letters that await the postman's
coming. It can be made of either copper or brass and need not

[Illustration: Finished Letter Holder]

be of very heavy material. Gauge 22 will be sufficiently heavy.
One sheet of metal, 6 by 9-1/2 in., a board on which to work it,
and an awl and hammer, will be needed. Prepare a design for the
front. If one such as is shown is to be used,

[Illustration: Layout for the Metal]

make one-quarter of it first, and then get the other parts by
folding on the center lines and tracing. This will insure having
all parts alike. The letters can be put on afterward.

Fasten the metal to the board, using tacks and nailing outside of
the required space, in the waste metal. Trace the design on the
metal with carbon paper; or, if desired, paste the paper design
right on the metal. With an awl pierce the metal between the
marginal line and the design, as shown. The holes should be
uniform along the outlines but should be pierced promiscuously
otherwise. On the back, only the marginal line is to be pierced.

Remove the metal, together with the paper if the latter was pasted
to the metal, and trim off the surplus metal where the tacks had
been placed. File off any sharpness so that the hand may not be
injured in handling it. Place the metal on the edge of a table or
between two boards, and bend on the two lines indicated in the
drawing, to right angles.

A good finish is obtained by just letting the copper age with its
natural color. If any polishing is required, it should be done
before the metal is fastened to the board and pierced.



** Imitating Ground Glass [294]

Make a mixture of white lead in oil, 1 part; varnish, 3/4 part;
turpentine, 1/4 part, and add sugar of lead as a dryer. Make a
very thin paint of this and use a broad, flat brush, says Master
Painter. With care you may succeed in getting the paint on quite
evenly all over, which is desirable. One coat will do. If it
becomes necessary to remove this coating for renewal, it may be
effected by an application of potash lye, or the old may be
renewed by a coating of a mixture of 2 parts hydrochloric acid, 2
parts white vitriol, 1 part sulphate of copper (blue vitriol) and
1 part of gum arabic, applied by means of a brush.



** Draw before Cutting [294]

A detail drawing made of a piece of furniture before starting the
work will often save time and mistakes.



** Making "Spirits" Play a Violin [295]

A very pretty trick, that can be worked in your own parlor, will
produce as much sensation as a fake "medium." In all appearance, a
violin, mandolin or guitar, placed on a table, will begin to
produce music simply through stamping the foot and a few passes of
the hand. The music will not sound natural, but weird and distant.

The trick is done by placing the end of a small stick on a music
box in the basement of the house and allowing the other end to
pass up through the floor and table top so it will project about
1/16 in. The stick may be placed by the side of, behind or through
the center of a table leg. Be careful not to have any obstruction
in the way of the stick. The instrument is placed sideways on the
protruding end of the stick. The "fake" work of invoking the
"spirit" is performed and ended by stamping the foot, which
signals the operator in the basement to start the machine, and the
violin seemingly produces music without anyone touching it.

So impressive are the results, that many people really think the
spirits of the departed are playing the violin with unseen hands.
The music is transmitted through the stick from the music box to
the violin.

[Illustration: The Music Produced by the Phonograph is Transmitted
to the Viohn on the Second Floor by the Aid of a Long Stick]



** Sizing a Threaded Hole [295]

It sometimes becomes necessary to transfer the size of a threaded
hole from some out-of-the-way place to the shop in order to make a
piece to fit it. With proper tools this is easy; without them, it
might be difficult. One thing is always at hand and that is wood.
Whittle a stick tapering until it starts in the hole. Then turn it
into the hole and a fair thread will be made on the wood. The
stick can be carried in the pocket without risk of changing the
size, as would be the case with ordinary calipers.



** Leaded-Glass Fire Screen [295]

The main frame of the fire screen shown in Fig. 1 is made from two
pieces of 1/2-in. square bar iron. The longest piece, which should
be about 5-1/2 ft. long, is bent square so as to form two
uprights, each 28 in. long and measuring 26 in. across the top.
The bottom crosspiece can be either riveted or welded to the
uprights. Two pairs of feet, each 6 in. long and spread about 8
in. apart, are shaped as shown in Fig. 2. These are welded to the
lower end of the uprights.

The ornamental scrollwork on the frame is simple and effective,
and is easy to construct, says Work, London. The scrolls are
attached to the frame by means of 3/16-in. round-head machine
screws. The leaf ornament at the

[Illustration: Completed Fire Screen and Parts]

termination of the scroll is shaped and embossed as shown in Fig.
3. The metal used for the scrolls is 3/16 in. thick by 1/2 in.
wide. The leaf ornament is formed by turning over the end of a
piece of metal and working it together at a welding heat, and then
shaping out the leaf with' a chisel and files, after which they
are embossed with a ballpeen hammer.

The center is made from colored glass of special make for leaded
work. The design is formed in the lead, of which a cross section
is shown in Fig. 4. Use care to give the lead a symmetrical
outline. The design should be drawn full size on a large sheet of
heavy paper and the spaces to be occupied by the lead cut out so
as to leave the exact size and shape of each piece of paper the
same as wanted for each piece of glass. These are used as patterns
in marking the glass for cutting. The glass is cut the same as
ordinary window glass. The glass, lead, border and special flux
can be purchased from an art glass shop.

After the glass is cut, the work of putting the pieces together
with the lead between them is begun. Secure a board as wide as the
screen--several narrow boards put together will do and begin by
placing one vertical side border, A, Fig. 5, and the base border,
B, on it as shown. Place the corner piece of glass, C, in the
grooves of the borders, cut a long piece of lead, D, and hold it
in place with two or three brads or glazier's points. The piece of
lead E is cut and a small tenon joint made as shown in Fig. 6.
While the piece of lead D, Fig. 5, is held by the brads, the piece
E can be fitted and soldered. The soldering is done with a hot
soldering iron and wire solder, using rosin as a flux, or, better
still, special flux purchased for this purpose. After the joints
are soldered, the piece of glass F is put in place and the lead
held with brads as before until the cross leads are fitted and
soldered. The brads are then removed, the glass piece as shown by
the dotted lines put in, and the leads around it held with brads
until the crosspieces are put in and soldered. This method is
pursued until the glass is complete, then the two remaining
vertical and top pieces of border are put on and all corners
soldered.

The leaded glass is held in the iron frame by means of eight
U-shaped clips, as shown in Fig. 7. A hole is drilled in the frame
for the retaining screw, the latter being tapped to the base of
the clip. Special screws may be made with ornamental heads, as
shown in Fig. 8, and used for securing the side scrolls and clips
together.



** A Revolving Teeter Board [297]

[Illustration: Details of Teeter Board ]

The accompanying sketch shows the details of a revolving teeter
board for the children's playground that can be constructed in a
few hours. Secure a post, not less than 4 in. square and of the
length given in the drawing, and round the corners of one end for
a ring. This ring can be made of 1-in. strap iron and it should be
shrunk on the post. Bore a 3/4-in. hole in the end of the post for
the center pin to rest in. Make three washers 3-in. in diameter
and 1/4 in. thick and drill 3/4-in. holes through their centers.
Drill and countersink two smaller holes for 2-in. wood screws in
each washer. Fasten one of these washers to the top of the post as
shown. The post is now ready to be set in the ground. Coarse
gravel should be packed tightly about it to make it solid.
Concrete is much better if it can be secured.

To make the swivel you will need two 1/4 by 5 by 8-in. plates,
rounded at the top as shown, and two wood blocks, A and B, each
3-1/2 by 5 by 10 in. Drill the lower ends of the plates for four
2-1/2-in. lag screws and the upper ends for a 5/8-in. bolt. Fasten
the plates to the block B, then drill a 3/4-in. hole as shown and
fasten the two remaining washers to the block, one on each side
and central with the hole. Bore a 5/8-in. hole lengthwise through
the block A for the 5/8-in. rocker bolt. This bolt should be
11-1/2 in. long.

The teeter board is made of a 2 by 12-in. plank about 12 ft. long.
It should be slightly tapered from the center to the ends. Two
styles of hand holds are shown, but the one on the left is the one
most generally used. The handles are rounded at the ends and are
fastened to the board with lag screws or bolts. The block A is
fastened to the board with lag screws and should be a working fit
between the wo plates where it is held by means of the 5/8-in.
bolt. The center pin is 3/4-in. in diameter and about 9 in. long.
--Contributed by W. H. Dreier, Jr., Camden, N. J.



** Home-Made Pot Covers [297]

Empty thread spools and the tins used as extra inside covers in
lard cans are usually thrown away, but these can be put to good
use as kettle covers, if they are made up as follows: Saw the
spool in half as shown, make a hole in the center of the tin and
run a screw or nail through the spool and the tin; then flatten
its end on the under side. This will make an excellent cover for a
pot.
--Contributed by Maurice Baudier, New Orleans, La.

[Illustration: Pot Covers]



** An Outdoor Gymnasium Part I-The Horizontal Bar [298]

Gymnastic apparatus costs money and needs to be housed, because it
will not stand the weather. Gymnasiums are not always available
for the average boy who likes exercise and who would like to learn
the tricks on horizontal and parallel bars, horse and rings, which
all young athletes are taught in regular gymnastic courses.

Any small crowd of boys--even two--having a few simple tools, a
will to use them and the small amount of money required to buy the
necessary

[Illustration: Adjustable Horizontal Bar

wood, bolts and rope, can make a first class gymnasium. If trees
are convenient, and some one can swing an axe, the money outlay
will be almost nothing. The following plans are for material
purchased from a mill squared and cut to length. To substitute
small, straight trees for the squared timbers requires but little
changes in the plans.

The most important piece of apparatus in the gymnasium is the
horizontal bar. Most gymnasiums have two: one adjustable bar for
various exercises and a high bar for gymnastic work. The outdoor
gymnasium combines the two. The material required is as follows: 2
pieces of wood, 4 in. square by 9-1/2 ft. long; 4 pieces, 2 by 4
in. by 2 ft. long; 4 pieces, 1 by 7 in. by 6-1/2 ft. long; 4
filler pieces, 3/4 by 3 in. by 3 ft. 9 in. long and 1 piece, 2-1/2
in. square by 5 ft. 7 in. long. This latter piece is for the bar
and should be of well seasoned, straight-grained hickory. It makes
no difference what kind of wood is used for the other pieces, but
it is best to use cedar for the heavy pieces that are set in the
ground as it will take years for this wood to rot. Ordinary yellow
pine will do very well. The four 7-in. boards should be of some
hard wood if possible such as oak, hickory, maple, chestnut or
ash. The other material necessary consists of 2 bolts, 1/2 in. in
diameter and 7 in. long; 16 screws, 3 in. long; 4 heavy screw eyes
with two 1/2-in. shanks; 50 ft. of heavy galvanized wire: 80 ft.
of 1/4-in. manila rope and 4 pulley blocks. Four cleats are also
required but these can be made of wood at home.

Draw a line on the four 7-in. boards along the side of each from
end to end, 1-1/4-in. from one edge. Beginning at one end of each
board make pencil dots on this line 5 in. apart for a distance of
3 ft. 4 in. Bore holes through the boards on these marks with a
9/15-in. bit. Fasten two of these boards on each post with the
3-in. screws, as shown in the top view of the post Fig. 1, forming
a channel of the edges in which the holes were bored. Two of the
filler pieces are fastened in each channel as shown, so as to make
the space fit the squared end of the bar snugly. The ends of the
boards with the holes should be flush with the top of the post.
This will make each pair of holes in the 7-in. boards coincide, so
the 1/2-in. bolt can be put through them and the squared end of
the bar.

Select a level place where the apparatus is to be placed and dig
two holes 6 ft. apart, each 3 ft. deep and remove all loose dirt.
The ends of the posts not covered with the boards are set in these
holes on bricks or small stones. The channels formed by the boards
must be set facing each other with the inner surfaces of the posts
parallel and 5 ft. 8 in. apart. The holes around the posts are
filled with earth and well tamped.

The hickory piece which is to form the bar should be planed,
scraped and sandpapered until it is perfectly smooth and round
except for 3 in. at each end. Bore a 9/16-in. hole through each
square end 1-1/4 in. from the end. The bar may be fastened at any
desired height by slipping the 1/2-in. bolts through the holes
bored in both the bar and channel.

Each post must be well braced to keep it rigid while a person is
swinging on the bar. Four anchors are placed in the ground at the
corners of an imaginary rectangle 9 by 16 ft., in the center of
which the posts stand as shown in Fig. 2. Each anchor is made of
one 2-ft. piece of wood, around the center of which four strands
of the heavy galvanized wire are twisted, then buried to a depth
of 2 ft., the extending ends of the wires coming up to the surface
at an angle.

The heavy screw eyes are turned into the posts at the top and
lengths of ropes tied to each. These ropes or guys pass through
the pulley blocks, which are fastened to the projecting ends of
the anchor wire, and return to the posts where they are tied to
cleats. Do not tighten the guy ropes without the bar in place, as
to do so will strain the posts in the ground. Do not change the
elevation of the bar without slacking up on the ropes. It takes
but little pull on the guy ropes to make them taut, and once
tightened the bar will be rigid.

[Illustration: Ground Plan]

Oil the bar when it is finished and remove it during the winter.
It is well to oil the wood occasionally during the summer and
reverse the bar at times to prevent its becoming curved. The wood
parts should be well painted to protect them from the weather.



** Electrostatic Illumination [299]

Anyone having the use of a static machine can perform the
following experiment which gives a striking result. A common
tumbler is mounted on a revolving

[Illustration: Illuminated Tumbler]

platform and a narrow strip of tinfoil is fastened with shellac
varnish to the surface of the glass as follows: Starting beneath
the foot of the glass from a point immediately below the stem, it
is taken to the edge of the foot; it follows the edge for about 1
in. and then passes in a curve across the base, and ascends the
stem; then it passes around the bowl in a sinuous course to the
rim, which it follows for about one-third of its circumference;
after which it descends on the inside and terminates at the
bottom. The tinfoil on the outside of the glass is divided by
cutting with a knife every 1/8 in., the parts inside and beneath
the glass being left undivided. Current is then led from a static
machine to two terminals, one terminal being connected to one end
of the tinfoil strip, and similarly the second terminal makes
contact with the other end. As soon as the current is led into the
apparatus, a spark is seen at each place where the knife has cut
through the tinfoil. If the tumbler is rotated, the effect will be
as shown in the illustration. A variety of small and peculiar
effects can be obtained by making some of the gaps in the tinfoil
larger than others, in which case larger sparks would be produced
at these points. The experiment should be carried out in a
darkened room, and under these circumstances when nothing is
visible, not even the tumbler, the effect is very striking.



** Balloon Ascension Illusion [300]
By C. W. Nieman

In these days of startling revelations in air-craft flight we are
prepared to see any day some marvelous machine driven bird cutting
figure-eights all over the sky above our heads. One boy recently
took advantage of this state of expectancy to have an evening's
harmless amusement, through an illusion which deceived even the
most incredulous. He caused a whole hotel-full of people to gaze
open mouthed at a sort of "Zeppelin XXIII," which skimmed along
the distant horizon, just visible against the dark evening sky,
disappearing only to reappear again, and working the whole crowd
up to a frenzy of excitement. And all he used was a black thread,
a big piece of cardboard and a pair of field glasses.

He stretched the thread between two buildings, about 100 ft.
apart, in an endless belt, passing through a screweye at either
end. On this thread he fastened a cardboard "cut-out" of a
dirigible, not much to look at in daytime, but most deceptive at
dusk. By pulling one or the other string he moved the "airship" in
either direction. He took the precaution of stretching his thread
just beyond a blackberry hedge and thus kept over-inquisitive
persons at a safe distance. He also saw to it that there was a
black background at either end so that the reversing of the
direction of the craft would not be noticed.

In attracting the crowd he had a confederate stand looking at the
moving ship through a field glass, which at once gave the
suggestion of distance, and materially heightened the illusion.
When the interest of the crowd, which at once gathered, was at its
height, the "aeronaut" pulled his craft out of sight and let the
disillusion come when the light of day laid bare his fraud.



** A Cork Extractor [300]

The device shown in the sketch is for removing a cork or stopper
from a bottle whether full or empty where the cork has been pushed
inside. A wire about No. 14 gauge is bent as shown at B, Fig. 1,
to fit the index finger and the other end filed to a point C, and
turned in a spiral D, so the point will be on top. Insert this
tool in the bottle as shown in Fig. 2 and place the end D under
the cork and pull up. The cork will come out easily. --Contributed
by Maurice Baudier. New Orleans. La.

[Illustration: Cork Extractor]



** An Outdoor Gymnasium Part II-Parallel Bars [301]

Parallel bars hold a high place in the affection of those who
frequent gymnasiums as the best apparatus for development of the
back and shoulder muscles, as well as a promoter of ease and grace
of movement. The outdoor "gym" can have a set of these bars with
very little more labor than was required for the horizontal bar.

The material required is as follows:

[Illustration: Detail of the Parallel Bars]

4 posts, preferably cedar, 4 in. square and 6 ft. long;
2 base pieces, 4 in. square and 5-1/2 ft. long;
2 cross braces, 2 by 4 in. by 2 ft. 2 in. long;
2 side braces, 2 by 4 in. by 7 ft. 8 in. long;
4 knee braces, 2 by 4 in. by 3 ft. 8 in. long;
2 bars of straight grained hickory, 2 by 3 in. by 10 ft. long;
4 wood screws, 6 in. long;
4 bolts, 8 in. long; 8 bolts, 7 in. long and
1 doz. large spikes.

To make the apparatus, lay off the bases as shown in the end view
and bevel the ends at an angle of 60 deg. Chisel out two notches 4
in. wide and 1 in. deep, beginning at a point 9 in. from either
side of the center. These are to receive the lower ends of the
posts. Bevel two sides of one end of each post down to the width
of the finished bar--a little less than 2 in. Cut notches in these
ends to receive the oval bars. Bevel the ends of the knee braces,
as shown in the diagram, and fasten the lower ends to the beveled
ends of the bases with the spikes. Fasten the upper ends of the
knee braces to the uprights with the 8-in. bolts put through the
holes bored for that purpose, and countersinking the heads. Lay
the whole end flat on the ground and make a mark 2-1/2 ft. from
the bottom of the base up along the posts, and fasten the end
braces with their top edges flush with the marks, using four of
the 7-in bolts. Finally toe-nail the base into the ends of the
posts merely to hold them in position while the whole structure is
being handled.

Two endpieces must be made. These sets or ends of the apparatus
are to be buried in trenches dug to the depth of 2-1/2 ft., with
the distance between the two inner surfaces of the posts, which
face each other, of 7 ft. After the trenches are dug, additional
long, shallow trenches must be made connecting the posts to
receive the side braces. The function of these side braces is to
hold both ends together solidly. It is necessary to bury these
braces so they will be out of the way of the performer. The side
braces are bolted to the posts just below the cross braces, so the
bolts in both will not meet. The bars are dressed down so that a
cross section is oval as shown in the end view. They are to be
screwed to the notched ends of the uprights with the 6-in. screws.
The holes should be countersunk so they can be filled with putty
after the screws are in place. The bars should be well oiled with
linseed oil to protect them from the weather, and in the winter
they should be removed and stored.

Every piece of wood in this apparatus can be round and cut from
trees, except the bars. If using mill-cut lumber, leave it
undressed, and if using round timber leave the bark upon it as a
protection from the weather. It is well to paint the entire
apparatus, save the bars, before burying the lower part of the end
pieces. The wood so treated will last for years, but even
unpainted they are very durable. Be sure to tamp down the earth
well about the posts. A smooth piece of ground should be selected
on which to erect the apparatus. (To be Continued.)



** Combined Ladle and Strainer [302]

When using a strainer in connection with a ladle the operation
requires both

[Illustration: Ladle and Strainer]

hands. A convenient article where a ladle and strainer are needed
is to swing a cup-shaped strainer under the bowl of a ladle as
shown in the illustration. The strainer can be held in place with
small bands that fit loosely over the handle and a small tip
soldered to the ladle. These will allow the ladle to be turned,
leaving the strainer always in position. A large sized ladle,
equipped with a strainer, is just the thing for painters to dip
and strain paint, while a small one is of great assistance to the
housewife for dipping and straining soups, jellies, etc.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond, Cal.



** Cleaning Gloves [302]

A solution consisting of 1 dr. of sodium carbonate and 1 qt. of
milk makes an excellent cleaner for motorists' gloves.



** Turpentine in Cutting Oil [302]

When cutting steel or wrought iron in a lathe, milling machine,
drill press or planer, it is sometimes necessary to leave a smooth
surface. Oil, or various cutting compounds of oil, is used for
this purpose and to keep the surface cool. If a little turpentine
is added to the oil, it will greatly assist in leaving a smooth
surface. A proportion of one-quarter turpentine is good.



** Center of Gravity Experiment [302]

This experiment consists of suspending a pail of water from a
stick placed upon a table as shown in the accompanying sketch. In
order to accomplish this experiment, which seems impossible, it is
necessary to place a stick, A, of sufficient length,

[Illustration: Experiment]

between the end of the stick on the table and the bottom of the
pail. This makes the center of gravity somewhere near the middle
of the stick on the table, thus holding the pail as shown.



** Lathe Accuracy [302]

A heavy lathe cut will not do accurate work.



** An Outdoor Gymnasium PART III-The Horse [303]

The German horse is that peculiar piece of apparatus which is
partly a horizontal obstruction to leap over, partly a barrier for
jumps, partly a smooth surface of long and narrow dimensions over
and about which the body may slide and swing, and partly an
artificial back for the purpose of a peculiar style of leap frog.

[Illustration: The German Horse]

To make a horse for the outdoor "gym" requires no difficult work
save the preparation of the top or body of the horse. The making
of the regular gymnasium horse requires a very elaborate
wood-working and leather upholstering plant, but the one used for
outdoor work can be made of a log of wood. Procure from a saw
mill, wood yard or from the woods, one-half of a tree trunk from a
tree 9 to 15 in. in diameter--the larger the better. The length
may be anywhere from 4 to 7 ft., but 5 ft. is a good length.

The round part of this log must be planed, scraped and sandpapered
until it is perfectly smooth, and free from knots, projections and
splinters. Hand holds must be provided next. These are placed 18
in. apart in a central position on the horse. Make two parallel
saw cuts 2 in. apart, straight down in the round surface of the
horse until each cut is 9 in. long. Chisel out the wood between
the cuts and in the mortises thus made insert the hand holds. Each
hand hold is made of a 9-in. piece of 2 by 4-in. stud cut rounding
on one edge. These are well nailed in place.

The body of the horse is to be fastened on top of posts so that it
may be adjusted for height. It is not as difficult to make as the
horizontal and parallel bars. The material required is as follows:
Two posts, 4 in. square by 5 ft. long; 2 adjusting pieces, 2 by 4
in. by 3 ft. 3 in. long; 1 cross brace, 2 by 4 in. by 3 ft. long;
2 bases, 4 in. square by 5-1/2 ft. long; 4 knee braces, 2 by 4 in.
by 3 ft. long; two 1/2-in. bolts, 1 in. long, to fasten the knee
braces at the top; ten 1/2-in. bolts, 7 in. long, 4 to fasten the
knee braces at the bottom, 2 to fasten the cross brace and 4 to be
used in fastening the adjusting pieces to the posts.

To construct, layout the bases as shown in the drawing, making the
mortises to receive the bottom ends of the posts exactly in the
center, and cut a slanting mortise 6 in. from each end to receive
the ends of the knee braces. Bevel the ends of the knee braces and
fasten the upper ends of each pair to the post with one 9-in.
bolt. Fasten the lower ends to the base with the 7-in. bolts.

The upper end of each post should have 5/8-in. holes bored through
it parallel to the base at intervals of 3 in., beginning 1-1/2 in.
from the top and extending down its length for 2 ft. 4-1/2 in. The
adjusting pieces are to be bored in a similar manner after which
they are to be mortised into the under side of the horse top 15
in. from each end, and secured with screws put through the top and
into the end of the adjusting pieces.

The bases with their posts and knee braces are buried 2 ft. 4 in.
in the ground, parallel to each other and the same distance apart
as the adjusting pieces are mortised in the horse top. When the
ground has been filled in and tamped hard, the cross brace should
be bolted in position with its lower edge resting on the ground
and connecting the two posts.

The height of the horse from the ground is adjusted by changing
the bolts in the different holes connecting the two adjusting
pieces with the two posts. Much pleasant and healthful gymnastic
exercise can be had in competitive horse jumping and leaping, the
handles providing a way to make many different leaps through, over
and around, including not only those made to see who can go over
the horse from a standing or running start at the greatest height,
but who can go over at the greatest height when starting from the
"toeing off mark" farthest away from the horse. This horse should
be located on level ground having smooth space about it for
several feet.



** Spoon Rest for Kettles [304]

A rest for keeping spoons from slipping into kettles can be made
from

[Illustration: Spoon Rest]

a strip of metal bent as shown in the illustration. The spring of
the metal will make it easy to apply to the kettle. The spoon
placed in the rest will drain back into the kettle. The cover can
be placed on without removing the spoon.
--Contributed by W. A. Jaquythe, Richmond. Cal.



** Reason for Bursting of Gun Barrels [304]

Gun barrels do not burst without a cause and usually that cause is
one of which the shooter is entirely ignorant, but nevertheless,
no one is responsible but himself, says the Sporting Goods Dealer.
Gun barrels can only burst by having some obstruction in the
barrel or by overloading with powder. Any gun barrel can be burst
by misuse or by carelessly loading smokeless powder, but no barrel
will burst by using factory loaded ammunition, provided there is
no obstruction or foreign substance inside the barrel. When a gun
barrel bursts at the breech or chamber, it is caused by an
overloaded shell, and when it bursts in the center or near the
muzzle, it is caused by some obstruction, such as a dent, snow,
water, etc.



** Hand Sled Made of Pipe and Fittings [305]

The accompanying sketch shows how an ordinary hand sled can be
made of 3/4-in. pipe and fittings. Each runner is made of one
piece of pipe bent to the proper shape. This can be accomplished
by filling the pipe with melted rosin or lead, then bending to the
shape desired, and afterward removing the rosin or lead by
heating. Each joint is turned up tightly and well pinned or
brazed. One of the top crosspieces should have right-hand and
left-hand threads or be fitted with a union. Also, one of the top
pieces connecting the rear part to the front part of each runner
must be fitted in the same way. The top is fastened to the two
crosspieces. Such a hand sled can be made in a

[Illustration: Parts Made of Pipe Fittings]

few hours' time and, when complete, is much better than a wood
sled.
--Contributed by James E. Noble, Toronto, Ontario.



** Emergency Magnifying Glass [305]

When in need of a microscope in the study of botany, one may be
made in the following manner: Bend a small wire or the stem of a
leaf so as to form a small loop not larger than the ordinary drop
of water.


Loop Inclosing a Drop of Water

When this is done place a drop of clear water in the loop and the
microscope is complete. This temporary device will prove valuable
where a strong magnifying glass is not at hand.
--Contributed by Arthur E. Joerin, Paris, France.



** Bent-Iron Pipe Rack [305]

Strips of soft iron, 1/4 or 3/16 in. in width and 1/32 in.
thick, are used in

[Illustration: Design of a Rack]

making the pipe rack shown in Fig. 1. This material can be
obtained from any local hardware dealer who carries bar iron in
stock.

Draw a full-size sketch of the design on paper, then run a string
over each part, which, when straightened out, will give the
length. The scrolls are bent with a pair of round-nose pliers.
These, with a pair of flat-nose pliers, are all the tools
necessary. The part for holding the pipes is shown in Fig. 2. The
end elevation, at E and F, shows how the rack is fastened to the
main frame of the rack.
--Contributed by J. W. Vener, Boston, Mass.



** To Clean Silver [305]

A good method to clean silver of any kind is to place the articles
in an aluminum vessel and add a few pieces of zinc. Hot water is
added and the silver boiled until clean. It is best to use soft
water. The tarnish is removed by the electrolytic action of the
zinc on the aluminum and the silver, and the latter will take on a
bright luster. This method of cleaning will not injure oxidized or
black silver, nor that which is partly oxidized.



** Sharpening Skates with a File [306

Two methods are shown in the sketches for filing skates-one for
hollow filing and the other for filing flat

[Illustration: Filing a Flat Surface]

and straight across the blade. The method shown in Figs. 1 and 2
is for filing the blade flat. The device for holding the skates
consists of a board on which four blocks, AA and BB, are nailed.
These blocks are fastened on the board in the relative positions
of the heel and sole on a shoe. The skates are clamped on them in
the same manner as on a shoe. A flat file is drawn across both
blades of the skates as shown. After the roundness is cut down on
the edges of the blades the skates are removed and the file is
drawn along the sides to remove the

[Illustration: Filing a Curved Surface]

burr. Skates filed in this way have flat surfaces with sharp
edges.

Some skaters like a hollow-ground skate and the method shown in
Figs. 3 and 4 can be used for filing a slightly curved surface in
the blade. A piece of tin or sheet metal is shaped over a round
file as shown in Fig. 3. The manner of filing the curves is shown
in Fig. 4. The piece of metal is held over the file and blade of
the skate as the file is worked.



** Lines and Letters Made with a Carpenter's Pencil [306]

The sketch shows some unusual work made with a carpenter's
pencil. If the flat lead is notched with a three-cornered file
(Fig. 1), two parallel lines may be drawn at one stroke, or
various rulings may be made, as shown in Fig. 2. Broad lines can
be made, as shown in Fig. 3, or unequal widths as in Fig. 4.

[Illustration: Pencil Points and Their Work]

In Figs. 2, 5 and 6 are shown lines especially adapted for the
bookkeeper or draftsman. If one lacks the ability to draw old
English letters with a pen, the letters may be first drawn with a
carpenter's pencil (Fig. 7) and the outlines marked with ink and
finally filled in. Narrow lines are made with points cut as in
Figs. 8 and 9. A little practice with the carpenter's pencil in
making these letters will enable the student to finally produce
them with the pen used for the purpose.



** Insulating Aluminum Wire [306]

Aluminum wire plunged hot into a cold solution of carbonate of
soda becomes coated with a strong layer of oxide which forms an
excellent insulator to electricity.



** How to Build an Ice-Yacht  [307]
Condensed from an article by H. Percy Ashley in Rudder.

The plans and specifications shown in the illustrations are for
making a 400-ft. class ice-yacht, having a double cockpit to
accommodate four persons. The weight of the persons in the forward
cockpit keeps the boat from rearing when in a stiff breeze. The
forward cockpit can be removed if necessary. The materials used
are: backbone,

[Illustration: Ice-Yacht Complete]

white pine; center, clear spruce; sides, white oak caps; runner
plank, basswood, butternut or oak; cockpit, oak; runners, chocks,
etc., quartered white oak. All the iron work should be first-grade
Swedish iron, with the exception of the runners, which are soft
cast iron.

It is not necessary to go into detail with the measurements as
they are plainly shown in the sketches. The backbone is 37-1/2 ft.
over all, 12 in. in the center, 5 in. stern, 3-1/2 in. at the
nose; width 4-1/2 in. All wood should be selected from the best
grades, well seasoned and free from checks. In Fig. 1 is shown the
complete ice-yacht with general dimensions for the sail and main
parts. Other dimensions are shown in Fig-, 2. The backbone is
