Louisa what it was like, her firm, pink-and-white face and the the
glossy waves of her golden brown hair. "You've held your own wonderfully
well."

"Haven't I?" said Nancy complacently. "Modern methods of massage and
cold cream have kept away the crowsfeet, and fortunately I had the
Rogerson complexion to start with. You wouldn't think I was really
thirty-eight, would you? Thirty-eight! Twenty years ago I thought
anybody who was thirty-eight was a perfect female Methuselah. And now I
feel so horribly, ridiculously young, Louisa. Every morning when I get
up I have to say solemnly to myself three times, 'You're an old maid,
Nancy Rogerson,' to tone myself down to anything like a becoming
attitude for the day."

"I guess you don't mind being an old maid much," said Louisa, shrugging
her shoulders. She would not have been an old maid herself for anything;
yet she inconsistently envied Nancy her freedom, her wide life in the
world, her unlined brow, and care-free lightness of spirit.

"Oh, but I do mind," said Nancy frankly. "I hate being an old maid."

"Why don't you get married, then?" asked Louisa, paying an unconscious
tribute to Nancy's perennial chance by her use of the present tense.

Nancy shook her head.

"No, that wouldn't suit me either. I don't want to be married. Do you
remember that story Anne Shirley used to tell long ago of the pupil who
wanted to be a widow because 'if you were married your husband bossed
you and if you weren't married people called you an old maid?' Well,
that is precisely my opinion. I'd like to be a widow. Then I'd have the
freedom of the unmarried, with the kudos of the married. I could eat my
cake and have it, too. Oh, to be a widow!"

"Nancy!" said Louisa in a shocked tone.

Nancy laughed, a mellow gurgle that rippled through the garden like a
brook.

"Oh, Louisa, I can shock you yet. That was just how you used to say
'Nancy' long ago, as if I'd broken all the commandments at once."

"You do say such queer things," protested Louisa, "and half the time I
don't know what you mean."

"Bless you, dear coz, half the time I don't myself. Perhaps the joy of
coming back to the old spot has slightly turned my brain, I've found my
lost girlhood here. I'm NOT thirty-eight in this garden--it is a flat
impossibility. I'm sweet eighteen, with a waist line two inches smaller.
Look, the sun is just setting. I see he has still his old trick of
throwing his last beams over the Wright farmhouse. By the way, Louisa,
is Peter Wright still living there?"

"Yes." Louisa threw a sudden interested glance at the apparently placid
Nancy.

"Married, I suppose, with half a dozen children?" said Nancy
indifferently, pulling up some more sprigs of mint and pinning them on
her breast. Perhaps the exertion of leaning over to do it flushed her
face. There was more than the Rogerson colour in it, anyhow, and Louisa,
slow though her mental processes might be in some respects, thought
she understood the meaning of a blush as well as the next one. All the
instinct of the matchmaker flamed up in her.

"Indeed he isn't," she said promptly. "Peter Wright has never married.
He has been faithful to your memory, Nancy."

"Ugh! You make me feel as if I were buried up there in the Avonlea
cemetery and had a monument over me with a weeping willow carved on
it," shivered Nancy. "When it is said that a man has been faithful to
a woman's memory it generally means that he couldn't get anyone else to
take him."

"That isn't the case with Peter," protested Louisa. "He is a good match,
and many a woman would have been glad to take him, and would yet. He's
only forty-three. But he's never taken the slightest interest in anyone
since you threw him over, Nancy."

"But I didn't. He threw me over," said Nancy, plaintively, looking afar
over the low-lying fields and a feathery young spruce valley to the
white buildings of the Wright farm, glowing rosily in the sunset light
when all the rest of Avonlea was scarfing itself in shadows. There was
laughter in her eyes. Louisa could not pierce beneath that laughter to
find if there were anything under it.

"Fudge!" said Louisa. "What on earth did you and Peter quarrel about?"
she added, curiously.

"I've often wondered," parried Nancy.

"And you've never seen him since?" reflected Louisa.

"No. Has he changed much?"

"Well, some. He is gray and kind of tired-looking. But it isn't to be
wondered at--living the life he does. He hasn't had a housekeeper for
two years--not since his old aunt died. He just lives there alone and
cooks his own meals. I've never been in the house, but folks say the
disorder is something awful."

"Yes, I shouldn't think Peter was cut out for a tidy housekeeper," said
Nancy lightly, dragging up more mint. "Just think, Louisa, if it hadn't
been for that old quarrel I might be Mrs. Peter Wright at this very
moment, mother to the aforesaid supposed half dozen, and vexing my soul
over Peter's meals and socks and cows."

"I guess you are better off as you are," said Louisa.

"Oh, I don't know." Nancy looked up at the white house on the hill
again. "I have an awfully good time out of life, but it doesn't seem to
satisfy, somehow. To be candid--and oh, Louisa, candour is a rare thing
among women when it comes to talking of the men--I believe I'd rather
be cooking Peter's meals and dusting his house. I wouldn't mind his bad
grammar now. I've learned one or two valuable little things out yonder,
and one is that it doesn't matter if a man's grammar is askew, so long
as he doesn't swear at you. By the way, is Peter as ungrammatical as
ever?"

"I--I don't know," said Louisa helplessly. "I never knew he WAS
ungrammatical."

"Does he still say, 'I seen,' and 'them things'?" demanded Nancy.

"I never noticed," confessed Louisa.

"Enviable Louisa! Would that I had been born with that blessed faculty
of never noticing! It stands a woman in better stead than beauty or
brains. _I_ used to notice Peter's mistakes. When he said 'I seen,' it
jarred on me in my salad days. I tried, oh, so tactfully, to reform him
in that respect. Peter didn't like being reformed--the Wrights always
had a fairly good opinion of themselves, you know. It was really over a
question of syntax we quarrelled. Peter told me I'd have to take him as
he was, grammar and all, or go without him. I went without him--and ever
since I've been wondering if I were really sorry, or if it were merely a
pleasantly sentimental regret I was hugging to my heart. I daresay it's
the latter. Now, Louisa, I see the beginning of the plot far down in
those placid eyes of yours. Strangle it at birth, dear Louisa. There is
no use in your trying to make up a match between Peter and me now--no,
nor in slyly inviting him up here to tea some evening, as you are even
this moment thinking of doing."

"Well, I must go and milk the cows," gasped Louisa, rather glad to make
her escape. Nancy's power of thought-reading struck her as uncanny. She
felt afraid to remain with her cousin any longer, lest Nancy should drag
to light all the secrets of her being.

Nancy sat long on the steps after Louisa had gone--sat until the night
came down, darkly and sweetly, over the garden, and the stars twinkled
out above the firs. This had been her home in girlhood. Here she had
lived and kept house for her father. When he died, Curtis Shaw, newly
married to her cousin Louisa, bought the farm from her and moved in.
Nancy stayed on with them, expecting soon to go to a home of her own.
She and Peter Wright were engaged.

Then came their mysterious quarrel, concerning the cause of which kith
and kin on both sides were left in annoying ignorance. Of the results
they were not ignorant. Nancy promptly packed up and left Avonlea seven
hundred miles behind her. She went to a hospital in Montreal and studied
nursing. In the twenty years that followed she had never even revisited
Avonlea. Her sudden descent on it this summer was a whim born of a
moment's homesick longing for this same old garden. She had not thought
about Peter. In very truth, she had thought little about Peter for the
last fifteen years. She supposed that she had forgotten him. But now,
sitting on the old doorstep, where she had often sat in her courting
days, with Peter lounging on a broad stone at her feet, something tugged
at her heartstrings. She looked over the valley to the light in the
kitchen of the Wright farmhouse, and pictured Peter sitting there,
lonely and uncared for, with naught but the cold comfort of his own
providing.

"Well, he should have got married," she said snappishly. "I am not going
to worry because he is a lonely old bachelor when all these years I have
supposed him a comfy Benedict. Why doesn't he hire him a housekeeper,
at least? He can afford it; the place looks prosperous. Ugh! I've a fat
bank account, and I've seen almost everything in the world worth
seeing; but I've got several carefully hidden gray hairs and a horrible
conviction that grammar isn't one of the essential things in life after
all. Well, I'm not going to moon out here in the dew any longer. I'm
going in to read the smartest, frilliest, frothiest society novel in my
trunk."

In the week that followed Nancy enjoyed herself after her own fashion.
She read and swung in the garden, having a hammock hung under the firs.
She went far afield, in rambles to woods and lonely uplands.

"I like it much better than meeting people," she said, when Louisa
suggested going to see this one and that one, "especially the Avonlea
people. All my old chums are gone, or hopelessly married and changed,
and the young set who have come up know not Joseph, and make me feel
uncomfortably middle-aged. It's far worse to feel middle-aged than old,
you know. Away there in the woods I feel as eternally young as Nature
herself. And oh, it's so nice not having to fuss with thermometers and
temperatures and other people's whims. Let me indulge my own whims,
Louisa dear, and punish me with a cold bite when I come in late for
meals. I'm not even going to church again. It was horrible there
yesterday. The church is so offensively spick-and-span brand new and
modern."

"It's thought to be the prettiest church in these parts," protested
Louisa, a little sorely.

"Churches shouldn't be pretty--they should at least be fifty years old
and mellowed into beauty. New churches are an abomination."

"Did you see Peter Wright in church?" asked Louisa. She had been
bursting to ask it.

Nancy nodded.

"Verily, yes. He sat right across from me in the corner pew. I didn't
think him painfully changed. Iron-gray hair becomes him. But I was
horribly disappointed in myself. I had expected to feel at least a
romantic thrill, but all I felt was a comfortable interest, such as I
might have taken in any old friend. Do my utmost, Louisa, I couldn't
compass a thrill."

"Did he come to speak to you?" asked Louisa, who hadn't any idea what
Nancy meant by her thrills.

"Alas, no. It wasn't my fault. I stood at the door outside with the
most amiable expression I could assume, but Peter merely sauntered away
without a glance in my direction. It would be some comfort to my vanity
if I could believe it was on account of rankling spite or pride. But the
honest truth, dear Weezy, is that it looked to me exactly as if he never
thought of it. He was more interested in talking about the hay crop with
Oliver Sloane--who, by the way, is more Oliver Sloaneish than ever."

"If you feel as you said you did the other night, why didn't you go and
speak to him?" Louisa wanted to know.

"But I don't feel that way now. That was just a mood. You don't know
anything about moods, dearie. You don't know what it is to yearn
desperately one hour for something you wouldn't take if it were offered
you the next."

"But that is foolishness," protested Louisa.

"To be sure it is--rank foolishness. But oh, it is so delightful to
be foolish after being compelled to be unbrokenly sensible for twenty
years. Well, I'm going picking strawberries this afternoon, Lou. Don't
wait tea for me. I probably won't be back till dark. I've only four more
days to stay and I want to make the most of them."

Nancy wandered far and wide in her rambles that afternoon. When she had
filled her jug she still roamed about with delicious aimlessness. Once
she found herself in a wood lane skirting a field wherein a man was
mowing hay. The man was Peter Wright. Nancy walked faster when she
discovered this, with never a roving glance, and presently the green,
ferny depths of the maple woods swallowed her up.

From old recollections, she knew that she was on Peter Morrison's land,
and calculated that if she kept straight on she would come out where the
old Morrison house used to be. Her calculations proved correct, with a
trifling variation. She came out fifty yards south of the old deserted
Morrison house, and found herself in the yard of the Wright farm!

Passing the house--the house where she had once dreamed of reigning as
mistress--Nancy's curiosity overcame her. The place was not in view of
any other near house. She deliberately went up to it intending--low be
it spoken--to peep in at the kitchen window. But, seeing the door wide
open, she went to it instead and halted on the step, looking about her
keenly.

The kitchen was certainly pitiful in its disorder. The floor had
apparently not been swept for a fortnight. On the bare deal table were
the remnants of Peter's dinner, a meal that could not have been very
tempting at its best.

"What a miserable place for a human being to live in!" groaned Nancy.
"Look at the ashes on that stove! And that table! Is it any wonder that
Peter has got gray? He'll work hard haymaking all the afternoon--and
then come home to THIS!"

An idea suddenly darted into Nancy's brain. At first she looked aghast.
Then she laughed and glanced at her watch.

"I'll do it--just for fun and a little pity. It's half-past two, and
Peter won't be home till four at the earliest. I'll have a good hour to
do it in, and still make my escape in good time. Nobody will ever know;
nobody can see me here."

Nancy went in, threw off her hat, and seized a broom. The first thing
she did was to give the kitchen a thorough sweeping. Then she kindled
a fire, put a kettle full of water on to heat, and attacked the dishes.
From the number of them she rightly concluded that Peter hadn't washed
any for at least a week.

"I suppose he just uses the clean ones as long as they hold out, and
then has a grand wash-up," she laughed. "I wonder where he keeps his
dish-towels, if he has any."

Evidently Peter hadn't any. At least, Nancy couldn't find any. She
marched boldly into the dusty sitting-room and explored the drawers of
an old-fashioned sideboard, confiscating a towel she found there. As she
worked, she hummed a song; her steps were light and her eyes bright with
excitement. Nancy was enjoying herself thoroughly, there was no doubt of
that. The spice of mischief in the adventure pleased her mightily.

The dishes washed, she hunted up a clean, but yellow and evidently long
unused tablecloth out of the sideboard, and proceeded to set the table
and get Peter's tea. She found bread and butter in the pantry, a trip to
the cellar furnished a pitcher of cream, and Nancy recklessly heaped the
contents of her strawberry jug on Peter's plate. The tea was made and
set back to keep warm. And, as a finishing touch, Nancy ravaged the old
neglected garden and set a huge bowl of crimson roses in the centre of
the table.

"Now I must go," she said aloud. "Wouldn't it be fun to see Peter's
face when he comes in, though? Ha-hum! I've enjoyed doing this--but why?
Nancy Rogerson, don't be asking yourself conundrums. Put on your hat and
proceed homeward, constructing on your way some reliable fib to account
to Louisa for the absence of your strawberries."

Nancy paused a moment and looked around wistfully. She had made the
place look cheery and neat and homelike. She felt that queer tugging at
her heart-strings again. Suppose she belonged here, and was waiting for
Peter to come home to tea. Suppose--Nancy whirled around with a sudden
horrible prescience of what she was going to see! Peter Wright was
standing in the doorway.

Nancy's face went crimson. For the first time in her life she had not a
word to say for herself. Peter looked at her and then at the table, with
its fruit and flowers.

"Thank you," he said politely.

Nancy recovered herself. With a shame-faced laugh, she held out her
hand.

"Don't have me arrested for trespass, Peter. I came and looked in at
your kitchen out of impertinent curiosity, and just for fun I thought
I'd come in and get your tea. I thought you'd be so surprised--and I
meant to go before you came home, of course."

"I wouldn't have been surprised," said Peter, shaking hands. "I saw you
go past the field and I tied the horses and followed you down through
the woods. I've been sitting on the fence back yonder, watching your
comings and goings." "Why didn't you come and speak to me at church
yesterday, Peter?" demanded Nancy boldly.

"I was afraid I would say something ungrammatical," answered Peter
drily.

The crimson flamed over Nancy's face again. She pulled her hand away.

"That's cruel of you, Peter."

Peter suddenly laughed. There was a note of boyishness in the laughter.

"So it is," he said, "but I had to get rid of the accumulated malice and
spite of twenty years somehow. It's all gone now, and I'll be as amiable
as I know how. But since you have gone to the trouble of getting
my supper for me, Nancy, you must stay and help me eat it. Them
strawberries look good. I haven't had any this summer--been too busy to
pick them."

Nancy stayed. She sat at the head of Peter's table and poured his tea
for him. She talked to him wittily of the Avonlea people and the changes
in their old set. Peter followed her lead with an apparent absence of
self-consciousness, eating his supper like a man whose heart and mind
were alike on good terms with him. Nancy felt wretched--and, at the
same time, ridiculously happy. It seemed the most grotesque thing in the
world that she should be presiding there at Peter's table, and yet
the most natural. There were moments when she felt like crying--other
moments when her laughter was as ready and spontaneous as a girl's.
Sentiment and humour had always waged an equal contest in Nancy's
nature.

When Peter had finished his strawberries he folded his arms on the table
and looked admiringly at Nancy.

"You look well at the head of a table, Nancy," he said critically. "How
is it that you haven't been presiding at one of your own long before
this? I thought you'd meet a lots of men out in the world that you'd
like--men who talked good grammar."

"Peter, don't!" said Nancy, wincing. "I was a goose."

"No, you were quite right. I was a tetchy fool. If I'd had any sense,
