paper, which she gave to me.

"'Here is something I found, sir, while I was scrubbing,' she said.

"I opened it indifferently, but conceive of my amazement when I found it
to be your mother's will, properly signed, sealed and witnessed.

"Of course it was not the will which Mr. Manning presented for probate.
This will gave Mr. Manning ten thousand dollars, and the residue of the
property to you, except a small amount bestowed upon Richard Green, the
coachman, and Deborah--sums larger, by the way, than those mentioned in
the will which was read after your mother's death."

There was more to Colonel Vincent's letter.

Frank showed it to Mr. Percival, and readily obtained permission to take
a few days vacation.

"I hope you will get back the estate, Frank," said Mr. Percival, "though
I don't know what I shall do without my secretary."

"That need not separate us, Mr. Percival," said our hero. "I have no
home but this."




CHAPTER XL

JONAS BARTON


Frank started for his old home on Saturday afternoon. He would arrive in
time for supper, at the house of his father's friend. The train was well
filled, and he was obliged to share his seat with a shabbily dressed
young man with whom, a single glance showed him, he was not likely to
sympathize.

The shabby suit did not repel him at all--he was too sensible for that;
but there was a furtive look in the man's face, which seemed to indicate
that he was not frank and straightforward, but had something to conceal.

Half the journey passed without a word between the two. Then his
companion, glancing at Frank, opened a conversation by remarking that it
was a fine day.

"Very," answered Frank, laconically.

"A pleasant day to travel."

"Yes."

"Do you go far?"

Frank mentioned his destination. His companion seemed to have his
interest awakened.

"Do you know a Mr. Manning, living in your town?" he asked.

"He is my stepfather," said Frank.

"Then you are Frank Courtney?" said his new acquaintance, quickly.

"I am."

"Pardon me, but I think your mother died recently?"

"Yes."

"And the property was left chiefly to Mr. Manning?"

"Yes."

"Of course, you were surprised, and probably very disappointed?"

"Excuse me," said Frank, coldly; "but I am not in the habit of
discussing my affairs with strangers."

"Quite right, but I think you will find it for your interest to discuss
them with me. Not in a public car, of course; but I have something of
importance to communicate. Where can I have a private interview with
you?"

It at once occurred to Frank that there was an opportunity, perhaps, to
solve the mystery concerning the will. This man might know nothing about
it; but, on the other hand, he might know everything. It would be
foolish to repulse him.

"If you have anything important to tell me, I shall be glad to hear it,"
he said. "I am going to the house of my friend, Col. Vincent, to pass a
few days. Do you know where he lives?"

"Yes, I know."

"If you will call this evening, after supper, I shall be glad to see
you."

"I will do so. I will be there at eight o'clock, sharp."

On arriving at his destination, Frank found the colonel's carriage
waiting for him at the station.

Col. Vincent was inside.

"Welcome, Frank!" he said, grasping heartily the hand of our young hero.
"I am delighted to see you. You are looking well, and, bless me, how you
have grown!"

"Thank you, Col. Vincent. Do you expect me to return the compliment?"

"About having grown? No, Frank, I hope not. I am six feet one, and don't
care to grow any taller. Well, what do you think of the news?"

"I have some for you, colonel;" and Frank mentioned what his new
acquaintance had told him.

"The missing link!" exclaimed the colonel, excited. "Do you know what I
think?"

"What?"

"That this man either forged the will which gives the property to your
stepfather, or is cognizant of it!"

"I thought of that."

"I shall be impatient to see him."

At eight o'clock the man called and gave his name as Jonas Barton.
Whether it was the right name might be a question; but this did not
matter.

"I understand," said Col. Vincent, "that you have some information to
give us."

"I have; and that of a very important nature."

"Is it of a nature to restore to my young friend here his property now
in the possession of Mr. Manning?"

"If it were," said Jonas Barton with a cunning glance of his left eye
"how much would it be worth?"

"I supposed it was for sale," said the colonel, quietly. "What is your
own idea?"

"I will take two thousand dollars."

"Suppose we say one thousand?"

"It is not enough."

"Were you aware that the genuine will had been found?" asked the
colonel, quietly.

Jonas Barton started.

"I thought Mr. Manning destroyed it," he said, hastily.

"No; he concealed it."

"Is this true?"

"Yes. You see that a part of your information has been forestalled."

"He was a fool, then, and still more a fool to refuse my last demand for
money. I accept your offer of a thousand dollars, and will tell all."

"Go on."

"I wrote the will which Mr. Manning presented for probate. It was copied
in part from the genuine will."

"Good! And you betray him because he will not pay what you consider the
service worth?"

"Yes, sir."

Jonas Barton here gave a full account of Mr. Manning, whom he had
formerly known in New York, seeking him out and proposing to him a job
for which he was willing to pay five hundred dollars. Barton was not
scrupulous, and readily agreed to do the work. He was skillful with the
pen, and did his work so well that all were deceived.

"You will be willing to swear to this in court?"

"Yes, sir, if you will guarantee the sum you proposed."

"I will. I shall wish you to find a boarding place in the village, and
remain here for the present, so as to be ready when needed. I will be
responsible for your board."

As Jonas Barton was leaving the house, one of the servants came in with
important news, in which Frank was strongly interested.




CHAPTER XLI

CONCLUSION


The news was that Mr. Manning and Mark had just arrived at the Cedars.
They had come by the last evening train. Why they had come back so
unexpectedly no one knew, but the servant had heard that Mark was in
poor health. This was true.

Mark, in Europe, had proved uncontrollable. He had given way to his
natural love of drink, had kept late hours, and had seriously injured
his constitution. In consequence of these excesses, he had contracted a
fever, which alarmed him father and induced him to take the first
steamer home.

"We won't call upon your stepfather this evening, Frank," said Col.
Vincent; "but early Monday morning we will bring matters to a crisis."

Mr. Manning did not hear of Frank's presence in the village. He was
fatigued with his rapid travel and kept at home. Besides, Mark was
prostrated by his journey and didn't wish to be left alone.

It was, therefore, a surprise to Mr. Manning when on Monday morning,
Col. Vincent was ushered into his presence, accompanied by Frank.

"Really, colonel," he said, recovering his composure, "you are very kind
to call so soon. I hope you are well, Frank? Are you staying with the
colonel? You must come back to your old home."

"Thank you, Mr. Manning, but I am living in New York. I am only passing
a day or two with the colonel."

"It is very friendly in you to call, Col. Vincent."

"Mr. Manning," said Col. Vincent, gravely, "I am not willing to receive
undeserved credit. Let me say, therefore, that this is a business, not a
friendly, call."

"Indeed," said Manning, uneasily.

"The business is connected with my young friend Frank."

"I am ready to listen," said Mr. Manning. "If Frank wants a larger
allowance, I am ready to give it."

"I venture to say for him that he will not be satisfied with that. Let
me come to the point at once, Mr. Manning. Mrs. Manning's will has been
found."

Mr. Manning started perceptibly, and his glance involuntarily wandered
to that part of the wall behind which the will was discovered, for they
were sitting in the very apartment where Mrs. Noonan had stumbled upon
it.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"A will has been found, leaving the bulk of the property to Frank."

"Indeed! I am surprised. Is it a later will than the one which
bequeathed the estate to me?" asked Mr. Manning, pointedly.

"It is Mrs. Manning's latest genuine will," said Col. Vincent,
emphatically.

Mr. Manning started to his feet. He could not help understanding the
colonel's meaning. It would have been idle to pretend it.

"What do you mean, Col. Vincent?" he asked, in a tone which he tried to
make one of dignified resentment.

"I mean that Mrs. Manning made but one will, and that this bequeaths the
property to Frank."

"How, then, do you account for the later will which was admitted to
probate?"

"In this way. It was not what it purported to be."

Mr. Manning's sallow face flushed.

"What do you mean to insinuate?" he asked.

"That the last will was forged!" said Col. Vincent, bluntly.

"This is a very serious charge," said Mr. Manning, unable to repress his
agitation. "You must allow me to say that I shall pay no attention to
it. When you furnish proof of what you assert, it will be time enough to
meet it. And now, gentlemen, if you have nothing further to say, I will
bid you good-morning."

"I think you will find it best not to be in a hurry, Mr. Manning," said
Col. Vincent. "The charge must be met here and now. I charge you with
instigating and being cognizant of the fraud that has been perpetrated!"

"On what grounds, sir? Do you know I can sue you for libel?"

"You are welcome to do so, Mr. Manning. I have a witness who will clear
me."

"Who is he?"

"Jonas Barton!"

If a bombshell had exploded in the room, Mr. Manning could not have
looked paler or more thoroughly dismayed. Yet he tried to keep up a
little longer.

"I don't know any man of that name," he answered, faintly.

"Your looks show that you do. I may as well tell you, Mr. Manning, that
resistance is useless. We can overwhelm you with proof if we take the
matter before the courts. But we do not care to do so. We have something
to propose."

"What is it?" said Mr. Manning, faintly.

"The genuine will must be substituted for the fraudulent one. By it you
will receive ten thousand dollars, and Frank will consent that you shall
receive it. He will not ask you to account for the sums you have
wrongfully spent during the last year, and will promise not to prosecute
you, provided you leave this neighborhood and never return to it, or in
any way interfere with him. To insure this, we shall have Jonas Barton's
written confession, attested before a justice of the peace, ready for
use, if needful. Do you accept?"

"I must," said Mr. Manning, despondently. "But I shall be a poor man."

"No man who has health and the use of his facilities is poor with ten
thousand dollars," answered the colonel.

"Mark alone will spend more than the interest of this sum."

"Then you must prevent him. He will be better off if he has to earn his
living, as Frank has done for the last year."

In less than a week the transfer was made, and Frank recovered his
patrimony.

Mr. Manning and Mark went to Chicago, and perhaps further West; but
nothing has been heard from them for years.

Frank didn't return to the Cedars. The place was let until he should
wish to return to it.

By the advice of Col. Vincent, he resumed his preparation for college,
and, graduating in due time, commenced the study of law.

Though rich enough to do without a profession, he felt that he should
not be content to lead an aimless life.

He obtained for his school friend, Herbert Grant, the post of private
secretary to Mr. Percival, and Herbert became nearly as great a favorite
as himself.

Through Mr. Percival's kindness, Herbert was enabled, while still living
at his house and attending to his duties as secretary, to enter Columbia
College, and complete his course there, graduating with honor.

Herbert selected the medical profession, and, when he has completed his
studies, will go abroad for a year with Frank, at the latter's expense,
and, returning, open an office in New York.

While he is waiting for the patients and Frank for clients, the two
will live together, and their common expenses will be defrayed by Frank.

"If I didn't like you so well, Frank," said Herbert, "I would not accept
this great favor at your hands--"

"But since we are dear friends," interrupts Frank, with a smile.

