will ever know how perfectly elegant Abijah is. Look the other way,
Rebecca. Shall I have to translate it for you, do you think, because it
seems to me I could not bear to do that!"

"It depends upon Abijah's Latin and your pronunciation," teased Rebecca.
"Go on; I will turn my eyes toward the orchard."

The Fair Emmajane, looking none too old still for the "little harbor,"
but almost too young for the "unknown seas," gathered up her courage and
recited like a tremulous parrot the boyish love letter that had so fired
her youthful imagination.

"Vale, carissima, carissima puella!" repeated Rebecca in her musical
voice. "Oh, how beautiful it sounds! I don't wonder it altered your
feeling for Abijah! Upon my word, Emma Jane," she cried with a sudden
change of tone, "if I had suspected for an instant that Abijah the Brave
had that Latin letter in him I should have tried to get him to write it
to me; and then it would be I who would sit down at my mahogany desk and
ask Miss Perkins to come to tea with Mrs. Flagg."

Emma Jane paled and shuddered openly. "I speak as a church member,
Rebecca," she said, "when I tell you I've always thanked the Lord that
you never looked at Abijah Flagg and he never looked at you. If either
of you ever had, there never would have been a chance for me, and I've
always known it!"

II

The romance alluded to in the foregoing chapter had been going on, so
far as Abijah Flagg's part of it was concerned, for many years, his
affection dating back in his own mind to the first moment that he saw
Emma Jane Perkins at the age of nine.

Emma Jane had shown no sign of reciprocating his attachment until the
last three years, when the evolution of the chore-boy into the
budding scholar and man of affairs had inflamed even her somewhat dull
imagination.

Squire Bean's wife had taken Abijah away from the poorhouse, thinking
that she could make him of some little use in her home. Abbie Flagg, the
mother, was neither wise nor beautiful; it is to be feared that she
was not even good, and her lack of all these desirable qualities,
particularly the last one, had been impressed upon the child ever since
he could remember. People seemed to blame him for being in the world at
all; this world that had not expected him nor desired him, nor made any
provision for him. The great battle-axe of poorhouse opinion was forever
leveled at the mere little atom of innocent transgression, until he grew
sad and shy, clumsy, stiff, and self-conscious. He had an indomitable
craving for love in his heart and had never received a caress in his
life.

He was more contented when he came to Squire Bean's house. The first
year he could only pick up chips, carry pine wood into the kitchen, go
to the post-office, run errands, drive the cows, and feed the hens, but
every day he grew more and more useful.

His only friend was little Jim Watson, the storekeeper's son, and they
were inseparable companions whenever Abijah had time for play.

One never-to-be-forgotten July day a new family moved into the white
cottage between Squire Bean's house and the Sawyers'. Mr. Perkins had
sold his farm beyond North Riverboro and had established a blacksmith's
shop in the village, at the Edgewood end of the bridge. This fact was of
no special interest to the nine-year-old Abijah, but what really was of
importance, was the appearance of a pretty little girl of seven in the
front yard; a pretty little fat doll of a girl, with bright fuzzy hair,
pink cheeks, blue eyes, and a smile of almost bewildering continuity.
Another might have criticised it as having the air of being glued on,
but Abijah was already in the toils and never wished it to move.

The next day being the glorious Fourth and a holiday, Jimmy Watson came
over like David, to visit his favorite Jonathan. His Jonathan met him
at the top of the hill, pleaded a pressing engagement, curtly sent him
home, and then went back to play with his new idol, with whom he
had already scraped acquaintance, her parents being exceedingly busy
settling the new house.

After the noon dinner Jimmy again yearned to resume friendly relations,
and, forgetting his rebuff, again toiled up the hill and appeared
unexpectedly at no great distance from the Perkins premises, wearing the
broad and beaming smile of one who is confident of welcome.

His morning call had been officious and unpleasant and unsolicited, but
his afternoon visit could only be regarded as impudent, audacious,
and positively dangerous; for Abijah and Emma Jane were cosily playing
house, the game of all others in which it is particularly desirable to
have two and not three participants.

At that moment the nature of Abijah changed, at once and forever.
Without a pang of conscience he flew over the intervening patch of
ground between himself and his dreaded rival, and seizing small stones
and larger ones, as haste and fury demanded, flung them at Jimmy Watson,
and flung and flung, till the bewildered boy ran down the hill howling.
Then he made a "stickin'" door to the play-house, put the awed Emma Jane
inside and strode up and down in front of the edifice like an Indian
brave. At such an early age does woman become a distracting and
disturbing influence in man's career!

Time went on, and so did the rivalry between the poorhouse boy and the
son of wealth, but Abijah's chances of friendship with Emma Jane grew
fewer and fewer as they both grew older. He did not go to school, so
there was no meeting-ground there, but sometimes, when he saw the knot
of boys and girls returning in the afternoon, he would invite Elijah and
Elisha, the Simpson twins, to visit him, and take pains to be in Squire
Bean's front yard, doing something that might impress his inamorata as
she passed the premises.

As Jimmy Watson was particularly small and fragile, Abijah generally
chose feats of strength and skill for these prearranged performances.

Sometimes he would throw his hat up into the elm trees as far as he
could and, when it came down, catch it on his head. Sometimes he would
walk on his hands, with his legs wriggling in the air, or turn a double
somersault, or jump incredible distances across the extended arms of
the Simpson twins; and his bosom swelled with pride when the girls
exclaimed, "Isn't he splendid!" although he often heard his rival murmur
scornfully, "SMARTY ALECK!"--a scathing allusion of unknown origin.

Squire Bean, although he did not send the boy to school (thinking, as
he was of no possible importance in the universe, it was not worth
while bothering about his education), finally became impressed with his
ability, lent him books, and gave him more time to study. These were all
he needed, books and time, and when there was an especially hard knot to
untie, Rebecca, as the star scholar of the neighborhood, helped him to
untie it.

When he was sixteen he longed to go away from Riverboro and be something
better than a chore boy. Squire Bean had been giving him small wages
for three or four years, and when the time of parting came presented him
with a ten-dollar bill and a silver watch.

Many a time had he discussed his future with Rebecca and asked her
opinion.

This was not strange, for there was nothing in human form that she could
not and did not converse with, easily and delightedly. She had ideas
on every conceivable subject, and would have cheerfully advised the
minister if he had asked her. The fishman consulted her when he couldn't
endure his mother-in-law another minute in the house; Uncle Jerry
Cobb didn't part with his river field until he had talked it over with
Rebecca; and as for Aunt Jane, she couldn't decide whether to wear her
black merino or her gray thibet unless Rebecca cast the final vote.

Abijah wanted to go far away from Riverboro, as far as Limerick Academy,
which was at least fifteen miles; but although this seemed extreme,
Rebecca agreed, saying pensively: "There IS a kind of magicness about
going far away and then coming back all changed."

This was precisely Abijah's unspoken thought. Limerick knew nothing of
Abbie Flagg's worthlessness, birth, and training, and the awful stigma
of his poorhouse birth, so that he would start fair. He could have gone
to Wareham and thus remained within daily sight of the beloved Emma
Jane; but no, he was not going to permit her to watch him in the process
of "becoming," but after he had "become" something. He did not propose
to take any risks after all these years of silence and patience. Not he!
He proposed to disappear, like the moon on a dark night, and as he was,
at present, something that Mr. Perkins would by no means have in the
family nor Mrs. Perkins allow in the house, he would neither return to
Riverboro nor ask any favors of them until he had something to offer.
Yes, sir. He was going to be crammed to the eyebrows with learning for
one thing,--useless kinds and all,--going to have good clothes, and a
good income. Everything that was in his power should be right, because
there would always be lurking in the background the things he never
could help--the mother and the poorhouse.

So he went away, and, although at Squire Bean's invitation he came back
the first year for two brief visits at Christmas and Easter, he was
little seen in Riverboro, for Mr. Ladd finally found him a place where
he could make his vacations profitable and learn bookkeeping at the same
time.

The visits in Riverboro were tantalizing rather than pleasant. He
was invited to two parties, but he was all the time conscious of his
shirt-collar, and he was sure that his "pants" were not the proper
thing, for by this time his ideals of dress had attained an almost
unrealizable height. As for his shoes, he felt that he walked on carpets
as if they were furrows and he were propelling a plow or a harrow before
him. They played Drop the Handkerchief and Copenhagen at the parties,
but he had not had the audacity to kiss Emma Jane, which was bad enough,
but Jimmy had and did, which was infinitely worse! The sight of James
Watson's unworthy and over-ambitious lips on Emma Jane's pink cheek
almost destroyed his faith in an overruling Providence.

After the parties were over he went back to his old room in Squire
Bean's shed chamber. As he lay in bed his thoughts fluttered about
Emma Jane as swallows circle around the eaves. The terrible sickness of
hopeless handicapped love kept him awake. Once he crawled out of bed in
the night, lighted the lamp, and looked for his mustache, remembering
that he had seen a suspicion of down on his rival's upper lip. He rose
again half an hour later, again lighted the lamp, put a few drops of oil
on his hair, and brushed it violently for several minutes. Then he went
back to bed, and after making up his mind that he would buy a dulcimer
and learn to play on it so that he would be more attractive at parties,
and outshine his rival in society as he had aforetime in athletics, he
finally sank into a troubled slumber.

Those days, so full of hope and doubt and torture, seemed mercifully
unreal now, they lay so far back in the past--six or eight years, in
fact, which is a lifetime to the lad of twenty--and meantime he had
conquered many of the adverse circumstances that had threatened to cloud
his career.

Abijah Flagg was a true child of his native State. Something of the same
timber that Maine puts into her forests, something of the same strength
and resisting power that she works into her rocks, goes into her sons
and daughters; and at twenty Abijah was going to take his fate in his
hand and ask Mr. Perkins, the rich blacksmith, if, after a suitable
period of probation (during which he would further prepare himself for
his exalted destiny), he might marry the fair Emma Jane, sole heiress of
the Perkins house and fortunes.

III

This was boy and girl love, calf love, perhaps, though even that may
develop into something larger, truer, and finer; but not so far away
were other and very different hearts growing and budding, each in its
own way. There was little Miss Dearborn, the pretty school teacher,
drifting into a foolish alliance because she did not agree with her
stepmother at home; there was Herbert Dunn, valedictorian of his class,
dazzled by Huldah Meserve, who like a glowworm "shone afar off bright,
but looked at near, had neither heat nor light."

There was sweet Emily Maxwell, less than thirty still, with most of her
heart bestowed in the wrong quarter. She was toiling on at the Wareham
school, living as unselfish a life as a nun in a convent; lavishing the
mind and soul of her, the heart and body of her, on her chosen work.
How many women give themselves thus, consciously and unconsciously;
and, though they themselves miss the joys and compensations of mothering
their own little twos and threes, God must be grateful to them for
their mothering of the hundreds which make them so precious in His
regenerating purposes.

Then there was Adam Ladd, waiting at thirty-five for a girl to grow a
little older, simply because he could not find one already grown who
suited his somewhat fastidious and exacting tastes.

"I'll not call Rebecca perfection," he quoted once, in a letter to Emily
Maxwell,--"I'll not call her perfection, for that's a post, afraid to
move. But she's a dancing sprig of the tree next it."

When first she appeared on his aunt's piazza in North Riverboro and
insisted on selling him a large quantity of very inferior soap in order
that her friends, the Simpsons, might possess a premium in the shape of
a greatly needed banquet lamp, she had riveted his attention. He thought
all the time that he enjoyed talking with her more than with any woman
alive, and he had never changed his opinion. She always caught what
he said as if it were a ball tossed to her, and sometimes her mind, as
through it his thoughts came back to him, seemed like a prism which had
dyed them with deeper colors.

Adam Ladd always called Rebecca in his heart his little Spring. His
boyhood had been lonely and unhappy. That was the part of life he had
missed, and although it was the full summer of success and prosperity
with him now, he found his lost youth only in her.

She was to him--how shall I describe it?

Do you remember an early day in May with budding leaf, warm earth,
tremulous air, and changing, willful sky--how new it seemed? How fresh
and joyous beyond all explaining?

Have you lain with half-closed eyes where the flickering of sunlight
through young leaves, the song of birds and brook and the fragrance of
wild flowers combined to charm your senses, and you felt the sweetness
and grace of nature as never before?

Rebecca was springtide to Adam's thirsty heart. She was blithe youth
incarnate; she was music--an Aeolian harp that every passing breeze
woke to some whispering little tune; she was a changing, iridescent
joy-bubble; she was the shadow of a leaf dancing across a dusty floor.
No bough of his thought could be so bare but she somehow built a nest in
it and evoked life where none was before.

And Rebecca herself?

She had been quite unconscious of all this until very lately, and even
now she was but half awakened; searching among her childish instincts
and her girlish dreams for some Ariadne thread that should guide her
safely through the labyrinth of her new sensations.

For the moment she was absorbed, or thought she was, in the little love
story of Abijah and Emma Jane, but in reality, had she realized it, that
love story served chiefly as a basis of comparison for a possible one of
her own, later on.

She liked and respected Abijah Flagg, and loving Emma Jane was a habit
contracted early in life; but everything that they did or said, or
thought or wrote, or hoped or feared, seemed so inadequate, so painfully
short of what might be done or said, or thought or written, or hoped or
feared, under easily conceivable circumstances, that she almost felt a
disposition to smile gently at the fancy of the ignorant young couple
that they had caught a glimpse of the great vision.

She was sitting under the sweet apple tree at twilight. Supper was over;
Mark's restless feet were quiet, Fanny and Jenny were tucked safely in
bed; her aunt and her mother were stemming currants on the side porch.

A blue spot at one of the Perkins windows showed that in one vestal
bosom hope was not dead yet, although it was seven o'clock.

Suddenly there was the sound of a horse's feet coming up the quiet road;
plainly a steed hired from some metropolis like Milltown or Wareham,
as Riverboro horses when through with their day's work never disported
themselves so gayly.

A little open vehicle came in sight, and in it sat Abijah Flagg. The
wagon was so freshly painted and so shiny that Rebecca thought that he
must have alighted at the bridge and given it a last polish. The creases
in his trousers, too, had an air of having been pressed in only a few
minutes before. The whip was new and had a yellow ribbon on it; the
gray suit of clothes was new, and the coat flourished a flower in its
button-hole. The hat was the latest thing in hats, and the intrepid
swain wore a seal-ring on the little finger of his right hand. As
Rebecca remembered that she had guided it in making capital G's in his
copy-book, she felt positively maternal, although she was two years
younger than Abijah the Brave.

He drove up to the Perkins gate and was so long about hitching the horse
that Rebecca's heart beat tumultuously at the thought of Emma Jane's
heart waiting under the blue barege. Then he brushed an imaginary speck
off his sleeve, then he drew on a pair of buff kid gloves, then he went
up the path, rapped at the knocker, and went in.

"Not all the heroes go to the wars," thought Rebecca. "Abijah has laid
the ghost of his father and redeemed the memory of his mother, for no
one will dare say again that Abbie Flagg's son could never amount to
anything!"

The minutes went by, and more minutes, and more. The tranquil dusk
settled down over the little village street and the young moon came out
just behind the top of the Perkins pine tree.

The Perkins front door opened and Abijah the Brave came out hand in hand
with his Fair Emma Jane.

They walked through the orchard, the eyes of the old couple following
them from the window, and just as they disappeared down the green slope
that led to the riverside the gray coat sleeve encircled the blue barege
waist.

Rebecca, quivering with instant sympathy and comprehension, hid her face
in her hands.

"Emmy has sailed away and I am all alone in the little harbor," she
thought.

It was as if childhood, like a thing real and visible, were slipping
down the grassy river banks, after Abijah and Emma Jane, and
disappearing like them into the moon-lit shadows of the summer night.

"I am all alone in the little harbor," she repeated; "and oh, I wonder,
I wonder, shall I be afraid to leave it, if anybody ever comes to carry
me out to sea!"





