
6. What was that? A strange, rustling, hissing sound, as of cattle
trampling through dry reeds,--a sound which quivered and shook, even in
the breath of the hurrying wind! Roger snorted, stood still, and trembled
in every limb; and a sensation of awe and terror struck a chill through
Gilbert's heart. The sound drew swiftly nearer, and became a wild,
seething roar, filling the whole breadth of the valley.

7. "The dam! the dam!" cried Gilbert, "the dam has given way!" He turned
Roger's head, gave him the rein, struck, spurred, cheered, and shouted.
The brave beast struggled through the impeding flood, but the advance wave
of the coming inundation already touched his side. He staggered; a line of
churning foam bore down upon them, the terrible roar was all around and
over them, and horse and rider were whirled away.

8. What happened during the first few seconds, Gilbert could never
distinctly recall. Now they were whelmed in the water, now riding its
careering tide, torn through the tops of brushwood, jostled by floating
logs and timbers of the dam, but always, as it seemed, remorselessly held
in the heart of the tumult and the ruin.

[Transcriber's Footnote: careering--Path or course, as the moon through
the sky.]

9. He saw at last that they had fallen behind the furious onset of the
flood, but Roger was still swimming with it, desperately throwing up his
head from time to time, and snorting the water from his nostrils. All his
efforts to gain a foothold failed; his strength was nearly spent, and
unless some help should come in a few minutes it would come in vain. And
in the darkness, and the rapidity with which they were borne along, how
should help come?

10. All at once Roger's course stopped. He became an obstacle to the
flood, which pressed him against some other obstacle below, and rushed
over horse and rider. Thrusting out his hand, Gilbert felt the rough bark
of a tree. Leaning towards it, and clasping the log in his arms, he drew
himself from the saddle, while Roger, freed from his burden, struggled
into the current and instantly disappeared. 11. As nearly as Gilbert could
ascertain, several timbers, thrown over each other, had lodged, probably
upon a rocky islet in the stream, the uppermost one projecting slantingly
out of the flood. It required all his strength to resist the current which
sucked, and whirled, and tugged at his body, and to climb high enough to
escape its force, without overbalancing his support. At last, though still
half immerged, he found himself comparatively safe for a time, yet as far
as ever from a final rescue.

12. Yet a new danger now assailed him, from the increasing cold. There was
already a sting of frost, a breath of ice, in the wind. In another hour
the sky was nearly swept bare of clouds, and he could note the lapse of
the night by the sinking of the moon. But he was by this time hardly in a
condition to note anything more.


DEFINITIONS.--1. In-ter'mi-na-ble, endless. 2. De-pressed', low-ered. 3.
Tur'bid, muddy. 5. Dis-cerncd' (pro. diz-zerned'), made out,
distinguished. 6. Seeth'ing, boiling, bubbling. 7. Im-ped'ing, hindering,
obstucting. In-un-da'tion, a flood. 9. On'set, a rushing upon, attack. 11.
Im-merged', plunged under a liquid. 12. Lapse, a gradual passing away.



LXXXVI. BRANDYWINE FORD. (Concluded.) (242)

1. The moon was low in the west, and there was a pale glimmer of the
coming dawn in the sky, when Gilbert Potter suddenly raised his head.
Above the noise of the water and the whistle of the wind, he heard a
familiar sound,--the shrill, sharp neigh of a horse. Lifting himself with
great exertion, to a sitting posture, he saw two men, on horseback, in the
flooded meadow, a little below him. They stopped, seemed to consult, and
presently drew nearer.

2. Gilbert tried to shout, but the muscles of his throat were stiff, and
his lungs refused to act. The horse neighed again. This time there was no
mistake; it was Roger that he heard! Voice came to him, and he cried
aloud,--a hoarse, strange, unnatural cry.

The horsemen heard it, and rapidly pushed up the bank, until they reached
a point directly opposite to him. The prospect of escape brought a thrill
of life to his frame; he looked around and saw that the flood had indeed
fallen.

3. "We have no rope," he heard one of the men say. "How shall we reach
him?"

"There is no time to get one now," the other answered. "My horse is
stronger than yours. I'll go into the creek just below, where it's broader
and not so deep, and work my way up to him,"

"But one horse can't carry both."

"His will follow, be sure, when it sees me."

4. As the last speaker moved away, Gilbert saw a led horse plunging
through the water beside the other. It was a difficult and dangerous
undertaking. The horseman and the loose horse entered the main stream
below, where its divided channel met and broadened, but it was still above
the saddle girths, and very swift.

5. Sometimes the animals plunged, losing their foothold; nevertheless,
they gallantly breasted the current, and inch by inch worked their way to
a point about six feet below Gilbert. It seemed impossible to approach
nearer.

"Can you swim?" asked the man.

Gilbert shook his head. "Throw me the end of Roger's bridle!" he then
cried.

6. The man unbuckled the bridle and threw it, keeping the end of the rein
in his hand. Gilbert tried to grasp it, but his hands were too numb. He
managed, however, to get one arm and his head through the opening, and
relaxed his hold on the log.

7. A plunge, and the man had him by the collar. He felt himself lifted by
a strong arm and laid across Roger's saddle. With his failing strength and
stiff limbs, it was no slight task to get into place; and the return,
though less laborious to the horses, was equally dangerous, because
Gilbert was scarcely able to support himself without help.

"You're safe now," said the man, when they reached the bank, "but it's a
downright mercy of God that you're alive!"

8. The other horseman joined them, and they rode slowly across the flooded
meadow. They had both thrown their cloaks around Gilbert, and carefully
steadied him in the saddle, one on each side. He was too much exhausted to
ask how they had found him, or whither they were taking him,--too numb
for curiosity, almost for gratitude.

9. "Here's your savior!" said one of the men, patting Roger's shoulder.
"It was through him that we found you. Do you wish to know how?
Well--about three o'clock it was, maybe a little earlier, maybe a little
later, my wife woke me up. 'Do you hear that?' she said.

10. "I listened and heard a horse in the lane before the door,
neighing,--I can't tell you exactly how it was,--as though he would call
up the house. It was rather queer, I thought, so I got up and looked out
of the window, and it seemed to me he had a saddle on. He stamped, and
pawed, and then he gave another neigh, and stamped again.

11. "Said I to my wife, 'There is something wrong here,' and I dressed and
went out. When he saw me, he acted in the strangest way you ever saw;
thought I, if ever an animal wanted to speak, that animal does. When I
tried to catch him, he shot off, ran down the lane a bit, and then came
back acting as strangely as ever.

12. "I went into the house and woke up my brother, here, and we saddled
our horses and started. Away went yours ahead, stopping every minute to
look around and see if we followed. When we came to the water I rather
hesitated, but it was of no use; the horse would have us go on and on,
till we found you. I never heard of such a thing before, in all my life."
Gilbert did not speak, but two large tears slowly gathered in his eyes,
and rolled down his cheeks. The men saw his emotion, and respected it.

13. In the light of the cold, keen dawn, they reached a snug farmhouse, a
mile from the Brandywine. The men lifted Gilbert from the saddle, and
would have carried him immediately into the house, but he first leaned
upon Roger's neck, took the faithful creature's head in his arms, and
kissed it.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Pros'pect, ground or reason for hoping, antic-ipation. 5.
Breast'ed (pro. brest'ed), opposed courageously. 6. Numb, without the
power of feeling or motion. Re-laxed', loosened. 12. E-mo'tion, excited
feeling, agitation.



LXXXVII. THE BEST CAPITAL (245)

Louisa May Alcott was born at Germantown, Pa., in 1833, and, among other
works, wrote many beautiful stories for children. During the Civil War she
was a hospital nurse at Washington. The following selection is adapted
from "Little Men." She died in 1888.

1. One would have said that modest John Brooke, in his busy, quiet, humble
life, had had little time to make friends; but now they seemed to start up
everywhere,--old and young, rich and poor, high and low; for all
unconsciously his influence had made itself widely felt, his virtues were
remembered, and his hidden charities rose up to bless him.

2. The group about his coffin was a far more eloquent eulogy than any that
man could utter. There were the rich men whom he had served faithfully for
years; the poor old women whom he cherished with his little store, in
memory of his mother; the wife to whom he had given such happiness that
death could not mar it utterly; the brothers and sisters in whose hearts
he had made a place forever; the little son and daughter who already felt
the loss of his strong arm and tender voice; the young children, sobbing
for their kindest playmate, and the tall lads, watching with softened
faces a scene which they never could forget.

3. That evening, as the Plumfield boys sat on the steps, as usual, in the
mild September moonlight, they naturally fell to talking of the event of
the day.

Emil began by breaking out in his impetuous way, "Uncle Fritz is the
wisest, and Uncle Laurie the jolliest, but Uncle John was the best; and
I'd rather be like him than any man I ever saw."

4. "So would I. Did you hear what those gentlemen said to Grandpa to-day?
I would like to have that said of me when I was dead;" and Franz felt with
regret that he had not appreciated Uncle John enough.

"What did they say?" asked Jack, who had been much impressed by the scenes
of the day.

5. "Why, one of the partners of Mr. Laurence, where Uncle John has been
ever so long, was saying that he was conscientious almost to a fault as a
business man, and above reproach in all things. Another gentleman said no
money could repay the fidelity and honesty with which Uncle John had
served him, and then Grandpa told them the best of all.

6. "Uncle John once had a place in the office of a man who cheated, and
when this man wanted uncle to help him do it, uncle wouldn't, though he
was offered a big salary. The man was angry, and said, 'You will never get
on in business with such strict principles;' and uncle answered back, 'I
never will try to get on without them,' and left the place for a much
harder and poorer one."

7. "Good !" cried several of the boys warmly, for they were in the mood to
understand and value the little story as never before.

"He wasn't rich, was he?" asked Jack.

"No."

"He never did anything to make a stir in the world, did he?"

"No."

"He was only good?"

"That's all;" and Franz found himself wishing that Uncle John had done
something to boast of, for it was evident that Jack was disappointed by
his replies.

8. "Only good. That is all and everything," said Uncle Fritz, who had
overheard the last few words, and guessed what was going on in the minds
of the lads.

"Let me tell you a little about John Brooke, and you will see why men
honor him, and why he was satisfied to be good rather than rich or famous.
He simply did his duty in all things, and did it so cheerfully, so
faithfully, that it kept him patient, brave, and happy, through poverty
and loneliness and years of hard work.

9. "He was a good son, and gave up his own plans to stay and live with his
mother while she needed him. He was a good friend, and taught your Uncle
Laurie much beside his Greek and Latin, did it unconsciously, perhaps, by
showing him an example of an upright man.

10. "He was a faithful servant, and made himself so valuable to those who
employed him that they will find it hard to fill his place. He was a good
husband and father, so tender, wise, and thoughtful, that Laurie and I
learned much of him, and only knew how well he loved his family when we
discovered all he had done for them, unsuspected and unassisted."

11. Uncle Fritz stopped a minute, and the boys sat like statues in the
moonlight until he went on again, in a subdued and earnest voice: "As he
lay dying, I said to him, 'Have no care for your wife and the little ones;
I will see that they never want.' Then he smiled and pressed my hand, and
answered, in his cheerful way, 'No need of that; I have cared for them.'

12. "And so he had, for when we looked among his papers, all was in
order,--not a debt remained; and safely put away was enough to keep his
wife comfortable and independent. Then we knew why he had lived so
plainly, denied himself so many pleasures, except that of charity, and
worked so hard that I fear he shortened his good life.

13. "He never asked help for himself, though often for others, but bore
his own burden and worked out his own task bravely and quietly. No one can
say a word of complaint against him, so just and generous and kind was he;
and now, when he is gone, all find so much to love and praise and honor,
that I am proud to have been his friend, and would rather leave my
children the legacy he leaves his than the largest fortune ever made.

14. "Yes! simple, genuine goodness is the best capital to found the
business of this life upon. It lasts when fame and money fail, and is the
only riches we can take out of this world with us. Remember that, my boys;
and, if you want to earn respect and confidence and love, follow in the
footsteps of John Brooke."


DEFINITIONS.--2. Eu'lo-gy, a speech or writing in praise of the character
of a person. Cher'ished, supported, nurtured with care. 4. Ap-pre'ci-at-ed
(pro. ap-pre'shi-at-ed), valued justly. 5. Con--sci-en'tious (pro.
kon-shi-en'shus), governed by a strict regard to the rules of right and
wrong. 7. Mood, state of mind, disposition. 11. Sub-dued', reduced to
tenderness, softened. 12. In-de-pend'ent, not relying on others. 13.
Leg'a-cy, a gift by will, a bequest. 14. Cap'i-tal stock employed in any
business.



LXXXVIII. THE INCHCAPE ROCK.

Robert Southey was a celebrated English poet, born 1774, who once held the
honorable position of poet laureate. He wrote a great deal both in prose
and verse. He died in 1843.

1. No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,
   The ship was as still as she could be,
   Her sails from heaven received no motion,
   Her keel was steady in the ocean.

2. Without either sign or sound of their shock
   The waves flowed over the Inchcape Rock;
   So little they rose, so little they fell,
   They did not move the Inchcape Bell.

3. The good old Abbot of Aberbrothok
   Had placed that bell on the lnchcape Rock;
   On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,
   And over the waves its warning rung.

4. When the Rock was hid by the surges' swell,
   The mariners heard the warning bell;
   And then they knew the perilous Rock,
   And blest the Abbot of Aberbrothok.

5. The sun in heaven was shining gay,
   All things were joyful on that day;
   The sea birds screamed as they wheeled round,
   And there was joyance in their sound.

6. The buoy of the Inchcape Bell was seen
   A darker speck on the ocean green;
   Sir Ralph the Rover walked his deck,
   And he fixed his eye on the darker speck.

7. He felt the cheering power of spring,
   It made him whistle, it made him sing;
   His heart was mirthful to excess,
   But the Rover's mirth was wickedness.

8. His eye was on the Inchcape float;
   Quoth he, "My men put out the boat,
   And row me to the Inchcape Rock,
   And I'll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothok."

9. The boat is lowered, the boatmen row,
   And to the Inchcape Rock they go;
   Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,
   And he cut the bell from the Inchcape float.

10. Down sunk the bell, with a gurgling sound,
    The bubbles rose and burst around;
    Quoth Sir Ralph, "The next who comes to the Rock,
    Won't bless the Abbot of Aberbrothok."

11. Sir Ralph the Rover sailed away,
    He scoured the seas for many a day;
    And now grown rich with plundered store,
    He steers his course for Scotland's shore.

12. So thick a haze o'erspreads the sky
    They can not see the sun on high;
    The wind hath blown a gale all day,
    At evening it hath died away.

13. On the deck the Rover takes his stand,
    So dark it is they see no land.
    Quoth Sir Ralph, "It will be lighter soon,
    For there is the dawn of the rising moon."

14. "Canst hear," said one, "the breakers roar?
    For methinks we should be near the shore."
    "Now where we are I can not tell,
    But I wish I could hear the Inchcape Bell."

15. They hear no sound, the swell is strong;
    Though the wind hath fallen, they drift along,
    Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock:
    Cried they, "It is the Inchcape Rock!"

16. Sir Ralph the rover tore his hair,
    He curst himself in his despair;
    The waves rush in on every side,
    The ship is sinking beneath the tide.

17. But even in his dying fear
    One dreadful sound could the Rover hear,
    A sound as if with the Inchcape Bell
    The fiends below were ringing his knell.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Keel, the principal timber in a ship, extending from bow
to stern, at the bottom. 3. Buoy (pro. bwoi) a float-ing mark to point out
the position of rocks, etc., beneath the water. 4. Surge, a large wave. 6.
Joy'ance, gayety. 11. Scoured, roved over, ranged about. Store,
that which is massed together. 14. Me-thinks', it seems to me. 17. Fiends
(pro. fends).  evil spirits. Knell (pro. nel), the stroke of a bell rung
at a funeral or at the death of a person.


NOTES.--The above poem was written at Bristol, England, in 1802, and
recounts an old tradition. 2. The Inchcape Rock is at the entrance of the
Frith of Tay, Scotland, about fifteen miles from shore.



LXXXIX. MY MOTHER'S GRAVE. (253)

1. It was thirteen years since my mother's death, when, after a long
absence from my native village, I stood beside the sacred mound beneath
which I had seen her buried. Since that mournful period, a great change
had come over me. My childish years had passed away, and with them my
youthful character. The world was altered, too; and as I stood at my
mother's grave, I could hardly realize that I was the same thoughtless,
happy creature, whose checks she so often kissed in an excess of
tenderness.

2. But the varied events of thirteen years had not effaced the remembrance
of that mother's smile. It seemed as if I had seen her but yesterday--as
if the blessed sound of her well-remembered voice was in my ear. The gay
dreams of my infancy and childhood were brought back so distinctly to my
mind that, had it not been for one bitter recollection, the tears I shed
would have been gentle and refreshing.

3. The circumstance may seem a trifling one, but the thought of it now
pains my heart; and I relate it, that those children who have parents to
love them may learn to value them as they ought. My mother had been ill a
long time, and I had become so accustomed to her pale face and weak voice,
that I was not frightened at them, as children usually are. At first, it
is true, I sobbed violently; but when, day after day, I returned from
school, and found her the same, I began to believe she would always be
spared to me; but they told me she would die.

4. One day when I had lost my place in the class, I came home discouraged
and fretful. I went to my mother's chamber. She was paler than usual, but
she met me with the same affectionate smile that always welcomed my
