"As General Santa Anna told you," said Urrea, "the assault is to be made
in overwhelming force early in the morning. It will succeed, of course.
Nothing can prevent it. Through the man Roylston, you have some claim
upon the general, but it may not be strong enough to save you long. A
service now might make his pardon permanent."

"What do you mean by a service now?"

"A few words as to the weaker points of the Alamo, the best places for
our troops to attack. You cannot do anything for the defenders. You
cannot alter their fate in any particular, but you might do something
for yourself."

Ned did not wish to appear dramatic. He merely turned his back upon the
young Mexican.

"Very well," said Urrea, "I made you the offer. It was for you to accept
it or not as you wish."

He left him upon the roof, and Ned saw the last rim of the red sun sink
in the plain. He saw the twilight come, and the Alamo fade into a dim
black bulk in the darkness. He thought once that he heard a cry of a
sentinel from its walls, "All's well," but he knew that it was only
fancy. The distance was far too great. Besides, all was not well.

When the darkness had fully come, he descended with his two benevolent
jailers to a lower part of the house, where he was assigned to a small
room, with a single barred window and without the possibility of escape.
His guards, after bringing him food and water, gave him a polite good
night and went outside. He knew that they would remain on watch in the
hall.

Ned could eat and drink but little. Nor could he yet sleep. The night
was far too heavy upon him for slumber. Besides, it had brought many
noises, significant noises that he knew. He heard the rumble of cannon
wheels over the rough pavements, and the shouts of men to the horses or
mules. He heard troops passing, now infantry, and then cavalry, the
hoofs of their horses grinding upon the stones.

He pressed his face against the barred window. He was eager to hear and
yet more eager to see. He caught glimpses only of horse and foot as they
passed, but he knew what all those sights and sounds portended. In the
night the steel coil of the Mexicans was being drawn closer and closer
about the Alamo.

Brave and resolute, he was only a boy after all. He felt deserted of all
men. He wanted to be back there with Crockett and Bowie and Travis and
the others. The water came into his eyes, and unconsciously he pulled
hard at the iron bars.

He remained there a long time, listening to the sounds. Once he heard a
trumpet, and its note in the night was singularly piercing. He knew that
it was a signal, probably for the moving of a regiment still closer to
the Alamo. But there were no shots from either the Mexicans or the
mission. The night was clear with many stars.

After two or three hours at the window Ned tried to sleep. There was a
narrow bed against the wall, and he lay upon it, full length, but he did
not even close his eyes. He became so restless that at last he rose and
went to the window again. It must have been then past midnight. The
noises had ceased. Evidently the Mexicans had everything ready. The wind
blew cold upon his face, but it brought him no news of what was passing
without.

He went back to the bed, and by and by he sank into a heavy slumber.




CHAPTER XIII

TO THE LAST MAN


Ned awoke after a feverish night, when there was yet but a strip of gray
in the east. It was Sunday morning, but he had lost count of time, and
did not know it. He had not undressed at all when he lay down, and now
he stood by the window, seeking to see and hear. But the light was yet
dim and the sounds were few. Nevertheless the great pulse in his throat
began to leap. The attack was at hand.

The door of the room was unlocked and the two peons who had guarded him
upon the roof came for him. Ned saw in the half gloom that they were
very grave of countenance.

"We are to take you to the noble Captain Urrea, who is waiting for you,"
said Fernando.

"Very well," said Ned. "I am ready. You have been kind to me, and I hope
that we shall meet again after to-day."

Both men shook their heads.

"We fear that is not to be," said Fernando.

They found Urrea and another young officer waiting at the door of the
house. Urrea was in his best uniform and his eyes were very bright. He
was no coward, and Ned knew that the gleam was in anticipation of the
coming attack.

"The time is at hand," he said, "and it will be your wonderful fortune
to see how Mexico strikes down her foe."

His voice, pitched high, showed excitement, and a sense of the dramatic.
Ned said nothing, and his own pulses began to leap again. The strip of
gray in the east was broadening, and he now saw that the whole town was
awake, although it was not yet full daylight. Santa Anna had been at
work in the night, while he lay in that feverish sleep. He heard
everywhere now the sound of voices, the clank of arms and the beat of
horses' hoofs. The flat roofs were crowded with the Mexican people. Ned
saw Mexican women there in their dresses of bright colors, like Roman
women in the Colosseum, awaiting the battle of the gladiators. The
atmosphere was surcharged with excitement, and the sense of coming
triumph.

Ned's breath seemed to choke in his throat and his heart beat painfully.
Once more he wished with all his soul that he was with his friends, that
he was in the Alamo. He belonged with them there, and he would rather
face death with those familiar faces around him than be here, safe
perhaps, but only a looker-on. It was with him now a matter of the
emotions, and not of reasoned intellect. Once more he looked toward the
old mission, and saw the dim outline of the buildings, with the
dominating walls of the church. He could not see whether anyone watched
on the walls, but he knew that the sentinels were there. Perhaps
Crockett, himself, stood among them now, looking at the great Mexican
coil of steel that was wrapping itself tighter and tighter around the
Alamo. Despite himself, Ned uttered a sigh.

"What is the matter with you?" asked Urrea, sharply. "Are you already
weeping for the conquered?"

"You know that I am not," replied Ned. "You need not believe me, but I
regret that I am not in the Alamo with my friends."

"It's an idle wish," said Urrea, "but I am taking you now to General
Santa Anna. Then I leave, and I go there! Look, the horsemen!"

He extended his hand, and Ned saw his eyes kindling. The Mexican cavalry
were filing out in the dim dawn, troop after troop, the early light
falling across the blades of the lances, spurs and bridles jingling. All
rode well, and they made a thrilling picture, as they rode steadily on,
curving about the old fortress.

"I shall soon be with them," said Urrea in a tone of pride. "We shall
see that not a single one of your Texans escapes from the Alamo."

Ned felt that choking in his throat again, but he deemed it wiser to
keep silent. They were going toward the main plaza now, and he saw
masses of troops gathered in the streets. These men were generally
silent, and he noticed that their faces expressed no elation. He divined
at once that they were intended for the assault, and they had no cause
for joy. They knew that they must face the deadly Texan rifles.

Urrea led the way to a fortified battery standing in front of the main
plaza. A brilliant group stood behind an earthen wall, and Ned saw Santa
Anna among them.

"I have brought the prisoner," said Urrea, saluting.

"Very good," replied the dictator, "and now, Captain Urrea, you can join
your command. You have served me well, and you shall have your share in
the glory of this day."

Urrea flushed with pride at the compliment, and bowed low. Then he
hurried away to join the horse. Santa Anna turned his attention.

"I have brought you here at this moment," he said, "to give you a last
chance. It is not due to any mercy for you, a rebel, but it is because
you have been so long in the Alamo that you must know it well. Point
out to us its weakest places, and you shall be free. You shall go north
in safety. I promise it here, in the presence of my generals."

"I have nothing to tell," replied Ned.

"Are you sure?"

"Absolutely sure."

"Then it merely means a little more effusion of blood. You may stay with
us and see the result."

All the ancient, inherited cruelty now shone in Santa Anna's eyes. It
was the strange satanic streak in him that made him keep his captive
there in order that he might see the fall of his own comrades. A half
dozen guards stood near the person of the dictator, and he said to them:

"If the prisoner seeks to leave us, shoot him at once."

The manner of Santa Anna was arrogant to the last degree, but Ned was
glad to stay. He was eager to see the great panorama which was about to
be unrolled before him. He was completely absorbed in the Alamo, and he
utterly forgot himself. Black specks were dancing before his eyes, and
the blood was pounding in his ears, but he took no notice of such
things.

The gray bar in the east broadened. A thin streak of shining silver cut
through it, and touched for a moment the town, the river, the army and
the Alamo. Ned leaned against an edge of the earthwork, and breathed
heavily and painfully. He had not known that his heart could beat so
hard.

The same portentous silence prevailed everywhere. The men and women on
the roofs of the houses were absolutely still. The cavalry, their line
now drawn completely about the mission, were motionless. Ned, straining
his eyes toward the Alamo, could see nothing there. Suddenly he put up
his hand and wiped his forehead. His fingers came away wet. His blood
prickled in his veins like salt. He became impatient, angry. If the mine
was ready, why did they not set the match? Such waiting was the pitch of
cruelty.

"Cos, my brother," said Santa Anna to the swart general, "take your
command. It was here that the Texan rebels humiliated you, and it is
here that you shall have full vengeance."

Cos saluted, and strode away. He was to lead one of the attacking
columns.

"Colonel Duque," said Santa Anna to another officer, "you are one of the
bravest of the brave. You are to direct the attack on the northern wall,
and may quick success go with you."

Duque glowed at the compliment, and he, too, strode away to the head of
his column.

"Colonel Romero," said Santa Anna, "the third column is yours, and the
fourth is yours, Colonel Morales. Take your places and, at the signal
agreed, the four columns will charge with all their strength. Let us see
which will be the first in the Alamo."

The two colonels saluted as the others had done, and joined their
columns.

The bar of gray in the east was still broadening, but the sun itself did
not yet show. The walls of the Alamo were still dim, and Ned could not
see whether any figures were there. Santa Anna had put a pair of
powerful glasses to his eyes, but when he took them down he said nothing
of what he had seen.

"Are all the columns provided?" he said to General Sesma, who stood
beside him.

"They have everything," replied Sesma, "crowbars, axes, scaling ladders.
Sir, they cannot fail!"

"No, they cannot," said Santa Anna exultantly. "These Texan rebels fight
like demons, but we have now a net through which they cannot break.
General Gaona, see that the bands are ready and direct them to play the
Deguelo when the signal for the charge is given."

Ned shivered again. The "Deguelo" meant the "cutting-of-throats," and
it, too, was to be the signal of no quarter. He remembered the red flag,
and he looked up. It hung, as ever, on the tower of the church of San
Fernando, and its scarlet folds moved slowly in the light morning
breeze. General Gaona returned.

"The bands are ready, general," he said, "and when the signal is given
they will play the air that you have chosen."

A Mexican, trumpet in hand, was standing near. Santa Anna turned and
said to him the single word:

"Blow!"

The man lifted the trumpet to his lips, and blew a long note that
swelled to its fullest pitch, then died away in a soft echo.

It was the signal. A tremendous cry burst from the vast ring of the
thousands, and it was taken up by the shrill voices of the women on the
flat roofs of the houses. The great circle of cavalrymen shook their
lances and sabers until they glittered.

When the last echo of the trumpet's dying note was gone the bands began
to play with their utmost vigor the murderous tune that Santa Anna had
chosen. Then four columns of picked Mexican troops, three thousand
strong, rushed toward the Alamo. Santa Anna and the generals around him
were tremendously excited. Their manner made no impression upon Ned
then, but he recalled the fact afterward.

The boy became quickly unconscious of everything except the charge of
the Mexicans and the Alamo. He no longer remembered that he was a
prisoner. He no longer remembered anything about himself. The cruel
throb of that murderous tune, the Deguelo, beat upon the drums of his
ears, and mingled with it came the sound of the charging Mexicans, the
beat of their feet, the clank of their arms, and the shouts of their
officers.

Whatever may be said of the herded masses of the Mexican troops, the
Mexican officers were full of courage. They were always in advance,
waving their swords and shouting to their men to come on. Another silver
gleam flashed through the gray light of the early morning, ran along the
edges of swords and lances, and lingered for a moment over the dark
walls of the Alamo.

No sound came from the mission, not a shot, not a cry. Were they asleep?
Was it possible that every man, overpowered by fatigue, had fallen into
slumber at such a moment? Could such as Crockett and Bowie and Travis be
blind to their danger? Such painful questions raced through Ned's mind.
He felt a chill run down his spine. Yet his breath was like fire to his
lips.

"Nothing will stop them!" cried Santa Anna. "The Texans cower before
such a splendid force! They will lay down their arms!"

Ned felt his body growing colder and colder, and there was a strange
tingling at the roots of the hair. Now the people upon the roofs were
shouting their utmost, and the voices of many women united in one
shrill, piercing cry. But he never turned to look at them. His eyes were
always on the charging host which converged so fast upon the Alamo.

The trumpet blew another signal, and there was a crash so loud that it
made Ned jump. All the Mexican batteries had fired at once over the
heads of their own troops at the Alamo. While the gunners reloaded the
smoke of the discharge drifted away and the Alamo still stood silent.
But over it yet hung a banner on which was written in great letters the
word, "Texas."

The Mexican troops were coming close now. The bands playing the Deguelo
swelled to greater volume and the ground shook again as the Mexican
artillery fired its second volley. When the smoke drifted away again the
Alamo itself suddenly burst into flame. The Texan cannon at close range
poured their shot and shell into the dense ranks of the Mexicans. But
piercing through the heavy thud of the cannon came the shriller and more
deadly crackle of the rifles. The Texans were there, every one of them,
on the walls. He might have known it. Nothing on earth could catch them
asleep, nor could anything on earth or under it frighten them into
laying down their arms.

Ned began to shout, but only hoarse cries came from a dry throat through
dry lips. The great pulses in his throat were leaping again, and he was
saying: "The Texans! The Texans! Oh, the brave Texans!"

But nobody heard him. Santa Anna, Filisola, Castrillon, Tolsa, Gaona and
the other generals were leaning against the earthwork, absorbed in the
tremendous spectacle that was passing before them. The soldiers who were
to guard the prisoner forgot him and they, too, were engrossed in the
terrible and thrilling panorama of war. Ned might have walked away, no
one noticing, but he, too, had but one thought, and that was the Alamo.

He saw the Mexican columns shiver when the first volley was poured upon
them from the walls. In a single glance aside he beheld the exultant
look on the faces of Santa Anna and his generals die away, and he
suddenly became conscious that the shrill shouting on the flat roofs of
the houses had ceased. But the Mexican cannon still poured a cloud of
shot and shell over the heads of their men at the Alamo, and the troops
went on.

Ned, keen of ear and so intent that he missed nothing, could now
separate the two fires. The crackle of the rifles which came from the
Alamo dominated. Rapid, steady, incessant, it beat heavily upon the
hearing and nerves. Pyramids and spires of smoke arose, drifted and
arose again. In the intervals he saw the walls of the church a sheet of
flame, and he saw the Mexicans falling by dozens and scores upon the
plain. He knew that at the short range the Texan rifles never missed,
and that the hail of their bullets was cutting through the Mexican ranks
like a fire through dry grass.

"God, how they fight!" he heard one of the generals--he never knew
which--exclaim.

Then he saw the officers rushing about, shouting to the men, striking
them with the flats of their swords and urging them on. The Mexican army
responded to the appeal, lifted itself up and continued its rush. The
fire from the Alamo seemed to Ned to increase. The fortress was a living
flame. He had not thought that men could fire so fast, but they had
three or four rifles apiece.

The silence which had replaced the shrill shouting in the town
continued. All the crash was now in front of them, and where they stood
the sound of the human voice would carry. In a dim far-away manner Ned
heard the guards talking to one another. Their words showed uneasiness.
It was not the swift triumphal rush into the Alamo that they had
expected. Great swaths had been cut through the Mexican army. Santa Anna
paled more than once when he saw his men falling so fast.

"They cannot recoil! They cannot!" he cried.

But they did. The column led by Colonel Duque, a brave man, was now at
the northern wall, and the men were rushing forward with the crowbars,
axes and scaling ladders. The Texan rifles, never more deadly, sent down
a storm of bullets upon them. A score of men fell all at once. Among
them was Duque, wounded terribly. The whole column broke and reeled
away, carrying Duque with them.

Ned saw the face of Santa Anna turn purple with rage. He struck the
earthwork furiously with the flat of his sword.

"Go! Go!" he cried to Gaona and Tolsa. "Rally them! See that they do not
run!"

The two generals sprang from the battery and rushed to their task. The
Mexican cannon had ceased firing, for fear of shooting down their own
men, and the smoke was drifting away from the field. The morning was
also growing much lighter. The gray dawn had turned to silver, and the
sun's red rim was just showing above the eastern horizon.

The Texan cannon were silent, too. The rifles were now doing all the
work. The volume of their fire never diminished. Ned saw the field
covered with slain, and many wounded were drifting back to the shelter
of the earthworks and the town.

Duque's column was rallied, but the column on the east and the column on
the west were also driven back, and Santa Anna rushed messenger after
