
"I regret to say that this will not do," said the squire, "I would
gladly postpone the matter. The investment has been satisfactory to me,
but necessity knows no law."

Frank was about to burst out with some indignant exclamation, but his
mother, checking him, said: "I think there is little chance of our being
able to pay you to-morrow. May I inquire what course you propose to
take?"

"It will be my painful duty to foreclose the mortgage."

"Squire Haynes," said Frank boldly, "haven't you intended to foreclose
the mortgage all along? Hadn't you decided about it when I called upon
you ten days ago?"

"What do you mean by your impertinence, sir?" demanded the squire,
giving vent to his anger.

"Just what I say. I believe you bear a grudge against my father, and
only put me off the other day in order to prevent my being able to
meet your demands to-morrow. What do you suppose we can do in less than
twenty-four hours?"

"Madam!" said the squire, purple with rage, "do you permit your son to
insult me in this manner?"

"I leave it to your conscience, Squire Haynes, whether his charges are
not deserved. I do not like to think ill of any man, but your course is
very suspicious."

"Madam," said Squire Haynes, now thoroughly enraged, "you are a woman,
and can say what you please; but as for this young rascal, I'll beat him
within an inch of his life if I ever catch him out of your presence."

"He is under the protection of the laws," said Mrs. Frost composedly,
"which you, being a lawyer, ought to understand."

"I'll have no mercy on you. I'll sell you up root and branch," said
Squire Haynes, trembling with passion, and smiting the floor with his
cane.

"At all events the house is ours to-day," returned Mrs. Frost, with
dignity, "and I must request you to leave us in quiet possession of it."

The squire left the house in undignified haste, muttering threats as he
went.

"Good, mother!" exclaimed Frank admiringly. "You turned him out
capitally. But," he added, an expression of dismay stealing over his
face, "what shall we do?"

"We must try to obtain a loan," said Mrs. Frost, "I will go and see Mr.
Sanger, while you go to Mr. Perry. Possibly they may help us. There is
no time to be lost."

An hour afterward Frank and his mother returned, both disappointed.
Mr. Sanger and Mr. Perry both had the will to help but not the ability.
There seemed no hope left save in Mr. Morton. At six o'clock the stage
rolled up to the gate.

"Thank Heaven! Mr. Morton has come!" exclaimed Frank eagerly.

Mr. Morton got out of the stage, and with him a feeble old man, or
such he seemed, whom the young man assisted to alight. They came up the
gravel walk together.

"How do you do, Frank?" he said, with a cheerful smile.

"We are in trouble," said Frank. "Squire Haynes is going to foreclose
the mortgage to-morrow."

"Never mind!" said Mr. Morton. "We will be ready for him. He can't do
either of us any more mischief, Frank. His race is about run."

A heavy weight seemed lifted from Frank's heart. For the rest of the day
he was in wild spirits. He asked no questions of Mr. Morton. He felt a
firm confidence that all would turn out for the best.



CHAPTER XXXII. TURNING THE TABLES

The next morning Mr. Morton made inquiries of Frank respecting the
mortgage. Frank explained that a loan of four hundred dollars would
enable him to cancel it.

"That is very easily arranged, then," said Henry Morton.

He opened his pocketbook and drew out four crisp new United States
notes, of one hundred dollars each.

"There, Frank," said he; "that will loosen the hold Squire Haynes has
upon you. I fancy he will find it a little more difficult to extricate
himself from my grasp."

"How can I ever thank you, Mr. Morton?" said Frank, with emotion.

"It gives me great pleasure to have it in my power to be of service to
you, Frank," said his friend kindly.

"We will have a mortgage made out to you," continued Frank.

"Not without my consent, I hope," said Mr. Morton, smiling.

Frank looked puzzled.

"No, Frank," resumed Mr. Morton, "I don't care for any security. You may
give me a simple acknowledgment of indebtedness, and then pay me at your
leisure."

Frank felt with Justice that Mr. Morton was acting very generously, and
he was more than ever drawn to him.

So passed the earlier hours of the forenoon.

About eleven o'clock Squire Haynes was observed approaching the house.
His step was firm and elastic, as if he rejoiced in the errand he was
upon. Again he lifted the knocker, and sounded a noisy summons. It was
in reality a summons to surrender.

The door was opened again by Mrs. Frost, who invited the squire to
enter. He did so, wondering at her apparent composure.

"They can't have raised the money," thought he apprehensively. "No, I am
sure the notice was too short."

Frank was in the room, but Squire Haynes did not deign to notice him,
nor did Frank choose to make advances. Mrs. Frost spoke upon indifferent
subjects, being determined to force Squire Haynes to broach himself the
business that had brought him to the farm.

Finally, clearing his throat, he said: "Well, madam, are you prepared to
cancel the mortgage which I hold upon your husband's farm?"

"I hope," said Mrs. Frost, "you will give us time. It is hardly possible
to obtain so large a sum in twenty-four hours."

"They haven't got it," thought the squire exultingly.

"As to that," he said aloud, "you've had several years to get ready in."

"Have you no consideration? Remember my husband's absence, and I am
unacquainted with business."

"I have already told you," said the squire hastily, "that I require the
money. I have a note to pay, and----"

"Can you give us a week?"

"No, I must have the money at once."

"And if we cannot pay?"

"I must foreclose."

"Will that give you the money any sooner? I suppose you would have to
advertise the farm for sale before you could realize anything, and I
hardly think that car be accomplished sooner than a week hence."

"The delay is only a subterfuge on your part," said the squire hotly.
"You would be no better prepared at the end of a week than you are now."

"No, perhaps not," said Mrs. Frost quietly.

"And yet you ask me to wait," said the squire indignantly. "Once for
all, let me tell you that all entreaties are vain. My mind is made up to
foreclose, and foreclose I will."

"Don't be too sure of that," interrupted Frank, with a triumphant smile.

"Ha, young impudence!" exclaimed the squire, wheeling round. "Who's to
prevent me, I should like to know?"

"I am," said Frank boldly.

The squire fingered his cane nervously. He was very strongly tempted to
lay it on our hero's back. But he reflected that the power was in his
hands, and that he was sure of his revenge.

"You won't gain anything by your impudence," he said loftily. "I might
have got you a place, out of pity to your mother, if you had behaved
differently. I need a boy to do odd jobs about the house, and I might
have offered the place to you."

"Thank you for your kind intentions," said Frank, "but I fear the care
of this farm will prevent my accepting your tempting offer."

"The care of the farm!" repeated the squire angrily. "Do you think I
will delegate it to you?"

"I don't see what you have to do about it," said Frank.

"Then you'll find out," roared the squire. "I shall take immediate
possession, and require you to leave at once."

"Then I suppose we had better pay the mortgage, mother," said Frank.

"Pay the mortgage! You can't do it," said the squire exultingly.

"Have you the document with you?" inquired Mrs. Frost.

"Yes, madam."

"Name the amount due on it."

"With interest eight hundred and twenty-four dollars."

"Frank, call in Mr. Morton as a witness."

Mr. Morton entered.

"Now, Frank, you may count out the money."

"What!" stammered the squire, in dismay, "can you pay it."

"We can."

"Why didn't you tell me so in the first place?" demanded Squire Haynes,
his wrath excited by his bitter disappointment.

"I wished to ascertain whether your course was dictated by necessity or
a desire to annoy and injure us. I can have no further doubt about it."

There was no help for it. Squire Haynes was compelled to release his
hold upon the Frost Farm, and pocket his money. He had never been so
sorry to receive money before.

This business over, he was about to beat a hurried retreat, when he was
suddenly arrested by a question from Henry Morton.

"Can you spare me a few minutes, Squire Haynes?"

"I am in haste, sir."

"My business is important, and has already been too long delayed."

"Too long delayed?"

"Yes, it has waited twelve years."

"I don't understand you, sir," said the squire.

"Perhaps I can assist you. You know me as Henry Morton. That is not my
real name."

"An alias!" sneered the squire in a significant tone.

"Yes, I had my reasons," returned the young man, unmoved.

"I have no doubt of it."

Henry Morton smiled, but did not otherwise notice the unpleasant
imputation.

"My real name is Richard Waring."

Squire Haynes started violently and scrutinized the young man closely
through his spectacles. His vague suspicions were confirmed.

"Do you wish to know my business with you?"

The squire muttered something inaudible.

"I demand the restitution of the large sum of money entrusted to you by
my father, just before his departure to the West Indies--a sum of which
you have been the wrongful possessor for twelve years."

"Do you mean to insult me?" exclaimed the squire, bold in the assurance
that the sole evidence of his fraud was undiscovered.

"Unless you comply with my demand I shall proceed against you legally,
and you are enough of a lawyer to understand the punishment meted out to
that description of felony."

"Pooh, pooh! Your threats won't avail you," said the squire
contemptuously. "Your plan is a very clumsy one. Let me suggest to
you, young man, that threats for the purpose of extorting money are
actionable."

"Do you doubt my identity?"

"You may very probably be the person you claim to be, but that won't
save you."

"Very well. You have conceded one point."

He walked quietly to the door of the adjoining room, opened it, and in a
distinct voice called "James Travers."

At the sound of this name Squire Haynes sank into a chair, ashy pale.

A man, not over forty, but with seamed face, hair nearly white, and a
form evidently broken with ill health, slowly entered.

Squire Haynes beheld him with dismay.

"You see before you, Squire Haynes, a man whose silence has been your
safeguard for the last twelve years. His lips are now unsealed. James
Travers, tell us what you know of the trust reposed in this man by my
father."

"No, no," said the squire hurriedly. "It--it is enough. I will make
restitution."

"You have done wisely," said Richard Waring. (We must give him his true
name.) "When will you be ready to meet me upon this business?"

"To-morrow," muttered the squire.

He left the house with the air of one who has been crushed by a sudden
blow.

The pride of the haughty had been laid low, and retribution, long
deferred, had come at last.

Numerous and hearty were the congratulations which Mr. Morton--I mean
Mr. Waring--received upon his new accession of property.

"I do not care so much for that," he said, "but my father's word has
been vindicated. My mind is now at peace."

There was more than one happy heart at the farm that night. Mr. Waring
had accomplished the great object of his life; and as for Frank and his
mother, they felt that the black cloud which had menaced their happiness
had been removed, and henceforth there seemed prosperous days in store.
To cap the climax of their happiness, the afternoon mail brought a
letter from Mr. Frost, in which he imparted the intelligence that he had
been promoted to a second lieutenancy.

"Mother," said Frank, "you must be very dignified now, You are an
officer's wife."



CHAPTER XXXIII. CONCLUSION

The restitution which Squire Haynes was compelled to make stripped him
of more than half his property. His mortification and chagrin was so
great that he determined to remove from Rossville. He gave no intimation
where he was going, but it is understood that he is now living in the
vicinity of Philadelphia, in a much more modest way than at Rossville.

To anticipate matters a little, it may be said that John was recently
examined for college, but failed so signally that he will not again make
the attempt. He has shown a disposition to be extravagant, which, unless
curbed, will help him run through his father's diminished property at a
rapid rate whenever it shall come into his possession.

The squire's handsome house in Rossville was purchased by Henry
Morton--I must still be allowed to call him thus, though not his real
name. He has not yet taken up his residence there, but there is reason
to believe that ere long there will be a Mrs. Morton to keep him company
therein.

Not long since, as he and Frank lay stretched out beneath a
thick-branching oak in the front yard at the farm, Mr. Morton turned to
our hero and said, "Are you meaning to go to college when your father
comes home, Frank?"

Frank hesitated.

"I have always looked forward to it," he said, "but lately I have been
thinking that I shall have to give up the idea."

"Why so?"

"Because it is so expensive that my father cannot, in justice to his
other children, support me through a four years' course. Besides, you
know, Mr. Morton, we are four hundred dollars in your debt."

"Should you like very much to go to college, Frank?"

"Better than anything else in the world."

"Then you shall go."

Frank looked up in surprise.

"Don't you understand me?" said Mr. Morton.

"I mean that I will defray your expenses through college."

Frank could hardly believe his ears.

"You would spend so much money on me!" he exclaimed incredulously. "Why,
it will cost a thousand dollars."

"Very well, I can afford it," said Mr. Morton. "But perhaps you object
to the plan."

"How good you are to me!" said Frank, impulsively seizing his friend's
hand. "What have I done to deserve so much kindness?"

"You have done your duty, Frank, at the sacrifice of your inclinations.
I think you ought to be rewarded. God has bestowed upon me more than I
need. I think he intends that I shall become his almoner. If you
desire to express your gratitude, you can best do it by improving the
advantages which will be opened to you."

Frank hastened to his mother to communicate his brilliant prospects. Her
joy was scarcely less than his.

"Do not forget, Frank," she said, "who it is that has raised up this
friend for you. Give Him the thanks."

There was another whose heart was gladdened when this welcome news
reached him in his tent beside the Rappahannock. He felt that while
he was doing his duty in the field, God was taking better care of his
family than he could have done if he remained at home.

Before closing this chronicle I must satisfy the curiosity of my readers
upon a few points in which they may feel interested.

The Rossville Guards are still in existence, and Frank is still their
captain. They have already done escort duty on several occasions, and
once they visited Boston, and marched up State Street with a precision
of step which would have done no discredit to veteran soldiers.

Dick Bumstead's reformation proved to be a permanent one. He is Frank's
most intimate friend, and with his assistance is laboring to remedy the
