
Directions for Reading.--In _calling tones_, as on pages 237 and 238,
notice that the falling inflections only can be used.[14]


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils make out an _analysis_, and use it in
telling the story in their own words.


[14] See the last six paragraphs.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LI.


rug'ged, _full of rough places_.

con cealed', _covered over; hidden_.

ra vines', _deep and narrow hollow places_.

prec'i pice, _a very steep place_.

dis'lo cate ed, _thrown out of joint_.

mis'er y, _great unhappiness_.

ev'i dence, _signs; that which is shown_.

de scent', _going down_.

haz'ards, _dangers; difficulties_.

toil, _hard work_.

pro ject'ing, _hanging over_.


       *       *       *       *       *




HALBERT AND HIS DOG.


Far up in the Highlands of Scotland lived Malcolm, a shepherd, with his
wife and his son Halbert.

Their little cottage was far from any village, and could only be reached
by a rugged path through the mountains.

One evening Halbert's mother was taken very ill, and Malcolm made
preparations to go to the village to obtain some medicine for her.

"Father," said Halbert, "I know the path through the dark glen better
than you. Shag will walk before me, and I will be quite safe. Let me go
for the doctor, and you stay at home and comfort mother."

Old Shag, the dog, stood by, wagging his tail and looking up into
Malcolm's face as if to say, "Yes, master, I will take good care of
Halbert. Let him go."

Malcolm did not like to have his boy undertake a journey of so much
peril, as the snow was falling in heavy flakes, and it was growing very
dark. But the boy again repeated his request, and Malcolm gave his
consent.

Halbert had been accustomed to the mountains from his earliest boyhood,
and Shag set out with his young master, not seeming to care for wind,
snow, or storm.

They reached the village safely. Halbert saw the doctor, received some
medicine for his mother, and then started on his return home with a
cheerful heart.

Shag trotted along before him to see that all was right. Suddenly,
however, in one of the most dangerous parts of the rocky path, he
stopped and began snuffing and smelling about.

"Go on, Shag," said Halbert.

Shag would not stir.

"Shag, go on, sir," repeated the boy. "We are nearly at the top of the
glen. Look through the dark, and you can see the candle shining through
our window."

Shag disobeyed for the first time in his life, and Halbert advanced
ahead of him, heedless of the warning growl of his companion.

He had proceeded but a few steps when he fell over a precipice, the
approach to which had been concealed by the snow.

It was getting late in the night, and Malcolm began to be alarmed at the
long absence of Halbert. He placed the candle so as to throw the light
over his boy's path, piled wood on the great hearth fire, and often went
to the door.

But no footstep sounded on the crackling ice; no figure darkened the
wide waste of snow.

"Perhaps the doctor is not at home, and he is waiting for him," said
Halbert's mother. She felt so uneasy at her boy's absence, that she
almost forgot her own pain.

It was midnight when Malcolm heard the well-known bark of the faithful
Shag.

"O there is Halbert!" cried both parents at the same moment. Malcolm
sprang to the door and opened it, expecting to see his son.

But alas! Halbert was not there. Shag was alone. The old dog entered
the door, and began to whine in a piteous manner.

"O Malcolm, Malcolm, my brave son has perished in the snow!" exclaimed
the mother.

Malcolm stood wondering. His heart beat rapidly. A fear that the worst
had happened almost overcame him. At that moment he saw a small package
around the dog's neck.

Seizing it in his hands, he exclaimed, "No, wife; look! Our boy lives!
Here is the medicine, tied with his handkerchief; he has fallen into one
of the deep ravines, but he is safe.

"I will go out, and Shag shall go with me. He will conduct me safely to
the rescue of my child."

In an instant Shag was again on his feet, and gave evidence of great joy
as he left the cottage with his old master.

You may imagine the misery and grief the poor mother suffered--alone in
her mountain dwelling; the certainty of her son's danger, and the fear
that her husband also might perish.

Shag went on straight and steadily for some distance after he left the
cottage. Suddenly he turned down a path which led to the foot of the
precipice over which Halbert had fallen.

The descent was steep and dangerous, and Malcolm was frequently obliged
to support himself by clinging to the frozen branches of the trees.

At last Malcolm stood on the lower and opposite edge of the pit into
which his son had fallen. He called to him, "Halbert! Halbert!" He
looked in every direction, but could not see or hear any thing.

Shag was making his way down a very steep and dangerous ledge of rocks,
and Malcolm resolved at all hazards to follow him.

After getting to the bottom, Shag scrambled to a projecting rock, which
was covered with snow, and commenced whining and scratching in a violent
manner.

Malcolm followed, and after some search found what appeared to be the
dead body of his son. He hastily tore off the jacket, which was soaked
with blood and snow, and wrapping Halbert in his great cloak, took him
upon his shoulders, and with much toil and difficulty reached the path
again, and soon had his boy at home.

Halbert was placed in his mother's bed, and by using great exertion,
they aroused him from his dangerous sleep.

He was much bruised and had his ankle dislocated, but was not otherwise
hurt. When he recovered his senses, he fixed his eyes on his mother, and
his first words were, "Did you get the medicine, mother?"

When he fell, Shag had descended after him. The affectionate son used
what little strength he had left to tie the medicine that he had
received from the doctor around the dog's neck, and then sent him home
with it.

You may be sure that Shag was well taken care of after this incident.
Even after Halbert became a man Shag was his constant companion, and he
lived to a good old age.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson--Let pupils add _ship_ to each of the following
words, and then give their meaning.

    friend    hard    relation    partner    fellow

Make out an _analysis_ of the lesson, and use it in telling the story
in your own words.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LII.


ebb'ing, _flowing out; falling_.

break'ers, _waves breaking into foam against_
     the shore_.

main, _the great sea; the ocean_.

reef, _a row or chain of rocks_.

dis mayed', _having lost courage_.

strand, _beach; shore_.

treach'er ous, _likely to do harm_.

vic'tor, _a successful warrior_.

shroud'ing, _covering over_.

murk'y, _gloomy; dark_.

bea'con, _a signal fire or light_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE LIGHT-HOUSE.


  The tide comes up, and the tide goes down,
  Over the rocks, so rugged and brown,
  And the cruel sea,  with a hungry roar,
  Dashes its breakers along the shore;
  But steady and clear, with a constant ray,
  The star of the light-house shines alway.

  The ships come sailing across the main,
  But the harbor mouth is hard to gain,
  For the treacherous reef lies close beside,
  And the rocks are bare at the ebbing tide,
  And the blinding fog comes down at night,
  Shrouding and hiding the harbor light.

  The sailors, sailing their ships along,
  Will tell you a tale of the light-house strong;
  How once, when the keeper was far away,
  A terrible storm swept down the bay,
  And two little children were left to keep
  Their awesome watch with the angry deep.

  The fair little sister wept, dismayed,
  But the brother said, "I am not afraid;
  There's One who ruleth on sea and land,
  And holds the sea in His mighty hand;
  For mercy's sake I will watch to-night,
  And feed, for the sailors, the beacon light."

  So the sailors heard through the murky shroud
  The fog-bell sounding its warning loud!
  While the children, up in the lonely tower,
  Tended the lamp in the midnight hour,
  And prayed for any whose souls might be
  In deadly peril by land or sea.

  Ghostly and dim, when the storm was o'er,
  The ships rode safely, far off the shore,
  And a boat shot out from the town that lay
  Dusk and purple, across the bay,
  She touched her keel to the light-house strand,
  And the eager keeper leaped to land.

  And swiftly climbing the light-house stair,
  He called to his children, young and fair;
  But, worn with their toilsome watch, they slept,
  While slowly o'er their foreheads crept,
  The golden light of the morning sun,
  Like a victor's crown, when his palm is won.

  "God bless you, children!" the keeper cried;
  "God bless thee, father!" the boy replied.
  "I dreamed that there stood beside my bed
  A beautiful angel, who smiled and said,
  'Blessed are they whose love can make
  Joy of labor, for mercy's sake!'"

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Mark the _inflection_ of the following lines.

    The tide comes up, and the tide goes down.

    The fair little sister wept, dismayed,
    But the brother said, "I am not afraid."

Name the _emphatic words_ in the lines just quoted. State whether the
emphasis falls upon words that are inflected.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Why is the sea called _cruel_ and its roar _hungry?_
Give two examples of a similar use of words.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LIII.


oc'cu pant, _one who is in possession of a thing_.

ac quired', _gained_.

mi'cro scope, _a glass so formed as to make small_
    _objects appear large_.

slug'gish, _slow; stupid_.

in spect'ing, _looking at with attention_.

com posed', _made up_.

se'ries, _a number of things in order_.

stub'bed, _short and thick_.

dis turbed', _interfered with_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE CATERPILLAR AND BUTTERFLY.


Last summer, when the trees were covered with green leaves, and when the
little stream was sparkling and dancing in the sun, there appeared in
the garden, a large caterpillar of many colors, and about as pretty as a
caterpillar could be.

All day long it was nibbling the green leaves, and leaf after leaf
disappeared before it with wonderful rapidity. It seemed to live only
for eating.

As autumn came on, it quite lost its appetite; so much so, that even the
tenderest and most juicy leaves could not tempt it to eat any more. It
grew dull and stiff, and lost all interest in life.

Feeling that some change was about to happen, it crawled into a little
hole in the old garden wall. It wrapped itself up in a cobweb, and fell
into a long sleep, during which it became changed from a caterpillar
into a dried-up, dead-looking grub or chrysalis.

It remained in this state through all the long winter, till the snow and
frost had gone, and the cold March winds were over.

In April the trees burst forth with their bright green leaves, and the
grass looked fresh under the power of the warm rains.

In May the many-tinted flowers appeared, filling the air with their
sweetness, and brightening the fields and gardens with their gay colors.

At this time another great change came over the old grub. It showed
signs of life again; but it was now no longer a caterpillar--it was
something else.

It wriggled and turned in its narrow little home, and seemed anxious to
get out and look at the sunshine and flowers. It bumped its head up and
down until it succeeded in pushing off a little door.

When the door was off, and the bright sunlight shone in, this little
occupant of the chrysalis took a look at itself.

It saw that during its long winter's nap, it had acquired a pair of
beautiful wings, and its legs had grown longer and stronger than they
were before.

Crawling out of the chrysalis, and taking a position on a branch of the
tree, it discovered that instead of a caterpillar, it was now a
beautiful butterfly.

It was a kind that is called the swallow-tail butterfly, because each of
its wings tapered to a point, something like the tail of a swallow. We
will call the butterfly, Miss Swallow-tail, and now let us see what her
next move was.

Her wings were damp and heavy, and she stood shivering and trembling;
for although she had six legs, they were weak, having never before borne
such a weight.

But fresh air brings strength; so she soon felt like trying to walk. At
first her movements were sluggish, but she finally reached a sunny spot
where she dried and warmed herself, giving her wings a little shake now
and then, until they opened grandly above her back.

And how beautiful they were! Dark brown, bordered with two rows of
yellow spots; and there were seven blue spots on each of the hind
wings.

As she stood there in the sun, a little wind came along and raised Miss
Swallow-tail off her feet. She spread her wings to keep from falling,
and found herself floating in the air.

This proved to be such a delightful way of traveling, that she lifted
her wings occasionally, and so kept herself floating; and in a short
time she learned to turn in any direction she chose.

As she flew along, growing stronger every minute, she was attracted by
the bright colors of a flower, and stopped to admire it.

The sweet perfume tempted her to taste, and unrolling her long tongue
from under her chin, where she carried it, she put it down into the
flower and drew up the honey hidden there.

Miss Swallow-tail had wonderful eyes. All butterflies have wonderful
eyes. If you will look at them through a microscope you will find that
each eye is composed of a great many smaller ones, that can see in all
directions.
