"Well, dear, there is a vacancy at the present moment. Mrs. Hagan
breathed her last, poor soul! and was waked not a fortnight ago. We'd
better wire to your father to keep the little cottage vacant until we
know more. This is going to be interesting, and you may be quite sure
that if there is going to be a lark that I'm the one to help you, my
colleen bawn."

Kathleen and her aunt talked until late into the night, and when the
young girl laid her head on her pillow she was lost immediately in
profound slumber.

It was not at all difficult for Kathleen to wake early, and accompanied
by Miss O'Flynn, she arrived at Merrifield at half-past eight on the
following morning. She had no time, however, to change her dress, but
after washing her hands and smoothing out her tangled hair, and leaving
Miss O'Flynn in the care of Mrs. Tennant--who, to tell the truth, found
her considerably in the way--Kathleen, accompanied by Alice, started for
school.

"You'll catch it," said Alice.

"Oh, that's very likely, darling," said Kathleen; "but I don't think I
much care. Did you see Miss Ravenscroft last night, and was she very,
very angry?"

"I saw her, and she was more than angry--she was astonished. I think you
will have to put up with a rather serious conversation with her this
morning. She asked me questions with regard to you and your doings
which, of course, I could not answer; but you will have to answer them.
I don't think particularly well of you, Kathleen; your ways are not my
ways, nor your ideas mine; but I don't think, bad as you are, that you
would tell a lie. You will have to speak out the truth to Miss
Ravenscroft, Kathleen, and no mistake about it."

"Thank you," replied Kathleen. "I think I can manage my own affairs,"
she added, and then she was silent, not exactly cross, but lost in
thought.

The girls reached the school without any further adventure. Prayers were
held as usual in the great hall, and then the members of the different
classes went to their places and the work of the morning began. The work
went on, and to look at those girls, all steadfast and attentive and
studious-looking, it was difficult to realize that in some of their
hearts was wild rebellion and a naughty and ever-increasing sense of
mischief. Certainly it was difficult to realize that one at least of
that number was determined to have her own way at any cost; that another
was extremely anxious, resolved to tell the truth, and hoping against
hope that she would not be questioned.

School had very nearly come to an end when the dread summons which both
Ruth Craven and Alice Tennant expected arrived for Kathleen. She was to
go to speak to Miss Ravenscroft in that lady's parlor.

"Miss Ravenscroft is waiting," said the mistress who brought Kathleen
the message. "Will you be quick, Kathleen, as she is rather in a hurry?"

Kathleen got up with apparent alacrity. Her face looked sunshiny and
genial. As she passed Ruth she put her hand on her shoulder and said in
her most pleasant voice:

"Extraordinary thing; Miss Ravenscroft has sent for me. I wonder what
for."

Ruth colored and looked down. One or two of the girls glanced round at
Kathleen in amazement. She did not say anything further but left the
room. When she got into the passage she hummed a little air. The teacher
who had summoned her had gone on in front. Kathleen followed her at a
respectful distance, and still humming "The wearing of the Green," she
knocked at Miss Ravenscroft's door.

Miss Ravenscroft was standing by her window. She turned when Kathleen
appeared, and desired her to sit down. Kathleen dropped into a chair.
Miss Ravenscroft did likewise. Then Miss Ravenscroft spoke gently, for
in spite of herself Kathleen's attractive face, the wilful, daring, and
yet affectionate glance in the eyes, attracted her. She had not yet had
a full and perfect view of Kathleen. She had seen, it is true, the
pretty little girl in a crowd of others; but now she saw Kathleen by
herself. The face was undoubtedly sweet--sweet with a radiance which
surprised and partly fascinated Miss Ravenscroft.

"Your name?" she said.

"Kathleen O'Hara," replied Kathleen.

She rose to her feet and dropped a little bobbing curtsy, then waited to
be asked to sit down again. Miss Ravenscroft did not invite her to
reseat herself. She spoke quietly, turning her eyes away from the
attractive little face and handsome figure.

"I sent for you last night and you did not obey my command. Why so?"

"I did not mean to be rude," said Kathleen. "You see, it was this way.
My aunt from Ireland (Miss O'Flynn is her name--Miss Katie O'Flynn) was
staying at the Metropole. I had a telegram from her desiring me to go to
her immediately in town. I got your note after I had read the telegram.
It seemed to me that I ought to go first to my aunt. She is my mother's
own sister, and such a darling. You couldn't but love her if you saw
her. You might think me a little rude not to come to you when you sent
for me, but Aunt Katie would have been hurt--terribly, fearfully hurt.
She might even have cried."

Kathleen raised her brows as she said the last word; her face expressed
consternation and a trifle of amazement. Miss Ravenscroft felt as though
smiles were very near.

"Even suppose your aunt had cried," she said, "your duty was to me as
your head-mistress."

"Please," said Kathleen, "I did not think it was. I thought my duty was
to my aunt."

Miss Ravenscroft was silent for a minute.

"My dear," she said then gently, "you are new to the school. You have
doubtless indulged in a very free-and-easy and unconventional life in
your own country. I was once in Ireland, in the west, and I liked the
people and the land, and the ways of the people and the looks of the
land, and for the sake of that visit I am not going to be hard on a
little Irish girl during her first sojourn in the school. In future,
Kathleen O'Hara, I must insist on instant obedience. I will forgive you
for your disregard of my message last night, but if ever I require you
again I shall expect you to come to me at once. For the present we will
forget last night."

"Thank you, madam. I am sure I should love you very much if I knew you
well."

"That is not the question, my dear. I must insist on your treating me
with respect. It is not very easy to know the head-mistress; the girls
know her up to a certain point, but personal friendship as between one
woman and another cannot quite exist between a little girl and her
head-mistress. Yes, my dear, I hope you will love me, but in the sense
of one who is set in authority over you. That is my position, and I hope
as long as I live to do my duty. Now then, Kathleen, I will speak to you
about the other matter which obliged me to send you a message last
night."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Kathleen. She looked down, so that the fun in
her eyes could not be seen.

"I am sure from your face that you will not tell me a lie."

"No," said Kathleen, "I won't tell you a lie."

"I must, however, ask you one or two direct questions. Is it true that
you have encouraged certain girls in this school--"

"Oh, I encourage all the girls, I know. Poor things! I--"

"Don't interrupt me, Kathleen; I have more to say. Is it true that you
encourage certain girls in this school"--here Miss Ravenscroft put up
her hand to check Kathleen's words--"to rebellion and insubordination?"

"I don't know what insubordination is," said Kathleen, shaking her head.

"Is it true," continued the head-mistress, "that you have started a
society which is called by some ridiculous name such as The Wild Irish
Girls, and that you meet each week in a quarry a short distance from
town; that you have got rules and badges; that you sing naughty songs,
and altogether misbehave yourselves? Is it true?"

Kathleen closed her lips firmly together. Miss Ravenscroft looked full
at her. Kathleen then spoke slowly:

"How did you hear that we do what you say we do?"

"I do not intend to name my informant. The girls who have joined your
society and are putting themselves under your influence are the sort of
girls who in a school like this get most injured by such proceedings.
They have never been accustomed to self-restraint; they have not been
guided to control themselves. Of all the girls in the school whom you,
Miss O'Hara, have tried to injure, you have selected the foundationers,
who have only been to Board schools before they came here. They look up
to you as above them by birth; your very way, your words, can influence
them. Wrong from your lips will appear right, and right will appear
wrong. You yourself are an ignorant and unlearned child, and yet you
attempt to guide others. This society must be broken up immediately. I
will forgive you for the past if you promise me that you will never hold
another meeting, that as long as you are at the school you will not
encourage another girl to join this society. You will have to give me
your word, and that before you leave this room. I do not require you to
betray your companions; I do not even ask their names. I but demand your
promise, which I insist on. The Irish Girls--or the Wild Irish Girls,
whatever you like to call them--must cease to exist."

Miss Ravenscroft ceased speaking.

"Is that all?" said Kathleen.

"What do you mean? I want your promise."

"But I have nothing to say."

"You are not stupid, Kathleen O'Hara--I can see that--and I should hope
you were too much of a lady to be impertinent. What do you mean to do?"

"Indeed," said Kathleen, "I don't mean to be impertinent, and I don't
want to tell a lie. The best way on the present occasion is to be
silent. I can't give myself or the other girls in the school away. You
ask me to make you a promise. I cannot make that promise. I am sorry.
Perhaps I had better leave the school."

"No, Kathleen, you cannot leave it in the ordinary way. You are
connected with other girls now; your influence must be publicly
withdrawn. I had hoped to spare you this, but if you defy me you know
the consequences."

"May I go now?" said Kathleen.

"You may--for the present. I must consult with the other teachers. It
may even be necessary to call a meeting of the Board of Governors. Your
conduct requires stringent measures. But, my child"--and here Miss
Ravenscroft changed her voice to one of gentleness and entreaty--"you
will not be so silly, so wicked, so perverse. Kathleen, it is sometimes
a hard thing to give up your own way, but I think an Irish girl can be
noble. You will be very noble now if you cease to belong to the Irish
Girls' Society."

"'Wild Irish Girls' is the name," said Kathleen.

"You must give it up. It was a mad and silly scheme. You must have
nothing more to do with it."

Kathleen slightly shook her head. Miss Ravenscroft uttered a deep sigh.

"I am afraid I must go," said Kathleen. "I think you have spoken to me
very kindly; I should like to have been able to oblige you."

"And you won't?"

Kathleen shook her head again. The next moment she had left the room.

The school was nearly over; but whether it had been or not, Kathleen had
not the slightest idea of returning to her class-room. She stood for a
moment in one of the corridors to collect her thoughts; then going to
the room where the hats and jackets hung on pegs, she took down her
own, put them on, and left the school. She walked fast and reached Mrs.
Tennant's house at a quarter to one. Both Mrs. Tennant and Miss O'Flynn
were out. There was a message for Kathleen to say that Miss O'Flynn
expected her to be ready to go to town with her immediately after
dinner. Kathleen smiled to herself.

"Dear Aunt Katie! She must get me out of this scrape. But as to thinking
of giving up girls whom I meant to help, and will help, I wouldn't do it
for twenty Miss Ravenscrofts." She stood at the door of the house; then
a sudden idea struck her, and as she saw the girls; filing out of the
school, she crossed the common and met Susy Hopkins, her satchel of
books flung across her shoulder.

"Ah, Susy, here I am. I want to speak to you."

Susy ran up to her in excitement. It was already whispered in the school
that their secret proceedings were becoming known. It had also been
whispered from one to another that Kathleen had undergone a formidable
interview with Miss Ravenscroft that very morning.

"What is it, Kathleen?" said Susy. "Was she very, very cross?"

"Who do you mean?" asked Kathleen, instantly on the defensive.

"Miss Ravenscroft. You went to see her; every one knows it. What did she
say?"

"That is my affair. But, Susy, I want you to do something. We must not
go to the quarry to-morrow evening. We want to have the meeting at your
aunt's. I want to go to Mrs. Church's. You must run round this afternoon
and make arrangements. There'll be about thirty or forty of us, and we
must all be smuggled into the cottage."

"Oh, dear!" said Susy. "But how are we to get there? It's four miles
away."

"Well, I suppose those who are really interested can walk four miles. I
certainly can. Susy, you had better not miss it to-morrow night, for
Aunt Katie O'Flynn is to be present, and there's no saying what she will
do. She will help us if any one can. She is ever so kind, and so
interested. It will be the greatest meeting the society has ever had; I
wouldn't miss it myself for the world."

"Oh, hurrah!" said Susy. "You certainly are a splendid girl, Kathleen.
And won't Aunt Church be pleased?"

"Tell her that if she wants to get one of the little almshouses she had
better oblige us as far as she can," said.

Kathleen. "Now I must rush back to dinner. I am going to town
afterwards."

Without waiting for Susy's reply, Kathleen turned on her heel and
returned home. Susy watched her for a minute, then slowly and gravely
went in the direction of her mother's shop. Mrs. Hopkins was getting in
fresh stock that morning, and the little shop looked brighter and
fresher than it had done for some time. It was a beautiful day in the
beginning of winter, with that feeling of summer in the air which comes
to cheer us now and then in November. Susy marched through the shop,
still swinging her satchel.

"I wish you wouldn't do that, Susy," said her mother. "And I wish, too,
that you wouldn't always be late home. Be quick now; there's
pease-pudding and pork for dinner. Tom is in a hurry to be off to his
football."

"Oh, bother!" said Susy.

Mrs. Hopkins frowned. Susy, in her mother's opinion, was not quite so
nice and comforting as she once had been. But it was not Mrs. Hopkins's
way to reproach her children; she bore her burden with regard to them
as silently and patiently as she could.

Susy ran up to her room, tossed off her hat, washed her hands, and came
down. Soon the three were seated at their frugal dinner.

"You seem to have got in a lot of fresh goods, mother," said Tom.

"I have," said Mrs. Hopkins, with a groan; "but I haven't paid for one
of them. Parkins says he will trust me for quite a month; but however I
am to pay your Aunt Church, and keep enough money for the new goods,
beats me. Sometimes I think that my burden is greater than I can bear. I
have often had a feeling that I ought to give up the shop and take
service somewhere. I used to be noted as the best of good housekeepers
when I was young."

"Oh, no, mother, you mustn't do that," said Susy. "What would Tom and I
do?"

"If it wasn't for you and Tom I'd give notice to-morrow," said the
widow. "But there! we must hope for the best, I suppose. God never
forsakes those who trust Him."

"Mother," said Susy suddenly, "I hope you will be able to spare me this
afternoon. I want to go and see Aunt Church."

"Why should you do that, child? There's no way for you to go except on
your legs, and it's a weary walk, and the days are getting short."

"All the same, I must go," said Susy. "I suppose you couldn't shut up
the shop and come with me, could you, mother?"

"Shut up the shop!" said Mrs. Hopkins. "What next will the child ask?
Not a bit of it, Susan. But what do you want to see your aunt for?"

"It is a little private message in connection with Miss Kathleen
O'Hara. It means money, mother; of that I am certain. It means that Aunt
Church will forgive you last month's installment of the debt, and
perhaps next month's, too. You had best let me go, mother. I am not
talking without knowledge, and I can't tell you what I know."

"I know something," said Tom, and he gave utterance to a low whistle.

Susy turned and glanced at her brother in some uneasiness.

"There are a deal of funny things whispered about your school just now,"
he said. "I'm not going to peach, of course; only you'd best look out.
They say if it got to the governors' ears every foundationer in the
place would be expelled. It is something that ought not to be done."

"Don't mind him, mother. Do you think I'd do anything to endanger my
continuing at the school, after all the trouble and care and anxiety you
had in getting me placed there?"

"Really, child," said Mrs. Hopkins, "I don't know. The wilfullness of
young folks in these days is past enduring. But you had better clearly
understand, Susy, that if for any reason you are dismissed from the
school there is nothing whatever for you but to take a place as a
servant; and that you wouldn't like."

"I should think not, indeed. Well, mother, to avoid all these
consequences I must go as fast as I can to see Aunt Church."




CHAPTER XVIII.

SUSY HOPKINS PERSUADES AUNT CHURCH.


Mrs. Hopkins said nothing more. Susy saw that she could have her own
way, and as soon as dinner was over, without even waiting to help her
mother to put the place in order, she started on her walk. She felt
pleased and self-important. The day was a frosty one, and the sunset
promised to be glorious. The road to Mrs. Church's house was flat and
long and pleasant to walk on. Susy had no particular eye for pretty
views, or she might have pleased herself with the wonderful tints of the
sky, and the autumnal shades which had not altogether deserted the
neighboring woods. Susy's thoughts, however, were occupied with very
different matters.

"Mother is always grumbling," she said to herself; "and for that matter,
so is Tom. As if I'd demean myself by taking a place! The idea of my
being a servant. Why, I know I shall do very well in the future. I look
high. I mean to be a lady, as good as the best. Would Miss Kathleen
O'Hara take so much notice of me if I was not a very nice, lady-like sort
of a girl? I am sure no one could look sweeter than I do in my pale-blue
blouse. Even Tom says so. He said I looked very genteel, and that he'd
like his great friend, Walter Amber, to see me. I don't want to have
anything to do with Tom's friends. Poor Tom! if mother can apprentice
him to somebody, that is the most that can be expected. But as for me,
the very lowest position I intend to take in life in the future is that
of a teacher. I shall probably be a teacher in this very school, and get
my couple of hundred a year. A place indeed! Poor dear mother doesn't
know what she is talking about."

Occupied with her own thoughts, the road did not turn out long to Susy.
She reached Mrs. Church's very humble abode between three and four
