down on the stone floor wrapped in his blankets, sank fast into sleep.
Morning dawned, sharp and clear, and the red sun came out of Asia,
turning the huge pile of Zillenstein once more into a scarlet glow, a
vast blood-red splotch in the side of the mountain.

He drank at the little stream, then bathed his face, ate breakfast, and,
knapsack on back, returned to the road that led down the far side of the
mountain. His courage was still high. The crusader of the day before was
none the less the crusader this morning, and he whistled soft and happy
airs as he descended. He knew that it was a trick that he had caught
from General Vaugirard and he wondered where that fat old hero might be
now.

But as he walked along he formed his plan. Every general who intends to
attack an enemy must choose a method of approach, and the crusader's
plan to assail Zillenstein was now quite clear in his mind. His decision
brought him the usual relief, following the solution of a doubt, and he
intended that his journey that day through the great valley should
resemble somewhat a stroll of pleasure.

He whistled at times and at times he sang. He remembered the story, of
the faithful troubadour, Blondel, who sought his master, Richard of the
Lion Heart, imprisoned somewhere in a castle in Austria, and who,
finding him, sang under his window to let him know one loyal friend was
there. But Richard, under the light of history, had become merely a
barbarous king, cruel to his enemies and unjust to his friends. John
felt that his own quest was higher and better.

Toward noon he was in the middle of a valley down which a swift little
river flowed. Old men, women and children were at work in the fields
preparing for the new crop, and again John's frank eyes and hearty voice
won him a welcome. He was a man of Lorraine who had been on the far
western front and they welcomed Ulysses on his travels. They said that
he was going to Zillenstein at a fortunate time, as the prince had just
returned for a space and the great castle was full of people. When so
much of the youth of the land was gone away a handy man with horses
might obtain work there. The prince used automobiles chiefly, but many
horses were employed also.

Once John was compelled to show the German passport. It was of no use in
Austria, except as a proof of identity, and good faith, and as such it
served him well.

In the afternoon he began to ascend the slope that confined the southern
side of the valley, and toward night he drew near to Zillenstein. The
view of the castle here was less clear than from the other side of the
valley. Patches of pine on the slopes beneath hid many of the towers and
battlements, but he saw lights shining from lofty windows, and about the
castle were many small houses. He surmised that Zillenstein and its
surroundings had not changed much since the Middle Ages. Here was the
castle, and below it were the cottages and huts of the peasants and
retainers who might be as loyal as ever to the prince whose lineage was
more ancient than that of either Hohenzollern or Hapsburg.

Two young hussars riding down the road, their horses' hoofs ringing on
the stones, brought back the modern world. They were gay young fellows,
smoking cigarettes, their Austrian caps tipped back to let the cool
breeze blow upon their foreheads, and they called cheerfully to the
strong young peasant who walked slowly up the road. John lifted his cap
and answered in a tone that was respectful but not servile.

"You look like one who has traveled far," said the younger of the two, a
mere boy.

"From Lorraine," answered John. "My name is Jean Castel, which is
French, but I, its owner, am not. My family became German before I was
born, and has been so ever since."

"Ah, I see, made German by strength of arms."

"And growing more German every day by will and liking."

"You speak well for a peasant."

"I was a dealer in horses, which took me much over the land and everyone
who travels learns. See, here is my passport."

"Why should I look at your passport?"

"Everyone else does. Then why not you?"

"No, I don't want to see it. I take your word for it You couldn't have
come so deep into Germany, unless you were one of us. What do you seek
at the castle?"

"My trade is gone and I want work with the horses. There must surely be
a place on the estate of so great a prince."

"There is, but he wants good men, the very best."

"Let him try me."

"I'll try you now."

The hussar leaped from his horse and asked John to get into the saddle.
John had noticed that it was a big brute with a red eye, and every other
indication of a wicked temper, but in his earlier youth he had spent a
year on a great ranch belonging to his uncle in Montana, and the cowboys
had taught him everything. He was quite aware that a dramatic effect
would be useful to him now, and he decided to temporize a little in
order that the culmination might be greater.

"It has been my business," he said, "to try and sell horses, not to ride
them."

Both officers laughed derisively.

"Prince Karl of Auersperg likes bold men around him," said the one who
had dismounted, "and he would not care for a hostler who was afraid of
his own horses."

John, despite the fact that he had invited it, was stung somewhat by the
taunt.

"While I said it was not my business to ride horses I didn't say I
couldn't ride them," he replied.

"Then up with you and prove it."

John seized the bridle, and as the great black horse, feeling the touch
of an unfamiliar hand, pulled away from him, he made one leap and was in
the saddle. He felt in an instant from the fierce quiver running through
the mighty frame that he had a demon beneath him. The Austrians, who
doubtless had not expected him to accept the challenge, were alarmed and
the younger, whose name John afterward learned to be Pappenheim,
shouted:

"Jump off! He'll kill you!"

John had no notion of leaving the saddle, either willingly or
unwillingly. He believed that after his training by the cowboys he could
ride anything, and when he felt the great frame draw itself together he
was ready. He saw too that he could make capital. He would impress these
volatile Austrians and at the same time he would recommend himself as an
expert horsemen to Prince Karl of Auersperg.

The black horse made a series of mighty jumps, any one of which would
have sent a novice flying, but the trained rider on his back knew
instinctively which way he was going to leap, and swayed easily every
time. Then panting, and mad with anger and fury, the horse rushed down
the road. John pulled hard on the bridle to keep him from stumbling. He
heard the two Austrians behind him shouting, and the one on horseback
pursuing, but he did not look back.

When the horse had gone three or four hundred yards he pulled harder on
the bit, and gradually turned him about in the road. Then he raced him
back up the hill, a most exhausting proceeding for any animal however
strong. Then the horse began to jump and kick again, but he could not
shake off his incubus. A side glance by John showed that young
Pappenheim was standing among the trees by the roadside well out of the
way and that the mounted officer had also drawn back among the trees.

He felt that now was the time for his stroke. He knew that the horse was
conquered, overcome chiefly by his own struggles, and letting him
breathe a little he urged him straight forward in the road toward the
castle, which was only a few hundred yards away.

As he emerged from the woods he saw that the road led through the
remains of an ancient wall, and across a bridge over a moat which was
partly filled up. In the cleared space in front of the wall several
soldiers were standing and near them were two hussars. The hussars rode
forward, as if they would prevent the flight of the horse, but John
urged on his waning spirit and he dashed over the moat and through the
wall into the inner precincts of the castle yard, where the animal
stopped dead beat and covered with foam.

He slipped from the horse, as a man, who had been sitting in a camp
chair in the shadow of a great pine, rose in surprise, and stood looking
at him. It was Prince Karl of Auersperg himself, in a uniform of gray
and silver, his great brown beard forked and spreading out
magnificently. John took off his cap, saluted and despite the fierce
beating of his heart stood calmly before him.

"What does this mean?" demanded the prince.

John was saved a reply by young Pappenheim, who came up running.

"It was my fault, Your Highness," he said. "We met him in the road
coming to the castle, where he said he wished to be employed as a
hostler. I told him to prove his skill by riding my horse, which
hitherto has tolerated no one but myself on his back. He rode him like a
Cossack, and here he is! The fault, sir, was mine, and I crave the
pardon of Your Highness, but this man has proved himself a horseman."

The prince combed his great forked beard with his fingers, and looked at
the young peasant with a contemplative eye. John surmised that
Pappenheim stood well with him, and would be forgiven.

"The test was, perhaps, severe," he said, "but the young man seems to
have endured it well. I might say that in his own little world he has
achieved a triumph. Send him to the stables, and tell Walther, the head
groom, to give him work."

After the one examining glance he no longer looked at John who had now
disappeared from his own world. John had no fear of detection. He had
let his semblance of a young beard grow again, and Prince Karl of
Auersperg would not dream of his presence there in the mountains of
Austria.

"Thanks, Your Highness," he said, again bowing respectfully. A groom
took the horse and Pappenheim went with him to the stables, where he
recommended him specially to Walther, a stalwart Tyrolean, who was
evidently glad to have him, as he was short of help.

"Treat him well. Walther, because he will be of use," said Pappenheim.
"He has ridden my own horse and no one but myself has ever done that
before."

The Tyrolean's eyes gleamed with wonder and approval.

"Then you must know horses," he said, and put him to work at once in the
stables. John toiled with a will. All things still moved as he could
wish them to go. The blessings upon his errand that he had received were
not without effect. It was true that he was but a stable boy, but he was
within the precincts of the castle of Auersperg, and Julie was but a few
hundred yards away. He recalled an old line or two, from Walter Scott,
he thought;

     And he bowed his pride
     To ride a horse-boy in his train.

As he remembered it, the service had a motive somewhat similar to his
own, and he was glad to "bow his pride," because he believed that he
would have ample chance to raise it up again. As he went about his work
singing and whistling softly to himself, he cast many a glance up at the
huge castle.

Truly Zillenstein had been a great fortress. In the old days it must
have been impregnable. Much of it was still standing in its ancient
strength. John saw that the walls were many feet thick, and that in the
older parts the windows were mere slits through which a human body could
not pass.

A much more modern addition to the right wing had been built, and John
surmised that Prince Karl and his suite lived there. Auersperg might
have medieval notions of caste, but he was certain to have modern ideas
of luxury.

He worked hard through all the rest of the day. What a lucky thing it
was that he had always liked horses, and had spent that year on the
western ranch of his uncle! Horses were the same everywhere, and as far
as he could see they responded as readily to kind treatment in Europe as
in America. The same friendly disposition that won him the favor of
people was now winning him the favor of animals, and Walther, who had
spent fifty years in the stables, complimented him on his soothing
touch. John saw that he had made a new friend, and he meant to use him
as a source of information.

He soon learned that Prince Karl would not stay long at Zillenstein. He
had come there, partly, to meet several great officers of Austria and
confer with them. His position as a Prussian general and a prince of
both empires made him the most suitable person for the duty, and
Zillenstein, in the heart of Austria, was the best place for the
meeting.

Walther, a taciturn man, volunteered so much, but he went no farther,
and John, despite his great anxiety, did not ask any questions. He knew
that he was a too recent arrival at Zillenstein to be making inquiries
without arousing suspicion, and it was better anyhow to go slowly. Late
in the afternoon, Walther directed him to saddle and bridle a fine young
horse and lead him to the front of the castle.

"One of the young noblemen who was wounded in a great battle in the west
has been recovering from his wound at Zillenstein," he said, "and he has
been riding every day toward evening. You will hold the horse until he
comes, but he is always prompt."

John led the horse, a fine young bay, along a curving road, until he
stood before the entrance of the castle. There he waited in silence, but
he was using his eyes all the time. He admired the great size and
strength of Zillenstein, even in its decayed state, and he was confirmed
in his belief that the prince and his suite inhabited the extension of
the right wing. Doubtless Julie and Suzanne should be sought there.

While he stood holding the horse one or two soldiers passing gave him
scrutinizing looks, and a couple of trim Austrian maids did likewise,
smiling at the same time, because John was very good looking, despite
his fuzzy young beard. He smiled back at them, as became one of his
lowly station who had met with approval, and whispering to each other
they passed on. Now, he had two more new friends, and it occurred to him
that these maids also might be of use to him in his great quest. He had
formed his plan and like a good general he was marshaling every possible
force for its success.

While he was thinking about it, the convalescent came, a young officer,
trim, slender, in a fine uniform of blue and silver. It was none other
than that same lad, Leopold Kratzek, whom he had saved in the fight at
the trench. In his surprise John came very near to greeting him by name,
but luckily he controlled himself in time.

He noticed that Kratzek was almost entirely recovered. The color in his
face was fresh, his walk was firm and elastic, and John was glad of it.
He liked the lad whose life he had saved. He recalled, too, that his
presence there was not strange. Kratzek was the relative of Auersperg,
and it was natural that he should be sent to Zillenstein to recover.

The young Austrian glanced at the new groom, but there was no sign of
recognition on his face.

"I have not seen you before," he said.

"No, sir," replied John, "I've just come today. I've been wandering
eastward from Lorraine, where I was born, and the Herr Walther has been
kind enough to give me work."

"You're the man of whom I heard Pappenheim speak so well. He has been
telling us all how a wandering peasant rode that black devil of his."

"I am fortunate in understanding horses."

"Well, you've made a friend in Pappenheim."

John gave him the reins and Kratzek, drawing himself a little stiffly
into the saddle, cantered away. John, although not recognized, felt as
if he had met a friend again, and Zillenstein seemed less lonely to him.

He watched Kratzek riding down the mountain until the firs and pines hid
him, and then, as he turned to go back to the stables, he found the two
maids near him, a little forward, and yet a little shy, but wholly
curious about the handsome young stranger.

Bearing in mind that the news of the household, even of a huge castle,
filtered most often through women, he smiled back at them and said
pleasantly in his new German:

"Good morning. May I ask your names?"

One was blond and the other brunette, and the brunette answered:

"We're Ilse and Olga, maids of the household of His Highness, Prince
Karl of Auersperg."

"And very pretty maids, too," said John gallantly, as he took off his
cap and bowed. "When I look at Ilse I think she is the more beautiful,
