of a Mexican with a smoking rifle leaping to cover, and he, too, sprang
back into the shelter of the trees.

It was the first shot of the great Texan struggle for independence!

Ned felt all of its significance even then, and so did Obed.

"You saw him?" asked the Maine man.

"I did, and I felt the breath of his bullet on my face, but he gained
cover too quick for me to return his fire."

"The first shot was theirs and it was at you. It seems odd, Ned, that
you should have been used as a target for the opening of the war."

"I'm proud of the honor."

"So would I be in your place."

Others came, drawn by the shot.

"Was it a Mexican?" asked the Ring Tailed Panther eagerly. "Tell me it
was a Mexican and make me happy."

"You can be happy," said Obed. "It was a Mexican and he was shooting
with what the law would define as an intent to kill. He sent a rifle
bullet across the Guadalupe, aimed at our young friend, Edward Fulton.
Ned did not see the bullet, but his sensitiveness to touch showed that
it passed within an inch of his face."

Now the Ring Tailed Panther roared, but it was not between his shut
teeth.

"By the great horn spoon, I'm glad!" he said, "All the waitin' an'
backin' an' fillin' are over. We do our talkin' now with cannon an'
rifles."

But not another shot was fired that night. It was merely some scout or
skirmisher who had sent the fugitive bullet across the river, but it was
enough. The Mexican intentions were now evident.

Ned went off duty toward morning and slept a few hours in one of the
cabins. When he awoke he ate a hearty breakfast and went back to the
river. About half of the eighteen had taken naps, but they were all
gathered once more along the Guadalupe. Ned observed the Mexican camp
and saw some movement there. Presently all the soldiers rode out, with
Castenada at their head.

"They're comin' to our ford! By the great horn spoon, they are comin'!"
roared the Ring Tailed Panther.

It seemed that he was right as the Mexicans were approaching at a
gallop, making a gallant show, their lances glittering in the sun.

"Lay down, all!" said the Ring Tailed Panther. "The moment they strike
the water turn loose with your rifles an' roar an' scratch an' claw!"

But when they were within one hundred yards of the Guadalupe the
Mexicans suddenly sheered off. Evidently they did not like the looks of
the Texan rifles which they could plainly see. The defenders of the
fords uttered a derisive shout, and some of the Mexicans fired. But
their bullets fell short, only a single one of them coming as far as the
edge of the Guadalupe. The Texans did not reply. They would not waste
ammunition in any such foolish fashion.

The Mexicans stopped, when four or five hundred yards away, and began to
wave their lances and utter taunting shouts. The Texans only laughed,
all except the Ring Tailed Panther, who growled.

"You see, Ned," said Obed, "that one charge does not make a passage. It
appears to me that our friend Castenada does not want his uniform or
himself spoiled by our good Texas lead. Now, I take it, we can rest easy
awhile longer."

He lay down in the grass under the trees and Ned did likewise, but the
Ring Tailed Panther would not be consoled. An opportunity had been lost,
and he hurled strange and miscellaneous epithets at the distant
Mexicans. Standing upon a little hillock he called them more bad names
than Ned had ever before heard. He aspersed the character of their
ancestors even to the eighth generation and of their possible
descendants also to the eighth generation. He issued every kind of
challenge to any kind of combat, and at last, red and panting, descended
the hillock.

"Do you feel better?" asked Obed.

"I've whispered a few of my thoughts. Yes, I can re'lly say that the
state of my health is improvin'."

"Then sit down and rest. It's never too late to try, try again. Remember
that the day is long and the Mexicans may certainly have a chance."

The Ring Tailed Panther growled, but sat down.

In the afternoon the Mexicans again formed in line and trotted down
toward the other ford, but as before they did not like the look of the
Texan rifles and turned away, after shouting many challenges,
brandishing lances and firing random shots. But the Texans contented
themselves again with a grim silence, and the Mexicans rode back to
their camp. The disgust of the Ring Tailed Panther was so deep that he
could not utter a word. But Obed was glad.

"More men will come to-night," he said to Ned. "You know that requests
for help were sent in all directions by the people of Gonzales, and if I
know our Texans, and I think I do, they'll ride hard to be here.
Castenada, in a way, is besieging us now, but--well, the tables may be
turned and he'll turn with 'em."

Just at twilight a great shout arose from the women in the village.
There was a snorting of horses, a jingling of spurs and embroidered
bridle reins, and twenty lean, brown men, very tall and broad of
shoulder, rode up. They were the vanguard of the Texan help, and they
rejoiced when they found that the Mexican force was still on the west
side of the Guadalupe.

Their welcome was not noisy but deep. The eighteen were now the
thirty-eight, and to-morrow they would be a hundred or more. The twenty
had ridden more than a hundred miles, but they were fresh and zealous
for the combat. They went down to the river, and, in the darkness,
looked at the Mexican camp fires, while the Ring Tailed Panther roared
out his opinion.

"The Mexicans won't bring the fight to us," he said, "so we must carry
it to them. They've galloped down here twice an' they've looked at the
river an' they've looked at us, an' they've galloped back again. We
can't let 'em set over there besiegin' us, we must cross an' besiege
them an' get to roarin' an' rippin' an' clawin'."

"To-morrow," said Obed, "more of our friends will be here and when we
all get together we will discuss it and make a decision."

"Of course we'll discuss it!" roared the Ring Tailed Panther, "an' then
we'll come to a decision, an' there's only one decision that we can come
to. We'll cross the river an' mighty quick we'll make them Mexicans wish
they'd chose a camp a hundred miles from Gonzales."

The others laughed, but after all, the Ring Tailed Panther had stated
their position truly. Every man agreed with him. The watch at the river
that night was as vigilant as ever, and the next morning parties of
Texans arrived from different points, swelling their numbers to more
than one hundred and fifty men, fully equaling the company of Castenada,
after allowing for reinforcements received by the Mexican captain.

With one of the Texan troops came a quiet man of confident bearing,
dressed like the others in buckskin, but with more authority in his
manner. The Ring Tailed Panther greeted him with great warmth, shaking
his hand and saying:

"John! John! We're awful glad you've come 'cause there's to be a lot of
roarin' an' tearin' an' clawin' to be done."

The man smiled and replied in his quiet tones:

"We know it and that's why we've come. Now, I suggest that while we
leave ten men at each ford, we hold a meeting in the village. Everything
we have is at stake and as one Texan is as good as another we ought to
talk it over."

"Who is he?" asked Ned of Obed.

"That's John Moore. He's been a great Indian fighter and one of the
defenders of the frontier. I think it likely that he'll be our leader in
whatever we undertake. He's certainly the man for the place."

"Oyez! Oyez!" roared the Ring Tailed Panther with mouth wide open. "Come
all ye upon the common, an' hear the case of Texas against Mexico which
is now about to be debated. The gentlemen representin' the other side
are on the west shore of the river about a mile from here, an' after
decidin' upon our argyment an' the manner of it we'll communicate it to
'em later whether they like our decision or not."

They poured upon the common in a tumultuous throng, the women and
children forming a continuous fringe about them.

"I move that John Moore be made the Chairman of this here meetin' an'
the leader in whatever it decides to do, 'specially as we know already
what it's goin' to decide," roared the Ring Tailed Panther, "an'
wherever he leads we will follow."

Ned said nothing, but his pulses were leaping. Perhaps the silent boy
appreciated more than any other present that this was the beginning of
a great epic in the American story. The young student, his head filled
with completed dramas of the past, could look further into the future
than the veteran men of action around him.

The debate was short. In truth it was no debate at all, because all were
of one mind. Since the Mexicans had already fired upon them and would
not go away they would cross the river and attack Castenada. As Obed had
predicted, Moore was unanimously chosen leader, the title of Colonel
being bestowed upon him, and they set to work at once for the attack.

Ned and Obed walked together to the cluster of oaks in which the two had
spent so much time. Both were grave, appreciating fully the fact that
they were about to go into battle.

"Ned," said Obed, "you and I have been through a lot of dangers together
and we're not afraid to talk about dangers to come. In case anything
should happen to you is there any word you want sent anybody?"

"To nobody except Mr. Austin. He's been very good to me here and in
Mexico. I suppose I've got some relatives in Missouri, but they are so
distant I've forgotten who they are, and probably they never knew
anything about me. If it's the other way about, Obed, what word shall I
send?"

"Nothing to nobody. I had a stepfather in Maine, who didn't like me, and
my mother died five years after her second marriage. I'm a Texan, Ned,
same as if I were born on this soil, and my best friends are around me.
I'll live and die with 'em."

The two, the man and the boy, shook hands, but made no further display
of feeling. The force was organized in the village, beyond the sight of
the Mexicans, who were lounging in the grass, although they had posted
sentinels. Every Texan was well armed, carrying a rifle, pistol and
knife. Some had in addition the Indian tomahawk.

It was the first day of October and the coolness of late afternoon had
come. A fresh breeze was blowing from the southwest. The little command,
silent save for the hoof beats of their horses, rode down to the river.
The women and children looked after them and they, too, were silent. A
strange Indian stoicism possessed them all.

Ned and Obed were side by side. The breeze cooled the forehead and
cheeks of the boy, but his pulses beat hard and fast. He looked back at
Gonzales and he knew that he would never forget that little village of
little log cabins. Then he looked straight before him at the yellow
river, and the shore beyond, where the Mexican camp lay.

It was now seven o'clock and the twilight was coming.

"Isn't it late to make an attack?" he said to Obed.

"It depends on what happens. Circumstances alter battles. If we surprise
them there'll be time for a fine fight. If they discover our advance it
may be better to wait until morning."

They rode into the water twenty abreast, and made for the farther shore.
So many horses made much splashing, and Ned expected bullets, but none
came. Dripping, they reached the farther shore and went straight toward
the Mexican camp. Then came sudden shouts, the flash of rifles and the
singing of bullets. The Mexican sentinels had discovered the Texan
advance.

Moore ordered his men to halt, and then he held a short conference with
the leaders. It was very late, and they would postpone the attack until
morning. Hence, they tethered their horses in sight of the Mexican camp,
set many sentinels and deliberately began to cook their suppers.

It was all very strange and unreal to Ned. Having started for a battle
it was battle he wanted at once and the wait of a night rested heavily
upon his nerves.

"Take it easy, Ned," said Obed, who observed him. "Willful haste makes
woeful fight. Eat your supper and then you'd better lie down and sleep
if you can. I'd rather go on watch toward morning if I were you, because
if anything happens in the night it will happen late."

Ned considered it good advice and he lay down in his blankets, having
been notified that he would be called at one o'clock in the morning to
take his turn. Once more he exerted will to the utmost in the effort to
control nerves and body. He told himself that he was now surrounded by
friends, who would watch while he slept, and that he could not be
surprised. Slumber came sooner than he had hoped, but at the appointed
hour he was awakened and took his place among the sentinels.

Ned found the night cold and dark, but he shook off the chill by
vigorous walking to and fro. He discovered, however, that he could not
see any better by use, as the darkness was caused by mists rather than
clouds. Vapors were rising from the prairie, and objects, seen through
them, assumed thin and distorted shapes. He saw west of him and
immediately facing him flickering lights which he knew were those of the
Mexican camp. The heavy air seemed to act as a conductor of sound, and
he heard faintly voices and the tread of horses' hoofs. They were on
watch there, also.

He walked back and forth a long time, and the air continued to thicken.
A heavy fog was rising from the prairie, and it became so dense that he
could no longer see the fires in the Mexican camp. Everything there was
shut out from the eye, but he yet heard the faint noises.

It seemed to him toward four o'clock in the morning that the noises were
increasing, and curiosity took hold of him. But the sentinel on the left
and the sentinel on the right were now hidden by the fog, and, since he
could not confer with them at once, he resolved to see what this
increase of noise meant.

He cocked his rifle and stole forward over the prairie. He could not see
more than ten or fifteen yards ahead, but he went very near to the
Mexican camp, and then lay down in the grass. Now he saw the cause of
the swelling sounds. The Mexican force, gathering up its arms and
horses, was retreating.

Ned stole back to the camp with his news.

"You have done well, Ned, lad," said Moore. "I think it likely, however,
that they are merely withdrawing to a stronger position, but they can't
escape us. We'll follow 'em, and since they wanted that cannon so badly
we'll give 'em a taste of it."

The cannon, a six-pounder, had been brought over on the ferryboat in the
night and was now in the Texan camp.

"Ned," said Moore, "do you, Obed and the Panther ride after those
fellows and see what they do. Then come back and report."

It was a dangerous duty, but the three responded gladly. They advanced
cautiously through the fog and the Ring Tailed Panther roared softly.

"Runnin' away?" he said. "I'd be ashamed to come for a cannon an' then
to slink off with tail droopin' like a cowardly coyote. By the great
horn spoon, I hope they are merely seekin' a better position an' will
give us a fight. It would be a mean Mexican trick to run clean away."

"The Mexicans are not cowards," said Ned.

"Depends on how the notion strikes 'em," said the Panther. "Sometimes
they fight like all creation an' sometimes they hit it for the high
grass an' the tall timber. There's never any tellin' what they'll do."

"Hark!" said Obed, "don't you hear their tramp there to our left?"

The three stopped and listened, and they detected sounds which they knew
were made by the retreating force. But they could see nothing through
the heavy white fog which covered everything like a blanket of snow.

"Suppose we ride parallel with them," whispered Ned. "We can go by the
sounds and by the same means we can tell exactly what they do."

"A good idea," said Obed. "We are going over prairie which affords easy
riding. We've got nothing to fear unless some lamb strays from the
Mexican flock, and blunders upon us. Even then he's more likely to be
shorn than to shear."

They advanced for some time, guided by the hoofbeats from the Mexican
column. But before the sun could rise and dispel the fog the sound of
the hoofbeats ceased.

"They've stopped," whispered the Ring Tailed Panther, joyously. "After
all they're not goin' to run away an' they will give us a fight. They
are expectin' reinforcements of course, or they wouldn't make a stand."

"But we must see what kind of a position they have taken up," said Obed.
"Seeing is telling and you know that when we get back to Colonel Moore
we've got to tell everything, or we might as well have stayed behind."

"You're the real article, all wool an' a yard wide, Obed White," said
the Ring Tailed Panther. "Now I think we'd better hitch our horses here
to these bushes an' creep as close as we can without gettin' our heads
knocked off. They might hear the horses when they wouldn't hear us."

"Good idea," said Obed White. "Nothing risk, nothing see."

They tethered the horses to the low bushes, marking well the place, as
the heavy, white fog was exceedingly deceptive, distorting and
exaggerating when it did not hide. Then the three went forward, side by
side. Ned looked back when he had gone a half dozen yards, and already
the horses were looming pale and gigantic in the fog. Three or four
steps more and they were gone entirely.

But they heard the sounds again in front of them, although they were now
of a different character. They were confined in one place, which showed
that the Mexicans had not resumed their march, and the tread of horses'
hoofs was replaced by a metallic rattle. It occurred to Ned that the
Mexicans might be intrenching and he wondered what place of strength
they had found.

The boy had the keenest eyes of the three and presently he saw a dark,
lofty shape, showing faintly through the fog. It looked to him like an
iceberg clothed in mist, and he called the attention of his comrades to
it. They went a little nearer, and the Ring Tailed Panther laughed low
between his shut teeth.

"We'll have our fight," he said, "an' these Mexicans won't go back to
Cos as fine as they were when they started. The tall an' broad thing
that you see is a big mound on the prairie an' they're goin' to make a
stand on it. It ain't a bad place. A hundred Texans up there could beat
off a thousand Mexicans."

They went a little nearer and saw that a fringe of bushes surrounded the
base of the mound. Further up the Mexicans were digging in the soft
earth with their lances as best they could and throwing up a breastwork.
The horses had been tethered in the bushes. Evidently they felt sure
that they would be attacked by the Texans. They knew the nature of these
riders of the plains.

"I think we've seen enough," said Obed. "We'll go back now to Colonel
Moore and the men."

They found their horses undisturbed and were about to gallop back to the
main body with the news that the Mexicans were on the mound, when some
Mexican sentinels saw them and uttered a shout. The three exchanged
shots with them but knowing that a strong force would be upon them in an
instant returned to their original intention and went at full speed
toward the camp. It was lucky that the fog still held, as the pursuing
bullets went wide, but Ned heard more than one sing. The Mexicans showed
courage and followed the three until they reached the Texan camp. As Ned
and his comrades dismounted they shouted that the Mexicans were on a
hill not far away and were fortifying.

Moore promptly had his men run forward that bone of contention, the
cannon, and a solid shot was sent humming toward those who had pursued
the three. The heavy report came back in sullen echoes from the prairie,
and the stream of fire split the fog asunder. But in a moment the mists
and vapors closed in again, and the Mexicans were gone. Then the little
army stood for a few moments, motionless, but breathing heavily. The
cannon shot had made the hearts of everyone leap. They were inured to
Indian battle and every kind of danger, but this was a great war.

"Boys," said Moore, "we are here and the enemy is before us."

A deep shout from broad chests and powerful lungs came forth. Then by a
