all the titles; but the Romans made his name into Augustulus, or Little
Augustus. At the end of a year, a Teutonic chief named Odoacer crossed
the Alps at the head of a great mixture of different German tribes, and
Orestes could make no stand against him, but was taken and put to death.
His little boy was spared, and was placed at Sorrento; but Odoacer sent
the crown and robes of the West to Zeno, the Eastern Emperor, saying
that one Emperor was enough. So fell the Roman power in 476, exactly
twelve centuries after the date of the founding of Rome. It was thought
that this was meant by the twelve vultures seen by Romulus, and that the
seven which Remus saw denoted the seven centuries that the Republic
stood. It was curious, too, that it should be with the two names of
Romulus and Augustus that Rome and her empire fell.

Odoacer called himself king, and, indeed, the Western Empire had been
nearly all seized by different kings--the Vandal kings in Africa, the
Gothic kings in Spain and Southern Gaul, the Burgundian kings and Frank
kings in Northern Gaul, the Saxon kings in Britain. The Ostro or Eastern
Goths, who had since the time of Valens dwelt on the banks of the
Danube, had been subdued by Attila, but recovered their freedom after
his death. One of their young chiefs, named Theodoric, was sent as a
hostage to Constantinople, and there learned much. He became king of the
Eastern Goths in 470, and showed himself such a dangerous neighbor to
the Eastern Empire that, to be rid of him the Emperor Zeno advised him
to go and attack Odoacer in Italy. The Ostrogoths marched seven hundred
miles, and came over the Alps into the plains of Northern Italy, where
Odoacer fought with them bravely, but was beaten. They besieged him even
in Ravenna, till after three years he was obliged to surrender and was
put to death.

[Illustration: ROMULUS AUGUSTUS RESIGNS THE CROWN.]

Rome could make no defence, and fell into Theodoric's hands with the
rest of Italy; but he was by far the best of the conquerors--he did not
hurt or misuse them, and only wished his Goths to learn of them and
become peaceful farmers. He gave them the lands which had lost their
owners; about thirty or forty thousand families were settled there by
him on the waste lands, and the Romans who were left took courage and
worked too. He did not live at Rome, though he came thither and was
complimented by the Senate, and he set a sum by every year for repairing
the old buildings; but he chiefly lived at Verona, where he reigned over
both the Eastern and Western Goths in Gaul and Italy.

He was an Arian, but he did not persecute the Catholics, and to such
persons as changed their profession of faith to please him he showed no
more favor, saying that those who were not faithful to their God would
never be faithful to their earthly master. He reigned thirty-three
years, but did not end as well as he began, for he grew irritable and
distrustful with age; and the Romans, on the other hand, forgot that
they were not the free, prosperous nation of old, and displeased him.
Two of their very best men, Boethius and Symmachus, were by him kept for
a long time prisoners at Rome and then put to death. While Boethius was
in prison at Pavia, he wrote a book called _The Consolations of
Philosophy_, so beautiful that the English king Alfred translated it
into Saxon four centuries later. Theodoric kept up a correspondence with
the other Gothic kings wherever a tribe of his people dwelt, even as far
as Sweden and Denmark; but as even he could not write, and only had a
seal with the letters [Greek: THEOD] with which to make his signature,
the whole was conducted in Latin by Roman slaves on either side, who
interpreted to their masters. An immense number of letters from
Theodoric's secretary are preserved, and show what an able man his
master was, and how well he deserved his name of "The Great." He died in
526, leaving only two daughters. Their two sons, Amalric and Athalaric,
divided the Eastern and Western Goths between them again.

Seven Gothic kings reigned over Northern Italy after Theodoric. They
were fierce and restless, but had nothing like his strength and spirit,
and they chiefly lived in the more northern cities--Milan, Verona, and
Ravenna, leaving Rome to be a tributary city to them, where there still
remained the old names of Senate and Consuls, but the person who was
generally most looked up to and trusted was the Pope. All this time Rome
was leavening the nations who had conquered her. When they tried to
learn civilized ways, it was from her; they learned to speak her tongue,
never wrote but in Latin, and worshipped with Latin prayers and
services. Far above all, these conquerors learned Christianity from the
Romans. When everything else was ruined, the Bishop and clergy remained,
and became the chief counsellors and advisers of many of these kings.

[Illustration]

It was just at this time that there was living at Monte Casino, in the
South of Italy, St. Benedict, an Italian hermit, who was there joined by
a number of others who, like him, longed to pray for the sinful world
apart rather than fight and struggle with bad men. He formed them into a
great band of monks, all wearing a plain dark dress with a hood, and
following a strict rule of plain living, hard work, and prayers at seven
regular hours in the course of the day and night. His rule was called
the Benedictine, and houses of monks arose in many places, and were safe
shelters in these fierce times.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XLV.

BELISARIUS.

533-563.


The Teutonic nations soon lost their spirit when they had settled in the
luxurious Roman cities, and as they were as fierce as ever, their kings
tore one another to pieces. A very able Emperor, named Justinian, had
come to the throne in the East, and in his armies there had grown up a
Thracian who was one of the greatest and best generals the world has
ever seen. His name was Belisarius, and strange to say, both he and the
Emperor had married the daughters of two charioteers in the circus
races. The Empress was named Theodora, the general's wife Antonina, and
their acquaintance first made Belisarius known to Justinian, who, by his
means, ended by winning back great part of the Western Empire.

He began with Africa, where Genseric's grandson was reigning over the
Vandals, and paying so little heed to his defences that Belisarius
landed without any warning, and called all the multitudes of old Roman
inhabitants to join him, which they joyfully did. He defeated the
Vandals in battle, entered Carthage, and restored the power of the
empire. He brought away the golden candlestick and treasures of the
Temple, and the cross believed to be the true one, and carried them to
Constantinople, whence the Emperor sent them back to the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem.

Just as Belisarius had returned to Constantinople, a piteous entreaty
came to Justinian from Amalosontha, the daughter of Theodoric, who had
been made prisoner by Theodotus, the husband she had chosen. It seemed
to be opening a way for getting back Italy, and Justinian sent off
Belisarius; but before he had sailed, the poor Gothic queen had been
strangled in her bath. Belisarius, however, with 4500 horse and 3000
foot soldiers, landed in Sicily and soon conquered the whole island, all
the people rejoicing in his coming. He then crossed to Rhegium, and laid
siege to Naples. As usual, the inhabitants were his friends, and one of
them showed him the way to enter the city through an old aqueduct which
opened into an old woman's garden.

[Illustration: NAPLES.]

Theodotus was a coward as well as a murderer, and fled away, while a
brave warrior named Vitiges was proclaimed king by the Goths at Rome.
But with the broken walls and all the Roman citizens against him,
Vitiges thought it best not to try to hold out against Belisarius, and
retreated to Ravenna, while Rome welcomed the Eastern army as
deliverers. But Vitiges was collecting an army at Ravenna, and in three
months was besieging Rome again. Never had there been greater bravery
and patience than Vitiges showed outside the walls of Rome, and
Belisarius inside, during the summer of 536. There was a terrible famine
within; all kinds of strange food were used in scanty measure, and the
Romans were so impatient of suffering, that Belisarius was forced to
watch them day and night to prevent them betraying him to the enemy.
Indeed, while the siege lasted a whole year, nearly all the people of
Rome died of hunger and wretchedness; and the Goths, in the unhealthy
Campagna around, died of fevers and agues, until they, too, had all
perished except a small band, which Vitiges led back to Ravenna, whither
Belisarius followed him, besieged him, made him prisoner, and carried
him to Constantinople. Justinian gave him an estate where he could live
in peace.

[Illustration: CONSTANTINOPLE.]

The Moors in Africa revolted, and Belisarius next went to subdue them.
While he was there, the Goths in Italy began to recover from the blow he
had given them, and chose a brave young man named Totila to be their
king. In a very short time he had won back almost all Italy, for there
really were hardly any men left, and even Justinian had only two small
armies to dispose of, and those made up of Thracians and Isaurians from
the shores of the Black Sea. One of these was sent with Belisarius to
attack the Goths, but was not strong enough to do more than just hold
Totila in check, and Justinian would not even send him all the help
possible, because he dreaded the love the army bore to him. After four
years of fighting with Totila he was recalled, and a slave named Narces,
who had always lived in the women's apartment in the palace, was sent to
take the command. He was really able and skilled, and being better
supported, he gained a great victory near Rome, in which Totila was
killed, and another near Naples, which quite overcame the Ostrogoths, so
that they never became a power again. Italy was restored to the Empire,
and was governed by an officer from Constantinople, who lived at
Ravenna, and was called the Exarch.

Belisarius, in the meantime, was sent to fight with the king of Persia,
Chosroes, a very warlike prince, who had overrun Syria and carried off
many prisoners from Antioch. Belisarius gained victory after victory
over him, and had just driven him back over the rivers, when again came
a recall, and Narses was sent out to finish the war. Theodora, the
Empress, wanted to reign after her husband, and had heard that, on a
report coming to the army of his death, Belisarius had said that he
should give his vote for Justin, the right heir. So she worked on the
fears all Emperors had--that their troops might proclaim a successful
general as Emperor, and again Belisarius was ordered home, while Narses
was sent to finish what he had begun.

There was one more war for this great man when the wild Bulgarians
invaded Thrace, and though his soldiers were little better than timid
peasants, he drove them back and saved the country. But Justinian grew
more and more jealous of him, and, fancying untruly that he was in a
plot for placing Justin on the throne, caused him to be thrown into
prison, and sent him out from thence stripped of everything, and with
his eyes torn out. He found a little child to lead him to a church door,
where he used to sit with a wooden dish before him for alms. When it was
known who the blind beggar was, there was such an uproar among the
people that Justinian was obliged to give him back his palace and some
of his riches; but he did not live much longer.

Though Justinian behaved so unjustly and ungratefully to this great man
and faithful servant, he is noted for better things, namely, for making
the Church of St. Sophia, or the Holy Wisdom, which Constantine had
built at Constantinople, the most splendid of all buildings, and for
having the whole body of Roman laws thoroughly overlooked and put into
order. Many even of the old heathen laws were very good ones, but there
were others connected with idolatry that needed to be done away with;
and in the course of years so many laws and alterations had been made,
that it was the study of a lifetime even to know what they were, or how
to act on them. Justinian set his best lawyers to put them all in order,
so that it might be more easy to work by them. The Roman citizens in
Greece, Italy, and all the lands overrun by the Teutonic nations were
still judged by their own laws, so that this was a very useful work; and
it was so well done that the conquerors took them up in time, and the
Roman law was the great model studied everywhere by those who wished to
understand the rules of jurisprudence, that is, of law and justice. Thus
in another way Rome conquered her conquerors.

Justinian died in 563, and was succeeded by his nephew Justin, whose
wife Sophia behaved almost as ill to Narses as Theodora had done to
Belisarius, for while he was doing his best to defend Italy from the
savage tribes who were ready at any moment to come over the Alps, she
sent him a distaff, and ordered him back to his old slavery in the
palace.




CHAPTER XLVI.

POPE GREGORY THE GREAT.

563--800.


No sooner was Narses called home than another terrible nation of
Teutones, who had hitherto dwelt in the North, began to come over the
Alps. These were the Longbeards, or Lombards, as they were more commonly
called; fierce and still heathen. Their king, Alboin, had carried off
Rosamond, the daughter of Kunimund, king of the Gepids, another Teutonic
tribe. There was a most terrible war, in which Kunimund was killed and
all his tribe broken up and joined with the Lombards. With the two
united, Alboin invaded Italy and conquered all the North. Ravenna,
Verona, Milan, and all the large towns held out bravely against them,
but were taken at last, except Venice, which still owned the Emperor at
Constantinople. Alboin had kept the skull of Kunimund as a trophy, and
had had it set in gold for a drinking-cup, as his wild faith made him
believe that the reward of the brave in the other world would be to
drink mead from the skulls of their fallen enemies. In a drunken fit at
Verona, he sent for Rosamond and made her pledge him in this horrible
cup. She had always hated him, and this made her revenge her father's
death by stabbing him to the heart in the year 573. The Lombard power
did not, however, fall with him; his nephew succeeded him, and ruled
over the country we still call Lombardy. Rome was not taken by them, but
was still in name belonging to the Emperor, though he had little power
there, and the Senate governed it in name, with all the old magistrates.
The Praetor at the time the Lombards arrived was a man of one of the old
noble families, Anicius Gregorius, or, as we have learned to call him,
Gregory. He had always been a good and pious man, and while he took
great care to fulfil all the duties of his office, his mind was more and
more drawn away from the world, till at last he became a monk of St.
Benedict, gave all his vast wealth to build and endow monasteries and
hospitals, and lived himself in an hospital for beggars, nursing them,
studying the Holy Scriptures, and living only on pulse, which his mother
sent him every day in a silver dish--the only remnant of his
wealth--till one day, having nothing else to give a shipwrecked sailor
who asked alms, he bestowed it on him.

[Illustration: POPE GREGORY THE GREAT.]

He was made one of the seven deacons who were called Cardinal Deacons,
because they had charge of the poor of the principal parishes of
Rome; and it was when going about on some errand of kindness that he saw
the English slave children in the market, and planned the conversion of
their country; but the people would not let him leave Rome, and in 590,
the Senate, the clergy, and the people chose him Pope. It was just then
that a terrible pestilence fell on Rome, and he made the people form
seven great processions--of clergy, of monks, of nuns, of children, of
men, of wives, and of widows--all singing litanies to entreat that the
plague might be turned away. Then it was that he beheld an angel
standing on the tomb of Hadrian, and the plague ceased. Ever after, the
great old tomb has been called the Castle of St. Angelo.

[Illustration: THE POPE'S PULPIT.]

It was a troublous time, but Gregory was so much respected that he was
able to keep Rome orderly and safe, and to make peace between the
Emperor Maurice and the Lombards' king, Agilulf, who had an excellent
wife, Theodolinda. She was a great friend of the Pope, wrote a letter to
him, and did all she could to support him. The Eastern Empire was still
owned at Rome, but when there was an attempt to make out that the
Patriarch of Constantinople was superior to the Pope, Gregory upheld the
principle that no Patriarch had any right to be above the rest, nor to
be called Universal Bishop. Gregory was a very great man, and the
justice and wisdom of his management did much to make the Romans look to
their Pope as the head of affairs even after his death in 604.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF TOURS.]

The Greek Empire sent an officer to govern the extreme South of Italy,
which, like Rome and Venice, still owned the Emperor; but all the troops
that could be hired were soon wanted to fight with the Arabs, whose
false prophet Mahommed had taught them to spread religion with the
sword. There was no one capable of making head against the Lombards, and
the Popes only kept them off by treaties and good management; and at
last, in 741, Pope Gregory III. put himself under the protection of
Charles Martel, the great Frank captain who had beaten the Mahometans at
the battle of Tours. Charles Martel was rewarded by being made a Roman
senator, so was his son Pippin, who was also king of the Franks, and his
grandson Charles the Great, who had to come often to Italy to protect
Rome, and at last broke up the Lombard kingdom, was chosen Roman Emperor
as of old, and crowned by Pope Leo III. in the year 800. From that time
there was again the Western Empire, commonly called the Holy Roman
Empire, the Emperor, or Caesar--Kaisar, as the Germans still call
him--being generally also king of Germany and king of Lombardy. Rome was
all this time chiefly under the power of the Popes, who grew in course
of years to be more and more of princes, and at the same time to claim
more power over the Church, calling themselves Universal Bishops
contrary to the teaching of St. Gregory the Great. All this, however,
belongs to the history of Europe in modern times, and will be found in
the history of Germany, since there were many struggles between the
Popes and Emperors. For Rome has really had _two_ histories, and those
who visit Rome and study the wonderful buildings there may dwell on the
old or the new, the pagan or the Christian, as their minds lead them, or
else on that strange middle time when idolatry and Christianity were
struggling together.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Young Folks' History of Rome
by Charlotte Mary Yonge

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YOUNG FOLKS' HISTORY OF ROME ***

***** This file should be named 16667.txt or 16667.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/6/16667/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Graeme Mackreth and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


