
"Oh! is it!" he cried out. "I dreamed about it all night. I heard you
say something about gray changing into green, and I dreamed I was
standing in a place all filled with trembling little green leaves--and
there were birds on nests everywhere and they looked so soft and still.
I'll lie and think about it until you come back."

In five minutes Mary was with Dickon in their garden. The fox and the
crow were with him again and this time he had brought two tame
squirrels.

"I came over on the pony this mornin'," he said. "Eh! he is a good
little chap--Jump is! I brought these two in my pockets. This here one
he's called Nut an' this here other one's called Shell."

When he said "Nut" one squirrel leaped on to his right shoulder and when
he said "Shell" the other one leaped on to his left shoulder.

When they sat down on the grass with Captain curled at their feet, Soot
solemnly listening on a tree and Nut and Shell nosing about close to
them, it seemed to Mary that it would be scarcely bearable to leave such
delightfulness, but when she began to tell her story somehow the look in
Dickon's funny face gradually changed her mind. She could see he felt
sorrier for Colin than she did. He looked up at the sky and all about
him.

"Just listen to them birds--th' world seems full of 'em--all whistlin'
an' pipin'," he said. "Look at 'em dartin' about, an' hearken at 'em
callin' to each other. Come springtime seems like as if all th' world's
callin'. The leaves is uncurlin' so you can see 'em--an', my word, th'
nice smells there is about!" sniffing with his happy turned-up nose.
"An' that poor lad lyin' shut up an' seein' so little that he gets to
thinkin' o' things as sets him screamin'. Eh! my! we mun get him out
here--we mun get him watchin' an' listenin' an' sniffin' up th' air an'
get him just soaked through wi' sunshine. An' we munnot lose no time
about it."

When he was very much interested he often spoke quite broad Yorkshire
though at other times he tried to modify his dialect so that Mary could
better understand. But she loved his broad Yorkshire and had in fact
been trying to learn to speak it herself. So she spoke a little now.

"Aye, that we mun," she said (which meant "Yes, indeed, we must"). "I'll
tell thee what us'll do first," she proceeded, and Dickon grinned,
because when the little wench tried to twist her tongue into speaking
Yorkshire it amused him very much. "He's took a graidely fancy to thee.
He wants to see thee and he wants to see Soot an' Captain. When I go
back to the house to talk to him I'll ax him if tha' canna' come an' see
him to-morrow mornin'--an' bring tha' creatures wi' thee--an' then--in a
bit, when there's more leaves out, an' happen a bud or two, we'll get
him to come out an' tha' shall push him in his chair an' we'll bring him
here an' show him everything."

When she stopped she was quite proud of herself. She had never made a
long speech in Yorkshire before and she had remembered very well.

"Tha' mun talk a bit o' Yorkshire like that to Mester Colin," Dickon
chuckled. "Tha'll make him laugh an' there's nowt as good for ill folk
as laughin' is. Mother says she believes as half a hour's good laugh
every mornin' 'ud cure a chap as was makin' ready for typhus fever."

"I'm going to talk Yorkshire to him this very day," said Mary, chuckling
herself.

The garden had reached the time when every day and every night it seemed
as if Magicians were passing through it drawing loveliness out of the
earth and the boughs with wands. It was hard to go away and leave it
all, particularly as Nut had actually crept on to her dress and Shell
had scrambled down the trunk of the apple-tree they sat under and stayed
there looking at her with inquiring eyes. But she went back to the house
and when she sat down close to Colin's bed he began to sniff as Dickon
did though not in such an experienced way.

"You smell like flowers and--and fresh things," he cried out quite
joyously. "What is it you smell of? It's cool and warm and sweet all at
the same time."

"It's th' wind from th' moor," said Mary. "It comes o' sittin' on th'
grass under a tree wi' Dickon an' wi' Captain an' Soot an' Nut an'
Shell. It's th' springtime an' out o' doors an' sunshine as smells so
graidely."

She said it as broadly as she could, and you do not know how broadly
Yorkshire sounds until you have heard some one speak it. Colin began to
laugh.

"What are you doing?" he said. "I never heard you talk like that before.
How funny it sounds."

"I'm givin' thee a bit o' Yorkshire," answered Mary triumphantly. "I
canna' talk as graidely as Dickon an' Martha can but tha' sees I can
shape a bit. Doesn't tha' understand a bit o' Yorkshire when tha' hears
it? An' tha' a Yorkshire lad thysel' bred an' born! Eh! I wonder tha'rt
not ashamed o' thy face."

And then she began to laugh too and they both laughed until they could
not stop themselves and they laughed until the room echoed and Mrs.
Medlock opening the door to come in drew back into the corridor and
stood listening amazed.

"Well, upon my word!" she said, speaking rather broad Yorkshire herself
because there was no one to hear her and she was so astonished. "Whoever
heard th' like! Whoever on earth would ha' thought it!"

There was so much to talk about. It seemed as if Colin could never hear
enough of Dickon and Captain and Soot and Nut and Shell and the pony
whose name was Jump. Mary had run round into the wood with Dickon to see
Jump. He was a tiny little shaggy moor pony with thick locks hanging
over his eyes and with a pretty face and a nuzzling velvet nose. He was
rather thin with living on moor grass but he was as tough and wiry as if
the muscle in his little legs had been made of steel springs. He had
lifted his head and whinnied softly the moment he saw Dickon and he had
trotted up to him and put his head across his shoulder and then Dickon
had talked into his ear and Jump had talked back in odd little whinnies
and puffs and snorts. Dickon had made him give Mary his small front hoof
and kiss her on her cheek with his velvet muzzle.

"Does he really understand everything Dickon says?" Colin asked.

"It seems as if he does," answered Mary. "Dickon says anything will
understand if you're friends with it for sure, but you have to be
friends for sure."

Colin lay quiet a little while and his strange gray eyes seemed to be
staring at the wall, but Mary saw he was thinking.

"I wish I was friends with things," he said at last, "but I'm not. I
never had anything to be friends with, and I can't bear people."

"Can't you bear me?" asked Mary.

"Yes, I can," he answered. "It's very funny but I even like you."

"Ben Weatherstaff said I was like him," said Mary. "He said he'd warrant
we'd both got the same nasty tempers. I think you are like him too. We
are all three alike--you and I and Ben Weatherstaff. He said we were
neither of us much to look at and we were as sour as we looked. But I
don't feel as sour as I used to before I knew the robin and Dickon."

"Did you feel as if you hated people?"

"Yes," answered Mary without any affectation. "I should have detested
you if I had seen you before I saw the robin and Dickon."

Colin put out his thin hand and touched her.

"Mary," he said, "I wish I hadn't said what I did about sending Dickon
away. I hated you when you said he was like an angel and I laughed at
you but--but perhaps he is."

"Well, it was rather funny to say it," she admitted frankly, "because
his nose does turn up and he has a big mouth and his clothes have
patches all over them and he talks broad Yorkshire, but--but if an angel
did come to Yorkshire and live on the moor--if there was a Yorkshire
angel--I believe he'd understand the green things and know how to make
them grow and he would know how to talk to the wild creatures as Dickon
does and they'd know he was friends for sure."

"I shouldn't mind Dickon looking at me," said Colin; "I want to see
him."

"I'm glad you said that," answered Mary, "because--because--"

Quite suddenly it came into her mind that this was the minute to tell
him. Colin knew something new was coming.

"Because what?" he cried eagerly.

Mary was so anxious that she got up from her stool and came to him and
caught hold of both his hands.

"Can I trust you? I trusted Dickon because birds trusted him. Can I
trust you--for sure--_for sure_?" she implored.

Her face was so solemn that he almost whispered his answer.

"Yes--yes!"

"Well, Dickon will come to see you to-morrow morning, and he'll bring
his creatures with him."

"Oh! Oh!" Colin cried out in delight.

"But that's not all," Mary went on, almost pale with solemn excitement.
"The rest is better. There is a door into the garden. I found it. It is
under the ivy on the wall."

If he had been a strong healthy boy Colin would probably have shouted
"Hooray! Hooray! Hooray!" but he was weak and rather hysterical; his
eyes grew bigger and bigger and he gasped for breath.

"Oh! Mary!" he cried out with a half sob. "Shall I see it? Shall I get
into it? Shall I _live_ to get into it?" and he clutched her hands and
dragged her toward him.

"Of course you'll see it!" snapped Mary indignantly. "Of course you'll
live to get into it! Don't be silly!"

And she was so un-hysterical and natural and childish that she brought
him to his senses and he began to laugh at himself and a few minutes
afterward she was sitting on her stool again telling him not what she
imagined the secret garden to be like but what it really was, and
Colin's aches and tiredness were forgotten and he was listening
enraptured.

"It is just what you thought it would be," he said at last. "It sounds
just as if you had really seen it. You know I said that when you told me
first."

Mary hesitated about two minutes and then boldly spoke the truth.

"I had seen it--and I had been in," she said. "I found the key and got
in weeks ago. But I daren't tell you--I daren't because I was so afraid
I couldn't trust you--_for sure_!"




CHAPTER XIX

"IT HAS COME!"


Of course Dr. Craven had been sent for the morning after Colin had had
his tantrum. He was always sent for at once when such a thing occurred
and he always found, when he arrived, a white shaken boy lying on his
bed, sulky and still so hysterical that he was ready to break into fresh
sobbing at the least word. In fact, Dr. Craven dreaded and detested the
difficulties of these visits. On this occasion he was away from
Misselthwaite Manor until afternoon.

"How is he?" he asked Mrs. Medlock rather irritably when he arrived. "He
will break a blood-vessel in one of those fits some day. The boy is half
insane with hysteria and self-indulgence."

"Well, sir," answered Mrs. Medlock, "you'll scarcely believe your eyes
when you see him. That plain sour-faced child that's almost as bad as
himself has just bewitched him. How she's done it there's no telling.
The Lord knows she's nothing to look at and you scarcely ever hear her
speak, but she did what none of us dare do. She just flew at him like a
little cat last night, and stamped her feet and ordered him to stop
screaming, and somehow she startled him so that he actually did stop,
and this afternoon--well just come up and see, sir. It's past
crediting."

The scene which Dr. Craven beheld when he entered his patient's room was
indeed rather astonishing to him. As Mrs. Medlock opened the door he
heard laughing and chattering. Colin was on his sofa in his
dressing-gown and he was sitting up quite straight looking at a picture
in one of the garden books and talking to the plain child who at that
moment could scarcely be called plain at all because her face was so
glowing with enjoyment.

"Those long spires of blue ones--we'll have a lot of those," Colin was
announcing. "They're called Del-phin-iums."

"Dickon says they're larkspurs made big and grand," cried Mistress Mary.
"There are clumps there already."

Then they saw Dr. Craven and stopped. Mary became quite still and Colin
looked fretful.

"I am sorry to hear you were ill last night, my boy," Dr. Craven said a
trifle nervously. He was rather a nervous man.

"I'm better now--much better," Colin answered, rather like a Rajah.
"I'm going out in my chair in a day or two if it is fine. I want some
fresh air."

Dr. Craven sat down by him and felt his pulse and looked at him
curiously.

"It must be a very fine day," he said, "and you must be very careful not
to tire yourself."

"Fresh air won't tire me," said the young Rajah.

As there had been occasions when this same young gentleman had shrieked
aloud with rage and had insisted that fresh air would give him cold and
kill him, it is not to be wondered at that his doctor felt somewhat
startled.

"I thought you did not like fresh air," he said.

"I don't when I am by myself," replied the Rajah; "but my cousin is
going out with me."

"And the nurse, of course?" suggested Dr. Craven.

"No, I will not have the nurse," so magnificently that Mary could not
help remembering how the young native Prince had looked with his
diamonds and emeralds and pearls stuck all over him and the great rubies
on the small dark hand he had waved to command his servants to approach
with salaams and receive his orders.

"My cousin knows how to take care of me. I am always better when she is
with me. She made me better last night. A very strong boy I know will
push my carriage."

Dr. Craven felt rather alarmed. If this tiresome hysterical boy should
chance to get well he himself would lose all chance of inheriting
Misselthwaite; but he was not an unscrupulous man, though he was a weak
one, and he did not intend to let him run into actual danger.

"He must be a strong boy and a steady boy," he said. "And I must know
something about him. Who is he? What is his name?"

"It's Dickon," Mary spoke up suddenly. She felt somehow that everybody
who knew the moor must know Dickon. And she was right, too. She saw that
in a moment Dr. Craven's serious face relaxed into a relieved smile.

"Oh, Dickon," he said. "If it is Dickon you will be safe enough. He's as
strong as a moor pony, is Dickon."

"And he's trusty," said Mary. "He's th' trustiest lad i' Yorkshire." She
had been talking Yorkshire to Colin and she forgot herself.

"Did Dickon teach you that?" asked Dr. Craven, laughing outright.

"I'm learning it as if it was French," said Mary rather coldly. "It's
like a native dialect in India. Very clever people try to learn them. I
like it and so does Colin."

"Well, well," he said. "If it amuses you perhaps it won't do you any
harm. Did you take your bromide last night, Colin?"

"No," Colin answered. "I wouldn't take it at first and after Mary made
me quiet she talked me to sleep--in a low voice--about the spring
creeping into a garden."

