"And does you mind?" asked Diana.

"Yes, dear; 'cos when people are poor they can't get bread to eat, and
then they can't get nice clothes like you, little missy. You are a
very rich little gal; aint you, little dear?"

"My faver's awfu' rich," said Diana. "We used to live in a most
beaut'ful house, and we had a beaut'ful garding to play in. We had
animals there--lots and lots. Woman, is you fond of animals--mices and
that sort?"

"Love--I just adores 'em."

"Then you _is_ a nice sort," answered Diana. She left her place by
Orion and crept up close to the woman.

"May I sit on your lap?" she said.

Mother Rodesia made a place for her at once.

"Put your arm wound me, p'ease; I is still a teeny bit s'eepy."

"You lay your head against my breast, little love, and you'll go off
into a beautiful sleep, and I'll keep you nice and warm, for hot as
the days are, it's chilly in the mornin's."

"When my faver comes home I'll ask him to give you lots of money,
Mother 'Odesia," said Diana.

She closed her eyes as she spoke, and in another moment was once again
slumbering peacefully.

When little Diana next opened her eyes all was completely changed. She
was no longer in the funny cart with the straw. Her nightdress was
still on her, it is true, and there were neither shoes nor stockings
on her bare feet; but she and Orion found themselves in a dirty room
with a nasty smell. Both children looked at one another, and both felt
cold and frightened. The broad daylight was lighting up the room, and
Diana could perceive that there was scarcely any furniture in it. Her
bow was also gone, and her arrow no longer hung round her neck. She
clutched a firm hold of Orion's hand.

"Don't you be afeared, Orion," she said. "Don't you forget you is a
big giant. Don't you forget you has got your belt and your sword."

"But I haven't, that's just it," replied Orion. "Diana, I aren't a
giant, and I'm awfu' frightened."

"Where can us be?" said Diana. "What a keer room! But there's one good
comfort; there isn't no aunts anywheres 'bout."

"I can't remember nothing," said Orion. "Why aren't we in bed? It's
too early to get up. How have we got into this horrid little room?"

"I don't know more nor you," said Diana, "only I do know that we has
got to be bwave. Don't you forget, Orion, that mother gived you your
name, and that you is a giant, whether you likes it or not. Don't you
forget that, and I won't forget that I is Diana, and that mother gived
me my name too, and that I is the bwavest huntwess in all the world."

"But you haven't got a bow and arrow," said Orion.

Diana was silent for a moment.

"Anyhow," she said, with a little shake, "I isn't going to be
fwightened. Let's sit close together, and let's think."

"Why can't we open that door and go out?" said Orion. "Why should we
stay in this horrid room?"

"'Cos our foots is bare," said Diana.

"But don't let's mind that," said Orion; "let's go to the door and
open it, and let's run back to Rectory. I'd rather have Aunt Jane and
Miss Ramsay than this horrid room--and oh, Diana! my tumtum has got a
big hole in it again."

"And mine has too," answered Diana. "I could eat a whole loaf, that I
could."

"Hush!" whispered Orion; "somebody's coming. Oh, come close to me,
Diana!"

"Now, you isn't to be fwightened, little boy," said Diana. "I is near
you, and I isn't fwightened of nobody."

At that moment the door was flung open, and Mother Rodesia,
accompanied by a tall, dark man, with a scowling face, came in.

"Mornin', little dears," said Mother Rodesia. "Now I have got
something to say to you."

"P'ease, where's Wectory?" asked Diana.

"You are not going there just for the present, my dear. This man, Ben
is his name--you told me last night that you were fond of uncles--you
can call 'im Uncle Ben; he's very kind and very, very fond of
children."

"Oh, yes! I'm very fond of children," said the man. He spoke in a
gruff voice which seemed to come right from the bottom of his chest.

"And as you don't like aunts," continued Mother Rodesia, "I have
brought an uncle. You can call 'im Uncle Ben; and if you do just what
he says, why, you'll be as happy as the day is long."

"Look here," said the man; "you stop your talk, Rodesia. Before I
makes myself an uncle to these kids I must see what sort they are. You
stand up along here, little gal, and let me examine you."

Diana scrambled instantly to her feet and went straight up to the man.
She gave him a keen glance from her piercing black eyes.

"What wight has you to speak to me in that sort of style?" she said.
"You isn't my uncle, and I isn't going to have nothing to do with
you."

"There," said Mother Rodesia; "did I say one word too much for her?"

The man burst into a loud laugh.

"No, that you didn't," he said; "and aint you frightened of me,
missy?"

"Fwightened?" replied Diana; "that aren't me." She turned her back and
strode back to Orion.

"'Member you is a giant," she said, in a whisper; "and giants never is
fwightened."

The man laughed again.

"Well, they are a queer little pair," he said. "I tell you what it is,
Rodesia Lee; I'll give you a pund apiece for 'em. Come, now; not a
penny more."

Diana stared very hard indeed when these words were uttered. She had
not the faintest idea what a "pund apiece" meant. Mother Rodesia
seemed to consider.

"And you may think yourself in rare luck," continued the man; "for,
remember, if it is known--" Here he walked to the farthest end of the
room, and Mother Rodesia followed him.

"You had best close up the bargain and be quick about it," he said;
"for not one penny more will you drag out of me. I'll give you a gold
sov. for each of 'em, and that's as much as I can manage. They will
take a sight of training, and then there's the risk."

"Very well," said Mother Rodesia, "I suppose I had best do it; only
they are worth more. There's a fortune in that little gal, and
whenever you are tired of her, why, there's a rich father to fall back
on. I spect he would give a sight of money to have her back again.
Very well, we'll agree; only, if ever you do get a fortune out of that
child, Ben Holt, you might remember poor Rodesia Lee."

The man laughed and patted Mother Rodesia on her shoulder. Then the
pair left the room, locking the door behind them.

"What does it all mean?" said Orion.

"I don't know," said Diana; "but I aren't fwightened; that aren't me."
Her little voice shook as she spoke, and she had great difficulty in
keeping the tears back from her big, black eyes.




CHAPTER XVII.

GREASED LIGHTNING.


At the end of half an hour the door of the small room was again
unlocked, and a woman with a thin, pale face, and somewhat frightened
manner, appeared. She carried a tray in her hand, which contained two
little bowls of porridge, and a small jug of milk. "So you are the two
young 'uns," she said. "Well, you had best be quick and eat up your
breakfast. Uncle Ben is going to have a rehearsal, and he wants you to
see what they are all doing."

"We hasn't got no Uncle Ben," said Diana; "don't be silly, woman.
What's your name?" she added.

"I'm generally called Aunt Sarah," was the reply; "and now, look here,
you two little mites; I'll be good to you if you'll let me. I'm real
sorry you has come, and it's against my wish, you remember that. Now,
eat up your breakfasts, both of you. Uncle Ben, he don't know that I
have brought you porridge and milk; but children as young as you are
can't eat coarse food. Sup up your porridge, my dears."

"Thank you very much indeed, Aunt Sawah," said Diana, slipping down
from her seat close to Orion on the bench, and preparing to attack her
breakfast. "P'w'aps," she continued, as she put great mouthfuls of
porridge into her mouth, "when we has finished this nice bekfus you'll
take us back to Wectory? You see, you isn't our aunt weally, not by no
manner of wights, and Uncle Ben isn't our uncle, and so we ought not
to stay here; and if we go back to Wectory, why, Uncle William, what's
our weal uncle, p'w'aps he would pay you money, if it's money you
wants."

"Yes; it's true enough, it is money we want," replied the woman; "but,
my dear," she added, the tears springing to her eyes, "I can't take
you back to no Rectory. You have just got to stay here and to watch
Uncle Ben when he's going through his rehearsal, and then this
afternoon we are going on a very long journey, and you are coming with
us--and oh, I forgot to say that, when you have finished your
breakfast, I must put something on your faces."

"Something on our faces?" said Diana.

"Yes, my little love; it has to be done. But when we get to another
part of the country I'll wash the ugly stuff off again, and you'll
look as fair and pretty as you do now. It won't make much difference
after all to you, little missy," she added, gazing fixedly at Diana,
"'cos you are very dark by nature. Yes, I had a little kid of my own,
a little gal, and she wasn't unlike you--no, not by no means. I'll be
kind to you for her pretty sake, my little dear. Now, eat your
breakfast, and be quick, the pair of you."

"Has your little girl what was like me got deaded?" asked Diana, in a
very thoughtful and earnest voice.

"She is dead, my dear. Yes, yes, she is dead," replied the woman. "Eat
up your breakfast now; I have no time to answer questions."

Orion did not need a second bidding; he had already plunged his spoon
into the porridge, and soon his little bowl was empty, and also the
jug of milk. Diana also finished her breakfast, but more thoughtfully.
She was a wonderfully wise little girl for her tender years, and at
the present moment she was dreadfully puzzled to know what to do. She
was quite shrewd enough to guess that Mother Rodesia was a bad sort of
woman, and that she, Diana, had done wrong ever to trust herself to
her. Uncle Ben, too, in spite of her brave words, terrified her more
or less. All things considered, therefore, she would not have been at
all sorry to find herself back again at the Rectory, with Miss Ramsay
to teach her, and Aunt Jane hovering in the background. "Isn't it
funny, we has got our nightdwesses on?" she said suddenly. "Woman,
it's not pwoper to have our bekfus in our nightdwesses; and these are
such keer nightdwesses, not at all what they ought to be. Our mother
would not like us to be dwessed in this sort of style. Can you get our
day dwesses, p'ease, for us to put on, Aunt Sawah?"

"No; I can't get the dresses you wore yesterday," replied Aunt Sarah;
"but for all that you shall wear a very pretty little frock. I have
got a blue one for you with white wings. What do you say to that?"

"B'ue, with white wings?" echoed Diana. "It sounds pwetty; but I must
have a b'ack bow, p'ease, woman, 'cos our mother has gone away to the
angels, you underland; and when mothers go to the angels little girls
wear b'ack bows--at least, that's what Iris says. Oh, I say, Orion,"
suddenly concluded Diana; "what is we to do without Iris? She is our
little mother now. You underland what I mean; doesn't you, Orion?"

The only answer Orion made was to fling himself flat down on the floor
and begin to howl with all his might.

"You had best not do that, young sir," said Aunt Sarah, "for if Uncle
Ben hears he'll be awful angry. He is a terrible man when he's
angered. It's only right I should tell you the solemn truth, you poor
little kids."

"We isn't kids; we is sildrens," said Diana.

"Well, you poor little children, then. Now, young master, if you'll
take my advice, you'll do exactly what I tell you. I'm going to be a
friend to you and to your little sister. I'll give you, by hook or by
crook, the very best food I can get, and the prettiest dresses to
wear, and I'll see that my husband, Ben Holt, aint rough to you, and
I'll see, also, that Molly and Kitty and Susan, the circus girls, are
kind to you, and that Tom, the clown, behaves as he ought; but I can
do nothing if you won't obey me. And if you begin by angering Uncle
Ben, why, it'll be all up with you, my little dears."

"I don't know what you mean by all up," answered Diana, her eyes
sparkling brightly; "and what's more, I don't care. But I'd like to
know if you has a weal live clown about, 'cos I like clowns and I love
pant'mimes. I went to a pant'mime 'fore mother was took to the
angels."

"Our show is something like a pantomime, and yet it's different,"
replied Aunt Sarah. "Now then, missy, stop talking, for we has no time
to waste. Come over here and let me put this nice stuff on your face.
It won't hurt you one little bit--it's just to make you look a little
browner than you do now, you and little master. Now, come along here,
and let me do it at once. Afterwards, I'll dress you in real pretty
things. You, little missy, shall wear some of my own child's
clothes--the little Rachel what died. My heart broke when she died,
missy, and if I didn't mean to be real kind to you I wouldn't put her
pretty little dress on you, that I wouldn't."

Orion stepped back in some alarm when he saw the woman stirring
something very brown and ugly in a tin can.

"I don't want that horrid stuff on my face," he said.

"But you must have it, master; if you don't, Uncle Ben will use you
dreadful," said the woman. "Now, missy, tell your little brother to be
guided by me. If he don't do what I tell 'im he'll suffer, and I won't
be able to help either of you."

"Don't be silly, Orion," said Diana. "What do a little bwown stuff
matter? And Aunt Sawah's wather a nice sort of woman. I'll do what you
wish, Aunt Sawah." She came up as she spoke, pushed her black, tangled
hair away from her charming little face, and allowed Aunt Sarah to
cover it with the walnut juice. "It's sort of sticky, and it don't
smell nice," said the little girl; "but I spects you can't help it. I
spects you is kind about your heart; isn't you?"

"Yes, my little dear; I try to be," said the woman. "Now, call your
brother over, and let me dye his face and neck and little hands."

"Come 'long, Orion," said Diana; "don't be silly."

"You do look so ugly, Diana," answered Orion.

"Well, what do it matter?" said Diana. "I has to p'ease Aunt Sawah;
she's a nice sort of a woman. I wather like her."

Orion, who had always submitted to Diana, submitted again now as a
