minutes, though not till several had fallen on both sides. The captain
seemed to have been too busy with his manoeuvre to escape to attend to
present conditions.

While the commander of the St. Regis remained on the deck, or even on
the top-gallant forecastle, the clang of his own engine prevented him
from hearing any other sounds; and the enemy appeared not to have seen
the ship till she emerged from the fog. The crew of the prize, as she
was by this time, were all driven below, and the victory was complete.

"Do you surrender?" demanded Mr. Baskirk of the officer who appeared to
be the captain.

"There appears to be no alternative," replied the commander very
gloomily: and he did not attempt to explain how his misfortune had come
upon him. He had counted upon the fog to insure his salvation; but it
appeared to have been the primary cause of his capture, though he
certainly had not been as vigilant as a commander should be. Christy
came on board, and Mr. Baskirk introduced him.

"I am glad to see you, Captain Passford," said the commander as a matter
of form. "I was absolutely sure that you would chase me to the westward,
sir; and I had not the slightest expectation of encountering you on this
course."

"I took my chances of finding you in this direction rather than in the
opposite one," replied Christy. "It appears that I correctly interpreted
your strategy, though I dared not even mention my plan to my executive
officer."

"I have fallen into my own trap, and being captured as I was, is
disgraceful to me," added Captain Winnlock, as his name proved to be;
and the steamer was the Watauga.

Christy's opinion of the capture did not differ from that of the
commander of the prize, but he made no remark upon it. The Watauga was
loaded with cotton, which was to be sent to England from Nassau, while
the steamer was to go on a cruise in search of defenceless merchantmen
of the United States.

"I have a passenger on board, Captain Passford, who bears the same name
that you do, and possibly he may be one of your relatives, though he is
by no means a Federalist," said Captain Winnlock.

"Indeed! May I ask his name?" replied Christy very much surprised.

"Colonel Homer Passford, sir."

"My uncle again!"

Mr. French, the master, had already been appointed prize-master; and
while Mr. Baskirk was making the arrangements for her departure for New
York, Christy accompanied the captain to the cabin. Colonel Passford had
learned the fate of the Watauga; and he sat at a table, his face covered
with both hands.

"I have brought down to see you, Colonel Passford, your nephew," said
the commander; and his uncle sprang to his feet, and gazed at his
brother's son as though he had been a spectre.

"Christy!" he exclaimed; but he could say no more, and groaned in his
anguish.

"He is a lieutenant-commander now, and captain of the steamer St. Regis,
formerly the Tallahatchie. The Watauga is now unfortunately the prize of
his ship," added Captain Winnlock, as he retired from the cabin.

"Captured again by my nephew," groaned the unhappy colonel. "I believe
you are the emissary of the Evil One, sent to torment me."

"I am sent by the opposite Power, Uncle Homer," replied Christy very
gently. "But I am more astonished to see you here than you ought to be
to see me, for I go wherever the fortunes of war carry me."

"I was still trying to serve my country in her misfortunes. I raised
another cargo of cotton among my friends, and it is now on board of this
vessel. It has fallen into your hands, where most of my cotton has
gone."

The victorious commander inquired for his aunt and cousins in the South,
and informed him that his mother and sister were very well. He added
that he should be obliged to send him to New York in the prize, and
insured him a brotherly welcome at Bonnydale. He parted with his uncle
pitying him very much; but he had chosen for himself which side he would
take in the great conflict.

The Watauga had a crew of sixty men, who were to be re-enforced at
Nassau, and a large prize-crew had to be sent with her; but French
returned with his force in three weeks, and the St. Regis was again
fully manned. Christy received a letter from the flag-officer, who
commended him very highly for the service he had rendered; and the St.
Regis was continued on her present station through the remainder of the
summer, and during the winter on the outer limit of the blockaders.

She made several captures, though all of them without any fighting, for
no more Confederate men-of-war, actually or intended as such, came out
of Wilmington, or attempted to enter the Cape Fear; but he sent a large
number of blockade-runners, loaded with cotton coming out, or with
supplies for the Confederate armies going in, to New York.

One day in August a large steamer was reported to the commander of the
St. Regis as coming from the South. Christy was all ready for a battle
if she proved to be a Confederate cruiser; but to his great joy she
turned out to be the Bellevite. The ocean was as smooth as glass, and
she came alongside the St. Regis. The young commander hastened on board
of her, followed by his chief engineer.

Captain Breaker actually hugged him amid the repeated cheers and
applause of the ship's company, and Paul Vapoor was received with hardly
less enthusiasm. Christy had to shake hands for the next half-hour.

"But how do you and the Bellevite happen to be in this latitude, Captain
Breaker?" asked the young commander when he had an opportunity to speak.

"Haven't you heard the news, Captain Passford?" demanded the captain of
the Bellevite.

"What news? We don't get the news so far off shore," replied Christy.

"There was no farther use for my ship in the Gulf, and I am sent here
to report to the flag-officer. Admiral Farragut turned his attention to
Mobile Bay with his fleet; and I gave him the information you procured
for me. The Bellevite took part in the battle, and it was the hottest
action in which I was ever engaged. My ship was badly cut up in her
upper works, but she came out all right."

"This is glorious news, Captain Breaker!" exclaimed Christy, waving his
hat, whereupon the tars in the waist broke out in a volley of cheers.

"The carpenters have been busy since the action, and the Bellevite is as
good as new," added her commander, as he proceeded to tell the story of
the great battle, to which Christy and Paul listened with breathless
interest. "Fort Morgan and Fort Gaines surrendered, and the bay is open
to our ships."

The narrative has gone into history, and it is not necessary to repeat
it. The Bellevite reported to the flag officer; and as her great speed
fitted her for duty like that in which the St. Regis was engaged, she
was employed as a cruiser till the end of the war, though she and
Christy's ship took part in the bombardment and capture of Fort Fisher
in January. The end was rapidly approaching. The Bellevite continued to
cruise until the end of the war, announced to the world by the surrender
of General Lee.

Among the steamers ordered up the James River were the Bellevite and
the St. Regis, and the sailors of both were among those who put out the
fire which threatened to consume the city of Richmond. Christy saw the
President there, and was presented to him, which he will remember as
long as he lives. In due time the St. Regis was ordered to the navy yard
at New York. As early as possible he hastened to Bonnydale, where all
the family and Bertha Pembroke were waiting for him. It was a sort of
united embrace which welcomed him; and all the day and half the night
were given to the narrative of the young commander's adventures. They
were all supremely happy.

Peace had come, and the whole North was ringing with the rejoicings of
the people. Thousands upon thousands had laid down their lives in the
army and the navy in their devotion to their country, and were laid in
graves far from home and kindred, or committed to the silent depths of
the ocean.

They had won Peace and A Victorious Union.

It was far otherwise in the South, though Peace spread her mantle over
the whole united nation. Her people had fought valiantly, and made
sacrifices which no one beyond their borders can understand or
appreciate. If the devotion and self-sacrifice of the South, the bravery
and determination with which her sons fought, and the heroism with which
they suffered and died, were the only considerations, they deserved
success. But thirty years of peace have made the South more prosperous
than ever before, and her people enjoy the benefits of the Victorious
Union.

  [Illustration: "Amid the cheers and applause of the ship's company."
  Page 356.]

Homer Passford, like thousands of others in the South, was a ruined man
at the close of the war. He had lost his plantation, and he and his
family had nowhere to lay their heads. But he was a true Southerner,
and he did not regret or repent of what he had done for what he called
his country. His brother chartered a steamer to bring the family to
Bonnydale, but only for a friendly visit. The reunion was a happy one;
and neither brother was disposed to talk politics, and those of the
North did not indulge in a single "I told you so!" in the presence of
their defeated relatives. They were the same as they had been before the
war; and it is needless to say that Horatio generously helped out Homer
financially; and now he is as wealthy and prosperous as ever before.

When it came to disposing of the vessels that were no longer needed for
the navy, Christy bought the St. Regis, for in a moderate way compared
with his father he was a rich man. On the day he was twenty-one years
old, Bertha Pembroke became his wife; and Paul Vapoor became the husband
of Florry Passford on the same occasion. Over a year had elapsed since
the war, and the St. Regis had been entirely reconstructed in her
interior, and furnished in the most elegant manner.

Her first mission was a voyage to Mobile to bring the family of Uncle
Homer to the wedding. It was the grandest occasion that had ever been
known in the region of Bonnydale. The young couple were to spend the
summer on their bridal trip on board of the elegant steam-yacht,
visiting various ports of Europe.

In the multitude who came to Bonnydale to assist at the marriage of the
young hero was Monsieur Gilfleur, who was received with distinguished
consideration by all the family, including the bride elect; and it can
be safely asserted that he was one of the happiest of the guests who
rejoiced in the felicity of the ex-lieutenant-commander, for he had
resigned his commission at the close of the war. This was not the first
time they had met since their memorable campaigns in Bermuda and Nassau;
for the detective had spent a fortnight at Bonnydale with his young
friend, during which they had told the stories of their experience in
secret service. They are fast friends for life.

Captain Passford, senior, presented to his son an elegant house, built
and magnificently furnished while Christy and his wife were voyaging in
European waters. It is on the Bonnydale estate: and the grandfather of
two boys and a girl does not have to go far to visit the family, for he
is nearly eighty years old. Christy is somewhat grizzled with iron gray
hair and whiskers; but he is still the same as when he was a young
officer, and still as devoted as ever to the country he helped to make
A Victorious Union.




OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

Sold in Sets or Separate Volumes. Each Set in a Neat Box
with Illuminated Labels.


ARMY AND NAVY STORIES.

A Library for Young and Old, in six volumes. 16mo. Illustrated.
    Per volume    $1.50

  The Soldier Boy.
  The Sailor Boy.
  The Young Lieutenant.
  The Yankee Middy.
  Fighting Joe.
  Brave Old Salt.


FAMOUS "BOAT-CLUB" SERIES.

A Library for Young People. Handsomely illustrated. Six volumes,
    in neat box. Per volume    1.25

  The Boat Club; or, The Bunkers of Rippleton.
  All Aboard; or, Life on the Lake.
  Now or Never; or, The Adventures of Bobby Bright.
  Try Again; or, the Trials and Triumphs of Harry West.
  Poor and Proud; or, The Fortunes of Katy Redburn.
  Little by Little; or, The Cruise of the Flyaway.


THE LAKE-SHORE SERIES.

Six volumes. Illustrated. In neat box. Per volume    1.25

  Through by Daylight; or, The Young Engineer of the Lake Shore
       Railroad.
  Lightning Express; or, The Rival Academies.
  On Time; or, The Young Captain of the Ucayga Steamer.
  Switch Off; or, The War of the-Students.
  Break Up; or, The Young Peacemakers.
  Bear and Forbear; or, The Young Skipper of Lake Ucayga.


THE SOLDIER-BOY SERIES.

Three volumes, in neat box. Illustrated. Per volume    1.50

  The Soldier Boy; or, Tom Somers in the Army.
  The Young Lieutenant; or, The Adventures of an Army Officer.
  Fighting Joe; or, The Fortunes of a Staff Officer.


_LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON._


_OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS_


THE SAILOR-BOY SERIES.

Three volumes, in neat box. Illustrated. Per volume    $1.50

  The Sailor Boy; or, Jack Somers in the Navy.
  The Yankee Middy; or, Adventures of a Naval Officer.
  Brave Old Salt; or, Life on the Quarter-Deck.


THE STARRY-FLAG SERIES.

Six volumes. Illustrated. Per volume    1.25

  The Starry Flag; or, The Young Fisherman of Cape Ann.
  Breaking Away; or, The Fortunes of a Student.
  Seek and Find; or, The Adventures of a Smart Boy.
  Freaks of Fortune; or, Half Round the World.
  Make or Break; or, The Rich Man's Daughter.
  Down the River; or, Buck Bradford and the Tyrants.


THE WAY OF THE WORLD.

By William T. Adams (Oliver Optic) 12mo    1.50


WOODVILLE STORIES.

Uniform with "Library for Young People." Six volumes. Illustrated.
    16mo. Per volume    1.25

  Rich and Humble; or, The Mission of Bertha Grant.
  In School and Out; or, The Conquest of Richard Grant.
  Watch and Wait; or, The Young Fugitives.
  Work and Win; or, Noddy Newman on a Cruise.
  Hope and Have; or, Fanny Grant among the Indians.
  Haste and Waste; or, The Young Pilot of Lake Champlain.


YACHT-CLUB SERIES.

Uniform with the ever popular "Boat-Club" Series. Completed in
    six volumes. Illustrated. 16mo. Per volume    1.50

  Little Bobtail; or, The Wreck of the Penobscot.
  The Yacht Club; or, The Young Boat-Builders.
  Money-Maker; or, The Victory of the Basilisk.
  The Coming Wave; or, The Treasure of High Rock.
  The Dorcas Club; or, Our Girls Afloat.
  Ocean Born; or, The Cruise of the Clubs.


_LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON._


_OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS._


THE HOUSEHOLD LIBRARY.

Three volumes. Illustrated. Per volume    $1.50

  Living Too Fast.
  In Doors and Out.
  The Way of the World.


THE ONWARD AND UPWARD SERIES.

Complete in six volumes. Illustrated. In neat box. Per volume    1.25

  Field and Forest; or, The Fortunes of a Farmer.
  Plane and Plank; or, The Mishaps of a Mechanic.
  Desk and Debit; or, The Catastrophes of a Clerk.
  Cringle and Cross-Tree; or, The Sea Swashes of a Sailor.
  Bivouac and Battle; or, The Struggles of a Soldier.
  Sea and Shore; or, The Tramps of a Traveller.


YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD SERIES.

A library of Travel and Adventure in Foreign Lands.
    Illustrated by Nast, Stevens, Perkins, and others.
    Per volume. 16mo    1.50

FIRST SERIES.

  Outward Bound; or, Young America Afloat.
  Shamrock and Thistle; or, Young America in Ireland and Scotland.
  Red Cross; or, Young America in England and Wales.
  Dikes and Ditches; or, Young America in Holland and Belgium.
  Palace and Cottage; or, Young America in France and Switzerland.
  Down the Rhine; or, Young America in Germany.

SECOND SERIES.

  Up the Baltic; or, Young America in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark.
  Northern Lands; or, Young America in Russia and Prussia.
  Cross and Crescent, or, Young America in Turkey and Greece.
  Sunny Shores; or, Young America in Italy and Austria.
  Vine and Olive: or, Young America in Spain and Portugal.
  Isles of the Sea; or, Young America Homeward Bound.


_LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON._


_OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS._


RIVERDALE STORIES.

Twelve volumes. A new edition. Profusely illustrated from new designs
    by Billings. Illuminated covers. Per set    $2.00

Same. Cloth (in neat box). Per set    3.60

  Little Merchant.
  Young Voyagers.
  Robinsoe Crusoe, jun.
  Dolly and I.
  Uncle Ben.
  Birthday Party.
  Proud and Lazy.
  Careless Kate.
  Christmas Gift.
  The Picnic Party.
  The Gold Thimble.
  The Do-Somethings.

RIVERDALE STORY BOOKS.

Six volumes, in neat box. Cloth. Per volume    .30

  Little Merchant.
  Young Voyagers.
  Dolly and I.
  Proud and Lazy.
  Careless Kate.
  Robinson Crusoe, jun.

