      And lived in a cellar damp,
    I had not a friend or a toy,
      But I had Aladdin's lamp;
    When I could not sleep for cold,
      I had fire enough in my brain,
    And builded with roofs of gold
      My beautiful castles in Spain!

    Since then I have toiled day and night,
      I have money and power good store,
    But I'd give all my lamps of silver bright
      For the one that is mine no more;
    Take, Fortune, whatever you choose,
      You gave, and may snatch again;
    I have nothing 'twould pain me to lose,
      For I own no more castles in Spain!

Lowell




DRAKE'S VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD


Francis Drake was born near Tavistock in the year 1545. He served his
time as an apprentice in a Channel coaster, and his master, who had been
struck with his character, left the vessel to him in his will when he
died. He was then twenty-one. His kinsman, John Hawkins, was fitting out
his third expedition to the Spanish Main, and young Drake, with a party
of his Kentish friends, went to Plymouth and joined him. In 1572 "he
made himself whole with the Spaniards" by seizing a convoy of bullion at
Panama, and on that occasion, having seen the South Pacific from the
mountains, "he fell on his knees and prayed God that he might one day
navigate those waters," which no English keel as yet had furrowed.

The time and the opportunity had come. He was now in the prime of his
strength, thirty-two years old, of middle height, with crisp brown hair,
a broad high forehead; gray, steady eyes, unusually long; small ears
tight to the head; the mouth and chin slightly concealed by the
moustache and beard, but hard, inflexible, and fierce. His dress, as he
appears in his portrait, is a loose, dark, seaman's shirt, belted at the
waist. About his neck is a plaited cord with a ring attached to it, in
which, as if the attitude was familiar, one of his fingers is slung,
displaying a small, delicate, but long and sinewy hand. When at sea he
wore a scarlet cap with a gold band, and was exacting in the respect
with which he required to be treated by his crew.

Such was Francis Drake when he stood on the deck of the Pelican in
Plymouth harbour, in November, 1577. The squadron, with which he was
preparing to sail into a chartless ocean and invade the dominions of the
King of Spain, consisted of his own ship, of a hundred and twenty tons,
the size of the smallest class of our modern Channel schooners, two
barques of fifty and thirty tons each, a second ship as it was called,
the Elizabeth, of eighty tons, not larger than a common revenue cutter,
and a pinnace, hardly more than a boat, intended to be burnt if it
could not bear the seas. These vessels, with a hundred and sixty-four
men, composed the force. The object of the expedition was kept as far as
possible secret. On the fifteenth of November the expedition sailed from
Plymouth Sound. The vessels struck across the Atlantic and made the
coast of South America on the fifth of April in latitude thirty-three
degrees South.

The perils of the voyage were now about to commence. No Englishman had
as yet passed Magellan's Strait. Cape Horn was unknown. Tierra del Fuego
was supposed to be part of a solid continent which stretched unbroken to
the Antarctic pole. A single narrow channel was the only access to the
Pacific then believed to exist. There were no charts, no records of past
experiences. It was known that Magellan had gone through, but that was
all. It was the wildest and coldest season of the year, and the vessels
in which the attempt was to be made were mere cockle-shells. They were
taken on shore, overhauled and scoured, the rigging looked to, and the
sails new bent.

On the seventeenth of August, answering to the February of the northern
hemisphere, all was once more in order. Drake sailed from Port St.
Julian, and on the twentieth entered the Strait and felt his way between
the walls of mountain "in extreme cold with frost and cold continually."
To relieve the crews, who were tried by continual boat work and heaving
the lead in front of the ships, they were allowed occasional halts at
the islands, where they amused and provisioned themselves with killing
infinite seals and penguins. Everything which they saw, birds, beasts,
trees, climate, country, were strange, wild, and wonderful. After three
weeks' toil and anxiety, they had accomplished the passage and found
themselves in the open Pacific. But they found also that it was no
peaceful ocean into which they had entered, but the stormiest they had
ever encountered. Their vessels were now reduced to three; the pinnace
had been left behind at Port St. Julian, and there remained only the
Pelican, the Elizabeth, and the thirty-ton cutter. Instantly that they
emerged out of the Strait, they were caught in a gale which swept them
six hundred miles to the south-west. For six weeks they were battered to
and fro, in bitter cold and winds which seemed as if they blew in these
latitudes for ever. The cutter went down in the fearful seas, carrying
her crew with her. The Elizabeth and the Pelican were separated. The
bravest sailor might well have been daunted at such a commencement, and
Winter, recovering the opening again and, believing Drake to be lost,
called a council in his cabin and proposed to return to England. They
had agreed to meet, if they were parted, on the coast in the latitude of
Valparaiso. The men, with better heart than their commander, desired to
keep the appointment. But those terrible weeks had sickened Winter. He
overruled the opinions of the rest, re-entered the Strait, and reached
England in the following June.

Drake, meanwhile, had found shelter among the islands of Tierra del
Fuego. At length spring brought fair winds and smooth seas, and running
up the coast and looking about for her consort, the Pelican or Golden
Hind--for she had both names--fell in with an Indian fisherman, who
informed Drake that in the harbour of Valparaiso, already a small
Spanish settlement, there lay a great galleon which had come from Peru.
Galleons were the fruit that he was in search of. He sailed in, and the
Spanish seamen, who had never yet seen a stranger in those waters, ran
up their flags, beat their drums, and prepared a banquet for their
supposed countrymen. The Pelican shot up alongside. The English sailors
leaped on board, and one "Thomas Moore," a lad from Plymouth, began the
play with knocking down the first man that he met, saluting him in
Spanish as he fell, and crying out "Down, dog." The Spaniards,
overwhelmed with surprise, began to cross and bless themselves. One
sprang overboard and swam ashore; the rest were bound and stowed away
under the hatches while the ship was rifled. The beginning was not a bad
one. Wedges of gold were found weighing four hundred pounds, besides
miscellaneous plunder. The settlement, which was visited next, was less
productive, for the inhabitants had fled, taking their valuables with
them.

At Arica, the port of Potosi, fifty-seven blocks of precious metal were
added to the store; and from thence they made haste to Lima, where the
largest booty was looked for. They found that they had just missed it.
Twelve ships lay at anchor in the port without arms, without crews, and
with their sails on shore. In all of these they discovered but a few
chests of reals and some bales of silk and linen. A thirteenth, called
by the seamen the Cacafuego, but christened in her baptism "Our Lady of
the Conception," had sailed for the Isthmus a few days before, taking
with her all the bullion which the mines had yielded for the season. She
had been literally ballasted with silver, and carried also several
precious boxes of gold and jewels.

Not a moment was lost. The cables of the ships at Lima were cut, and
they were left to drive on shore to prevent pursuit; and then away sped
the Pelican due north, with every stitch of her canvas spread. A gold
chain was promised to the first man who caught sight of the Cacafuego. A
sail was seen the second day of the chase: it was not the vessel which
they were in pursuit of, but the prize was worth the having. They took
eighty pounds' weight of gold in wedges, the purest which they yet had
seen.

For eight hundred miles the Pelican flew on. At length, one degree to
the north of the line, off Quito, and close to the shore, a look-out on
the mast-head cried out that he saw the chase and claimed the promised
chain; she was recognized by the peculiarities in her sails, of which
they had received exact information at Lima. There lay the Cacafuego; if
they could take her their work would be done, and they might go home in
triumph. She was several miles ahead of them; if she guessed their
character, she would run in under the land, and they might lose her. It
was afternoon: several hours remained of daylight, and Drake did not
wish to come up with her till dark.

The Pelican sailed two feet to the Cacafuego's one, and dreading that
her speed might rouse suspicion, he filled his empty wine casks with
water and trailed them astern. The chase meanwhile unsuspecting, and
glad of company on a lonely voyage, slackened sail and waited for her
slow pursuer. The sun sank low, and at last set into the ocean, and
then, when both ships had become invisible from the land, the casks were
hoisted in, the Pelican was restored to her speed, and shooting up
within a cable's length of the Cacafuego, hailed to her to run into the
wind. The Spanish commander, not understanding the meaning of such an
order, paid no attention to it. The next moment the corsair opened her
ports, fired a broadside, and brought his main-mast about his ears. His
decks were cleared by a shower of arrows, with one of which he was
himself wounded. In a few minutes more he was a prisoner, and his ship
and all that it contained was in the hands of the English. The wreck
was cut away, the ship cleared, and her head turned to the sea; by
daybreak even the line of the Andes had become invisible, and at
leisure, in the open ocean, the work of rifling began. The full value of
the plunder taken in this ship was never actually confessed. It remained
a secret between Drake and the Queen. In a schedule afterwards
published, he acknowledged to have found in the Cacafuego alone
twenty-six tons of silver bullion, thirteen chests of coined silver, and
almost a hundredweight of gold. But this was only so much as the
Spaniards could prove to have been on board.

Drake imagined, like most other English seamen, that there was a passage
to the north corresponding to Magellan's Strait, of which Frobisher
conceived that he had found the eastern entrance. He went on therefore
at his leisure towards the coast of Mexico, intending to follow the
shore till he found it. Another ship coming from China crossed him on
his way loaded with silks and porcelain. He took the best of the freight
with a golden falcon and a superb emerald. Then needing fresh water he
touched at the Spanish settlement of Guatulco.

The work of plunder was nearly over. Again sailing north, the Pelican
fell in with a Spanish nobleman who was going out as Governor to the
Philippines. He was detained a few hours and relieved of his finery, and
then, says one of the party: "Our general, thinking himself both in
respect of his private injuries received from the Spaniards, as also
their contempt and indignities offered to our country and prince in
general, sufficiently satisfied and revenged, and supposing her Majesty
would rest contented with this service, began to consider the best way
for his country."

The first necessity was a complete repair of the Pelican's hull. Before
the days of copper sheathing, the ships' bottoms grew foul with weed;
the great barnacles formed in clusters and stopped their speed, and the
sea-worms bored holes into the planking. Twenty thousand miles of
unknown water lay between Drake and Plymouth Sound, and he was not a man
to run idle risks. Running on till he had left the furthest Spanish
station far to the south, he put into the Bay of Canoa in Lower
California. There he laid his ship on shore, set up forge and workshop,
and refitted her with a month's labour from stem to stern.

By the sixteenth of April, 1579, the Pelican was once more in order, and
started on her northern course in search of the expected passage. She
held on up the coast for eight hundred miles into latitude forty-three
degrees North, but no signs appeared of an opening. Though it was summer
the air grew colder, and the crew having been long in the tropics
suffered from the change. Not caring to run risks in exploring with so
precious a cargo, and finding by observation that the passage, if it
existed, must be of enormous length, Drake resolved to go no further,
and expecting, as proved to be the case, that the Spaniards would be on
the look-out for him at Magellan's Strait, he determined on the
alternative route by the Cape of Good Hope. The Portuguese had long
traded with China. In the ship going to the Philippines he had found a
Portuguese chart of the Indian Archipelago, and with the help of this
and his own skill he trusted to find his way.

At the little island of Ternate, south of the Celebes, the ship was
again docked and scraped. The crew were allowed another month's rest,
when they feasted their eyes on the marvels of tropical life, then first
revealed to them in their luxuriance--vampires "as large as hens,"
crayfish a foot round, and fireflies lighting the midnight forest.
Starting once more, they had now to feel their way among the rocks and
shoals of the most dangerous waters in the world. They crept round
Celebes among coral reefs and low islands scarcely visible above the
water-line. The Malacca Straits formed the only route marked in the
Portuguese chart, and between Drake and his apparent passage lay the
Java Sea and the channel between Borneo and Sumatra. But it was not
impossible that there might be some other opening, and the Pelican
crawled in search of it along the Java coast. Here, if nowhere else, her
small size and manageableness were in her favour. In spite of all the
care that was taken, she was almost lost. One evening as the black
tropical night was closing, a grating sound was heard under her keel:
another moment she was hard and fast upon an invisible reef. The breeze
was light and the water calm, or the world would have heard no more of
Francis Drake and the Pelican. She lay immovable till morning; "we were
out of all hope to escape danger," but with the daylight the position
was seen not to be utterly desperate. "Our general, then as always,
showed himself most courageous, and of good confidence in the mercy and
protection of God; and as he would not seem to perish wilfully, so he
and we did our best endeavour to save ourselves, and in the end cleared
ourselves of that danger."

The Pelican had no more adventures; and sweeping in clear fine weather
close to the Cape of Good Hope, and touching for water at Sierra Leone,
she sailed in triumph into Plymouth harbour in the beginning of October,
having marked a furrow with her keel round the globe.

Froude: "History of England."
(Adapted)




    Who, if he rise to station of command,
    Rises by open means; and there will stand
    On honourable terms, or else retire,
    And in himself possess his own desire;
    Who comprehends his trust, and to the same
    Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim;
    And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait
    For wealth, or honours, or for worldly state:
    Whom they must follow; on whose head must fall,
    Like showers of manna, if they come at all.

Wordsworth: "The Happy Warrior."




THE SOLITARY REAPER


    Behold her, single in the field,
      Yon solitary Highland Lass!
    Reaping and singing by herself;
      Stop here, or gently pass!
    Alone she cuts and binds the grain,
    And sings a melancholy strain;
    O listen! for the Vale profound
    Is overflowing with the sound.

    No Nightingale did ever chaunt
      More welcome notes to weary bands
    Of travellers in some shady haunt
      Among Arabian sands:
    A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard
    In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,
    Breaking the silence of the seas
    Among the farthest Hebrides.

    Will no one tell me what she sings?--
      Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
    For old, unhappy, far-off things,
      And battles long ago:
    Or is it some more humble lay,
    Familiar matter of to-day?
    Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
    That has been, and may be again?

    Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang
      As if her song could have no ending;
    I saw her singing at her work,
      And o'er the sickle bending;--
    I listened, motionless and still;
    And, as I mounted up the hill,
    The music in my heart I bore
    Long after it was heard no more.

Wordsworth




CLOUDS, RAINS, AND RIVERS


Every occurrence in Nature is preceded by other occurrences which are
its causes, and succeeded by others which are its effects. The human
mind is not satisfied with observing and studying any natural occurrence
alone, but takes pleasure in connecting every natural fact with what has
gone before it, and with what is to come after it. Thus, when we enter
upon the study of rivers, our interest will be greatly increased by
taking into account, not only their actual appearances but also their
causes and effects.

Let us trace a river to its source. Beginning where it empties itself
into the sea, and following it backwards, we find it from time to time
joined by tributaries which swell its waters. The river, of course,
becomes smaller as these tributaries are passed. It shrinks first to a
brook, then to a stream; this again divides itself into a number of
smaller streamlets, ending in mere threads of water. These constitute
the source of the river, and are usually found among hills. Thus, the
Severn has its source in the Welsh Mountains; the Thames in the Cotswold
Hills; the Rhine and the Rhone in the Alps; the Missouri in the Rocky
Mountains; and the Amazon in the Andes of Peru.

But it is quite plain, that we have not yet reached the real beginning
of the rivers. Whence do the earliest streams derive their water? A
brief residence among the mountains would prove to you that they are fed
by rains. In dry weather you would find the streams feeble, sometimes
indeed quite dried up. In wet weather you would see them foaming
torrents. In general these streams lose themselves as little threads of
water upon the hillsides; but sometimes you may trace a river to a
definite spring. You may, however, very soon assure yourself that such
springs are also fed by rain, which has percolated through the rocks or
soil, and which, through some orifice that it has found or formed, comes
to the light of day.

But we cannot end here. Whence comes the rain which forms the mountain
streams? Observation enables you to answer the question. Rain does not
come from a clear sky. It comes from clouds. But what are clouds? Is
there nothing you are acquainted with, which they resemble? You discover
