"I think I understand the matter perfectly, colonel," replied Lonley,
who did not seem to take kindly to any advice from a landsman.

"Do not take any unnecessary risks, Captain Lonley, for more than the
value of the cotton is at stake," continued the planter.

"I have a plan of my own which I am confident will take me through the
blockade all right," added the captain.

"You must remember that my brother's steamer is on the blockade, and
that she makes over twenty knots an hour."

"I shall pretend to be a prize of the Bellevite long enough to distract
the attention of the fleet," added Lonley, impatiently.

"I don't understand these things, and I shall leave you to manage the
affair as you think best; but I beg you will use all proper caution,"
continued Colonel Passford. "Here are the ship's papers. You will give
the one on the top to the officer from the fort, and he will cause you
no delay."

Lonley took the papers, and thrust them into his pocket without any
reply. Christy had taken charge of the hoisting of the mainsail without
waiting for any special orders, and Flint was doing his best to assist
him. The negroes, though not expert seamen, knew the ropes of a
schooner, and they did very well with Flint in their midst.

"We are going to have a fresh breeze, Fetters," said Captain Lonley,
as the new mate came near him.

"It looks like it now," added Christy, changing his voice as much as he
could, and as he had done before when he spoke to the captain.

"If things are not favorable when you get to the forte, I think you had
better anchor inside of the point," suggested the planter, who could not
be blamed for being deeply interested in the fate of his cotton, and the
fortune which was locked up in it.

"Of course, I shall have to do that if necessary; but I don't like to do
that, for every blockader will watch her all the time if I do," replied
Captain Lonley, still maintaining his respectful demeanor, though it
seemed to be hard work.

By this time the mainsail was set, and was banging in the lively breeze.
The negro sailors seemed to have become weary with wasting the day
in the sailing of the schooner, and they worked with a good deal of
enthusiasm.

"Now set the foresail, Fetters. I don't think we can carry the
topsails," said the captain. "Isn't that a white man with the hands?"
asked he, as the men went to the foremast.

"That's a man I brought along with me," replied Christy. "He is an able
seaman, and he is very anxious to get to some port outside where he can
obtain a berth as mate."

"All right; I thought the work was going on exceedingly well, and his
presence explains it," added the captain.

"He owns the boat in which we came over here, and I think we had better
hoist it on deck," said the mate.

"All right; do so, Fetters. I suppose you have nothing on your hands?"

"Nothing very particular," replied Christy.

"I am instructed to buy a fast steamer if I can find one, even if I have
to go to England to obtain her. What do you say to taking the berth of
first officer in her, Fetters, for I know that you are a sailor, and
that you have pluck enough to fire a gun?"

"Such a position would suit me first rate," replied Christy, with proper
enthusiasm.

Still Lonley did not recognize his voice, and he took especial pains
that he should not. But this state of things could not long continue. If
the Unionist went into the cabin where there was a light, he could not
help betraying himself. It was necessary to provide against this or any
similar emergency very soon. He had already arranged his plan, and it
was his purpose to carry it into execution as soon as the vessel was
fully clear of the creek.

The boat was hoisted on the deck; the fore and main sail were set, and
everything was in readiness for a departure. Colonel Passford, after
repeating some of his admonition to the captain, shook hands with him,
and stepped down upon the wharf. Lonley gave the order to stand by the
jib, and cast off the fasts. The two principal sails filled on the
starboard tack, the jib went up in the twinkling of an eye under the
direction of Flint, and the schooner began to gather headway. The
captain was at the helm, for he would trust no other there, and Christy
went forward.

"Set the fore topmast staysail," said the mate; but he was willing the
crew should execute the order in their own way, for he called the
master's mate to him. "The biggest job is yet to be done," he added,
in a low tone.

"What is that?" asked Flint.

"To get possession of the vessel," replied Christy, impressively.

"That will be an easy matter, with nothing but niggers on board," added
Flint.

They talked together for a few minutes, and the plan was arranged. Flint
saw that the fore topmast staysail was properly set and trimmed. The two
Unionists on board did not even know the name of the schooner, but she
gathered headway as she approached the mouth of the creek, and went
along at a very satisfactory rate. The mate of the vessel and his fellow
fugitive then went aft to be ready for the decisive action in which they
were to engage. But they had hardly reached the quarter-deck before the
schooner was hailed by a boat.

"Schooner, ahoy! On board the Judith!" shouted a man.

"In the boat!" replied the captain. "Who's there?"

"Fetters!" responded the boatman.

"Fetters!" exclaimed Captain Lonley, apparently bewildered by the reply.
"It seems to me that Fetterses are plenty to-night."

But this was all he was permitted to say, for the stroke of a handspike,
in the hands of Flint, fell upon his head at this instant, and he
dropped upon the quarter-deck like a log. At the same moment, Christy
sprang to the wheel, and the schooner was not allowed to broach to. She
dashed on her course, increasing her speed every moment, without heeding
the boat that had hailed her. In the darkness, the genuine Fetters, as
doubtless he was in the boat, could not have seen in what manner Captain
Lonley had been disposed of, and all the crew were forward, so that they
were no wiser.

"Judith, ahoy!" repeated the genuine and only true Fetters, at the top
of his lungs, as the schooner hurried off on her course. "I am Fetters,
the mate!"

"All right!" replied Christy. "I will see you in the morning. Come on
board at six o'clock."

Mr. Fetters said no more, and probably he concluded that the Judith had
gone to get firewood for the galley, to fill her water-casks, or for
some similar purpose. The fictitious Mr. Fetters kept his place at the
wheel. The binnacle had been lighted by the cook, and he knew the exact
course for the entrance to the bay. He felt that he was in possession of
the Judith and her valuable cargo; and he had become so hardened in his
patriotic duty that he felt no compunction of conscience because the
vessel and cotton had been wrested from his uncle.

As Colonel Passford had not scrupled to attempt to capture the
magnificent steamer of his own brother, it would be a poor rule that
would not work both ways. Besides, the proceeds of the sale of the cargo
were to be expended in the purchase of supplies, and a steamer to carry
them, for the use of the Confederacy. His uncle, from his elevated
standpoint of duty, would have an opportunity to consider the
application of his stringent views on the other side of the question.

"I hope he is not dead," said Christy, as Flint bent over the prostrate
form of the captain.

"I don't know; but I am going to take him below, and lock him up in his
stateroom, where the crew will not see him," replied Flint.

"That is right; and I would help you if I could leave the wheel long
enough," replied Christy.

"I can handle him alone; but see that none of the sailors come aft while
I am about it," added the master's mate, as he dragged the form to the
companion-way.

In such a work as he had on his hands, he had the strength of two men.
Without any great difficulty, he dragged the body to the cabin, and then
into one of the two staterooms he found, which was lighted. It was a
more difficult task, for Lonley was a heavy man, but he placed the form
in the berth. His first duty was to examine very carefully the pockets
of the captain. He secured the file of papers first, and then drew a
large naval revolver from each of his hip pockets. Then he took his
papers from his pocket-book, but left his money, watch, and other
valuables where he found them.

After a careful examination of the insensible form, he was satisfied
that he was not dead, though he might yet die from the blow he had
received. He locked the door of the room, and went on deck. He gave one
of the revolvers to Christy, and retained the other, handing over to him
also all the papers he had taken.

"This is the biggest venture we have undertaken yet," said Flint, as he
seated himself by Christy.

"But everything has gone well so far," replied the lieutenant. "If you
are not promoted for this and the Teaser affair, Flint, it shall not be
for the want of any recommendation on my part."

"Thank you, Mr. Passford; you are very kind. I hope your services will
be recognized in the same manner," returned the master's mate.

"I don't care so much for myself, and I should not cry if I were never
to become anything more than a midshipman."

"All I have done has been to obey your orders, and follow your lead;
and if anybody is promoted for the two affairs in which we have been
engaged, you are surely the one who is entitled to it."

"Well, we will do our duty, whether we are promoted or not," added
Christy.

It was not more than nine o'clock in the evening when the Judith came
out of the creek, and in about four hours she was approaching Fort
Morgan. She was still within the enemy's lines, and her acting captain
was disposed to do everything in a regular manner, especially as he
had the means of doing so. He had not the same risk to run in getting
through the blockading fleet that Captain Lonley would have had, and
he promptly decided to take his chances without waiting for a dark
and foggy night. A boat came off from the inner side of the fort, and
Christy ordered Flint to bring her to.

The permit to pass the forts was in due form, and signed by the proper
officials. The officer in the boat examined it carefully by the light
of a lantern, and declared that he was satisfied with it. Then he asked
some questions, which the acting commander of the Judith answered. The
toughest inquiry he made was as to how he expected to get through the
blockaders in a clear night like that. Christy assured him that he had a
plan which he was confident would carry him through without difficulty.

The schooner filled away again, and passed through the main channel;
and in another hour she was in the midst of the Union fleet. There was
a rattling of drums, a hissing of steam, and energetic commands heard as
soon as the Judith was made out in the darkness, and doubtless a vision
of prize-money flitted through the brains of officers and seamen. But
Christy soon impaired the vividness of these fancies by ordering the
foresail of the schooner to be taken in, and then the fore topmast
staysail. The expectant ships' companies were not willing to believe
that the vessel had come out for the purpose of surrendering.

"Schooner, ahoy!" shouted the officer of a boat sent off by the nearest
blockader. "What vessel is that?"

"The Judith, prize to the United States steamer Bellevite," replied
Christy, "Kindly inform me where the Bellevite lies."

In another half-hour, Christy had dropped his anchor a cable's length
from the Bellevite. Instructing Flint to ascertain the condition of
Lonley, the lieutenant went on board of her to make his report, using
the boat they had captured at Mobile, pulled by two of the negroes.

"I have come on board, Captain Breaker," said Christy, as he met the
commander, who had come on deck at the alarm.

"I see you have," replied the captain, grasping him by the hand. "I have
been terribly worried about you, Christy."

"I am all right, sir; and so is Mr. Flint, who was with me. We have
brought off a schooner of two hundred tons, loaded with cotton,"
continued Christy, as modestly as the circumstances would permit.

"I am very anxious to hear your report, Mr. Passford," said the
commander.

"Excuse me, sir, but the captain of that schooner is badly wounded, and
needs Dr. Linscott as soon as possible."

The surgeon was sent on board of the Judith. As Paul Vapoor caught a
sight of the returned third lieutenant, he hugged him as though he had
been separated from him for years instead of a few days. His welcome
was quite as cordial, though not as demonstrative, from the rest of the
officers. Then he went to the cabin with the captain, where he reported
all that had transpired since he had been separated from his companions
on board of the Teaser. He was warmly commended for his bravery and
skill, and Captain Breaker assured him that he should be remembered
in the reports to the department.

Captain Lonley was conveyed on board of the Bellevite, where he was
committed to the sick bay. He had recovered his senses, but it was
likely, the surgeon said, that it would be a month before his health was
restored. The Teaser had not yet been sent away; but the next day the
third lieutenant was appointed prize-master of the steamer, and Flint of
the schooner, for he had been the master of a coaster, and was competent
for the position.

A considerable crew was put on board of the Teaser, and both vessels
were sent to New York instead of Key West. The steamer was expected to
tow the Judith when necessary, and defend her if she was attacked. But
both arrived at their destination without any mishap, and both were
condemned; the Teaser was purchased by the government, for she was
likely to be a very useful vessel on account of her speed and light
draught.

Christy had a brief leave of absence after he had served as a witness
against the captured vessels. He had seen his father, mother, and sister
on his arrival, and they were as proud of him as though he had been
made a rear-admiral. Captain Breaker had written to his father of his
disappearance on Santa Rosa Island, and had no doubt he had been made
a prisoner within the enemy's lines. Christy brought the news of his
escape himself, which made him even doubly welcome at Bonnydale.
Certainly the young lieutenant had never been so happy before in his
life.

Captain Passford was a man of great influence, though he held no
position in authority. At the first opportunity he obtained to talk with
him, Christy made a strong plea in favor of the promotion of Flint. The
late owner of the Bellevite knew him well. The master's mate had been a
schoolmaster, and was very well educated; but he had a taste for the
sea. He had made several foreign voyages, and had bought a schooner
then, of which he went as master. But he had sold his vessel to great
advantage, and, having nothing to do, he shipped as third officer of the
Bellevite.

Sampson, who had come home as chief engineer of the Teaser, was also
remembered by Christy, who interceded for his promotion, or rather
appointment. The government promptly obtained possession from the court
of the prize-steamer, and the repairs and alterations upon her were
begun at once. She had proved herself to be a fast sailer, and had
logged sixteen knots, so that much was expected of her.

Captain Passford, after his son had pleaded so earnestly for the
promotion of the master's mate and the fireman, asked Christy what he
expected in the way of promotion for himself. The young officer did not
ask for any promotion, he was abundantly satisfied with his present
rank, and he rather preferred to retain it. His father laughed, and
declared that he was very glad of it, for he had some delicacy in asking
favors for a member of his own family.

Corny still remained at the house of his uncle; and he was as
thoroughbred a rebel as his father, though he said next to nothing
about his "cause." At a later period both he and Major Pierson were duly
exchanged; but the gallant officer had come to the conclusion that Miss
Florry Passford was very far from being infatuated with him.

As the Bronx, which was the name given to the Teaser at the suggestion
of Captain Passford, was to be ready about as soon as the legal
proceedings would permit of the departure of the officers and seamen of
the Bellevite, they were ordered to return to their ship in her. Flint's
commission as a master, and Sampson's as an assistant engineer, were
received. Christy's companion in the night expeditions had not expected
to be anything more than a midshipman, and he was immeasurably delighted
at his good fortune. Then it appeared that other influences than that of
Captain Passford had been employed, for Christy, almost in spite of
himself, was promoted to the rank of master, his commission antedating
that of Flint.

Mr. Blowitt was appointed to the command of the Bronx, with Master
Passford as first lieutenant, and Master Flint as second; and Christy
was to take her to the Gulf. She was to be used at the discretion of the
flag officer after she had delivered her passengers on board of the
Bellevite, and received her new commander.

The Bronx was soon ready for sea with her new ship's company, and sailed
for her destination, where Christy was to make some further inquiries
into operations ON THE BLOCKADE.




_OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS._

THE BLUE AND THE GRAY

SERIES

Illustrated. With Emblematic Dies. Each volume bound in Blue and Gray.
Per volume, $1.50.

  TAKEN BY THE ENEMY.

  WITHIN THE ENEMY'S LINES.

  The opening of a new series of books from the pen of Oliver Optic
  is bound to arouse the highest anticipation in the minds of boy and
  girl readers. There never has been a more interesting writer in the
  field of juvenile literature than Mr. W. T. Adams, who, under his
  well-known pseudonym, is known and admired by every boy and girl
  in the country, and by thousands who have long since passed the
  boundaries of youth, yet who remember with pleasure the genial,
  interesting pen that did so much to interest, instruct and entertain
  their younger years. The present volume opens "The Blue and the Gray
  Series," a title that is sufficiently indicative of the nature and
  spirit of the series, of which the first volume is now presented,
  while the name of Oliver Optic is sufficient warrant of the
  absorbing style of narrative. "Taken by the Enemy," the first book
  of the series, is as bright and entertaining as any work that Mr.
  Adams has yet put forth, and will be as eagerly perused as any that
  has borne his name. It would not be fair to the prospective reader
  to deprive him of the zest which comes from the unexpected, by
  entering into a synopsis of the story. A word, however, should be
  said in regard to the beauty and appropriateness of the binding,
  which makes it a most attractive volume.--_Boston Budget._

  "Taken by the Enemy" has just come from the press, an announcement
  that cannot but appeal to every healthy boy from ten to fifteen
  years of age in the country. "No writer of the present day." says
  the Boston _Commonwealth_, "whose aim has been to hit the boyish
  heart, has been as successful as Oliver Optic. There is a period in
  the life of every youth, just about the time that he is collecting
  postage-stamps, and before his legs are long enough for a bicycle,
  when he has the Oliver Optic fever. He catches it by reading a few
  stray pages somewhere, and then there is nothing for it but to let
  the matter take its course. Relief comes only when the last page of
  the last book is read; and then there are relapses whenever a new
  book appears until one is safely on through the teens. The boys will
  be delighted to know, therefore, that 'Taken by the Enemy' is but
  the first of six books to come out in rapid succession, all based on
  the thrilling incidents of the late war."--_Literary News._


_OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS._
