I can do more good by staying and giving such aid and comfort as I can
to my countrymen. You will, I am sure, excuse my saying that I think you
must let me aid you a little farther. I understand you to say that Miss
Kingston will go to friends in Georgia, and I suppose you will see her
safely there. Then you have a considerable journey to make to Richmond,
and the sum that you possess is utterly inadequate for all this. It will
give me real pleasure if you will accept the loan of a hundred dollars,
which you can repay when you write to me from Richmond. You will need
money for the sake of your companions rather than your own. When you
have once crossed the line you will then be able to appear in your
proper character."

Vincent grasped the doctor's hand, and with suffused eyes replied:
"Thank you greatly, doctor. I will accept your offer as frankly as it
was made. I had intended telegraphing for money as soon as I was among
our own people, but there would be delay in receiving it, and it will be
much more pleasant to push on at once."

"By the way, you cannot cross at Florence, for I hear that Hood has
fallen back across the river, the forces advancing against him from this
side being too strong to be resisted. But I think that this is no
disadvantage to you, for it would have been far more difficult to pass
the Federals and get to Florence than to make for some point on the
river as far as possible from the contending armies."

"We talked that over the last time you were here, doctor, and you know
we agreed it was better to run the risk of falling into the hands of the
Yankee troops than into those of one of those partisan bands whose
exploits are always performed at a distance from the army. However, if
Hood has retreated across the Tennessee, there is an end of that plan,
and we must take some other route. Which do you advise?"

"The Yankees will be strong all around the great bend of the river to
the west of Florence and along the line to the east, which would, of
course, be your direct way. The passage, however, is your real
difficulty, and I should say that, instead of going in that direction,
you had better bear nearly due south. There is a road from Mount
Pleasant that strikes into the main road from Columbia up to Camden. You
can cross the river at that point without any question or suspicion, as
you would be merely traveling to the west of the State. Once across you
could work directly south, crossing into the State of Mississippi, and
from there take the cars through Alabama to Georgia.

"It seems a roundabout way, but I think you would find it far the
safest, for there are no armies operating upon that line. The
population, at any rate as you get south, are for us, and there are, so
far as I have heard, very few of these bushwhacking bands about, either
on one side or the other. The difficult part of the journey is that up
to Camden, but as you will be going away from the seat of war instead of
toward it, there will be little risk of being questioned."

"I had thought of buying a horse and cart," Vincent said. "Jogging along
a road like that, we should attract no attention. I gave up the idea
because our funds were not sufficient, but, thanks to your kindness, we
might manage now to pick up something of the sort."

The doctor was silent for a minute.

"If you will send Dan over to me to-morrow afternoon, I will see what
can be done," he said. "It would certainly be the safest plan by far;
but I must think it over. You will not leave before that, will you?"

"Certainly not, doctor. In any case we should have stayed another day to
get a few more things for our journey."

The next afternoon Dan went over to Mount Pleasant. He was away two
hours longer than they had expected, and they began to feel quite uneasy
about him, when the sound of wheels was heard, and Dan appeared, driving
a cart. Vincent gave a shout of satisfaction in which Lucy and Chloe
joined.

"Here am de cart. Me had to go five miles from de town to get him. Dat
what took me so long. Here am a letter, sah, from the doctor. First-rate
man dat. Good man all ober."

The letter was as follows:

"My Dear Mr. Wingfield:

"I did not see how you would be able to buy a cart, and I was sure that
you could not obtain one with the funds in your possession. As, from
what you have said, I knew that you would not in the least mind the
expense, I have taken the matter upon myself, and have bought from your
landlady a cart and horse, which will, I think, suit you well. I have
paid for them a hundred and fifty dollars, which you can remit me, with
the hundred I handed you yesterday. Sincerely trusting that you may
succeed in carrying out your plans in safety, and with kind regards to
yourself and Miss Kingston,

"I remain, yours truly,
"James Spencer."


"That is a noble fellow," Vincent said, "and I trust, for his sake as
well as our own, that we shall get safely through. Now, Lucy, I think
you had better go into town the first thing, and buy some clothes of
good homely fashion. Dan can go with you and buy a suit for me--those
fitted for a young farmer. Then we shall look like a young farmer and
his sister jogging comfortably along to market; we can stop and buy a
stock of goods at some farm on the way."

"That will be capital," the girl said.

Lucy started early the next morning for the town, and the shopping was
satisfactorily accomplished. They returned by eleven o'clock. The new
purchases were at once donned, and half an hour later they set off in
the cart: Vincent sitting on the side driving; Lucy in the corner facing
him, on a basket turned upside down; Dan and Chloe on a thick bag of
rushes in the bottom of the cart.




CHAPTER XIV.

ACROSS THE BORDER.


Dan, on his return with the cart, had brought back a message from its
late owner to say that if she could in any way be of use to them, she
should be glad to aid them. Her farm lay on the road they were now
following, and they determined therefore to stop there. As the cart drew
up at the door the woman came out.

"Glad to see you," she said; "come right in. It's strange now you should
have been lodging in my house for more than six weeks and I should never
have set eyes on you before. The doctor talked to me a heap about you,
but I didn't look to see quite such a young couple."

Lucy colored hotly, and was about to explain that they did not stand in
the supposed relationship to each other, but Vincent slightly shook his
head. It was not worth while to undeceive the woman, and although they
had agreed to pass as brother and sister, Vincent was determined not to
tell an untruth about it unless deceit was absolutely necessary for
their safety.

"And you want to get out of the way without questions being asked, I
understand?" the woman went on. "There are many such about at present. I
don't want to ask no questions; the war has brought trouble enough on
me. Now is there anything I can do? If so, say it right out."

"Yes, there is something you can do for us. We want to fill up our cart
with the sort of stuff you take to market--apples and pumpkins, and
things of that sort. If we had gone to buy them anywhere else, there
might have been questions asked. From what the doctor said you can let
us have some."

"I can do that. The storeroom's chuck-full; and it was only a few days
ago I said to David it was time we set about getting them off. I will
fill your cart, sir, and not overcharge you neither. It will save us the
trouble of taking it over to Columbia or Camden, for there's plenty of
garden truck round Mount Pleasant, and one cannot get enough to pay for
the trouble of taking them there."

The cart was soon filled with apples, pumpkins, and other vegetables,
and the price put upon them was very moderate.

"What ought we to ask for these?" Vincent soon inquired. "One does not
want to be extra cheap or dear."

The woman informed them of the prices they might expect to get for the
produce; and they at once started, amid many warm good wishes from her.

Before leaving the farm the woman had given them a letter to her sister,
who lived a mile from Camden.

"It's always awkward stopping at a strange place," she said, "and
farmers don't often put up at hotels when they drive in with garden
truck to a town, though they may do sometimes; besides it's always nice
being with friends. I will just write a line to Jane and tell her you
have been my tenants at Woodford, and where you are going, and ask her
to take you in for the night and give you a note in the morning to
anyone she or her husband may know, a good bit along that road."

When they reached the house it was dark, but, directly Vincent showed
the note, the farmer and his wife heartily bade them come in.

"Your boy can put up the horse at the stable, and you are heartily
welcome. But the house is pretty full, and we can't make you as
comfortable as we should wish at night; but still we will do our best."

Vincent and Lucy were soon seated by the fire. Their hostess bustled
about preparing supper for them, and the children, of whom the house
seemed full, stared shyly at the newcomers. As soon as the meal was over
Chloe's wants were attended to, and a lunch of bread and bacon taken out
by the farmer to Dan in the stables. The children were then packed off
to bed, and the farmer and his wife joined Vincent and Lucy by the fire.

"As to sleeping," the woman said, "John and I have been talking it over,
and the best way we can see is that you should sleep with me, ma'am, and
we will make up a bed on the floor here for my husband and yours."

"Thank you, that will do very nicely; though I don't like interfering
with your arrangements."

"Not at all, ma'am--not at all; it makes a nice change having someone
come in, especially of late, when there is no more pleasure in going
about in this country, and people don't go out after dark more than they
can help. Ah, it's a bad time! My sister says you are going west, but I
see you have got your cart full of garden truck. How you have raised it
so soon, I don't know; for Liza wrote to me two months since as she
hadn't been able to sell her place, and it was just a wilderness. Are
you going to get rid of it at Camden to-morrow?"

Vincent had already been assured as to the politics of his present host
and hostess, and he therefore did not hesitate to say:

"The fact is, madam, we are anxious to get along without being
questioned by any Yankee troops we may fall in with; and we have bought
the things you see in the cart from your sister, as, going along with a
cart full, anyone we met would take us for farmers living close by, on
their road to the next market town."

"Oh, oh! that's it!" the farmer said significantly. "Want to get through
the lines, eh?"

Vincent nodded.

"Didn't I think so!" the farmer said, rubbing his hands. "I thought
directly my eyes hit upon you that you did not look the cut of a
granger. Been fighting--eh? and they are after you?"

"I don't think they are after me here," Vincent said. "But I have seen a
good deal of fighting with Jackson and Stuart; and I am just getting
over a collar bone, which was smashed by a Yankee bullet."

"You don't say!" the farmer exclaimed. "Well, I should have gone out
myself, if it hadn't been for Jane and the children. But there are such
a lot of them that I could not bring myself to run the chances of
leaving them all on her hands. Still, I am with our army, heart and
soul."

"Your wife's sister told me that you were on the right side," Vincent
said, "and that I could trust you altogether."

"Now, if you tell me which road you want to go, I don't mind if I get on
my horse to-morrow and ride with you a stage, and see you put up for the
night. I know lots of people, and I am sure to be acquainted with
someone, whichever road we may go. We are pretty near all the right side
about here, though, as you get further on, there are lots of Northern
men. Now, what are your ideas as to the roads?"

Vincent told him the route he intended to take.

"You ought to get through there right enough," the farmer said. "There
are some Yankee troops moving about to the west of the river, but not
many of them; and even if you fell in with them, with your cargo of
stuff they would not suspect you. Anyhow, I expect we can get you passed
down so as to be among friends. So you fought under Jackson and Stuart,
did you? Ah, they have done well in Virginia! I only wish we had such
men here. What made you take those two darkies along with you? I should
have thought you would have got along better by yourself."

"We couldn't very well leave them," Vincent said; "the boy has been with
me all through the wars, and is as true as steel. Old Chloe was Lucy's
nurse, and would have broken her heart had she been left behind."

"They are faithful creatures when they are well treated. Mighty few of
them have run away all this time from their masters, though in the parts
the Yankees hold there is nothing to prevent their bolting if they have
a mind to it. I haven't got no niggers myself. I tried them, but they
want more looking after than they are worth; and I can make a shift with
my boys to help me, and hiring a hand in busy times to work the farm.
Now, sir, what do you think of the lookout?"

The subject of the war fairly started, his host talked until midnight,
long before which Lucy and the farmer's wife had gone off to bed.

"We will start as soon as it is light," the farmer said, as he and
Vincent stretched themselves upon a heap of straw covered with blankets
that was to serve as their bed, Chloe having hours before gone up to
share the bed of the negro girl who assisted the farmer's wife in her
management of the house and children.

"It's best to get through Camden before people are about. There are
Yankee soldiers at the bridge, but it will be all right you driving in,
however early, to sell your stuff. Going out you aint likely to meet
with Yankees; but as it would look queer, you taking your garden truck
out of the town, it's just as well to be on the road before people are
about. Once you get five or six miles the other side you might be going
to the next place to sell your stuff."

"That is just what I have been thinking," Vincent said, "and I agree
with you the earlier we get through Camden the better."

Accordingly, as soon as daylight appeared, the horse was put in the
cart, the farmer mounting his own animal, and with a hearty good-by from
his wife the party started away. The Yankee sentinels at each end of the
bridge were passed without questions, for, early as it was, the carts
were coming in with farm produce. As yet the streets of the town were
almost deserted, and the farmer, who, before starting, had tossed a
tarpaulin into the back of the cart, said:

"Now, pull that over all that stuff, and then anyone that meets us will
think that you are taking out bacon and groceries, and such like, for
some store way off."

This suggestion was carried out, and Camden was soon left behind. A few
carts were met as they drove along. The farmer knew some of the drivers
and pulled up to say a few words to them. After a twenty-mile drive they
stopped at another farm, where their friend's introduction insured them
as cordial a welcome as that upon the preceding evening. So, step by
step, they journeyed on, escorted in almost every case by their host of
the night before, and meeting with no interruption. Once they passed a
strong body of Federal cavalry, but these, supposing that the party
belonged to the neighborhood, asked no questions; and at last, after
eight days' traveling, they passed two posts which marked the boundary
between Tennessee and Alabama.

For the last two days they had been beyond the point to which the
Federal troops had penetrated. They now felt that all risk was at an
end. Another day's journey brought them to a railway station, and they
learned that the trains were running as usual, although somewhat
irregular as to the hours at which they came along or as to the time
they took upon their journey. The contents of the cart had been left at
the farm at which they stopped the night before, and Vincent had now no
difficulty in disposing of the horse and cart, as he did not stand out
for price, but took the first offer made. Two hours later a train came
along, and the party were soon on their way to Rome in Georgia; after
their arrival there they went to Macon, at which place they alighted and
hired a conveyance to take them to Antioch, near which place Lucy's
relatives resided.

The latter part of the journey by rail had been a silent one. Lucy felt
none of the pleasure that she had expected at finding herself safely
through her dangers and upon the point of joining relations who would be
delighted to see her, and she sat looking blankly out of the window at
the surrounding country. At last Vincent, who had been half an hour
without speaking said:

"Are you sorry our journey is just over, Lucy?"

The girl's lip quivered, but she did not speak for a moment. "Of course
it is unpleasant saying good-by when people have been together for some
time," she said with an effort.

"I hope it will not be good-by for long," he said. "I shall be back here
as soon as this horrible war is over."

"What for?" the girl asked, looking round in surprise. "You live a long
way from here, and you told me you knew nobody in these parts."

"I know you," Vincent said, "and that is quite enough. Do you not know
that I love you?"

The girl gave a start of surprise, her cheek flushed but her eyes did
not drop as she looked frankly at him.

"No, Vincent," she said after a pause, "I never once thought you loved
me--never once. You have not been a bit like what I thought people were
when they felt like that."

"I hope not, Lucy. I was your protector then, I have tried my best to
be what people thought me--your brother; but now that you are just home
and among your own people, I think I may speak and tell you how I feel
toward you, and how I loved you since the moment I first saw you. And
you, Lucy, do you think you could care for me?"

"Not more than I do now, Vincent. I love you with all my heart. I have
been trying so hard to believe that I didn't because I thought you did
not care for me that way."

For some minutes no further word was spoken. Vincent was the first to
speak:

"It is horrid to have to sit here in this stiff, unnatural way, Lucy,
when one is inclined to do something outrageous from sheer happiness.
These long, open cars, where people can see from end to end what
everyone is doing, are hateful inventions. It is perfectly absurd, when
one finds one's self the happiest fellow living, that one is obliged to
look as demure and solemn as if one was in church."

"Then you should have waited, sir," the girl said.

"I meant to have waited, Lucy, until I got to your home; but as soon as
I felt that there was no longer any harm in speaking, out it came; but
it's very hard to have to wait for hours, perhaps."

"To wait for what?" Lucy asked demurely.

"You must wait for explanations until we are alone, Lucy. And now I
think the train begins to slacken, and it is the next station at which
we get out."

"I think, Lucy," Vincent said, when they had approached the house of her
relatives, "you and Chloe had better get out and go in by yourselves and
tell your story. Dan and I will go to the inn, and I will come round in
an hour. If we were to walk in together like this, it would be next to
impossible for you to explain how it all came about."

"I think that would be the best plan. My two aunts are the kindest
creatures possible, but no doubt they will be bewildered at seeing me so
suddenly. I do think it would be best to let me have a talk with them,
and tell them all about it, before you appear upon the scene."

"Very well, then, in an hour I will come in."

When they arrived at the gate, therefore, Vincent helped Lucy and Chloe
to alight, and then, jumping into the buggy again, told the driver to
take him to the hotel.

After engaging a room and enjoying a bath, Vincent sallied out into the
little town, and was fortunate enough to succeed in purchasing a suit of
tweed clothes, which, although they scarcely fitted as if they had been
made for him, were still an immense improvement upon the rough clothes
in which he had traveled. Returning to the hotel, he put on his new
purchases, and then walked to the house of Lucy's aunts, which was a
quarter of a mile outside the town.

Lucy had walked up the little path through the garden in front of the
house, and turning the handle of the door, had entered unannounced and
walked straight into the parlor. The two elderly ladies rose with some
surprise at the entry of a strange visitor. It was three years since she
had paid her last visit there, and for a moment they did not recognize
her.

"Don't you know me, aunts?"

"Why, goodness me!" the eldest exclaimed, "if it isn't our little Lucy
grown into womanhood! My dear child, where have you sprung from?" And
the two ladies warmly embraced their niece, who, as soon as they
released her from their arms, burst into a fit of crying, and it was
some time before she could answer the questions showered upon her.

"It is nothing, aunts," she said at last, wiping her eyes; "but I am so
glad to be with you again, and I have gone through so much, and I am so
happy, and it's so nice being with you again! Here is Chloe waiting to
speak to you, aunts. She has come with me all the way."

The old negress, who had been waiting in the passage, was now called in.

"Why, Chloe, you look no older than when you went away from here six
years ago," Miss Kingston said. "But how did you get through the lines?
