little inclosure, six feet long by four wide and three high, had been
constructed. An armful of dry heather was then pulled up, and laid on
the ground.

"There, girls, I think you will be able to manage to keep yourselves
warm, by lying close together."

"What are you going to do, Oswald?"

"We shall be all right; and we can, if we like, make another shelter;
and, if we feel cold, can walk about to warm ourselves. Now, Roger, get
half a dozen sticks and lay across the top."

While Roger was away getting the sticks, Oswald helped the girls over
the wall, for no entrance had been left.

"Now, Janet, give me those two wet smocks; I see that you have brought
them with you."

"What do you want them for, Oswald?"

"I want them for the roof, Janet. It is beginning to freeze hard, and
it is of no use having walls, if you have not a roof."

"Won't you take my cloak, instead?"

"Certainly not, Janet, you will want your cloak for a covering. Don't
be silly, but hand them over."

By this time, Roger had returned with the sticks. They were laid across
the top, and the girls' smocks spread over them.

"Now, go to sleep," Oswald said; "we must be on foot, an hour before
dawn."

Oswald then started down the hill for Parton. When he got within a mile
of the town, he could see lights moving about on the road; and guessed
that the Bairds had got torches, and were making sure that the
fugitives had not hidden themselves anywhere close to the road; for
they must have felt certain that they could not have reached the town,
before being overtaken. When the lights had gone along the road, he
descended to the river, took off his doublet and shirt, as before, and
swam over; crossed the road, and was not long in finding the trees that
marked the spot where he was to turn off to the farmhouse.

He made his way to the stable, raised the latch, and entered. A lamp
was burning, and the two men sitting and talking together. They leapt
up, with an exclamation of pleasure, as Oswald entered.

"We were afraid that something might have gone wrong; for, as I was
waiting for you in the road, I heard a body of horsemen coming along,
and hid behind the trees. As they went by, one of them said, 'We must
have passed them long ago, if they came by this road. They had not more
than a quarter of an hour's start.'

"I heard no more, but it suggested that, maybe, you had managed to
escape with the ladies, and that the Bairds were in pursuit of you."

"That was exactly the case. We have got them out of the hold, and
methought that we should have got two hours' start, at least, in which
case they would not have overtaken us before we had crossed the Liddel,
at the ford, six miles above the junction of the Esk with it, and were
well on our road towards Longtown; but by some accident, I know not
what, the matter was discovered before we have been gone ten minutes.
As it was certain that they would overtake us, long before we got to
Parton, we swam the Esk, and I have left the ladies on the hill over
there, in charge of Roger, while I came here. We know that, by morning,
the countryside will be up and searching the hills; and that, with the
two lasses, it would be hopeless for us to try and make our way on to
Hiniltie.

"Therefore, we decided to hide up for two or three days, then to make
our way down here at night, mount, and ride through. By that time the
search down in the valley here will have slackened, and we shall get
through Parton all right, and our only danger will be at the ford
across the Liddel; where, possibly, the Bairds may set a guard, lest we
find our way down there. I had intended that we should take the four
horses, and that you should make your way to Hiniltie across the hills;
but as there will now be no great occasion for speed, one of you had
best ride with us, while the other bears the news to Hiniltie that we
have carried off the girls.

"You had better settle between yourselves which shall go with us. You
may take it that there is about equal danger, both ways, for the one
that goes to Hiniltie must travel cautiously, as it will be a week
before the Bairds give up the search among the hills."

"We had best decide by lot."

Oswald picked up a piece of straw, and broke off two fragments, one an
inch longer than the other; and, closing his hand on them, he held the
two ends out.

"Do you draw," he said, holding it out to Fergus. "The longest straw
goes to Hiniltie, and shortest with us."

The man drew.

"I have the longest," he said, "and perhaps it were best that it should
be so, for I know the way thoroughly, having often been over the hills
in search of missing cattle."

"You will both remain here, till we come. Now, what food have you?"

"We bought a supply in Parton, yesterday evening, and have enough for a
week; for we thought that some might be needed by the whole party, on
our way; and moreover, we care not to go down often to the town, as we
might attract attention."

"That is good. Keep enough for tomorrow, for yourselves; I will take
the rest."

"There is no need for that. We can get what we want from the house and,
tomorrow evening, one of us will go down into Parton again."

"Or better still," Oswald said, "give the money to the hind here. I
suppose there is one."

"Yes; he sleeps in the house."

"Give him money, then, and a present for himself, and get him to fetch
it for you. Some of the Bairds may remain there, and you may be sure
that every stranger will be strictly questioned. I want also the four
horse cloths, which please make into a bundle. Is your water skin
full?"

"We filled it this afternoon, thinking it possible that we might make a
hasty start tonight."

"How much does it hold?"

"About two gallons."

"It would have been better had it been four. However, we must manage
with it. Now, do you know of any ford across the river? for I certainly
could not swim across, with this load."

"There is one half a mile farther up. We were asking the hind about it,
the other day, thinking that it might be useful should we have to fly
suddenly. I will go down with you; and indeed, I shall be glad to go
the whole way with you, for the provisions and those blankets and the
skin will be no light weight; and, as I am going to Hiniltie, it will
cheer Armstrong if I could tell him that I saw his daughters."

"It would be a good plan, Fergus, though in truth the weight would be
no great burden; but certainly, Armstrong would be pleased to know that
you had seen his daughters."

A few minutes later they set out, forded the river breast high,
carrying the loads on their heads; and then, climbing the hill, made
their way to the shelter, whose exact position Oswald had marked, on
starting, by a huge boulder that stood on the crest of the hill, some
fifty feet above it.

Roger was on the lookout. Seeing two figures approaching, when he
expected but one, he grasped his staff firmly.

"Who comes there?" he asked.

"It is I, Roger. I have brought one of the men with me, to help carry
the things. He is going to Hiniltie, and thought that Armstrong would
be pleased to know he had seen his daughters. I have got plenty of
food, and a skin of water."

"That is capital," Roger said cheerfully. "I was fearing that, having
so many things to think of, you might forget water."

Oswald went to the shelter.

"Are you awake, Janet?"

"Yes," she replied. "I have been anxious, while you were away."

"Are you cold?"

"I am not very warm," she answered; "but do not trouble about it, we
shall do very well."

"I have two blankets here," he said, as he removed the covering. "One
of these I will put over you both, and tuck it well in, each side, to
keep out the wind that comes in between the stones. Then I will lay
your smocks over that. I wrung them well, before putting them on the
sticks; and although I cannot say they are dry, yet they are not damp
enough to matter, and will help keep you warm. The other blanket I will
put over the sticks."

"Thank you indeed, Oswald," the girl said, gratefully. "That feels very
much more comfortable."

"Now, Roger, there is a blanket for you, and one for me, to wrap round
us, plaid fashion."

"I do not need one, master. In faith, I have more respect for this gown
than I ever had before--it is wondrously warm and, with the hood over
my head, I want nothing more."

"That is all very well, Roger. If you don't need it for your shoulders,
you need it for your legs; for being without hose, and with nought but
those sandals, you must be freezing. We will walk up and down here, for
a bit, and do you wrap it round your legs, like a Highlander's
petticoat. When we have tired ourselves, we will lie down and try to
get a sleep, for an hour or two."

As they walked, they talked over their plans; and Oswald decided that,
before daybreak, he would set out on the search for a place of
concealment.

"I will leave my helmet and breast and back piece behind me," he said,
"and will take your staff. Then, if I am caught sight of by any party
in the distance, I shall look like a shepherd; while, had I on my iron
harness, they would at once suspect me of being of the party, even
though I were alone. As for you, your monk's robe would be detected,
miles off."

"I could leave it behind me," Roger said.

"You have not much on underneath, Roger; and your bareness, in such
weather as this, would be as noticeable as your gown. Mind, before it
gets light, get the ladies up, and carry our bag of victuals and the
water skin over the crest. You may be sure that, as soon as it is
light, there will be many sharp eyes watching the hillside, all along
here."

The man who had come up with them had already wrapped himself in the
blanket he had brought with him, had crawled in among the bushes, and
was, as they could hear by his heavy breathing, already sound asleep.
After a time Oswald said that, as they had nothing more to settle, he
would try and get a few hours' rest. There was not the slightest fear
of surprise, and Roger and he were not long before they were both sound
asleep. Oswald woke two or three times and, at first sign of dawn,
shook Roger.

"You had better wake the ladies, in a few minutes, Roger, and get them
over the crest. Let their man, as soon as he has seen them, start at
once, keeping along behind the ridge, and warn him not to go down into
the valley until he is fully a mile beyond Parton. Tell him to look
carefully along the road, before he begins to descend, and to see that
it is clear. Even then, let him hide as much as may be, behind
brushwood and rock, until he gets down. When he has swum the river, let
him make a wide detour round Parton, so as to come down to the stables
without being noticed.

"I shall not be very long away. 'Tis scarce likely, among these hills,
that I shall find any place that we can crawl into; and I think we
shall have to content ourselves with lying down among the heather. I
must find a spot where no one, on any hill above, can look down on us.
We shall be quite safe from any party moving along on the same level as
ourselves."

Oswald had gone but a little distance, when he determined that no
better place could be found than the plateau itself. This extended, for
two or three hundred yards from the edge, looking down into the valley.
Beyond, the ground sloped sharply down again into a deep hollow; and
beyond, it was broken into rounded swells, rising one above another. A
party lying among the heather, where he was standing, could not be seen
by watchers from any other point. Moreover, it was most important that
all should be in shelter before it was fairly daylight. He therefore,
as soon as it was light enough to take in the principal features of the
scene, hurried back to his companions.

"We can do no better, girls, than to lie down together, two hundred
yards away. Pick your way through the bushes where they are thinnest,
so as not to disturb them. Please be off at once, and choose a spot
close to where the ground falls away, on the other side. Roger and I
must tumble this shelter down, and scatter the sticks; for if anyone
searching the hillside came along, he would guess that we had slept
here, and there would be a hue and cry at once."

The man had left, sometime before, for the valley; having gone off as
soon as he had spoken to the girls. Oswald and Roger ran down to the
shelter, speedily threw the stones into a heap, and scattered the
sticks; then, after glancing round to see that nothing had been left,
they collected the blankets, provisions, and water skin; and, taking up
these and Oswald's armour, ran in the direction that Oswald had pointed
out to the girls.

The ground was thickly covered with heather, and they had to step
carefully to avoid pressing it down. They reached the edge of the
plateau without seeing the girls and, after looking round for a minute
or two, Oswald called aloud.

He was answered by a merry laugh, and Jessie's head rose above the
heather. They had, indeed, passed within five or six yards of the
girls.

"That is good, indeed," Oswald said, as he lay down beside them. "If I
could not see you, when I was sure that you were quite near, there is
no fear of any searchers lighting upon you.

"The sun has just risen, and a mist still hangs on the top of the
hills," he went on; "and I am convinced that we cannot have been seen,
for men placed on the watch are sure to be high up on the hills, and it
will be some time yet before the sun rises high enough to drive away
the mist."

Although it was freezing sharply, they felt by no means cold as they
lay, wrapped in their blankets, with the heather rising well above
them, and sheltering them from a light breeze that had sprung up at
sunrise. After chatting with the girls for a time, Roger and Oswald
left them and, crawling along on their stomachs, got to the edge of the
descent.

By this time the sun was well above the hills, the mist had cleared
off, and they had an extensive view. From time to time they caught
sight of groups of three or four mounted men moving about, searching
the valleys; while single men, on foot, rambled over the hills.

"They are keeping up an active search, Roger. 'Tis well that we went no
farther. They will scarce suspect us of lying close to the valley we
left. I expect the main body has gone much farther. I have no doubt the
Bairds have a couple of hundred men and boys out. They would call out
every man and boy from their holdings, and most likely get a couple of
score of men from their village, and perhaps twice as many from Parton.
No doubt they will think that, if we came in this direction, we should,
last night, have found our way to one of the tracks across the hills,
and it is near these that their search will be the keenest.
Fortunately, they cannot know that I am here, nor guess that it is to
Yardhope that we intend to take them, and not to Hiniltie. Still, they
may expect that we shall try to cross the border, and I fancy we shall
scarcely get through without a fight."

"All the better," Roger grumbled. "My fingers tingle to bring down this
staff on the head of some of the Bairds, after all the trouble they
have given us."

They remained watching until it became dusk, except that, twice during
the day, they crawled back and partook of a meal with the girls. The
last time they joined them, Oswald said:

"Now, in half an hour it will be quite dark, and then we can safely get
up and walk about for a bit. I am sure you must feel stiff, lying still
so long."

"I have never kept quiet for so long a time, since I can remember,"
Jessie said, laughing.

"That shows that you have had no illnesses, Jessie. However, I shall be
glad to get up and stretch my limbs, myself. Half an hour will be
enough, and then we will have a good, long night. Another day of it,
and I think it will be safe to start."

The next afternoon they saw a number of parties searching the hills, in
all directions.

"I expect they have become convinced that we have not tried to get
straight through, Roger, and are hunting back for us. It is as well
that it will be dark in another half hour, and they will then have to
give up their search, for the night. If there were a couple of hours
more light, I should feel very uneasy."

"So should I, master. You and I would have little chance of mercy, if
we fell into their hands. It might well be that, in their anger, they
might slay the ladies, also."

"That would be like enough, Roger. However, there can be no chance of
their coming here, before it is dark."

At nine o'clock they started, and made their way down, with some
difficulty and many slips and falls, into the valley. Then they kept
along near the river, till Oswald was sure they were close to the ford.
He bade them halt here, and went forward alone. Before he had gone
fifty yards, he nearly stumbled against a man.

"Is it you, John?"

"Yes, it is I."

"Is all well?"

"It is all well, but I had a fright, yesterday morning. The Bairds
searched every cottage and hut over the hills, on this side, and they
say their men rode almost as far as Galloway; but they gave up the
search before they got here, feeling assured that they must have passed
you, very soon after you left the hold, and you could never have got as
far down as this."

"'Tis well they did not search, indeed," Oswald said. "Your story about
the horses might do well enough, for those who have no interest in the
matter, but it would never have done for the Bairds. All has been quiet
today?"

"They seem to have given up searching on this side. I hear that they
feel sure, now, the ladies have made for Hiniltie; and they have had
great forces out among the hills, and feel confident that they must
catch them soon."

"Have you got the horses saddled?"

"They are saddled, and brought down close to the road. Fergus is with
them."

"Then bring them across, at once. The sooner we are off now, the
better. Are there any of the Bairds' men in the town?"

"There are a few of them, but as no one has any idea that you are like
to pass through there, they will not be on the lookout. Besides, all
will have been among the hills, from daybreak this morning; and I
expect, by this time, there is scarce a soul awake in Parton."

Oswald returned to the girls, and they went out together to the ford.
In a couple of minutes the men were seen making their way across,
riding two horses, and leading the others.

"We thank you heartily," Janet said, "for having so risked your lives
for us; for, had you been caught with the four horses, they would at
once have connected you with us, and it would have gone hard with you."

"We have been keeping away from the horses, yesterday and today, just
going to a distance and lying down where, without being seen ourselves,
we could watch anyone who went up to the farm. We could have done no
good, and thought that it was better that we should be able to warn
you, if they had come and taken the horses away."

After crossing the river, Fergus at once started, on foot, for
Hiniltie.

They had already discussed how they should ride, and it had been
settled that, at starting, Janet should ride the fourth horse; and that
Jessie should ride behind the others, by turns. If an attack was
threatened, Jessie was to mount behind her sister, and they were to
take their place between Oswald and Roger, while their own man rode
close behind them.

It was just ten o'clock as they rode through Parton. Not a light was to
be seen. The whole place appeared wrapt in sleep. They went through at
a walk, so that, if any heard them, they would suppose that it was a
belated party of the searchers, and would give the matter no further
thought.

After riding for a short distance, they put the horses into a trot.
Four hours later they halted, at the point where the road down the Esk
valley divided, one going to the ferry a few hundred yards farther on,
while the other turned to the left, and followed the bank of the
Liddel.

John had inquired about the ferry, and learned that the ferryboat no
longer plied, as, since the troubles began, there was so little traffic
that it did not pay the ferryman to remain there. As they had already
decided to cross by the ford, four miles higher up, this did not
matter. As none of them was aware of its exact position, they decided
to wait where they were, until daylight.

Searching about, they found a deserted hut, with a shed adjoining it.
The horses were led into this, and the party then gathered in the hut,
and John struck a light, while Oswald and Roger broke up a fallen gate,
and the fire was soon blazing. Although there was not the slightest
chance of anyone travelling the road, at this hour, they hung one of
the thick blankets across the window, thus keeping out the cold air, as
well as preventing the light from being seen. Then the party lay down,
the men taking it by turns to stand guard outside, being relieved every
two hours.

As soon as day dawned they again mounted. It was about four miles' ride
to the point where the road divided, one branch going towards the
river, some seventy or eighty yards away. Here stood a square building
of some size, used as a refuge by travellers who arrived when the
Liddel was swollen, and the ford impracticable.

When the riders had come within a few yards of this building, two men,
hearing the sound of horses' hoofs, came out. As their eye fell upon
the party they gave a shout, ran out into the road, and drew their
swords.

Roger and Oswald rode at them. Parrying a thrust of one of the men,
Oswald cut him down; while Roger, with a tremendous blow from his
