The seniors smiled at his hurry, as they proceeded in a more leisurely
fashion to follow his example.

"Don't wait for us; over you go," said Cresswell, "and tell old Neptune
we are coming."

Dick waited for no further invitation, and sprang from the gunwale.
They watched the spreading circles that tracked his dive, and marked the
white shining streak as it darted past, under the water.

"He'll be a shark, before long," said Cresswell.  "Look at the distance
he's dived."

"He has to thank the tide for part of this, though," said Freckleton,
looking at his watch.  "Why, it's--"

An exclamation from Cresswell stopped him.  Dick had reappeared, but he
was twenty yards at least astern of the boat, and drifting back every
moment.

At first he did not seem to be aware of it; but, treading water, waved
one hand exultantly to celebrate his long dive.

But when he began to swim, leisurely at first, but harder presently, he
suddenly realised his position, and saw that instead of making way back
to the boat, he was losing distance at every stroke.

Some of my readers may have been in a similar position, and know the
horror of helplessness which, for a moment, comes over the swimmer at
such a time.  Dick was not given to panic, still less fear, but, for all
that, the minute which ensued was one of the most terrible in his life.

At certain times of the tide, the current between the Sprit Rock and the
long Fiddle-Sandbank rushed like a mill-race.  The boys knew this; they
had been reminded of it at starting.  But the morning had passed so
quickly that, until Dick had taken his header, and they saw him swept
astern, it had never occurred to one of them that it could possibly be
three o'clock.  Freckleton was the first to see the danger, and almost
as soon as Dick appeared above water, he flung off his coat and boots,
and saying to Cresswell, "Come quick with the boat," plunged into the
water.

He was soon at Dick's side; not to support him, for the boy was able to
do that for himself, but to encourage him to keep cool, and not waste
his strength in endeavouring to stem the tide.  And Dick had sense
enough to take the advice, and tread water quietly till the boat should
come.

It seemed a long time coming.  The anchor was fast in the bottom, and it
wanted all Cresswell's strength to get it up.  Indeed he would have been
tempted to simplify matters by cutting the cord, had he had a knife at
hand.

By the time it was free, the boys were almost a quarter of a mile away,
and getting weary.  But once free, their suspense was not prolonged.
Cresswell bore quickly down upon them, and picked them up; and rarely
did three friends breathe more freely than when they all stood once more
on the floor of their boat.

There was no speech-making or wringing of hands, no bragging, no
compliments.  They knew one another too well for that, and dressed in
silence, much as if the adventure had been an ordinary incident of an
ordinary bathe.

"It strikes me," said Cresswell, who still had the oars out, "it will
take us all our time to get back.  Are you ready to take an oar, old
man?"

Short as the time had been--indeed the whole incident had not occupied
much more than five minutes--the boat was about a mile below her old
moorings, and still in the rush of the current.

It was little the two rowers could do to keep her head up, much less to
make any way; and finally it became clear that if they were to get back
to Templeton at all that day, they must either anchor where they were,
for six hours, with the risk of their rope not holding in the Race, or
else let the current take them out to the open, and then make a long row
back outside the Sprit, and clear of the Fiddle Bank.

They decided on the latter, and somewhat gloomily rested on their oars,
and watched the backward sweep of the boat on the tide seaward.

The square tower of Templeton had become a mere speck on the coast-line,
before they felt the tide under them relax, and knew they were out of
the Race.

Then they manned their oars, and began their long pull home.
Fortunately the water still remained quiet, and the breeze did not
freshen.  But after about a mile had been made, and the Sprit Rock
seemed only midway between them and the shore, a peril still more
serious overtook them.  The sky became overcast, and a sea mist,
springing from nowhere, came down on the breeze, blotting out first the
horizon, then the rock, and finally the coast, and leaving them
virtually blindfolded in mid-ocean.

"We may as well anchor, and wait till it clears," said Cresswell.

"I think we might go on slowly," said Freckleton.  "If we keep the
breeze on our left, and Dick looks sharp out in front, we are bound to
come either on the Sprit or the shore.  Try it for a bit."

So they tried; rowing gingerly, and steering by the breeze on their
cheeks, while Dick, ahead, strained his eyes into the soaking mist.

They may have made another mile, and still the mist wrapped them round.
They had no idea where, they were.  They might be close to the Rock, or
they might have drifted down the coast, or they might be coming on to
the Race again.

Still, anything seemed better than lying idle, and they paddled steadily
on, hoping against hope for a single glimpse of daylight through the
veil.

Suddenly Dick held his hand above his head, and shouted--

"Easy!  Hold hard!"

And they could just see a dark object ahead on the water.

It couldn't be the rock, for it was too small; and they could hardly
imagine it to be part of the pier, or a boat on the beach.

They shouted; and, in a moment, an answer came, "Ahoy, there!" and they
knew they had come upon a fishing-boat at anchor.

"It's one of the fleet, waiting to get in.  We'd better go alongside,
and wait with them," said Freckleton.

So Dick shouted to say they were coming, and they rowed carefully
alongside.

The first sight that met Dick's astonished eyes, as he reached across to
seize the gunwale of the friendly boat, was Tom White, sitting
comfortably smoking in the stern.

"Good day, young gentlemen," said that worthy.  "Can't keep away from
us, can't yer?"

"Hullo, Tom!  We've lost our way in the mist," said Cresswell.  "Where
are we?"

"Reckon you're in the bay, and a swim to the pierhead."

"So near!  We made sure we were outside the Sprit.  How long have you
been here?"

"Come here when the tide turned, we did," said Tom, "with a boat full,
and no mistake.  Say, young gentlemen, you ain't forgot the poor mariner
that lost his boat, have yer?  It's cruel hard to lose your living and
have to begin afresh."

"If you mean you want a shilling for piloting us ashore," said
Cresswell, "here you are.  Will you take us, or will your mate?"

Dick grew uncomfortable, and, under pretence of wanting to examine some
of the fish on the floor of the lugger, he scrambled up the side, and
got in.

"Come back, Dick; do you hear?" called Cresswell.  "We must go back if
one of those fellows will run us in.  Will you come, Tom?"

Visions of the bar-parlour of the "Dolphin" hovered before Tom's mind as
he looked down at the speaker and the shilling that lay in his hand.

He was just about to consent, when he felt his arm nudged by Dick, who
was crouching down over the fish at his feet.

"Tom White," said the boy, looking up nervously, "don't go ashore.  They
are going to arrest you for pawning that boat that didn't belong to you.
Tell your mate to see us ashore.  There's another shilling for you!"

Tom took his pipe out of his mouth and gaped at the boy.  Then he slowly
pocketed the shilling.  Then he relieved himself of an oath.  Then he
called his mate--

"Jerry, see the squires ashore."

With fluttering heart Dick scrambled back into the boat, followed by the
hulking Jerry, who, in a very few minutes, ran them comfortably on to
the beach, and made an end of all their perils for that day.

They reached Templeton just in time for call over; and no one knew, as
they walked into Chapel that evening, through what adventures they had
passed since they left Templeton in the morning.

Early next morning Dick could not resist the temptation of going down to
call on Mr Green.

"Well, did the boats all come in?" he inquired.

"All, bar Tom White's.  And they do say it will be long enough before
any one sees him in these parts again.  He's got wind somehow.  It's
wonderful the way news travels on water--so it is."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

IN WHICH HEATHCOTE MOUNTS HIGH AND FALLS LOW.

George Heathcote celebrated the early hours of his holiday by "sleeping
in," until the boom of the Chapel bell shot him headlong out of bed into
his garments.

Coote, who had not yet mastered the art of venturing into Chapel alone,
grew more and more pale as the hand of the clock crawled on, and the
desperate alternative loomed before him, either of sharing his
unpunctual friend's fate, or else of facing the exploit of walking
unaided into his stall in the presence of gazing Templeton.

He had almost made up his heroic mind to the latter course, when a
sound, as of coals being shot into a cellar, broke the stillness of the
morning air; and next moment, Heathcote descended the stairs at the rate
of five steps a second.

"Come on, you idiot; put it on!" he cried, as he reached Coote, and
swept him forward towards the Chapel.

It was a close shave.  Swinstead was shutting the door as Heathcote got
his first foot in, and, but that the usher was unprepared for the
desperate assault of the two juniors, and lost a second in looking to
see what was the matter, Coote would have scored his first bad mark, and
Heathcote's name would have figured, for the fifth or sixth time that
term, on the monitor's black list.

As the latter young gentleman had nothing but his trousers, slippers,
and coat on over his nightshirt, he deemed it prudent to bolt as soon as
chapel was over, so as to elude the vigilant eyes of the authorities.
He, therefore, saw nothing of Dick as he came out; and Dick, as we have
seen, had too much on hand, just then, to see him.

At length, however, when the toilet was complete, and the glorious
liberty from lessons began to swell our heroes' breasts, Heathcote's
thoughts turned to Dick.

"Where's old Dick?" said he to Coote; "did you see him at breakfast?"

"Yes; he was at the other table.  But I didn't see where he went
afterwards."

Heathcote didn't like it.  Dick had done him a bad turn yesterday over
that levee business, and the least he could have done to-day would have
been to find him out and make things jolly again.

But, instead of that, he had vanished, and left it to Heathcote to find
him out.  "Go and see where he is," said he to Coote.

The meek Coote obeyed, and took a cursory trot round the School Fields
in search of his leader.  No Dick was there, and no one had seen him.

Heathcote's face grew longer as he heard the report.  It was getting
serious.  Dick was not only ill-treating him; he was cutting him.

He went off to Cresswell's study, as a last chance.  The study was
empty; and even the caps were gone from the pegs.  Base desertion!

As he left the study he met Pledge.

"Ah, youngster!  Going to grind all to-day?"

"I was looking for Dick."

"Oh!  David looking for Jonathan.  Poor chap!  Johnny has given you the
slip this time."

"Where has he gone?" asked Heathcote, trying to appear indifferent.

"The saintly youth has gone for a day's fishing in the Bay, with the
dearly-beloved Cresswell and the reverend Freckleton.  They have got him
an exeat from the Doctor, they have bought him lines and bait, they have
filled his pockets with good things.  So you see piety pays after all,
Georgie.  What a pity you are not pious, too!  You wouldn't be left so
lonely if you were."

Heathcote was too hard hit to reply; and Pledge was kind enough not to
attempt any further consolation.

It had been coming to this for weeks past.  Georgie had refused to
believe it as long as he could.  He had stuck to his chum, and borne all
the rebuffs which had rewarded him, patiently.  He had even made excuses
for Dick, and tried to think that their friendship was as strong as
ever.

But now he saw that all the time Dick had been falling away and cutting
himself adrift.  This was why he left the "Select Sociables" the moment
Heathcote joined them.  This was why he went to the levee as soon as he
saw Heathcote was not going.  And this was why he had hidden out of the
way this morning, for fear Heathcote should find out where he was going,
and want to come too.

Georgie laughed bitterly to himself, as he made the discovery.  As if he
cared for fishing, or boating, or sandwiches!  As if he cared about
being cooped up in a tarry boat the livelong day, with a couple of such
fellows as Cresswell and Freckleton!  As if he couldn't enjoy himself
alone or with Coote--poor young Coote, who had come to Templeton
believing Dick to be his friend, whereas Dick, in his eagerness to toady
to the "saints," would let him go to the dogs, if it wasn't that he,
Heathcote, was there to befriend him.

So Heathcote went forth defiant, with Coote at his heels, resolved to
let Templeton see he could enjoy himself without Dick.

He laughed extravagantly at nothing; he feigned to delight himself in
the company of every idler he came across; he scorned loudly such stupid
sport as fishing, or tennis, or fives.

He meant to make his mark.  And then Dick, when he came back, would
gnash his teeth with _envy_ and wish woe to the hour when he was fool
enough to desert his noblest friend!

"Tell you what'll be a lark, Coote," said Heathcote, as the two strode
on, arm in arm, followed by a small crowd of juniors, who, seeing they
were "on the swagger," hoped to be in the sport as spectators.  "Tell
you what; we'll have a walk round the roofs.  I know where we can get
up.  We can get nearly all round the Quad.  Won't it be a spree?"

Coote looked as delighted as he could, and said he hoped they wouldn't
be caught, or there might be a row.

"Bless you, no one's about to-day.  Come on.  Nobody's done it since
Fitch fell off a year ago, and he only got half round."

Coote was inwardly most reluctant to deprive the late Master Fitch of
his hard-earned laurels, and even hinted as much.  But Heathcote was in
no humour for paltering.  He was playing a high game, and Coote must
play, too.

So they gave their followers the slip, and dodged their way back to the
Quad, and made for the first staircase next to the Great Gate.  Up here
they crept, hurriedly and stealthily.  One or two boys met them on the
way, but Georgie swaggered past them, as though bound to pay an ordinary
morning call on some occupant of the top floor.  The top floor of all
was dedicated to the use of the maids, who at that hour of the day were
too much occupied elsewhere in making beds and filling jugs, to be at
all inconvenient.

Heathcote, who, considering he had never made the expedition before, was
wonderfully well up in the geography of the place, piloted Coote up a
sort of ladder which ended in a trap-door in the ceiling of the garret.

"I know it's up here," he said.  "Raggles told me it was the way Fitch
got up."

"Oh!" said Coote, hanging tight on to the ladder with both arms, and
trusting that, whichever way they ascended, they might select a
different mode of descent from that adopted by the unfortunate Fitch.

Horrors!  The trap-door was padlocked!

Joy!  The padlock was not locked!

They opened the flap, and scrambled into a cavernous space between the
ceiling and the roof, from which, to Coote's relief, there seemed no
exit, except by the door at which they entered.

Heathcote, however, was not to be put off, and scrambled round the place
on his hands and knees, in search of the hole in the roof, which he
knew, on Raggles' authority, was there.

It was there, at the very end of the gable: a little manhole, just big
enough to let a small body through to clear the gutter, and no more.

"Hurrah, old man!" shouted Heathcote, in a whisper, to his follower, who
still lingered at the trap-door.  "I've got it.  Shut that door down,
and crawl over here.  Mind you keep on the rafters, or you'll drop
through."

"Hurrah!" said Coote, pensively, as he proceeded to obey.

In two minutes they were out upon the roof, and enjoying a wonderful
bird's-eye view of Templeton and the coast beyond.

A moderately broad gutter ran round the roof on the inside of the
Quadrangle, with a low stone parapet at the edge.  Along this the two
boys crawled slowly and cautiously, until they had reached about the
middle of their side of the Quadrangle.

It was dizzy work, looking down from their eminence; but glorious.  Even
Coote, now the venture had been made, and no relics of the late Master
Fitch had appeared, began to enjoy himself.

"What a pity Dick isn't here!" said he.

"Rather!  Won't he look blue when he hears of it?" said Heathcote.
"Hullo! there are some of the fellows in the Quad.  There's Pauncefote,
isn't it?  I vote we yell."

"Perhaps somebody would hear.  Hadn't we better chuck a stone."

Heathcote detached a piece of plaster from the gutter, and pitched it
neatly down within an inch of the head of the unsuspecting Pauncefote.
That hero started, and looked first at the stone, then at the sky.
Finally his eyes met Georgie's triumphant face beaming over the parapet,
side by side with the rosy countenance of Coote.

It was enough.  In another two minutes the Den knew what was going on,
and Georgie and Coote were the heroes of the hour.

Moved by a desire to afford their spectators an entertainment worthy of
their applause, they proceeded to make the round of the Quadrangle at a
smart, though not always steady, pace; for their attention was so much
divided between the gutter before them and the upturned faces below
them, that they were once or twice decidedly close on the heels of the
luckless Fitch.

Once, when they came to a comparatively broad landing, they varied the
entertainment by swarming a little way up the tiles and sliding
gracefully down again, regardless of tailors' bills; and when the
spectators got tired of that, they treated them to a little horse-play
by pelting them with bits of plaster, and finally with Coote's hat.

Even the highest class of entertainment cannot thrill for ever, and
after a quarter of an hour of this edifying exhibition, the Den found
they had had enough of it, and began to saunter off, much to the
amazement of the two performers.

"May as well cut down," said Heathcote, when at length the Quad was
deserted, and nothing seemed likely to be gained by remaining.

Coote was quite ready to obey.  He had enjoyed his outing pretty well,
but was rather tired of standing with one foot in front of the other,
and keeping his eyes on Georgie.

He was nearest to the trap-door and had already crouched through it when
Heathcote, perceiving that one of the Den had come back for another
look, decided, in the kindness of his heart, to take one last turn round
before retiring.

He had accomplished half his journey, and was glancing down rather
anxiously to see if the boy was enjoying it, when a second-floor window
on the opposite side suddenly opened and Mansfield looked out.

This apparition nearly sent Georgie headlong over the parapet.  He saved
himself by dropping on his hands and knees.  He wasn't sure whether the
Captain had seen him or not.  If he had, he was in for it.  If he had
not, why on earth did he stand there at the window?

Georgie's performance ended in a humiliating wriggle back along the
gutter to the trap-door.  He dared not show so much as his "whisker"
above the parapet, and as the parapet was only high enough to conceal
him as he lay full length on his face, the return journey was both
painful and tedious.

