we'll find the right shop. I had my own bottle filled there yesterday,
so I know where to go."

On the Friday, Mrs. Cameron, who by universal consent had constituted
herself organizer of the various joint expeditions, sent out invitations
for a grand gathering of the Clan to go and view the ruins of the villa
of Tiberius. This was one of the principal sights of the island, and, as
the Preston party were not staying over the following week, it would
have seemed a pity for them to miss it.

"It's a case of taking nose-bags and going for the day," said Stewart,
delivering his messages at the various villas. "Meeting-place, the
piazza in the town. Those who like to come up by the funicular can do
so. We'll wait for them. I think the Mater will take the train and save
herself some of the climb. She doesn't like these endless steps, and
it's certainly a pull from our place to the town. It's worth while
walking down to the Marina to get the railway."

Mrs. Beverley, Mrs. Roper, and Joyce Preston joined Mrs. Cameron in
taking advantage of the little "Ferrovia Funicolare" that connected the
harbor with the town, and arrived on the piazza cool and fresh compared
with those who had preferred to toil up the steep path.

"I told you to come with me, Renie child," chided Mrs. Beverley. "Look
how hot you are already. You'll be quite overdone before we get to the
summit."

"Oh, Mums darling, I'm not tired! I've saved the fare and bought this
swanky little cane instead. Look! Isn't it dinky?" protested Irene,
proudly exhibiting her newly purchased treasure. "It has a leather strap
and a tassel and a knob that one can suck."

"You baby," laughed her mother. "We shall have to buy you a tin trumpet.
I don't believe you're out of the nursery yet."

"Tin trumpet, Mums darling? Oh! You've given me such an idea," purred
Irene, running to Michael Foard and whispering some communication into
his sympathetic ear, which caused him to walk back to a certain street
stall and purchase nine tin whistles, with which the younger members of
the party armed themselves and immediately began a desperate attempt to
reproduce "The Bluebells of Scotland," hugely to the entertainment of
the natives, who flocked to their doors all smiles and amused
exclamations.

"Bairns! I think shame of you," declared Mrs. Cameron. "They'll take us
for a wandering circus. Put those unmusical instruments in your pockets
till we're clear of the town. I never heard a poor Scottish air so
mangled. You may practice your band on the hills and scare the goats.
Don't play it in my ears again till you catch the proper tune."

The musicians, after their first burst of enthusiasm was expended, were
glad to save their breath for the climb. When houses were left behind
their way wound between high walls, up, up, up, along a paved pathway
among orange groves, till at last the allotments disappeared, and they
were on the open hillside, among the low shrubs and the rough grass and
the beautiful flowers. Irene, running up a bank in quest of
bee-orchises, broke her new cane into four pieces, but was somewhat
consoled by a stick which Michael cut her from a chestnut tree.

"It hasn't a knob to suck," he laughed, "but I'll tie a stick of
peppermint on to the end of it if you like."

"Don't tease me, or I'll throw a squashy orange at you."

"I thought you were fond of peppermint."

"So I am, and if there's another of those creamy Neapolitans left in
your pocket I'll accept it and forgive you."

"Right you are, O Queen! There are two here. Does your Majesty prefer a
purple paper or a green?"

The ruins, which formed the goal of their expedition, were the remains
of a once splendid villa erected by the Emperor Tiberius, and used
constantly by him until his death in A.D. 37. Most of the party were
disappointed to find them, as Peachy expressed it, "so very ruiny." It
was difficult to picture what the original palace must have been like,
for nothing was left of all the grandeur but crumbling walls, over which
Nature had scattered ferns and flowers. At the very top some of the old
masonry had been used to build a tiny church; this was closed, but,
peeping through the grille in the door, the visitors could catch
glimpses of blue-painted roof and of little model ships, placed as
votive offerings by the sailors in gratitude for preservation from
danger at sea. Outside this chapel was a great stone monument built so
near the edge of the cliff that, when sitting on its steps, one could
look down a sheer drop of several hundred feet into the blue waters
below. The view from here was magnificent, and as the Clan, in turns,
scanned the neighboring coast of Italy with field glasses, they believed
they could even distinguish the Greek temples at Paestum. The girls
described the glorious excursion they had taken there from school.

"You were lucky to be able to go all the way by char-a-banc," commented
Mrs. Cameron. "Dad and I went there on our honeymoon, years and years
ago, and traveled all the way from Naples by a terrible little jolting
train that carried cattle-trucks and luggage-trucks as well as passenger
carriages. I shan't ever forget that journey. We had to leave the
station at 6.30 and when we came downstairs we found it was a pouring
wet day. It was only the fact that the sleepy looking waiter at our
hotel must have roused himself at 5 A.M. to prepare our coffee, and that
we did not like to ask him to do it again another morning, that forced
us to set off in the rain. I never felt so disinclined for an excursion
in my life. Dad said afterwards if I'd given him the least hint he'd
have joyfully relinquished it, but each thought the other wanted to go,
so off we set. All the way to Cava it simply streamed, and we sat in our
corners of the carriage secretly calling ourselves idiots, and wondering
how we were going to look over temples in a deluge. But our heroism was
rewarded, for just as the train crossed the brigand's marsh the rain
stopped and the sun shone out, and the effect of blue sky and clouds was
simply glorious. We had a great joke at Paestum. A mosquito had stung me
badly on one lid so that I looked as if I had a black eye. It was most
uncomfortable and painful, I remember. Well, a party of French tourists
were going round the temples, and as they passed us they glanced at my
eye and then at Daddy--a husband of three weeks' standing--and they
murmured something to one another. I couldn't catch their words, but
quite plainly they were saying: 'Oh, these dreadful English! He's
evidently given her a black eye, poor thing! That's how they treat their
wives!'

"The French people went on to the second temple, and Dad and I sat down
to eat our lunch. We were fearfully annoyed by dogs that sat in front of
us and watched every mouthful, and barked incessantly. (Did they trouble
you too! How funny! They must surely be the descendants of our dogs
who've inherited a bad habit.) Dad got so utterly exasperated that he
said he must and would get rid of them, so he seized my umbrella, shook
it furiously at them and yelled out '_Va via_' in the most awful and
blood-curdling voice he could command. Just at that moment the French
tourists came back round the corner. They turned to one another with
nods of comprehension, as if they were saying, 'There! Didn't I tell you
so! See what a brute he really is,' and they cast the most sympathetic
glances at me as they filed by. Isn't that true, Daddy?"

Mr. Cameron lazily removed his cigarette.

"It's a stock story, my dear, that you've told against me for the last
twenty years. I won't say that it's not exaggerated. Go on telling it if
you like. My back's broad enough to bear it. Shall I return good for
evil? Well, as I walked through the town to-day, waiting till you came
up by the funicular, I saw one of the Tarantella dancers, and I engaged
the whole troupe to come to the house to-night and give us a
performance. You said you wanted to see them. Will our friends here
honor us with their company and help to act audience?"

It seemed an appropriate ending to such a delightful day, and all the
party readily accepted the invitation. After twilight fell they
assembled at the Camerons' villa and took their places in the salon,
which had been temporarily cleared of some of its furniture. The
Tarantella dancers, who were accustomed to give their small exhibition
to visitors, brought their own orchestra with them, a thin youth who
played the violin, a stout individual who plucked the mandolin, and an
enthusiast who twanged the guitar. The performers were charmingly
dressed in the old native costumes of the country, the men in soft white
shirts, green sleeveless velvet coats, red plush knickers, silk
stockings and shoes with scarlet bows, while the girls wore gay skirts,
striped sashes, lace fichus, and aprons, and gold beads round their
shapely throats. They danced several sprightly measures, waving
tambourines and rattling castanets, or twining silk scarves together,
while the musicians fiddled and strummed their hardest; then six of them
stood aside and the two principal artists advanced to do a "star turn."
"Romeo" sang an impassioned love song, with his hand on his heart, while
"Juliette" plucked at her apron and appeared doubtful of the truth of
his protestations. Then the "funny man" had his innings. He sat in a
chair with a shoe in his hand and tried to smack the head of a humorist
who knelt in front but always managed neatly to avoid his blows, the
whole being punctuated by vigorous exclamations in Italian, and much
energetic music from the orchestra.

A pretty girl sauntered next on to the scene, and sang--in a rather
peacock voice--a little ditty lamenting the weather, at which a
velvet-coated cavalier came to the rescue, and chanting his offer of
help sheltered her with a huge green umbrella, under which they
proceeded to make love, and finally executed a dance beneath its
friendly shade. The whole of the little performance was very graceful
and attractive, savoring so thoroughly of Southern Italy and showing the
courteous manners and winning smiles to the utmost advantage. The
dancers themselves seemed to have enjoyed it, and stood with beaming
faces as they bowed their adieux and thanked the audience for their kind
attention.

"Aren't they just too perfect," commented Peachy.

"_I_ want to wear a velvet bodice and a green skirt with a yellow
border. I want to dance the tarantella with a tambourine in my hand."

"Won't a two-step content you?" said Angus. "Mater says since the
room is cleared we may just as well finish with a little hop ourselves.
May I have the pleasure? Thanks so much. Mrs. Beverley's going to play
for us. It's a beast of a piano but it's good enough to dance to. We
mustn't notice if the bass is out of tune."




CHAPTER XXI

The Blue Grotto


Very early on Saturday morning Mr. Carson returned to Capri in a
sailing vessel, having taken advantage of a night crossing and arriving
with the dawn. Lorna had bidden her friends a temporary good-by for the
week-end, refusing all kind invitations of "bring your father to see
us," or "tell him he must join the Clan." She felt that her excuses for
him were of the flimsiest; she said he was tired, unwell, and needed
absolute rest and solitude, and begged them to forgive her if she spent
the time with him alone, and, though they replied that they could
understand his desire for quiet, she was conscious that they thought she
might at least have volunteered an introduction. Lorna knew only too
well that, if her father was aware there was the slightest danger of
meeting English people, he would probably insist upon taking the next
boat back to Naples; it was the consciousness of complete isolation that
gave the value to his holiday. She told him indeed that she had met some
of her school friends and had taken walks with them, but she mentioned
that they were staying down below, nearer the Marina, and that they were
not in the least likely to come up to the Casa Verdi.

"Let us take our books, Daddy," she suggested, "and go and sit on the
hillside as we did last Sunday. It was quiet on that ledge of the crag,
and away from everybody. The rest did you good, and I'm sure you enjoyed
it."

Lying on the cliff among the flowers, with blue sky above and blue sea
beneath, poor Mr. Carson allowed himself a temporary relaxation. He
smoked his pipe and read his paper, and for a little while at least the
hard lines round his mouth softened, and his anxious eyes grew easy. He
finished his Italian journal, lay idly watching the scenery, chatted,
dozed, and finally stretched out his hand for one of Lorna's books. It
happened to be an Anthology of Poetry which Irene had lent her, and
which contained one of the ballads that Mrs. Cameron had recited to the
assembled Clan. It had struck Lorna's fancy, and she was trying to learn
it by heart. Mr. Carson turned over the pages, read a few of the pieces,
and was closing the little volume when his eye chanced to light upon the
name written on the title page. Its effect upon him was like a charge of
electricity.

"David Beverley," he gasped. "David Beverley! Lorna! Great Heavens! By
all that's sacred, where did you get this?"

[Illustration: "'BY ALL THAT'S SACRED, WHERE DID YOU GET THIS BOOK?'"

--_Page 304_]

"Why, Dad! What's the matter? Irene lent me the book. It belongs to her
father."

"Her father! You don't mean to tell me your friend's father is David
Beverley?"

"Why not, Dad," whispered Lorna, looking with apprehension into his
haggard, excited face.

She guessed even before he spoke what the answer was going to be.

"David Beverley is the man who ruined my life!"

The blow which had fallen was utterly overwhelming. For a moment Lorna
fought against the knowledge like a drowning man battling with the
waters.

"Oh, Dad! Surely there's some mistake. It _can't_ be! Isn't it some
other Beverley perhaps?"

"I know his writing only too well. There's no possibility of a mistake.
Besides, I saw him in Naples--at the end of February. I haven't
forgotten the shock it gave me. Why," turning almost fiercely upon
Lorna, "didn't you tell me your schoolfellow's name before? Have you all
this time been making friends with your father's enemy?"

"I thought I'd often talked about Renie," faltered poor Lorna. "Perhaps
I never mentioned her surname. Oh, Dad! Dad! Is it really true? It's too
horrible to be believed."

Lying in the soft Capri grass, with the pink cistus flowers brushing
her hot cheeks, Lorna raged impotently against the tragedy of a fate
which was changing the dearest friendship of her life into a feud.
Irene!--the only one at school who had sympathized and understood her,
who had behaved with a delicacy and kindness such as no other person had
ever shown her, who had taken her into her home circle and given her the
happiest time she had ever had in her shadowed girlhood; Irene with her
merry gray eyes and her bright sunny hair, the very incarnation of
warm-hearted genuine affection--Irene, her roommate, her buddy, her
chosen confidante. How was it possible ever to regard her as an enemy?
Yet had she not vowed a solemn oath to hate all belonging to the man who
had so desperately injured them? Oh! The world seemed turning upside
down. Loyalty to her father and love for her friend dragged different
ways, and in the bitter conflict her heart was torn in two.

Mr. Carson, haunted to the verge of insanity by the terror of discovery,
was now obsessed with the one idea of escape from Mr. Beverley. He no
longer felt safe on the island. Any moment he dreaded to meet faces that
would betray recognition of his past. The calm and content of his visit
were utterly shattered, and a sudden violent impulse urged him to return
to Naples.

"Capri is not large enough to hold myself and David Beverley," he
declared. "We'll go back by the night boat, Lorna. Meantime we'll borrow
Signor Verdi's skiff and paddle about among the rocks. I feel easier on
water than on land. I like the sense of a space of ocean round me. You
can't suddenly meet a man when you've plenty of sea-room, can you?"

"No, no, Dad!" said Lorna, trying to soothe him. "We can walk down the
steps to the cove and get the skiff, and be quite away from everybody
once we are on the sea."

She was ready to humor his every whim, for in the blackness of her
trouble nothing seemed at present to really matter. The whirling eddies
of her thoughts rushed through her brain in a perpetual series of
questions and answers. Must hate strike the death knell of love? Surely
the only thing to do with an injury is to forgive it. Would revenge wipe
out the wrong or in any way solve anything? No, there would only be one
more wrong done in the world, to go on in ever-widening circles of
hatred and misery. Curses, like chickens, come home to roost, and
"getting even" may bring its own punishment.

"Our only chance is to go away and start afresh in a new country," she
sobbed. "At the other side of the Pacific we might forget--but no!
Renie! Renie! If I go to the back of beyond I shan't forget you, and all
you've been to me. The memory of you, darling, will last until the end
of my life."

Mr. Carson found Signor Verdi working in his allotment, obtained leave
from him to use the skiff, and climbing down the flight of steep steps
cut in the rock, reached the cove where the boat was beached on the
shingle. He had been an expert oarsman from his college days, and
understood Neapolitan waters, so in a short time he and Lorna were
skimming gently over the surface of the blue sea, keeping well away from
rocks and out of currents, but within reasonable distance of the land.
Sometimes they rowed and sometimes they drifted, hardly caring in what
direction they steered so long as they circled round the island. Their
only object was to stop out on the sea, and, as they had brought a
picnic basket with them, there was nothing to urge their return until
sunset. In the course of the afternoon they had coasted below Monte
Solaro, and found themselves approaching the entrance that led to the
Blue Grotto. In the mornings, when the steamer brought its crowd of
tourists, there was generally quite a little fleet of skiffs to be seen
here, but now, with the exception of a solitary boat, the famous cavern
was deserted. To avoid passing too near to even this one craft Mr.
Carson steered away from the shore, but turned his head in
consternation, for loud and unmistakable cries of "help" were ringing
over the water, and the occupants, frantically waving handkerchiefs,
were evidently doing their utmost to attract his attention. Common
humanity demanded that he must at least go and see what was the matter,
so he reluctantly altered his course.

In a boat close to the entrance of the grotto were several young people,
and Lorna instantly recognized Angus, Stewart, Jess, Michael, and
Peachy. They appeared in much anxiety, and directly they were within
hailing distance they called out their news:

"Mr. Beverley and Vincent and Irene have gone inside the grotto, and
they don't seem able to get out again. We can hear them shouting for
help."

The party, in their British imprudence, had not brought a boatman, and
they were uncertain what to do. Their own barque was too large to go
through the narrow opening into the cavern, and they looked hopefully at
Mr. Carson's little skiff.

"We don't know what's happened," gulped Jess.

"They went in to explore the Roman passage."

"Just by themselves."

"They've been gone such a long time," volunteered the others.

"Listen," said Peachy.

For from out the low entrance of the grotto floated a faint far-off
echoing ghost of a shout.

Lorna glanced imploringly at her father. He did not hesitate for a
moment. The man who had injured him was inside the cavern, perhaps in
deadly danger, and he was going to risk his own life and his daughter's
to save him. And risk there undoubtedly was. A breeze had arisen and
agitated the surface of the water, so that the ingress was smaller than
ever and more difficult to compass. When waves lashed the tideless
Mediterranean even the Capri fishermen shunned entering the grotto, for
they knew its perils only too well. Telling Lorna to lie flat on her
back Mr. Carson took the same position, and with infinite difficulty
managed to maneuver the skiff into the rocky entrance. There was barely
room, for each wave bumped it against the roof, but by clinging to the
chain he worked his way along and shot through into the lake within. On
the right of the cavern three figures, holding a light, stood on a kind
of landing-place, while a skiff drifting far off in the shadows told its
own tale.

Mr. Carson rowed at once to retrieve the truant boat, and towed it back
to its owners.

"We thought we had tied it securely," explained Mr. Beverley. "We were
utterly aghast when we came back and found it had drifted. It would have
been a horrible experience to stay here all night. If the sea rose we
might even have been imprisoned for days. We were fools to come, but I
didn't realize the danger."

"The sea is much rougher already," said Mr. Carson. "It'll be a ticklish
matter to get out again, and the sooner we do it the better. Will you go
first and I'll follow on after?"

"It's like you, Lorna, to come to rescue us. I always called you my good
angel," choked Irene, as she entered the skiff. "I thought just now I
was never going to see you again in this world. Let's get out of this
horrible place as fast as we can. It's like Dante's Inferno. I've never
been so frightened in all my life."

One after the other the two skiffs started on their risky exit from the
grotto, scraping and bumping against the roof with the water on a level
with the gunwale; one wave indeed overflowed and soused them, but the
next moment they sighted the sky and grazing through the entrance they
gained the open water.

It was only when, in the clear afternoon daylight he turned to thank his
rescuer that a flash of recognition flooded Mr. Beverley's face.

"Cedric Houghten! You! You!" he stammered, as if almost disbelieving the
evidence of his own eyes.

"Yes, it is I; but having seen me, forget me," returned Mr. Carson, his
dark face flushed and his hand on the oar. "It's the one favor you can
do me for saving you. Let me vanish as I came, and don't try to follow
me. I only hope we may never cross each other's paths again."

"Cedric! Come back!" yelled Mr. Beverley, as the skiff shot away. "Man
alive! We've been searching for you for years. Don't you know that we've
proved your innocence! Come back, I say, and let me tell you."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late that evening, after a very long talk with Mr. Beverley, that
Lorna's father explained to her the circumstances that had cleared his
name.

"David had no more embezzled the money than I, and, thank God, he has
no idea I ever distrusted him. When a further sum went, Mr. Fenton set a
trap, and discovered to his infinite grief that it was his own son who
had been robbing the firm. It practically broke him, and he has retired
from all active share in the business now. They packed young Fenton off
to New Zealand to try farming instead of finance, but he's not doing any
good there. Mr. Fenton, it seems, was most anxious to find me and right
the injustice done me, but I had hidden myself so well under an assumed
name in Naples that it was impossible for them to trace me. They
advertised in the Agony column of _The Times_, but I avoided English
papers, so never saw the advertisements. My efforts to escape notice
were only too successful, and, although I didn't know it, I was actually
defeating my own ends by my caution. If, as I intended, I had started
for a new continent, I might so completely have broken all links with my
