cheerfully and agreed at once to the proposed arrangement of continuing
the search all night by torchlight.

When the plan of search had been arranged, and another rendezvous fixed,
the various parties went out and searched the live-long night in every
copse and dell, in every bush and brake, and on every ridge and knoll
that seemed the least likely to have been selected by the lost little
ones as a place of shelter.  But the forest was wide.  A party of ten
times their number would have found it absolutely impossible to avoid
passing many a dell and copse and height and hollow unawares.  Thus it
came to pass that although they were once or twice pretty near the cave
where the children were sleeping, they did not find it.  Moreover, the
ground in places was very hard, so that, although they more than once
discovered faint tracks, they invariably lost them again in a few
minutes.  They shouted lustily, too, as they went along, but to two such
sleepers as Olaf and Snorro in their exhausted condition, their wildest
shouts were but as the whisperings of a sick mosquito.

Gradually the searchers wandered farther and farther away from the spot,
until they were out of sight and hearing.

We say sight and hearing, because, though the children were capable of
neither at that time, there was in that wood an individual who was
particularly sharp in regard to both.  This was a scout of a party of
natives who chanced to be travelling in that neighbourhood at the time.
The man--who had a reddish-brown body partially clad in a deer-skin,
glittering black eyes, and very stiff wiry black hair, besides
uncommonly strong and long white teeth, in excellent order--chanced to
have taken up his quarters for the night under a tree on the top of a
knoll.  When, in the course of his slumbers, he became aware of the fact
that a body of men were going about the woods with flaring torches and
shouting like maniacs, he awoke, _not_ with a start, or any such
ridiculous exclamation as "Ho!"  "Ha!" or "Hist!" but with the mild
operation of opening his saucer-like eyes until they were at their
widest.  No evil resulting from this cautious course of action, he
ventured to raise his head an inch off the ground--which was his rather
extensive pillow--then another inch and another, until he found himself
resting on his elbow and craning his neck over a low bush.  Being almost
black, and quite noiseless, he might have been mistaken for a
slowly-moving shadow.

Gradually he gained his knees, then his feet, and then, peering into
space, he observed Biarne and Krake, with several others, ascending the
knoll.

For the shadow to sink again to its knees, slope to its elbows, recline
on its face, and glide into the heart of a thick bush and disappear, did
not seem at all difficult or unnatural.  At any rate that is what it
did, and there it remained observing all that passed.

"Ho! hallo!  Olaf!  Snorro! hi-i-i!" shouted Biarne on reaching the
summit of the knoll.

"Hooroo!" yelled Krake, in a tone that must have induced the shadow to
take him for a half-brother.

"Nothing here," said Biarne, holding up the torch and peering round in
all directions.

"Nothing whatever," responded Krake.

He little knew at the time that the shadow was displaying his teeth, and
loosening in its sheath a long knife or dagger made of bone, which, from
the spot where he lay, he could have launched with unerring certainty
into the heart of any of those who stood before him.  It is well for man
that he sometimes does not know what _might_ be!

After a brief inspection of the knoll, and another shout or two, they
descended again into the brake and pushed on.  The shadow rose and
followed until he reached a height whence he could see that the
torch-bearers had wandered far away to the westward.  As the friends and
relatives for whom he acted the part of scout were encamped away to the
eastward, he returned to his tree and continued his nap till daybreak,
when he arose and shook himself, yawned and scratched his head.
Evidently he pondered the occurrences of the night, and felt convinced
that if so many strange men went about looking for something with so
much care and anxiety, it must undoubtedly, be something that was worth
looking for.  Acting on this idea he began to look.

Now, it must be well-known to most people that savages are rather smart
fellows at making observations on things in general and drawing
conclusions therefrom.  The shouts led him to believe that lost human
beings were being sought for.  Daylight enabled him to see little feet
which darkness had concealed from the Norsemen, whence he concluded that
children were being sought for.  Following out his clue, with that
singular power of following a trail for which savages are noted, he came
to the cave, and peered through the bushes with his great eyes, pounced
upon the sleepers, and had his pug nose converted into a Roman--all as
related in the last chapter.

Sometime after sunrise the various searching parties assembled at the
place of rendezvous--fagged, dispirited, and hungry.

"Come," said Karlsefin, who would not permit his feelings to influence
his conduct, "we must not allow ourselves to despond at little more than
the beginning of our search.  We will breakfast here, lads, and then
return to the ridge where we first saw their footsteps.  Daylight will
enable us to track them more easily.  Thank God the weather is warm, and
I daresay if they kept well under cover of the trees, the dear children
may have got no harm from exposure.  They have not been fasting _very_
long, so--let us to work."

Leif and Biarne both fell in with Karlsefin's humour, and cheered the
spirits of the men by their tone and example, so that when the hurried
meal was finished they felt much refreshed, and ready to begin the work
of another day.

It was past noon before they returned to the ridge and began the renewed
search.  Daylight now enabled them to trace the little footsteps with
more certainty, and towards the afternoon they came to the cave where
the children had slept.

"Here have they spent the night," said Leif, with breathless interest,
as he and Karlsefin examined every corner of the place.

"But they are gone," returned the other, "and it behoves us to waste no
time.  Go, Biarne, let the men spread out--stay!--Is not this the foot
of a man who wears a shoe somewhat different from ours?"

"'Tis a savage," said Biarne, in a tone of great anxiety.

Karlsefin made no reply, and the party being now concentrated, they
followed eagerly on, finding the prints of the feet quite plain in many
places.

"Unquestionably they have been captured by a savage," said Leif.

"Ay, and he must have taken Snorro on his shoulder, and made poor Olaf
walk alongside," observed Biarne.

Following the trail with the perseverance and certainty of blood-hounds,
they at last came to the deserted encampment on the banks of the
rivulet.  That it had been forsaken only a short time before was
apparent from the circumstance of the embers of the fires still smoking.
They examined the place closely and found the little foot-marks of the
children, which were quite distinguishable from those of the native
children by the difference in the form of the shoes.  Soon they came to
marks on the bank of the stream which indicated unmistakeably that
canoes had been launched there.  And now, for the first time, the
countenances of Leif and Karlsefin fell.

"You think there is no hope?" asked the latter.

"I won't say that," replied Leif; "but we know not what course they have
taken, and we cannot follow them on foot."

"True," observed Karlsefin, in bitter despondency.

"The case is not so bad," observed Heika, stepping forward at this
point.  "You know we have a number of canoes captured from the savages;
some of us have become somewhat expert in the management of these.  Let
a few of us go back and fetch them hither on our shoulders, with
provisions for a long journey, and we shall soon be in a position to
give chase.  They cannot have gone far yet, and we shall be sure to
overtake them, for what we lack in experience shall be more than made up
by the strength of our arms and wills."

"Thou art a good counsellor, Heika," said Karlsefin, with a sad smile;
"I will follow that advice.  Go thou and Hake back to the huts as fast
as may be, and order the home-guard to make all needful preparation.
Some of us will follow in thy steps more leisurely, and others will
remain here to rest until you return with the canoes."

Thus directed the brothers turned their powers of speed to good account,
so that, when some of their comrades returned foot-sore and jaded for
want of rest, they not only found that everything was ready for a start,
but that a good meal had been prepared for them.

While these remained in the settlement to rest and protect it, the
home-guards were ordered to get ready for immediate service.  Before
night had closed in, the brothers, with torches in their hands, headed a
party of fresh men carrying three canoes and provisions on their
shoulders.  They reached the encampment again in the early morning, and
by daybreak all was ready for a start.  Karlsefin, Thorward, and Heika
acted as steersmen; Krake, Tyrker, and Hake filled the important posts
of bowmen.  Besides these there were six men in each canoe, so that the
entire party numbered twenty-four strong men, fully armed with bow and
arrow, sword and shield, and provisioned for a lengthened voyage.

"Farewell, friends," said Karlsefin to those who stood on the banks of
the little stream.  "It may be that we shall never return from this
enterprise.  You may rest assured that we will either rescue the
children or perish in the attempt.  Leif and Biarne have agreed to
remain in charge of the settlement.  They are good men and true, and
well able to guide and advise you.  Tell Gudrid that my last thoughts
shall be of her--if I do not return.  But I do not anticipate failure,
for the God of the Christians is with us.--Farewell."

"Farewell," responded the Norsemen on the bank, waving their hands as
the canoes shot out into the stream.

In a few minutes they reached the great river, and, turning upstream,
were soon lost to view in the depths of the wide wilderness.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

NEW EXPERIENCES--DIFFICULTIES ENCOUNTERED AND OVERCOME--THORWARD AND
TYRKER MAKE A JOINT EFFORT, WITH HUMBLING RESULTS.

It may be as well to remark here, that the Norsemen were not altogether
ignorant of the course of the great river on which they had now
embarked.  During their sojourn in those regions they had, as we have
said, sent out many exploring parties, and were pretty well acquainted
with the nature of the country within fifty miles or so in all
directions.  These expeditions, however, had been conducted chiefly on
land; only one of them by water.

That one consisted of a solitary canoe, manned by four men, of whom
Heika was steersman, while Hake managed the bow-paddle, these having
proved themselves of all the party the most apt to learn the use of the
paddle and management of the canoe.  During the fight with the savages,
recorded in a previous chapter, the brothers had observed that the man
who sat in the bow was of quite as much importance in regard to steering
as he who sat in the stern; and when they afterwards ascended the river,
and found it necessary to shoot hither and thither amongst the surges,
cross-currents, and eddies of a rapid, they then discovered that simple
steering at one end of their frail bark would not suffice, but that it
was necessary to steer, as it were, at both ends.  Sometimes, in order
to avoid a stone, or a dangerous whirlpool, or a violent shoot, it
became necessary to turn the canoe almost on its centre, as on a pivot,
or at least within its own length; and in order to accomplish this, the
steersman had to dip his paddle as far out to one side as possible, to
draw the stern in that direction, while the bowman did the same on the
opposite side, and drew the bow the other way--thus causing the light
craft to spin round almost instantly.  The two guiding men thus acted in
unison, and it was only by thoroughly understanding each other, in all
conceivable situations, that good and safe steering could be achieved.

The canoes which had been captured from the savages were frail barks in
the most literal sense of these words.  They were made of the bark of
the birch-tree, a substance which, though tough, was very easily split
insomuch that a single touch upon a stone was sufficient to cause a bad
leak.  Hence the utmost care was required in their navigation.  But
although thus easily damaged they were also easily repaired, the
materials for reparation--or even, if necessary, reconstruction--being
always at hand in the forest.

Now although Heika and his brother were, as we have said, remarkably
expert, it does not follow that those were equally so who managed the
other two canoes of the expedition.  On the contrary, their experience
in canoeing had hitherto been slight.  Karlsefin and his bowman Krake
were indeed tolerably expert, having practised a good deal with the
Scottish brothers, but Thorward turned out to be an uncommonly bad
canoe-man; nevertheless, with the self-confidence natural to a good
seaman, and one who was expert with the oar, he scouted the idea that
anything connected with fresh-water voyaging could prove difficult to
_him_, and resolutely claimed and took his position as one of the
steersmen of the expedition.  His bowman, Tyrker, as ill luck would have
it, turned out to be the worst man of them all in rough water, although
he had shown himself sufficiently good on the smooth lake to induce the
belief that he might do well enough.

But their various powers in this respect were not at first put to the
test, because for a very long way the river was uninterrupted by rapids,
and progress was therefore comparatively easy.  The scenery through
which they passed was rich and varied in the extreme.  At one part the
river ran between high banks, which were covered to the water's edge
with trees and bushes of different kinds, many of them being exceedingly
brilliant in colour.  At another part the banks were lower, with level
spaces like lawns, and here and there little openings where rivulets
joined the river, their beds affording far-reaching glimpses of
woodland, in which deer might occasionally be seen gambolling.
Elsewhere the river widened occasionally into something like a lake,
with wooded islets on its calm surface, while everywhere the water,
earth, and air teemed with animal life--fish, flesh, fowl, and insect.
It was such a sight of God's beautiful earth as may still be witnessed
by those who, leaving the civilised world behind, plunge into the vast
wildernesses that exist to this day in North America.

Beautiful though it was, however, the Norsemen had small leisure and not
much capacity to admire it, being pre-occupied and oppressed by anxiety
as to the fate of the children.  Still, in spite of this, a burst of
admiration would escape them ever and anon as they passed rapidly along.

The first night they came to the spot where the natives had encamped the
night before, and all hands were very sanguine of overtaking them
quickly.  They went about the encampment examining everything, stirring
up the embers of the fires, which were still hot, and searching for
little footprints.

Hake's unerring bow had supplied the party with fresh venison and some
wild-geese.  While they sat over the fires that night roasting steaks
and enjoying marrow-bones, they discussed their prospects.

"They have got but a short start of us," said Karlsefin, looking
thoughtfully into the fire, before which he reclined on a couch of
pine-branches, "and if we push on with vigour, giving ourselves only
just sufficient repose to keep up our strength, we shall be sure to
overtake them in a day or two."

"It may be so," said Thorward, with a doubtful shake of the head; "but
you know, brother, that a stern chase is usually a long one."

Thorward was one of those unfortunate men who get the credit of desiring
to throw wet blankets and cold water upon everything, whereas, poor man,
his only fault was a tendency to view things critically, so as to avoid
the evil consequences of acting on the impulse of an over-sanguine
temperament.  Thorward was a safe adviser, but was not a pleasant one,
to those who regard all objection as opposition, and who don't like to
look difficulties full in the face.  However, there is no question that
it would have been better for him, sometimes, if he had been gifted with
the power of holding his tongue!

His friend Karlsefin, however, fully appreciated and understood him.

"True," said he, with a quiet smile, "as you say, a stern chase is a
long one; nevertheless we are not _far_ astern, and that is what I count
on for shortening the chase."

"That is a just remark," said Thorward gravely, applying a marrow-bone
to his lips, and drinking the semi-liquid fat therefrom as if from a
cup; "but I think you might make it (this is most excellent marrow!) a
still shorter chase if you would take my advice.--Ho!  Krake, hand me
another marrow-bone.  It seems to me that Vinland deer have a peculiar
sweetness, which is not so obvious in those of Norway, though perchance
it is hunger which gives the relish; and yet can I truly say that I have
been hungered in Norway.  However, I care not to investigate reasons too
closely while I am engaged in the actual practice of consumption."

Here he put another marrow-bone to his lips, and sucked out the contents
with infinite gusto.

"And what may your advice be?" asked his friend, laughing.

"I'll wager that Hake could tell you if his mouth were not too full,"
replied Thorward, with a smile.

"Say, thou thrall, before refilling that capacious cavern, what had best
be done in order to increase our speed?"

Hake checked a piece of wild-fowl on its passage to his mouth, and,
after a moment's consideration, replied that in his opinion lightening
the load of the canoe was the best thing to be done.

"And say," continued Thorward, beginning to [eat] a large drumstick,
"how may _that_ be done?"

"By leaving our provisions behind," answered Hake.

"Ha! did not I say that he could tell you?" growled Thorward between his
teeth, which were at that moment conflicting with the sinewy part of the
drumstick.

"There is something in that," remarked Karlsefin.

