and not be afraid."

About this time the cloud which hung over the emigrant ship was darkened
still more by a visit from the Angel of Death.  The mother of Brown-eyes
died.  At that time Pauline was indeed an angel of mercy to mother and
child.  After the remains of the mother were committed to the deep, the
poor orphan clung so piteously to Pauline that it was scarcely possible
to tear her away.  It was agreed at last that, as the child had now no
natural protector, except an uncle and aunt, who seemed to think they
had already too many children of their own, Pauline should adopt her.

When the emigrants reached the island-harbour, without further mishap,
they were surprised to find a large steamer at anchor.  The captain of
it soon explained that extensive damage to the machinery had compelled
him to run in there for shelter while the necessary repairs were being
effected.

"Where are you bound for?" asked Dominick, who with Dr Marsh and Otto
had accompanied Malines on board the steamer.

"For England."

"For England?" almost shouted Dominick and Otto in the same breath.

"Yes.  Our repairs are completed, we set off to-morrow."

"Have you room for two or three passengers?"

"Yes, plenty of room.  We shall have to put several ashore at the Cape,
where I hope to get a doctor, too, for our doctor died soon after we
left port, and we are much in want of one, having a good many sick men
on board."

"Otto," whispered Dr Marsh, "our having been diverted from our course
has not turned out such a bad business after all, has it?"

"On the contrary, the very best that could have happened.  I'll never
give way to unbelief again!"

Poor Otto!  He did not at that time know how deeply doubt and unbelief
are ingrained in the human heart.  He did not know that man has to be
convinced again and again, and over again, before he learns to hope
against hope, and to believe heartily at all times that, "He doeth all
things well."

It was with very mingled feelings that the Rigondas, Dr Marsh, and
Brown-eyes parted next day from the friends with whom they had
associated so long.  It is no exaggeration to say that there was
scarcely a dry eye in the two vessels; for, while the settlers wept for
sorrow, the crews and passengers wept more or less from sympathy.  Even
the dead-eyes of the ship, according to Malone, shed tears!  As for poor
Brown-eyes, who was a prime favourite with many of her old friends, male
and female, before she got away she had been almost crushed out of
existence by strong arms, and her eyes might have been pea-green or pink
for anything you could tell, so lost were they in the swollen lids.
Long after the vessels had separated the settlers continued to shout
words of good-will and blessing, "We'll never forgit ye, Miss Pauline,"
came rolling after them in the strong tones of Joe Binney.  "God bless
you, Miss," came not less heartily from Hugh Morris.  "We loves ye,
darlint," followed clear and shrill from the vigorous throat of the
widow Lynch, and a wild "Hooray!" from Teddy endorsed the sentiment.
Nobbs, the blacksmith, and little Buxley, ran up the rigging to make the
waving of their caps more conspicuous, and when faces could no longer be
distinguished and voices no longer be heard, the waving of kerchiefs
continued until the rounding of a cape suddenly shut them all out from
view for ever.

"Thank God," said Dr Marsh, with a voice deepened and tremulous from
emotion, "that though they have lost their queen, they shall never lose
the sweet influences she has left behind her."

The great ocean steamer had now cleared the land; her mighty engines
seemed to throb with joy at being permitted once more to, "Go ahead,
full speed," and soon she was cleaving her way grandly through the
broad-backed billows of the Southern sea--homeward bound!

Let us leap on in advance of her.

The little old lady with the gold spectacles and neat black cap, and
smooth, braided hair, is seated in her old arm-chair, with the old sock,
apparently--though it must have been the latest born of many hundreds of
socks--on the needles, and the unfailing cat at her elbow.  The aspect
of the pair gives the impression that if a French Revolution or a Chili
earthquake were to visit England they would click-and-gaze on with
imperturbable serenity through it all.

But the little old lady is not alone now.  Old Mr Rigonda sits at the
table opposite to her, with his forehead in his hands, as though he
sought to squeeze ideas into his head from a book which lies open before
him on the table.  Vain hope, for the book is upside down.  Profound
silence reigns, with the exception of the clicking needles and the
purring cat.

"My dear," at length exclaimed the bald old gentleman, looking up with a
weary sigh.

"Yes, John?"  (Such is his romantic Christian name!)

"I can't stand it, Maggie."  (Such is _her_ ditto!)

"It is, indeed, hard to bear, John.  If we only knew for certain that
they are--are gone, it seems as if we could bow to His will; but this
terrible and wearing uncertainty is awful.  Did you make inquiry at
Lloyd's to-day?"

"Lloyd's?  You seem to think Lloyd's can tell everything about all that
happens on the sea.  No, it's of no use inquiring anywhere, or doing
anything.  We can only sit still and groan."

In pursuance of this remaining consolation, the poor old gentleman
groaned heavily and squeezed his forehead tighter, and gazed at the
reversed book more sternly, while the old lady heaved several deep
sighs.  Even the cat introduced a feeble mew, as of sympathy, into the
midst of its purr--the hypocrite!

"It was the earthquake that did it," cried Mr Rigonda, starting up, and
pacing the room wildly, "I'm convinced of that."

"How can that be, John, dear, when you were in Java at the time, and our
darlings were far away upon the sea?"

"How can _I_ tell how it could be, Maggie?  Do you take me for a
geological philosopher, who can give reasons for every earthly thing he
asserts?  All I know is that these abominable earthquakes go half
through the world sometimes.  Pity they don't go through the other half,
split the world in two, and get rid of the subterranean fires
altogether."

"John, my dear!"

"Well, Maggie, don't be hard on me for gettin' irascible now and then.
If you only knew what I suffer when--but forgive me.  You _do_ know what
I suffer--there!"

He stooped and kissed the old lady's forehead.  The cat, uncertain,
apparently, whether an assault was meant, arched its back and tall, and
glared slightly.  Seeing however that nothing more was done, it
subsided.

Just then the wheels of a cab were heard rattling towards the front
door, as if in haste.  The vehicle stopped suddenly.  Then there was
impatient thundering at the knocker, and wild ringing of the bell.

"Fire!" gasped the half-petrified Mrs Rigonda.

"No smell!" said her half-paralysed spouse.

Loud voices in the passage; stumbling feet on the stairs; suppressed
female shrieks; bass masculine exclamations; room door burst open; old
couple, in alarm, on their feet; cat, in horror, on the top of the
bookcase!

"Mother! mother!  O father!"--yelled, rather than spoken.

Another moment, and the bald, little old man was wrestling in the
ex-queen's arms; the little old lady was engulfed by Dominick and Otto;
Dr John Marsh and Brown-eyes stood transfixed and smiling with idiotic
joy at the door; while the cat--twice its size, with every hair erect--
glared, and evolved miniature volcanoes in its stomach.

It was an impressive sight.  Much too much so to dwell on!

Passing it over, let us look in on that happy home when toned down to a
condition of reasonable felicity.

"It's a dream--all a wild, unbelievable dream!" sighed the old
gentleman, as, with flushed face and dishevelled hair, he spread himself
out in an easy chair, with Queen Pina on his knee and Brown-eyes at his
feet.  "Hush! all of you--wait a bit."

There was dead silence, and some surprise for a few seconds, while Mr
Rigonda shut his eyes tight and remained perfectly still, during which
brief lull the volcanic action in the cat ceased, and its fur slowly
collapsed.

"Dreams shift and change so!" murmured the sceptical man, gradually
opening his eyes again--"What! you're there yet, Pina?"

"Of course I am, darling daddy."

"Here, pinch me on the arm, Dominick--the tender part, else I'll not
waken up sufficiently to dispel it."

A fresh outburst of hilarity, which started the stomachic volcanoes and
hair afresh, while Pauline flung her arms round her father's neck for
the fiftieth time, and smothered him.  When he was released, and
partially recovered, Otto demanded to know if he really wanted the dream
dispelled.

"Certainly not, my boy, certainly not, if it's real; but it would be so
dreadfully dismal to awake and find you all gone, that I'd prefer to
dream it out, and turn to something else, if possible, before waking.
I--I--"

Here the old gentleman suddenly seized his handkerchief, with a view to
wipe his eyes, but, changing his mind, blew his nose instead.

Just then the door opened, and a small domestic entered with that
eminently sociable meal, tea.  With a final explosion, worthy of Hecla
or Vesuvius, the cat shot through the doorway, as if from a catapult,
and found refuge in the darkest recesses of the familiar coal-hole.

"But who," said Mr Rigonda, casting his eyes suddenly downward, "who is
this charming little brown-eyed maid that you have brought with you from
the isles of the southern seas?  A native--a little Fiji princess--eh?"

"Hush! father," whispered Pauline in his ear, "she's a dear little
orphan who has adopted me as her mother, and would not be persuaded to
leave me.  So, you see, I've brought her home."

"Quite right, quite right," returned the old man, stooping to kiss the
little one.  "I've often thought you'd be the better of a sister, Pina,
so, perhaps, a daughter will do as well."

"Now, then, tea is ready; draw in your chairs, darlings," said Mrs
Rigonda, with a quavering voice.  The truth is that all the voices
quavered that night, more or less, and it was a matter of uncertainty
several times whether the quavering would culminate in laughter or in
tears.

"Why do you so often call Pina a queen, dear boy?" asked Mrs Rigonda of
her volatile son, Otto.

"Why?" replied the youth, whose excitement did not by any means injure
his appetite--to judge from the manner in which he disposed of muffins
and toast, sandwiched now and then with wedges of cake--"Why? because
she _is_ a queen--at least she _was_ not long ago."

An incredulous smile playing on the good lady's little mouth, Pauline
was obliged to corroborate Otto's statement.

"And what were you queen of?" asked her father, who was plainly under
the impression that his children were jesting.

"Of Refuge Islands, daddy," said Pina; "pass the toast, Otto, I think I
never _was_ so hungry.  Coming home obviously improves one's appetite."

"You forget the open boat, Pina."

"Ah, true," returned Pauline, "I did for a moment forget that.  Yes, we
were fearfully hungry _that_ time."

Of course this led to further inquiry, and to Dominick clearing his
throat at last, and saying--"Come, I'll give you a short outline of our
adventures since we left home.  It must only be a mere sketch, of
course, because it would take days and weeks to give you all the
details."

"Don't be prosy, Dom," said Otto, helping himself to a fifth, if not a
tenth, muffin.  "Prosiness is one of your weak points when left to your
own promptings."

"But before you begin, Dom," said old Mr Rigonda, "tell us where Refuge
Islands are."

"In the Southern Pacific, father."

"Yes," observed Otto; "at the bottom of the Southern Pacific."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the old gentleman, whose incredulity was fast taking
the form of sarcasm.  "Not far, I suppose, from that celebrated island
which was the last home and refuge of our famous ancestor, the Spanish
pirate, who was distantly related, through a first cousin of his mother,
to Don Quixote."

"You doubt us, daddy, I see," said Pauline, laughing; "but I do assure
you we are telling you the simple truth.  I appeal to Dr Marsh."

Dr Marsh, who had chiefly acted the part of observant listener up to
that moment, now assured Mr Rigonda with so much sincerity that what
had been told him was true, that he felt bound to believe him.

"Yes, indeed," said Dr Marsh, "your daughter was in truth a queen, and
I was one of her subjects.  Indeed, I may say that, in one sense, she is
a queen still, but she has been dethroned by fire and water, as you
shall presently hear, though she still reigns in the affections of her
people, and can _never_ be dethroned again!"

This speech was greeted with some merriment, for the doctor said it with
much enthusiasm.  Then Dominick began to give an account of their
adventures, interrupted and corrected, not infrequently, by his pert
brother Otto, who, being still afflicted with his South-Sea-island
appetite, remained unsatisfied until the last slice of toast, and the
last muffin, and the last wedge of cake had disappeared from the table.

Dominick's intentions were undoubtedly good; and when he asserted that
it was his purpose to give his father and mother merely an outline of
their adventures, he was unquestionably sincere; but the outline became
so extended, and assumed such a variety of complex convolutions, that
there seemed to be no end to the story--as there certainly seemed to be
no end to the patience of the listeners.  So Dominick went, "on and on
and on," as story-books put it, until the fire in the grate began to
burn low; until Otto had consumed the contents of the teapot, and the
cream-jug, and the sugar-basin, and had even gathered up, economically,
the crumbs of the cake; until the still eager audience had begun to yawn
considerately with shut mouths; until the household cat, lost in
amazement at prolonged neglect, had ventured to creep from the
coal-hole, and take up a modest position on the floor, in the shadow of
its little old mistress.

There is no saying how long this state of things would have gone on, if
it had not been for the exuberant spirits of Otto, who, under an impulse
of maternal affection, sprang to his mother's side with intent to
embrace her, and unwittingly planted his foot on the cat's tail.

Then, indeed, the convoluted outline came to an abrupt end; for, with a
volcanic explosion, suggestive of thunder and lightning, inlaid with
dynamite, the hapless creature sprang from the room, followed by a
shriek from its mistress, and a roar of laughter from all the rest.

It is not certainly known where that cat spent the following fortnight.
The only thing about it that remains on record is the fact that, at the
end of that space of time, it returned to its old haunts, deeply
humbled, and much reduced; that it gradually became accustomed to the
new state of things, and even mounted the table, and sat blinking in its
old position, and grew visibly fatter, while the old lady revived old
times by stroking it, as she had been wont to, and communicating to it
some of her thoughts and fancies.

"Ay, pussy," she said, on one of these occasions when they chanced to be
alone together, "little did you and I think, when we used to be sitting
so comfortably here, that our darlings were being tossed about and
starved in open boats on the stormy sea!  Ah! pussy, pussy, we little
knew--but `it's all well that ends well,' as a great writer that you
know nothing about has said, and you and I can never, never be thankful
enough for getting back, safe and sound, our dear old man, and our
darling boys, and our--our little Pauline, the Island Queen."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Island Queen, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ISLAND QUEEN ***

***** This file should be named 21741.txt or 21741.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/7/4/21741/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

