like a telescope.  You'll be a six-footer yet.  Why, you're taller than
I am already by two inches."

In process of time Carteret was finished; it was then begun a second
time, and once more read through.  After that Adams felt a chill feeling
of helplessness steal over him, for Carteret could not be read over and
over again like the Bible, and he could not quite see his way to reading
the Church of England prayers by way of recreation.  In his extremity he
had recourse to Sally for advice.  Indeed, now that Sall was approaching
young womanhood, not only the children but all the grown people of the
island, including their chief or "father," found themselves when in
trouble gravitating, as if by instinct, to the sympathetic heart and the
ready hand.

"I'll tell you what to do," said Sally, when appealed to, as she took
the seaman's rough hand and fondled it; "just try to invent stories, and
tell them to us as if you was readin' a book.  You might even turn
Carteret upside down and pretend that you was readin'."

Adams shook his head.

"I never could invent anything, Sall, 'xcept w'en I was tellin' lies,
an' that's a long while ago now--a long, long while.  No; I doubt that I
couldn't invent, but I'll tell 'ee what; I'll try to remember some old
yarns, and spin them off as well as I can."

The new idea broke on Adams's mind so suddenly that his eyes sparkled,
and he bestowed a nautical slap on his thigh.

"The very thing!" cried Sally, whose eyes sparkled fully more than those
of the sailor, while she clapped her hands; "nothing could be better.
What will you begin with?"

"Let me see," said Adams, seating himself on a tree-stump, and knitting
his brows with a severe strain of memory.  "There's Cinderella; an'
there's Ally Babby or the fifty thieves--if it wasn't forty--I'm not
rightly sure which, but it don't much matter; an' there's Jack the
Giant-killer, an' Jack and the Pea-stalk--no; let me see; it was a
beanstalk, I think--anyhow, it was the stalk of a vegetable o' some
sort.  Why, I wonder it never struck me before to tell you all about
them tales."

Reader, if you had seen the joy depicted on Sally's face, and the rich
flush of her cheek, and her half-open mouth with its double row of
pearls, while Adams ran over this familiar list, you would have thought
it well worth that seaman's while to tax his memory even more severely
than he did.

"And then," he continued, knitting his brows still more severely,
"there's Gulliver an' the Lillycups or putts, an' the Pilgrim's
Progress--though, of course, I don't mean for to say I knows 'em all
right off by heart, but that's no odds.  An' there's Robinson Crusoe--
ha! _that's_ the story for you, Sall; that's the tale that'll make your
hair stand on end, an' a'most split your sides open, an' cause the very
marrow in your spine to wriggle.  Yes; we'll begin with Robinson
Crusoe."

Having settled this point to their mutual and entire satisfaction, the
two went off for a short walk before supper.  On the way, they met
Elizabeth Mills and Mary Christian, both of whom were now no longer
staggerers, but far advanced as jumpers.  They led between them Adams's
little daughter Dinah, who, being still very small, could not take long
walks without assistance and an occasional carry.

"Di, my pet," cried her father, seizing the willing child, and hoisting
her on his shoulder.  "Come, you shall go along with us.  And you too,
lassies, if you have no other business in hand."

"Yes, we'll go with you," cried Bessy Mills.  "May was just saying it
was too soon to go home to supper."

"Come along, then," cried Adams, tossing his child in the air as he
went.  "My beauty, you'll beat your mammy in looks yet, eh? an' when
you're old enough we'll tell you all about Rob--"

He checked himself abruptly, cleared his voice, and looked at Sally.

"Well, father," said May Christian, quickly, "about Rob who?"

"Ahem! eh? well, yes, about Rob--ha, but we won't talk about him just
now, dear.  Sally and I were havin' some private conversation just now
about Rob, though that isn't the whole of his name neither, but we won't
make it public at present.  You'll hear about him time enough--eh,
Sall?"

The girls were so little accustomed to anything approaching to mystery
or secrecy in John Adams, that they looked at him in silent wonder.
Then they glanced at Sally, whose suppressed smile and downcast eyes
told eloquently that there was, as Adams would have said, "something in
the wind," and they tried to get her to reveal the secret, but Sall was
immovable.  She would not add a single syllable to the information given
inadvertently by Adams, but she and he laughed a good deal in a quiet
way, and made frequent references to Rob in the course of the walk.

Of course, when the mysterious word was pronounced in the village in the
evening, and what had been said and hinted about it was repeated,
curiosity was kindled into a violent flame; and when the entire colony
was invited to a feast that night, the excitement was intense.  From the
oldest to the youngest, excluding the more recently arrived sprawlers,
every eye was fixed on John Adams during the whole course of supper,
except at the commencement, when the customary blessing was asked, at
which point every eye was tightly closed.

Adams, conscious of increased importance, spoke little during the meal,
and maintained an air of profounder gravity than usual until the dishes
were cleared away.  Then he looked round the assembled circle, and said,
"Women an' child'n, I'm goin' to tell 'ee a story."



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE PITCAIRNERS HAVE A NIGHT OF IT.

Although John Adams had often, in the course of his residence on
Pitcairn, jested and chatted and taken his share in relating many an
anecdote, he had never up till that time resolved to "go in," as he
said, "for a regular story, like a book."

"Women an' child'n," he began, "it may be that I'm goin' to attempt more
than I'm fit to carry out in this business, for my memory's none o' the
best.  However, that won't matter much, for I tell 'ee, fair an'
aboveboard at the beginnin', that when I come to gaps that I can't fill
up from memory, I'll just bridge 'em over from imagination, d'ye see?"

"What's imagination?" demanded Dan McCoy, whose tendency to pert
interruption and reply nothing yet discovered could restrain.

"It's a puzzler," said Otaheitan Sally, in a low tone, which called
forth a laugh from the others.

It did not take much to make these people laugh, as the observant reader
will have perceived.

"Well, it _is_ a puzzler," said Adams, with a quiet smile and a
perplexed look.  "I may say, Dan McCoy, in an off-hand rough-an'-ready
sort o' way, that imagination is that power o' the mind which enables a
man to tell lies."

There was a general opening of juvenile eyes at this, as if recent
biblical instruction had led them to believe that the use of such a
power must be naughty.

"You see," explained Adams, "when a man, usin' his imagination, tells
what's not true, just to deceive people an' mislead 'em, we call it
lyin', but when his imagination invents what's not true merely for the
fun o' the thing, an' tells it as a joke, never pretendin' that it's
true, he ain't lyin', he's only tellin' a story, or a anecdote, or a
parable.  Now, Dan, put that in your pipe an' smoke it.  Likewise shut
your potato-trap, and let me go on wi' my story, which is, (he looked
impressively round, while every eye gazed, and ear listened, and mouth
opened in breathless attention), the Adventure of Robinson Crusoe an'
his man Friday!"

All eyes were turned, as if by magic, on Thursday,--as if there must be
some strange connection here.  Toc suddenly shut his mouth and hung his
head in confusion at this unexpected concentration of attention on
himself.

"You've no need to be ashamed, Thursday," said Adams, with a laugh.
"You've got the advantage of Friday, anyhow, bein' a day in advance of
him.  Well, as I was about to say, boys an' girls, this Robinson Crusoe
was a seafarin' man, just like myself; an' he went to sea, an' was
shipwrecked on a desolate island just like this, but there was nobody
whatever on that island, not even a woman or a babby.  Poor Robinson was
all alone, an' it wasn't till a consid'rable time after he had gone
ashore that he discovered Friday, (who was a black savage), through
seein' his footprint in the sand."

Adams having burst thus suddenly into the very marrow of his story, had
no reason thereafter to complain either of interruption or inattention.
Neither had he reason to find fault with the wealth of his prolific
imagination.  It would have done the soul of a painter good to have
watched the faces of that rapt, eager, breathless audience, and it would
have afforded much material for reflection to a student of mind, had he,
knowing the original story of Robinson Crusoe, been permitted to trace
the ingenious sinuosities and astounding creations by which Adams wove
his meagre amount of original matter into a magnificent tale, which not
only thrilled his audience, but amazed himself.

In short, he quite justified the assurance formerly given to Sally, that
the story of Robinson Crusoe would make the hair of his hearers stand on
end, their sides almost split open, and the very marrow in their spines
wriggle.  Indeed, his version of the tale might have caused similar
results in Robinson Crusoe himself, had he been there to hear it,
besides causing his eyebrows to rise and vanish evermore among the hair
of his head with astonishment.

It was the same with the Pilgrim's Progress, which he often told to them
afterwards.  Simple justice to Adams, however, requires us to state that
he was particularly careful to impress on his hearers that the Pilgrim's
Progress was a religious tale.

"It's a allegory, you must know," he said, on first introducing it,
"which means a story intended to teach some good lesson--a story which
says one thing and means another."

He looked pointedly at Dan McCoy here, as if to say, "That's an
exhaustive explanation, which takes the wind out o' _your_ sails, young
man," but Dan was not to be so easily silenced.

"What's the use, father," he asked, with an air of affected simplicity,
"of a story sayin' one thing an' meanin' another?  Wouldn't it be more
honest like if it said what it meant at once, straight off?"

"P'r'aps it would," returned Adams, who secretly enjoyed Dan's
irrepressible impudence; "but, then, if it did, Dan, it would take away
your chance of askin' questions, d'ye see?  Anyhow, _this_ story don't
say what it means straight off, an' that gives me a chance to expound
it."

Now, it was in the expounding of the Pilgrim's Progress that John
Adams's peculiar talents shone out brilliantly, for not only did he
"misremember," jumble, and confuse the whole allegory, but he so
misapprehended its meaning in many points, that the lessons taught and
the morals drawn were very wide of the mark indeed.  In regard to some
particular points, too, he felt himself at liberty to let his genius
have free untrammelled scope, as, for instance, in the celebrated battle
between Christian and Apollyon.  Arguing with himself that it was not
possible for any man to overdo a fight with the devil, Adams made up his
mind to "go well in" for that incident, and spent a whole evening over
it, keeping his audience glaring and on the rack of expectation the
whole time.  Taking, perhaps, an unfair advantage of his minute
knowledge as a man-of-war's-man of cutlass-drill and of fighting in
general, from pugilistic encounters to great-gun exercise, including all
the intermediate performances with rapiers, swords, muskets, pistols,
blunderbusses, and other weapons for "general scrimmaging," he so
wrought upon the nerves of his hearers that they quivered with emotion,
and when at last he drove Apollyon discomfited from the field, like
chaff before the wind, there burst forth a united cheer of triumph and
relief, Dan McCoy, in particular, jumping up with tumbled yellow locks
and glittering eyes in a perfect yell of exultation.

But, to return from this digression to the story of Robinson Crusoe.  It
must not be supposed that Adams exhausted that tale in one night.  No;
soon discovering that he had struck an intellectual vein, so to speak,
he resolved to work it out economically, and with that end in view,
devoted the first evening to a minute dissection of Crusoe's character
as a man and a seaman, to the supposed fitting out and provisioning of
his ship, to the imaginary cause of the disaster to the ship, which,
(with Bligh, no doubt, in memory), he referred to the incompetence and
wickedness of the skipper, and to the terrible incidents of the wreck,
winding up with the landing of his hero, half-dead and alone, on the
uninhabited island.

"Now, child'n," he concluded, "that'll do for one night; and as it's of
no manner of use sending you all to bed to dream of bein' shipwrecked
and drownded, we'll finish off with a game of blind-man's-buff."

Need we say that the disappointment at the cutting short of the story
was fully compensated by the game?  Leaping up with another cheer,
taught them by the best authorities, and given with true British
fervour, they scattered about the room.

Otaheitan Sally was, as a matter of course, the first to be blindfolded.

And really, reader, it was wonderful how like that game, as played at
Pitcairn, was to the same as performed in England.  To justify this
remark, let us describe it, and see whether there were any points of
material difference.

The apartment, let it be understood, was a pretty large one, lighted by
two nut-candles in brackets on the walls.  There was little furniture in
it, only a few stools and two small tables, which were quickly thrust
into a corner.  Then Sally was taken to the centre of the room by Adams,
and there blindfolded with a snuff-coloured silken bandana handkerchief,
which had seen much service on board of the _Bounty_.

"Now, Sall, can you see?" asks Adams.

"No, not one bit."

"Oh, yes you can," from Charlie Christian, who hovers round her like the
moth round the candle.

"No, really, I can't."

"Yes you can," from Dan McCoy, who is on the alert; "I see your piercin'
black eyes comin' right through the hankitchif."

"Get along, then," cries Adams, twirling Sally round, and skipping out
of the way.

It is not the first time the women have played at that game, and their
short garments, reaching little below the knees, seem admirably adapted
to it, while they glide about with motions little less easy and agile
than those of the children, and cause the roof to ring with laughter at
the various misadventures that occur.

Mrs Adams, however, does not join.  Besides being considerably older
than her husband, that good woman has become prematurely short-sighted
and deaf.  This being so, she sits in a corner, not inappropriately, to
act the part of grandmother to the players, and to serve as an
occasional buffer to such of the children as are hurled against her.

Now, Otaheitan Sally, having gone rather cautiously about without
catching any one except Charlie--whom she pretends not to know, examines
from head to foot, and then guesses wrong on purpose--becomes suddenly
wild, makes a desperate lunge, as she thinks, at Dan McCoy, and tumbles
into Mrs Adams's lap, amid shouts of delight.

Of course Dan brought about this incident by wise forethought.  His next
success is unpremeditated.  Making a pull at Sally's skirt, he glides
quickly out of her way as she wheels round, and hits Mainmast an
unintentional backhander on the nose.  This is received by Mainmast with
a little scream, and by the children with an "Oh! o-o" of consternation,
while Sally, pulling down the handkerchief, hastens to give needless
assurance that she is "_so_ vexed," etcetera.  Susannah joins her in
condoling, and so does widow Martin; but Mainmast, with tears in her
eyes, (drawn by the blow), and a smile on her lips, declares that she
"don't care a button."  Sally is therefore blindfolded again.  She
catches Charlie Christian immediately, and feeling that there is no
other way of escaping from him, names him.

Then Charlie, being blindfolded, sets to work with one solitary end in
view, namely, to capture Sally.  The injustice to the others of this
proceeding never enters his innocent mind.  He hears no voice but
Sally's; he clutches at nobody but Sally.  When he is compelled to lay
hold of any one else, he guesses wrong, not on purpose, but because he
is thinking of Sally.  Perceiving this, Sally retires quietly behind
Mrs Adams's chair, and Charlie, growing desperate, makes wild dashes,
tumbling into the corner among the tables and stools, sending the
staggerers spinning in all directions, and finally pitching headlong
into Mrs Adams's lap.

At last he catches John Adams himself and as there is no possibility of
mistaking him, the handkerchief is changed, and the game becomes more
sedate, at the same time more nervous, for the stride of the seaman is
awful, and the sweep of his outstretched arms comprehensive.  Besides,
he has a way of listening and making sudden darts in unexpected
directions, which is very perplexing.

After a few failures, Adams makes what he calls a wild roll to
starboard, followed instantly by a heavy lurch to port, and pins Dan
McCoy into a corner.

"Ha!  I've grabbed you at last, have I?" says he.

"Who is it?" shout half-a-dozen voices.

"Who but Dan'l?  There's impudence in the very feel of his hair."

So Dan is blindfolded.  And now comes the tug of war.  If it was fast
and furious before, it is maniacal madness now.  The noise is
indescribable, yet it fails to waken two infants, who, with expressions
of perfect peace on their innocent faces, repose in two bunks at one
side of the room.

At last Thursday October tumbles into one of these bunks, and all but
immolates an infant.  Mrs Adams is fairly overturned; one table comes
by a damaged leg, the other is split lengthwise, and one of the candles
is blown out.  These symptoms are as good as a weather-glass to Adams.
