
"Yes," replied Elwood, "I have learned something during the last few
days. It is all well enough to be reckless and careless about danger
when we are at home and there is no danger, but it is another thing when
we are in these parts."

"As the Frenchman remarked, 'tiger hunting is very fine so long as we
hunt the tiger, but when he takes it into his head to hunt us the
mischief is to pay."

"If Shasta will have the onspakable kindness to tow us along in this
shtyle for a few waaks, I think we will cast anchor at the wharf in San
Francisco without any loss to passingers and freight."

"He has seen what ninnies we were," said Elwood, "and no doubt will
accompany us some distance further when he certainly ought to let us try
it alone again."

"Ah! but he's a smart young gintleman, as the acquaintances of Tim
O'Rooney used to say when they made the slightest reference to him.
Couldn't we persuade him to go on to San Francisco wid us? I think your
father would be plaised to take him in as a partner in their business
wid them."

"But _he_ would hardly fancy the change," laughed Howard.

"He might now. When we should state the sarvices he has rindered to us,
it's meself that doesn't think they'd require him to put in a very large
pile of capital."

"I am sure if he should prove as keen and sharp in business matters as
he does in the way of the woods, he would make one of the most
successful merchants in the country."

"It's a pity that he doesn't understand the illegant use of the tongue,
that we might confaar wid him. We could lay the proposition forninst
him, and he could gives us the tarms to carry wid us."

However philanthropic this might be as regarded the Pah Utah, our
friends deemed it hardly feasible to make the attempt to reach his views
through the medium of signs.

As for Shasta, he did not once look backward to observe what his
passengers were doing. He was propelling his boat through the water with
his usual celerity, his head occasionally turning slightly as he glanced
first at one shore and then the other, as though looking for some sign
or landmark.

The day that succeeded the storm was beautiful and clear, everything in
nature wearing a fresh and rosy look, as if refreshed by the needed
shower. The current of the Salinas was as clear and crystal-like as
though it had not received the muddy contents of a thousand brooks,
rivulets and torrents gorged with the debris and leaves of its own
valley.

"I am troubled by one sore anxiety."

"What can that be?"

"It is for Mr. Shasta. He seems quite forgetful this morning."

"In what respect?" asked Elwood, who did not see the drift of the
Irishman's remarks.

"He hasn't had his breakfast, and he must be faaling a wee bit hungry,
and be the same token, he must be the victim of great distress, that he
hasn't indulged in the use of his pipe."

As Tim O'Rooney had made similar remarks on more than one previous
occasion, it may be that the Pah Utah gathered an inkling of his
meaning, for the words were scarce uttered when the canoes were headed
toward shore, and a landing speedily made.

A piscatorial meal was provided after the manner already fully given,
and when finished the soothing pipe of Tim O'Rooney was produced and
enjoyed to its full extent.

But Shasta showed no disposition to wait, or to indulge in the solace of
the weed. Motioning to his friends to enter the boat, he towed them to
the center of the river, where he loosed the fastenings, and without a
word or sign he headed his canoe up stream and sped away.

"He is going home," said Howard.

"He must imagine that we are owld enough to walk alone," remarked Tim as
he took the paddle.

"But why not bid us good-by?" asked Elwood.

"As he has already done so," replied Howard, "he doubtless does not
believe in adding a postscript."




CHAPTER XLIX.

HOMEWARD BOUND.


Now that our friends were left entirely alone, it became a question
whether they should continue journeying by day or night.

"It seems to me that we are approaching a more civilized part of the
country," said Howard. "I think there will be little risk in continuing
our journey."

Tim industriously used his paddle, and shortly afterward, Elwood pointed
to an open space some distance inland.

"Yonder are people, and they look as if they were gathered around a
camp-fire at their dinner."

Tim jerked his head around, gave a puff of his pipe and said:

"Rid gintlemen ag'in, and I'll shy the canoe under the bank, and craap
along till we gets beyonst thim."

"No, they are not Indians--they are white men," quickly added Elwood.

A careful scrutiny by all ended in a confirmation of Elwood's suspicion.

"That is good," said Howard, with a pleased expression, "it shows that
we are getting beyond the wild country into a neighborhood where white
men abound, and where we can feel some degree of safety."

"I suppose they are miners or hunters who are taking their midday meal
in the open air," added Elwood, who was still gazing at them.

"Shall we heave too, pitch over the anchor, and s'lute them?" asked Tim.

"No; go ahead, we have no time to spare."

The cheering signs continued. An hour later they descried several white
men seated in canoes and fishing near shore. They exchanged the
courtesies of the day with them and passed on, growing more eager as
they neared the goal.

It would have been no difficult feat of the imagination for one standing
on shore to fancy that the cause was a pocket edition of a Hudson River
steamboat, so powerfully did Tim O'Rooney puff at his pipe, the whiffs
speeding away over his shoulder in exact time with the dipping of the
paddle, as though the two united cause and effect. The fellow was in the
best of spirits. Suddenly he paused and commenced sucking desperately at
his pipe-stem, but all in vain; no smoke was emitted.

"What is the matter?" asked Elwood.

"Steam is out, and the paddle won't go."

"Let me relieve you."

The boy used it with good effect, while Tim shoved his blunt finger into
the pipe-bowl, shut one eye and squinted into it, rattled it on his
hand, puffed at it again, turned his pockets wrong side out, then put
them to rights, and repeated the operation, just as we open the door a
half-dozen times to make sure our friend isn't behind it, then gave one
of his great sighs and looked toward Howard.

"I put the last switch of tobaccy I had in the world into that pipe,
just arter throwing myself outside of that quince of fish."

"Quience?" laughed the boy, "you mean _quintal_."

"Yis, and what's to come of Tim O'Rooney, if he doesn't git some more
right spaddily. His intellect toppled all the mornin', and can't stand
another such strain, or it'll be nipped in the bud afore it has reached
the topmost round at the bar of fame."

"Why, Tim, you are growing poetical," called Elwood over his shoulder,
not a little amused at his bewildering metaphors.

"We shall doubtless come across some friends before long who will be
glad to supply you."

"Elwood!" called Tim.

"What is it!" he asked, pausing in his paddling.

"If you saas a rid gintleman do yez jist rist till I takes aim and
shoots him."

"Why so blood-thirsty?"

"Not blood-thirsty, but tobaccy thirsty. The haythen deal in the
article, and if we saas one he must yield."

Elwood promised obedience, but they saw nothing of the coveted people
whom they had been so anxious to avoid hitherto, but a half-hour later
Howard said:

"Heigh-ho! Yonder is just the man you want to see!"

A single person dressed in the garb of a miner was standing on the shore
leisurely surveying them as they came along. There could be no doubt
that he was supplied with the noxious weed, for he was smoking a pipe
with all the cool, deliberate enjoyment of a veteran at the business.

"Shall I head toward shore!" asked Elwood.

"Sartin, sartin. Oh that we had Mr. Shasta here that he might hurry to
land wid the ould canoe!"

A few minutes sufficed to place the prow of the boat against the shore,
and Tim O'Rooney sprung out. The miner, if such he was, stood with his
hands in his pockets, looking sleepily at the stranger.

"How do yez do, William?" reaching out and shaking the hand which was
rather reluctantly given him.

"Who you calling William?" demanded the miner gruffly.

"I beg yez pardon, but it was a slip of the tongue, Thomas."

"Who you calling Thomas?"

"Is your family well, my dear sir?"

"Whose family you talking about?"

"Did yez lave the wife and childer well?"

"Whose wife and childer you talking about?"

"Yez got over the cowld yez had the other day?"

"'Pears to me you know a blamed sight more about me than I do,
stranger."

"My dear sir, I have the greatest affection for yez. The moment I seen
yez a qua'ar faaling come over me, and I filt I must come ashore and
shake you by the hand. I faals much better."

"You don't say?"

"That I does. Would yez have the kindness to give me a wee bit of
tobaccy?"

The sleepy-looking stranger gazed drowsily at him a moment and then made
answer:

"I'm just smoking the last bit I've got. I was going to ax you for some,
being you had such a great affection for me."




CHAPTER L.

RESCUED.


The miner having made his reply, turned on his heel, still smoking his
pipe, and coolly walked away, while Tim O'Rooney gazed after him in
amazement. The boys were amused spectators of the scene, and Elwood now
called out.

"Come, Tim, don't wait! We shall meet somebody else before long; and as
you have just had a good smoking spell, you can certainly wait a while."

"Yes," added Howard, "no good can come of waiting; so jump in and let's
be off."

The Irishman obeyed like a child which hardly understood what was
required of it, and taking his seat said never a word.

"Let me alternate with you for a while," said Howard to his cousin, "you
have worked quite a while with the paddle."

"I am not tired, but if you are eager to try your skill I won't object."

The boys changed places, and while Howard gave his exclusive attention
to the management of the canoe, Elwood devoid himself to consoling Tim
O'Rooney in the most serio-comic manner.

"Bear up a little longer, my good fellow. There's plenty of tobacco in
the country, and there must be some that is waiting expressly for you."

"Where bees the same?"

"Of course we are to find that out; and I haven't the least doubt but
the way will appear."

"Elwood," sighed Tim, "'spose by towken of the severe suffering that
meself is undergoing I should lose me intellect----"

"I don't think there's any danger."

"And why not?" demanded the Irishman, in assumed fierceness.

"For the good reason that you haven't any to lose."

Tim bowed his head in graceful acknowledgment.

"But suppose I does run mad for all that?"

"I can easily dispose of you?"

"Afther what shtyle?"

"A madman is always a dangerous person in the community, and the moment
I see any signs of your malady all I have to do is to shoot you through
the head."

"Do yez obsarve any signs at presint?"

"You needn't ask the question, for the moment it breaks out the report
of the gun and the crash of the bullet will give you a hint of the
trouble."

Tim laughed.

"Yez are a bright child, as me mother used to obsarve whin I'd wash me
face in her buttermilk and smiled through the windy at her. If ye
continues to grow in your intellect yez may come to be a man that I
won't be ashamed to addriss and take by the hand when I maats yez in the
straats."

"I hope I shall," laughed Elwood, "the prize that you hold out is enough
to make any boy work as he never did before. I hope you will not wish to
withdraw your offer."

"Niver a faar--niver a faar, as Bridget Mughalligan said, when I asked
her if she'd be kind enough to remimber me for a few days."

"Tim," added Elwood, after a moment's silence, "we are out of the
woods."

"What do yez maan by that?"

"We can see signs of the presence of white men all around us, and we
have nothing further to fear from Indians."

At this point Howard called the attention of his companion to a large
canoe which was coming around a curve in the river. It contained nearly
a dozen men, and was the largest boat of the kind which they had ever
seen, and savored also of a civilized rather than a savage architect.

"They are white men," said Howard.

"Do yez obsarve any pipes sticking out of their mouths?"

"One or two are smoking."

"Then boord them if they won't surrender."

"They have headed toward us," remarked Elwood, "and must wish to say
something."

A few moments later the two boats came side by side, and before any one
else could speak Tim made his request known for tobacco. This was
furnished him, and as he relit his pipe he announced that he had no
objection to their proceeding with their business.

There were nine men in the larger boat, and all were armed with pistols,
rifles and knives. In truth they resembled a war party more than
anything else bound upon some desperate expedition.

The boys noticed as they came along, and while Tim O'Rooney was
speaking, that several of the men looked very keenly at them, as though
they entertained some strong suspicion. Finally one of the men asked:

"Are you youngsters named Lawrence and Brandon?"

"Yes, sir."

Here the questioner produced a paper from his pocket, and seemed to read
his questions from that.

"And is that man Timothy O'Rooney?"

"Timothy O'Rooney, Esquire, from Tipperary, at your sarvice," called out
the Irishman from the stern of the canoe, where he was elegantly
reclining, and without removing the pipe from his mouth.

"Were you on the steamer ---- ---- that was burned off the coast of
California?" pursued the interlocutor.

"Yes, sir."

"Then you are just the party we are looking for."

"Where do you come from?"

"We are from San Francisco, sent out by Messrs. Lawrence and Brandon in
search of their children, whom they learned a few days ago from Mr.
Yard, one of the survivors, were left on the coast, having wandered
inland at the time the others were taken off by the Relief."

This was to the point.

"It is fortunate for all parties that we met you," added the man with a
smile, "for we receive a very liberal reward to bring you back, no
matter whether we met you within a dozen miles of San Francisco, or were
obliged to spend the summer hunting for you among the mountains, only to
succeed after giving the largest kind of a ransom."

"Prosaad," said Tim O'Rooney, with a magnificent wave of his hand,
without rising from his reclining position. "We're glad to maat yez, as
me uncle obsarved, whin Micky O'Shaunhanaley's pig walked into his
shanty and stood still till he was salted down and stowed away in the
barrel, by raisin of which Micky niver found his pig agin."

The next day the party reached the outlet of the Salinas River, Monterey
Bay, where they succeeded in securing transit to San Francisco, and the
two boys were once more clasped in the loving arms of their anxious
parents.

Howard and Elwood remained in San Francisco until autumn, when they came
East again and entered college, and having passed through with honor
they returned to the Golden City, and are now partners in a flourishing
business. Tim O'Rooney is in their service, and they both hold him in
great regard. He is as good-natured as when "Adrift in the Wilds" with
the boys, and his greatest grief is that he has never been able to meet
Mr. Shasta, the most "illigent savage gintleman that iver paddled his
own canoe."

THE END.



       *       *       *       *      *




