that he nearly fell off the platform of the mortar-gallery in one of his
extravagant gyrations.

"That won't do, Pup," said Bremner, shaking his head at the creature,
whose countenance expressed deep contrition.  "Don't go on like that,
else you'll fall into the sea and be drownded, and then I shall be left
alone.  What a dark night it is, to be sure!  I doubt if it was wise of
me to stop here.  Suppose the beacon were to be washed away?"

Bremner paused, and Pup wagged his tail interrogatively, as though to
say, "What then?"

"Ah! it's of no use supposin'," continued the man slowly.  "The beacon
has stood it out all winter, and it ain't likely it's goin' to be washed
away to-night.  But suppose I was to be took bad?"

Again the dog seemed to demand, "What then?"

"Well, that's not very likely either, for I never was took bad in my
life since I took the measles, and that's more than twenty years ago.
Come, Pup, don't let us look at the black side o' things, let us try to
be cheerful, my dog.  Hallo!"

The exclamation was caused by the appearance of a green billow, which in
the uncertain light seemed to advance in a threatening attitude towards
the beacon as if to overwhelm it, but it fell at some distance, and only
rolled in a churning sea of milky foam among the posts, and sprang up
and licked the beams, as a serpent might do before swallowing them.

"Come, it was the light deceived me.  If I go for to start at every wave
like that I'll have a poor night of it, for the tide has a long way to
rise yet.  Let's go and have a bit supper, lad."

Bremner rose from the anvil, on which he had seated himself, and went up
the ladder into the cook-house above.  Here all was pitch dark, owing to
the place being enclosed all round, which the mortar-gallery was not,
but a light was soon struck, a lamp trimmed, and the fire in the stove
kindled.

Bremner now busied himself in silently preparing a cup of tea, which,
with a quantity of sea-biscuit, a little cold salt pork, and a hunk of
stale bread, constituted his supper.  Pup watched his every movement
with an expression of earnest solicitude, combined with goodwill, in his
sharp intelligent eyes.

When supper was ready Pup had his share, then, feeling that the duties
of the day were now satisfactorily accomplished, he coiled himself up at
his master's feet, and went to sleep.  His master rolled himself up in a
rug, and lying down before the fire, also tried to sleep, but without
success for a long time.

As he lay there counting the number of seconds of awful silence that
elapsed between the fall of each successive billow, and listening to the
crash and the roar as wave after wave rushed underneath him, and caused
his habitation to tremble, he could not avoid feeling alarmed in some
degree.  Do what he would, the thought of the wrecks that had taken
place there, the shrieks that must have often rung above these rocks,
and the dead and mangled bodies that must have lain among them, _would_
obtrude upon him and banish sleep from his eyes.

At last he became somewhat accustomed to the rush of waters and the
tremulous motion of the beacon.  His frame, too, exhausted by a day of
hard toil, refused to support itself, and he sank into slumber.  But it
was not unbroken.  A falling cinder from the sinking fire would awaken
him with a start; a larger wave than usual would cause him to spring up
and look round in alarm; or a shrieking sea-bird, as it swooped past,
would induce a dream, in which the cries of drowning men arose, causing
him to awake with a cry that set Pup barking furiously.

Frequently during that night, after some such dream, Bremner would get
up and descend to the mortar-gallery to see that all was right there.
He found the waves always hissing below, but the starry sky was calm and
peaceful above, so he returned to his couch comforted a little, and fell
again into a troubled sleep, to be again awakened by frightful dreams of
dreadful sights, and scenes of death and danger on the sea.

Thus the hours wore slowly away.  As the tide fell the noise of waves
retired a little from the beacon, and the wearied man and dog sank
gradually at last into deep, untroubled slumber.

So deep was it, that they did not hear the increasing noise of the gulls
as they wheeled round the beacon after having breakfasted near it; so
deep, that they did not feel the sun as it streamed through an opening
in the woodwork and glared on their respective faces; so deep, that they
were ignorant of the arrival of the boats with the workmen, and were
dead to the shouts of their companions, until one of them, Jamie Dove,
put his head up the hatchway and uttered one of his loudest roars, close
to their ears.

Then indeed Bremner rose up and looked bewildered, and Pup, starting up,
barked as furiously as if its own little black body had miraculously
become the concentrated essence of all the other noisy dogs in the wide
world rolled into one!



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

LIFE IN THE BEACON--STORY OF THE EDDYSTONE LIGHTHOUSE.

Some time after this a number of the men took up their permanent abode
in the beacon house, and the work was carried on by night as well as by
day, when the state of the tide and the weather permitted.

Immense numbers of fish called poddlies were discovered to be swimming
about at high water.  So numerous were they, that the rock was sometimes
hidden by the shoals of them.  Fishing for these thenceforth became a
pastime among the men, who not only supplied their own table with fresh
fish, but at times sent presents of them to their friends in the
vessels.

All the men who dwelt on the beacon were volunteers, for Mr Stevenson
felt that it would be cruel to compel men to live at such a post of
danger.  Those who chose, therefore, remained in the lightship or the
tender, and those who preferred it went to the beacon.  It is scarcely
necessary to add, that among the latter were found all the "sea-sick
men!"

These bold artificers were not long of having their courage tested.
Soon after their removal to the beacon they experienced some very rough
weather, which shook the posts violently, and caused them to twist in a
most unpleasant way.

But it was not until some time after that a storm arose, which caused
the stoutest-hearted of them all to quail more than once.

It began on the night of as fine a day as they had had the whole season.

In order that the reader may form a just conception of what we are about
to describe, it may not be amiss to note the state of things at the
rock, and the employment of the men at the time.

A second forge had been put up on the higher platform of the beacon, but
the night before that of which we write, the lower platform had been
burst up by a wave, and the mortar and forge thereon, with all the
implements, were cast down.  The damaged forge was therefore set up for
the time on its old site, near the foundation-pit of the lighthouse,
while the carpenters were busy repairing the mortar-gallery.

The smiths were as usual busy sharpening picks and irons, and making
bats and stanchions, and other iron work connected with the building
operations.  The landing-master's crew were occupied in assisting the
millwrights to lay the railways to hand, and joiners were kept almost
constantly employed in fitting picks to their handles, which latter were
very frequently broken.

Nearly all the miscellaneous work was done by seamen.  There was no such
character on the Bell Rock as the common labourer.  The sailors
cheerfully undertook the work usually performed by such men, and they
did it admirably.

In consequence of the men being able to remain on the beacon, the work
went on literally "by double tides"; and at night the rock was often
ablaze with torches, while the artificers wrought until the waves drove
them away.

On the night in question there was a low spring-tide, so that a
night-tide's work of five hours was secured.  This was one of the
longest spells they had had since the beginning of the operations.

The stars shone brightly in a very dark sky.  Not a breath of air was
felt.  Even the smoke of the forge fire rose perpendicularly a short
way, until an imperceptible zephyr wafted it gently to the west.  Yet
there was a heavy swell rolling in from the eastward, which caused
enormous waves to thunder on Ralph the Rover's Ledge, as if they would
drive down the solid rock.

Mingled with this solemn, intermittent roar of the sea was the
continuous clink of picks, chisels, and hammers, and the loud clang of
the two forges; that on the beacon being distinctly different from the
other, owing to the wooden erection on which it stood rendering it deep
and thunderous.  Torches and forge fires cast a glare over all,
rendering the foam pale green and the rocks deep red.  Some of the
active figures at work stood out black and sharp against the light,
while others shone in its blaze like red-hot fiends.  Above all sounded
an occasional cry from the sea-gulls, as they swooped down into the
magic circle of light, and then soared away shrieking into darkness.

"Hard work's not easy," observed James Dove, pausing in the midst of his
labours to wipe his brow.

"True for ye; but as we've got to arn our brid be the sweat of our
brows, we're in the fair way to fortin," said Ned O'Connor, blowing away
energetically with the big bellows.

Ned had been reappointed to this duty since the erection of the second
forge, which was in Ruby's charge.  It was our hero's hammer that
created such a din up in the beacon, while Dove wrought down on the
rock.

"We'll have a gale to-night," said the smith; "I know that by the
feelin' of the air."

"Well, I can't boast o' much knowledge o' feelin'," said O'Connor; "but
I believe you're right, for the fish towld me the news this mornin'."

This remark of Ned had reference to a well-ascertained fact, that, when
a storm was coming, the fish invariably left the neighbourhood of the
rock; doubtless in order to seek the security of depths which are not
affected by winds or waves.

While Dove and his comrade commented on this subject, two of the other
men had retired to the south-eastern end of the rock to take a look at
the weather.  These were Peter Logan, the foreman, whose position
required him to have a care for the safety of the men as well as for the
progress of the work, and our friend Bremner, who had just descended
from the cooking-room, where he had been superintending the preparation
of supper.

"It will be a stiff breeze, I fear, to-night," said Logan.

"D'ye think so I" said Bremner; "it seems to me so calm that I would
think a storm a'most impossible.  But the fish never tell lies."

"True.  You got no fish to-day, I believe?" said Logan.

"Not a nibble," replied the other.

As he spoke, he was obliged to rise from a rock on which he had seated
himself, because of a large wave, which, breaking on the outer reefs,
sent the foam a little closer to his toes than was agreeable.

"That was a big one, but yonder is a bigger," cried Logan.

The wave to which he referred was indeed a majestic wall of water.  It
came on with such an awful appearance of power, that some of the men who
perceived it could not repress a cry of astonishment.

In another moment it fell, and, bursting over the rocks with a terrific
roar, extinguished the forge fire, and compelled the men to take refuge
in the beacon.

Jamie Dove saved his bellows with difficulty.  The other men, catching
up their things as they best might, crowded up the ladder in a more or
less draggled condition.

The beacon house was gained by means of one of the main beams, which had
been converted into a stair, by the simple process of nailing small
battens thereon, about a foot apart from each other.  The men could only
go up one at a time, but as they were active and accustomed to the work,
were all speedily within their place of refuge.  Soon afterwards the sea
covered the rock, and the place where they had been at work was a mass
of seething foam.

Still there was no wind; but dark clouds had begun to rise on the
seaward horizon.

The sudden change in the appearance of the rock after the last torches
were extinguished was very striking.  For a few seconds there seemed to
be no light at all.  The darkness of a coal mine appeared to have
settled down on the scene.  But this soon passed away, as the men's eyes
became accustomed to the change, and then the dark loom of the advancing
billows, the pale light of the flashing foam, and occasional gleams of
phosphorescence, and glimpses of black rocks in the midst of all, took
the place of the warm, busy scene which the spot had presented a few
minutes before.

"Supper, boys!" shouted Bremner.

Peter Bremner, we may remark in passing, was a particularly useful
member of society.  Besides being small and corpulent, he was a capital
cook.  He had acted during his busy life both as a groom and a
house-servant; he had been a soldier, a sutler, a writer's clerk, and an
apothecary--in which latter profession he had acquired the art of
writing and suggesting recipes, and a taste for making collections in
natural history.  He was very partial to the use of the lancet, and
quite a terrible adept at tooth-drawing.  In short, Peter was the
_factotum_ of the beacon house, where, in addition to his other offices,
he filled those of barber and steward to the admiration of all.

But Bremner came out in quite a new and valuable light after he went to
reside in the beacon--namely, as a storyteller.  During the long periods
of inaction that ensued, when the men were imprisoned there by storms,
he lightened many an hour that would have otherwise hung heavily on
their hands, and he cheered the more timid among them by speaking
lightly of the danger of their position.

On the signal for supper being given, there was a general rush down the
ladders into the kitchen, where as comfortable a meal as one could wish
for was smoking in pot and pan and platter.

As there were twenty-three to partake, it was impossible, of course, for
all to sit down to table.  They were obliged to stow themselves away on
such articles of furniture as came most readily to hand, and eat as they
best could.  Hungry men find no difficulty in doing this.  For some time
the conversation was restricted to a word or two.  Soon, however, as
appetite began to be appeased, tongues began to loosen.  The silence was
first broken by a groan.

"Ochone!" exclaimed O'Connor, as well as a mouthful of pork and potatoes
would allow him; "was it _you_ that groaned like a dyin' pig?"

The question was put to Forsyth, who was holding his head between his
hands, and swaying his body to and fro in agony.

"Hae ye the colic, freen'?" enquired John Watt, in a tone of sympathy.

"No-n-o," groaned Forsyth, "it's a--a--too-tooth!"

"Och! is that all?"

"Have it out, man, at once."

"Ram a red-hot skewer into it."

"No, no; let it alone, and it'll go away."

Such was the advice tendered, and much more of a similar nature, to the
suffering man.

"There's nothink like 'ot water an' cold," said Joe Dumsby in the tones
of an oracle.  "Just fill your mouth with bilin' 'ot Water, an' dip your
face in a basin o' cold, and it's sartain to cure."

"Or kill," suggested Jamie Dove.

"It's better now," said Forsyth, with a sigh of relief.  "I scrunched a
bit o' bone into it; that was all."

"There's nothing like the string and the red-hot poker," suggested Ruby
Brand.  "Tie the one end o' the string to a post and t'other end to the
tooth, an' stick a red-hot poker to your nose.  Away it comes at once."

"Hoot! nonsense," said Watt.  "Ye might as weel tie a string to his lug
an' dip him into the sea.  Tak' my word for't, there's naethin' like
pooin'."

"D'you mean pooh pooin'?" enquired Dumsby.

Watt's reply was interrupted by a loud gust of wind, which burst upon
the beacon house at that moment and shook it violently.

Everyone started up, and all clustered round the door and windows to
observe the appearance of things without.  Every object was shrouded in
thick darkness, but a flash of lightning revealed the approach of the
storm which had been predicted, and which had already commenced to blow.

All tendency to jest instantly vanished, and for a time some of the men
stood watching the scene outside, while others sat smoking their pipes
by the fire in silence.

"What think ye of things?" enquired one of the men, as Ruby came up from
the mortar-gallery, to which he had descended at the first gust of the
storm.

"I don't know what to think," said he gravely.  "It's clear enough that
we shall have a stiffish gale.  I think little of that with a tight
craft below me and plenty of sea-room; but I don't know what to think of
a _beacon_ in a gale."

As he spoke another furious burst of wind shook the place, and a flash
of vivid lightning was speedily followed by a crash of thunder, that
caused some hearts there to beat faster and harder than usual.

