stove in, we can patch it up somehow, and go fishin'."

"Without hooks or lines?" said Gaff.

Billy was posed again, and his father laughed at the perplexed
expression on his countenance, as he said, "Never mind, boy, we'll find
somethin' or other that will do instead o' hooks an' lines."

"To be sure we will," assented the other encouragingly; "an' that'll be
one of the jolliest bits of it all, that we'll spend lots of our time in
tryin' to find out things that'll do instead o' other things, won't we?
And then--hallo! was that a grump?"

"It sounded uncommon like one."

"An' that's a squeal," said Billy.

In another moment both "grump" and "squeal" were repeated in full chorus
by a drove of wild pigs that burst suddenly out of a thick bush, and,
rushing in mad haste past the intruders on their domain, disappeared,
yelling, into a neighbouring thicket.

"Pork for our ducks, daddy!" shouted Billy, when the first burst of his
surprise was over; "we'll have plenty of grub now; but how are we to
catch them?"

"Ha! we must find that out," replied Gaff cheerfully; "it'll give us
summat to think about, d'ye see?  Now then, here we are at the beach,
an' as far as I can see we have bright prospects in regard to victuals
of another sort, for here be crabs an' oysters an' no end o' cockles.
Come, we'll not be badly off, if we only had a hut o' some sort to sleep
in; but, after all, we can manage to be comfortable enough under a tree.
It will be better than the housin' we've had for the last few nights,
anyhow."

To their great delight they found that the boat had been cast ashore on
a sandy place, and that it was uninjured.  A short way beyond it, too,
the oars were found stranded between two rocks.

This was a piece of great good fortune, because it placed within their
reach the means of an immediate circumnavigation of their island.  But
before entering on this voyage of discovery they resolved to explore the
woods near the place where they had landed, in search of a cavern, or
some suitable place in which to fix their home.

Acting on this resolve they pulled the boat up the beach, placed the
oars within it, and returned to the woods.  As they went they picked up
a few shell-fish, and ate them raw.  Thus they breakfasted; but although
the meal was a poor one it was unusually pleasant, because of the hunger
which had previously oppressed them, and which Billy, in a fit of
confidential talk with his father, compared to having his "interior
gnawed out by rats!"

Passing through the woods they found a quantity of ripe berries, of
various kinds, of which they ate heartily, and then came to a spring of
clear cold water.  Gaff also climbed a cocoa-nut tree and brought down
two nuts, which were clothed in such thick hard shells that they
well-nigh broke their hearts before they succeeded in getting at the
kernels.  However, they got at them in course of time, and feasted
sumptuously on them.

It was half an hour, or perhaps three-quarters of an hour, after the
gathering of the cocoa-nuts, that they came suddenly on a spring of
water above which there was a cloud of vapour resembling steam.

"It's bilin'," exclaimed Billy, as he ran forward and eagerly thrust his
hand into the water.

Billy had said this in joke, for he had never conceived of such a thing
as a spring of hot water, but he found that his jest might have been
said in earnest, for the spring was almost "bilin'," and caused the
Bu'ster to pull his hand out again with a roar of surprise and pain.

Just beyond the hot spring they found a small cavern in the face of a
cliff, which appeared to them to be quite dry.

"Here's the very thing we want, daddy," cried Billy in gleeful surprise.

"Don't be too sure, lad; p'raps it's damp."

"No, it's dry as bone," said the boy, running in and placing his hands
on the floor; "it's wide inside too, and the entrance is small, so we
can put a door to it; and look there! see--an't that a hole leadin' to
some other place?"

Billy was right.  A small hole, not much larger than was sufficient to
admit of a man passing through, conducted them into a larger cave than
the first one, and here they found another hole leading into a third,
which was so large and dark that they dared not venture to explore it
without a light.  They saw enough, however, to be convinced that the
caverns were well ventilated and free from damp, so they returned to the
entrance cave and examined it carefully with a view to making it their
home.

Billy's romantic spirit was filled to overflowing with joy while thus
engaged, insomuch that Gaff himself became excited as well as interested
in the investigation.  They little knew at the time how familiar each
rock and crevice of that cave was to become, and how long it was
destined to be their island-home!



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

RELATING TO IMPROVEMENTS IN THE HUT, AND MRS. GAFF'S PERPLEXITIES.

While Stephen Gaff and his son were busy preparing their residence in
the South Sea island, Mrs Gaff was equally busy in preparing her
residence for their reception on their return to Cove.

The little cottage had undergone so many changes during the past few
months that it is doubtful whether its rightful owner would have
recognised his own property,--internally at least; externally it
remained unaltered.

Having, with much pains, ascertained that she might venture to launch
out pretty freely in the way of expenditure without becoming absolutely
bankrupt, Mrs Gaff had supplied herself with a handsome new grate, a
large proportion of which was of polished brass, that cost herself and
Tottie much of their time to keep clean and brilliant; there were also
fender and fire-irons to match, adorned with brass knobs and points,
which latter were the special admiration of Tottie.  There was a carpet,
too, straight from the looms of Turkey--as the man who sold it informed
Mrs Gaff--which was the admiration of all Cove, for it was divided into
squares of brilliant colours, with huge red roses in the centre of each.
It was positively a superb, a resplendent, carpet, and rejoiced the
hearts and eyes of Mrs Gaff and her child every time they looked at it,
which you may be sure was pretty often.  It kept them indeed in a
constant state of nervous dread lest they should spill or capsize
anything upon it, and in this respect might almost be said to have
rendered their lives a burden, but they bore up under it with surprising
cheerfulness.

There was also a new eight-day clock, with a polished mahogany case and
a really white face, which by contrast made the old Dutch clock more
yellow and bilious than ever, and if possible more horrified in its
expression.  Mrs Gaff had allowed the old clock to retain its corner,
wisely concluding that it would be a pleasantly familiar sight and sound
to her husband and son when they returned.  It was quite apparent to the
meanest capacity that there was a rivalry between the two timepieces;
for, being both rather good timekeepers, they invariably struck the
hours at the same time, but the new clock struck with such a loud
overbearing ring that the old one was quite overpowered.  The latter had
the advantage, however, of getting the first two strokes before the
other began, besides which it prefaced its remarks every hour with a
mysterious hissing and whirring sound that the new clock could not have
got up to save its life.

There were also half-a-dozen new cane chairs.  The shopman who had sold
Mrs Gaff the carpet told her that they would look more elegant and
drawing-room-like than the six heavy second-hand mahogany ones, with the
hair-cloth seats, on which she had set her heart.  Mrs Gaff would not
at first agree to take the cane chairs, observing truly that they "was
too slim," but she was shaken in her mind when the shopman said they
were quite the thing for a lady's boudoir.

She immediately demanded to know what a "boodwar" was.  The shopman told
her that it was an elegant apartment in which young ladies were wont to
sit and read poetry, and think of their absent lovers.

On hearing this she retired into a corner of the shop, taking refuge
behind a chest of drawers, and held a long whispered conversation with
Tottie, after which she came forth and asked the shopman if married
ladies ever used boodwars where they might sit and think of their absent
husbands.

The shopman smiled, and said he had no doubt they did--indeed, he was
sure of it; for, said he, there was a certain apartment in his own house
in which his own wife was wont to sit up at night, when he chanced to be
absent, and think of _him_.

The uncandid man did not add that in the same apartment he was in the
habit of being taken pretty sharply to task as to what had kept him out
so late; but, after all, what had Mrs Gaff to do with that?  The result
was that the six cane chairs were ordered by Mrs Gaff, who remarked
that she never read "poitry," but that that wouldn't matter much.
Thenceforth she styled the cottage at Cove the Boodwar.

It is worthy of remark that Mrs Gaff, being a heavy woman, went through
the bottom of the first of the cane chairs she sat down on after they
were placed in the boudoir, and that her fisher-friends, being all more
or less heavy, went successively through the bottoms of all the rest
until none were left, and they were finally replaced by the six heavy
mahogany chairs, with the hair seats, which ever afterwards stood every
test to which they were subjected, that of Haco Barepoles' weight
included.

But the chief ornament of the cottage was a magnificent old mahogany
four-poster, which was so large that it took up at least a third of the
apartment, and so solidly dark and heavy that visitors were invariably,
on their first entrance, impressed with the belief that a hearse had
been set up in a corner of the boudoir.  The posts of this bed were
richly carved, and the top of each was ornamented with an imposing ball.
The whole was tastefully draped with red damask so dark with age as to
be almost black.  Altogether this piece of furniture was so grand that
words cannot fully describe it, and it stood so high on its carved legs
that Mrs Gaff and Tottie were obliged to climb into it each night by a
flight of three steps, which were richly carpeted, and which folded into
a square box, which was extremely convenient as a seat or ottoman during
the day, and quite in keeping with the rest of the furniture of the
"boodwar."

In addition to all these beautiful and expensive articles, Mrs Gaff
displayed her love for the fine arts in the selection and purchase of
four engravings in black frames with gold slips, one for each wall of
the cottage.  The largest of these was the portrait of a first-rate
line-of-battle ship in full sail, with the yards manned, and dressed
from deck to trucks with all the flags of the navy.  Another was a head
of Lord Nelson, said to be a speaking likeness!

This head had the astonishing property of always looking at you, no
matter what part of the room you looked at it from!  Tottie had
expressed a wish that it might be hung opposite the new clock, in order
that it might have something, as it were, to look at; but although the
eyes looked straight out of the picture, they refused to look at the
clock, and pertinaciously looked at living beings instead.  Mrs Gaff
asserted that it had a squint, and that it was really looking at the
Dutch clock, and on going to the corner where that timepiece stood she
found that Lord Nelson _was_ gazing in that direction!  But Tottie, who
went to the opposite corner of the room, roundly asseverated that the
head looked at _her_.

There was no getting over this difficulty, so Mrs Gaff gave it up as an
unsolvable riddle; but Tottie, who was fond of riddles, pondered the
matter, and at length came to the conclusion that as Lord Nelson was a
great man, it must be because of his greatness that he could look in two
directions at the same moment.

Mrs Gaff furthermore displayed her taste for articles of _vertu_ in her
selection of chimney-piece ornaments.  She had completely covered every
inch of available space with shells of a brilliant and foreign aspect,
and articles of chinaware, such as parrots and shepherds, besides
various creatures which the designer had evidently failed to represent
correctly, as they resembled none of the known animals of modern times.

From this abode of elegance and luxury Mrs Gaff issued one forenoon in
her gay cotton visiting dress and the huge bonnet with the pink bows and
ribbons.  Tottie accompanied her, for the two were seldom apart for any
lengthened period since the time when Stephen and Billy went away.
Mother and daughter seemed from that date to have been united by a new
and stronger bond than heretofore; they walked, worked, ate, slept, and
almost thought together.  On the present occasion they meant to pay a
business visit at the house of Mr Stuart.

While they were on their way thither, Miss Penelope Stuart was engaged
in the difficult and harassing work of preparing for a journey.  She was
assisted by Mrs Niven, who was particularly anxious to know the cause
of the intended journey, to the great annoyance of Miss Peppy, who did
not wish to reveal the cause, but who was so incapable of concealing
anything that she found it absolutely necessary to take the housekeeper
into her confidence.

"Niven," she said, sitting down on a portmanteau, which was packed,
beside one which was packing.

"Yes, ma'am."

"I may as well tell you why it is that I am going to visit my
brother-in-law--"

"Oh, it's to your brother-in-law you're goin', is it?"

"Yes, I forgot that you did not know, but to be sure I might have known
that you could not know unless you were told, although it's difficult to
understand why people shouldn't know what others are thinking of, as
well as what they are looking at.  We can see them looking, but we can't
hear them thinking--really it is very perplexing--dear me, where can
they be?"

"What, ma'am?"

"My thick walking-shoes.  I'm quite sure that I had them in my hand a
minute ago."

"Ho! ma'am," exclaimed Mrs Niven suddenly, "if you aren't bin an' put
'em into your bonnet-box among the caps."

"Well now, that _is_ odd.  Put them into the bag, Niven.  Well, as I was
saying--where was I?"

"You was goin' to tell me why you are goin' to your brother, ma'am,"
observed the housekeeper.

"Ah! to be sure; well then--.  But you must never mention it, Niven."

Miss Peppy said this with much solemnity, as if she were administering
an oath.

"On my honour, ma'am; trust me.  I never mentions hanythink."

Mrs Niven said this as though she wondered that the supposition could
have entered into Miss Peppy's head for a moment, that she, (Mrs
Niven), could, would, or should tell anything to anybody.

"Well then, you must know," resumed Miss Peppy, with a cautious glance
round the room, "my brother-in-law, Colonel Crusty, who lives in the
town of Athenbury, is a military man--"

"So I should suppose, ma'am," observed Mrs Niven, "he being called
Kurnel, w'ich is an army name."

"Ah, yes, to be sure, I forgot that; well, it is two hours by train to
Athenbury, which is a dirty place, as all seaports are--full of fishy
and sailory smells, though I've never heard that such smells are bad for
the health; at least the Sanitary Commissioners say that if all the
filth were cleaned away the effluvia would be less offensive, and--
and--.  But, as I was saying, for those reasons I mean to pay my
brother-in-law a short visit."

"Beg parding, ma'am," said Mrs Niven, "but, if I may remark so, you
'ave not mentioned your reasons as yet."

"Oh, to be sure," said the baffled Miss Peppy, who had weakly hoped that
she could escape with an indefinite explanation; "I meant to say, (and
you'll be sure not to tell, Niven), that the Colonel has a remarkably
pretty daughter, with _such_ a sweet temper, and heiress to all her
father's property; though I never knew rightly how much it was, for the
Crustys are very close, and since their mother died--"

"Whose mother, ma'am? the Colonel's or his daughter's?"

"His daughter's, of course--Bella, she is called.  Since she died, (not
Bella, but her mother), since then I've never heard anything about the
family; but now that Bella is grown up, I mean to get her and Kenneth to
see each other, and I have no doubt that they will fall in love, which
would be very nice, for you know Kenneth will have a good income one of
those days, and it's as well that the young people should be--be married
if they can, and indeed I see nothing in the way; though, after all,
they would probably be happier if they were _not_ to marry, for I don't
believe the state to be a happy one, and that's the reason, Niven, that
I never entered into it myself; but it's too late now, though I cannot
conceive why it should ever be too late, for if people can be happy at
all, any time, what's to hinder?"

Miss Peppy paused abruptly here, and Mrs Niven, supposing that she
awaited a reply, said--

"Nothing whatever, ma'am."

"Exactly so, Niven, that's just what I think.  Kenneth is young and tall
and handsome, Bella is young and small and pretty, and that's the reason
the match is so suitable, though, to be sure, there are many people
similarly situated whose union would not be suitable; dear me, this
world of perplexities!  No one can read the riddle, for this world is no
better than a big round riddle, flattened a little at the poles, to be
sure, like an orange, though to _my_ eyes it seems as flat as a pancake,
except in the Scotch Highlands, where it's very irregular, and the
people wear kilts; still, upon the whole, I think the match will be a
good one, so I am going to try to bring it about."

"But are you sure, ma'am, that Master Kenneth will go to visit Colonel
Crusty?"

"O yes, he has promised to escort me there, and then he'll see Bella,
