
"No--no lad came near the camp yesterday," answered the chief gruffly.

Here was cause for wonder, both for the Hebrew and the prince.

"Forgive me, sir," said the latter, with a deferential air that greatly
pleased the warrior, "forgive me if I venture to intrude my own troubles
on one whose anxiety must needs be greater, but this youth left my hut
yesterday to visit you, saying that he knew you well, and if he has not
arrived some evil must have befallen him, for the distance he had to
traverse was very short."

"That is sad," returned the chief in a tone of sympathy, "for he must
either have been caught by robbers, or come by an accident on the way.
Did you not follow his footsteps as you came along?"

"We never thought of following them--the distance being so short,"
returned the prince with increasing anxiety.

"Are you, then, so fond of this lad?" asked the chief.

"Ay, that am I, and with good reason, for he has tended me with
self-denying care during illness, and in circumstances which few men
would have faced.  In truth, I feel indebted to him for my life."

"Say you so?" cried the chief with sudden energy; "then shall we search
for _him_ as well as for my daughter.  And you, Hebrew, shall help us.
Doubtless, young man, you will aid us by your knowledge of the district.
I have secured the services of the hunter of the Swamp, so we can
divide into three bands, and scour the whole country round.  We cannot
fail to find them, for neither of them can have got far away, whether
they be lost or stolen.  Ho! there.  Assemble the force, instantly.
Divide it into three bands.  My lieutenant shall head one.  You, Bladud,
shall lead another, and I myself will head the third, guided by Beniah.
Away!"

With a wave of both hands Gadarn dismissed those around him, and retired
to his booth to arm himself, and prepare for the pending search.

The Hebrew was sorely tempted just then to speak out, but his solemn
promise to Branwen sealed his lips.  The fact also that the girl seemed
really to have disappeared, filled him with alarm as well as surprise,
and made him anxious to participate in the search.  In a perplexed state
of mind, and unenviable temper, he went away with Bladud to the place
where the force was being marshalled.

"Strange that fate should send us on a double search of this kind,"
remarked the prince as they hurried along.

"Whether fate sent us, or some mischievous sprite, I know not," growled
the Hebrew, "but there is no need for more than one search."

"How!" exclaimed Bladud sternly.  "Think you that my poor lad's fate is
not of as much interest to me as that of Gadarn's daughter is to him?"

"Nay, verily, I presume not to gauge the interest of princes and
chiefs," returned Beniah, with an exasperated air.  "All I know is, that
if we find the lad, we are full sure to find the lass not far off."

"How?  You speak in riddles to-day."

"Ay, and there are like to be more riddles tomorrow, for what the upshot
of it will be is more than I can tell.  See you not that, as the two
were lost about the same time, and near the same place, they will
probably be found together?"

"Your wits seem to be shaken to-day, old man," rejoined Bladud, smiling,
"for these two were not lost about the same place or time."

Fortunately for the Hebrew's peace of mind, an officer accosted them at
that moment, and, directing the one to head a band just ready to march,
led the other to the force which was to be commanded by the chief in
person.

In a few minutes the three bands were in motion, the main bodies
marching north, south, and east, while strong parties were sent out from
each to skirmish in all directions.

"Think you we shall find them, Hebrew?" asked the chief, who seemed to
be in a curiously impulsive state of mind.

"I trust we may.  It seems to me almost certain."

"I hope so, for your sake as well as my own, old man; for, if we do not,
I will surely cut your head off for bringing me here for nothing."

"Does it not seem unjust to punish a man for doing his best?" asked
Beniah.

"It may seem so to you men of the east, but to the men of the west
justice is not held of much account."

Proceeding round by the Hot Springs, the party led by Gadarn made a
careful inspection of every cavern, defile, glade, and thicket,
returning at evening towards the camp from which they set out, it having
been arranged that they were all to meet there and start again to renew
the search, in a wider circle, on the following morning.

"No success," remarked Gadarn sternly, unbuckling his sword and flinging
it violently on the ground.

"Not yet, but we may have better fortune tomorrow," said Beniah.

"Don't you think the small footprints we saw near the Springs were those
of the boy?"

"They may have been."

"And those that we saw further on, but lost sight of in the rocky
ground--did they not look like those of a girl?"

"They certainly did."

"And yet strangely like to each other," said the chief.

"Marvellously," returned Beniah.

A slight sound in Gadarn's nose caused the Hebrew to look up quickly,
but the chief was gazing with stern gravity out at the opening of his
booth, where the men of his force could be seen busily at work felling
trees, kindling fires, and otherwise preparing for the evening meal.

CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

MORE SECRETS AND SURPRISES.

All went well with the party that conducted Branwen to King Hudibras'
town until they reached the hut of Beniah the Hebrew, when the lad
suggested to the leader of the escort that they should put up there, as
it was too late to think of intruding on the king that night.

As the lieutenant had been told to pay particular regard to the wishes
of his charge, he at once agreed.  Indeed, during the journey, Cormac
(as we may here continue to call the girl) had expressed his wishes with
such a quiet, matter-of-course air of authority that the officer in
charge had come to the conclusion that the youth must be the son of some
person of importance--perhaps even of King Hudibras himself.  He
therefore accorded him implicit obedience and deference.

"The hut is too small for all of us," said Cormac; "the greater number
of your men must sleep outside; but that does not matter on so fine a
night."

"True, it matters nothing," replied the officer.  "We will all of us sup
and sleep round the campfires."

"Nay, you and your lieutenant will sup with me.  Afterwards you can join
the men.  By-the-by, there is an old woman here, who takes charge--or
ought to take charge--of the Hebrew's dwelling during his absence."

"I have not seen her," said the officer.

"True--but she will no doubt make her appearance soon.  Let her come and
go as she pleases without hindrance.  It is not safe to thwart her, for
her temper is none of the sweetest, and she is apt to scratch."

Supper was soon over, for the party had travelled all day, and were
weary.  When it was finished Cormac again cautioned the officers not to
interfere with the old woman, for she was dangerous.

"I will have a care," said the officer, laughing, as he and his
subaltern rose, bade their charge good-night, and took their leave.

The instant they were gone Branwen pushed the plank-bridge across the
chasm, and disappeared in the secret cave.

Half an hour later the two officers were seated with some of the men at
the camp-fire nearest the hut, making preparations for going to rest,
when they were startled by the creaking of the hut door.  To their
intense surprise it opened wide enough to let a little old woman step
out.  She was much bent, wore an old grey shawl over her head, and
leaned on a staff.  For some moments she looked from side to side as if
in search of something.

"See! the old woman!" murmured the officer in a low whisper.

"True, but we did not see her enter the hut," replied the sub with a
solemn look.

In those days witchcraft was implicitly believed in, so, when they saw
the old creature hobble towards them, they experienced feelings of alarm
that had never yet affected their manly bosoms in danger or in war.
Their faces paled a little, but their courage stood the test, for they
sat still till she came close enough to let her piercing dark eyes be
seen peering at them like those of a basilisk from out the folds of the
shawl that enveloped her.

"Y-you are the--the old woman, I suppose?" said the officer in a
deferential tone.

"Yes, I am the old woman, young man, and you will be an old woman too
when you reach my time of life," she replied, in a deep metallic voice.

"I hope not," returned the officer, sincerely.

"At all events you'll be a dead man before long if you don't attend to
what I say," continued the woman.  "Your young master in the hut there
told me to tell you that he is tired and wants a good long rest, so you
are not to disturb him in the morning till he calls you.  D'you hear?"

"I hear, and will obey."

"Eh?  What?  Speak out.  I'm deaf."

"I hear, and will attend to your wishes."

"Humph! it will be worse for you if you don't," muttered the old hag, as
she turned away, hobbled into the woods, and slowly disappeared.

It need scarcely be said that the lieutenant and his sub did not sleep
much that night.  They discussed the subject of witches, their powers
and propensities, and the bad luck likely to attend those who actually
had the misfortune to see them, until the hair on their heads betrayed a
tendency to rise, and the grey dawn began to appear.  Then they lay down
and indulged in some fitful slumber.  But the discomforts of the night
were as nothing to the anxieties of the morning, for the lazy Cormac
seemed to have gone in for an extent of slumber that was out of all
reason, considering his circumstances.  The ordinary breakfast hour
arrived, but there was no intimation of his having awoke.  Hours passed,
but there was no call from the hut, and the officer, with
ever-increasing anxiety, bade his men to kick up a row--or words to that
effect.  No command they ever received was more easy of fulfilment.
They laughed and talked; they cut down trees and cleaned their breakfast
utensils with overwhelming demonstration; they shouted, they even sang
and roared in chorus, but without effect.  Noon arrived and passed,
still Cormac slept on.  It was worse than perplexing--it was becoming
desperate!

The officer commanding the party was a brave man; so was the sub.  Their
native courage overcame their superstitious fears.

"I'll be battle-axed!" exclaimed the first, using a very objectionable
old British oath, "if I don't rouse him, though all the witches in
Albion should withstand me."

"And I'll back you up," said the sub with a frown that spoke volumes--
perhaps, considering the times, we should have written--rolls of
papyrus.

Accordingly the two went towards the hut, with pluck and misgiving
contending for the mastery.

"Perchance the witch may have returned while we slept," said the sub in
a low voice.

"Or she may have re-entered the hut invisibly--as she did at first,"
replied the other.

The door was found to be on the latch.  The lieutenant opened it a
little and peeped in.

"Ho!  Cormac!" he shouted; "hi! ho! hooroo hooh!" but he shouted in
vain.

Becoming accustomed to the dim light, he perceived that there was no one
within to answer to the call, so he suddenly sprang in, followed by the
sub and a few of the more daring spirits among the men.

A hasty search revealed the fact that the lad was not to be seen.  A
more minute and thorough inspection showed clearly that no one was
there.  They did not, of course, discover the cave, for the plank had
been removed, but they gazed solemnly into the depths of the dark chasm
and wondered if poor Cormac had committed suicide there, or if the witch
had murdered him and thrown him in.  Having neither rope nor ladder, and
the chasm appearing to be bottomless, they had no means of settling the
question.

But now a point of far greater moment pressed on their consideration.
What was to be said to King Hudibras about the disappearance of the lad?
Would he believe them?  It was not likely.  And, on the other hand,
what would Gadarn say?  Would _he_ believe them?  He might, indeed, for
he knew them to be faithful, but that would not mitigate his wrath, and
when he was roused by neglected duty they knew too well that their lives
would hang on a thread.  What was to be done?  To go forward or backward
seemed to involve death!  One only resource was left, namely, for the
whole band to go off on its own account and take to the woods as
independent robbers--or hunters--or both combined.

In an unenviable frame of mind the lieutenant and his sub sat down to
the discussion of these knotty points and their mid-day meal.

Meanwhile the witch, who had been the occasion of all this distress,
having got out of sight in the woods, assumed a very upright gait and
stepped out with a degree of bounding elasticity that would have done
credit to a girl of nineteen.

The sun was just rising in a flood of glorious light when she entered
the suburbs of King Hudibras' town--having previously resumed her stoop
and hobbling gait.

The king was lazy.  He was still a-bed snoring.  But the household was
up and at breakfast, when the witch--passing the guards who looked upon
her as too contemptible to question--knocked at the palace door.  It was
the back-door, for even at that time palaces had such convenient
apertures, for purposes, no doubt, of undignified retreat.  A menial
answered the knock--after wearisome delay.

"Is the Princess Hafrydda within?"

"She is," answered the menial, with a supercilious look, "but she is at
breakfast, and does not see poor people at such an hour."

"Would she see rich people if they were to call at such an hour?"
demanded the witch, sharply.

"Per--perhaps she would," replied the menial with some hesitation.

"Then I'll wait here till she has finished breakfast.  Is the king up?"

"N-no.  He still slumbers."

"Hah!  Like him!  He was always lazy in the mornings.  Go fetch me a
stool."

The manner of the old woman with her magnificent dark eyes and deep
metallic voice, and her evident knowledge of the king's habits, were too
much for the menial--a chord of superstition had been touched; it
vibrated, and he was quelled.  Humbly but quickly he fetched a stool.

"Won't you step in?" he said.

"No, I'll stop out!" she replied, and sat herself doggedly down, with
the air of one who had resolved never more to go away.

Meanwhile, in the breakfast room of the palace, which was on the ground
floor--indeed, all the rooms of the palace were on the ground floor, for
there was no upper one--the queen and her fair daughter Hafrydda were
entertaining a stranger who had arrived the day before.

He was an exceedingly handsome man of about six-and-twenty; moderately
tall and strong, but with an air of graceful activity in all his
movements that gave people, somehow, the belief that whatever he chose
to attempt he could do.  Both his olive complexion and his tongue
betokened him a foreigner, for although the language he spoke was
Albionic, it was what we now style broken--very much broken indeed.
With a small head, short curly black hair, a very young beard, and small
pointed moustache, fine intellectual features, and an expression of
imperturbable good-humour, he presented an appearance which might have
claimed the regard of any woman.  At all events the queen had formed a
very high opinion of him--and she was a woman of much experience, having
seen many men in her day.  Hafrydda, though, of course, not so
experienced, fully equalled her mother, if she did not excel her, in her
estimate of the young stranger.

As we should be unintelligible if we gave the youth's words in the
broken dialect, we must render his speech in fair English.

"I cannot tell how deeply I am grieved to hear this dreadful news of my
dear friend," he said, with a look of profound sorrow that went home to
