the captives--

"If you truly love Jesus, let these go free."

The chief had to bend down to catch the feebly-spoken words.  Rising
instantly, he drew his knife, went to Little Tim, and cut the thongs
that bound him.  Then he cut those of Big Tim and Whitewing, and lastly
those of Bounding Bull.

He had scarcely completed the latter act when his old enemy suddenly
snatched the knife out of his hand, caught him by the right arm with a
vice-like grasp, and pointed the weapon at his heart.

"Bounding Bull," he said fiercely, "knows not the meaning of all this,
but he knows that his child is in the Blackfoot camp, and that Rushing
River is at his mercy."

No effort did Rushing River make to avert the impending blow, but stood
perfectly still, and, with a look of simple gravity, said--

"Skipping Rabbit is not in the Blackfoot camp.  She is now in the camp
of her kindred; and Moonlight," he added, turning a glance on Little
Tim, "is safe."

"Your face looks truthful and your tone sounds honest, Rushing River,"
said Little Tim, "but the Blackfeet are clever at deceiving, and the
chief is our bitter foe.  What surety have we that he is not telling
lies?  Rushing River knows well he has only to give a signal and his red
reptiles will swarm in on us, all unarmed as we are, and take our
scalps."

"My young men are beyond hearing," returned the chief.  "I have sent
them away.  My breast is open to the knife in the hand of Bounding Bull.
I am no longer an enemy, but a follower of Jesus, and the preacher has
told us that He is the Prince of peace."

At this the prairie chief stepped forward.

"Friends," he said, "my heart is glad this day, for I am sure that you
may trust the word of Rushing River.  Something of his change of mind I
have heard of in the course of my wanderings, but I had not been sure
that there was truth in the report till now."

Still Bounding Bull maintained his grasp on his old foe, and held the
knife in readiness, so that if there should be any sudden attempt at
rescue, he, at least, should not escape.

The two Tims, Little and Big, although moved by Whitewing's remarks,
were clearly not quite convinced.  They seemed uncertain how to view the
matter, and were still hesitating when Rushing River again spoke.

"The pale-faces," he said, "do not seem to be so trustful as the red
men.  I have put myself in your power, yet you do not believe me.  Why,
then, does not Bounding Bull strike his ancient enemy?  His great
opportunity has come.  His squaws are waiting in his wigwam fur the
scalp of Rushing River."

For the first time in his life Bounding Bull was rendered incapable of
action.  In all his extensive experience of Indian warfare he had never
been placed in such a predicament.  If he had been an out-and-out
heathen, he would have known what to do, and would have done it at
once--he would have gratified revenge.  Had Rushing River been an
out-and-out heathen, he never would have given him the chance he now
possessed of wreaking his vengeance.  Then the thought of Skipping
Rabbit filled his heart with tender anxiety, and confused his judgment
still more.  It was very perplexing!  But Rushing River brought the
perplexity to an end by saying--

"If you wish for further proof that Rushing River tells no lies,
Moonlight will give it.  Let her come forward."

Little Tim was beginning to think that the Blackfoot chief was, as he
expressed it, somewhat "off his head," when Moonlight ran into the room,
and seized him with her wonted energy round the neck.

"Yes, father, it's all true.  I am safe, as you see, and happy."

"An' Skippin' Rabbit?" said Little Tim.

"Is in her own wigwam by this time."

As she spoke in the Indian tongue, Bounding Bull understood her.  He at
once let go his hold of his old foe.  Returning the knife to him, he
grasped his right hand after the manner of the pale-faces, and said--

"My brother."

By this time Eaglenose and Umqua had appeared upon the scene, and added
their testimony to that of their chief.  While they were still engaged
in explanation, a low wail from Softswan turned their attention to the
corner where the preacher lay.

The prairie chief glided to the side of his old friend, and kneeled by
the couch.  The others clustered round in solemn silence.  They guessed
too surely what had drawn forth the girl's wail.  The old man lay, with
his thin white locks scattered on the pillow, his hands clasped as if in
prayer, and with eyes nearly closed, but the lips moved not.  His days
of prayer and striving on this earth were over, and his eternity of
praise and glory had begun.

We might here, appropriately enough, close our record of the prairie
chief and the preacher, but we feel loath to leave them without a few
parting words, for the good work which the preacher had begun was
carried on, not only by Whitewing, but, as far as example went--and that
was a long way--by Little and Big Tim and their respective wives, and
Bounding Bull, as well as by many of their kindred.

After the preacher's remains had been laid in the grave at the foot of a
pine-tree in that far western wilderness, Little Tim, with his son and
Indian friends, followed Bounding Bull to his camp, where one of the
very first persons they saw was Skipping Rabbit engaged in violently
agitating the limbs of her jumping-jack, to the ineffable delight of
Eaglenose.

Soon after, diplomatic negotiations were entered into between the tribe
of Bounding Bull and the Blackfeet, resulting in a treaty of peace which
bid fair to be a lasting treaty, at least as lasting as most other human
treaties ever are.  The pipe of peace was solemnly smoked, the
war-hatchet was not less solemnly buried, and a feast on a gigantic
scale, was much more solemnly held.

Another result was that Rushing River and Moonlight were married--not
after the simple Indian fashion, but with the assistance of a real
pale-faced missionary, who was brought from a distance of nearly three
hundred miles, from a pale-face pioneer settlement, for the express
purpose of tying that knot along with several other knots of the same
kind, and doing what in him lay to establish and strengthen the good
work which the old preacher had begun.

Years passed away, and a fur-trading establishment was sent into those
western regions, which gradually attracted round it a group of Indians,
who not only bartered skins with the traders, but kept them constantly
supplied with meat.  Among the most active hunters of this group were
our friends Little and Big Tim, Bounding Bull, Rushing River, and
Eaglenose.  Sometimes these hunted singly, sometimes in couples, not
unfrequently all together, for they were a very sociable band.

Whitewing was not one of them, for he devoted himself exclusively to
wandering about the mountains and prairies, telling men and women and
children of the Saviour of sinners, of righteousness and judgment to
come--a self-appointed Red Indian missionary, deriving his authority
from the Word of God.

But the prairie chief did not forsake his old and well-tried friends.
He left a hostage in the little community, a sort of living lodestone,
which was sure to bring him back again and again, however far his
wanderings might extend.  This was a wrinkled specimen of female
humanity, which seemed to be absolutely incapable of extinction because
of the superhuman warmth of its heart and the intrinsic hilarity of its
feelings!  Whoever chanced to inquire for Whitewing, whether in summer
or in winter, in autumn or in spring, was sure to receive some such
answer as the following: "Nobody knows where he is.  He wanders here and
there and everywhere; but he'll not be absent long, for he always turns
up, sooner or later, to see his old mother."

Yes, that mummified old mother, that "dear old one," was a sort of
planet round which Brighteyes and Softswan and Moonlight and Skipping
Rabbit and others, with a host of little Brighteyes and little
Softswans, revolved, forming a grand constellation, which the men of the
settlement gazed at and followed as the mariners of old followed the
Pole star.

The mention of Skipping Rabbit reminds us that we have something more to
say about her.

It so happened that the fur trader who had been sent to establish a post
in that region was a good man, and, strange to say, entertained a strong
belief that the soul of man was of far greater importance than his body.
On the strength of this opinion he gathered the Indians of the
neighbourhood around him, and told them that, as he wished to read to
them out of the Word of the Great Manitou, he would hold a class twice a
week in the fur-store; and, further, that if any of them wished to learn
English, and read the Bible of the pale-faces for themselves, he was
quite willing to teach them.

Well, the very first pupil that came to the English class was Skipping
Rabbit, and, curiously enough, the very second was Eaglenose.

Now it must be remembered that we have said that years had passed away.
Skipping Rabbit was no longer a spoiled, little laughing child, but a
tall, graceful, modest girl, just bursting into womanhood.  She was
still as fond as ever of the jumping-jack, but she slily worked its
galvanic limbs for the benefit of little children, not for her own--O
dear no!  Eaglenose had also grown during these years into a stalwart
man, and his chin and lower jaws having developed considerably, his nose
was relatively much reduced in appearance.  About the same time
Brighteyes and Softswan, naturally desiring to become more interesting
to their husbands, also joined this class, and they were speedily
followed by Moonlight and Bounding Bull.  Rushing River also looked in,
now and then, in a patronising sort of way, but Whitewing resolutely
refused to be troubled with anything when in camp save his mother and
his mother-tongue.

It will not therefore surprise the reader to be told that Eaglenose and
the skipping one, being thus engaged in a common pursuit, were
naturally, we may even say unavoidably, thrown a good deal together; and
as their philological acquirements extended, they were wont at times to
air their English on each other.  The lone woods formed a convenient
scene for their intercourse.

"Kom vis me," said Eaglenose to Skipping Rabbit one day after school.

"Var you goes?" asked the girl shyly--yet we might almost say
twinklingly.

"Don' know.  Nowhars.  Everywhars.  Anywhars."

"Kim 'long, den."

"Skipping one," said Eaglenose--of course in his own tongue, though he
continued the sentence in English--"de lunguish of de pale-fass am
diffikilt."

"Yes--'most too diffikilt for larn."

"Bot Softswan larn him easy."

"Bot Softswan have one pale-fass hubsind," replied the girl, breaking
into one of her old merry laughs at the trouble they both experienced in
communicating through such a "lunguish."

"Would the skipping one," said Eaglenose, with a sharp look, "like to
have a hubsind?"

The skipping one looked at her companion with a startled air, blushed,
cast down her eyes, and said nothing.

"Come, sit down here," said the Indian, suddenly reverting to his native
tongue, as he pointed to the trunk of a fallen tree.

The girl suffered herself to be led to the tree, and sat down beside the
youth, who retained one of her hands.

"Does not the skipping one know," he said earnestly, "that for many
moons she has been as the sun in the sky to Eaglenose?  When she was a
little one, and played with the jumping-jack, her eyes seemed to
Eaglenose like the stars, and her voice sounded like the rippling water
after it has reached the flowering prairie.  When the skipping one
laughed, did not the heart of Eaglenose jump? and when she let drops
fall from her stars, was not his heart heavy?  Afterwards, when she
began to think and talk of the Great Manitou, did not the Indian's ears
tingle and his heart burn?  It is true," continued the youth, with a
touch of pathos in his tone which went straight to the girl's heart, "it
is true that Eaglenose dwells far below the skipping one.  He creeps
like the beetle on the ground.  She flies like the wild swan among the
clouds.  Eaglenose is not worthy of her; but love is a strong horse that
scorns to stop at difficulties.  Skipping Rabbit and Eaglenose have the
same thoughts, the same God, the same hopes and desires.  They have one
heart--why should they not have one wigwam?"

Reader, we do not ask you to accept the above declaration as a specimen
of Indian love-making.  You are probably aware that the red men have a
very different and much more prosaic manner of doing things than this.
But we have already said that Eaglenose was an eccentric youth;
moreover, he was a Christian, and we do not feel bound to account for
the conduct or sentiments of people who act under the combined influence
of Christianity and eccentricity.

When Skipping Rabbit heard the above declaration, she did indeed blush a
little.  She could not help that, we suppose, but she did not look
awkward, or wait for the gentleman to say more, but quietly putting her
arm round his neck, she raised her little head and kissed that part of
his manly face which lay immediately underneath his eagle nose!

Of course he was not shabby enough to retain the kiss.  He understood it
to be a loan, and returned it immediately with interest--but--surely we
have said enough for an intelligent reader!

Not many days after that these two were married in the fur-store of the
traders.  A grand feast and a great dance followed, as a matter of
course.  It is noteworthy that there was no drink stronger than tea at
that merry-making, yet the revellers were wonderfully uproarious and
very happy, and it was universally admitted that, exclusive of course of
the bride and bridegroom, the happiest couple there were a wrinkled old
woman of fabulous age and her amiable son--the Prairie Chief.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Prairie Chief, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRAIRIE CHIEF ***

***** This file should be named 21694.txt or 21694.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/9/21694/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
