moved on.

Sinking back in his seat at the dining-car table, the swindler mopped
the beads of perspiration from his forehead with his handkerchief. He
was utterly disgusted.

"That is where I certainly put my foot in it," he muttered. "But I can
be thankful I didn't marry the girl!"

"Sorry, sar, but you'll have to settle for this lunch," said the waiter.

"If so, I reckon I'll eat it," answered Nick Smithers, and proceeded to
do so.

Nat had watched the whole scene with interest. At first he was inclined
to confront the swindler without delay, but then reconsidered the
matter.

"I must go slow," he mused. "If I'm not careful he'll get away again."

When Nick Smithers left the dining car Nat followed him to the smoker
and saw the swindler settle down for a comfortable smoke.

"He isn't going to leave the train just yet," thought our hero. "I
shouldn't be surprised if he is bound for Albany. If that's so, I had
better wait until we arrive there. Then we'll be in New York State,
where the offense was committed."

The train rattled on, and at the proper time rolled into the big station
at Albany. Nat kept close behind Nick Smithers and at the same time
looked around anxiously to see if he could find a policeman.

It was not long before our hero sighted an officer of the law, gazing
curiously at the crowd leaving the train. At once he beckoned the
policeman to come to him.

"What's wanted?" asked the officer, anxiously.

"Do you see that man?"

"Yes."

"He is a swindler, who is wanted in New York City for swindling several
men and myself. I want him arrested. Be careful how you handle him, for
he ran away from me in Springfield."

"You are sure of this?"

"I am positive. But be careful, or he will get away."

"He won't get away from me," said the policeman.

Nick Smithers was hurrying for the street when Nat and the officer of
the law came up to him.

"Stop, Nick Smithers!" cried our hero, and caught him by the arm.

The swindler swung around, stared at Nat, and his face fell.

"This is the time you don't get away so easily," went on Nat. "Officer,
do your duty."

"You'll have to consider yourself under arrest," said the policeman.
"This young man makes a charge against you."

"Why, that young man is a lunatic!" cried Nick Smithers, thinking of
his experience on the train. "They let him out of the asylum only day
before yesterday."

"Don't you believe a word of it," said Nat. "This rascal is one of the
slickest swindlers in the world. Take him to headquarters, and I'll go
along and prove every word I say."

"You'll have to come along," said the officer.

"All right, I'll go," answered Nick Smithers, but an instant later he
started to run away through the crowd. Nat, however, was on guard, and
putting out a foot, he sent the rascal pitching headlong on the depot
platform.

"Hi! what did you do that for?" demanded Nick Smithers, on arising. And
he glared at our hero as if to eat him up.

"You'll come along with me!" came angrily from the policeman, and
without more ceremony he marched the swindler to the police station,
with our hero following.




CHAPTER XXX

NAT COMES INTO HIS OWN


Once at the police station, Nat made a charge against Nick Smithers, and
then the swindler was asked what he had to say for himself.

"This is all a mistake," he said. "I am not the person."

"He is wanted in Chicago as well as in New York City," went on our hero.

In the meantime another officer had been looking up Nick Smithers'
picture in the rogues' gallery.

"I don't think the young man is mistaken," he said. "Wait till I
telephone to New York for more particulars."

This was done, and inside of an hour the rascal's identity was fully
established. Then Nick Smithers broke down.

"It's all up with me, and I may as well confess," he said, scowling at
Nat. "But I must say, I never thought a country boy would run me down."

"Well, you see, I am not quite as green as I used to be," answered Nat,
with a faint smile.

"But you missed it by not coming to me on the quiet," went on Nick
Smithers. "Had you done so, you might have gotten your hundred dollars
back. As it is, you'll not get a cent."

"That remains to be seen," answered our hero.

When Nat could get away from the police station he hurried at once to
the law offices of Messrs. Caswick & Sampson, as directed by Mr.
Garwell.

"So you are the young man John Garwell telegraphed about," said Mr.
Sampson, shaking hands. "I am glad to meet you. The business on hand
concerns you personally as well as it concerns your employer."

"Concerns me?" ejaculated Nat, in wonder. "How is that?"

"I am interested in a piece of property located in New York City, near
Central Park. By some papers which you turned over to Mr. Garwell it
would seem that you are likewise interested in the land."

"Through my grandfather?"

"Yes."

"Then he really owned a share of the land?"

"He did, and so far as Mr. Garwell and I can ascertain he never sold out
his claim."

"What is the claim worth?"

"You will have to ask Mr. Garwell about that. He wanted me to sign
certain documents, and let you take them to New York to-night. Can you
do that?"

"I think I can. But the police may wish to detain me." And then our hero
told of the arrest of Nick Smithers. Mr. Sampson became interested, and
in the end went to the station with Nat. He knew some of the officials,
so our hero had no more trouble.

"We shall send the rascal to New York as soon as the officers down there
want him," said one of the police officials; and, later on, this was
done.

Not to lose time, our hero took the night train for the metropolis. He
had a berth in the sleeper, but it was a long while before he could get
to sleep. There were many things to think about, and the question of
property near Central Park was an absorbing one.

Arriving in New York, he went to his boarding house for breakfast, and
then hurried down to the office. It was not until ten o'clock that John
Garwell appeared.

"Did you get the papers from Mr. Sampson?" was his employer's first
question.

"Yes, sir."

"And fix up those matters at Springfield, too?"

"Yes, Mr. Garwell, and I did some other things, too," added Nat. "I had
that rascal, Hamilton Dart, alias Nick Smithers, arrested."

"Is it possible! Tell me the particulars," and Nat did so. "We must do
what we can to get your money back. This chap may have some property
somewhere."

"Well, even if I don't get the money back, it's a satisfaction to put
him where he belongs," said our hero.

"Perhaps you'll not be so anxious to get that hundred dollars after
you've heard what I have to tell, Nat," went on John Garwell, with a
quiet smile.

"What have you to tell, Mr. Garwell?"

"It's about that property in which your grandfather and your father were
interested."

"Is there a share coming to me?"

"Yes."

"What is it worth?"

"That remains to be learned. The hotel folks want all that tract of
land, as I told you. I shall advise you to hold out for sixty thousand
dollars."

"Sixty thousand dollars!" gasped Nat, thinking he had not heard aright.

"Yes."

"Do you mean to say that you think my share in that property is worth
sixty thousand dollars?"

"Either that or pretty close to it. I would not take a cent less than
fifty-five thousand dollars."

"It's a--a fortune!"

"It certainly is a neat sum of money for any lad to fall heir to. I
trust, if you do get it, that you invest it wisely."

"I'll do my best to do that, Mr. Garwell. But this--stumps me! Sixty
thousand dollars! What will Uncle Abner say when he hears of it!"

"I'm afraid he will be a bit jealous. I'm jealous myself," added the
real estate broker, with a twinkle in his eye.

"I know you are not," answered Nat, honestly. "Just the same, sir, if I
get that money, you are going to have your full share for helping me get
it."

"Well, I shan't object to my regular commission."

"And you are going to have more," added Nat, firmly.

"The way matters have turned out will make that Shanley of Brooklyn
sick," continued John Garwell. "And it will make Rufus Cameron sick,
too. The business will be transacted entirely through me, and they will
not get a cent in commissions."

"Well, I'm glad to get back at Rufus Cameron," answered Nat. "I haven't
forgotten how he treated me."

"His aunt will have nothing more to do with him. He has got to support
himself."

"I hope it makes a man of him," said our hero.

The next three weeks were busy ones for Nat. He had to appear against
Nick Smithers, who was brought to New York, tried, and sentenced to
several years in prison. It was found that there was money coming to the
swindler, and through this our hero and the others who had put up their
money for positions with "Hamilton Dart," received what was coming to
them.

"It was great of you to run him down," said the sick man to Nat. "This
return of money will please my sister."

"And I am thankful too," added Harry Bray.

The day after Nick Smithers was convicted the deal concerning the
property near Central Park was closed. It was shown that a part of the
property really belonged to Nat, and the sum of sixty thousand dollars
was eventually turned over to the youth for this. But this was not
until he was of age.

"Nat's a rich man now," said Abner Balberry, when the youth became
twenty-one. "He's got a reg'lar fortune."

"You shall have something of this, Uncle Abner," said our hero, and he
gave his uncle five thousand dollars in cash. He also gave the same
amount to John Garwell.

In the meantime our hero had stuck close to the real-estate business,
and learned it thoroughly. He was still John Garwell's private clerk.

"Are you going to leave me, now you have your fortune?" questioned the
real estate broker, anxiously.

"Do you want me to leave?"

"No, indeed!"

"How would you like to take me in as a partner, Mr. Garwell?"

"I'd like it first-rate, Nat--in fact, I was going to mention that
myself."

"Then let us form a partnership," and this was done without delay. The
new firm, prospered from the very start, much to the satisfaction of all
concerned.

In the meantime, Nat did not forget his old friends the Talcotts.
Although he no longer lived with them, he visited them often. He
learned through the widow that her son was anxious to buy out the store
in which he worked. The price was twelve hundred dollars, and one day
Nat bought it, and had the transfer made out in Dick's name.

"You deserve this, Dick," said he. "When I was a stranger and mighty
green you did your best by me."

"Well, you've paid me back," said Dick, with a grin. "You're a
gentleman, Nat, you are."

"And how about being green?"

"You're not green any more. You're as smart as they make 'em!"

Since then the years have rolled on. Nat is still in business and is
doing well. He has married and settled down in New York City; and here
we will leave him.


THE END




The Enterprise Books

Captivating Stories for Boys by Justly Popular Writers

The episodes are graphic, exciting, realistic--the tendency of the tales
is to the formation of an honorable and manly character. They are
unusually interesting, and convey lessons of pluck, perseverance and
manly independence.

12mo. Handsomely illustrated. Printed on excellent paper, and
attractively bound in colored cloth, stamped in Colors.


    MOFFAT, WILLIAM D.
        THE CRIMSON BANNER.
          A Story of College Baseball

Books have been written about college baseball, but it remained for Mr.
Moffat, a Princeton man, to come forward with a tale that grips one from
start to finish. The students are almost flesh and blood, and the
contests become real as we read about them. The best all-around college
and baseball tale yet presented.


    GRAYDON, WILLIAM MURRAY
        CANOE BOYS AND CAMP FIRES.
          Or, Adventures in Winding Waters

Where is there a youth who does not love a gun, a fishing rod, a canoe,
or a roaring camp-fire? In this book we have the doings of several
bright and lively boys, who go on a canoeing trip on a winding stream,
and meet with many exciting happenings. The breath of the forest blows
through this tale, and every boy who reads it will be sorry that he was
not a member of the canoe club that took that never-to-be-forgotten
outing.


    HARKNESS, PETER T.
        ANDY, THE ACROBAT.
          Or, With the Greatest Show on Earth

Andy is as a bright as a silver dollar. In the book we can smell the
sawdust, hear the flapping of the big white canvas and the roaring of
the lions, and listen to the merry "hoop la!" of the clown.


    FOSTER, W. BERT
        THE QUEST OF THE SILVER SWAN.
          A Tale of Ocean Adventure

A Youth's story of the deep blue sea--of the search for a derelict
carrying a fortune. Brandon Tarr is a manly lad, and all lads will be
eager to learn whether he failed or succeeded in his mission.


    WHITE, MATTHEW, JR.
        TWO BOYS AND A FORTUNE.
          Or, The Tyler Will

If you had been poor and were suddenly left a half-million dollars, what
would you do with it? Do you think the money would bring you happiness,
or would it bring only increased cares? That was the problem that
confronted the Pell family, and especially the twin brothers, Rex and
Roy. A strong, helpful story, that should be read by every boy and every
young man in our land.


    WINFIELD, ARTHUR M.
        BOB, THE PHOTOGRAPHER.
          Or, A Hero in Spite of Himself

Relates the experiences of a poor boy who falls in with a "camera
fiend," and develops a liking for photography. After a number of
stirring adventures Bob becomes photographer for a railroad, and while
taking pictures along the line thwarts the plan of those who would
injure the railroad corporation and incidentally clears a mystery
