among the lawless crew, feared to take the ship through so narrow and
dangerous a passage, and endeavoured to persuade Captain Cook to sail
round Cape Horn, instead of attempting that of the straits.  Captain
Cook, however, insisted on keeping to his original plan; but on reaching
the northern entrance to the Straits of Le Maire, the ship, having been
tossed about in the sea created by counter-currents, was forced through
them, and the pirates were compelled, after all, to go round Cape Horn.
Fortunately they were able to supply themselves with water from the
heavy rain which fell.

The _Bachelor's Delight_, entering the South Sea on the 3rd of March,
steered for Juan Fernandez.  On the 19th a strange sail was seen bearing
down upon them, and it being supposed she was Spanish, preparations were
made for a fight.

On signals being exchanged, she was found to be the _Nicholas_ of
London, which, though nominally an honest trader, was in reality a
pirate, commanded by Captain Eaton.  He coming on board, the _Bachelor's
Delight_ supplied him with water, while he gave bread and beef in
exchange.  Both being bound for the same island, they continued their
course together, and on the 22nd of March, 1684, came in sight of it.

Having come to an anchor, Dampier and others went on shore to look for a
Mosquito Indian named Will, who had been left there three years before
by Captain Watling.  As they approached, he having discerned the ships,
and knowing them to be English, came down to the seaside to welcome
them.  As soon as they reached the beach, another Mosquito Indian, named
Robin, leapt on shore, and running to his brother Mosquito man, threw
himself flat on his face at his feet.  The other helped him up, and
having embraced him, also fell flat on his face on the ground at the
feet of Robin, who also took him up.

Dampier and his companions stood watching with pleasure and surprise the
tenderness and solemnity of this interview, which was exceedingly
affectionate on both sides.  When it was over they all embraced.

Will was delighted to see so many old friends, coming, as he supposed,
to take him away.  He was almost naked, his own clothes having been worn
out, so that he had only a skin about his waist.  Seeing the vessels, he
had in the morning killed three goats and dressed them with cabbage, to
treat his visitors as soon as they got on shore.

The Spaniards had several times searched for him, but he had always
managed to conceal himself from them.  He had been out hunting in the
woods for goats when Captain Watling had embarked his men, and he had
thus been left behind.  He had with him his gun and a knife, with a
small horn of powder and a few shot.  This ammunition being spent, he
contrived, by notching his knife, to saw the barrel of his gun into
small pieces, with which he made harpoons, lances, hooks, and a long
knife.  Having made a fire by means of his gun-flint and a piece of the
barrel of his gun which he had hardened, he heated the pieces, which he
hammered out or bent as he desired with stones, and either sawed them
with his jagged knife or ground them to an edge with persevering labour,
hardening them to a good temper.

This may seem strange, but the Mosquito Indians are especially clever in
manufacturing implements out of the roughest materials.  With the
weapons he thus made he was able to kill goats or fish.  At first he had
lived upon seals; but, having made some good hooks, he never afterwards
killed any seals, except for the purpose of cutting up their skins to
make lines and thongs.  He had erected a hut for himself, half a mile
from the sea, which was lined with goat-skins, his clothes and bedding
being formed of the same material.  Seals and sea-lions swarmed round
the coast of this island.

Although Alexander Selkirk, afterwards found by Dampier, was the true
original of Robinson Crusoe, Defoe appears to have taken some of his
descriptions from the adventures of the Mosquito Indian just mentioned.

The hills of Juan Fernandez are partly covered with woods, and partly
open, intersected by fertile valleys, the grass being rich and delicate.
There were no trees fit for masts, but there was much fine timber,
among which was the cabbage-tree.  Here Captain Cook was taken seriously
ill, and was evidently in a declining state.

The crews having refreshed themselves during sixteen days, the two ships
sailed for the coast of America.  A Spanish vessel was captured on the
3rd of May, bound for Lima with timber, before news of the pirates being
on the coast was known at the settlements.

Notwithstanding this, Cook and Eaton, uniting their forces, determined
to attack Truxillo.  Three vessels were shortly afterwards captured,
laden with flour.  On board one of them were eight tons of quince
marmalade, but the pirates were bitterly disappointed on learning that
they had missed a vessel containing eight hundred thousand pieces of
eight, which had shortly before been landed.  Finding that the garrison
of Truxillo was prepared for them, they steered for the Galapagos, which
lie under the equator, and are uninhabited.  They abound, however, in
land turtle and enormous iguanas; there was also abundance of sea
turtle.  So numerous, indeed, were the land turtle, that a large ship's
company might subsist on them for many months together.

Depositing a portion of their flour in a hut built on one of the
islands, they again sailed for the mainland.  As they were standing off
Cape Blanco, Captain Cook died, and, as he was much respected, his crew
carried him on shore to be buried.  While they were engaged in digging
the grave three Indians appeared, two of whom were captured.  They
informed the pirates that large herds of cattle were to be found in the
neighbourhood.  Two boats were therefore sent, under the guidance of the
Indians, to obtain a supply.

Dampier, considering that the enterprise was dangerous, returned with a
part of the men on board; the rest continued their sport and slept on
shore.  Next morning they discovered that their boat, which they had
left on the beach, was destroyed, and that they were watched by a party
of fifty armed Spaniards.  The enemy, however, afraid to encounter them
openly, remained among the trees, and kept firing from thence at them.
The latter thought it prudent to retreat to an isolated rock which they
had seen when landing, just appearing above the water.  Wading off to
it, almost up to their necks, amidst a shower of bullets, they gained
its highest point.  Here they hoped to hold out until the Spaniards had
retired; but what was their horror to find that the water was rising,
and that in a short time the rock would be entirely covered!
Fortunately their position was seen from the ships, and a boat sent to
rescue them.

On the death of Captain Cook, the quartermaster, Edward Davis, was
elected commander in his stead.

After this the pirates entered the Gulf of Amapalla.  On an island
within it the priest of a village was made prisoner, with two native
boys, while endeavouring to escape.  With these as hostages, Captain
Davis and a number of his men proceeded to the town, where he told the
people that his people were Spaniards, and had been sent to clear the
sea of pirates, his intention being to repair his ships.

This statement being credited, he and his men were well received.  He
accompanied the inhabitants to church, where all public business was
transacted.  The intention of Davis was to ensnare the principal
inhabitants, and to make them pay a ransom.  His object was frustrated,
in consequence of one of the pirates violently pushing a man before him,
when the Indians, suspecting treachery, took to flight.  Upon this Davis
and his people fired, and one of the unfortunate Indians was killed.
Notwithstanding this, through fear, they assisted in storing the ships
with animals taken from a farm belonging to a nunnery.  In return, Davis
presented one of his prizes, laden with flour, to the inhabitants.  The
crews having had a dispute about the division of the spoil, the two
vessels here separated; Eaton sailing on the 2nd of September, and
Davis, accompanied by Dampier, on the following day, the padre and the
young Indians having been previously landed.  Davis now found it
difficult to decide what course to pursue.  The Spaniards were
everywhere on the alert, in consequence of a party of buccaneers having
crossed the isthmus, and now being engaged in cruising in boats along
the coast.

The _Bachelor's Delight_ now put into La Plata, where Drake had
destroyed the _Cacafuego_.  While she lay here, the _Cygnet_, of London,
a regular trader, under Captain Swan, came in.  He had endeavoured to
open up a peaceful traffic with the Spaniards, but his party had been
attacked and several of his men killed.

Swan was therefore, in his own defence, compelled to turn pirate.  While
the two ships lay here, they were joined by the band of buccaneers who
had crossed the isthmus under the command of Peter Harris, the nephew of
a well-known leader of that name.

During the time that the ships were refitting, a small bark which had
been captured was sent out on a cruise, and succeeded in taking a vessel
of four hundred tons, laden with timber.  From her crew the rovers
obtained intelligence that the Viceroy was fitting out a fleet of ten
frigates, to drive them from the South Seas.  Having formed the design
of attacking Paita, they joined forces, and, much regretting the absence
of Eaton, sailed for that place.  Entering the roads on the 3rd of
November, they found the town nearly abandoned, with all the treasure
carried away.  They demanded, however, flour, sugar, wine, and water to
be sent off; but, as this was not complied with, landing, they set the
town on fire, and it was burnt to the ground.

Harris's ship being found a slow one, she was burnt, and her crew joined
the larger vessels.  In vain they looked for Eaton, who, as it turned
out, had sailed for the East Indies.

Having refitted the vessels, and obtained a supply of wood, seals,
penguins, and boobies, which were salted at the island of Lobos de
Tierra, they made a descent on Guayaquil; but disagreements arose
between the commanders, and, after landing and getting in sight of the
town, they abandoned the enterprise, neither being willing to trust the
other.

Descents were made on two or three other places, and near Tomaco they
captured a vessel, with a Spanish gentleman--Don Diego de Pinas--on
board, and several other Spaniards.

On the 1st of January, 1685, the two vessels sailed for the island of
Gallo.  On their way they captured a packet-boat from Lima, and,
securing her despatches, learned that the Governor had hastened the
sailing of the Plate fleet from Callao to Panama.

On hearing this, the rovers eagerly looked forward to the capture of
these richly-laden vessels.  In order to careen their ships, and lay in
wait for their prey, they steered for the Pearl Islands.  On their way
they touched at Gorgona, where they landed most of their prisoners.

Several prizes having been captured, their squadron now consisted of six
sail, but only two--the _Bachelor's Delight_ and the _Cygnet_--were
large vessels.

Reaching the Pearl Islands, they supplied themselves with all
necessaries, then again sailed to watch for the Plate fleet.  For some
time they cruised before New Panama, a very fair city, standing close by
the sea, about four miles from the ruins of the old town.  The country
round it was very beautiful, and it was newly walled, with guns pointing
seaward.  Growing weary of watching, they stood out to sea, and came to
an anchor near the island of Taboga.  While they lay here a vessel
appeared, the people on board of which stated that they had come to
traffic secretly with the English.  Suddenly, however, about midnight,
they were seen to take their departure, and the vessel, bursting into
flames, was discovered to be a fire-ship.

The vessels slipping their cables, by great exertions put to sea and
escaped damage.  On their return they were alarmed by observing a fleet
of canoes full of armed men steering towards them.  Their joy was great
when they discovered that the new-comers were a party of buccaneers,
mustering two hundred and eighty men, English and French, who had
crossed the isthmus on an expedition to the South Sea.  About eighty of
the former entered with Davis and Swan, and the vessels which had before
been captured were given to the remainder.  Their force was further
increased by another party numbering one hundred and eighty, all
British, under Captain Townley.  Three other parties shortly afterwards
arrived, mustering two hundred and sixty-four men.

With a force amounting in all to about one thousand men, they resolved
to attack Panama.  Before, however, making the attempt, they ascertained
from intercepted letters that the Lima fleet was at sea, and they
resolved to capture it in the first place.  Their squadron now consisted
of ten sail, but the _Bachelor's Delight_ and _Cygnet_ were the only
well-armed vessels, while the Spanish fleet amounted to fourteen,--two
of which carried forty guns, one thirty-six, another eighteen, one
eight, and two fire-ships, all supplied with numerous crews.

At length, sighting the enemy, they bore down before the wind; but the
Spaniards kept close on a wind, and although a few shots were exchanged,
succeeded in avoiding their assailants until nightfall.  A light was
then seen hoisted on board the Spanish Admiral's ship.  This was
supposed to be a signal for his fleet to anchor.  After some time it was
lowered, but was again seen to leeward.  Consequently the buccaneers
steered for it during the night.  Great was their disgust when morning
broke to discover the Spanish fleet well to windward, a small bark
having conveyed the lantern to leeward, and thus placed them in a
dangerous position.  The Spaniards now got under weigh and bore down
before the wind, compelling the buccaneers to retreat.

A running fight ensued, but the Frenchmen kept out of the way, and the
rovers, bold as they were, dared not, in their small vessels, come to
closer quarters.  All hopes of the capture of the long-looked-for Lima
fleet was thus lost.  To avenge themselves they sailed for the Rio Lexa,
near which was the town of Leon, on the Lake of Nicaragua.  Both places
were attacked and captured.  A ransom of three hundred thousand dollars
was demanded for Leon, but the Spaniards put off paying it; and the
buccaneers, suspecting that a strong force was gathering to overwhelm
them, retreated to the shore.  One Spanish gentleman who had promised
one hundred and fifty head of cattle as his ransom, scrupulously
redeemed his word.

After this adventure the buccaneers determined to separate, and Captain
Swan proposed to his crew to cross the Pacific, and to return home by
India.  Dampier, who had long wished to get free from the lawless band,
was among the first to agree to the proposal, and leaving the
_Bachelor's Delight_, he joined the _Cygnet_.  It was necessary,
however, first to victual the ship.  For this purpose the town of Santa
Pecaque, which was well stored with provisions for supplying the slaves
in the neighbouring mines, was captured.  During two or more days a
large quantity of maize and other provisions were brought off.  Captain
Swan warned his men when on shore engaged in transporting the provisions
to keep together, and to be constantly on the watch, lest they should be
attacked by the Spaniards.  A party of fifty-four Englishmen and nine
blacks had been thus engaged, and were on their return to the ship, when
the sound of rapid firing was heard on board.  Captain Swan, fearing
that they were attacked, immediately landed with the greater part of the
remainder of his crew, and hurried to their assistance.  On reaching the
spot, to his grief he found that the whole had been massacred, a large
body of Spaniards having suddenly set upon them, and either shot them
down or sabred them, not allowing one to escape.  Among them were
several of the officers, one of whom was supercargo on board the
_Cygnet_, and who had written the history of his adventures.

This disaster, the most serious which had befallen the buccaneers since
their arrival on the coast, determined Captain Swan to hasten his
departure.  The _Cygnet_ now sailed for Cape Saint Lucas, and put into
the middle island of the Tres Marias.  It was well stored with iguanas,
raccoons, rabbits, pigeons, deer, turtle, seals, and fish of various
kinds.  Here a considerable number of persons whom the pirates had taken
prisoners were landed and left to shift for themselves, in revenge for
the disaster suffered at Santa Pecaque.

The ship was careened, a tender was sent across to the mainland for
water, and final preparations made for the intended voyage.  Dampier had
been suffering much from dropsy, when, by the advice of a native, he
underwent a treatment which he was assured would restore him to health.
He was first buried up to his neck in hot sand, and then, after
undergoing a profuse perspiration, he was placed in a close tent, where
he remained until he became cool.  By this means he was entirely cured.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

DAMPIER'S VOYAGES, CONTINUED--A.D. 1686.

The _Cygnet_ and a bark sail from Cape Corrientes for the Ladrones--
Short allowance of food--The crew threaten to mutiny--Narrow escape from
shipwreck--Guam reached--Friendly intercourse with the Governor--
Provisions obtained--A friar kept as hostage--A Manilla ship appears and
escapes--Quit Guam and reach Mindanao, one of the Philippines--Visit
from Rajah Laut--The Viceroy--An officer visits the Sultan--Friendly
reception--Entertainments on shore--Rajah Laut's treachery--The crew
become discontented--Run off with the _Cygnet_ leaving Captain Swan and
portion of the crew on shore--Many die poisoned by the natives--The
_Cygnet_ lays in wait for the Manilla ship--Reed chosen as captain--Put
into a harbour--Refit the ship and cut down the quarter-deck--Nearly
wrecked--Anchor off Mindano--Go to Polo Condore--Refit the ship--Live on
friendly terms with the natives--Again sail--Some of a boat's crew
killed by Malays--Proceed to the west of China--Remarks on the natives--
Come off the Pescadores--Obtain provisions from the natives--The Bashee
Islands visited--Leave Luconia--Dampier desires to return for Captain
Swan--Hears of his death--Waterspouts--Anchor off Callasunguny--Visits
exchanged with the Sultan--Sail for the coast of New Holland--
Intercourse with the natives--Sail for the Nicobar Islands--A canoe with
natives captured--Dampier set on shore--Brought off again--Again set on
shore with several companions--They obtain a canoe, and set sail for
Achin--Perilous voyage--Reach Achin--Sufferings of the voyagers--Dampier
makes several voyages, and becomes gunner at Boncoulin--Plan of trading
to Meangis--The Painted Prince--He escapes privately to Boncoulin on
board the _Defence_--Reaches England after twelve years absence--Death
of the Painted Prince-Dampier publishes his adventures.

On the 31st of March, 1686, the _Cygnet_, with a hundred men on board,
commanded by Captain Swan, and a bark, commanded by Captain Tait, with
whom went fifty men besides slaves, made sail from Cape Corrientes with
a fresh breeze of north-north-east.  The only provisions they had been
able to obtain were some Jew-fish, caught by the Mosquito men, and
salted, and a store of maize.  They now steered due west for the
Ladrones.  As they might possibly be fifty or sixty days before making
Guam, the crews were at once put on short allowance, having only one
meal a day.  In three days they had consumed their salted Jew-fish, and
had now nothing but the maize on which to subsist.  However, they made
good runs every day before the fresh trade winds, and in about twenty
days the crews, expecting to get soon in, insisted on having a larger
allowance.

With some reluctance the captain allowed them ten spoonfuls of maize a
day each man, instead of eight.  Dampier declares that he benefited by
this meagre fare, and drank about three times every twenty-four hours,
but some men drank only once in nine or ten days, and one did not
swallow any liquid for seventeen days, and asserted that he did not feel
at all thirsty.  They ran on for nearly five thousand miles without
seeing a flying-fish or fowl of any sort, but then they fell in with a
number of boobies, which they supposed came from some rocks not far off.
As they approached Guam some rain fell, a sign that they were in the
neighbourhood of land.  Many of the crew were in a state of mutiny, and
had formed a plot to kill Captain Swan and eat him should their
provisions fail, and they had now only meal sufficient for three days
more.

He was a stout, lusty man, and when the danger was past he remarked,
laughing, "Ah, Dampier, you would have made them but a poor meal!" for
the latter was as lean as the captain was fat.

The bark being ahead, passed over a shoal with only four fathoms of
water on it, on which Captain Tait hauled his wind and waited for the
_Cygnet_.  He then came on board and described what he had seen.  At
first they were very doubtful where they had got to, as no shoal was
marked on the Spanish charts; but by keeping northward, at four o'clock
that evening, the 20th of May, the island of Guam was sighted.  On the
following day the two vessels came to an anchor on the western side of
Guam, about a mile from shore, after a run of seven thousand three
hundred and two miles.  The Spaniards had here a port and a garrison of
thirty men.  Having been unable to distinguish the vessels as they
approached after dark, supposing that they belonged to their own nation,
a priest came off with two boats, and was greatly surprised to find that
they were English.  He was, however, well treated, although detained as
a hostage.  He agreed to obtain the necessary provisions, and to arrange
for a fair exchange of commodities.  He accordingly wrote to the
Governor of the fort, who willingly agreed to the proposed terms.  Next
day the natives brought off rice, pineapples, melons, oranges, limes,
cocoa-nuts, and a sort of fruit called by the English bread-fruit, which
proved of the greatest value to the half-starved seamen.  The fruit was
baked on shore, and brought off hot ready to be eaten.  Besides the
garrison there were only two or three Spanish priests on the island; the
rest of the inhabitants consisting of about one hundred natives.  It had
but shortly before been thickly populated, but the natives, attempting
to capture the fort and turn out their tyrants, were, with the help of
Captain Eaton, who put in there at this juncture, either killed or
compelled to fly the island.

Besides the fruit, the Governor sent every day one or two canoes laden
with hogs and various delicacies.  While the vessels lay here, a Manilla
ship appeared in the offing, and, unseen by the English, the Governor
made her a signal that the buccaneers were there, and she stood away
from the shore.  Running to the southward, however, she got on the shoal
from which Captain Tait had so narrowly escaped, and was very nearly
lost.  The pirate crews, hearing of this, were eager to go and capture
her.  Captain Swan, however, being sick or ashamed of robbing, and
perhaps suspecting that she would prove a tough customer, persuaded them
to abandon their design.

On the 30th of May the Governor sent off a last present, including six
or seven bags of rice; he also hinted that the west monsoon was at hand,
and that therefore it behoved his visitors to be jogging, unless they
desired to return to America.  The same day the friar who had remained
as a hostage was sent on shore with various presents, including a brass
clock, an astrolabe, and a telescope.  Grateful for these, he made a
return present of six hogs and a roasting pig, three or four bushels of
potatoes, and fifty pounds of Manilla tobacco.

Besides minor articles they had as many cocoa-nuts as could be stowed, a
good stock of rice, and fifty hogs in salt.  This store, they hoped, was
amply sufficient to carry them on to Mindanao, one of the Philippine
Islands, where they had resolved to go.

The two largest of these islands are Luconia and Mindanao, on the former
of which Magalhaens was killed in his mad attempt to conquer the
natives.  The whole of the group was then subject to the Spaniards, with
the exception of the islands of Mindanao and Saint John's.

The passage to Mindanao occupied nineteen days, during which the
_Cygnet_ and her consort met with a heavy gale which compelled them to
remain at anchor.  On approaching they hoisted their colours and fired a
salute of seven guns, which was returned from the shore by three.  The
town stood on the banks of the river about two miles from the sea.  The
houses were built upon piles from fourteen to twenty feet in height, and
as this was the rainy season, were completely surrounded by water, so
that they appeared as if standing in a lake, many of the inhabitants
going from house to house in their canoes.  The island was at this time
governed by rival Rajahs, the Rajah of Mindanao being the chief.

Captain Swan's object was to gain his friendship, especially as he was
supposed to be hostile to the Spaniards.  As soon as the _Cygnet_ and
her consort dropped their anchors, a canoe, paddled by ten paddlers,
came off, carrying a man of consequence, who introduced himself as Rajah
Laut, the brother and prime minister of the Sultan.  He was attended by
one of his nephews, who spoke Spanish fluently, and a conversation was
thus carried on through Mr Smith, who had been made prisoner at Rio
Lexa.

When he understood that the strangers were English, he welcomed them
cordially, but evidently seemed disappointed on being told by Captain
Swan that he had come merely to obtain provisions, and not to establish
a factory.

The Rajah had been informed by a Captain Goodlad, who had touched there
some time before, that he would induce the East India merchants to form
one on the island to carry on a trade with him.

Rajah Laut and his nephew remained all the time in their canoe, saying
that they had no authority from the Sultan to go on board the ship.
Captain Swan, believing that he should have to remain some time at the
island, was anxious to consult the Sultan, and accordingly sent a Mr
More on shore with a present of scarlet cloth, three yards of broad gold
lace, a Turkish scimitar, and a pair of pistols.  Mr More was well
received, and many questions were asked him through an interpreter in
Spanish.

On being dismissed he found a supper prepared for him and his boat's
crew at Rajah Laut's house, after partaking of which he returned on
board.  The inhabitants behaved to their visitors in the most friendly
way, insisting on their coming into their houses to be treated, although
their treats were but mean, consisting of tobacco and betel-nut and a
little sweet spiced water.

Rajah Laut, seeing so many of the men in fine clothes, asked who they
were, when he was told, as a joke, that they were noblemen, who had come
aboard to see the world, but that the rest, who had shabby garments,
were only common seamen.

After this he showed much respect to those who had good clothes, and
especially to one John Thacker, who, having husbanded his share of the
spoil, had plenty of gold in his pocket, which he liberally spent,
besides which he was a good dancer.

Captain Swan discovering this, undeceived the Rajah, and gave a drubbing
to the unfortunate nobleman, against whom he was so much incensed that
he could never afterwards bear to see him.

At this time Captain Swan had his men in such perfect subjection, that
he could punish whom he chose, and he might, had he wished, have induced
them to form a settlement on the island.  During the Ramadan no
amusement of any sort took place on shore; but as soon as the feast was
over, Rajah Laut entertained Captain Swan and his officers with
performances of dancing women, such as are common over India.  The
females of the place were especially addicted to dancing.  Forty or
fifty would form a ring, joined hand in hand, and sing a chorus while
keeping time; though they never moved from the same spot, they would
make various gestures, now throwing forward one leg, now another, while
they shouted loudly and clapped their hands while the chorus was sung.

Much of the night was spent in this way.  Many of the seamen who had
money lived on shore among the inhabitants, spending it in the too usual
profligate manner.  Christmas Day was spent on board, and it was
expected that Captain Swan would then announce his intentions for the
future; but he kept them to himself, and no one could tell what he
intended to do.

He now received a secret visit from the nephew of a Sultan of one of the
Spice Islands, who came to invite him to form a settlement on shore,
provided he would defend the island from the Dutch.  He, however, had
not the resolution to engage in the undertaking.

So satisfied was Captain Swan of the good intentions of the natives,
that he carried his vessel over the bar into the river.  She had not
been there long when it was discovered that her bottom was perforated by
the teredo, and it appeared a short time before that a Dutch vessel had
been entirely destroyed by them in less than two months.

Rajah Laut, who had become heir to her great guns, no doubt hoped to
obtain those of the _Cygnet_, as well as her stores and cargo, in the
same manner.

The evil having been discovered in time, the crew set to work to rip off
the worm-eaten planks, and put on new, and to sheathe and tallow the
ship's bottom.  They also took on board her cargo, consisting of iron
and lead, as also rice for the voyage, and filled the water-casks.

Rajah Laut had long promised to supply her with beef, and he invited
Dampier and a party of others to accompany him on a hunting expedition;
but only a few cows were seen, and none were shot.  It now became
evident that he was playing false with the voyagers, and that his great
object was to detain them until their ship was destroyed.  Suspecting
this, they got her over the bar.  On a second expedition, when Rajah
Laut carried his wives and family with him, Dampier had an opportunity
of seeing much of the manners and customs of the people.

As soon as the Rajah was out of the house the ladies came to the
quarters of the English, and talked freely with them.  They were much
surprised on hearing that the King of England had only one wife.  Some
approved of the custom, but others considered it a very bad one.

Though the party were several days out in the country, the cows were so
wild that only three heifers were killed.  With these Dampier and his
men returned on board.

Rajah Laut now showed his true character.  He first borrowed twenty
ounces of gold from Captain Swan, who very unwillingly lent them to him,
and could not afterwards get them back.  He also demanded payment for
the food the captain and his men had eaten at his house.

These matters greatly annoyed the captain, who was a man of bad temper.
His own ship's company were every day pressing him to be gone.  Some of
them ran away, assisted by Rajah Laut; the whole crew, indeed, became
disaffected.  Those who had no money lived on board and wished to be
off, while those who had still some cash remaining were content to stay.
The former stole some of the cargo, which they sent on shore to
purchase arrack and honey to make punch, with which they became drunk
and quarrelsome.

Captain Swan might at once have put a stop to these disorders, had he
exerted his authority; but, as he and the supercargo were always living
on shore, nothing was done.  The mutiny was brought to a head by the
discovery of the captain's journal, in which he inveighed against the
crew, and especially a man named Reed.

Captain Tait, who had before behaved ill and been punished by Captain
Swan, took advantage of this state of discontent to advise the men to
turn him out, hoping to be chosen in his stead to command the ship.

They would have sailed at once, had not the surgeon and his mate been on
shore.  To get them off, the mutineers dispatched John Cookworthy, a
follower of their party, who was directed to say that one of the men had
broken his leg, and required their assistance.  The surgeon replied that
he intended to return next day, but sent his mate, Herman Coppinger.
Dampier, who had been on shore, accompanied Coppinger off to the ship,
and then discovered the trick that had been played, and the treacherous
projects of the crew.  He immediately on this sent to the captain, who,
however, not believing that his men would run away, remained on shore.

The next day he did not appear, and on the morning of the 13th the
mutineers, firing a gun, weighed anchor, and were standing out to sea,
when Mr Nelly, the chief mate, pulled after them and got on board.  He
advised them again to anchor, which they did; but Captain Swan, either
from cowardice or reluctance to leave the island, still refused to
return on board.

The mutineers would allow no one to visit on shore, so Dampier and
Coppinger were kept prisoners.  Losing patience, they once more weighed
and steered for Mindanao, leaving the captain and thirty-six men on
shore, besides those who had run off.  Sixteen had been buried there,
most of whom had died from the effects of poison administered to them by
the natives.  Several others succumbed from the same cause, after they
had been some weeks at sea, the surgeon being unable to counteract the
effects of the noxious drugs they had swallowed.

The _Cygnet_ left Mindanao on the 14th of January, 1687, directing her
course to Manilla, in the neighbourhood of which place it was intended
to cruise, in the hopes of capturing the galleon.  On the 3rd of
February they came to an anchor off an island well suited for beaching
the ship.

Before this Reed had been chosen as captain, Tait as master, and More as
quartermaster.  The quarter-deck was here cut down, to make the ship the
better for sailing, and her bottom was scrubbed and tallowed.

In the island were seen vast numbers of large bats, their bodies as big
as ducks, with wings from seven to eight feet from tip to top.  The
