we got invited. I was afraid some well-meaning person might have taken
pity on him and begged him a card. Had not you and Hal declared you had
nothing to do with our being asked, I should not have stirred a peg to
the party, let Carl plead as he might. But now I feel more comfortable
about our going, although I must confess it puzzles me why the
invitation was sent to him instead of to me. It certainly seems a
little funny. However, it may have been an accident. Of course Mr.
Coulter has had a lot to think of and might well be forgiven one
mistake. It isn't likely he could remember my husband's name. He was
pretty good to think of us at all."

"They say at the mills that Mr. John is very friendly and has ever so
many plans afoot for the workers. There is even talk of a recreation
building being put up on the factory grounds."

"Not much like his father, who wouldn't spend a cent he didn't have
to," mused Mrs. McGregor.

"No. Mr. John is different; everybody says so. Besides, he is younger
and belongs to a generation with other ideas."

"Better ideas, I hope. If children didn't improve on their fathers
where would the world be?" Then suddenly cutting short her
philosophical meditations Mrs. McGregor called imperatively:

"Timmie, stop chasing those butterflies this minute. Do you want to
spoil the shine on your shoes before you even get to the party? You'll
have your collar ruined if you gallop round and get so hot. Come back
here and walk beside me. I'm resolved to land you all at Mr. Coulter's
looking like human beings, whatever happens afterward. Then if you
prefer to smooch your face with dirt and rumple up your hair, I can't
help it. But you shall stay clean until you're inside the gate."

Glaring for a moment on her subjects with subduing ferocity Mrs.
McGregor drew herself up and moved majestically in at the entrance of
the Coulter mansion.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE SOLUTION OF MANY MYSTERIES


Once inside the magic portal of the great estate, however, Mrs.
McGregor's task became increasingly difficult. What a bewildering scene
it was! The green lawns, terraced down to the lake, were dotted with
tents and from each one floated out tantalizing hints of the delights
within. The strains of a band and the laughter of dancers drifted
forth from one; waiters with heavily laden trays passed in and out of
another; around still a third swarmed children and one glimpsed through
the open doorway a marionette show. Under a gay red umbrella at the
edge of the garden women, fluttering like multi-hued butterflies,
ladled lemonade from giant punch-bowls.

Oh, a wonderland of myriad delights beckoned in every direction and it
was only by dint of extreme severity that Mrs. McGregor succeeded in
keeping her little army in formation and preventing its neatly ranged
ranks from becoming lost in the surrounding hubbub.

"You're not to stir a step from this spot until I tell you you may,"
commanded she. "The very notion of your all racing off to enjoy
yourselves before you have so much as said a word of thanks to Mr.
Coulter who asked you here! Where are your manners? Are you forgetting
so quick that it is his wedding day? Aren't you going to wish him joy
as is proper to do when he has taken all this trouble to give you a
good time?"

Her tone was withering in its rebuke and as if hypnotized by its
cadence the wriggling children thronging in her wake stood motionless.

"In my day folks were grateful for what was done for them and expected
to say _thank you_ to their elders. Now there seems to be no such thing
as politeness among youngsters. But to-day, whether you will or no,
before you do anything else we are going to hunt up Mr. John and his
bride and every one of you is to thank him for asking you to his party.
And Tim, you and Mary and Carl are to repeat the speech I taught you. I
pray you've not forgotten it already. You hope he and his wife will
have many days as happy as this one. Remember and don't get mixed up
and say the wrong thing."

With this final caution Mrs. McGregor wheeled about and marshalled the
miniature procession following her into a vast, rose-garlanded tent at
the right of the entrance. Two aisles roped off with laurel divided it,
and throngs of people were moving down one of these and returning by
the other. In the far distance one could see a canopy of green, a
figure misty in white tulle, and a bevy of bridesmaids in pink, blue,
yellow, and lavender.

"This seems to be the right place," whispered Mrs. McGregor. "We'll
fall right in behind this man and woman. Now mind your manners, all of
you. Poor though we are, we can be polite without it costing us a cent.
Timmie, you keep close at my heels with Mary. I've got all I can do to
handle the baby and Nell. Carl, see that you don't squeeze Martin's
hand too tight and get him peevish. Take hold of him gently. And don't
one of you dare to push. We must expect to move along slowly and wait
our turn. Yes, I know it's hot. But there'll be lemonade and ice cream
by and by. I guess you can stand the heat for a little while. What is
it, Tim? Your boots hurt? Nonsense! They're the same boots you always
wear, aren't they? Were you racing round playing ball in them it's
little notice you'd be taking of them, I reckon. Don't be silly and get
sulky now or next time I shall leave you at home."

To an accompaniment of these and similar admonitions the McGregor host
proceeded on its way along with the other guests.

Then at last when the receiving party was well in sight and Mrs.
McGregor and her family were making a decorous approach the anxious
mother was horrified to see Carl, forgetful of all else, rush from the
line and racing up to Mr. John Coulter, seize both his hands.

"Oh!" cried the boy, in a voice so shrill with ecstasy that its accents
penetrated to every corner of the great tent, "Oh, Mr. Coulter, I never
dreamed it was you! Why didn't you tell me who you were? I'm so glad to
see you again! I thought I never would. I've hunted and hunted for you
and your red car ever since."

[Illustration: "I've hunted for you and your red car ever since."
_Page_ 253.]

Plainly Mr. John Coulter, instead of being offended by this unexpected
onslaught, was delighted for he beamed down on the excited lad, shook
both his hands heartily, and laughed so the ring of it echoed all
about.

"So you didn't guess the riddle, little chap," Mrs. McGregor heard him
say. "Well, I didn't mean you should."

"And to think it was you!" Carl was still murmuring, as if in a trance.
"Just to think it was you! Of course you were the one who got Louise
her new place."

"Guilty."

"Gee, but it was white of you! She's right here behind my mother." Then
inspired by sudden understanding he added, "And the Christmas dinners
came from you, too."

"Come, come, youngster, this is no moment to be confronting me with all
my crimes," the blushing bridegroom protested. "Here's Mrs. Coulter
just married to me--what is she going to think if you tell her how many
conspiracies I have been mixed up in? This, Marion, is one of my very
good friends, Carl McGregor. His father was for many years in our mills
and if I mistake not here is his whole family coming up to speak to
us."

"Indeed we are, sir," declared Mrs. McGregor, making a quaint English
curtsy, "and it's scandalized enough I am to see my boy here racing at
you as if he was a wild beast and forgetting all the etiquette I've
taught him. He had a nice speech ready to say but where it is now
heaven only knows!"

"I'd far rather he said to me what he did," asserted Mr. Coulter. "You
see, Carl and I are old friends."

"I don't see," replied the mystified mother, "but no doubt you are,
since you tell me so. I myself had no idea the lad know you from Adam."

"And I hadn't either, Mother. Gee, but it is rich! To think I went
riding with you that day, Mr. Coulter, and speeled off all that guff,
and you never so much as raised an eyelash!"

"Carl!" ejaculated his despairing parent.

"Well, I hope this is not to be the end of our acquaintance,
youngster," Mr. Coulter returned, passing over Mrs. McGregor's rebuke.
"Come and see Mrs. Coulter and me some day. And remember that if you
ever wish to enter the mills I will make a place for you."

"That's bully of you, sir!"

"Carl!" Mrs. McGregor was dumb with consternation. "The very idea of
your speaking to Mr. Coulter like that!" declared she, when at last she
could catch her breath. "Come away before you say anything more to
disgrace the family. There's others waiting to give him their good
wishes and you seem to have forgotten all about yours, although
goodness knows you were drilled and drilled on the speech you were to
make. Yes, Mrs. Coulter, these are my children--all six of them. The
baby's name? James Frederick, after his uncle. And this is Mary, and
Timmie, and Martin, and Nell. The oldest ones had nice things ready to
say to you but Carl has knocked 'em clean out of their heads. I hope
you'll not lay it up against us. No, marm, this tall boy and girl don't
belong to me, but I'm that fond of 'em I wish they did. They are our
neighbors, Hal and Louise Harling."

Instantly Mr. Coulter reached forward and greeted the young people.

"The new job is going well?" he asked, addressing Louise.

"Oh, I'm so happy in it, Mr. Coulter."

"That's good! And you, Harling?"

"I'm getting on splendidly, sir."

"Excellent! There'll be a raise coming to you next month--quite a
substantial one. We've been looking you up."

"Oh, sir, how can I----"

"There, there! We mustn't stop to talk about it now. If you must thank
somebody for it thank this young scoundrel here. It was he put me up to
it."

There was time for nothing further. Swept onward by crowds that surged
behind, the McGregors, like chips on the crest of a mammoth wave, were
borne forward and out of the tent.

In the open air Mrs. McGregor wiped her perspiring brow.

"Now," began she, turning accusingly on her son, "perhaps you will be
so good as to tell us what all this is about. How came you to know Mr.
John Coulter well enough to be treating him like a long-lost brother?
And what had you to do with Hal and Louise and the Coulter mills? I
feel as if I were going crazy! One minute you don't even know Mr.
Coulter by sight and the next he is sending us a Christmas dinner and
you are fairly falling on his neck."

Carl shook with laughter.

"Oh, Mother, it's all so rich--so perfectly corking!" he cried. "You
couldn't half appreciate it if I told you."

"I could try," came curtly from Mrs. McGregor.

But her son did not heed her.

"To think of that being Mr. John Coulter," chuckled he. "And, oh, the
things I said to him! I tremble to recall them. I told him Corcoran was
a low-down skunk, I know that. And I gushed on a lot about Hal and
Louise. I only wish I could remember what I did say. Jove! He must have
split his sides laughing."

"When? When did you do all this?" interrogated the lad's mother
impatiently.

"Oh, when was it?" ruminated Carl, struggling to collect his scattered
wits. "It seems ages and ages ago that all that happened. It was before
Christmas, I'm certain of that."

"And you went riding with Mr. Coulter? I heard you saying something
about it."

"Yes."

"You actually went to ride with him?"

"I sure did!"

"Well, all I can say is I should like to know when all these miracles
took place," repeated Carl's mother. "Where was I, and why wasn't I
told? You might at least have mentioned it at home."

"I know it, Ma," apologized Carl with disarming frankness. "I did try
twice to tell you but the chance never seemed to come right; and by and
by it got to be so long ago that I forgot all about it."

"Forgot you went motoring with Mr. John Coulter?" Mrs. McGregor spoke
with incredulity.

"You see I didn't know at the time that it was Mr. John Coulter, Ma."

"I don't see! I don't understand anything about it," repeated the woman
helplessly.

"Well, you will by and by. It is a long story--too long to tell now.
When we get home you shall hear it from beginning to end. But now----
Gee whizz! There goes Martin making for the pond! I'll head him off."

Away went Carl across the velvet lawn and with an unsatisfied air Mrs.
McGregor wheeled about to collect Nell and Tim, who were already
tugging at her skirts. She felt as if the events of the past half-hour
were a dream. Carl, her harum-scarum son, the catastrophe worker of the
family, was the acknowledged friend of Mr. John Coulter, one of the
richest and most revered citizens of Baileyville. And more than that he
appeared to possess the influence to have men removed from their jobs
and discharged employees reinstated in lost positions. He even had
power to have people's salaries raised. Would wonders never cease?




CHAPTER XIX

UNRAVELING THE SNARLS


How late the McGregors sat up talking that night it would have been
alarming to confess. It was so late that the streets became silent and
deserted and conversation had to be conducted in whispers lest it
arouse the O'Dowds, Sullivans, and Murphys.

And what tense, eager whispers they were!

Mrs. McGregor, her bonnet still in her lap, sat on the edge of a chair
too engrossed to so much as think of the shrimp pink tulle dress she
had planned to finish before she went to bed that night; nor did she,
in her usual methodical manner, take time to slip out of her best skirt
or put away her company shoes and gloves. She was far too excited for
that.

Happy, tumbled, and nodding the babies had been put to sleep and
afterward their elders, joined by Hal and Louise Harling, huddled in
the kitchen, closed the doors, and talked and talked. Every detail of
Carl's amazing story had to be told over and over again that his
listeners might enjoy to the full the marvel and humor of each
successive event. Everything was clear as crystal now--Corcoran's
transfer, Louise's reinstatement, Hal's increasing salary, the
Christmas dinners. Even the conundrum of the watch remained an enigma
no longer.

"It was, of course, Mr. Coulter who told Corcoran about your rescuing
his baby," Carl explained to his chum. "I remember that I happened to
mention the accident to him."

Hal nodded.

"But the thing I don't understand," he said with a puzzled air, "is how
you could go to that office looking for a job and never so much as
suspect who Mr. Coulter was. There must have been signs up with the
firm's name on them."

"I suppose there were," Carl answered. "I don't know about that. You
see, I was too rattled and wrought up to notice much of anything.
Besides, I was some scared. It was such a swell joint and that bell-boy
(or whatever you call him) was so lofty and elegant that it froze the
blood in my veins. More than that I was crazy to get a position and was
so darned afraid they wouldn't take me that I wasn't thinking of
anything else."

"You're a bully little pal, Carl," Hal remarked, placing an
affectionate hand on the younger boy's shoulder.

"Pooh! I did no more than you'd have done for me if I'd been in a
hole," replied Carl modestly. "You'd move heaven and earth to help us
if we needed you."

"You've said it, youngster!"

"Then what is there so remarkable in my trying to do the same for you
and Louise?"

"It was splendid of you, Carlie," whispered Louise.

"Oh, I didn't do much," was the gruff retort. "As it happened, I didn't
really do anything. But I wanted to--you can bank on that."

"Evidently you convinced Mr. Coulter of the sincerity of your good
intentions," grinned Hal.

"Mr. Coulter! Gee! Every time I think of him I have to laugh. Picture
my having the nerve to go reforming his mill for him and complaining of
his employees! And fancy me parading into his private office asking him
for work! Had I known what I was doing I should have been petrified
with fear." Smothered laughter convulsed the boys frame. "Well, as Ma
says, ignorance is bliss and fools rush in where angels fear to tread."

"I guess Mr. Coulter sized up the situation all right," mused Hal.

"Oh, he knew; he understood the whole thing. He told me so to-day,"
Carl responded quickly. "He's live wire enough not to let a joke slip
past him. He had his fun out of the affair and don't you think he
didn't. What's more, he didn't mean ever to let me find out what a boob
I'd been. He was just going to keep the secret to himself. Then this
wedding party came along and he happened to think we might like to
come. So he took a chance and sent the bid."

"And that explains why the invitation came to you," reflected Mrs.
McGregor.

"That's it, Ma. You have your little son Carlie to thank for your card
to the spree," the lad responded impishly. "I'll be getting you into
high society some day if you're good."

"If you don't get us all into jail or some other place before then
we'll be lucky," came brusquely from his mother.

"Now isn't that gratitude for you?" growled Carl with mock indignation.
"Here I take my mother and all her family to a perfectly good party and
this is all the thanks I get for it."

"Yes, this happened to be a perfectly good party," agreed Mrs. McGregor
mischievously. "But it might have ended in some scrape or other and
like as not it would another time. One never can be sure where your
adventures will bring up."

"Well, Ma, Mr. Coulter appreciates me if you don't."

"Apparently he does--up to date. Just you take care that you go on
deserving his good opinion."

"I mean to," Carl flashed. "Say, folks, sha'n't we have something to
write Uncle Frederick now? I'll bet it will take ten sheets of paper to
retail the whole thing; and then he won't really have any idea of what
happened. None of you ever can. You just ought to have been there and
seen the play."

"It's as good as a play--as good as any moving picture, in my opinion,"
Louise ventured.

"What wouldn't I have given to be under the seat of that car and
listened when you were laying out poor old Cork!" Hal ejaculated.

"I laid him fine and flat," acknowledged Carl with candor.
