do."

"If it had know'd you was a murderin' pirate," retorted the jailer, "it
would ha' thought twice before it would ha' chose _you_ for a comrade."

"Come, now," said Bumpus, in a remonstrative tone, "you don't really
b'lieve I'm a pirate, do you?"

"In coorse I do."

"Well, now, that's xtraor'nary.  Does everybody else think that too?"

"Everybody."

"An' am I _really_ goin' to be hanged?"

"Till you're dead as mutton."

"That's entertainin', ain't it, Toozle?" cried poor Bumpus with a laugh
of desperation, for he found it utterly impossible to persuade himself
to believe in the reality of his awful position.

As he said nothing more, the jailer went away, and Bumpus, after heaving
two or three very deep sighs, attempted to partake of his meagre
breakfast.  The effort was a vain one.  The bite stuck in his throat, so
he washed it down with a gulp of water, and, for the first time in his
life, made up his mind to go without his breakfast.

A little before twelve o'clock the door again opened, and the surly
jailer entered bearing a halter, and accompanied by six stout men.  The
irons were now removed from Bumpus's wrists, and his arms pinioned
behind his back.  Being almost stupified with amazement at his position,
he submitted without a struggle.

"I say, friends," he at last exclaimed, "would any amount of oaths took
before a maginstrate convince ye that I'm not a pirate, but a true-blue
seaman?"

"If you were to swear from this time till doomsday it would make no
difference.  You admit that you were one of the _Foam's_ crew.  We now
know that the _Foam_ and the _Avenger_ are the same schooner.  Birds of
a feather flock together.  A pirate would swear anything to save his
life.  Come, time's up."

Bumpus bent his head for a minute.  The truth forced itself upon him now
in all its dread reality.  But no unmanly terrors filled his breast at
that moment.  The fear of man or of violent death was a sensation which
the seaman never knew.  The feeling of the huge injustice that was about
to be done filled him with generous indignation; the blood rushed to his
temples, and, with a bound like a tiger, he leaped out of the jailer's
grasp, hurling him to the ground in the act.

With the strength almost of a Samson he wrestled with his cords for a
few seconds; but they were new and strong.  He failed to burst them.  In
another moment he was overpowered by the six men who guarded him.  True
to his principles, he did his utmost to escape.  Strong in the faith
that while there is life there is hope, he did not cease to struggle,
like a chained giant, until he was placed under the limb of the fatal
tree which had been selected, and round which an immense crowd of
natives and white settlers had gathered.

During the previous night the widow Stuart had striven to save the man
whom she knew to be honest, for Gascoyne had explained to her all about
his being engaged in his service.  But those to whom she appealed, even
on her knees, were immovable.  They considered the proof of the man's
guilt quite conclusive, and regarded the widow's intercession as the
mere weakness of a tender-hearted woman.

On the following morning, and again beside the fatal tree itself, the
widow pled for the man's life with all her powers of eloquence, but in
vain.  When all hope appeared to have passed away, she could not stand
to witness so horrible a murder.  She fled to her cottage, and, throwing
herself on her bed, burst into an agony of tears and prayer.

But there were some among the European settlers there who, now that
things had come to a point, felt ill at ease, and would fain have washed
their hands of the whole affair.  Others there were who judged the man
from his countenance and his acts, not from circumstances.  These
remonstrated even to the last, and advised delay.  But the half dozen
who were set upon the man's death--not to gratify a thirst for blood,
but to execute due justice on a pirate whom they abhorred--were
influential and violent, men.  They silenced all opposition at last, and
John Bumpus finally had the noose put round, his neck.

"O Susan, Susan," cried the poor man in an agony of intense feeling,
"it's little ye thought your Jo would come to such an end as this when
ye last sot eyes on him--an' sweet blue eyes they wos, too!"

There was something ludicrous as well as pathetic in this cry.  It did
more for him than the most eloquent pleading could have done.  Man, in a
crowd, is an unstable being.  At any moment he will veer right round and
run in an opposite direction.  The idea that the condemned man had a
Susan who would mourn over his untimely end, touched a cord in the
hearts of many among the crowd.  The reference to her sweet blue eyes at
such a moment raised a smile, and an extremely dismal but opportune howl
from poor Toozle raised a laugh.

Bumpus started and looked sternly on the crowd.

"You may think me a pirate," said he, "but I know enough of the feelin's
of honest men to expect no mercy from those wot can laugh at a
fellow-creetur in such an hour.  You had better get the murder over as
soon as ye can.  I am ready--Stay! one moment more.  I had a'most forgot
it.  There's a letter here that I want one o' you to take charge of.
It's the last I ever got from my Susan, an' if I had taken her advice to
let alone havin' to do with all sandalwood traders, I'd never ha' bin in
such a fix as I am this day.  I want it sent back to her with my
blessin' and a lock o' my hair.  Is there an honest man among ye who'll
take in hand to do this for me?"

As he spoke, a young man, in a costume somewhat resembling that of a
sailor, pushed through the crowd, leaped upon the deal table on which Jo
stood, and removed the noose from his neck.

An exclamation of anger burst from those who surrounded the table, but a
sound something like applause broke from the crowd, and restrained any
attempt at violence.  The young man at the same time held up his hand
and asked leave to address them.

"Ay! ay! let's hear what he has got to say.  That's it; speak up, Dan!"

The youth, whose dark olive complexion proclaimed him to be a
half-caste, and whose language shewed that he had received at least the
rudiments of education, stretched out his hand and said--

"Friends, I do not stand here to interfere with justice.  Those who seek
to give a pirate his just reward do well.  But there has been doubt in
the minds of some that this man may not be a pirate.  His own word is of
no value; but if I can bring forward anything to shew that perhaps his
word is true, then we have no right to hang him till we have given him a
longer trial."

"Hear! hear!" from the white men in the crowd, and "Ho! ho!" from the
natives.

Meanwhile the young man, or Dan, as some one called him, turned to
Bumpus and asked for the letter to which he had referred.  Being
informed that it was in the inside pocket of his jacket, the youth put
his hand in and drew it forth.

"May I read it?  Your life may depend on what I find here."

"Sartinly, by all manner of means," replied Jo, not a little surprised
at the turn affairs were taking.

Dan opened and perused the epistle for a few minutes, during which
intense silence was maintained in the crowd, as if they expected to
_hear_ the thoughts of the young man as they passed through his brain.

"Ha!  I thought so," exclaimed Dan, looking up and again addressing the
crowd.  "At the trial yesterday you heard this man say that he was
engaged at San Francisco by Gascoyne on the 12th of April last, and that
he believed the schooner to be a sandalwood trader when he shipped."

"Yes, yes, ho!" from the crowd.

"If this statement of his be true, then he was not a pirate when he
shipped, and he has not had much time to become one between that time
and this.  The letter which I hold in my hand proves the truth of this
statement.  It is dated San Francisco, 11th _April_, and is written in a
female hand.  Listen, I will read it, and you shall judge for
yourselves."

The young man then read the following letter, which, being a peculiar as
well as an interesting specimen of a love-letter, we give _verbatim et
literatim_:--

  "Peelers farm near Sanfransko Aprile 11.

  "For John bumpuss, aboord the Skooner fome

  "my darlin Jo,

  "ever sins you towld me yisterday that youd bin an gaged yerself into
  the fome, my mind has bin Onaisy.  Ye no, darlint, from the our ye
  cald me yer own Susan--in clare county More betoken--iv bin onaisy
  about ye yer so bowld an Rekles, but this is wurst ov all.  Iv no
  noshun o them sandlewood skooners.  The Haf ov thems pirits an The
  other hafs no beter.  Whats wus is that my owld master was drownded in
  wan, or out o wan, but shure its All the Saim.  Down he wint an that
  wos the Endd.

  "now Deer jo don't go to say in that skooner i beseech ye, jo.  Ye
  towld me that ye liked the looks o the cappen an haited the looks o
  the Krew.  Now deer, take warnin, think ov me.  Think ov the words in
  the coppie book weev writ so often together at owld makmahons skool,
  eevil emunishakens Krupt yer maners, i misrember it, but ye no wot id
  be sayin' to ye.

  "o jo Don't go, but cum an see me as soon as iver ye can

  "yours til deth.

  "SUSAN.

  "P.S. the piggs is quite livly but ther not so hansum heer as in the
  owld country.  Don't forgit to rite to your susan."

No one can conceive the indignation that swelled the broad chest of
honest John Bumpus when he listened to the laughter with which some
parts of this letter were received.

"Now," said Dan, "could any man want better proof than this that John
Bumpus _is not_ a pirate?"

This question was answered by a perfect yell from the crowd.

"Set him free; cut his cords!" cried a voice.

"Stop, friends," cried a big coarse-looking man, leaping on the table
and jostling Dan out of the way.  "Not quite so fast.  I don't pretend
to be a learned feller, and I can't make a speech with a buttery tongue
like Dan here.  But wot I've got to say is--Justice for ever!"

"Hurrah!" from some of the wild spirits of the crowd.  "Go on, Burke,"
from others.

"Yes, wot I say is--Justice for ever!  Fair play an' no favour: _That's_
wot I say!"

Another cheer greeted the bold assertion of these noble sentiments.

"Now, here it is," continued Burke, becoming much excited, "wot's to
hinder that there letter bein' a forgery?--ay, that's the word, a
forgery?  (Hear! hear!) got up a-purpose to bamboozle us chaps that
ain't lawyers.  D'ye see?"

Burke glanced at Dan and smote his thigh triumphantly as he said this.

"It does not _look_ like a forgery," said Dan, holding up the letter and
pointing to the writing.  "I leave it to yourselves to say if it
_sounds_ like a forgery--"

"I don't care a farthin' dip for yer _looks_ and _sounds_," cried Burke,
interrupting the other.  "No man is goin' for to tell me that anybody
can trust to _looks_ and _sounds_.  Why, I've know'd the greatest
villain that ever chewed the end of a smuggled cigar _look_ as innocent
as the babe unborn.  An' is there a man here wot'll tell me he hasn't
often an' over again mistook the crack of a big gun for a clap o'
thunder?"

This was received with much approval by the crowd, which had evidently
more than half-forgotten the terrible purpose for which it had assembled
there, and was now much interested in what bid fair to be a keen
dispute.  When the noise abated, Dan raised his voice and said--"If
Burke had not interrupted me, I was going to have said that another
thing which proves the letter to be no forgery is, that the post-mark of
San Francisco is on the back of it, with the date all right."

This statement delighted the crowd immensely, and caused Burke to look
disconcerted for a few seconds; he rallied, however, and returned to the
charge.

"Post-marks! wot do I care for post-marks?  Can't a man forge a
post-mark as easy as any other mark?"

"Ah! that's true," from a voice in the crowd.

"No, not so easily as _any_ other mark," retorted Dan, "for it's made
with a kind of ink that's not sold in shops.  Everything goes to prove
that the letter is no forgery.  But, Mr Burke, will you answer me
this--if it _was_ a forgery, got up for the purpose of saving this man's
life, _at what time was it forged_? for Bumpus could not know that he
would ever need such a letter until yesterday afternoon, and between
that time and this there was but little time to forge a letter from San
Francisco, post-mark and all, and make it soiled and worn at the edges
like an old letter.  (`Hear!' and sensation.)  More than that," cried
Dan, waxing eager and earnest, "if it was a forgery, got up for this
purpose, _why was it not produced at the trial_?  (`Hear! hear!' and
cheers!)  And, last of all, why, if this forgery was so important to
him, did John Bumpus forget all about it until he stood on this table;
ay, _until the rope was round his neck_?"

A perfect storm of cheers and applause followed this last sentence, in
the midst of which there were cries of "You're floored, Burke!  Hurrah
for Bumpus!  Cut the ropes!"

But although John's life was now safe, his indignation at Susan's letter
having been laughed at was not altogether allayed.

"I'll tell ye wot it is," said he, the instant there was a lull in the
uproar of voices.  "If you think that I'll stand here and see my Susan's
letter insulted before my eyes, you're very far out o' your reckoning.
Just cut them ropes an put any two o' ye'r biggest men, black or white,
before _me_, an' if I don't shew them a lot o' new stars as hasn't been
seed in no sky wotiver since Adam was a little boy, my name's--"

Up to this point Jo was heard, but the conclusion of his defiance was
drowned in roars of laughter.

"Cut the ropes," shouted the crowd.

Dan drew a clasp-knife from his pocket, and with one stroke set Bumpus
free.

"Shoulder high," yelled a voice; "hurrah!"

A wild rush was made at the table.  Jo's executioners were overturned
and trampled under foot, and the table, with himself and his young
advocate sprawling on it, was raised on the shoulders of the crowd and
borne off in triumph.

Half-an-hour later, Bumpus was set down at the widow's door.  Mrs
Stuart received him with a scream of surprise and joy, for she had given
him up as a lost man.

"Now, then, Mrs Stuart," said Jo, throwing himself on a chair and
wiping the perspiration from his forehead, "don't make such a fuss about
me, like a good creetur.  But do get me a bit o' bacon, and let's be
thankful that I'm here to eat it.  Cut it fat, Mrs Stuart; cut it fat;
for it's wonderful wot a appetite I've got after such a mornin's work as
I've gone through.  Well, well, after all that yer friends have said of
ye, Jo Bumpus, I do believe that yer _not_ born to be hanged?"



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE RENDEZVOUS--AN EPISODE--PECULIAR CIRCUMSTANCES--AND OTHER MATTERS.

About five or six days' sail from the scene of our tale there lies one
of those small rocks or islets with which the breast of the Pacific is
in many places thickly studded.

It is a lonely coral isle, far removed from any of its fellows, and
presenting none of those grand features which characterise the island on
which the settlement of Sandy Cove was situated.  In no part does it
rise more than thirty feet above the level of the sea; in most places it
is little more than a few feet above it.  The coral reefs around it are
numerous; and as many of them rise to within a few feet of the surface,
the navigation in its neighbourhood is dangerous in the extreme.

At the time of which we write, the vegetation of the isle was not very
luxuriant.  Only a few clusters of cocoa-nut palms grew here and there
over its otherwise barren surface.  In this respect it did not resemble
most of the other islands of the Pacific.  Owing partly to its being out
of the usual course of ships, and partly to the dangerous reefs already
referred to, the spot was never approached by vessels, or, if a ship
happened to be driven towards it, she got out of its way as speedily as
possible.

This was the rendezvous of the pirates, and was named by them the Isle
of Palms.

Here, in caverns hollowed out of the coral rock, Gascoyne had been wont
to secrete such goods and stores as were necessary for the maintenance
of his piratical course of life, and to this lone spot did Manton convey
his prisoners after getting rid of his former commander.  Towards this
spot, also, did Gascoyne turn the prow of the cutter _Wasp_ in pursuit
of his mutinous first mate.

Manton, for reasons best known to himself, (certainly not from goodness
of heart,) was kind to his captives to the extent of simply letting them
alone.  He declined to hold any intercourse whatever with Captain
Montague, and forbade him to speak with the men upon pain of being
confined to his berth.  The young people were allowed to do as they
pleased, so long as they kept out of the way.

On reaching the Isle of Palms the pirates at once proceeded to take in
those stores of which they stood in need.  The harbour into which the
schooner ran was a narrow bay, on the shores of which the palm trees
grew sufficiently high to prevent her masts from being seen from the
other side of the island.  Here the captives were landed, but as Manton
did not wish them to witness his proceedings, he sent them across the
islet under the escort of a party who conveyed them to the shores of a
small bay.  On the rocks in this bay lay the wreck of what once had been
a noble ship.  It was now completely dismantled.  Her hull was stove in
by the rocks.  Her masts and yards were gone, with the exception of
their stumps and the lower part of the main-mast, to which the main-yard
still hung with a ragged portion of the mainsail attached to it.

A feeling of depression filled the breast of Montague and his companions
as they came in sight of this wreck, and the former attempted to obtain
some information in regard to her from his conductors, but they sternly
bade him ask no questions.  Some time afterwards he heard the story of
this vessel's fate.  We shall record it here.

Not many months prior to the date of our tale, the _Avenger_ happened to
have occasion to run down to the Isle of Palms.  Gascoyne was absent at
the time.  He had been landed at Sandy Cove, and had ordered Manton to
go to the rendezvous for supplies.  On nearing the isle a storm arose.
The wind was fair, however, and the schooner ran for her destination
