"Little Rab holler: 'Who dat?'

"Brer Wolf tu'n loose en sing:--

    "'_I'll stay w'en you away,
    'Kaze no gol' will pay toll!_'

"Little Rab holler back, he did:--

"'Go 'way, Mr. Wolf! go 'way! We-all daddy kin sing lots puttier dan
dat. Go 'way, Mr. Wolf! go 'way!'

"Brer Wolf he slunk off, he did, en he go 'way out in de woods, en he
sing, en sing, twel he kin sing fine ez de nex' man. Den he go back en
knock at de do', en w'en de little Rabs ax who dat, he sing dem de song;
en he sing so nice, en he sing so fine, dat dey ondo de do', en ole Brer
Wolf walk in en gobble um all up, fum de fus' ter de las'.

"W'en ole Brer Rabbit git back home, he fine de do' stannin' wide open
en all de chilluns gone. Dey wa'n't no sign er no tussle; de h'a'th 'uz
all swep' clean, en eve'ything wuz all ter rights, but right over in de
cornder he see a pile er bones, en den he know in reason dat some er de
yuther creeturs done bin dar en make hash outen he chilluns.

    [Illustration: "DE LITTLE RABS, DEY PROMISE DAT DEY WON'T OPEN
    DE DO' FER NOBODY"]

"Den he go 'roun' en ax um 'bout it, but dey all 'ny it; dey all 'ny it
ter de las', en Brer Wolf, he 'ny it wuss'n all un um. Den Brer Rabbit
tuck'n lay de case 'fo' Brer Tarrypin. Ole Brer Tarrypin wuz a mighty
man in dem days," continued Uncle Remus, with something like a
sigh,--"a mighty man, en no sooner is he year de state er de condition
dan he up'n call all de creeturs tergedder. He call um tergedder, he
did, en den he up'n tell um 'bout how somebody done tuck'n 'stroy all er
Brer Rabbit chillun, en he 'low dat de man w'at do dat bleedz ter be
kotch, 'kaze ef he ain't, dey ain't no tellin' how long it'll be 'fo' de
same somebody'll come 'long en 'stroy all de chillun in de settlement.

"Brer B'ar, he up'n ax how dey gwine fine 'im, en Brer Tarrypin say dey
er allers a way. Den he 'low:--

"'Less dig a deep pit.'

"'I'll dig de pit,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"Atter de pit done dug, Brer Tarrypin say:--

"'Less fill de pit full er lighter'd knots en bresh.'

"'I'll fill de pit,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"Atter de pit done fill up, Brer Tarrypin say:--

"'Now, den, less set it a-fier.'

"'I'll kindle de fier,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"W'en de fier 'gun ter blaze up, Brer Tarrypin 'low dat de creeturs mus'
jump 'cross dat, en de man w'at 'stroy Brer Rabbit chilluns will drap in
en git bu'nt up. Brer Wolf bin so uppity 'bout diggin', en fillin', en
kindlin', dat dey all 'spected 'im fer ter make de fus' trial; but,
bless yo' soul en body! Brer Wolf look lak he got some yuther business
fer ter 'ten' ter.

"De pit look so deep, en de fier bu'n so high, dat dey mos' all 'fear'd
fer ter make de trial, but atter w'ile, Brer Mink 'low dat he ain't
hunted none er Brer Rabbit chilluns, en wid dat, he tuck runnin' start,
en lipt across. Den Brer Coon say he ain't hunted um, en over he sailed.
Brer B'ar say he feel mo' heavy dan he ever is befo' in all he born
days, but he ain't hurted none er Brer Rabbit po' little chilluns, en
wid dat away he went 'cross de fier. Dey all jump, twel bimeby hit come
Brer Wolf time. Den he 'gun ter git skeered, en he mighty sorry 'kaze he
dig dat pit so deep en wide, en kindle dat fier so high. He tuck sech a
long runnin' start, dat time he git ter de jumpin' place, he 'uz done
wo' teetotally out, en he lipt up, he did, en fetch'd a squall en drapt
right spang in de middle er de fier."

"Uncle Remus," said the little boy, after a while, "did Brother Terrapin
jump over the fire?"

"Wat Brer Tarrypin gwine jump fer?" responded Uncle Remus, "w'en
eve'ybody know Tarrypins ain't eat Rabbits."

"Well, you know you said everything was different then," said the child.

"Look yer, Brer Jack," exclaimed Uncle Remus, "ef you got any tale on
yo' mine, des let 'er come. Dish yer youngster gittin' too long-headed
fer me; dat he is."[51]


FOOTNOTES:

[49] A species of hickory-nut. The tree sheds its bark every year, hence
the name, which is applied to both tree and fruit.

[50] The king-bird.

[51] See _Uncle Remus: His Songs and his Sayings_, p. 79.




XLIII

THE CUNNING SNAKE


Daddy Jack, thus appealed to, turned half round in his seat, winked his
bright little eyes very rapidly, and said, with great animation:--

"Hoo! me bin yeddy one sing-tale; me yeddy um so long tam 'go. One tam
dere bin one ole Affiky ooman, 'e call 'im name Coomba. 'E go walky troo
da woots, 'e walky troo da fiel. Bumbye 'e is bin come 'pon one
snake-nes' fill wit' aig. Snake big snake, aig big aig. Affiky oomans is
bin want-a dem aig so bahd; 'e 'fraid fer tek um. 'E gone home; 'e is
see dem aig in 'e dream, 'e want um so bahd. Wun da nex' day mornin'
come, da Affiky oomans say 'e bleeze fer hab dem aig. 'E go 'way, 'e
bin-a see da snake-nes', 'e is git-a da aig; 'e fetch um at 'e own
house; 'e cook um fer 'e brekwuss.

"Bumbye da snake bin-a come by 'e nes'. Aig done gone. 'E pit 'e nose
'pon da groun', 'e is track da Affiky oomans by 'e own house. Snake
come by da Affiky oomans house; 'e ahx 'bout 'e aig. Affiky oomans say
'e no hab bin see no aig. Snake see da skin wut bin 'pon 'e aig; 'e ahx
wut is dis. Affiky oomans no say nuttin' 't all. Snake 'e say:--

"'Wey fer you come brek up me nes' un tekky me aig?'

"Affiky oomans 'e no say nuttin' 't all. 'E toss 'e head, 'e mek lak 'e
no yeddy da snake v'ice, 'e go 'bout 'e wuk. Snake, 'e say:--

"'Ooman! you is bin yed me v'ice wun me cry out. You bin tekky me aig;
you is bin 'stroy me chillun. Tek keer you' own; tek keer you' own.'

"Snake gone 'way; 'e slick out 'e tongue, 'e slide 'way. Bumbye de
Affiky oomans, 'e hab one putty lil pickaninny; 'e lub um ha'd all over.
'E is mine wut da snake say; 'e tote da pickaninny 'roun' 'pon 'e bahck.
'E call um Noncy, 'e tote um fur, 'e lub um ha'd.

"Snake, 'e bin-a stay in da bush-side; 'e watch all day, 'e wait all
night; 'e git honkry fer da pickaninny, 'e want um so bahd. 'E bin slick
out 'e tongue, 'e bin slide troo da grass, 'e bin hanker fer da
pickaninny.

"Bumbye da Affiky oomans tote-a da Noncy til 'e git tire; 'e puff, 'e
blow, 'e wuk 'e gill sem lak cat-fish."

Aunt Tempy burst into loud laughter at this remarkable statement.

"Whoever is year de beat er dat!" she exclaimed. "Daddy Jack, you goes
on owdashus 'bout de wimmen, dat you does!"

"'E puff, 'e blow, 'e pant; 'e say:--

"'Da pickaninny, 'e der git-a big lak one bag rice. 'E der git-a so
heffy, me yent mos' know wut fer do. Me yent kin tote um no mo'.'

"Da Affiky oomans is bin-a pit da pickaninny down 'pon da groun'. 'E mek
up one sing[52] in 'e head, un 'e l'arn da lilly gal fer answer da sing.
'E do show um how fer pull out da peg in da do'. Snake, 'e is bin lay
quile up in da bush; 'e say nuttin' 't all.

"Affiky oomans is l'arn-a da pickaninny fer answer da sing, un wun he
sta't fer go off, 'e say:--

"Pit da peg in da do' un you no y-open um fer nobody 'cep' you is yeddy
me sing.'

"Lil gal, 'e say yassum, un da Affiky oomans gone off. Snake stay still.
'E quile up in 'e quile; 'e yent moof[53] 'e tail. Bumbye, toze
night-time, da Affiky oomans come bahck wey 'e lif. 'E stan' by da do';
'e talk dis sing:--

    "'_Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy!_'

"'E v'ice 'come finer toze da las' tel 'e do git loud fer true. Da lilly
gal, 'e do mek answer lak dis:--

    "'_Andolee! Andoli! Andolo!_'

"'E know 'e mammy v'ice, en 'e bin pull out da peg queek. 'E run to 'e
mammy; 'e mammy der hung um up. Nex' day, 'e da sem t'ing; two, t'ree,
sev'm day, 'e da sem t'ing. Affiky oomans holler da sing; da lilly gal
mek answer 'pon turrer side da do'. Snake, 'e lay quile up in da bush.
'E watch da night, 'e lissun da day; 'e try fer l'arn-a da sing; 'e no
say nuttin' 't all. Bumbye, one tam wun Affiky oomans bin gone 'way,
snake, 'e wait 'til 'e mos' tam fer oomans fer come bahck. 'E gone by da
do'; 'e y-open 'e mout'; 'e say:--

    "'_Wullo wullo widdo, me Noncy,
    Wullo wullo widdo, me Noncy,
    Wullo wullo widdo, me Noncy!_'

"'E try fer mekky 'e v'ice come fine lak da lil gal mammy; 'e der hab
one rough place in 'e t'roat, un 'e v'ice come big. Lilly gal no mek
answer. 'E no y-open da do'. 'E say:--

"'Go 'way fum dey-dey! Me mammy no holler da sing lak dat!'

"Snake, 'e try one, two, t'ree time; 'e yent no use. Lilly gal no
y-open da do', 'e no mek answer. Snake 'e slick out 'e tongue un slide
'way; 'e say 'e mus' l'arn-a da sing sho' 'nuff.

"Bumbye, da Affiky oomans come bahck. 'E holler da sing:--

    "'_Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy!_'

"Lilly gal say: 'Da' me mammy!' 'E answer da sing:--

    "'_Andolee! Andoli! Andolo!_'

"Snake, 'e quile up in da chimmerly-corner; 'e hol' 'e bre't' fer
lissun; 'e der l'arn-a da sing. Nex' day mornin' da Affiky oomans bin-a
gone 'way un lef' da lilly gal all by 'ese'f. All de day long da snake
'e t'ink about da song; 'e say um in 'e min', 'e say um forwud, 'e say
um backwud. Bumbye, mos' toze sundown, 'e come at da do'; 'e come, 'e
holler da sing:--

    "'_Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy,
    Walla walla witto, me Noncy!_'

"Da lil gal, 'e t'ink-a da snake bin 'e mammy; 'e is answer da sing:--

    "'Adolee! Andoli! Andolo!'

"'E mek answer lak dat, un 'e y-open da do' queek. 'E run 'pon da snake
'fo' 'e is _shum_.[54] Snake, 'e bin-a hug da lilly gal mo' sem dun 'e
mammy; 'e is twis' 'e tail 'roun' um; 'e is ketch um in 'e quile. Lilly
gal 'e holler, 'e squall; 'e squall, 'e holler. Nobody bin-a come by fer
yeddy um. Snake 'e 'quees'[55] um tight, 'e no l'em go; 'e 'quees' um
tight, 'e swaller um whole; 'e bre'k-a no bone; 'e tekky da lilly gal
lak 'e stan'.

"Bumbye da lil mammy come home at 'e house. 'E holler da sing, 'e git-a
no answer. 'E come skeer'; 'e v'ice shek, 'e body trimple. 'E lissun, 'e
no yeddy no fuss. 'E push de do' y-open, 'e no see nuttin' 't all; da
lilly gal gone! Da ooman 'e holler, 'e cry; 'e ahx way 'e lilly gal bin
gone; 'e no git no answer. 'E look all 'roun', 'e see way da snake bin-a
'cross da road. 'E holler:--

"'Ow, me Lard! da snake bin come swaller me lil Noncy gal. I gwan hunt
'im up; I gwan foller da snake pas' da een' da yet'.'[56]

"'E go in da swamp, 'e cut 'im one cane; 'e come bahck, 'e fine da snake
track, un 'e do foller 'long wey 'e lead. Snake 'e so full wit de lilly
gal 'e no walk fas'; lil gal mammy, 'e bin mad, 'e go stret 'long. Snake
'e so full wit' da lilly gal, 'e come sleepy. 'E lay down, 'e shed-a 'e
y-eye. 'E y-open um no mo'," continued Daddy Jack, moving his head
slowly from side to side, and looking as solemn as he could. "Da ooman
come 'pon de snake wun 'e bin lay dar 'sleep; 'e come 'pon 'im, un 'e
tekky da cane un bre'k 'e head, 'e mash um flat. 'E cut da snake open,
'e fine da lilly gal sem lak 'e bin 'sleep. 'E tek um home, 'e wash um
off. Bumbye da lilly gal y-open 'e y-eye, un soon 'e see 'e mammy, 'e
answer da sing. 'E say:--

    "'_Andolee! Andoli! Andolo!_'"

"Well, well, well!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, sympathetically. "Un de po'
little creetur wuz 'live?"

"Enty!" exclaimed Daddy Jack. No reply could possibly have been more
prompt, more emphatic, or more convincing.


FOOTNOTES:

[52] "'E mek up one sing." She composed a song and taught the child the
refrain.

[53] Move; he ain't move he tail; he hasn't even moved his tail.

[54] Before he see um.

[55] Squeeze.

[56] Earth. Uncle Remus would say "Yeth."




XLIV

HOW BRER FOX WAS TOO SMART


"Uncle Remus," said the little boy, one night when he found the old man
alone, "I don't like these stories where somebody has to stand at the
door and sing, do you? They don't sound funny to me."

Uncle Remus crossed his legs, took off his spectacles and laid them
carefully on the floor under his chair, and made a great pretence of
arguing the matter with the child.

"Now, den, honey, w'ich tale is it w'at you ain't lak de mos'?"

The little boy reflected a moment and then replied:--

"About the snake swallowing the little girl. I don't see any fun in
that. Papa says they have snakes in Africa as big around as his body;
and, goodness knows, I hope they won't get after me."

"How dey gwine git atter you, honey, w'en you settin' up yer 'long side
er me en de snakes 'way 'cross dar in Affiky?"

"Well, Daddy Jack, he came, and the snakes might come too."

Uncle Remus laughed, more to reassure the child than to ridicule his
argument.

"Dem ar snakes ain't no water-moccasin, not ez I knows un. Brer Jack bin
yer mighty long time, en dey ain't no snake foller atter 'im yit."

"Now, Uncle Remus! papa says they have them in shows."

"I 'speck dey is, honey, but who's afear'd er snake stufft wid
meal-bran? Not none er ole Miss gran'chillun, sho'!"

"Well, the stories don't sound funny to me."

"Dat mought be, yit deyer funny ter Brer Jack, en dey do mighty well fer
ter pass de time. Atter w'ile you'll be a-gwine 'roun' runnin' down
ole-Brer Rabbit en de t'er creeturs, en somehow er n'er you'll take'n
git ole Remus mix up wid um twel you won't know w'ich one un um you er
runnin' down, en let 'lone dat, you won't keer needer. Shoo, honey! you
ain't de fus' chap w'at I done tole deze yer tales ter."

"Why, Uncle Remus," exclaimed the little boy, in a horrified tone, "I
_would n't_; you _know_ I would n't!"

"Don't tell me!" insisted the old man, "you er outgrowin' me, en you er
outgrowin' de tales. Des lak Miss Sally change de lenk er yo' britches,
des dat a-way I got ter do w'ence I whirl in en persoo atter de
creeturs. Time wuz w'en you 'ud set down yer by dish yer h'a'th, en
you'd take'n holler en laugh en clap yo' han's w'en ole Brer Rabbit 'ud
kick outen all er he tanglements; but deze times you sets dar wid yo'
eyes wide open, en you don't crack a smile. I say it!" Uncle Remus
exclaimed, changing his tone and attitude, as if addressing some third
person concealed in the room. "I say it! Stidder j'inin' in wid de fun,
he'll take'n lean back dar en 'spute 'long wid you des lak grow'd up
folks. I'll stick it out dis season, but w'en Chrismus come, I be bless
ef I ain't gwine ter ax Miss Sally fer my remoovance papers, en I'm
gwine ter hang my bundle on my walkin'-cane, en see w'at kinder dirt dey
is at de fur een' er de big road."

"Yes!" exclaimed the little boy, triumphantly, "and, if you do, the
patter-rollers will get you."

"Well," replied the old man, with a curious air of resignation, "ef dey
does, I ain't gwine ter do lak Brer Fox did w'en Brer Rabbit showed him
de tracks in de big road."

"How did Brother Fox do, Uncle Remus?"

"Watch out, now! Dish yer one er de tales w'at ain't got no fun in it."

"Uncle Remus, please tell it."

"Hol' on dar! Dey mought be a snake some'rs in it--one er deze yer
meal-bran snakes."

"_Please_, Uncle Remus, tell it."

The old man never allowed himself to resist the artful pleadings of the
little boy. So he recovered his specks from under the chair, looked up
the chimney for luck, as he explained to his little partner, and
proceeded:--

"One day w'en Brer Fox went callin' on Miss Meadows en Miss Motts en de
t'er gals, who should he fine settin' up dar but ole Brer Rabbit?
Yasser! Dar he wuz, des ez sociable ez you please. He 'uz gwine on wid
de gals, en w'en Brer Fox drapt in dey look lak dey wuz mighty tickled
'bout sump'n' n'er Brer Rabbit bin sayin'. Brer Fox, he look sorter
jub'ous, he did, des lak folks does w'en dey walks up in a crowd whar
de yuthers all a-gigglin'. He tuck'n kotch de dry grins terreckerly. But
dey all howdied, en Miss Meadows, she up'n say:--

"'You'll des hatter skuse us, Brer Fox, on de 'count er dish yer
gigglement. Tooby sho', hit monst'us disperlite fer we-all fer to be
gwine on dat a-way; but I mighty glad you come, en I sez ter de gals,
s'I, "'Fo' de Lord, gals! dar come Brer Fox, en yer we is a-gigglin' en
a-gwine on scan'lous; yit hit done come ter mighty funny pass," s'I, "ef
you can't run on en laugh 'fo' home folks," s'I. Dat des 'zactly w'at I
say, en I leave it ter ole Brer Rabbit en de gals yer ef 't ain't.'

"De gals, dey tuck'n jine in, dey did, en dey make ole Brer Fox feel
right splimmy-splammy, en dey all sot dar en run on 'bout dey neighbors
des lak folks does deze days. Dey sot dar, dey did, twel atter w'ile
Brer Rabbit look out todes sundown, en 'low:--

"'Now, den, folks and fr'en's, I bleedz ter say goo' bye. Cloud comin'
up out yan, en mos' 'fo' we know it de rain 'll be a-po'in' en de grass
'll be a-growin'.'"

"Why, that's poetry, Uncle Remus!" interrupted the little boy.

"Tooby sho' 't is, honey! tooby sho' 't is. I des let you know Brer
Rabbit 'uz a mighty man in dem days. Brer Fox, he see de cloud comin'
up, en he up'n 'low he 'speck he better be gittin' 'long hisse'f, 'kaze
he ain't wanter git he Sunday-go-ter-meetin' cloze wet. Miss Meadows en
Miss Motts, en de gals, dey want um ter stay, but bofe er dem ar
creeturs 'uz mighty fear'd er gittin' der foots wet, en atter w'ile dey
put out.

"W'iles dey 'uz gwine down de big road, jawin' at one er 'n'er, Brer
Fox, he tuck'n stop right quick, en 'low:--

"'Run yer, Brer Rabbit! run yer! Ef my eye ain't 'ceive me yer de signs
whar Mr. Dog bin 'long, en mo'n dat dey er right fresh.'

"Brer Rabbit, he sidle up en look. Den he 'low:--

"'Dat ar track ain't never fit Mr. Dog foot in de roun' worl'. W'at
make it mo' bindin',' sezee, 'I done gone en bin 'quainted wid de man
w'at make dat track, too long 'go ter talk 'bout,' sezee.

"'Brer Rabbit, please, sir, tell me he name.'

"Brer Rabbit, he laugh lak he makin' light er sump'n' 'n'er.

"'Ef I ain't make no mistakes, Brer Fox, de po' creetur w'at make dat
track is Cousin Wildcat; no mo' en no less.'

"'How big is he, Brer Rabbit?'

"'He des 'bout yo' heft, Brer Fox.' Den Brer Rabbit make lak he talkin'
wid hisse'f. 'Tut, tut, tut! Hit mighty funny dat I should run up on
Cousin Wildcat in dis part er de worl'. Tooby sho', tooby sho'! Many en
manys de time I see my ole Grandaddy kick en cuff Cousin Wildcat, twel I
git sorry 'bout 'im. Ef you want any fun, Brer Fox, right now de time
ter git it.'

"Brer Fox up'n ax, he did, how he gwine have any fun. Brer Rabbit, he
'low:--

"'Easy 'nuff; des go en tackle ole Cousin Wildcat, en lam 'im 'roun'.'

"Brer Fox, he sorter scratch he year, en 'low:--

"'Eh-eh, Brer Rabbit, I fear'd. He track too much lak Mr. Dog.'

"Brer Rabbit des set right flat down in de road, en holler en laugh. He
'low, sezee:--
