    THE YOUNG BANK MESSENGER.


HOW TO RISE LIBRARY.

    JED, THE POORHOUSE BOY.
    RUPERT'S AMBITION.
    LESTER'S LUCK.




THE JOHN C. WINSTON CO.'S POPULAR JUVENILES: HARRY CASTLEMON BOOKS


HOW I CAME TO WRITE MY FIRST BOOK.

When I was sixteen years old I belonged to a composition class. It was
our custom to go on the recitation seat every day with clean slates, and
we were allowed ten minutes to write seventy words on any subject the
teacher thought suited to our capacity. One day he gave out "What a Man
Would See if He Went to Greenland." My heart was in the matter, and
before the ten minutes were up I had one side of my slate filled. The
teacher listened to the reading of our compositions, and when they were
all over he simply said: "Some of you will make your living by writing
one of these days." That gave me something to ponder upon. I did not say
so out loud, but I knew that my composition was as good as the best of
them. By the way, there was another thing that came in my way just then.
I was reading at that time one of Mayne Reid's works which I had drawn
from the library, and I pondered upon it as much as I did upon what the
teacher said to me. In introducing Swartboy to his readers he made use
of this expression: "No visible change was observable in Swartboy's
countenance." Now, it occurred to me that if a man of his education
could make such a blunder as that and still write a book, I ought to be
able to do it, too. I went home that very day and began a story, "The
Old Guide's Narrative," which was sent to the _New York Weekly_, and
came back, respectfully declined. It was written on both sides of the
sheets but I didn't know that this was against the rules. Nothing
abashed, I began another, and receiving some instruction, from a friend
of mine who was a clerk in a book store, I wrote it on only one side of
the paper. But mind you, he didn't know what I was doing. Nobody knew
it; but one day, after a hard Saturday's work--the other boys had been
out skating on the brick-pond--I shyly broached the subject to my
mother. I felt the need of some sympathy. She listened in amazement, and
then said: "Why, do you think you could write a book like that?" That
settled the matter, and from that day no one knew what I was up to until
I sent the first four volumes of Gunboat Series to my father. Was it
work? Well, yes; it was hard work, but each week I had the satisfaction
of seeing the manuscript grow until the "Young Naturalist" was all
complete.--_Harry Castlemon in the Writer._


GUNBOAT SERIES.

    Frank the Young Naturalist.
    Frank on a Gunboat.
    Frank in the Woods.
    Frank before Vicksburg.
    Frank on the Lower Mississippi.
    Frank on the Prairie.


ROCKY MOUNTAIN SERIES.

    Frank Among the Rancheros.
    Frank in the Mountains.
    Frank at Don Carlos' Rancho.


SPORTSMAN'S CLUB SERIES.

    The Sportsman's Club in the Saddle.
    The Sportsman's Club
    Among the Trappers.
    The Sportsman's Club Afloat.


FRANK NELSON SERIES.

    Snowed up.
    Frank in the Forecastle.
    The Boy Traders.


ROUGHING IT SERIES.

    George in Camp.
    George at the Fort.
    George at the Wheel.


ROD AND GUN SERIES.

    Don Gordon's Shooting Box.
    The Young Wild Fowlers.
    Rod and Gun Club.


GO-AHEAD SERIES.

    Tom Newcombe.
    Go-Ahead.
    No Moss.


WAR SERIES.

    True to His Colors.
    Rodney the Partisan.
    Rodney the Overseer.
    Marcy the Blockade-Runner.
    Marcy the Refugee.
    Sailor Jack the Trader.


HOUSEBOAT SERIES.

    The Houseboat Boys.
    The Mystery of Lost River Canon.
    The Young Game Warden.


AFLOAT AND ASHORE SERIES.

    Rebellion in Dixie.
    A Sailor in Spite of Himself.
    The Ten-Ton Cutter.




THE JOHN C. WINSTON CO.'S POPULAR JUVENILES: J. T. TROWBRIDGE.


Neither as a writer does he stand apart from the great currents of life
and select some exceptional phase or odd combination of circumstances.
He stands on the common level and appeals to the universal heart, and
all that he suggests or achieves is on the plane and in the line of
march of the great body of humanity.

The Jack Hazard series of stories, published in the late _Our Young
Folks_, and continued in the first volume of _St. Nicholas_, under the
title of "Fast Friends," is no doubt destined to hold a high place in
this class of literature. The delight of the boys in them (and of their
seniors, too) is well founded. They go to the right spot every time.
Trowbridge knows the heart of a boy like a book, and the heart of a man,
too, and he has laid them both open in these books in a most successful
manner. Apart from the qualities that render the series so attractive to
all young readers, they have great value on account of their
portraitures of American country life and character. The drawing is
wonderfully accurate, and as spirited as it is true. The constable,
Sellick, is an original character, and as minor figures where will we
find anything better than Miss Wansey, and Mr. P. Pipkin, Esq. The
picture of Mr. Dink's school, too, is capital, and where else in fiction
is there a better nick-name than that the boys gave to poor little
Stephen Treadwell, "Step Hen," as he himself pronounced his name in an
unfortunate moment when he saw it in print for the first time in his
lesson in school.

On the whole, these books are very satisfactory, and afford the critical
reader the rare pleasure of the works that are just adequate, that
easily fulfill themselves and accomplish all they set out to
do.--_Scribner's Monthly_.


JACK HAZARD SERIES.

    Jack Hazard and His Fortunes.
    The Young Surveyor.
    Fast Friends.
    Doing His Best.
    A Chance for Himself.
    Lawrence's Adventures.



CHARLES ASBURY STEPHENS.

This author wrote his "Camping Out Series" at the very height of his
mental and physical powers.

     "We do not wonder at the popularity of these books; there is a
     freshness and variety about them, and an enthusiasm in the
     description of sport and adventure, which even the older folk can
     hardly fail to share."--_Worcester Spy._

     "The author of the Camping Out Series is entitled to rank as
     decidedly at the head of what may be called boys'
     literature."--_Buffalo Courier._


CAMPING OUT SERIES.


CAMPING OUT. As Recorded by "Kit."

     "This book is bright, breezy, wholesome, instructive, and stands
     above the ordinary boys' books of the day by a whole head and
     shoulders."--_The Christian Register, Boston_.


LEFT ON LABRADOR; OR, THE CRUISE OF THE SCHOONER YACHT "CURLEW." As
Recorded by "Wash."

     "The perils of the voyagers, the narrow escapes, their strange
     expedients, and the fun and jollity when danger had passed, will
     make boys even unconscious of hunger."--_New Bedford Mercury._


OFF TO THE GEYSERS; OR THE YOUNG YACHTERS IN ICELAND. AS RECORDED BY
"WADE."

     "It is difficult to believe that Wade and Raed and Kit and Wash
     were not live boys, sailing up Hudson Straits, and reigning
     temporarily over an Esquimaux tribe."--_The Independent, New York._


LYNX HUNTING: From Notes by the Author of "Camping Out."

     "Of first quality as a boys' book, and fit to take its place beside
     the best."--_Richmond Enquirer._


FOX HUNTING. As Recorded by "Raed."

     "The most spirited and entertaining book that has as yet appeared.
     It overflows with incident, and is characterized by dash and
     brilliancy throughout."--_Boston Gazette._


ON THE AMAZON; OR, THE CRUISE OF THE "RAMBLER." As Recorded by "Wash."

     "Gives vivid pictures of Brazilian adventure and
     scenery."--_Buffalo Courier._




FAMOUS STANDARD JUVENILES FOR GIRLS


A GOOD GIRL'S BOOK IS HARD TO FIND!

One often hears the above quoted. _These_ books have stood the tests of
time and careful mothers, and will be of the greatest interest to girls
of all ages. Free from any unhealthy sensationalism, yet full of
incident and romance, they are the cream of the best girls' books
published.


WAYS AND MEANS LIBRARY. By Margaret Vandegrift.

    Queen's Body Guard.
    Rose Raymond's Wards.
    Doris and Theodora.
    Ways and Means.


STORIES FOR GIRLS.

    Dr. Gilbert's Daughters.
    Marion Berkley.
    Hartwell Farm.


HONEST ENDEAVOR LIBRARY. By Lucy C. Lillie.

    The Family Dilemma.
    Allison's Adventures.
    Ruth Endicott's Way.


MILBROOK LIBRARY. By Lucy C. Lillie.

    Helen Glenn.
    The Squire's Daughter.
    Esther's Fortune.
    For Honor's Sake.


RECENT SUCCESSES

The following, though of recent date, have at once reached such a height
of popularity that they can already be classified as standards.

    Lady Green Satin. By Baroness Deschesney.
    Marion Berkley. By Elizabeth B. Comins.
    Lenny, the Orphan. By Margaret Hosmer.
    Family Dilemma. By Lucy C. Lillie.
    Question of Honor. By Lynde Palmer
    Girl's Ordeal, A. By Lucy C. Lillie.
    Elinor Belden; or The Step Brothers. By Lucy C. Lillie.
    Where Honor Leads. By Lynde Palmer.
    Under the Holly. By Margaret Hosmer.
    Two Bequests. The; or, Heavenward Led. By Jane R. Sommere.
    The Thistles of Mount Cedar. By Ursula Tannenforst.




HURLBUT'S STORY OF THE BIBLE told for YOUNG AND OLD

by Rev. Jesse Lyman Hurlbut, D.D.

A Veritable "Arabian Nights" of Entertainment Containing 168 Complete
Illustrated Stories


THE BIBLE MADE FASCINATING TO CHILDREN.--The heroes and the noble men
and women of the Bible are made to appear as living, acting people. The
book is an original work, and in no sense an imitation. It has been in
preparation for a number of years.

THE DISTINGUISHED AUTHOR.--Dr. Hurlbut has long been associated with,
and director of, the Sunday School work of one of the largest
denominations, and he has been more closely associated with the detail
work of the Chautauqua movement than has any other man. He is also well
known as a writer.

REMARKABLE FOR THE BEAUTY AND NUMBER OF ITS ILLUSTRATIONS.--There are
sixteen pictures in color prepared for this work by the distinguished
artist, W. H. Margetson, and reproduced with the beauty and
attractiveness of the artist's original work. There are also nearly 300
half-tone engravings in this remarkable book, which is as original in
the selection of its illustrations as it is in its stories.

WHAT OTHERS THINK OF IT

     "It is a needed and original work. Not an imitation."--_Christian
     Advocate_, New York.

     "Written in such a style as to fascinate and hold the interest of
     child or man."--REV. F. E. CLARK, Pres. Society of Christian
     Endeavor.

     "It is a beautiful book. I hope every family in the land will
     secure 'Hurlbut's Story of the Bible,'"--GENERAL O. O. HOWARD.

     "The best book of its kind, and that kind the most important."--REV.
     JAMES A. WORDEN, Presbyterian B'd of Pub. and S. S. Work.

     "I like very much the vocabulary you have used, and I can see how
     careful you have been in choosing understandable words."--MR.
     PHILIP E. HOWARD, _Sunday-School Times_, Philadelphia.

     "It is the completest and best thing of the kind I have seen. The
     book is splendidly illustrated." MARIAN LAWRANCE, General Secretary
     International Sunday-School Association.

     "Many will be drawn to the Bible who otherwise might look upon it
     as only adapted for older people."--HON. DAVID J. BREWER, Justice
