which were close by. Here I was put into a well-littered stall, and some
warm gruel was brought to me, which I drank thankfully.

In the evening I was sufficiently recovered to be led back to Skinner's
stables, where I think they did the best for me they could. In the
morning Skinner came with a farrier to look at me. He examined me very
closely and said:

"This is a case of overwork more than disease, and if you could give him
a run off for six months he would be able to work again; but now there
is not an ounce of strength left in him."

"Then he must just go to the dogs," said Skinner. "I have no meadows to
nurse sick horses in--he might get well or he might not; that sort of
thing don't suit my business; my plan is to work 'em as long as they'll
go, and then sell 'em for what they'll fetch, at the knacker's or
elsewhere."

"If he was broken-winded," said the farrier, "you had better have him
killed out of hand, but he is not; there is a sale of horses coming off
in about ten days; if you rest him and feed him up he may pick up, and
you may get more than his skin is worth, at any rate."

Upon this advice Skinner, rather unwillingly, I think, gave orders that
I should be well fed and cared for, and the stable man, happily for me,
carried out the orders with a much better will than his master had in
giving them. Ten days of perfect rest, plenty of good oats, hay,
bran mashes, with boiled linseed mixed in them, did more to get up my
condition than anything else could have done; those linseed mashes were
delicious, and I began to think, after all, it might be better to live
than go to the dogs. When the twelfth day after the accident came, I
was taken to the sale, a few miles out of London. I felt that any change
from my present place must be an improvement, so I held up my head, and
hoped for the best.




48 Farmer Thoroughgood and His Grandson Willie


At this sale, of course I found myself in company with the old
broken-down horses--some lame, some broken-winded, some old, and some
that I am sure it would have been merciful to shoot.

The buyers and sellers, too, many of them, looked not much better off
than the poor beasts they were bargaining about. There were poor old
men, trying to get a horse or a pony for a few pounds, that might drag
about some little wood or coal cart. There were poor men trying to sell
a worn-out beast for two or three pounds, rather than have the greater
loss of killing him. Some of them looked as if poverty and hard times
had hardened them all over; but there were others that I would have
willingly used the last of my strength in serving; poor and shabby, but
kind and human, with voices that I could trust. There was one tottering
old man who took a great fancy to me, and I to him, but I was not strong
enough--it was an anxious time! Coming from the better part of the fair,
I noticed a man who looked like a gentleman farmer, with a young boy by
his side; he had a broad back and round shoulders, a kind, ruddy face,
and he wore a broad-brimmed hat. When he came up to me and my companions
he stood still and gave a pitiful look round upon us. I saw his eye
rest on me; I had still a good mane and tail, which did something for my
appearance. I pricked my ears and looked at him.

"There's a horse, Willie, that has known better days."

"Poor old fellow!" said the boy, "do you think, grandpapa, he was ever a
carriage horse?"

"Oh, yes! my boy," said the farmer, coming closer, "he might have been
anything when he was young; look at his nostrils and his ears, the shape
of his neck and shoulder; there's a deal of breeding about that horse."
He put out his hand and gave me a kind pat on the neck. I put out my
nose in answer to his kindness; the boy stroked my face.

"Poor old fellow! see, grandpapa, how well he understands kindness.
Could not you buy him and make him young again as you did with
Ladybird?"

"My dear boy, I can't make all old horses young; besides, Ladybird was
not so very old, as she was run down and badly used."

"Well, grandpapa, I don't believe that this one is old; look at his mane
and tail. I wish you would look into his mouth, and then you could tell;
though he is so very thin, his eyes are not sunk like some old horses'."

The old gentleman laughed. "Bless the boy! he is as horsey as his old
grandfather."

"But do look at his mouth, grandpapa, and ask the price; I am sure he
would grow young in our meadows."

The man who had brought me for sale now put in his word.

"The young gentleman's a real knowing one, sir. Now the fact is, this
'ere hoss is just pulled down with overwork in the cabs; he's not an old
one, and I heerd as how the vetenary should say, that a six months' run
off would set him right up, being as how his wind was not broken.
I've had the tending of him these ten days past, and a gratefuller,
pleasanter animal I never met with, and 'twould be worth a gentleman's
while to give a five-pound note for him, and let him have a chance. I'll
be bound he'd be worth twenty pounds next spring."

The old gentleman laughed, and the little boy looked up eagerly.

"Oh, grandpapa, did you not say the colt sold for five pounds more than
you expected? You would not be poorer if you did buy this one."

The farmer slowly felt my legs, which were much swelled and strained;
then he looked at my mouth. "Thirteen or fourteen, I should say; just
trot him out, will you?"

I arched my poor thin neck, raised my tail a little, and threw out my
legs as well as I could, for they were very stiff.

"What is the lowest you will take for him?" said the farmer as I came
back.

"Five pounds, sir; that was the lowest price my master set."

"'Tis a speculation," said the old gentleman, shaking his head, but at
the same time slowly drawing out his purse, "quite a speculation! Have
you any more business here?" he said, counting the sovereigns into his
hand.

"No, sir, I can take him for you to the inn, if you please."

"Do so, I am now going there."

They walked forward, and I was led behind. The boy could hardly control
his delight, and the old gentleman seemed to enjoy his pleasure. I had a
good feed at the inn, and was then gently ridden home by a servant of my
new master's, and turned into a large meadow with a shed in one corner
of it.

Mr. Thoroughgood, for that was the name of my benefactor, gave orders
that I should have hay and oats every night and morning, and the run of
the meadow during the day, and, "you, Willie," said he, "must take the
oversight of him; I give him in charge to you."

The boy was proud of his charge, and undertook it in all seriousness.
There was not a day when he did not pay me a visit; sometimes picking
me out from among the other horses, and giving me a bit of carrot, or
something good, or sometimes standing by me while I ate my oats. He
always came with kind words and caresses, and of course I grew very fond
of him. He called me Old Crony, as I used to come to him in the field
and follow him about. Sometimes he brought his grandfather, who always
looked closely at my legs.

"This is our point, Willie," he would say; "but he is improving so
steadily that I think we shall see a change for the better in the
spring."

The perfect rest, the good food, the soft turf, and gentle exercise,
soon began to tell on my condition and my spirits. I had a good
constitution from my mother, and I was never strained when I was young,
so that I had a better chance than many horses who have been worked
before they came to their full strength. During the winter my legs
improved so much that I began to feel quite young again. The spring came
round, and one day in March Mr. Thoroughgood determined that he would
try me in the phaeton. I was well pleased, and he and Willie drove me a
few miles. My legs were not stiff now, and I did the work with perfect
ease.

"He's growing young, Willie; we must give him a little gentle work now,
and by mid-summer he will be as good as Ladybird. He has a beautiful
mouth and good paces; they can't be better."

"Oh, grandpapa, how glad I am you bought him!"

"So am I, my boy; but he has to thank you more than me; we must now
be looking out for a quiet, genteel place for him, where he will be
valued."




49 My Last Home


One day during this summer the groom cleaned and dressed me with such
extraordinary care that I thought some new change must be at hand; he
trimmed my fetlocks and legs, passed the tarbrush over my hoofs, and
even parted my forelock. I think the harness had an extra polish. Willie
seemed half-anxious, half-merry, as he got into the chaise with his
grandfather.

"If the ladies take to him," said the old gentleman, "they'll be suited
and he'll be suited. We can but try."

At the distance of a mile or two from the village we came to a pretty,
low house, with a lawn and shrubbery at the front and a drive up to the
door. Willie rang the bell, and asked if Miss Blomefield or Miss Ellen
was at home. Yes, they were. So, while Willie stayed with me, Mr.
Thoroughgood went into the house. In about ten minutes he returned,
followed by three ladies; one tall, pale lady, wrapped in a white shawl,
leaned on a younger lady, with dark eyes and a merry face; the other,
a very stately-looking person, was Miss Blomefield. They all came
and looked at me and asked questions. The younger lady--that was Miss
Ellen--took to me very much; she said she was sure she should like me, I
had such a good face. The tall, pale lady said that she should always
be nervous in riding behind a horse that had once been down, as I might
come down again, and if I did she should never get over the fright.

"You see, ladies," said Mr. Thoroughgood, "many first-rate horses have
had their knees broken through the carelessness of their drivers without
any fault of their own, and from what I see of this horse I should say
that is his case; but of course I do not wish to influence you. If you
incline you can have him on trial, and then your coachman will see what
he thinks of him."

"You have always been such a good adviser to us about our horses," said
the stately lady, "that your recommendation would go a long way with me,
and if my sister Lavinia sees no objection we will accept your offer of
a trial, with thanks."

It was then arranged that I should be sent for the next day.

In the morning a smart-looking young man came for me. At first he looked
pleased; but when he saw my knees he said in a disappointed voice:

"I didn't think, sir, you would have recommended my ladies a blemished
horse like that."

"'Handsome is that handsome does'," said my master; "you are only taking
him on trial, and I am sure you will do fairly by him, young man. If he
is not as safe as any horse you ever drove send him back."

I was led to my new home, placed in a comfortable stable, fed, and left
to myself. The next day, when the groom was cleaning my face, he said:

"That is just like the star that 'Black Beauty' had; he is much the same
height, too. I wonder where he is now."

A little further on he came to the place in my neck where I was bled and
where a little knot was left in the skin. He almost started, and began
to look me over carefully, talking to himself.

"White star in the forehead, one white foot on the off side, this little
knot just in that place;" then looking at the middle of my back--"and,
as I am alive, there is that little patch of white hair that John used
to call 'Beauty's three-penny bit'. It must be 'Black Beauty'! Why,
Beauty! Beauty! do you know me?--little Joe Green, that almost killed
you?" And he began patting and patting me as if he was quite overjoyed.

I could not say that I remembered him, for now he was a fine grown young
fellow, with black whiskers and a man's voice, but I was sure he knew
me, and that he was Joe Green, and I was very glad. I put my nose up
to him, and tried to say that we were friends. I never saw a man so
pleased.

"Give you a fair trial! I should think so indeed! I wonder who the
rascal was that broke your knees, my old Beauty! you must have been
badly served out somewhere; well, well, it won't be my fault if you
haven't good times of it now. I wish John Manly was here to see you."

In the afternoon I was put into a low park chair and brought to the
door. Miss Ellen was going to try me, and Green went with her. I soon
found that she was a good driver, and she seemed pleased with my paces.
I heard Joe telling her about me, and that he was sure I was Squire
Gordon's old "Black Beauty".

When we returned the other sisters came out to hear how I had behaved
myself. She told them what she had just heard, and said:

"I shall certainly write to Mrs. Gordon, and tell her that her favorite
horse has come to us. How pleased she will be!"

After this I was driven every day for a week or so, and as I appeared
to be quite safe, Miss Lavinia at last ventured out in the small close
carriage. After this it was quite decided to keep me and call me by my
old name of "Black Beauty".

I have now lived in this happy place a whole year. Joe is the best and
kindest of grooms. My work is easy and pleasant, and I feel my strength
and spirits all coming back again. Mr. Thoroughgood said to Joe the
other day:

"In your place he will last till he is twenty years old--perhaps more."

Willie always speaks to me when he can, and treats me as his special
friend. My ladies have promised that I shall never be sold, and so I
have nothing to fear; and here my story ends. My troubles are all over,
and I am at home; and often before I am quite awake, I fancy I am still
in the orchard at Birtwick, standing with my old friends under the
apple-trees.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Black Beauty, by Anna Sewell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACK BEAUTY ***

***** This file should be named 271.txt or 271.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/271/

Produced by A. Light, Linda Bowser, and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
