eye that caused his brother to stare at him with his mouth open in
an imbecile sort of way, which seemed to excite Mac still more, for,
turning to his young host, he said, in a low voice, and with a look that
made the gentlemen on the chairs sit up suddenly: "I beg pardon, Van,
for making a mess, but I can't stand by and see my own brother tempt
another man beyond his strength or make a brute of himself. That's plain
English, but I can't help speaking out, for I know not one of you would
willingly hurt Charlie, and you will if you don't let him alone."

"What do you pitch into me for? I've done nothing. A fellow must be
civil in his own house, mustn't he?" asked Van good-humoredly as he
faced about, corkscrew in hand.

"Yes, but it is not civil to urge or joke a guest into doing what you
know and he knows is bad for him. That's only a glass of wine to you,
but it is perdition to Charlie, and if Steve knew what he was about,
he'd cut his right hand off before he'd offer it."

"Do you mean to say I'm tipsy?" demanded Steve, ruffling up like a
little gamecock, for though he saw now what he had done and was ashamed
of it, he hated to have Mac air his peculiar notions before other
people.

"With excitement, not champagne, I hope, for I wouldn't own you if you
were," answered Mac, in whom indignation was effervescing like the wine
in the forgotten bottle, for the men were all young, friends of Steve's
and admirers of Charlie's. "Look here, boys," he went on more quietly,
"I know I ought not to explode in this violent sort of way, but upon my
life I couldn't help it when I heard what you were saying and saw what
Steve was doing. Since I have begun, I may as well finish and tell you
straight out that Prince can't stand this sort of thing. He is trying
to flee temptation, and whoever leads him into it does a cowardly
and sinful act, for the loss of one's own self-respect is bad enough,
without losing the more precious things that make life worth having.
Don't tell him I've said this, but lend a hand if you can, and never
have to reproach yourselves with the knowledge that you helped to ruin a
fellow creature, soul and body."

It was well for the success of Mac's first crusade that his hearers
were gentlemen and sober, so his outburst was not received with jeers or
laughter but listened to in silence, while the expression of the faces
changed from one of surprise to regret and respect, for earnestness is
always effective and championship of this sort seldom fails to touch
hearts as yet unspoiled. As he paused with an eloquent little quiver
in his eager voice, Van corked the bottle at a blow, threw down the
corkscrew, and offered Mac his hand, saying heartily, in spite of his
slang: "You are a first-class old brick! I'll lend a hand for one, and
do my best to back up Charlie, for he's the finest fellow I know, and
shan't go to the devil like poor Randal if I can help it."

Murmurs of applause from the others seemed to express a general assent
to this vigorous statement, and, giving the hand a grateful shake, Mac
retreated to the door, anxious to be off now that he had freed his mind
with such unusual impetuosity.

"Count on me for anything I can do in return for this, Van. I'm sorry
to be such a marplot, but you can take it out in quizzing me after I'm
gone. I'm fair game, and Steve can set you going."

With that, Mac departed as abruptly as he had come, feeling that he
had "made a mess" of it, but comforting himself with the thought that
perhaps he had secured help for Charlie at his own expense and thinking
with a droll smile as he went back to his mother: "My romance begins by
looking after other girls' lovers instead of finding a sweetheart for
myself, but I can't tell Rose, so she won't laugh at me."




Chapter 13 BOTH SIDES

Steve's engagement made a great stir in the family a pleasant one this
time, for nobody objected, everything seemed felicitous, and the course
of true love ran very smoothly for the young couple, who promised to
remove the only obstacle to their union by growing old and wise as soon
as possible. If he had not been so genuinely happy, the little lover's
airs would have been unbearable, for he patronized all mankind in
general, his brother and elder cousins in particular.

"Now, that is the way to manage matters," he declared, standing before
the fire in Aunt Clara's billiard room a day or two after the ball, with
his hands behind his back. "No nonsense, no delay, no domestic rows or
tragic separations. Just choose with taste and judgment, make yourself
agreeable through thick and thin, and when it is perfectly evident that
the dear creature adores the ground you walk on, say the word like a
man, and there you are."

"All very easy to do that with a girl like Kitty, who has no confounded
notions to spoil her and trip you up every time you don't exactly toe
the mark," muttered Charlie, knocking the balls about as if it were
a relief to hit something, for he was in a gloriously bad humor that
evening, because time hung heavy on his hands since he had forsworn the
company he could not keep without danger to himself.

"You should humor those little notions, for all women have them, and it
needs tact to steer clear of them. Kitty's got dozens, but I treat them
with respect, have my own way when I can, give in without growling when
I can't, and we get on like a couple of--"

"Spoons," put in Charlie, who felt that he had not steered clear and so
suffered shipwreck in sight of land.

Steve meant to have said "doves," but his cousin's levity caused him to
add with calm dignity, "reasonable beings," and then revenged himself by
making a good shot which won him the game.

"You always were a lucky little dog, Steve. I don't begrudge you a
particle of your happiness, but it does seem as if things weren't quite
fair sometimes," said Archie, suppressing an envious sigh, for, though
he seldom complained, it was impossible to contrast his own and his
cousin's prospects with perfect equanimity.

    "His worth shines forth the brightest who in hope
     Always confides: the Abject soul despairs,"

observed Mac, quoting Euripides in a conversational tone as he lay upon
a divan reposing after a hard day's work.

"Thank you," said Archie, brightening a little, for a hopeful word from
any source was very comfortable.

"That's your favorite Rip, isn't it? He was a wise old boy, but you
could find advice as good as that nearer home," put in Steve, who just
then felt equal to slapping Plato on the shoulder, so elated was he at
being engaged "first of all the lot," as he gracefully expressed it.

"Don't halloo till you are out of the wood, Dandy Mrs. Kit has jilted
two men, and may a third, so you'd better not brag of your wisdom too
soon, for she may make a fool of you yet," said Charlie, cynically, his
views of life being very gloomy about this time.

"No, she won't, Steve, if you do your part honestly. There's the making
of a good little woman in Kitty, and she has proved it by taking you
instead of those other fellows. You are not a Solomon, but you're not
spoilt yet, and she had the sense to see it," said Mac encouragingly
from his corner, for he and his brother were better friends than even
since the little scene at the Van Tassels'.

"Hear! Hear!" cried Steve, looking more than ever like a cheerful young
cockerel trying to crow as he stood upon the hearth rug with his hands
under his coat tails, rising and falling alternately upon the toes and
heels of his neat little boots.

"Come, you've given them each a pat on the head haven't you got one for
me? I need it enough, for if ever there was a poor devil born under an
evil star, it is C. C. Campbell," exclaimed Charlie, leaning his chin on
his cue with a discontented expression of countenance, for trying to be
good is often very hard work till one gets used to it.

"Oh, yes! I can accommodate you." And, as if his words suggested the
selection, Mac, still lying flat upon his back, repeated one of his
favorite bits from Beaumont and Fletcher, for he had a wonderful memory
and could reel off poetry by the hour together.

    "Man is his own star; and the soul that can
    Render an honest and a perfect man
    Commands all light, all influence, all fate.
    Nothing to him falls early or too late.

    Our acts our angels are; or good or ill,
    Our fatal shadows that walk by us still."

"Confoundedly bad angels they are too," muttered Charlie ruefully,
remembering the one that undid him.

His cousins never knew exactly what occurred on New Year's night, but
suspected that something was amiss, for Charlie had the blues, and Rose,
though as kind as ever, expressed no surprise at his long absences. They
had all observed and wondered at this state of things, yet discreetly
made no remark till Steve, who was as inquisitive as a magpie, seized
this opportunity to say in a friendly tone, which showed that he bore no
malice for the dark prophecy regarding his Kitty's faithfulness: "What's
the trouble, Prince? You are so seldom in a bad humor that we don't know
what to make of it and all feel out of spirits when you have the blues.
Had a tiff with Rose?"

"Never you mind, little boy, but this I will say the better women are,
the more unreasonable they are. They don't require us to be saints like
themselves, which is lucky, but they do expect us to render an 'honest
and a perfect man' sometimes, and that is asking rather too much in a
fallen world like this," said Charlie, glad to get a little sympathy,
though he had no intention of confessing his transgressions.

"No, it isn't," said Mac, decidedly.

"Much you know about it," began Charlie, ill pleased to be so flatly
contradicted.

"Well, I know this much," added Mac, suddenly sitting up with his hair
in a highly disheveled condition. "It is very unreasonable in us to ask
women to be saints and then expect them to feel honored when we offer
them our damaged hearts or, at best, one not half as good as theirs. If
they weren't blinded by love, they'd see what a mean advantage we take
of them and not make such bad bargains."

"Upon my word, the philosopher is coming out strong upon the subject!
We shall have him preaching 'Women's Rights' directly," said Steve, much
amazed at this outburst.

"I've begun, you see, and much good may it do you," answered Mac, laying
himself placidly down again.

"Well, but look here, man you are arguing on the wrong side," put in
Archie, quite agreeing with him, but feeling that he must stand by his
order at all costs.

"Never mind sides, uphold the right wherever you find it. You needn't
stare, Steve I told you I was going to look into this matter, and I am.
You think I'm wrapped up in books, but I see a great deal more of what
is going on around me than you imagine, and I'm getting on in this new
branch, let me tell you, quite as fast as is good for me, I daresay."

"Going in for perfection, are you?" asked Charlie, both amused and
interested, for he respected Mac more than he owned even to himself, and
though he had never alluded to the timely warning, neither forgot.

"Yes, I think of it."

"How will you begin?"

"Do my best all-round keep good company, read good books, love good
things, and cultivate soul and body as faithfully and wisely as I can."

"And you expect to succeed, do you?"

"Please God, I will."

The quiet energy of Mac's last words produced a momentary silence.
Charlie thoughtfully studied the carpet; Archie, who had been absently
poking the fire, looked over at Mac as if he thanked him again, and
Steve, forgetting his self-conceit, began to wonder if it was not
possible to improve himself a little for Kitty's sake. Only a minute,
for young men do not give much time to thoughts of this kind, even when
love stirs up the noblest impulses within them. To act rather than to
talk is more natural to most of them, as Charlie's next question showed,
for, having the matter much at heart, he ventured to ask in an offhand
way as he laughed and twirled his cue: "Do you intend to reach the
highest point of perfection before you address one of the fair saints,
or shall you ask her to lend a hand somewhere short of that?"

"As it takes a long lifetime to do what I plan, I think I shall ask some
good woman 'to lend a hand' when I've got anything worth offering her.
Not a saint, for I never shall be one myself, but a gentle creature who
will help me, as I shall try to help her, so that we can go on together
and finish our work hereafter, if we haven't time to do it here."

If Mac had been a lover, he would not have discussed the subject in
this simple and sincere fashion, though he might have felt it far more
deeply, but being quite heart-free, he frankly showed his interest and,
curiously enough, out of his wise young head unconsciously gave the
three lovers before him counsel which they valued, because he practiced
what he preached.

"Well, I hope you'll find her!" said Charlie heartily as he went back to
his game.

"I think I shall." And while the others played, Mac lay staring at the
window curtain as contentedly as if, through it, he beheld "a dream of
fair women" from which to choose his future mate.

A few days after this talk in the billiard room, Kitty went to call upon
Rose, for as she was about to enter the family she felt it her duty
to become acquainted with all its branches. This branch, however, she
cultivated more assiduously than any other and was continually running
in to confer with "Cousin Rose," whom she considered the wisest,
dearest, kindest girl ever created. And Rose, finding that, in spite
of her flighty head, Kitty had a good heart of her own, did her best to
encourage all the new hopes and aspirations springing up in it under the
warmth of the first genuine affection she had ever known.

"My dear, I want to have some serious conversation with you upon a
subject in which I take an interest for the first time in my life,"
began Miss Kitty, seating herself and pulling off her gloves as if the
subject was one which needed a firm grasp.

"Tell away, and don't mind if I go on working, as I want to finish this
job today," answered Rose, with a long-handled paintbrush in her hand
and a great pair of shears at her side.

"You are always so busy! What is it now? Let me help I can talk faster
when I'm doing something," which seemed hardly possible, for Kitty's
tongue went like a mill clapper at all hours.

"Making picture books for my sick babies at the hospital. Pretty work,
isn't it? You cut out, and I'll paste them on these squares of gay
cambric then we just tie up a few pages with a ribbon and there is a
nice, light, durable book for the poor dears to look at as they lie in
their little beds."

"A capital idea. Do you go there often? How ever do you find the time
for such things?" asked Kitty, busily cutting from a big sheet the
touching picture of a parent bird with a red head and a blue tail
offering what looked like a small boa constrictor to one of its
nestlings, a fat young squab with a green head, yellow body, and no tail
at all.

"I have plenty of time now I don't go out so much, for a party uses up
two days generally one to prepare for it and one to get over it, you
know."

"People think it is so odd of you to give up society all of a sudden.
They say you have 'turned pious' and it is owing to your peculiar
bringing-up. I always take your part and say it is a pity other girls
haven't as sensible an education, for I don't know one who is as
satisfactory on the whole as you are."

"Much obliged. You may also tell people I gave up gaiety because I value
health more. But I haven't forsworn everything of the kind, Kit. I go
to concerts and lectures, and all sorts of early things, and have nice
times at home, as you know. I like fun as well as ever, but I'm getting
on, you see, and must be preparing a little for the serious part of
life. One never knows when it may come," said Rose, thoughtfully as she
pasted a squirrel upside down on the pink cotton page before her.

"That reminds me of what I wanted to say. If you'll believe me, my
dear, Steve has got that very idea into his head! Did you or Mac put it
there?" asked Kitty, industriously clashing her shears.

"No, I've given up lecturing the boys lately they are so big now they
don't like it, and I fancy I'd got into a way that was rather tiresome."

"Well, then, he is 'turning pious' too. And what is very singular, I
like it. Now don't smile I really do and I want to be getting ready
for the 'serious part of life,' as you call it. That is, I want to grow
better as fast as I can, for Steve says he isn't half good enough for
me. Just think of that!"

Kitty looked so surprised and pleased and proud that Rose felt no
desire to laugh at her sudden fancy for sobriety but said in her most
sympathetic tone: "I'm very glad to hear it, for it shows that he loves
you in the right way."

"Is there more than one way?"

"Yes, I fancy so, because some people improve so much after they fall in
love, and others do not at all. Have you never observed that?"

"I never learned how to observe. Of course I know that some matches turn
out well and some don't, but I never thought much about it."

"Well, I have, for I was rather interested in the subject lately and had
a talk with Aunt Jessie and Uncle about it."

"Gracious! You don't talk to them about such things, do you?"

"Yes, indeed. I ask any questions I like, and always get a good answer.
It is such a nice way to learn, Kitty, for you don't have to pore over
books, but as things come along you talk about them and remember, and
