But the woman only shook her head. 'No, I know nothing of her,' said
she.

The young man turned to leave the hut, but the old woman stopped him,
and, giving him a letter, begged him to carry it to her next eldest
sister, saying: 'If you should get tired on the way, take out the letter
and rustle the paper.'

This advice surprised the young man a good deal, as he did not see how
it could help him; but he did not answer, and went down the road without
knowing where he was going. At length he grew so tired he could walk
no more; then he remembered what the old woman had said. After he had
rustled the leaves only once all fatigue disappeared, and he strode over
the grass till he came to another little turf hut.

'Let me in, I pray you, dear mother,' cried he. And the door opened in
front of him. 'Your sister has sent you this letter,' he said, and added
quickly: 'O mother! can you tell me anything of the Sister of the Sun?'

'No, I know nothing of her,' answered she. But as he turned hopelessly
away, she stopped him.

'If you happen to pass my eldest sister's house, will you give her this
letter?' said she. 'And if you should get tired on the road, just take
it out of your pocket and rustle the paper.'

So the young man put the letter in his pocket, and walked all day over
the hills till he reached a little turf hut, exactly like the other two.

'Let me in, I pray you, dear mother,' cried he. And as he entered he
added: 'Here is a letter from your sister and--can you tell me anything
of the Sister of the Sun?'

'Yes, I can,' answered the old woman. 'She lives in the castle on the
Banka. Her father lost a battle only a few days ago because you had
stolen his sword from him, and the Sister of the Sun herself is almost
dead of grief. But, when you see her, stick a pin into the palm of her
hand, and suck the drops of blood that flow. Then she will grow calmer,
and will know you again. Only, beware; for before you reach the castle
on the Banka fearful things will happen.'

He thanked the old woman with tears of gladness for the good news she
had given him, and continued his journey. But he had not gone very
far when, at a turn of the road, he met with two brothers, who were
quarrelling over a piece of cloth.

'My good men, what are you fighting about?' said he. 'That cloth does
not look worth much!'

'Oh, it is ragged enough,' answered they, 'but it was left us by our
father, and if any man wraps it round him no one can see him; and we
each want it for our own.'

'Let me put it round me for a moment,' said the youth, 'and then I will
tell you whose it ought to be!'

The brothers were pleased with this idea, and gave him the stuff;
but the moment he had thrown it over his shoulder he disappeared as
completely as if he had never been there at all.

Meanwhile the young man walked briskly along, till he came up with two
other men, who were disputing over a table-cloth.

'What is the matter?' asked he, stopping in front of them.

'If this cloth is spread on a table,' answered they, 'the table is
instantly covered with the most delicious food; and we each want to have
it.'

'Let me try the table-cloth,' said the youth, 'and I will tell you whose
it ought to be.'

The two men were quite pleased with this idea, and handed him the cloth.
He then hastily threw the first piece of stuff round his shoulders and
vanished from sight, leaving the two men grieving over their own folly.

The young man had not walked far before he saw two more men standing
by the road-side, both grasping the same stout staff, and sometimes one
seemed on the point of getting it, and sometimes the other.

'What are you quarrelling about? You could cut a dozen sticks from the
wood each just as good as that!' said the young man. And as he spoke the
fighters both stopped and looked at him.

'Ah! you may think so,' said one, 'but a blow from one end of this stick
will kill a man, while a touch from the other end will bring him back to
life. You won't easily find another stick like that!'

'No; that is true,' answered the young man. 'Let me just look at it, and
I will tell you whose it ought to be.'

The men were pleased with the idea, and handed him the staff.

'It is very curious, certainly,' said he; 'but which end is it that
restores people to life? After all, anyone can be killed by a blow from
a stick if it is only hard enough!' But when he was shown the end he
threw the stuff over his shoulders and vanished.

At last he saw another set of men, who were struggling for the
possession of a pair of shoes.

'Why can't you leave that pair of old shoes alone?' said he. 'Why, you
could not walk a yard in them!'

'Yes, they are old enough,' answered they; 'but whoever puts them on and
wishes himself at a particular place, gets there without going.'

'That sounds very clever,' said the youth. 'Let me try them, and then I
shall be able to tell you whose they ought to be.'

The idea pleased the men, and they handed him the shoes; but the moment
they were on his feet he cried:

'I wish to be in the castle on the Banka!' And before he knew it, he was
there, and found the Sister of the Sun dying of grief. He knelt down by
her side, and pulling a pin he stuck it into the palm of her hand, so
that a drop of blood gushed out. This he sucked, as he had been told to
do by the old woman, and immediately the princess came to herself, and
flung her arms round his neck. Then she told him all her story, and what
had happened since the ship had sailed away without him. 'But the
worst misfortune of all,' she added, 'was a battle which my father lost
because you had vanished with his magic sword; and out of his whole army
hardly one man was left.'

'Show me the battle-field,' said he. And she took him to a wild heath,
where the dead were lying as they fell, waiting for burial. One by one
he touched them with the end of his staff, till at length they all stood
before him. Throughout the kingdom there was nothing but joy; and
THIS time the wedding was REALLY celebrated. And the bridal pair lived
happily in the castle on the Banka till they died.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]




The Prince and the Three Fates



Once upon a time a little boy was born to a king who ruled over a great
country through which ran a wide river. The king was nearly beside
himself with joy, for he had always longed for a son to inherit his
crown, and he sent messages to beg all the most powerful fairies to come
and see this wonderful baby. In an hour or two, so many were gathered
round the cradle, that the child seemed in danger of being smothered;
but the king, who was watching the fairies eagerly, was disturbed to see
them looking grave. 'Is there anything the matter?' he asked anxiously.

The fairies looked at him, and all shook their heads at once.

'He is a beautiful boy, and it is a great pity; but what IS to happen
WILL happen,' said they. 'It is written in the books of fate that he
must die, either by a crocodile, or a serpent, or by a dog. If we could
save him we would; but that is beyond our power.'

And so saying they vanished.

For a time the king stood where he was, horror-stricken at what he had
heard; but, being of a hopeful nature, he began at once to invent plans
to save the prince from the dreadful doom that awaited him. He instantly
sent for his master builder, and bade him construct a strong castle on
the top of a mountain, which should be fitted with the most precious
things from the king's own palace, and every kind of toy a child could
wish to play with. And, besides, he gave the strictest orders that a
guard should walk round the castle night and day.

For four or five years the baby lived in the castle alone with his
nurses, taking his airings on the broad terraces, which were surrounded
by walls, with a moat beneath them, and only a drawbridge to connect
them with the outer world.

One day, when the prince was old enough to run quite fast by himself,
he looked from the terrace across the moat, and saw a little soft fluffy
ball of a dog jumping and playing on the other side. Now, of course, all
dogs had been kept from him for fear that the fairies' prophecy should
come true, and he had never even beheld one before. So he turned to the
page who was walking behind him, and said:

'What is that funny little thing which is running so fast over there?'

'That is a dog, prince,' answered the page.

'Well, bring me one like it, and we will see which can run the faster.'
And he watched the dog till it had disappeared round the corner.

The page was much puzzled to know what to do. He had strict orders to
refuse the prince nothing; yet he remembered the prophecy, and felt that
this was a serious matter. At last he thought he had better tell the
king the whole story, and let him decide the question.

'Oh, get him a dog if he wants one,' said the king, 'he will only cry
his heart out if he does not have it.' So a puppy was found, exactly
like the other; they might have been twins, and perhaps they were.

Years went by, and the boy and the dog played together till the boy grew
tall and strong. The time came at last when he sent a message to his
father, saying:

'Why do you keep me shut up here, doing nothing? I know all about the
prophecy that was made at my birth, but I would far rather be killed at
once than live an idle, useless life here. So give me arms, and let me
go, I pray you; me and my dog too.'

And again the king listened to his wishes, and he and his dog were
carried in a ship to the other side of the river, which was so broad
here it might almost have been the sea. A black horse was waiting for
him, tied to a tree, and he mounted and rode away wherever his fancy
took him, the dog always at his heels. Never was any prince so happy as
he, and he rode and rode till at length he came to a king's palace.

The king who lived in it did not care about looking after his country,
and seeing that his people lived cheerful and contented lives. He spent
his whole time in making riddles, and inventing plans which he had much
better have let alone. At the period when the young prince reached the
kingdom he had just completed a wonderful house for his only child, a
daughter. It had seventy windows, each seventy feet from the ground,
and he had sent the royal herald round the borders of the neighbouring
kingdoms to proclaim that whoever could climb up the walls to the window
of the princess should win her for his wife.

The fame of the princess's beauty had spread far and wide, and there
was no lack of princes who wished to try their fortune. Very funny the
palace must have looked each morning, with the dabs of different colour
on the white marble as the princes were climbing up the walls. But
though some managed to get further than others, nobody was anywhere near
the top.

They had already been spending several days in this manner when the
young prince arrived, and as he was pleasant to look upon, and civil to
talk to, they welcomed him to the house, which had been given to them,
and saw that his bath was properly perfumed after his long journey.
'Where do you come from?' they said at last. 'And whose son are you?'

But the young prince had reasons for keeping his own secret, and he
answered:

'My father was master of the horse to the king of my country, and after
my mother died he married another wife. At first all went well, but as
soon as she had babies of her own she hated me, and I fled, lest she
should do me harm.'

The hearts of the other young men were touched as soon as they heard
this story, and they did everything they could think of to make him
forget his past sorrows.

'What are you doing here?' said the youth, one day.

'We spend our whole time climbing up the walls of the palace, trying
to reach the windows of the princess,' answered the young men; 'but, as
yet, no one has reached within ten feet of them.'

'Oh, let me try too,' cried the prince; 'but to-morrow I will wait and
see what you do before I begin.

So the next day he stood where he could watch the young men go up, and
he noted the places on the wall that seemed most difficult, and made up
his mind that when his turn came he would go up some other way.

Day after day he was to be seen watching the wooers, till, one morning,
he felt that he knew the plan of the walls by heart, and took his
place by the side of the others. Thanks to what he had learned from the
failure of the rest, he managed to grasp one little rough projection
after another, till at last, to the envy of his friends, he stood on the
sill of the princess's window. Looking up from below, they saw a white
hand stretched forth to draw him in.

Then one of the young men ran straight to the king's palace, and said:
'The wall has been climbed, and the prize is won!'

'By whom?' cried the king, starting up from his throne; 'which of the
princes may I claim as my son-in-law?'

'The youth who succeeded in climbing to the princess's window is not a
prince at all,' answered the young man. 'He is the son of the master
of the horse to the great king who dwells across the river, and he fled
from his own country to escape from the hatred of his stepmother.'

At this news the king was very angry, for it had never entered his head
that anyone BUT a prince would seek to woo his daughter.

'Let him go back to the land whence he came,' he shouted in wrath; 'does
he expect me to give my daughter to an exile?' And he began to smash the
drinking vessels in his fury; indeed, he quite frightened the young man,
who ran hastily home to his friends, and told the youth what the king
had said.

Now the princess, who was leaning from her window, heard his words and
bade the messenger go back to the king her father and tell him that she
had sworn a vow never to eat or drink again if the youth was taken from
her. The king was more angry than ever when he received this message,
and ordered his guards to go at once to the palace and put the
successful wooer to death; but the princess threw herself between him
and his murderers.

'Lay a finger on him, and I shall be dead before sunset,' said she; and
as they saw that she meant it, they left the palace, and carried the
tale to her father.

By this time the king's anger was dying away, and he began to consider
what his people would think of him if he broke the promise he had
publicly given. So he ordered the princess to be brought before him,
and the young man also, and when they entered the throne room he was
so pleased with the noble air of the victor that his wrath quite melted
away, and he ran to him and embraced him.

'Tell me who you are?' he asked, when he had recovered himself a little,
'for I will never believe that you have not royal blood in your veins.'

But the prince still had his reasons for being silent, and only told the
same story. However, the king had taken such a fancy to the youth that
he said no more, and the marriage took place the following day, and
great herds of cattle and a large estate were given to the young couple.

After a little while the prince said to his wife: 'My life is in the
hands of three creatures--a crocodile, a serpent, and a dog.'

'Ah, how rash you are!' cried the princess, throwing her arms round his
neck. 'If you know that, how can you have that horrid beast about you? I
will give orders to have him killed at once.'

But the prince would not listen to her.

'Kill my dear little dog, who had been my playfellow since he was a
puppy?' exclaimed he. 'Oh, never would I allow that.' And all that the
princess could get from him was that he would always wear a sword, and
have somebody with him when he left the palace.

When the prince and princess had been married a few months, the prince
heard that his stepmother was dead, and his father was old and ill, and
longing to have his eldest son by his side again. The young man could
not remain deaf to such a message, and he took a tender farewell of his
wife, and set out on his journey home. It was a long way, and he was
forced to rest often on the road, and so it happened that, one night,
when he was sleeping in a city on the banks of the great river, a huge
crocodile came silently up and made its way along a passage to the
prince's room. Fortunately one of his guards woke up as it was trying
to steal past them, and shut the crocodile up in a large hall, where a
giant watched over it, never leaving the spot except during the night,
when the crocodile slept. And this went on for more than a month.

Now, when the prince found that he was not likely to leave his father's
kingdom again, he sent for his wife, and bade the messenger tell her
that he would await her coming in the town on the banks of the great
river. This was the reason why he delayed his journey so long, and
