be associated in business than with you. How much capital could you
contribute?"

"I will think it over, Mr. Wheeler. By the way what business do you
propose that we shall go into?"

"I will think it over and report to you."

By this time they had reached the theater. The play soon commenced. Mr.
Pettigrew enjoyed it highly, for he had not had much opportunity at the
West of attending a high class theatrical performance.

When the play ended, Louis Wheeler said, "Suppose we go to Delmonico's
and have a little refreshment."

"Very well."

They adjourned to the well known restaurant, and Mr. Pettigrew ordered
an ice and some cakes, but his companion made a hearty supper. When the
bill came, Louis Wheeler let it lie on the table, but Mr. Pettigrew did
not appear to see it.

"I wonder if he expects me to pay for it," Wheeler asked himself
anxiously.

"Thank you for this pleasant little supper," said Pettigrew
mischievously. "Delmonico's is certainly a fine place."

Wheeler changed color. He glanced at the check. It was for two dollars
and seventy five cents, and this represented a larger sum than he
possessed.

He took the check and led the way to the cashier's desk. Then he
examined his pockets.

"By Jove," he said, "I left my wallet in my other coat. May I borrow
five dollars till tomorrow?"

Jefferson Pettigrew eyed him shrewdly. "Never mind," he said, "I will
pay the check."

"I am very much ashamed of having put you to this expense."

"If that is all you have to be ashamed of Mr. Wheeler," said the miner
pointedly, "you can rest easy."

"What do you mean?" stammered Wheeler.

"Wait till we get into the street, and I will tell you."

They went out at the Broadway entrance, and then Mr. Pettigrew turned to
his new acquaintance.

"I think I will bid you good night and good by at the same time, Mr.
Wheeler," he said.

"My dear sir, I hoped you won't misjudge me on account of my
unfortunately leaving my money at home."

"I only wish to tell you that I have not been taken in by your plausible
statement, Mr. Wheeler, if that is really your name. Before we started
for the theater I had gauged you and taken your measure."

"Sir, I hope you don't mean to insult me!" blustered Wheeler.

"Not at all. You have been mistaken in me, but I am not mistaken in you.
I judge you to be a gentlemanly adventurer, ready to take advantage of
any who have money and are foolish enough to be gulled by your tricks.
You are welcome to the profit you made out of the theater tickets, also
to the little supper to which you have done so much justice. I must
request you, now, however, to devote yourself to some one else, as I do
not care to meet you again."

Louis Wheeler slunk away, deciding that he had made a great mistake in
setting down his Montana acquaintance as an easy victim.

"I didn't think he'd get on to my little game so quick," he reflected.
"He's sharper than he looks."

Rodney took breakfast with Mr. Pettigrew the next morning. When
breakfast was over, the Montana man said:

"I'm going to make a proposal to you, Rodney. How much pay did you get
at your last place?"

"Seven dollars a week."

"I'll pay you that and give you your meals. In return I want you to keep
me company and go about with me."

"I shall not be apt to refuse such an offer as that, Mr. Pettigrew, but
are you sure you prefer me to Mr. Wheeler?" laughed Rodney.

"Wheeler be--blessed!" returned the miner.

"How long are you going to stay in New York?"

"About two weeks. Then I shall go back to Montana and take you with me."

"Thank you. There is nothing I should like better."

Two days later, as the two were walking along Broadway, they met Mr.
Wheeler. The latter instantly recognized his friend from Montana, and
scrutinized closely his young companion.

Rodney's face looked strangely familiar to him, but somehow he could not
recollect when or under what circumstances he had met him. He did not,
however, like to give up his intended victim, but had the effrontery to
address the man from Montana.

"I hope you are well, Mr. Pettigrew."

"Thank you, I am very well."

"I hope you are enjoying yourself. I should be glad to show you the
sights. Have you been to Grants Tomb?"

"Not yet."

"I should like to take you there."

"Thank you, but I have a competent guide."

"Won't you introduce me to the young gentleman?"

"I don't require any introduction to you, Mr. Wheeler," said Rodney.

"Where have I met you before?" asked Wheeler abruptly.

"In the cars. I had a box of jewelry with me," answered Rodney
significantly.

Louis Wheeler changed color. Now he remembered Rodney, and he was
satisfied that he owed to him the coolness with which the Western man
had treated him.

"I remember you had," he said spitefully, "but I don't know how you came
by it."

"It isn't necessary that you should know. I remember I had considerable
difficulty in getting it out of your hands."

"Mr. Pettigrew," said Wheeler angrily, "I feel interested in you, and
I want to warn you against the boy who is with you. He is a dangerous
companion."

"I dare say you are right," said Pettigrew in a quizzical tone. "I shall
look after him sharply, and I thank you for your kind and considerate
warning. I don't care to take up any more of your valuable time. Rodney,
let us be going."

"It must have been the kid that exposed me," muttered Wheeler, as he
watched the two go down the street. "I will get even with him some time.
That man would have been good for a thousand dollars to me if I had not
been interfered with."

"You have been warned against me, Mr. Pettigrew," said Rodney, laughing.
"Mr. Wheeler has really been very unkind in interfering with my plans."

"I shan't borrow any trouble, or lie awake nights thinking about it,
Rodney. I don't care to see or think of that rascal again."

The week passed, and the arrangement between Mr. Pettigrew and Rodney
continued to their mutual satisfaction. One morning, when Rodney came to
the Continental as usual, his new friend said: "I received a letter last
evening from my old home in Vermont."

"I hope it contained good news."

"On the contrary it contained bad news. My parents are dead, but I have
an old uncle and aunt living. When I left Burton he was comfortably
fixed, with a small farm of his own, and two thousand dollars in bank.
Now I hear that he is in trouble. He has lost money, and a knavish
neighbor has threatened to foreclose a mortgage on the farm and turn out
the old people to die or go to the poorhouse."

"Is the mortgage a large one?"

"It is much less than the value of the farm, but ready money is scarce
in the town, and that old Sheldon calculates upon. Now I think of going
to Burton to look up the matter."

"You must save your uncle, if you can, Mr. Pettigrew."

"I can and I will. I shall start for Boston this afternoon by the Fall
River boat and I want you to go with me."

"I should enjoy the journey, Mr. Pettigrew."

"Then it is settled. Go home and pack your gripsack. You may be gone
three or four days."



CHAPTER XXIV.


A CHANGE OF SCENE.


"Now," said Mr. Pettigrew, when they were sitting side by side on the
upper deck of the Puritan, the magnificent steamer on the Fall River
line. "I want you to consent to a little plan that will mystify my old
friends and neighbors."

"What is it, Mr. Pettigrew?"

"I have never written home about my good fortune; so far as they know I
am no better off than when I went away."

"I don't think I could have concealed my success."

"It may seem strange, but I'll explain--I want to learn who are my
friends and who are not. I am afraid I wasn't very highly thought of
when I left Burton. I was considered rather shiftless.

"I was always in for a good time, and never saved a cent. Everybody
predicted that I would fail, and I expect most wanted me to fail. There
were two or three, including my uncle, aunt and the friend who lent me
money, who wished me well.

"I mustn't forget to mention the old minister who baptized me when I was
an infant. The good old man has been preaching thirty or forty years
on a salary of four hundred dollars, and has had to run a small farm to
make both ends meet. He believed in me and gave me good advice. Outside
of these I don't remember any one who felt an interest in Jefferson
Pettigrew."

"You will have the satisfaction of letting them see that they did not do
you justice."

"Yes, but I may not tell them--that is none except my true friends. If
I did, they would hover round me and want to borrow money, or get me to
take them out West with me. So I have hit upon a plan. I shall want to
use money, but I will pretend it is yours."

Rodney opened his eyes in surprise.

"I will pass you off as a rich friend from New York, who feels an
interest in me and is willing to help me."

Rodney smiled.

"I don't know if I can look the character," he said.

"Oh yes you can. You are nicely dressed, while I am hardly any better
dressed than when I left Burton."

"I have wondered why you didn't buy some new clothes when you were able
to afford it."

"You see we Western miners don't care much for style, perhaps not
enough. Still I probably shall buy a suit or two, but not till I have
made my visit home. I want to see how people will receive me, when they
think I haven't got much money. I shall own up to about five hundred
dollars, but that isn't enough to dazzle people even in a small country
village."

"I am wiling to help you in any way you wish, Mr. Pettigrew."

"Then I think we shall get some amusement out of it. I shall represent
you as worth about a hundred thousand dollars."

"I wish I were."

"Very likely you will be some time if you go out to Montana with me."

"How large a place is Burton?"

"It has not quite a thousand inhabitants. It is set among the hills,
and has but one rich man, Lemuel Sheldon, who is worth perhaps fifty
thousand dollars, but put on the airs of a millionaire."

"You are as rich as he, then."

"Yes, and shall soon be richer. However, I don't want him to know it. It
is he who holds the mortgage on my uncle's farm."

"Do you know how large the mortgage is?"

"It is twelve hundred dollars. I shall borrow the money of you to pay
it."

"I understand," said Rodney, smiling.

"I shall enjoy the way the old man will look down upon me very much as a
millionaire looks down upon a town pauper."

"How will he look upon me?"

"He will be very polite to you, for he will think you richer than
himself."

"On the whole, we are going to act a comedy, Mr. Pettigrew. What is the
name of the man who lent you money to go to Montana?"

"A young carpenter, Frank Dobson. He lent me a hundred dollars, which
was about all the money he had saved up."

"He was a true friend."

"You are right. He was. Everybody told Frank that he would never see his
money again, but he did. As soon as I could get together enough to
repay him I sent it on, though I remember it left me with less than ten
dollars in my pocket.

"I couldn't bear to think that Frank would lose anything by me. You see
we were chums at school and always stood by each other. He is married
and has two children."

"While you are an old bachelor."

"Yes; I ain't in a hurry to travel in double harness. I'll wait till
I am ready to leave Montana, with money enough to live handsomely at
home."

"You have got enough now."

"But I may as well get more. I am only thirty years old, and I can
afford to work a few years longer."

"I wish I could be sure of being worth fifty thousand dollars when I am
your age."

"You have been worth that, you tell me."
