Anne rose betimes the next morning and blithely greeted the fresh day,
when the banners of the sunrise were shaken triumphantly across the
pearly skies. Green Gables lay in a pool of sunshine, flecked with the
dancing shadows of poplar and willow. Beyond the land was Mr. Harrison's
wheatfield, a great, windrippled expanse of pale gold. The world was
so beautiful that Anne spent ten blissful minutes hanging idly over the
garden gate drinking the loveliness in.

After breakfast Marilla made ready for her journey. Dora was to go with
her, having been long promised this treat.

"Now, Davy, you try to be a good boy and don't bother Anne," she
straitly charged him. "If you are good I'll bring you a striped candy
cane from town."

For alas, Marilla had stooped to the evil habit of bribing people to be
good!

"I won't be bad on purpose, but s'posen I'm bad zacksidentally?" Davy
wanted to know.

"You'll have to guard against accidents," admonished Marilla. "Anne, if
Mr. Shearer comes today get a nice roast and some steak. If he doesn't
you'll have to kill a fowl for dinner tomorrow."

Anne nodded.

"I'm not going to bother cooking any dinner for just Davy and myself
today," she said. "That cold ham bone will do for noon lunch and I'll
have some steak fried for you when you come home at night."

"I'm going to help Mr. Harrison haul dulse this morning," announced
Davy. "He asked me to, and I guess he'll ask me to dinner too. Mr.
Harrison is an awful kind man. He's a real sociable man. I hope I'll be
like him when I grow up. I mean BEHAVE like him . . . I don't want to LOOK
like him. But I guess there's no danger, for Mrs. Lynde says I'm a very
handsome child. Do you s'pose it'll last, Anne? I want to know?"

"I daresay it will," said Anne gravely. "You ARE a handsome boy, Davy,"
 . . . Marilla looked volumes of disapproval . . . "but you must live up to
it and be just as nice and gentlemanly as you look to be."

"And you told Minnie May Barry the other day, when you found her crying
'cause some one said she was ugly, that if she was nice and kind and
loving people wouldn't mind her looks," said Davy discontentedly. "Seems
to me you can't get out of being good in this world for some reason or
'nother. You just HAVE to behave."

"Don't you want to be good?" asked Marilla, who had learned a great deal
but had not yet learned the futility of asking such questions.

"Yes, I want to be good but not TOO good," said Davy cautiously. "You
don't have to be very good to be a Sunday School superintendent. Mr.
Bell's that, and he's a real bad man."

"Indeed he's not," said Marila indignantly.

"He is . . . he says he is himself," asseverated Davy. "He said it when
he prayed in Sunday School last Sunday. He said he was a vile worm and
a miserable sinner and guilty of the blackest 'niquity. What did he do
that was so bad, Marilla? Did he kill anybody? Or steal the collection
cents? I want to know."

Fortunately Mrs. Lynde came driving up the lane at this moment and
Marilla made off, feeling that she had escaped from the snare of the
fowler, and wishing devoutly that Mr. Bell were not quite so highly
figurative in his public petitions, especially in the hearing of small
boys who were always "wanting to know."

Anne, left alone in her glory, worked with a will. The floor was swept,
the beds made, the hens fed, the muslin dress washed and hung out on the
line. Then Anne prepared for the transfer of feathers. She mounted to
the garret and donned the first old dress that came to hand . . . a navy
blue cashmere she had worn at fourteen. It was decidedly on the short
side and as "skimpy" as the notable wincey Anne had worn upon the
occasion of her debut at Green Gables; but at least it would not be
materially injured by down and feathers. Anne completed her toilet by
tying a big red and white spotted handkerchief that had belonged to
Matthew over her head, and, thus accoutred, betook herself to the
kitchen chamber, whither Marilla, before her departure, had helped her
carry the feather bed.

A cracked mirror hung by the chamber window and in an unlucky moment
Anne looked into it. There were those seven freckles on her nose,
more rampant than ever, or so it seemed in the glare of light from the
unshaded window.

"Oh, I forgot to rub that lotion on last night," she thought. "I'd
better run down to the pantry and do it now."

Anne had already suffered many things trying to remove those freckles.
On one occasion the entire skin had peeled off her nose but the freckles
remained. A few days previously she had found a recipe for a freckle
lotion in a magazine and, as the ingredients were within her reach, she
straightway compounded it, much to the disgust of Marilla, who thought
that if Providence had placed freckles on your nose it was your bounden
duty to leave them there.

Anne scurried down to the pantry, which, always dim from the big willow
growing close to the window, was now almost dark by reason of the shade
drawn to exclude flies. Anne caught the bottle containing the lotion
from the shelf and copiously anointed her nose therewith by means of
a little sponge sacred to the purpose. This important duty done, she
returned to her work. Any one who has ever shifted feathers from one
tick to another will not need to be told that when Anne finished she
was a sight to behold. Her dress was white with down and fluff, and her
front hair, escaping from under the handkerchief, was adorned with a
veritable halo of feathers. At this auspicious moment a knock sounded at
the kitchen door.

"That must be Mr. Shearer," thought Anne. "I'm in a dreadful mess but
I'll have to run down as I am, for he's always in a hurry."

Down flew Anne to the kitchen door. If ever a charitable floor did open
to swallow up a miserable, befeathered damsel the Green Gables porch
floor should promptly have engulfed Anne at that moment. On the doorstep
were standing Priscilla Grant, golden and fair in silk attire, a short,
stout gray-haired lady in a tweed suit, and another lady, tall
stately, wonderfully gowned, with a beautiful, highbred face and large,
black-lashed violet eyes, whom Anne "instinctively felt," as she would
have said in her earlier days, to be Mrs. Charlotte E. Morgan.

In the dismay of the moment one thought stood out from the confusion of
Anne's mind and she grasped at it as at the proverbial straw. All Mrs.
Morgan's heroines were noted for "rising to the occasion." No matter
what their troubles were, they invariably rose to the occasion and
showed their superiority over all ills of time, space, and quantity.
Anne therefore felt it was HER duty to rise to the occasion and she did
it, so perfectly that Priscilla afterward declared she never admired
Anne Shirley more than at that moment. No matter what her outraged
feelings were she did not show them. She greeted Priscilla and was
introduced to her companions as calmly and composedly as if she had been
arrayed in purple and fine linen. To be sure, it was somewhat of a shock
to find that the lady she had instinctively felt to be Mrs. Morgan was
not Mrs. Morgan at all, but an unknown Mrs. Pendexter, while the stout
little gray-haired woman was Mrs. Morgan; but in the greater shock the
lesser lost its power. Anne ushered her guests to the spare room and
thence into the parlor, where she left them while she hastened out to
help Priscilla unharness her horse.

"It's dreadful to come upon you so unexpectedly as this," apologized
Priscilla, "but I did not know till last night that we were coming. Aunt
Charlotte is going away Monday and she had promised to spend today with
a friend in town. But last night her friend telephoned to her not to
come because they were quarantined for scarlet fever. So I suggested we
come here instead, for I knew you were longing to see her. We called
at the White Sands Hotel and brought Mrs. Pendexter with us. She is a
friend of aunt's and lives in New York and her husband is a millionaire.
We can't stay very long, for Mrs. Pendexter has to be back at the hotel
by five o'clock."

Several times while they were putting away the horse Anne caught
Priscilla looking at her in a furtive, puzzled way.

"She needn't stare at me so," Anne thought a little resentfully. "If she
doesn't KNOW what it is to change a feather bed she might IMAGINE it."

When Priscilla had gone to the parlor, and before Anne could escape
upstairs, Diana walked into the kitchen. Anne caught her astonished
friend by the arm.

"Diana Barry, who do you suppose is in that parlor at this very moment?
Mrs. Charlotte E. Morgan . . . and a New York millionaire's wife . . . and
here I am like THIS . . . and NOT A THING IN THE HOUSE FOR DINNER BUT A
COLD HAM BONE, Diana!"

By this time Anne had become aware that Diana was staring at her in
precisely the same bewildered fashion as Priscilla had done. It was
really too much.

"Oh, Diana, don't look at me so," she implored. "YOU, at least, must
know that the neatest person in the world couldn't empty feathers from
one tick into another and remain neat in the process."

"It . . . it . . . isn't the feathers," hesitated Diana. "It's . . .
it's . . . your nose, Anne."

"My nose? Oh, Diana, surely nothing has gone wrong with it!"

Anne rushed to the little looking glass over the sink. One glance
revealed the fatal truth. Her nose was a brilliant scarlet!

Anne sat down on the sofa, her dauntless spirit subdued at last.

"What is the matter with it?" asked Diana, curiosity overcoming
delicacy.

"I thought I was rubbing my freckle lotion on it, but I must have used
that red dye Marilla has for marking the pattern on her rugs," was the
despairing response. "What shall I do?"

"Wash it off," said Diana practically.

"Perhaps it won't wash off. First I dye my hair; then I dye my nose.
Marilla cut my hair off when I dyed it but that remedy would hardly be
practicable in this case. Well, this is another punishment for vanity
and I suppose I deserve it . . . though there's not much comfort in THAT.
It is really almost enough to make one believe in ill-luck, though Mrs.
Lynde says there is no such thing, because everything is foreordained."

Fortunately the dye washed off easily and Anne, somewhat consoled,
betook herself to the east gable while Diana ran home. Presently Anne
came down again, clothed and in her right mind. The muslin dress she had
fondly hoped to wear was bobbing merrily about on the line outside, so
she was forced to content herself with her black lawn. She had the fire
on and the tea steeping when Diana returned; the latter wore HER muslin,
at least, and carried a covered platter in her hand.

"Mother sent you this," she said, lifting the cover and displaying a
nicely carved and jointed chicken to Anne's greatful eyes.

The chicken was supplemented by light new bread, excellent butter and
cheese, Marilla's fruit cake and a dish of preserved plums, floating
in their golden syrup as in congealed summer sunshine. There was a big
bowlful of pink-and-white asters also, by way of decoration; yet the
spread seemed very meager beside the elaborate one formerly prepared for
Mrs. Morgan.

Anne's hungry guests, however, did not seem to think anything was
lacking and they ate the simple viands with apparent enjoyment. But
after the first few moments Anne thought no more of what was or was
not on her bill of fare. Mrs. Morgan's appearance might be somewhat
disappointing, as even her loyal worshippers had been forced to admit to
each other; but she proved to be a delightful conversationalist. She had
traveled extensively and was an excellent storyteller. She had seen
much of men and women, and crystalized her experiences into witty little
sentences and epigrams which made her hearers feel as if they were
listening to one of the people in clever books. But under all her
sparkle there was a strongly felt undercurrent of true, womanly sympathy
and kindheartedness which won affection as easily as her brilliancy
won admiration. Nor did she monopolize the conversation. She could draw
others out as skillfully and fully as she could talk herself, and Anne
and Diana found themselves chattering freely to her. Mrs. Pendexter said
little; she merely smiled with her lovely eyes and lips, and ate chicken
and fruit cake and preserves with such exquisite grace that she conveyed
the impression of dining on ambrosia and honeydew. But then, as Anne
said to Diana later on, anybody so divinely beautiful as Mrs. Pendexter
didn't need to talk; it was enough for her just to LOOK.

After dinner they all had a walk through Lover's Lane and Violet Vale
and the Birch Path, then back through the Haunted Wood to the Dryad's
Bubble, where they sat down and talked for a delightful last half hour.
Mrs. Morgan wanted to know how the Haunted Wood came by its name, and
laughed until she cried when she heard the story and Anne's dramatic
account of a certain memorable walk through it at the witching hour of
twilight.

"It has indeed been a feast of reason and flow of soul, hasn't it?" said
Anne, when her guests had gone and she and Diana were alone again. "I
don't know which I enjoyed more . . . listening to Mrs. Morgan or gazing
at Mrs. Pendexter. I believe we had a nicer time than if we'd known they
were coming and been cumbered with much serving. You must stay to tea
with me, Diana, and we'll talk it all over."

"Priscilla says Mrs. Pendexter's husband's sister is married to an
English earl; and yet she took a second helping of the plum preserves,"
said Diana, as if the two facts were somehow incompatible.

"I daresay even the English earl himself wouldn't have turned up his
aristocratic nose at Marilla's plum preserves," said Anne proudly.

Anne did not mention the misfortune which had befallen HER nose when
she related the day's history to Marilla that evening. But she took the
bottle of freckle lotion and emptied it out of the window.

"I shall never try any beautifying messes again," she said, darkly
resolute. "They may do for careful, deliberate people; but for anyone so
hopelessly given over to making mistakes as I seem to be it's tempting
fate to meddle with them."




XXI

Sweet Miss Lavendar


School opened and Anne returned to her work, with fewer theories but
considerably more experience. She had several new pupils, six- and
seven-year-olds just venturing, round-eyed, into a world of wonder.
Among them were Davy and Dora. Davy sat with Milty Boulter, who had been
going to school for a year and was therefore quite a man of the world.
Dora had made a compact at Sunday School the previous Sunday to sit
with Lily Sloane; but Lily Sloane not coming the first day, she was
temporarily assigned to Mirabel Cotton, who was ten years old and
therefore, in Dora's eyes, one of the "big girls."

"I think school is great fun," Davy told Marilla when he got home that
night. "You said I'd find it hard to sit still and I did . . .  you mostly
do tell the truth, I notice . . . but you can wriggle your legs about
under the desk and that helps a lot. It's splendid to have so many boys
to play with. I sit with Milty Boulter and he's fine. He's longer than
me but I'm wider. It's nicer to sit in the back seats but you can't sit
there till your legs grow long enough to touch the floor. Milty drawed a
picture of Anne on his slate and it was awful ugly and I told him if he
made pictures of Anne like that I'd lick him at recess. I thought first
I'd draw one of him and put horns and a tail on it, but I was afraid it
would hurt his feelings, and Anne says you should never hurt anyone's
feelings. It seems it's dreadful to have your feelings hurt. It's better
to knock a boy down than hurt his feelings if you MUST do something.
Milty said he wasn't scared of me but he'd just as soon call it somebody
else to 'blige me, so he rubbed out Anne's name and printed Barbara
Shaw's under it. Milty doesn't like Barbara 'cause she calls him a sweet
little boy and once she patted him on his head."

Dora said primly that she liked school; but she was very quiet, even
for her; and when at twilight Marilla bade her go upstairs to bed she
hesitated and began to cry.

"I'm . . . I'm frightened," she sobbed. "I . . . I don't want to go
upstairs alone in the dark."

"What notion have you got into your head now?" demanded Marilla. "I'm
sure you've gone to bed alone all summer and never been frightened
before."

Dora still continued to cry, so Anne picked her up, cuddled her
sympathetically, and whispered,

"Tell Anne all about it, sweetheart. What are you frightened of?"

"Of . . . of Mirabel Cotton's uncle," sobbed Dora. "Mirabel Cotton told me
all about her family today in school. Nearly everybody in her family has
died . . . all her grandfathers and grandmothers and ever so many uncles
and aunts. They have a habit of dying, Mirabel says. Mirabel's awful
proud of having so many dead relations, and she told me what they all
died of, and what they said, and how they looked in their coffins. And
Mirabel says one of her uncles was seen walking around the house after
he was buried. Her mother saw him. I don't mind the rest so much but I
can't help thinking about that uncle."

Anne went upstairs with Dora and sat by her until she fell asleep. The
next day Mirabel Cotton was kept in at recess and "gently but firmly"
given to understand that when you were so unfortunate as to possess an
