The chief ostensible reason, however, for going to Genoa was that there
would be no difficulty in engaging as many sailors as might be necessary
to take the prizes to Rhodes. Underlying all the arguments was another
reason which Ralph laughingly stated.

"It is all very well to bring forward one argument after another, but
not one of you has the courage to say what I am sure all of you have
at the bottom of your hearts. You know very well that you want to go to
Genoa to enjoy a triumph. The Rhodians are all very well, but there are
very many more fair faces at Genoa. Fie, Sir Knights! Such a spirit is
little in accordance with the vows of the Order. Are we not bound to
humility? And here you are all longing for the plaudits of the nobles
and ladies of Genoa!"

Some of the young knights laughed, others coloured hotly.

"They need not be ashamed of the feeling," Caretto said. "Is it not the
ardent desire of all true knights to do gallant deeds, and do they not
value above all things the guerdon of applause from the fair eyes of
ladies. Your comrades have performed the gallant deeds, and well deserve
the reward. Now, Sir Gervaise, if not for this reason, at any rate for
the others that have been brought forward, I suppose we are all agreed
that we sail for Genoa. For our part we are heartily glad that such
is your decision. We, and the young knights of our langue, have many
friends there, and in their name I am sure I can promise you a reception
as hearty and sincere as that which we shall ourselves receive."

It was settled that the rescued captives should be divided equally
among the thirteen prizes, and that three knights should go in each. The
Moorish captives were also divided equally among them, to aid with the
sails, and to row a few oars, in case of a dead calm setting in. The
commands were distributed according to seniority, the three rescued
Italian knights remaining on board the Santa Barbara with Gervaise.

The Sards were anxious to return to their villages, in order to carry
the news that several hundreds of Moorish pirates had landed.

"We shall have great trouble with them," one of the young fishermen,
who spoke a little Italian, said to Gervaise. "There are always a great
number of swine, and herds of goats, up among the forests on the hills.
We must send up and drive in as many of these as possible, and of course
we shall send messengers to Tempe; but it will need a very large force
to combat these pirates, who will be able to come down and plunder
and destroy, and then retire to the hills, whence it will be hard to
dislodge them."

"I am sorry indeed that such trouble should have been caused to you,"
Gervaise replied; "but I am afraid that I can give you no assistance."

"We shall hunt them down in time," the Sard said confidently.

"There are many villages scattered about Tempe, and what with us
fishermen, and the woodmen and charcoal burners, we shall soon get a
strong body together. Besides, we know the mountains, and they do not."

"I should say that you had best avoid a pitched battle with them, but
keep on harassing them by night and day, cutting off all who separate
themselves from the main body, until at last they are completely worn
out."

"We shall deal with them, Sir Knight. We are all hunters, for there are
wild boars and stags in the forest, and wolves too, and wild sheep on
the higher mountains. Every man among us can use his bow skillfully, and
wield pike and hatchet. The hunt will not be unprofitable, either, for
we can get a good price for all we take alive, to work in the mines."

An hour later one of the galleys started with the Sards for their
villages in the bay of Tempe. After landing them, she was to rejoin the
rest of the fleet at their former anchorage at Madalena. By nightfall
all were gathered there, and the next morning they set out for Genoa.
The wind was light; but in their anxiety to return home as soon as
possible the released captives all volunteered to take their former
places on the benches, and the vessels were kept going at a fair rate
of speed. Two days' rowing took them to Bastia, where their approach
created unbounded excitement until the banner of the Order was seen
floating from the stern of the Santa Barbara, while smaller flags, that
had been hastily manufactured, flew from the mastheads of the thirteen
prizes. Even then the inhabitants feared to put out, believing that
the flags were but a ruse, and numbers of them fled at once, with their
families and valuables, to the mountains. It was not until a boat was
lowered, and Ralph, accompanied by three or four other knights, rowed
ashore, that the panic was allayed.

As soon as it was understood that the galley of the knights had not only
captured the thirteen corsairs, but had destroyed eleven others, and had
thus annihilated a fleet that was intended to prey upon the commerce
of Italy, and ravage the western coast, the alarm was succeeded by the
wildest enthusiasm. By the time Ralph had obtained the fresh meat and
stores he came ashore to purchase, the greater part of the population
were gathered on the shore, and a flotilla of boats put out with him,
filled with picturesquely dressed men and women. Some carried flags,
others green boughs, while the ladies had bouquets and baskets of fruit.
The galley was the first attraction, and, mounting her sides, the ladies
presented their offerings of fruit, while the men cheered, and waved
their hats; many musicians came out in the boats, and these played on
bagpipes and three-reeded flutes a succession of airs peculiar to the
island.

Gervaise received his visitors on the poop. These were at first
altogether incredulous when told that it was the lad before them who
had commanded the galley, had performed such a remarkable feat, and had
freed them from a terrible danger. The youth of the knights of the Order
no less surprised them, and had not Gervaise assured them that it was
altogether contrary to the rules of the Order for a knight to allow
himself to be embraced, many of the ladies would have taken this form
of showing their enthusiasm and gratitude. The next morning the fleet
started for Genoa. The wind was much stronger than it had been on the
previous day, and it was therefore unnecessary for the oars to be put
out, except, indeed, on board the galley. There, at nightfall, the
Christians relieved the slaves for some hours at their benches, and the
next morning the circle of hills round Genoa, with the city nestling at
their feet on the water's edge, and climbing for some distance up their
slopes, was in view. Caretto at once suggested that it would be well to
signal to the fleet to lie to.

"If we do not do so," he said, "they will assuredly think that it is the
corsair fleet advancing to attack and burn the vessels in port, and you
may be saluted as you approach by a shower of cannonballs. If you will
permit me, Sir Gervaise, I will go forward in one of the prizes and
explain matters, and will return here in a short time."

"Thank you, Sir Fabricius. As such mischance as you mention might indeed
very well occur, we will lower sail and lie here until you return."

While Caretto was away, the knights and crews breakfasted, and the
former put on their armour and gayest attire, in readiness for the
landing. Gervaise, although with much inward vexation, considered it
necessary to do the same.

"I do wish," he said to Ralph, who was smiling at his rueful face, "that
you could for today take my place, and let me pass as lieutenant."

"I should not mind at all, Gervaise. But you must put up with the
disagreeables as well as the advantages of being commander, and must
submit to be honoured and feted here, as well as getting no end of
credit at Rhodes. You will have the satisfaction of well deserving it,
for I am sure the plan of attacking them with fire ships would never
have occurred to any one else, and if it had not been for that, we
should have had the mortification of seeing them sail off without being
able to move a finger to interfere with them."

"If one were fighting for fame and honour, all that would be true
enough; but members of an Order, whose sole object is to defend
Christendom from the Moslems, should strive only to do their duty, and
care nothing for such things as honour and glory."

"Human nature is human nature, and I don't see any reason why one should
despise honour and glory when they come to one in the course of duty.
I fancy you will think so too, Gervaise, in course of time. I am quite
sure that among the fifty knights, there is not one who does not feel
well content that he has not only done his duty to the Order, but has
gained a share in the credit and honour that will certainly be given to
all who have taken a part in so crushing a defeat of the corsairs. As
for myself, I do not for a moment pretend that I am not sensible of the
fact that, as second in command of the galley, my chances of obtaining
promotion in the Order are very greatly improved."

It was nearly two hours before Caretto returned.

"It was well indeed that I went in," he said to Gervaise, "for I found
the city in an uproar. The alarm bells of the churches were calling all
citizens to arms, and troops were being hurried down to the forts and
batteries. Rumour had of course exaggerated the strength of the fleet,
and half the population believed that the safety of the city itself was
menaced by the approach of a mighty squadron. As soon as my news was
bruited abroad, and they learned that the fleet consisted solely of
prizes captured from the Moors by a galley of the Order, alarm quickly
changed into delight, the sharp, angry clang of the bells was succeeded
by peals of gladness, and the joy of the citizens at being relieved from
the cloud of anxiety that had hung over the city since my last visit,
was unbounded. I went at once to the council chamber, where I found many
of the leading citizens already assembled, having been summoned in hot
haste as soon as our approach was made out. At first they were almost
incredulous when I told them that every ship of the pirate fleet had
been either destroyed or captured, and that the fleet in the offing
consisted entirely of your galley and the thirteen corsairs she had
captured. As soon as they really grasped the fact, they sent off
messengers to the churches to order the joy bells to be rung, and to the
dockyard to arrest all work upon the galleys. Then I had to give them a
short account of the surprise and destruction of the corsair fleet, and
finally they begged me to ask you to delay your entry to the port for
a couple of hours, in order that they might have time to prepare a
suitable reception for you."

"I suppose there is no help for it," Gervaise said. "Is there anything
that we ought to do?"

"I should decorate the galley with all the flags on board: should set
every one to work to make great flags with the cross of the Order to
hoist to the masthead of the prizes, instead of the little things that
are now flying; and under them we will hoist the flags of the corsairs,
among which are those of Tripoli, Tunis, and Algiers. I do not know that
there is aught else we can do."



CHAPTER XVI FESTIVITIES


At last the fleet, headed by the galley, to which all the knights had
returned, rowed towards the port. A gun flashed out from the fort at
its entrance, and at once those from all the other batteries responded;
bells pealed out again, and a confused roar of cheering broke from the
crowds occupying every spot from which a view of the harbour could be
obtained. The ships in the port were all decked with flags, and the
front windows and balconies of every house were hung with tapestries and
bright curtains. As soon as the galley entered the port, a state barge,
flying the flag of the Republic, advanced to meet her from the wharf.
As she approached, Ralph gave orders for the oars to be laid in, and
the barge was soon alongside. The knights were already ranged along
the poop, and, accompanied by Ralph and Caretto, Gervaise moved to the
gangway to receive the visitors. At their head was Battista Fragoso, the
doge, in his robe of state, and following him were a body of the highest
nobles of Genoa, all brilliant in gala costume.

"This, my lord duke," Caretto said, "is Sir Gervaise Tresham, a knight
commander of our Order, and the commander of this, their galley. He has
before, as you may well believe from his appointment to so honourable a
post, highly distinguished himself, but what he has before accomplished
is far surpassed by the brilliant action that he has now achieved. He
has won a victory that not only reflects the highest honour upon the
Order, but is an inestimable service to Italy, and has freed her from a
corsair fleet that would have been a scourge to her, both at sea and to
the towns and villages along the coast. Not only has he, with the brave
knights under his orders, annihilated the corsair fleet, burning eleven
of their galleys, and capturing thirteen others, but he has restored
to freedom no less than two hundred Christian captives, among them the
cavaliers Giacomo da Vinci, Pietro Forzi, and myself."

"In the name of the Republic, Sir Gervaise Tresham, and I may say in
that of all Italy, I thank you most heartily for the splendid service
that you have rendered us. It would have seemed to me well nigh
incredible that a single galley, even if commanded and manned by the
most famous knights of your great Order, should have accomplished so
extraordinary a feat. Still more strange is it that it should have been
performed by so young a knight, with a crew composed, as Sir Fabricius
Caretto has told us, of knights chosen from among the youngest of the
Order."

"You give far more credit to us, your Highness, than we deserve,"
Gervaise replied. "Three of the ships were indeed captured in fair
fight, but we caught the rest asleep and massed together as to be
incapable of successful resistance, and they fell easy victims to the
fire ships we launched against them. Any credit that is due to me is
shared equally by my subcommander here, Sir Ralph Harcourt, and indeed
by every knight of my company."

"This, doubtless, may be so, Sir Gervaise," the doge said, with a slight
smile, "but it is to the head that plans, rather than to the hand that
strikes, that such success as you have achieved is due; and the credit
of this night attack is, as the cavalier Caretto tells me, wholly yours,
for until you issued your final orders it seemed to him, and to the two
good knights his companions, that there was naught to do but to remain
in port and watch this corsair fleet sail away to carry out its work of
destruction."

By this time they had reached the poop of the galley. Gervaise now
called forward the knights one by one, and presented them to the doge,
who expressed to them all the gratitude felt by himself and the whole of
the citizens of Genoa for the service they had rendered to the Republic.
This ceremony being over, the knights broke up their ranks and conversed
for a few minutes with those who had come on board with the doge. The
latter then took his place in the barge with his companions, inviting
Gervaise and Ralph to accompany him. As the barge left the side of the
galley, which followed closely behind her, the guns again thundered
out their welcome, and a roar of greeting rose from the inhabitants. On
landing, the party waited until the knights had joined them, and
then proceeded up the street to the ducal palace, amidst enthusiastic
cheering from the crowd that lined the road, occupied the windows and
balconies, and even scrambled on the housetops, the ladies waving their
handkerchiefs and scarves.

At the palace were assembled all the municipal authorities, and the
congratulations given on board were here repeated. After this there was
a great banquet, at which Gervaise was placed on the right hand of the
doge, who, at the conclusion of the feast, called upon the assembled
guests to drink to the health of the knights of St. John, who had saved
the commerce and seacoast of Italy from the greatest danger that had
menaced them since the days when the Northern rovers had desolated the
shores of the Mediterranean. The toast was drunk with enthusiasm, and
Gervaise then replied with a few words of thanks for the honour done to
himself and his comrades.

The party then left the banqueting hall for the great reception rooms,
where the wives and daughters of all the nobles and principal citizens
of Genoa were assembled. Most of the young knights, belonging as
they did to noble families, and accustomed from childhood to courtly
ceremonies and festivities, were quite at home here. Caretto, his two
companions, and their six Italian comrades, speedily introduced them,
and each was soon surrounded by a group of ladies, anxious to hear from
his lips the details of the exploits of the galley.

"But how is it that you are all so young, Sir Ralph?" one of the ladies,
to whom Harcourt had been introduced as the second in command, asked
him, when he had finished his account of the capture of the galleys.
"We heard from those who met you on landing, that all your comrades were
young, but we were filled with surprise when you entered the room, for
many of them are but lads."

"You may say that all of us are but lads, Countess. I am the oldest of
the party, and am but little over twenty-two, but few of the others are
over nineteen; they are all professed knights of the Order, who, as you
doubtless know, come out to Rhodes when only sixteen. Some, of course,
do not join until later, but I think that all here entered at the
earliest age permitted, and almost all had served in two or three
voyages in the galleys before they were appointed to the Santa Barbara.
The reason why so young a crew was chosen was that our commander was
also young. He had done such exceptional service to the Order that he
was appointed to the command of a galley, and he has, as all will allow,
well justified the choice. It was because it was deemed inexpedient
to place knights many years his senior under his command, and partly,
perhaps, to encourage the younger knights, by giving them an exceptional
opportunity of distinguishing themselves, that the crew was chosen
entirely from their ranks. I was selected as second in command because
Gervaise and I had been special friends when we came out from England in
the same ship, and had before fought side by side against the Moslems."

"I see that you wear gilded spurs, Sir Ralph," another lady said; "you
must therefore be a dubbed knight?"

"Yes; I had the good fortune to be knighted by D'Aubusson himself, at
the same time that Sir Gervaise was also so honoured. It was for an
affair with the Turkish pirates. It was Gervaise who really won the
honour, for I had no share in the affair, save that of doing my best in
the fight."

"And who could do more?" the countess queried.

"Gervaise could do more, Countess, as was shown in that attack on the
corsairs by means of fire ships. He has a head to plan, and, in the case
I speak of, a happy thought of his not only saved the lives of ourselves
and Sir John Boswell, but, indirectly, was the means of preventing two
of our galleys being captured by the corsairs."

"Which is Sir Gervaise?" one of the ladies asked.

Ralph smiled.

"Look round the hall, signoras, and see if any of you can pick him out
from the rest of us."

The ladies looked round the hall.

"There are only about twenty here; the rest are in the other rooms. Do
not set us to work guessing, if he is not in sight, Sir Ralph."

"Oh yes, he is in sight. Now do each of you fix on the one you think
most accords with your ideas of what a knight, brave in action and wise
and prudent in council, would be like."

The six ladies each fixed on one of the young knights.

"You are all wrong," said Ralph.

"How can we choose?" the countess said laughingly, "when none of them
resemble our ideal hero? Most of them are pleasant and courtly looking
youths, but as yet there is scarce a vestige of hair on their faces,
and one could not fancy any of them as the destroyer of the fleet of
corsairs."

"Do you see the one speaking to the elderly lady in the recess?"

"Yes; she is the wife of Fragoso. You do not mean to say that that lad
is the commander of the galley? Why, he looks the youngest of you all."

"He is between seventeen and eighteen, and there are several others who
are no older. Yes, that is Sir Gervaise, Knight Commander of the Order
of St. John."

"But how can he possibly have served his time as a professed knight?"

"He was one of the grand master's pages, and his time in that service
counted just as it would have done had he entered as a professed knight;
and at fifteen, therefore, he stood in the same position as those three
or four years older than himself. He speaks Turkish as well as our own
tongue, and, as I told you, we received the accolade at the hands of the
grand master, a year and a half ago. He is now a knight commander, and
will assuredly one day occupy one of the highest posts in the Order."

"You do not speak as if you were jealous, Sir Ralph; and yet methinks
it cannot be pleasant for you all to have one younger than yourselves
placed at your head."

"I do not think there is one of us who so feels," Ralph said earnestly.
"In the first place, he has performed excellent service; in the next
place, even those who did not know him before, have felt, since we
started, that he is a born leader. Then, too, we regard with pride one
who has brought credit upon the younger members of the Order. Moreover,
we all owe our posts in the galley to the fact that he was chosen for
its command. It is a difficult position for him to fill, but he has
managed so that, while all obey his orders as cheerfully and willingly
as if he were a veteran, when off duty we regard him as one of
ourselves."

"You are a staunch friend, Sir Ralph."

"I am a staunch friend of Sir Gervaise, Countess, for the more I know of
him the more I care for him. He well deserves the promotion and honour
that have fallen to his share."

"Will you bring him across here to us, Sir Ralph? I want to talk to
this hero of yours, and I am sure that my daughter is longing to be
introduced to him."

Ralph waited until Gervaise was disengaged, and then brought him across,
and, after introducing him, moved away at once, leaving Gervaise to be
interrogated by the ladies.

"You must be accustomed to festivities, Sir Gervaise, for we have just
heard that you were one of the grand master's pages?"

"I am accustomed to them, signora; but that is not at all the same thing
as liking them."

The reply was given so earnestly that all the ladies smiled.

"Your taste is quite exceptional. Do you mean to say that you would
rather be on board your galley than here?"

"It would not be polite," Gervaise said, with a laugh, "if I were to say
that I would infinitely rather be on board; but indeed I have not, like
most of my comrades, been brought up in court or castle. Until the day I
joined the Order, we led the lives of exiles. My father belonged to the
defeated party in England, and, save for a few months when the cause to
which he was attached was triumphant, we lived quietly on the estates
he had recovered, our life being one of care and anxiety. So, you see,
I had no training in gaiety and pleasure. At Rhodes there are state
receptions and religious pageants, but a meeting such as this, is, of
course, impossible in a convent; and since I was eleven years old I
think I have only once spoken to a woman. So you can well understand,
signora, that I feel awkward in speech, and I pray you to make allowance
for my ignorance of the language of courtesy, such as would naturally be
expected in a knight, even though belonging to a religious Order."

"There is naught to make allowance for," the countess said gently.
"Women can appreciate simple truth, and are not, as men seem to think,
always yearning for compliments. Those who are most proficient in
turning phrases are not often among those foremost in battle, or wisest
in council, and I can tell you that we women value deeds far higher than
words. Sir Fabricius Caretto is a cousin of mine, and has this afternoon
been speaking so highly of you to me and my young daughter here, that I
am glad indeed to make your acquaintance. How long do you intend to stay
in Genoa?"

"No longer than it will take me to engage men to carry the prizes to
Rhodes. I am afraid that sounds rude," he broke off, as he noticed a
smile on the faces of the ladies.

"Not rude," said the countess; "though most knights would have put it
differently, and said that their duty compelled them to leave as soon as
the prizes could be manned. But it comes to the same thing. Of
course, you will remain the guest of the doge as long as you are
here; otherwise, it would have given us the greatest pleasure to have
entertained you. My cousin is, of course, staying with us, and you see
we all feel a very deep obligation to you. He has been so long a slave
among the Moors, that we had almost come to hope death had freed him
from his fetters; so you may imagine our pleasure when he arrived here
so suddenly ten days ago. We were expecting that he would remain with us
for some time, but he says that he must first go back to Rhodes, after
which he will ask for leave, and return here. We have a banquet tomorrow
evening to celebrate his return, and earnestly hoped that you would be
present, but, since you say that you do not care for such gaieties,
we shall, if you prefer it, be glad if you will come to join us at our
family meal at twelve."
