"I am going to send a telegram to Mr. Vane," said Joe, and did so
without further delay. He was careful of the satchel and did not leave
it out of his sight.

They found they could get a train for the West that evening at seven
o'clock and at the proper time hurried to the depot.

"I'm glad I met you," said Joe, to his newly-made friend. "Now, what do
you think I owe you for what you did?"

"As we didn't land the fellows in jail you don't owe me anything," said
Bill Badger, promptly.

"Oh, yes, I do."

"Well then, you can pay the extra expense, and let that fill the bill."

"I'll certainly do that," said Joe, promptly.

As they rode along Bill Badger told something of himself and of the mine
his father owned, and then Joe told something of his own story.

"Did you say your name is Joe Bodley?" asked the young westerner, with
deep interest.

"Yes."

"And you are looking for a man by the name of William A. Bodley?"

"I am."

"It seems to me I know a man by that name, although the miners all call
him Bill Bodley."

"Where is this Bill Bodley?"

"Out in Montana somewhere. He worked for my father once, about three
years ago. He was rather a strange man, about fifty years old. He had
white hair and a white beard, and acted as if he had great trouble on
his mind."

"You do not know where he is now?"

"No, but perhaps my father knows."

"Then I'm going to see your father as soon as I can," said Joe,
decidedly.

"Mind you, I don't say that this Bill Bodley is the man you are after,
Joe. I don't want to raise any false hopes."

"Did you ever hear where the man came from?"

"I think he told somebody that he once owned a farm in Kansas or Iowa."

"This William A. Bodley once owned a farm at Millville, Iowa."

"Is that so! Then he may be the same man after all. To tell the truth,
he looked a little bit like you."

"Was he a good man?" asked Joe, eagerly.

"Yes, indeed. But some of the men poked fun at him because he was so
silent and strange at times. I liked him and so did father. He left us
to go prospecting in the mountains."

Thus the talk ran on for half an hour, when the train came to a sudden
halt.

"Are we at a station?" asked Bill Badger.

"I don't know," said Joe.

Both looked out of the window but could see nothing except hills and
forests.

"We are in the foothills," said the young westerner. "Something must be
wrong on the tracks."

"More fallen trees perhaps."

"Or a landslide. They have them sometimes, when it rains as hard as it
did to-day."

They left the car with some others and soon learned that there had been
a freight collision ahead and that half a dozen freight cars had been
smashed to splinters.

"Do you think it can be the freight that Caven and Malone boarded?" came
from our hero, on hearing this news.

"It might be," answered Bill Badger. "Let us take a look. Our train
won't move for hours now."

They walked to the scene of the wreck. One of the cars had been burnt
up but the conflagration was now under control and a wrecking crew was
already at work clearing the tracks so that they might be used.

"Anybody hurt?" asked Joe of a train hand.

"Yes, two men killed. They were riding between the cars."

"Tramps?"

"They didn't look like tramps. But they hadn't any right to ride on the
freight."

"Where are they?"

"Over in the shanty yonder."

With a queer sensation in his heart Joe walked to the little building,
accompanied by Bill Badger. A curious crowd was around and they had to
force their way to the front.

One look was enough. Gaff Caven and Pat Malone lay there, cold in death.
They had paid the penalty of their crimes on earth and gone to the final
judgment.



CHAPTER XXX.


CONCLUSION.


"Let us go away!" whispered Joe, and moved out of the gathering without
delay.

"It was sure rough on 'em," was Bill Badger's comment.

"Oh, it was awful!" cried our hero. "I--I didn't expect this, did you?"

"Nobody did. It must have come sudden like on to 'em."

"It makes me sick at heart to think of it. I--I hope it wasn't our
fault."

"Not at all. If they hadn't broke away they'd be alive this minute.
They'll never bother you or your friend again, Joe."

Our hero felt weak at the knees and was glad enough to go back to the
train, where he sank into his seat. He scarcely said another word until
the wreck was cleared away and they were once more on their journey.

"I reckon you are glad you got the satchel before this happened,"
remarked Bill Badger, when they were preparing to retire.

"Yes. But I--I wish they had gotten away. It's awful to think they are
dead--and with such bad doings to their credit."

Joe did not sleep very well and he was up early in the morning and out
on the rear platform, drinking in the fresh air. He felt as if he had
passed through some fearful nightmare.

"How do you like this climate?" asked Bill Badger, as he came out.
"Ain't it just glorious?"

"It certainly is," said Joe, and he remembered what Ned had told him. "I
don't wonder some folks like it better than the East."

"Oh, the East can't compare to it," answered Bill Badger. "Why I was
once down to New York and Boston, and the crowd and confusion and smoke
and smells made me sick for a week! Give me the pure mountain air every
time!"

The day proved a pleasant one and when he did not remember the tragedy
that had occurred our hero enjoyed the ride and the wild scenery.

At last Golden Pass was reached, late at night, and they got off in a
crowd of people.

"Joe!"

"Mr. Vane!" was the answering cry, and soon the two were shaking hands.
"Let me introduce a new friend, Mr. Bill Badger."

"Glad to know you."

"Mr. Badger helped me get back your satchel," went on our hero.

"Then I am deeply indebted to him."

"In that case, just drop the mister from my name," drawled the young
westerner. "Joe tells me you have a mine up here. My father has one,
too--the Mary Jennie, next to the Royal Flush."

"Oh, yes, I know the mine, and I have met your father," said Maurice
Vane.

They walked to a hotel, and there Joe and his young western friend told
their stories, to which Maurice Vane listened with keen interest. The
gentleman was shocked to learn of the sudden death of Caven and Malone.

"It was certainly a sad ending for them," said he. "But, as Badger says,
they had nobody but themselves to blame for it."

Maurice Vane was extremely glad to get back his mining shares and
thanked Bill Badger warmly for what he had done.

"Don't you mention it," said the young westerner. "I'm going to hunt up
dad now. When you get time, call and see us."

"I'm coming up soon, to find out about that Bill Bodley," said Joe.

As late as it was Joe listened to what Maurice Vane had to tell.

"Now that Caven and Malone are gone I do not anticipate further trouble
at the mine," said the gentleman. "I am in practical possession of all
the shares, and shall have a clear title to the whole property inside of
a few weeks."

When Joe told him what Bill Badger had had to say about a certain man
called Bill Bodley he was much interested.

"Yes, you must find out about this man at once," said he. "I will help
you, as soon as certain matters are settled."

The next morning proved a busy one and Joe got no time to call upon Bill
Badger's father. He visited the mine and looked over it with interest.

During the middle of the afternoon he went back to town on an errand
for Mr. Vane. He was passing a cabin on the outskirts when he heard loud
words and a struggle.

"Let me go, you ruffian!" cried a weak voice. "Leave that money alone!"

"You shut up, old man!" was the answer. "The money is all right."

"You are trying to rob me!"

Then there was another struggle, and suddenly a door burst open and a
man leaped into the roadway. At sight of him Joe came to a halt. The
fellow was Bill Butts, the man who had tried to swindle Josiah Bean.

"Stop him!" came from the cabin. "He has my gold!"

"Stop!" cried Joe, and ran up to Butts. The next moment man and boy
tripped and fell, but, luckily, our hero was on top.

"Let me go!" growled the man.

"So we meet again, Butts!" cried Joe.

The man stared in amazement and then began to struggle. Seeing this, Joe
doubled up his fists and gave him a blow in the nose and in the right
eye, which caused him to roar with pain.

"That's right!" came from the doorway of the cabin. "Give it to him!
Make him give me my gold!"

"Give up the gold," ordered Joe.

"There it is!" growled Bill Butts, and threw a buckskin bag towards
the cabin. The man from within caught it up and stowed it away in his
pocket.

"Shall I call a policeman?" asked Joe.

"I don't know," said the man from the cabin. He wore a troubled face and
had white hair and a white beard. "It may be--Wha--where did you come
from?" he gasped.

"Where did I come from?" asked Joe.

"Yes! yes! Answer me quickly! You are--you must be a ghost! I saw you in
my dreams last week!"

"I don't understand you," said Joe, and arose slowly to his feet, at
which Bill Butts did likewise and began to retreat. "I never met you
before."

"No? It's queer." The man brushed his hand over his forehead. "Yes, I
must be dreaming. But I am glad I got my gold back."

"So am I, but the rascal has run away."

"Never mind, let him go."

"What makes you think you've seen me before?" questioned Joe, and his
breath came thick and fast.

"I--er--I don't know. You mustn't mind me--I have queer spells at times.
You see, I had a whole lot of trouble once, and when I get to thinking
about it--" The man did not finish.

"May I ask your name?" asked Joe, and his voice trembled in spite of his
efforts at self-control.

"Sure you can. It's Bill Bodley."

"William A. Bodley?"

"Yes. But how do you happen to know my full name?"

"Did you once own a farm in Millville, Iowa?"

"I had a farm in Iowa, yes. It was Millville Center in those days."

Joe drew closer and looked at the man with care and emotion.

"Did you ever have a brother named Hiram Bodley?"

"I did--but he has been dead for years."

"No, Hiram Bodley died only a short time ago," answered Joe. "I used to
live with him. My name is Joe Bodley. He told me I was his nephew."

"You his nephew! Hiram Bodley's nephew! We didn't have any brothers or
sisters, and he was a bachelor!"

"I know he was a bachelor. But I don't know--" Joe paused.

"He told me Joe died, at least I got a letter from somebody to that
effect. But I was near crazy just then, and I can't remember exactly how
it was. I lost my wife and two children and then I guess I about lost
my mind for a spell. I sold out, and the next thing I knew I was roving
around the mountains and in rags. Then I took to mining, and now I've
got a mine of my own, up yonder in the mountains. Come in and talk this
over."

Joe entered the cabin and sat down, and William Bodley plied him with
questions, all of which he answered to the best of his ability.

"There was a blue tin box I had," said he, presently, "that contained
some documents that were mine."

"A blue tin box!" ejaculated Joe. "Hiram Bodley had it and it got lost.
I found it a long time afterwards and some parts of the documents were
destroyed. I have the rest in my suit case at the hotel."

"Can I see those papers?"

"Certainly."

"Perhaps you are my son, Joe?"

"Perhaps I am, sir."

They went to the hotel, and the documents were produced. Then William
Bodley brought out some letters he possessed. Man and boy went over
everything with care.

"You must be my son!" cried William Bodley. "Thank heaven you are
found!" And they shook hands warmly.

He told Joe to move over to the cabin, and our hero did so. It was
a neat and clean place and soon Joe felt at home. Then he heard his
father's tale in detail--an odd and wonderful story--of great trials and
hardship.

"There will always be something of a mystery about this," said William
Bodley. "But, no matter, so long as I have you with me."

"Uncle Hiram was a queer stick," answered Joe. "I suppose if he was
alive he could explain many things." And in this Joe was correct.

Let us add a few words more and then draw our tale to a close.

When Joe told Maurice Vane how he had found a father the gentlemen was
much astonished. So were the Badgers, but all were glad matters had
ended so well.

It was found that William Bodley's mine was a valuable one. The ore in
it was about equal to the ore in the mine owned by Maurice Vane, and
this was likewise equal to that in the mine run by Mr. Badger.

After some conversation on the subject it was agreed by all the
interested parties to form a new company, embracing all the mines.
Of the shares of this new concern, one-third went to Maurice Vane,
one-third to the Badgers, and one-third to William Bodley and Joe. The
necessary machinery was duly installed, and to-day the new company is
making money fast.

