expect to know anything, if you don't try?"

"I can't learn."

"You can, if you want to."

Johnny Nolan was evidently of a different opinion. He was a
good-natured boy, large of his age, with nothing particularly bad
about him, but utterly lacking in that energy, ambition, and natural
sharpness, for which Dick was distinguished. He was not adapted to
succeed in the life which circumstances had forced upon him; for in
the street-life of the metropolis a boy needs to be on the alert,
and have all his wits about him, or he will find himself wholly
distanced by his more enterprising competitors for popular favor. To
succeed in his profession, humble as it is, a boot-black must depend
upon the same qualities which gain success in higher walks in
life. It was easy to see that Johnny, unless very much favored by
circumstances, would never rise much above his present level. For
Dick, we cannot help hoping much better things.



CHAPTER XXVI

AN EXCITING ADVENTURE


Dick now began to look about for a position in a store or
counting-room. Until he should obtain one he determined to devote
half the day to blacking boots, not being willing to break in upon
his small capital. He found that he could earn enough in half a day
to pay all his necessary expenses, including the entire rent of the
room. Fosdick desired to pay his half; but Dick steadily refused,
insisting upon paying so much as compensation for his friend's
services as instructor.

It should be added that Dick's peculiar way of speaking and use of
slang terms had been somewhat modified by his education and his
intimacy with Henry Fosdick. Still he continued to indulge in them
to some extent, especially when he felt like joking, and it was
natural to Dick to joke, as my readers have probably found out by
this time. Still his manners were considerably improved, so that he
was more likely to obtain a situation than when first introduced
to our notice.

Just now, however, business was very dull, and merchants, instead of
hiring new assistants, were disposed to part with those already in
their employ. After making several ineffectual applications, Dick
began to think he should be obliged to stick to his profession until
the next season. But about this time something occurred which
considerably improved his chances of preferment.

This is the way it happened.

As Dick, with a balance of more than a hundred dollars in the
savings bank, might fairly consider himself a young man of property,
he thought himself justified in occasionally taking a half holiday
from business, and going on an excursion. On Wednesday afternoon
Henry Fosdick was sent by his employer on an errand to that part of
Brooklyn near Greenwood Cemetery. Dick hastily dressed himself in
his best, and determined to accompany him.

The two boys walked down to the South Ferry, and, paying their two
cents each, entered the ferry boat. They remained at the stern, and
stood by the railing, watching the great city, with its crowded
wharves, receding from view. Beside them was a gentleman with two
children,--a girl of eight and a little boy of six. The children
were talking gayly to their father. While he was pointing out some
object of interest to the little girl, the boy managed to creep,
unobserved, beneath the chain that extends across the boat, for the
protection of passengers, and, stepping incautiously to the edge
of the boat, fell over into the foaming water.

At the child's scream, the father looked up, and, with a cry of
horror, sprang to the edge of the boat. He would have plunged in,
but, being unable to swim, would only have endangered his own life,
without being able to save his child.

"My child!" he exclaimed in anguish,--"who will save my child? A
thousand--ten thousand dollars to any one who will save him!"

There chanced to be but few passengers on board at the time, and
nearly all these were either in the cabins or standing forward.
Among the few who saw the child fall was our hero.

Now Dick was an expert swimmer. It was an accomplishment which he
had possessed for years, and he no sooner saw the boy fall than he
resolved to rescue him. His determination was formed before he heard
the liberal offer made by the boy's father. Indeed, I must do Dick
the justice to say that, in the excitement of the moment, he did not
hear it at all, nor would it have stimulated the alacrity with which
he sprang to the rescue of the little boy.

Little Johnny had already risen once, and gone under for the second
time, when our hero plunged in. He was obliged to strike out for
the boy, and this took time. He reached him none too soon. Just as
he was sinking for the third and last time, he caught him by the
jacket. Dick was stout and strong, but Johnny clung to him so
tightly, that it was with great difficulty he was able to sustain
himself.

"Put your arms round my neck," said Dick.

The little boy mechanically obeyed, and clung with a grasp
strengthened by his terror. In this position Dick could bear his
weight better. But the ferry-boat was receding fast. It was quite
impossible to reach it. The father, his face pale with terror and
anguish, and his hands clasped in suspense, saw the brave boy's
struggles, and prayed with agonizing fervor that he might be
successful. But it is probable, for they were now midway of the
river, that both Dick and the little boy whom he had bravely
undertaken to rescue would have been drowned, had not a row-boat
been fortunately near. The two men who were in it witnessed the
accident, and hastened to the rescue of our hero.

"Keep up a little longer," they shouted, bending to their oars,
"and we will save you."

Dick heard the shout, and it put fresh strength into him. He battled
manfully with the treacherous sea, his eyes fixed longingly upon the
approaching boat.

"Hold on tight, little boy," he said. "There's a boat coming."

The little boy did not see the boat. His eyes were closed to shut
out the fearful water, but he clung the closer to his young
preserver. Six long, steady strokes, and the boat dashed along side.
Strong hands seized Dick and his youthful burden, and drew them into
the boat, both dripping with water.

"God be thanked!" exclaimed the father, as from the steamer he saw
the child's rescue. "That brave boy shall be rewarded, if I
sacrifice my whole fortune to compass it."

"You've had a pretty narrow escape, young chap," said one of the
boatmen to Dick. "It was a pretty tough job you undertook."

"Yes," said Dick. "That's what I thought when I was in the water. If
it hadn't been for you, I don't know what would have 'come of us."

"Anyhow you're a plucky boy, or you wouldn't have dared to jump into
the water after this little chap. It was a risky thing to do."

"I'm used to the water," said Dick, modestly. "I didn't stop to
think of the danger, but I wasn't going to see that little fellow
drown without tryin' to save him."

The boat at once headed for the ferry wharf on the Brooklyn side.
The captain of the ferry-boat, seeing the rescue, did not think
it necessary to stop his boat, but kept on his way. The whole
occurrence took place in less time than I have occupied in
telling it.

The father was waiting on the wharf to receive his little boy, with
what feelings of gratitude and joy can be easily understood. With a
burst of happy tears he clasped him to his arms. Dick was about to
withdraw modestly, but the gentleman perceived the movement, and,
putting down the child, came forward, and, clasping his hand, said
with emotion, "My brave boy, I owe you a debt I can never repay.
But for your timely service I should now be plunged into an anguish
which I cannot think of without a shudder."

Our hero was ready enough to speak on most occasions, but always
felt awkward when he was praised.

"It wasn't any trouble," he said, modestly. "I can swim like a top."

"But not many boys would have risked their lives for a stranger,"
said the gentleman. "But," he added with a sudden thought, as his
glance rested on Dick's dripping garments, "both you and my little
boy will take cold in wet clothes. Fortunately I have a friend
living close at hand, at whose house you will have an opportunity
of taking off your clothes, and having them dried."

Dick protested that he never took cold; but Fosdick, who had now
joined them, and who, it is needless to say, had been greatly
alarmed at Dick's danger, joined in urging compliance with the
gentleman's proposal, and in the end our hero had to yield. His
new friend secured a hack, the driver of which agreed for extra
recompense to receive the dripping boys into his carriage, and they
were whirled rapidly to a pleasant house in a side street, where
matters were quickly explained, and both boys were put to bed.

"I aint used to goin' to bed quite so early," thought Dick. "This is
the queerest excursion I ever took."

Like most active boys Dick did not enjoy the prospect of spending
half a day in bed; but his confinement did not last as long as he
anticipated.

In about an hour the door of his chamber was opened, and a servant
appeared, bringing a new and handsome suit of clothes throughout.

"You are to put on these," said the servant to Dick; "but you
needn't get up till you feel like it."

"Whose clothes are they?" asked Dick.

"They are yours."

"Mine! Where did they come from?"

"Mr. Rockwell sent out and bought them for you. They are the
same size as your wet ones."

"Is he here now?"

"No. He bought another suit for the little boy, and has gone back to
New York. Here's a note he asked me to give you."

Dick opened the paper, and read as follows,--


"Please accept this outfit of clothes as the first instalment of
a debt which I can never repay. I have asked to have your wet suit
dried, when you can reclaim it. Will you oblige me by calling
to-morrow at my counting room, No. --, Pearl Street.

  "Your friend,
  "JAMES ROCKWELL."



CHAPTER XXVII

CONCLUSION


When Dick was dressed in his new suit, he surveyed his figure with
pardonable complacency. It was the best he had ever worn, and fitted
him as well as if it had been made expressly for him.

"He's done the handsome thing," said Dick to himself; "but there
wasn't no 'casion for his givin' me these clothes. My lucky stars
are shinin' pretty bright now. Jumpin' into the water pays better
than shinin' boots; but I don't think I'd like to try it more'n once
a week."

About eleven o'clock the next morning Dick repaired to Mr.
Rockwell's counting-room on Pearl Street. He found himself in front
of a large and handsome warehouse. The counting-room was on the
lower floor. Our hero entered, and found Mr. Rockwell sitting at a
desk. No sooner did that gentleman see him than he arose, and,
advancing, shook Dick by the hand in the most friendly manner.

"My young friend," he said, "you have done me so great service that
I wish to be of some service to you in return. Tell me about
yourself, and what plans or wishes you have formed for the future."

Dick frankly related his past history, and told Mr. Rockwell of his
desire to get into a store or counting-room, and of the failure of
all his applications thus far. The merchant listened attentively to
Dick's statement, and, when he had finished, placed a sheet of paper
before him, and, handing him a pen, said, "Will you write your name
on this piece of paper?"

Dick wrote in a free, bold hand, the name Richard Hunter. He had
very much improved in his penmanship, as has already been mentioned,
and now had no cause to be ashamed of it.

Mr. Rockwell surveyed it approvingly.

"How would you like to enter my counting-room as clerk, Richard?" he
asked.

Dick was about to say "Bully," when he recollected himself, and
answered, "Very much."

"I suppose you know something of arithmetic, do you not?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then you may consider yourself engaged at a salary of ten dollars a
week. You may come next Monday morning."

"Ten dollars!" repeated Dick, thinking he must have misunderstood.

"Yes; will that be sufficient?"

"It's more than I can earn," said Dick, honestly.

"Perhaps it is at first," said Mr. Rockwell, smiling; "but I am
willing to pay you that. I will besides advance you as fast as your
progress will justify it."

Dick was so elated that he hardly restrained himself from some
demonstration which would have astonished the merchant; but he
exercised self-control, and only said, "I'll try to serve you so
faithfully, sir, that you won't repent having taken me into your
service."

"And I think you will succeed," said Mr. Rockwell, encouragingly. "I
will not detain you any longer, for I have some important business
to attend to. I shall expect to see you on Monday morning."

Dick left the counting-room, hardly knowing whether he stood on his
head or his heels, so overjoyed was he at the sudden change in his
fortunes. Ten dollars a week was to him a fortune, and three times
as much as he had expected to obtain at first. Indeed he would have
been glad, only the day before, to get a place at three dollars a
week. He reflected that with the stock of clothes which he had now
on hand, he could save up at least half of it, and even then live
better than he had been accustomed to do; so that his little fund in
the savings bank, instead of being diminished, would be steadily
increasing. Then he was to be advanced if he deserved it. It was
indeed a bright prospect for a boy who, only a year before, could
neither read nor write, and depended for a night's lodging upon
the chance hospitality of an alley-way or old wagon. Dick's great
ambition to "grow up 'spectable" seemed likely to be accomplished
after all.

"I wish Fosdick was as well off as I am," he thought generously. But
he determined to help his less fortunate friend, and assist him up
the ladder as he advanced himself.

When Dick entered his room on Mott Street, he discovered that some
one else had been there before him, and two articles of wearing
apparel had disappeared.

"By gracious!" he exclaimed; "somebody's stole my Washington coat
and Napoleon pants. Maybe it's an agent of Barnum's, who expects to
make a fortun' by exhibitin' the valooable wardrobe of a gentleman
of fashion."

Dick did not shed many tears over his loss, as, in his present
circumstances, he never expected to have any further use for the
well-worn garments. It may be stated that he afterwards saw them
adorning the figure of Micky Maguire; but whether that estimable
young man stole them himself, he never ascertained. As to the loss,
Dick was rather pleased that it had occurred. It seemed to cut him
off from the old vagabond life which he hoped never to resume.
Henceforward he meant to press onward, and rise as high as possible.

Although it was yet only noon, Dick did not go out again with his
brush. He felt that it was time to retire from business. He would
leave his share of the public patronage to other boys less fortunate
than himself. That evening Dick and Fosdick had a long conversation.
Fosdick rejoiced heartily in his friend's success, and on his side
had the pleasant news to communicate that his pay had been advanced
to six dollars a week.

"I think we can afford to leave Mott Street now," he continued.
"This house isn't as neat as it might be, and I shall like to live
in a nicer quarter of the city."

"All right," said Dick. "We'll hunt up a new room to-morrow. I shall
have plenty of time, having retired from business. I'll try to get
my reg'lar customers to take Johnny Nolan in my place. That boy
hasn't any enterprise. He needs some body to look out for him."

"You might give him your box and brush, too, Dick."

"No," said Dick; "I'll give him some new ones, but mine I want
to keep, to remind me of the hard times I've had, when I was an
ignorant boot-black, and never expected to be anything better."

"When, in short, you were 'Ragged Dick.' You must drop that name,
and think of yourself now as"--

"Richard Hunter, Esq.," said our hero, smiling.

"A young gentleman on the way to fame and fortune," added Fosdick.


                              -------


Here ends the story of Ragged Dick. As Fosdick said, he is Ragged Dick
no longer. He has taken a step upward, and is determined to mount still
