so long.

"Candace" was the widow of an old colored servant of Mr. King's; she
called herself a "relict;" that, and the pride in her little shop, made
her hold her turbaned head high in the air, while a perennial smile
enwreathed her round face.

The shop was on Temple Place, a narrow extension thrown out from one of
the city's thoroughfares. She was known for a few specialties; such as
big sugary doughnuts that appealed alike to old and young. They were
always fresh and sweet, with just the proper amount of spice to make
them toothsome; and she made holders of various descriptions, with the
most elaborate patterns wrought always in yellow worsted; with several
other things that the ladies protested could never be found elsewhere.
Jasper had been accustomed to run down to Candace's little shop, since
pinafore days, when he had been taken there by his nurse, and set upon
a high stool before the small counter, and plied with dainties by the
delighted Candace.

"The first thing I can remember," he had often told Polly, "is Candace
taking out huge red and white peppermint drops, from the big glass jar
in the window, and telling me to hold out both hands."

And after the "pinafore days" were over, Candace was the boy's helper
in all his sports where a woman's needle could stitch him out of any
difficulty. She it was who made the sails to his boats, and marvelous
skate bags. She embroidered the most intricate of straps for his
school-books, and once she horrified him completely by working in red
cotton, large "J's" on two handkerchiefs. He stifled the horror when he
saw her delight in presenting the gift, and afterwards was careful to
remember to carry a handkerchief occasionally when on an errand to the
shop.

Latterly Candace was occupied in preparing pins for Jasper's cabinet,
out of old needles that had lost their eyes. She cleverly put on red
and black sealing wax heads, turning them out as round as the skillful
manipulation of deft fingers could make them. In this new employment,
the boy kept her well occupied, many half-dollars thereby finding their
way into her little till.

"I wish Phronsie had come," said Polly, as she and Jasper sorted the
pins in the little wooden tray Candace kept for the purpose. "How many
red ones you will have, Jasper--see--fifteen; well, they're prettier
than the others."

"Ef little Miss had come wid you," said Candace, emerging from the
folds of a chintz curtain that divided the shop from the bedroom,
"she'd 'a' seen my doll I made for her. Land! but it's a beauty."

"Oh, Candace!" exclaimed Polly, dropping the big pin she held, and
allowing it to roll off the counter to the floor. "What a pity we
didn't bring her! Do let us see the doll."

"She's a perfec' beauty!" repeated Candace in satisfaction, "an' I done
made her all myself fer de little Miss," and she dodged behind the
curtain again, this time bringing out a large rag doll with surprising
black bead eyes, a generous crop of wool on its head, and a red worsted
mouth.

"Dat's my own hair," said Candace, pointing to the doll's head with
pride, "so I know it's good; an' ain't dat mouf pretty?"

"Oh, Candace!" exclaimed Polly, seizing the doll, and skillfully
evading the question, "what a lovely dress--and the apron is a dear"--

"Ain't it?" said Candace, her black face aglow with delight. "Ole Miss
gimme dat yeller satin long ago, w'en I belonged to her befo' de war.
An' dat yere apun was a piece of ole Miss's night-cap. She used to have
sights of 'em, and dey was all ruffled like to kill, an' made o'
tambour work."

Polly had already heard many times the story of Madame Carroll's
night-caps, so she returned to the subject of the doll's beauty as a
desirable change.

"Do you want us to take this to Phronsie?" she asked. "Jasper, won't
she be delighted?"

"Land, no!" cried Candace, recovering the doll in alarm; "I'd never
sleep a week o' nights ef I didn't put dat yere doll into dat bressed
child's arms."

"Then I'll tell Phronsie to come over to-morrow," said Polly. "Shall I,
Candace?"

"Yes," said Candace, "you tell her I got somefin' fer her; don't you
tell her what, an' send her along."

"All right," said Jasper. "Just imagine Phronsie's eyes when she sees
that production. Candace, you've surpassed yourself."

"You go 'long!" exclaimed Candace, in delight, and bestowing a gentle
pat of deprecation on his shoulder, "'tain't like what I could do; but
la! well, you send de bressed chile along, and mabbe she'll like it."

"Jasper, we'll stop at Helen's now," said Polly as the two hurried by
the tall iron fence, that, lined with its thick hedge, shut out the
Fargo estate from vulgar eyes, "and get Phronsie; she'll be ready to
come home now; it's nearly luncheon time."

"All right," said Jasper; so the two ran over the carriage drive to a
side door by which the King family always had entree.

"Is Phronsie ready to come home?" asked Polly of the maid. "Tell her to
hurry and get her things on; we'll wait here. Oh, Jasper!" turning to
him, "why couldn't we have the club next week, Wednesday night?"

"Miss Mary," said the maid, interrupting, "what do you mean? I haven't
seen Miss Phronsie to-day."

Polly whirled around on the step and looked at her.

"Oh! she's upstairs in the nursery, playing with Helen, I suppose.
Please ask her to hurry, Hannah."

"No, she isn't, Miss Mary," said Hannah. "I've been sweeping the
nursery this morning; just got through." She pointed to her broom and
dustpan that she had set in a convenient corner, as proof of her
statement.

"Well, she's with Helen somewhere," said Polly, a little impatiently.

"Yes; find Helen, and you have the two," broke in Jasper. "Just have
the goodness, Hannah, to produce Helen."

"Miss Helen isn't home," said Hannah. "She went to Greenpoint yesterday
with Mrs. Fargo to spend Sunday."

"Why," exclaimed Polly in bewilderment, "Mamsie said she told Phronsie
right after breakfast that she could come over here."

"She hasn't been here," said the maid positively. "I know for certain
sure, Miss Mary. Has she, Jane?" appealing to another maid coming down
the hall.

"No," said Jane. "She hasn't been here for ever so many days."

"Phronsie played around outside probably," said Jasper quickly;
"anyway, she's home now. Come on, Polly. She'll run out to meet us."

"Oh, Jasper! do you suppose she will?" cried Polly, unable to stifle an
undefinable dread. She was running now on frightened feet, Jasper
having hard work to keep up with her, and the two dashed through the
little gate in the hedge where Phronsie was accustomed to let herself
through on the only walk she was ever allowed to take alone, and into
the house where Polly cried to the first person she met, "Where's
Phronsie?" to be met with what she dreaded, "Gone over to Helen
Fargo's."

And now there was indeed alarm through the big house. Not knowing where
to look, each fell in the other's way, quite as much concerned for Mr.
King's well-being; for the old gentleman was reduced to such a state by
the fright that the entire household had all they could do to keep him
in bounds.

"Madame is not to come home to luncheon," announced Hortense to Mrs.
Whitney in the midst of the excitement. "She told me to tell you that
de Mees Taylor met her at de modiste, and took her home with her."

Mrs. Whitney made no reply, but raised her eyes swollen with much
crying, to the maid's face.

"Hortense, run as quickly as possible down to Dr. Fisher's office, and
tell him to come home."

"Thomas should be sent," said Hortense, with a toss of her head. "It's
not de work for me. Beside I am Madame's maid."

"Do you go at once," commanded Mrs. Whitney, with a light in her blue
eyes that the maid never remembered seeing. She was even guilty of
stamping her pretty foot in the exigency, and Hortense slowly gathered
herself up.

"I will go, Madame," with the air of conferring a great favor, "only I
do not such t'ings again."




XVII

PHRONSIE IS FOUND


"I am glad that you agree with me." Mrs. Chatterton bestowed a
complacent smile upon the company.

"But we don't in the least agree with you," said Madame Dyce, her stiff
brocade rustling impatiently in the effort to put her declaration
before the others, "not in the least."

"Ah? Well, you must allow that I have good opportunities to judge. The
Pepper entanglement can be explained only by saying that my cousin's
mental faculties are impaired."

"The rest of the family are afflicted in the same way, aren't they?"
remarked Hamilton Dyce nonchalantly.

"Humph! yes." Mrs. Chatterton's still shapely shoulders allowed
themselves a shrug intended to reveal volumes. "What Jasper Horatio
King believes, the rest of the household accept as law and gospel. But
it's no less infatuation."

"I'll not hear one word involving those dear Peppers," cried Madame
Dyce. "If I could, I'd have them in my house. And it's a most
unrighteous piece of work, in my opinion, to endeavor to arouse
prejudice against them. It goes quite to my heart to remember their
struggles all those years."

Mrs. Chatterton turned on her with venom. Was all the world arrayed
against her, to take up with those hateful interlopers in her cousin's
home? She made another effort. "I should have credited you with more
penetration into motives than to allow yourself to be deceived by such
a woman as Mrs. Pepper."

"Do give her the name that belongs to her. I believe she's Mrs. Dr.
Fisher, isn't she?" drawled Livingston Bayley, a budding youth, with a
moustache that occasioned him much thought, and a solitary eyeglass.

"Stuff and nonsense! Yes, what an absurd thing that wedding was. Did
anybody ever hear or see the like!" Mrs. Chatterton lifted her long
jeweled hands in derision, but as no one joined in the laugh, she
dropped them slowly into her lap.

"I don't see any food for scorn in that episode," said the youth with
the moustache. "Possibly there will be another marriage there before
many years. I'm sweet on Polly."

Mrs. Chatterton's face held nothing but blank dismay. The rest shouted.

"You needn't laugh, you people," said the youth, setting his eyeglass
straight, "that girl is going to make a sensation, I tell you, when she
comes out. I'm going to secure her early."

"Not a word, mind you, about Miss Polly's preferences," laughed
Hamilton Dyce aside to Miss Mary.

"'Tisn't possible that she could be anything but fascinated, of
course," Mary laughed back.

"Of course not. The callow youth knows his power. Anybody else in favor
of the Peppers?" aloud, and looking at the company.

"Don't ask us if we like the Peppers," cried two young ladies
simultaneously. "They are our especial and particular pets, every one
of them."

"The Peppers win," said Hamilton Dyce, looking full into Mrs.
Chatterton's contemptuous face. "I'm glad to record my humble self as
their admirer. Now"--

"Well, pa!" Mary could not refrain from interrupting as her father
suddenly appeared in the doorway.

"I can't sit down," he said, as the company made way for him to join
them. "I came home for some important papers. I suppose you have heard
the trouble at the Kings? I happened to drop in there. Well, Dyce,"
laying his hand on that gentleman's chair, "I scarcely expected to see
you here to-day. Why aren't you at the club spread?"

"Cousin Horatio! I suppose he's had a paralytic attack," interrupted
Mrs. Chatterton, with her most sagacious air.

"What's the trouble up there?" queried Mr. Dyce, ignoring the question
thrust at him.

"It's the little beauty--Phronsie," said Mr. Taylor.

"Nothing's happened to that child I hope!" cried Madame Dyce, paling.

"Now, Mr. Taylor, you are not going to harrow our feelings by telling
us anything has harmed that lovely creature," exclaimed the two young
ladies excitedly.

"Phronsie can't be found," said Mr. Taylor.

"Can't be found!" echoed all the voices, except Mrs. Chatterton's. She
ejaculated "Ridiculous!"

Hamilton Dyce sprang to his feet and threw down his napkin. "Excuse me,
Miss Taylor. Come, Bayley, now is the time to show our devotion to the
family. Let us go and help them out of this."

Young Bayley jumped lightly up and stroked his moustache like a man of
affairs. "All right, Dyce. Bon jour, ladies."

"How easily a scene is gotten up," said Mrs. Chatterton, "over a
naughty little runaway. I wish some of the poor people in this town
could have a tithe of the attention that is wasted on these Peppers,"
she added virtuously.

Madame Dyce turned uneasily in her seat, and played with the almonds on
her plate. "I think we do best to reserve our judgments," she said
coolly. "I don't believe Phronsie has run away."

"Of course she has," asserted Mrs. Chatterton, in that positive way
that made everybody hate her to begin with. "She was all right this
morning when I left home. Where else is she, if she hasn't run away,
pray tell?"

Not being able to answer this, no one attempted it, and the meal ended
in an uncomfortable silence.

Driving home a half-hour later, in a cab summoned for that purpose,
Mrs. Chatterton threw off her things, angry not to find Hortense at her
post in the dressing-room, where she had been told to finish a piece of
sewing, and not caring to encounter any of the family in their present
excitement, she determined to take herself off upstairs, where "I can
kill two birds with one stone; get rid of everybody, and find my box
myself, because of course that child ran away before she got it."

So she mounted the stairs laboriously, counting herself lucky indeed in
finding the upper part of the house quite deserted, and shutting the
lumber-room door when she was well within it, she proceeded to open the
door of the closet.

"Hortense didn't tell me there was a spring lock on this door," she
exclaimed, with an impatient pull. "Oh! good heavens." She had nearly
