'Hallo!' he called out, 'what are you doing down there?'

'I am listening to what is going on in the world,' replied the man.

'Come with me in my ship,' said the Simpleton.

So the man was only too glad, and got in beside him; and the ship flew,
and flew, and flew through the air, till again from his outlook the
Simpleton saw a man on the road below, who was hopping on one leg, while
his other leg was tied up behind his ear. So he hailed him, calling out:

'Hallo! what are you doing, hopping on one leg?'

'I can't help it,' replied the man. 'I walk so fast that unless I tied
up one leg I should be at the end of the earth in a bound.'

'Come with us on my ship,' he answered; and the man made no objections,
but joined them; and the ship flew on, and on, and on, till suddenly the
Simpleton, looking down on the road below, beheld a man aiming with a
gun into the distance.

'Hallo!' he shouted to him, 'what are you aiming at? As far as eye can
see, there is no bird in sight.'

'What would be the good of my taking a near shot?' replied the man; 'I
can hit beast or bird at a hundred miles' distance. That is the kind of
shot I enjoy.'

'Come into the ship with us,' answered the Simpleton; and the man was
only too glad to join them, and he got in; and the ship flew on, farther
and farther, till again the Simpleton from his outlook saw a man on the
road below, carrying on his back a basket full of bread. And he waved to
him, calling out:

'Hallo! where are you going?'

'To fetch bread for my breakfast.'

'Bread? Why, you have got a whole basket-load of it on your back.'

'That's nothing,' answered the man; 'I should finish that in one
mouthful.'

'Come along with us in my ship, then.'

And so the glutton joined the party, and the ship mounted again into the
air, and flew up and onward, till the Simpleton from his outlook saw
a man walking by the shore of a great lake, and evidently looking for
something.

'Hallo!' he cried to him,' what are you seeking?

'I want water to drink, I'm so thirsty,' replied the man.

'Well, there's a whole lake in front of you; why don't you drink some of
that?'

'Do you call that enough?' answered the other. 'Why, I should drink it
up in one gulp.'

'Well, come with us in the ship.'

And so the mighty drinker was added to the company; and the ship flew
farther, and even farther, till again the Simpleton looked out, and this
time he saw a man dragging a bundle of wood, walking through the forest
beneath them.

'Hallo!' he shouted to him, 'why are you carrying wood through a
forest?'

'This is not common wood,' answered the other.

'What sort of wood is it, then?' said the Simpleton.

'If you throw it upon the ground,' said the man, 'it will be changed
into an army of soldiers.'

'Come into the ship with us, then.'

And so he too joined them; and away the ship flew on, and on, and on,
and once more the Simpleton looked out, and this time he saw a man
carrying straw upon his back.

'Hallo! Where are you carrying that straw to?'

'To the village,' said the man.

'Do you mean to say there is no straw in the village?'

'Ah! but this is quite a peculiar straw. If you strew it about even in
the hottest summer the air at once becomes cold, and snow falls, and the
people freeze.'

Then the Simpleton asked him also to join them.

At last the ship, with its strange crew, arrived at the King's Court.
The King was having his dinner, but he at once despatched one of his
courtiers to find out what the huge, strange new bird could be that had
come flying through the air. The courtier peeped into the ship, and,
seeing what it was, instantly went back to the King and told him that it
was a flying ship, and that it was manned by a few peasants.

Then the King remembered his royal oath; but he made up his mind that
he would never consent to let the Princess marry a poor peasant. So he
thought and thought, and then said to himself:

'I will give him some impossible tasks to perform; that will be the best
way of getting rid of him.' And he there and then decided to despatch
one of his courtiers to the Simpleton, with the command that he was
to fetch the King the healing water from the world's end before he had
finished his dinner.

But while the King was still instructing the courtier exactly what
he was to say, the first man of the ship's company, the one with the
miraculous power of hearing, had overheard the King's words, and hastily
reported them to the poor Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he cried; 'what am I to do now? It would take me quite a
year, possibly my whole life, to find the water.'

'Never fear,' said his fleet-footed comrade, 'I will fetch what the King
wants.'

Just then the courtier arrived, bearing the King's command.

'Tell his Majesty,' said the Simpleton, 'that his orders shall be
obeyed; 'and forthwith the swift runner unbound the foot that was strung
up behind his ear and started off, and in less than no time had reached
the world's end and drawn the healing water from the well.

'Dear me,' he thought to himself, 'that's rather tiring! I'll just rest
for a few minutes; it will be some little time yet before the King has
got to dessert.' So he threw himself down on the grass, and, as the sun
was very dazzling, he closed his eyes, and in a few seconds had fallen
sound asleep.

In the meantime all the ship's crew were anxiously awaiting him; the
King's dinner would soon be finished, and their comrade had not yet
returned. So the man with the marvellous quick hearing lay down and,
putting his ear to the ground, listened.

'That's a nice sort of fellow!' he suddenly exclaimed. 'He's lying on
the ground, snoring hard!'

At this the marksman seized his gun, took aim, and fired in the
direction of the world's end, in order to awaken the sluggard. And a
moment later the swift runner reappeared, and, stepping on board the
ship, handed the healing water to the Simpleton. So while the King was
still sitting at table finishing his dinner news was brought to him that
his orders had been obeyed to the letter.

What was to be done now? The King determined to think of a still more
impossible task. So he told another courtier to go to the Simpleton with
the command that he and his comrades were instantly to eat up twelve
oxen and twelve tons of bread. Once more the sharp-eared comrade
overheard the King's words while he was still talking to the courtier,
and reported them to the Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he sighed; 'what in the world shall I do? Why, it would
take us a year, possibly our whole lives, to eat up twelve oxen and
twelve tons of bread.'

'Never fear,' said the glutton. 'It will scarcely be enough for me, I'm
so hungry.'

So when the courtier arrived with the royal message he was told to take
back word to the King that his orders should be obeyed. Then twelve
roasted oxen and twelve tons of bread were brought alongside of the
ship, and at one sitting the glutton had devoured it all.

'I call that a small meal,' he said. 'I wish they'd brought me some
more.'

Next, the King ordered that forty casks of wine, containing forty
gallons each, were to be drunk up on the spot by the Simpleton and his
party. When these words were overheard by the sharp-eared comrade and
repeated to the Simpleton, he was in despair.

'Alas, alas!' he exclaimed; 'what is to be done? It would take us a
year, possibly our whole lives, to drink so much.'

'Never fear,' said his thirsty comrade. 'I'll drink it all up at a
gulp, see if I don't.' And sure enough, when the forty casks of wine
containing forty gallons each were brought alongside of the ship, they
disappeared down the thirsty comrade's throat in no time; and when they
were empty he remarked:

'Why, I'm still thirsty. I should have been glad of two more casks.'

Then the King took counsel with himself and sent an order to the
Simpleton that he was to have a bath, in a bath-room at the royal
palace, and after that the betrothal should take place. Now the
bath-room was built of iron, and the King gave orders that it was to
be heated to such a pitch that it would suffocate the Simpleton. And so
when the poor silly youth entered the room, he discovered that the iron
walls were red hot. But, fortunately, his comrade with the straw on his
back had entered behind him, and when the door was shut upon them he
scattered the straw about, and suddenly the red-hot walls cooled down,
and it became so very cold that the Simpleton could scarcely bear to
take a bath, and all the water in the room froze. So the Simpleton
climbed up upon the stove, and, wrapping himself up in the bath
blankets, lay there the whole night. And in the morning when they opened
the door there he lay sound and safe, singing cheerfully to himself.

Now when this strange tale was told to the King he became quite sad,
not knowing what he should do to get rid of so undesirable a son-in-law,
when suddenly a brilliant idea occurred to him.

'Tell the rascal to raise me an army, now at this instant!' he exclaimed
to one of his courtiers. 'Inform him at once of this, my royal will.'
And to himself he added, 'I think I shall do for him this time.'

As on former occasions, the quick-eared comrade had overheard the King's
command and repeated it to the Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he groaned; 'now I am quite done for.'

'Not at all,' replied one of his comrades (the one who had dragged the
bundle of wood through the forest). 'Have you quite forgotten me?'

In the meantime the courtier, who had run all the way from the palace,
reached the ship panting and breathless, and delivered the King's
message.

'Good!' remarked the Simpleton. 'I will raise an army for the King,' and
he drew himself up. 'But if, after that, the King refuses to accept me
as his son-in-law, I will wage war against him, and carry the Princess
off by force.'

During the night the Simpleton and his comrade went, together into a big
field, not forgetting to take the bundle of wood with them, which the
man spread out in all directions--and in a moment a mighty army stood
upon the spot, regiment on regiment of foot and horse soldiers; the
bugles sounded and the drums beat, the chargers neighed, and their
riders put their lances in rest, and the soldiers presented arms.

In the morning when the King awoke he was startled by these warlike
sounds, the bugles and the drums, and the clatter of the horses, and the
shouts of the soldiers. And, stepping to the window, he saw the lances
gleam in the sunlight and the armour and weapons glitter. And the proud
monarch said to himself, 'I am powerless in comparison with this man.'
So he sent him royal robes and costly jewels, and commanded him to come
to the palace to be married to the Princess. And his son-in-law put
on the royal robes, and he looked so grand and stately that it was
impossible to recognise the poor Simpleton, so changed was he; and the
Princess fell in love with him as soon as ever she saw him.

Never before had so grand a wedding been seen, and there was so much
food and wine that even the glutton and the thirsty comrade had enough
to eat and drink.




THE SNOW-DAUGHTER AND THE FIRE-SON(25)

(25) From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

There was once upon a time a man and his wife, and they had no children,
which was a great grief to them. One winter's day, when the sun was
shining brightly, the couple were standing outside their cottage, and
the woman was looking at all the little icicles which hung from the
roof. She sighed, and turning to her husband said, 'I wish I had as many
children as there are icicles hanging there.' 'Nothing would please me
more either,' replied her husband. Then a tiny icicle detached itself
from the roof, and dropped into the woman's mouth, who swallowed it with
a smile, and said, 'Perhaps I shall give birth to a snow child now!' Her
husband laughed at his wife's strange idea, and they went back into the
house.

But after a short time the woman gave birth to a little girl, who was
as white as snow and as cold as ice. If they brought the child anywhere
near the fire, it screamed loudly till they put it back into some cool
place. The little maid throve wonderfully, and in a few months she could
run about and speak. But she was not altogether easy to bring up, and
gave her parents much trouble and anxiety, for all summer she insisted
on spending in the cellar, and in the winter she would sleep outside in
the snow, and the colder it was the happier she seemed to be. Her father
and mother called her simply 'Our Snow-daughter,' and this name stuck to
her all her life.

One day her parents sat by the fire, talking over the extraordinary
behaviour of their daughter, who was disporting herself in the snowstorm
that raged outside. The woman sighed deeply and said, 'I wish I had
given birth to a Fire-son!' As she said these words, a spark from the
big wood fire flew into the woman's lap, and she said with a laugh, 'Now
perhaps I shall give birth to a Fire-son!' The man laughed at his wife's
words, and thought it was a good joke. But he ceased to think it a
joke when his wife shortly afterwards gave birth to a boy, who screamed
lustily till he was put quite close to the fire, and who nearly yelled
himself into a fit if the Snow-daughter came anywhere near him. The
Snow-daughter herself avoided him as much as she could, and always crept
into a corner as far away from him as possible. The parents called the
boy simply 'Our Fire-son,' a name which stuck to him all his life. They
had a great deal of trouble and worry with him too; but he throve and
grew very quickly, and before he was a year old he could run about and
talk. He was as red as fire, and as hot to touch, and he always sat on
the hearth quite close to the fire, and complained of the cold; if his
sister were in the room he almost crept into the flames, while the girl
on her part always complained of the great heat if her brother were
anywhere near. In summer the boy always lay out in the sun, while the
girl hid herself in the cellar: so it happened that the brother and
sister came very little into contact with each other--in fact, they
carefully avoided it.

Just as the girl grew up into a beautiful woman, her father and mother
both died one after the other. Then the Fire-son, who had grown up in
the meantime into a fine, strong young man, said to his sister, 'I am
going out into the world, for what is the use of remaining on here?'

'I shall go with you,' she answered, 'for, except you, I have no one in
the world, and I have a feeling that if we set out together we shall be
lucky.'

The Fire-son said, 'I love you with all my heart, but at the same time
I always freeze if you are near me, and you nearly die of heat if I
approach you! How shall we travel about together without being odious
the one to the other?'

'Don't worry about that,' replied the girl, 'for I've thought it all
over, and have settled on a plan which will make us each able to bear
with the other! See, I have had a fur cloak made for each of us, and if
we put them on I shall not feel the heat so much nor you the cold.' So
they put on the fur cloaks, and set out cheerfully on their way, and for
the first time in their lives quite happy in each other's company.

For a long time the Fire-son and the Snow-daughter wandered through the
world, and when at the beginning of winter they came to a big wood they
determined to stay there till spring. The Fire-son built himself a hut
where he always kept up a huge fire, while his sister with very few
clothes on stayed outside night and day. Now it happened one day that
the King of the land held a hunt in this wood, and saw the Snow-daughter
wandering about in the open air. He wondered very much who the beautiful
girl clad in such garments could be, and he stopped and spoke to her.
He soon learnt that she could not stand heat, and that her brother could
not endure cold. The King was so charmed by the Snow-daughter, that he
asked her to be his wife. The girl consented, and the wedding was held
with much state. The King had a huge house of ice made for his wife
underground, so that even in summer it did not melt. But for his
brother-in-law he had a house built with huge ovens all round it, that
were kept heated all day and night. The Fire-son was delighted, but
the perpetual heat in which he lived made his body so hot, that it was
dangerous to go too close to him.

One day the King gave a great feast, and asked his brother-in-law
among the other guests. The Fire-son did not appear till everyone had
assembled, and when he did, everyone fled outside to the open air, so
intense was the heat he gave forth. Then the King was very angry and
said, 'If I had known what a lot of trouble you would have been, I would
never have taken you into my house.' Then the Fire-son replied with a
laugh, 'Don't be angry, dear brother! I love heat and my sister loves
cold--come here and let me embrace you, and then I'll go home at once.'
And before the King had time to reply, the Fire-son seized him in a
tight embrace. The King screamed aloud in agony, and when his wife, the
Snow-daughter, who had taken refuge from her brother in the next room,
hurried to him, the King lay dead on the ground burnt to a cinder. When
the Snow-daughter saw this she turned on her brother and flew at him.
Then a fight began, the like of which had never been seen on earth. When
the people, attracted by the noise, hurried to the spot, they saw the
Snow-daughter melting into water and the Fire-son burn to a cinder. And
so ended the unhappy brother and sister.




THE STORY OF KING FROST (26)

(26) From the Russian.

There was once upon a time a peasant-woman who had a daughter and a
step-daughter. The daughter had her own way in everything, and whatever
she did was right in her mother's eyes; but the poor step-daughter had
a hard time. Let her do what she would, she was always blamed, and got
small thanks for all the trouble she took; nothing was right, everything
wrong; and yet, if the truth were known, the girl was worth her weight
in gold--she was so unselfish and good-hearted. But her step-mother did
not like her, and the poor girl's days were spent in weeping; for it
was impossible to live peacefully with the woman. The wicked shrew was
determined to get rid of the girl by fair means or foul, and kept saying
to her father: 'Send her away, old man; send her away--anywhere so that
my eyes sha'n't be plagued any longer by the sight of her, or my ears
tormented by the sound of her voice. Send her out into the fields, and
let the cutting frost do for her.'

In vain did the poor old father weep and implore her pity; she was firm,
and he dared not gainsay her. So he placed his daughter in a sledge,
not even daring to give her a horse-cloth to keep herself warm with, and
drove her out on to the bare, open fields, where he kissed her and left
her, driving home as fast as he could, that he might not witness her
miserable death.
