eyes.  Instead of a crew of such sailors as we were accustomed to see,
there were only fifteen blacks standing on the quarter-deck and regarding
us with looks of undisguised alarm.  They were totally unarmed and most
of them unclothed; one or two, however, wore portions of European attire.
One had on a pair of duck trousers which were much too large for him and
stuck out in a most ungainly manner.  Another wore nothing but the common
scanty native garment round the loins, and a black beaver hat.  But the
most ludicrous personage of all, and one who seemed to be chief, was a
tall middle-aged man, of a mild, simple expression of countenance, who
wore a white cotton shirt, a swallow-tailed coat, and a straw hat, while
his black brawny legs were totally uncovered below the knees.

"Where's the commander of this ship?" inquired our captain, stepping up
to this individual.

"I is capin," he answered, taking off his straw hat and making a low bow.

"You!" said our captain, in surprise.  "Where do you come from, and where
are you bound?  What cargo have you aboard?"

"We is come," answered the man with the swallow-tail, "from Aitutaki; we
was go for Rarotonga.  We is native miss'nary ship; our name is de _Olive
Branch_; an' our cargo is two tons cocoa-nuts, seventy pigs, twenty cats,
and de Gosp'l."

This announcement was received by the crew of our vessel with a shout of
laughter, which, however, was peremptorily checked by the captain, whose
expression instantly changed from one of severity to that of frank
urbanity as he advanced towards the missionary and shook him warmly by
the hand.

"I am very glad to have fallen in with you," said he, "and I wish you
much success in your missionary labours.  Pray take me to your cabin, as
I wish to converse with you privately."

The missionary immediately took him by the hand, and as he led him away I
heard him saying, "Me most glad to find you trader; we t'ought you be
pirate.  You very like one 'bout the masts."

What conversation the captain had with this man I never heard, but he
came on deck again in a quarter of an hour, and, shaking hands cordially
with the missionary, ordered us into our boat and returned to the
schooner, which was immediately put before the wind.  In a few minutes
the _Olive Branch_ was left far behind us.

That afternoon, as I was down below at dinner, I heard the men talking
about this curious ship.

"I wonder," said one, "why our captain looked so sweet on yon swallow-
tailed super-cargo o' pigs and Gospels.  If it had been an ordinary
trader, now, he would have taken as many o' the pigs as he required and
sent the ship with all on board to the bottom."

"Why, Dick, you must be new to these seas if you don't know that," cried
another.  "The captain cares as much for the gospel as you do (an' that's
precious little), but he knows, and everybody knows, that the only place
among the southern islands where a ship can put in and get what she wants
in comfort, is where the gospel has been sent to.  There are hundreds o'
islands, at this blessed moment, where you might as well jump straight
into a shark's maw as land without a band o' thirty comrades armed to the
teeth to back you."

"Ay," said a man with a deep scar over his right eye, "Dick's new to the
work.  But if the captain takes us for a cargo o' sandal-wood to the
Feejees he'll get a taste o' these black gentry in their native
condition.  For my part I don't know, an' I don't care, what the gospel
does to them; but I know that when any o' the islands chance to get it,
trade goes all smooth an' easy; but where they ha'nt got it, Beelzebub
himself could hardly desire better company."

"Well, you ought to be a good judge," cried another, laughing, "for
you've never kept any company but the worst all your life!"

"Ralph Rover!" shouted a voice down the hatchway.  "Captain wants you,
aft."

Springing up the ladder I hastened to the cabin, pondering as I went the
strange testimony borne by these men to the effect of the gospel on
savage natures;--testimony which, as it was perfectly disinterested, I
had no doubt whatever was strictly true.

On coming again on deck I found Bloody Bill at the helm, and as we were
alone together I tried to draw him into conversation.  After repeating to
him the conversation in the forecastle about the missionaries, I said,--

"Tell me, Bill, is this schooner really a trader in sandal-wood?"

"Yes, Ralph, she is; but she's just as really a pirate.  The black flag
you saw flying at the peak was no deception."

"Then how can you say she's a trader?" asked I.

"Why, as to that, she trades when she can't take by force, but she takes
by force, when she can, in preference.  Ralph," he added, lowering his
voice, "if you had seen the bloody deeds that I have witnessed done on
these decks you would not need to ask if we were pirates.  But you'll
find it out soon enough.  As for the missionaries, the captain favours
them because they are useful to him.  The South-Sea islanders are such
incarnate fiends that they are the better of being tamed, and the
missionaries are the only men who can do it."

Our track after this lay through several clusters of small islets, among
which we were becalmed more than once.  During this part of our voyage
the watch on deck and the look-out at the mast-head were more than
usually vigilant, as we were not only in danger of being attacked by the
natives, who, I learned from the captain's remarks, were a bloody and
deceitful tribe at this group, but we were also exposed to much risk from
the multitudes of coral reefs that rose up in the channels between the
islands, some of them just above the surface, others a few feet below it.
Our precautions against the savages I found were indeed necessary.

One day we were becalmed among a group of small islands, most of which
appeared to be uninhabited.  As we were in want of fresh water the
captain sent the boat ashore to bring off a cask or two.  But we were
mistaken in thinking there were no natives; for scarcely had we drawn
near to the shore when a band of naked blacks rushed out of the bush and
assembled on the beach, brandishing their clubs and spears in a
threatening manner.  Our men were well armed, but refrained from showing
any signs of hostility, and rowed nearer in order to converse with the
natives; and I now found that more than one of the crew could imperfectly
speak dialects of the language peculiar to the South Sea islanders.  When
within forty yards of the shore, we ceased rowing, and the first mate
stood up to address the multitude; but, instead of answering us, they
replied with a shower of stones, some of which cut the men severely.
Instantly our muskets were levelled, and a volley was about to be fired,
when the captain hailed us in a loud voice from the schooner, which lay
not more than five or six hundred yards off the shore.

"Don't fire," he shouted, angrily.  "Pull off to the point ahead of you."

The men looked surprised at this order, and uttered deep curses as they
prepared to obey, for their wrath was roused and they burned for revenge.
Three or four of them hesitated, and seemed disposed to mutiny.

"Don't distress yourselves, lads," said the mate, while a bitter smile
curled his lip.  "Obey orders.  The captain's not the man to take an
insult tamely.  If Long Tom does not speak presently I'll give myself to
the sharks."

The men smiled significantly as they pulled from the shore, which was now
crowded with a dense mass of savages, amounting, probably, to five or six
hundred.  We had not rowed off above a couple of hundred yards when a
loud roar thundered over the sea, and the big brass gun sent a withering
shower of grape point blank into the midst of the living mass, through
which a wide lane was cut, while a yell, the like of which I could not
have imagined, burst from the miserable survivors as they fled to the
woods.  Amongst the heaps of dead that lay on the sand, just where they
had fallen, I could distinguish mutilated forms writhing in agony, while
ever and anon one and another rose convulsively from out the mass,
endeavoured to stagger towards the wood, and ere they had taken a few
steps, fell and wallowed on the bloody sand.  My blood curdled within me
as I witnessed this frightful and wanton slaughter; but I had little time
to think, for the captain's deep voice came again over the water towards
us: "Pull ashore, lads, and fill your water casks."  The men obeyed in
silence, and it seemed to me as if even their hard hearts were shocked by
the ruthless deed.  On gaining the mouth of the rivulet at which we
intended to take in water, we found it flowing with blood, for the
greater part of those who were slain had been standing on the banks of
the stream, a short way above its mouth.  Many of the wretched creatures
had fallen into it, and we found one body, which had been carried down,
jammed between two rocks, with the staring eyeballs turned towards us and
his black hair waving in the ripples of the blood-red stream.  No one
dared to oppose our landing now, so we carried our casks to a pool above
the murdered group, and having filled them, returned on board.
Fortunately a breeze sprang up soon afterwards and carried us away from
the dreadful spot; but it could not waft me away from the memory of what
I had seen.

"And this," thought I, gazing in horror at the captain, who, with a quiet
look of indifference, leaned upon the taffrail smoking a cigar and
contemplating the fertile green islets as they passed like a lovely
picture before our eyes--"this is the man who favours the missionaries
because they are useful to him and can tame the savages better than any
one else can do it!"  Then I wondered in my mind whether it were possible
for any missionary to tame _him_!




CHAPTER XXIV.


Bloody Bill is communicative and sagacious--Unpleasant
prospects--Retrospective meditations interrupted by volcanic agency--The
pirates negotiate with a Feejee chief--Various etceteras that are
calculated to surprise and horrify.

It was many days after the events just narrated ere I recovered a little
of my wonted spirits.  I could not shake off the feeling for a long time
that I was in a frightful dream, and the sight of our captain filled me
with so much horror that I kept out of his way as much as my duties about
the cabin would permit.  Fortunately he took so little notice of me that
he did not observe my changed feelings towards him, otherwise it might
have been worse for me.

But I was now resolved that I would run away the very first island we
should land at, and commit myself to the hospitality of the natives
rather than remain an hour longer than I could help in the pirate
schooner.  I pondered this subject a good deal, and at last made up my
mind to communicate my intention to Bloody Bill; for, during several
talks I had had with him of late, I felt assured that he too would
willingly escape if possible.  When I told him of my design he shook his
head.  "No, no, Ralph," said he, "you must not think of running away
here.  Among some of the groups of islands you might do so with safety,
but if you tried it here you would find that you had jumped out of the
fryin' pan into the fire."

"How so, Bill?" said I, "would the natives not receive me?"

"That they would, lad; but they would eat you too."

"Eat me!" said I in surprise, "I thought the South Sea islanders never
ate anybody except their enemies."

"Humph!" ejaculated Bill.  "I s'pose 'twas yer tender-hearted friends in
England that put that notion into your head.  There's a set o'
soft-hearted folk at home that I knows on, who don't like to have their
feelin's ruffled, and when you tell them anything they don't like--that
shocks them, as they call it--no matter how true it be, they stop their
ears and cry out, 'Oh, that is _too_ horrible!  We can't believe that!'
An' they say truth.  They can't believe it 'cause they won't believe it.
Now, I believe there's thousands o' the people in England who are sich
born drivellin' _won't-believers_ that they think the black fellows
hereaway, at the worst, eat an enemy only now an' then, out o' spite;
whereas, I know for certain, and many captains of the British and
American navies know as well as me, that the Feejee islanders eat not
only their enemies but one another; and they do it not for spite, but for
pleasure.  It's a _fact_ that they prefer human flesh to any other.  But
they don't like white men's flesh so well as black.  They say it makes
them sick."

"Why, Bill," said I, "you told me just now that they would eat _me_ if
they caught me."

"So I did; and so I think they would.  I've only heard some o' them say
they don't like white men _so well_ as black; but if they was hungry they
wouldn't be particular.  Anyhow, I'm sure they would kill you.  You see,
Ralph, I've been a good while in them parts, and I've visited the
different groups of islands oftentimes as a trader.  And thorough goin'
blackguards some o' them traders are.  No better than pirates, I can tell
you.  One captain that I sailed with was not a chip better than the one
we're with now.  He was tradin' with a friendly chief one day, aboard his
vessel.  The chief had swam off to us with the things for trade tied a-
top of his head, for them chaps are like otters in the water.  Well, the
chief was hard on the captain, and would not part with some o' his
things.  When their bargainin' was over they shook hands, and the chief
jumped over board to swim ashore; but before he got forty yards from the
ship the captain seized a musket and shot him dead.  He then hove up
anchor and put to sea, and as we sailed along shore, he dropped six black-
fellows with his rifle, remarkin' that 'that would spoil the trade for
the next comers.'  But, as I was sayin', I'm up to the ways o' these
fellows.  One o' the laws o' the country is, that every shipwrecked
person who happens to be cast ashore, be he dead or alive, is doomed to
be roasted and eaten.  There was a small tradin' schooner wrecked off one
of these islands when we were lyin' there in harbour during a storm.  The
crew was lost, all but three men, who swam ashore.  The moment they
landed they were seized by the natives and carried up into the woods.  We
knew pretty well what their fate would be, but we could not help them,
for our crew was small, and if we had gone ashore they would likely have
killed us all.  We never saw the three men again; but we heard frightful
yelling, and dancing, and merry-making that night; and one of the
natives, who came aboard to trade with us next day, told us that the
_long pigs_, as he called the men, had been roasted and eaten, and their
bones were to be converted into sail needles.  He also said that white
men were bad to eat, and that most o' the people on shore were sick."

I was very much shocked and cast down in my mind at this terrible account
of the natives, and asked Bill what he would advise me to do.  Looking
round the deck to make sure that we were not overheard, he lowered his
voice and said, "There are two or three ways that we might escape, Ralph,
but none o' them's easy.  If the captain would only sail for some o' the
islands near Tahiti, we might run away there well enough, because the
natives are all Christians; an' we find that wherever the savages take up
with Christianity they always give over their bloody ways, and are safe
to be trusted.  I never cared for Christianity myself," he continued, in
a soliloquising voice, "and I don't well know what it means; but a man
with half an eye can see what it does for these black critters.  However,
the captain always keeps a sharp look out after us when we get to these
islands, for he half suspects that one or two o' us are tired of his
company.  Then, we might manage to cut the boat adrift some fine night
when it's our watch on deck, and clear off before they discovered that we
were gone.  But we would run the risk o' bein' caught by the blacks.  I
wouldn't like to try that plan.  But you and I will think over it, Ralph,
and see what's to be done.  In the meantime it's our watch below, so I'll
go and turn in."

Bill then bade me good night, and went below, while a comrade took his
place at the helm; but, feeling no desire to enter into conversation with
him, I walked aft, and, leaning over the stern, looked down into the
phosphorescent waves that gargled around the ladder, and streamed out
like a flame of blue light in the vessel's wake.  My thoughts were very
sad, and I could scarce refrain from tears as I contrasted my present
wretched position with the happy, peaceful time, I had spent on the Coral
Island with my dear companions.  As I thought upon Jack and Peterkin
anxious forebodings crossed my mind, and I pictured to myself the grief
and dismay with which they would search every nook and corner of the
island, in a vain attempt to discover my dead body; for I felt assured
that if they did not see any sign of the pirate schooner or boat, when
they came out of the cave to look for me, they would never imagine that I
had been carried away.  I wondered, too, how Jack would succeed in
getting Peterkin out of the cave without my assistance; and I trembled
when I thought that he might lose presence of mind, and begin to kick
when he was in the tunnel!  These thoughts were suddenly interrupted and
put to flight by a bright red blaze which lighted up the horizon to the
southward, and cut a crimson glow far over the sea.  This appearance was
accompanied by a low growling sound, as of distant thunder, and, at the
same time, the sky above us became black, while a hot stifling wind blew
around us in fitful gusts.

The crew assembled hastily on deck, and most of them were under the
belief that a frightful hurricane was pending; but the captain coming on
deck, soon explained the phenomena.

"It's only a volcano," said he.  "I knew there was one hereabouts, but
thought it was extinct.  Up there and furl top-gallant-sails; we'll
likely have a breeze, and it's well to be ready."

As he spoke, a shower began to fall, which we quickly observed was not
rain, but fine ashes.  As we were many miles distant from the volcano,
these must have been carried to us from it by the wind.  As the captain
had predicted, a stiff breeze soon afterwards sprang up, under the
influence of which we speedily left the volcano far behind us; but during
the greater part of the night we could see its lurid glare and hear its
distant thunder.  The shower did not cease to fall for several hours, and
we must have sailed under it for nearly forty miles, perhaps farther.
When we emerged from the cloud, our decks and every part of the rigging
were completely covered with a thick coat of ashes.  I was much
interested in this, and recollected that Jack had often spoken of many of
the islands of the Pacific as being volcanoes, either active or extinct,
and had said that the whole region was more or less volcanic, and that
some scientific men were of opinion that the islands of the Pacific were
nothing more or less than the mountain tops of a huge continent which had
sunk under the influence of volcanic agency.

Three days after passing the volcano, we found ourselves a few miles to
windward of an island of considerable size and luxuriant aspect.  It
consisted of two mountains, which seemed to be nearly four thousand feet
high.  They were separated from each other by a broad valley, whose thick-
