begins before our attack, the artillerymen will prepare for action, and
may discover that the breeches of their guns are wet. Call up every man
at once, Mr. Johnson, and let them fall in on the battery; and do you,"
he turned to another, "run down to the Sikh Square and Martiniere
garrison, and warn them that a great attack is just going to be made.
Tell them that we are making a sortie, and ask them to bring every
rifle to bear on the houses to the left of the guns, so as to keep down
the infantry fire there."

In two minutes every man of the garrison was assembled in the battery,
even those from the roof being called down.

"Bring a dark lantern," Mr. Gubbins said; "it may be useful. Now, lads,
we are going to spike the guns; they have been rendered useless, so we
have only got to make a dash for them. The moment they are in our
possession, you, Mr. Johnson, with ten men, will clear the house
immediately behind it, and look for the magazine. Mr. Leathes, you,
with fifteen men, will move to the right a little; and you, Mr.
Percival, with your command, to the left. Do not go far, but each carry
a house or two, set them on fire, and fall back here when you hear the
bugle. I have got the hammer and spiking nails. Now, as quietly as you
can till you hear that we are discovered, and then go with a rush at
the guns."

In fact, they had gone very few paces before there was a shout in the
enemy's line. The noise of so many men stumbling over the _debris_ of
leveled houses was heard in an instant in the night air.

"Forward!" Mr. Gubbins shouted; "don't fire, give them the bayonet."

At a charge the little party rushed along. They were in the lane now,
and were able to run fast. The shout had been followed by a shot, then
by a dozen others, and then a rapid fire broke out from the houses and
walls in front.

They were still invisible, however, and the balls whistled overhead.
They heard the voice of the officer at the guns shout to his men:

"Steady; don't fire till they are on the crest, then blow them into
dust."

They topped the crest and rushed at the guns.

"Fire!" shouted the officer, but a cry of dismay alone answered his
words, and in a moment the British rushed on to the guns, and bayoneted
the astonished and dismayed enemy.

Then they separated each to the work assigned to them, while Mr.
Gubbins, with a man with the lantern, went from gun to gun and drove a
nail down the touchhole of each. Then he followed into the house
behind. Here a short but furious fight had taken place. The Sepoys
lodged there fought desperately but unavailingly. A few leaped from the
windows, but the rest were bayoneted. The fight was stern and silent;
no words were spoken, for the Sepoys knew that it was useless to ask
for quarter; the clashing of sabers against muskets, an occasional
sharp cry, and the sound of the falling of heavy bodies alone told of
the desperate struggle.

It ended just as Mr. Gubbins entered.

"Look about," he said; "they must have a magazine somewhere here;
perhaps a large one."

There was a rapid search.

"Here it is," Ned said, as he looked into a large outhouse behind the
building. "There are some twenty barrels of powder and a large quantity
of shot and shell."

"Break open a barrel, quick!" Mr. Gubbins said. "Mr. Johnson, I will do
this with the Warreners. Do you line that low wall, and keep back the
pandies a minute or two; they will be on us like a swarm of bees. Run
into the house," he said to Dick, as Mr. Johnson led his men forward to
the wall, "you will see a bucket of water in the first room. Bring it
here quick. Now then," he said, "empty this barrel among the others;
that's right, smash in the heads of three or four others with this
hammer. That's right," as Dick returned with the water. "Now fill your
cap with powder."

Dick did so, and Mr. Gubbins poured some water into it, stirred them
together till the powder was damped through, and with this made a train
some five feet long to the dry powder.

The party at the wall were now hotly engaged with a mass of advancing
enemy.

"Fall back, Mr. Johnson, quickly. Sound the retreat, bugler. Go along,
lads; I'll light the train."

He waited until the last man had passed, applied a lighted match to the
train, which began to fizz and sputter, and then ran out and followed
the rest, shutting the door of the magazine as he went out, in order
that the burning fuse should not be seen.

By this time the houses on either side were alight, and the whole party
were returning at a double toward the intrenchments.

As they neared the lines the enemy swarmed out from their cover, and
the head of the reinforcements were pouring out through the house into
the battery, when the earth shook, a mighty flash of fire lit the sky;
there was a roar like thunder, and most of the retreating party were
swept from their feet by the shock, while a shower of stones and timber
fell in a wide circle. They were soon up again, and scrambled over the
earthworks.

For a minute the explosion was succeeded by a deathlike stillness,
broken only by the sound of the falling fragments; then from the whole
circle of the British lines a great cheer of triumph rose up, while a
yell of fury answered them from the enemy's intrenchments.

"Any loss?" was Mr. Gubbins' first question.

"No one killed," was the report of the officers of the three sections.

"Any wounded?"

Four of the men stepped forward; two were slightly wounded only; two
were seriously hit, but a glance showed that the wounds were not of a
nature likely to be fatal.

"Hurrah! my lads," Mr. Gubbins said cheerily; "six guns spiked, our
garrison freed from that troublesome battery, a lesson given to the
enemy, and I expect a few hundred of them blown up, and all at the cost
of four wounded."

"Well done, indeed," a voice said; and General Inglis, with two or
three of his officers, stepped forward. "Gallantly done; but how was it
that the guns were silent? you could hardly have caught them asleep."

"No, sir," Mr. Gubbins said; "the gentlemen who brought in the message
from General Havelock, two days ago, went out on their own account, and
silenced the guns by wetting the priming."

A suppressed cheer broke from the whole party; for until now only Mr.
Johnson and those on guard with him knew what had happened, and the
silence of the guns had been a mystery to all.

"Step forward, young gentlemen, will you?" General Inglis said. "You
have done a most gallant action," he went on, shaking them by the hand,
"a most gallant action; and the whole garrison are greatly indebted to
you. I shall have great pleasure in reporting your gallant conduct to
the commander-in-chief, when the time comes for doing so. I will not
mar the pleasure which all feel at your deed by blaming you for acting
on your own inspiration, but I must do so to-morrow. Good fortune has
attended your enterprise, but the lives of brave men are too valuable
to allow them to undertake such risks as this on their own account. And
now that I have said what I was obliged to say, I ask you all to give
three cheers for our gallant young friends."

Three hearty cheers were given, and then the general hurried off to
superintend the preparations for the defense of the quarter threatened
by the attack from Johannes' house, if indeed that attack should not be
postponed, owing to the discouragement which the blow just inflicted
would naturally spread. Surrounded by their comrades, the Warreners
re-entered the house.

"What was that terrible explosion?" "What has happened?" was asked by a
score of female voices as they entered.

"Good news," Mr. Gubbins said; "you can sleep in peace. The guns of the
battery which has annoyed us are all spiked, and their magazine blown
up, and all this without the loss of a man, thanks to the Warreners,
who went out alone and disabled all the guns, by wetting the primings.
All your thanks are due to them."

There was a general cry of grateful joy; for since the battery had
begun to play upon the house, no one had felt that his own life or the
lives of those dearest to him were safe for a moment. All were dressed,
for in these times of peril no one went regularly to bed; and they now
crowded round the boys, shaking them by the hand, patting them on the
shoulders, many crying for very joy and relief.

Mrs. Hargreaves was standing at the door, and the boys went up to her.
She drew back the curtain for them to enter; for, sure that the boys
intended to carry out some desperate enterprise, none of her family had
even lain down. Mr. Hargreaves and Mr. Righton followed them in.

"We were all praying for you," she said simply, "as if you had been my
own sons; for you were doing as much for me and mine as my own could
have done;" and she kissed both their foreheads.

"I think, Mrs. Hargreaves," said Dick, with the demure impudence of a
midshipman, "that that ought to go round."

"I think you have fairly earned it, you impudent boy," Mrs. Hargreaves
said, smiling.

Mrs. Righton kissed Dick tearfully, for she was thinking that, had the
battery been silenced only one day earlier, her little one would have
been saved. Edith glanced at her mother, and allowed Dick to kiss her;
while Nelly threw her arms round his neck and kissed him heartily,
telling him he was a darling boy.

Ned, who possessed none of the impudence of his brother, and who was
moreover at the age when many boys become bashful with women, contented
himself with shaking hands with Mrs. Righton and Edith, and would have
done the same with Nelly, but that young lady put up her cheek with a
laugh.

"I choose to be kissed, sir," she said; "it is not much kissing that we
get here, goodness knows."




CHAPTER XVI.

A SORTIE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.


The night passed off without the expected attack from Johannes' house,
the rebels being too much disconcerted by the destruction of the
battery, and the loss of so many men, to attempt any offensive
operations. The destruction of the house behind the guns, and of all
those in its vicinity, deterred them from re-establishing a battery in
the same place, as there would be no shelter for the infantry
supporting the guns; and after the result of the sortie it was evident
to them that a large force must be kept in readiness to repel the
attacks of the British.

For a few days life was more tolerable in Gubbins' garrison; for
although shot and shell frequently struck the house, and batteries
multiplied in the circle around, none kept up so deadly and accurate a
fire as that which they had destroyed.

The Warreners took their fair share in all the heavy fatigue work, and
in the picket duty in the battery or on the roof; but they enjoyed
their intervals of repose, which were now always spent with Mr.
Hargreaves' family.

Mr. Hargreaves was collector of a district near Lucknow, and was high
in the Civil Service. He was a fit husband for his kindly wife; and as
Mr. Righton was of a cheerful and hopeful disposition, the boys found
themselves members of a charming family circle. Often and often they
wished that their father, sister, and cousin could but join them; or
rather, as Ned said, they could join the party without, for no one
could wish that any they loved should be at Lucknow at that time.

One evening late they were sitting together in a group outside the
house, the enemy's fire being slack, when Mr. Johnson came up from the
battery to Mr. Gubbins, who formed one of the party.

"I am afraid, sir, they are mining again; lying on the ground, we think
we can hear the sound of blows."

"That is bad," Mr. Gubbins said; "I heard this afternoon that they
believe that two mines are being driven from Johannes' house in the
direction of the Martiniere, and the brigade messhouse; now we are to
have our turn, eh? Well, we blew in the last they tried, and must do it
again; but it is so much more hard work. Now, gentlemen, let us see who
has the best ears. Excuse us, Mrs. Hargreaves, we shall not be long
away."

On entering the battery they found the men on guard all lying down
listening, and were soon at full length with their ears to the ground.
All could hear the sound; it was very faint, as faint as the muffled
tick of a watch, sometimes beating at regular intervals of a second or
so, sometimes ceasing for a minute or two.

"There is no doubt they are mining," Mr. Gubbins said; "the question
is, from which way are they coming."

None could give an opinion. The sound was so faint, and seemed to come
so directly from below, that the ear could not discriminate in the
slightest.

"At any rate," Mr. Gubbins said, "we must begin at once to sink a
shaft. If, when we get down a bit, we cannot judge as to the direction,
we must drive two or three listening galleries in different directions.
But before we begin we must let Major Anderson, of the Royal Engineers,
know, and take his advice; he is in command of all mining operations."

In ten minutes Major Anderson was on the ground.

"The fellows are taking to mining in earnest," he said; "this is the
third we have discovered to-day, and how many more there may be,
goodness only knows. I think you had better begin here," he said to Mr.
Gubbins. "You have got tools, I think. Say about six feet square, then
two men can work at once. I will be here the first thing in the
morning, and then we will look round and see which is the likeliest
spot for the fellows to be working from. Will you ask your sentries on
the roof to listen closely to-night, in order to detect, if possible, a
stir of men coming or going from any given point."

Picks and shovels were brought out, the garrison told off into working
parties of four each, to relieve each other every hour, and the work
began. Well-sinking is hard work in any climate, but with a thermometer
marking a hundred and five at night, it is terrible; and each set of
workers, as they came up bathed in perspiration, threw themselves on
the ground utterly exhausted. Mr. Hargreaves and a few of the elders of
the garrison were excused this work, and took extra duty on the terrace
and battery.

The next day it was decided that the enemy were probably working from a
ruined house near their former battery, and a gallery was begun from
the bottom of the shaft. This was pushed on night and day for three
days, the workers being now certain, from the rapidly increasing sound
of the workers, that this was the line by which the enemy was
approaching. The gallery was driven nearly twenty yards, and then three
barrels of powder were stored there, and the besieged awaited the
approach of the rebels' gallery.

The Sepoys had now erected batteries whose cross fire swept the ground
outside the intrenchments, so that a sortie could no longer be carried
out with any hope of success. Had it been possible to have attempted
it, a party would have gone out, and driving off any guard that might
have been placed, entered the enemy's gallery and caught them at their
work. A sentry was placed continually in the gallery, and each hour the
sound of the pick and crowbar became louder.

On the fifth day the engineers judged that there could not be more than
a yard of earth between them. The train was laid now, and a cautious
watch kept, until, just at the moment when it was thought that an
opening would be made, the train was fired. The earth heaved, and a
great opening was made, while a shower of stones flew high in the air.
The enemy's gallery was blown in, and the men working destroyed, and a
loud cheer broke from the garrison at the defeat of another attempt
upon them.

The month of August began badly in Lucknow. Major Banks, the civil
commissioner named by Sir Henry Lawrence to succeed him, was shot dead
while reconnoitering from the top of an outhouse. The Reverend Mr.
Polehampton, who had been wounded at the commencement of the siege, was
killed, as were Lieutenants Lewin, Shepherd, and Archer.

On the 8th large bodies of Sepoys were observed to enter the city, and
on the 10th a furious attack was made all round the British line. Every
man capable of bearing arms stood at his post, and even the sick and
wounded crawled out of hospital and took posts on housetops wherever
they could fire on the foe. The din was prodigious--the yells of the
enemy, their tremendous fire of musketry, the incessant roar of their
cannon, but they lacked heart for close fighting.

Frequently large bodies of men showed from behind their shelter, and,
carrying ladders, advanced as if with the determination of making an
assault. Each time, however, the withering fire opened upon them from
the line of earthworks, from the roof of every house, and the storm of
grape from the batteries, caused them to waver and fall back. Each
fresh effort was led by brave men, fanatics, who advanced alone far in
front of the rest, shrieking, "Death to the infidel!"

But they died, and their spirit failed to animate their followers. Only
once or twice did the assailing parties get near the line of
intrenchments, and then but to fall back rapidly after heavy loss.

Day after day the position of the besieged grew more unendurable. The
buildings were crumbling away under the heavy and continued fire; and
as one after another became absolutely untenable, the ladies and
children were more closely crowded in those which still offered some
sort of shelter. Even death, fearful as were its ravages, did not
suffice to counteract the closeness of the packing. Crowded in dark
rooms, living on the most meager food--for all the comforts, such as
tea, sugar, wine, spirits, etc., were exhausted, and even the bread was
made of flour ground, each for himself, between rough stones--without
proper medicines, attendance, or even bedding; tormented by a plague of
flies, sickened by disgusting smells, condemned to inaction and
confinement, the women and children died off rapidly, and the men,
although better off with regard to light and air, sickened fast. Half
the officers were laid up with disease, and all were lowered in health
and strength.

On the 18th, as the Warreners had just returned from a heavy night's
work, strengthening the defenses, and burying horses and cattle, a
great explosion was heard, and one of those posted on the roof ran down
shouting:

"To arms! they have fired a mine under the Sikh Square!"

Every man caught up his rifle and rushed to the spot. The mine had
carried away a portion of the exterior defense, and the enemy, with
yells of triumph, rushed forward toward the opening. Then ensued a
furious _melee_; each man fought for himself, hand to hand, in the
breach; Mussulmen and Englishmen struggled in deadly combat; the crack
of the revolver, the thud of the clubbed guns, the clash of sword
against steel, the British cheer and the native yell, were mingled in
wild confusion. While some drove the enemy back, others brought boxes
and beams, fascines and sandbags, to repair the breach. The enemy were
forced back, and the British poured out with shouts of triumph.

Our men's blood was up, and they followed their advantage. Part of the
engineers, ever on the alert, joined the throng with some barrels of
powder, and the enemy were pushed back sufficiently far to enable some
of the houses, from which we had been greatly annoyed by the enemy's
sharpshooters, to be blown up.
