
"It is this, darling--your father has bought Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"Oh! and given it to the O'Shanaghgans. Why did he do that?"

"He has bought it, but he has not given it to the O'Shanaghgans. Some
day, if Terence turns out worthy, the old place will doubtless be
his, as we have no son of our own; but at present it is your father's
property; he has bought it."

"Then no wonder poor Nora is sad," said Linda. "I can understand her;
she is fond of the old place."

"But why should she be sad? They are not going; they are to stay there,
practically owners of all they possess; for, although the property
is really your father's, he will only exercise sufficient control to
prevent that poor, wild, eccentric uncle of yours from throwing good
money after bad. To all intents and purposes the O'Shanaghgans still
hold possession; only now, my dear Linda, they will have a beautiful
house, magnificently furnished. The grounds are carefully attended to,
good gardeners provided, English servants sent for, and the whole place
made suitable for your father's sister."

"But does Nora know of this?"

"I suppose so. I know your father said she was to be told."

"She is very miserable about something. I cannot understand her," said
Linda. "I tell you what, I'll just go down and tell her. Perhaps those
two letters were nothing but grumbles; and the O'Shanaghgans did not
know then the happiness that was in store for them."

"You can tell her if you like, dear."

"I will, I will," said Linda. She jumped off her mother's bed and ran
downstairs.

Nora was standing in the conservatory. She was gazing straight before
her, not at the great, tall, flowering cactus nor the orchids, nor
the mass of geraniums and pelargoniums of every shade and hue--she was
seeing a picture of a wild, wild lonely place, of a bare old house, of
a seashore that was like no other seashore in the world. She was looking
at this picture with all the heart of which she was capable shining in
her eyes; and she knew that she was looking at it in imagination only,
and that she would never see the real picture again, for the wild old
place was wild no longer, and in Nora's opinion the glory had departed.
She turned when Linda's somewhat mincing voice fell upon her ears.

"How you startled me!" she said. "What is it?"

"Oh, good news," said Linda. "I am not quite so bad as you think
me, Nora, and I am delighted. Mother has told me everything. Castle
O'Shanaghgan is yours to live in as long as ever you care to do so. Of
course it belongs to us; but that does not matter, and it is furnished
from attic to cellar most splendidly, and there are English servants,
and there are--"

"Everything abominable and odious and horrible!" burst from Nora's
lips. "Oh, don't keep me; don't keep me! I am smothered at the
thought--O'Shanaghgan is ruined--ruined!"

She ran away from her cousin out into the air. At headlong speed did
she go, until at last she found herself in the most remote and least
cultivated part of the plantation.

Oh, to be alone! Now she could cry, and cry she did right bitterly.




CHAPTER XXIII.


THE BOX OF BON-BONS.

It occurred to Stephanotie that, as she could not wear the rose-colored
dress, as she must go perforce to the Hartricks' in her dove-colored
cashmere, with its very neat velvet collar and cuffs, she would at least
make her entrance a little striking.

"Why not take a box of bon-bons to Mrs. Hartrick?" she said to herself.
"There's that great big new box which I have not opened yet It contains
dozens of every kind of sweetmeat. I'll present it to her; she'll be
pleased with the attention."

The box was a very large one; on its lid was painted a picture of two or
three cupids hovering in the air, some of them touching the shoulders of
a pretty girl who was supposed to be opening a box of chocolates. There
was a good deal of color and embossed writing also on the cover, and
altogether it was as showy and, in Stephanotie's opinion, as handsome a
thing as anybody could desire.

She walked through the village, holding the box, tied with great bunches
of red ribbon, in her hand. She scorned to put a brown-paper cover
over it; she would take it in all its naked glory into the midst of the
Hartrick household.

On her way she met the other two girls who were also going to spend an
afternoon at The Laurels. Rose and Mabel Armitage were the daughters of
a neighbouring squire. They were nice girls, but conventional.

There was nothing original about either of them; but they were very
much respected in the school, not only on account of their father's
position--he represented the county in the House--but also because they
were good, industrious, and so-called clever. The Armitages took prizes
at every examination. Their French was considered very nearly Parisian
in accent; their drawings were all in absolutely perfect proportions.
It is true the trees in Rose's landscapes looked a little stiff; but how
carefully she laid on her water-colors; how honestly she endeavored to
copy her master's smallest requirements! Then Mabel played with great
correctness, never for a single moment allowing a wrong note to appear;
and they both sang, very prettily, simple little ballads; and they were
dressed with exquisite neatness and propriety in very quiet colors--dark
blues, very dark reds, pretty, neat blouses, suitable skirts. Their hair
was shiny, and sat in little tight tendrils and pretty curls round their
heads. They were as like as two peas--each girl had a prim little mouth
with rosy lips; each girl possessed an immaculate set of white teeth;
each girl had a little, straight nose and pretty, clear gray-blue eyes;
their foreheads were low, their eyebrows penciled and delicately marked.
They had neat little figures; they were neat in every way, neat in soul
too; admirable little people, but commonplace. And, just because they
were commonplace, they did not like fiery-red-haired Stephanotie; they
thought Molly the essence of vulgarity; they secretly admired beautiful
Nora, but thought her manners and style of conversation deplorable; and
they adored Linda as a kindred spirit.

Seeing them walking on in advance, like a little pair of doves,
Stephanotie quickened her steps until she came up to them.

"Hallo!" she said; "you guess where I'm off to?"

"I am sure I cannot say," answered Rose, turning gently round.

Mabel was always Rose's echo.

"I cannot say," she repeated.

"Well, I can guess where you're going. You're going to have a right down
good time at The Laurels--guess I'm right?"

"We are going to spend an afternoon at The Laurels," said Rose.

"An afternoon at The Laurels," echoed Mabel.

"And so am I--that's the best of the fun," said Stephanotie; "and I mean
to give her something to remember me by."

"Whom do you mean?" said Rose.

"Why, my good, respected hostess, Mrs. Hartrick."

"What do you mean to give her?" asked Rose.

"This. How do you like it? It's full of bon-bons."

Rose, notwithstanding her virtuous and commonplace mind, had a secret
leaning toward bon-bons. She did not dare to confess it even to Mabel;
for Mabel also had a secret leaning, and did not dare to confess it to
Rose. It was not _comme il faut_ in their family for the girls of the
house to indulge in bon-bons; but still, they would have liked some of
those delicious sweets, and had often envied Stephanotie when she was
showing them to her companions.

Of course, not for worlds would they have been friendly with the
terrible American girl; but they did envy her her boxes of sweets.

"How gay!" said Rose, looking at the startling cover, with its cupids
and its greedy-looking maiden.

"How jolly," said the American girl--"how luscious when you're eating
them! Would you like to see them inside?"

"Oh, I think not," said Rose.

"Better not," said Mabel.

"But why better not?" continued Stephanotie. "It's natural that girls
like us should like sweetmeats, bon-bons, or anything of that sort.
Here, there's a nice little bit of shelter under this tree, and there's
no one looking. I'll untie the ribbons; just hold the box, Rose."

Rose held it. Stephanotie hastily pulled off the red ribbons and lifted
the cover. Oh, how delicious the inside did look!--rows upon rows of
every imaginable sweet--cream-colored sweets, rose-colored, green,
white; plums, apples, pears, figs, chocolates; every sort that the heart
of girl could desire lay before them in rows on rows.

"They are, every one of them, for Mrs. Hartrick," said Stephanotie, "and
you mustn't touch them. But I have got two boxes in my pocket; they make
it bulge out; I should be glad to get rid of them. We'll tie this up,
but you'll each have one of my boxes."

In a jiffy the big box was tied up again with its huge crimson bows, and
each of the Armitage girls possessed one of the American girl's boxes of
bon-bons.

"Aren't they pretty? Do have some; you don't know how long you may be
kept waiting for your tea," said Stephanotie as she danced beside her
companions up the avenue.

In this fashion, therefore, did the three enter the house, for both
of the Armitages had yielded to temptation, and each girl was just
finishing a large bon-bon when they appeared on the scene.

Mrs. Hartrick was standing in the great square central hall, waiting for
her guests.

Stephanotie ran up to her.

"It's very good of you indeed to ask me," she said; "and please accept
this--won't you? It's from an American girl, a trophy to remember her
by."

"Indeed?" said Mrs. Hartrick, flushing very brightly. She stepped back a
little; the huge box of bon-bons was forced into her hands.

"Jehoshaphat!" exclaimed Molly.

"Molly!" said her mother.

Linda uttered a little sigh. Rose and Mabel immediately became as
discreet and commonplace and proper as they could be; but Stephanotie
knew that the boxes of bon-bons were reposing in each of their pockets
and her spirits rose higher than ever.

"Where is Irish Nora?" she said. "It's she that is fond of a good sweet
such as they make for us in the States. But have the box--won't you,
Mrs. Hartrick? I have brought it to you as a token of my regard."

"Indeed? Thank you very much, Miss Miller," said Mrs. Hartrick in a
chilly voice. She laid the box on a side-table.




CHAPTER XXIV.


THE TELEGRAM,

The girls went out into the grounds. The afternoon happened to be a
perfect one; the air was balmy, with a touch of the Indian summer
about it. The last roses were blooming on their respective bushes; the
geraniums were making a good show in the carefully laid out beds. There
were clumps of asters and dahlias to be seen in every direction; some
late poppies and some sweet-peas and mignonette made the borders still
look very attractive, and the chrysanthemums were beginning to appear.

"In a week's time they will be splendid," said Linda, piloting her two
friends through the largest of the greenhouses.

"Do come away," said Molly; "when Linda speaks in that prim voice
she's intolerable. Come, Nora; come, Stephie--we'll just have a run by
ourselves."

Nora was still looking rather pale. The shock of the morning had caused
the color to fade from her cheeks; she could not get the utterly changed
O'Shanaghgan out of her head. She longed to write to her father, and yet
she did not dare.

Stephanotie looked at her with the curious, keen glance which an
American girl possesses.

"What is it? Do say," she said, linking her hand inside Nora's. "Is it
anything that a bon-bon will soothe, or is it past that?"

"It is quite past that; but don't ask me now, Stephie. I cannot tell
you, really."

"Don't bother her," said Molly; "she has partly confided in me, but not
wholly. We'll have a good time by ourselves. What game do you think we
had best play, Stephie?"

"I'm not one for games at all," answered Stephanotie. "Girls of my
age don't play games. They are thinking seriously of the business of
life--the flirtations and the jolly time they are going to have before
they settle down to their staid married life. You English are so very
childish."

"And we Irish are childish too," said Nora. "It's lovely to be
childish," she added. "I hate to put away childish things."

"Oh, dear! so that is the Irish and English way," said Stephanotie. "But
there, don't let us talk nationalities; let's be cozy and cheerful. I
can tell you I did feel annoyed at coming here such a dowd; it was not
my fault. I meant to make an impression; I did, really and truly. It
was very good of you, Molly, to ask me; and I know that proud lady,
your mother, didn't want to have me a bit. I am nothing but Stephanotie
Miller, and she doesn't know the style we live in at home. If she did,
maybe she would open her eyes a little; but she doesn't, and that's
flat; and I am vulgar, or supposed to be, just because I am frank and
open, and I have no concealment about me. I call a spade a spade."

"Oh, hurrah! so do I," said Molly, the irrepressible.

"Well, my dear, I don't use your words; they wouldn't suit me at all,"
said the American girl. "I never call out Jehoshaphat the way you do,
whoever Jehoshaphat _is_; but I have my little eccentricities, and they
run to pretty and gay dresses--dresses with bright colors and quantities
of lace on them--and bon-bons at all hours, in season and out of season.
It's easy to content me, and I don't see why my little innocent wishes
should not be gratified."

"But you are very nicely dressed now," said Nora, looking with approval
at the gray cashmere.

"Me nicely dressed!" screamed Stephanotie. "Do you call this dress nice?
Why, I do declare it's a perfect shame that I should be made such a
spectacle. It don't suit my hair. When I am ordering a dress I choose
shades of red; they tone me down. I am fiery to-day--am I not, Molly?"

"Well, you certainly are," said Molly. "But what--what did you do to
it?"

"To my locks, do you mean?"

"Yes. They do stick out so funnily. I know mother was shocked; she likes
our heads to be perfectly smooth.'

"Like the Armitages', for instance," said Stephanotie.

"Well, yes; something like theirs. They are pretty girls, are they not?"

"Yes," said Stephanotie; "but don't they give you the quivers? Don't you
feel as if you were rubbed the wrong way the moment you speak to them?"

"I don't take to them," said Molly; "but I think they're pretty."

"They're just like what O'Shanaghgan is now," thought Nora, who did
not speak. "They are all prim and proper; there's not a single wildness
allowed to come out anywhere."

"But they're for all the world like anybody else," said Stephanotie.
"Don't they love sweeties just! If you' had seen them--the greedy way
they took the bon-bons out of the little boxes I gave them. Oh, they're
just like anybody else, only they are playing parts; they are little
actors; they're always acting. I'd like to catch them when they were
not. I'd like to have them for one wild week, with you, Molly, and you,
Nora. I tell you there would be a fine change in them both."

"There's a telegraph-boy coming down the avenue," cried Molly suddenly.
"I'll run and see what is the matter?"

Nora did not know why her heart beat. Telegrams arrived every day at The
Laurels. Nevertheless she felt sure that this was no ordinary message;
she stood now and stared at that boy as though her eyes would start from
their sockets.

"What is the matter?" said Stephanotie.

"Nothing--nothing."

"You're vexed about something. Why should you be so distant with me?"

"I am not, Stephie. I am a little anxious; it is difficult always to be
just the same," said Nora.

"Oh, don't I know it, my darling; and if you had as much to do with Aunt
Vi Truefitt as I have, you would realize how often _my_ spirits turn
topsy-turvy. I often hope that I'll be Englishized quickly, so that I
may get back to my dear parents. But there, Molly is coming back."

"The telegram was for mother," she said. "Do let us play."

Nora looked at Molly. Her face was red; it was usually pale. Nora
wondered what had brought that high color into her cheeks. Molly seemed
excited, and did not want to meet her cousin's eyes.
