of my own accord. Captain Haley, with his own hands, tied me to a tree
on a small island in the Southern Ocean, and there left me, as he
supposed, to a solitary death. But Heaven did not forsake me, and sent
first a brave sailor and afterward a ship to my assistance. The charge
that I stole money from him I shall not answer, for I know Mr. Morgan
will not believe it."

Captain Haley was not a fool, and he knew that it would be useless to
press the charge further. He rose from his seat; his face was dark with
anger and smarting under a sense of defeat.

"You have not done with me yet," he said to Robert, and without another
word left the office.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


THE CUP AND THE LIP.

Affairs in Millville had gone on much as usual. Mrs. Rushton had not yet
exhausted the supply of money left by Robert in the hands of his friend
the lawyer. Her expenses were small, and were eked out by her earnings;
for she continued to braid straw, and was able in this way to earn two
dollars a week. Indeed, she made it a point to be as economical as
possible, for she thought it likely Robert would spend all his money,
and return penniless. She had received no letter from him since the one
announcing his being about to sail for Calcutta, and this made her
naturally anxious. But Mr. Paine assured her that letters were likely to
be irregular, and there was no ground for alarm. So she waited with what
patience she could till Robert should return, hoping that by some
strange chance he might succeed in his quest, and bring his father back
with him.

Meanwhile, fortune had improved with Mr. Davis, the superintendent of
the factory. He had lost largely by speculation, but had blundered at
last into the purchase of a stock in which some interested parties had
effected a corner. It went up rapidly, and on the morning when we
introduce him again to the reader he was in high good spirits, having
just received intelligence from his broker that he had cleared seven
thousand dollars by selling at the top of the market.

"Another cup of coffee, Mrs. Davis," he said, passing his cup across the
table.

Seeing that his father appeared in good humor, Halbert ventured to
prefer a request, which, however, he had little hope of having granted.

"Have you seen Will Paine's pony?" he said, paving the way for the
request.

"Yes," said his father; "I saw him on it yesterday."

"It's a regular beauty--I wish I had one."

"How much did it cost?"

"Two hundred dollars."

"That is rather a high price."

"But it will increase in value every year. I wish you would buy me one,
father."

"I think I will," said the superintendent, helping himself to a fresh
slice of toast.

"Do you mean it?" asked Halbert, in the utmost astonishment.

"Certainly I do. I can afford you a pony as well as Mr. Paine can
afford to buy William one."

"Thank you!" said Halbert, his selfish nature more nearly affected by
gratitude than ever before. "You are very kind. When will you see about
it?"

"I am busy. You may go yourself and ask Mr. Paine where he got William's
pony, and if he knows of any other equally good."

"That I will," said Halbert, leaving the table in haste.

"Halbert, you have eaten scarcely anything," said his mother.

"I am not hungry," said the excited boy, seizing his hat, and dashing
off in the direction of Mr. Paine's office.

"By the way, Mrs. Davis," said the husband, "I think you mentioned last
week that the parlor needed a new carpet."

"So it does. The old one is looking very shabby."

"How much will a new one cost?"

"I can get a nice Brussels for a hundred dollars."

"Well, you may order one."

It was the wife's turn to be astonished, for on broaching the subject
the week previous, her husband had given her a lecture on extravagance,
and absolutely refused to consider her request. This was before the
tidings of his good fortune. She was not slow to accept the present
concession, and assumed an unusually affectionate manner, in the excess
of her delight.

Meanwhile, Halbert, in opening the front door, came in collision with a
boy taller and stouter than himself, brown and sunburned. But, changed
as he was, he was not slow in recognizing his old enemy, Robert Rushton.

"What, are you back again?" he said, ungraciously.

"So it appears. Is your father at home?"

"Yes; but he is at breakfast. I don't think you can see him."

"I'll make the attempt, at any rate," said Robert.

"Where have you been all this time?" asked Halbert, more from curiosity
than interest.

"I went to Calcutta."

"Common sailor, I suppose," said Halbert, contemptuously.

"No, I was a passenger."

"Where did you get your money to pay the passage?"

"I'm sorry that I can't stop to gratify your curiosity just at present,
but I have important business with your father."

"You're getting mighty important," sneered Halbert.

"Am I?"

"I wouldn't advise you to put on so many airs, just because you've been
to Calcutta."

"I never thought of putting on any. I see you haven't changed much since
I went away. You have the same agreeable, gentlemanly manners."

"Do you mean to say that I am not a gentleman?" blustered Halbert.

"Not at all. You may be one, but you don't show it."

"I have a great mind to put you out of the yard."

Robert glanced at Halbert's figure, slight compared with his own, and
laughed.

"I think you would find it a difficult undertaking," he said.

Halbert privately came to the same conclusion, and decided to war only
with words.

"I have got something better to do than to stand here listening to your
impudence. I won't soil my fingers by touching you."

"That's a sensible conclusion. Good-morning."

Halbert did not deign to respond, but walked off, holding his nose very
high in the air. Then, as he thought of the pony, he quickened his pace,
and bent his steps to Mr. Paine's office.

"A young man to see you, Mr. Davis," said Bridget, entering the
breakfast-room.

"Who is it?"

"I think it's young Robert Rushton, but he's much grown entirely."

"That boy home again!" exclaimed the superintendent, in displeased
surprise. "Well, you may ask him into the next room."

"Good-morning, Mr. Davis," said Robert, as the superintendent entered.

"Good-morning. When did you get home?" was the cold reply.

"Last evening."

"Where have you been?"

"To Calcutta."

"On a fool's errand."

"I felt it my duty to search for my father."

"I could have told you beforehand you would not succeed. Did you go as a
sailor?"

"No."

"Where did you raise money to pay your expenses?"

"I found friends who helped me."

"It is a poor policy for a boy to live on charity."

"I never intend to do it," said Robert, firmly. "But I would rather do
it than live on money that did not belong to me."

"What do you mean by that, sir?" said the superintendent, suspiciously.

"It was a general remark," said Robert.

"May I ask what is your motive in calling upon me?" asked Mr. Davis. "I
suppose you have some object."

"I have, and I think you can guess it."

"I am not good at guessing," said Davis, haughtily.

"Then I will not put you to that trouble. You remember, before I sailed
for Calcutta, I called here and asked you to restore the sum of five
thousand dollars deposited with you by my father?"

"I remember it, and at the time I stigmatized the claim as a fraudulent
one. No such sum was ever deposited with me by your father."

"How can you say that, when my father expressly stated it in the letter,
written by him, from the boat in which he was drifting about on the
ocean?"

"I have no proof that the letter was genuine, and even if it were, I
deny the claim. I am not responsible for money I never received."

"I understand you then refuse to pay the money?"

"You would have understood it long ago, if you had not been uncommonly
thick-headed," sneered the superintendent. "Let this be the end of it.
When you present my note of acknowledgment for the amount, I will pay
it and not before."

"That is all I ask," said Robert.

"What?" demanded the superintendent.

"I mean that this assurance is all I want. The note shall be presented
to you in the course of the day."

"What do you mean?" asked Davis, startled.

"I mean this, Mr. Davis: that I found my father in Calcutta. He came
home with me, and, far from having perished at sea, is now alive and
well. He has with him your note for five thousand dollars, and will
present it in person."

"You are deceiving me!" exclaimed Davis, in consternation.

"You will soon learn whether I am deceiving you or not," said Robert. "I
will now bid you good-morning. My father will call upon you in the
course of the day."

He rose to go, leaving the superintendent thunderstruck at the
intelligence of Captain Rushton's return. The five thousand dollars,
with arrears of interest, would take the greater part of the money whose
sudden acquisition had so elated him. While he was considering the
situation, his wife entered.

"I think, Mr. Davis," she said, "I will go to New York to-day to buy
carpeting, if you can spare the money."

"Neither now nor at any other time," he roared, savagely; "the old
carpet must do."

"Why, then, did you tell me fifteen minutes since that I might buy one?
What do you mean by such trifling, Mr. Davis?" said his wife, her eyes
flashing.

"I mean what I say. I've changed my mind. I can't afford to buy a new
carpet."

There was a stormy scene between man and wife, which may be passed over
in silence. It ended with a fit of hysterics on the part of Mrs. Davis,
while her husband put on his hat and walked gloomily over to the
factory. Here he soon received a call from Halbert, who informed him,
with great elation, that Mr. Paine knew of a desirable pony which could
be had on the same terms as his son's.

"I've changed my mind," said his father. "A pony will cost too much
money."

All Halbert's entreaties were unavailing, and he finally left his
father's presence in a very unfilial frame of mind.




CHAPTER XXXV.


CONCLUSION.

The arrival of Captain Rushton, confidently supposed to be dead,
produced a great sensation in Millville, and many were the
congratulatory visits received at the little cottage. Mrs. Rushton was
doubly happy at the unexpected return of her husband and son, and felt
for the first time in her life perfectly happy. She cared little for
poverty or riches, as long as she had regained her chief treasures.

When Captain Rushton called upon the superintendent, the latter received
him with embarrassment, knowing that the captain was aware of his
intended dishonesty. He tried to evade immediate payment, but on this
point his creditor was peremptory. He had no further confidence in Mr.
Davis, and felt that the sooner he got his money back into his hands the
better. It was fortunate for him that the superintendent had been at
last successful in speculation, or restitution would have been
impossible. As is was, he received his money in full, nearly six
thousand dollars, which he at once invested in bank stock of reliable
city banks, yielding a good annual income. Only the day after the
payment of this sum, a committee of investigation appointed by the
directors, whose suspicions had been excited, visited the factory, and
subjected the superintendent's books to a thorough scrutiny. The result
showed that Mr. Davis, in whom hitherto perfect confidence had been
felt, had for years pursued a system of embezzlement, which he had
covered up by false entries in his books, and had appropriated to his
own use from fifteen to twenty thousand dollars belonging to the
corporation. While this investigation was pending, the superintendent
disappeared, leaving his wife and son unprovided for. His estate was
seized in part satisfaction of the amounts he had appropriated, and
Halbert's pride was brought low. The wealth and position upon which he
had based his aristocratic pretensions vanished, and in bitter
mortification he found himself reduced to poverty. He could no longer
flaunt his cane and promenade the streets in kid gloves, but was glad to
accept a position in the factory store, where he was compelled to dress
according to his work. In fact, he had exchanged positions with Robert,
who was now, owing to a circumstance which will at once be mentioned,
possessed of a considerable inheritance.

The old farmer, Paul Nichols, whom Robert tried to defend from his
unprincipled nephew, Ben Haley, died suddenly of heart disease.
Speculation was rife as to who would inherit the estate which he left
behind him. He had no near relation except Ben Haley, and so great was
the dislike he entertained toward him that no one anticipated that the
estate would go to him, unless through Paul's dying intestate. But
shortly after Haley's visit, his uncle made a will, which he deposited
in the hands of Lawyer Paine. On the day after the funeral, the latter
met Captain Rushton and Robert, and said:

"Will you come to my office this afternoon at three o'clock?"

"Certainly," said the captain.

"I suppose you don't want me, Mr. Paine?" said Robert.

"I do want you, particularly," said the lawyer.

Our hero wondered a little why his presence was required, but dismissed
the matter from his mind, until three o'clock found him in the lawyer's
office.

"Gentlemen," said the lawyer, "I am about to read the last will and
testament of our neighbor, Paul Nichols, recently deceased."

This preamble created surprise, for this was the first intimation that
such a will was in existence.

The document was brief, and the substance of it was contained in the
following paragraph:

"Having no near relatives, except Benjamin Haley, for whom I have
neither regard nor affection, and who, moreover, has recently stolen a
considerable sum of money from me, I leave all of which I may die
possessed, whether in land or money, to my brave young friend, Robert
Rushton, who courageously defended me from my said nephew, at his own
bodily risk, and I hope he may live long to enjoy the property I
bequeath him."

No one was more surprised than Robert at the unexpected inheritance. He
could hardly realize that he was now possessed of a considerable
property in his own right. It may be said here that, including the value
of the farm, and the gold concealed, his inheritance amounted to quite
ten thousand dollars. Paul had considerately supplied the lawyer with a
list of the hiding places where he had secreted his money on the
strictest injunctions of secrecy, and this made the task of finding it
quite easy.

Congratulations poured in upon our hero, who received them with modest
satisfaction.

"It is a good thing to have a rich son," said Captain Rushton,
humorously. "Robert, I hope you won't look down upon me on account of my
comparative poverty."

"Father," said Robert, "I wish you would take this money--I don't want
it."

"I shall do nothing of the kind, Robert. It is fairly and deservedly
yours, though I confess you may attribute it partly to good luck, for
virtue is not always so well rewarded in this world. I will take care of
it for you, and if you choose to pay your own expenses out of your
income, I shall allow you to do so, since you are now rich and
prosperous."

"You must take all the income, father. Then it will not be necessary for
you to go to sea again."

"I have already made up my mind to stay on land hereafter," said Captain
Rushton. "My cruise in an open boat without provisions has cured me of
my love for the sea. With the little money I have saved, and the help of
a rich son, I think I can afford to stay on shore."

The cottage was enlarged by the erection of another story, as well as by
the addition of a wing and the throwing out of two bay windows, and was
otherwise refitted and so metamorphosed by fresh paint and new
furniture, that it became one of the most attractive houses in
Millville. Captain Rushton, who knew something of agriculture, decided
to carry on Robert's farm himself, and found the employment both
pleasant and profitable.

"My only trouble," he used to say, jocosely, "is that I have a very
