"We're bound to strike back with all our might," said Paul, who had the
softest heart of them all.

"Now, I wonder who's in this here town," said Tom Ross. "Mebbe
Timmendiquas an' Brant an' all them renegades."

"It may be so," said Henry. "This is their base and store of supplies.
Oh, if Colonel Butler were only here with all his men, what a rush we
could make!"

So great was their eagerness that they crept closer to the village,
passing among some thick clusters of grapevines. Henry was in the lead,
and he heard a sudden snarl. A large cur of the kind that infest Indian
villages leaped straight at him.

The very suddenness of the attack saved Henry and his comrades from the
consequences of an alarm. He dropped his rifle instinctively, and seized
the dog by the throat with both hands. A bark following the snarl had
risen to the animal's throat, but it was cut short there. The hands of
the great youth pressed tighter and tighter, and the dog was lifted from
the earth. The four stood quietly beside their comrade, knowing that no
alarm would be made now.

The dog kicked convulsively, then hung without motion or noise. Henry
cast the dead body aside, picked up his rifle, and then all five of them
sank softly down in the shelter of the grapevines. About fifteen yards
away an Indian warrior was walking cautiously along and looking among
the vines. Evidently he had heard the snarl of the dog, and was seeking
the cause. But it had been only a single sound, and he would not look
far. Yet the hearts of the five beat a little faster as he prowled among
the vines, and their nerves were tense for action should the need for it
come.

The Indian, a Mohawk, came within ten yards of them, but he did not see
the five figures among the vines, blending darkly with the dark
growth, and presently, satisfied that the sound he had heard was of no
importance, he walked in another direction, and passed out of sight.

The five, not daunted at all by this living proof of risk, crept to the
very edge of the clusters of grapevines, and looked upon an open space,
beyond which stood some houses made of wood; but their attention was
centered upon a figure that stood in the open.

Although the distance was too great and the light too poor to disclose
the features, every one of the scouts recognized the figure. It could be
none other than that of Timmendiquas, the great White Lightning of the
Wyandots. He was pacing back and forth, somewhat in the fashion of the
white man, and his manner implied thought.

"I could bring him down from here with a bullet," said Shif'less Sol,
"but I ain't ever goin' to shoot at the chief, Henry."

"No," said Henry, "nor will I. But look, there's another."

A second figure came out of the dark and joined the first. It was also
that of a chief, powerful and tall, though not as tall as Timmendiquas.
It was Thayendanegea. Then three white figures appeared. One was that of
Braxton Wyatt, and the others they took to be those of "Indian" Butler
and his son, Walter Butler. After a talk of a minute or two they entered
one of the wooden houses.

"It's to be a conference of some kind," whispered Henry. "I wish I could
look in on it."

"And I," said the others together.

"Well, we know this much," continued Henry. "No great force of the
Iroquois is present, and if Colonel Butler's men come up quickly, we can
take the town."

"It's a chance not to be lost," said Paul.

They crept slowly away from the village, not stopping until they reached
the crest of a hill, from which they could see the roofs of two or three
of the Indian houses.

"I've a feeling in me," said Paul, "that the place is doomed. We'll
strike the first blow for Wyoming."

They neither slept nor rested that night, but retraced their trail with
the utmost speed toward the marching American force, going in Indian
file through the wilderness. Henry, as usual, led; Shif'less Sol
followed, then came Paul, and then Long Jim, while Silent Tom was the
rear guard. They traveled at great speed, and, some time after daylight,
met the advance of the colonial force under Captain William Gray.

William Gray was a gallant young officer, but he was startled a little
when five figures as silent as phantoms appeared. But he uttered an
exclamation of delight when he recognized the leader, Henry.

"What have you found?" he asked eagerly.

"We've been to Oghwaga," replied the youth, "and we went all about the
town. They do not suspect our coming. At least, they did not know when
we left. We saw Brant, Timmendiquas, the Butlers, and Wyatt enter the
house for a conference."

"And now is our chance," said eager young William Gray. "What if we
should take the town, and with it these men, at one blow."

"We can scarcely hope for as much as that," said Henry, who knew
that men like Timmendiquas and Thayendanegea were not likely to allow
themselves to be seized by so small a force, "but we can hope for a good
victory."

The young captain rode quickly back to his comrades with the news, and,
led by the five, the whole force pushed forward with all possible haste.
William Gray was still sanguine of a surprise, but the young riflemen
did not expect it. Indian sentinels were sure to be in the forest
between them and Oghwaga. Yet they said nothing to dash this hope. Henry
had already seen enough to know the immense value of enthusiasm, and
the little army full of zeal would accomplish much if the chance came.
Besides the young captain, William Gray, there was a lieutenant named
Taylor, who had been in the battle at Wyoming, but who had escaped the
massacre. The five had not met him there, but the common share in so
great a tragedy proved a tie between them. Taylor's name was Robert,
but all the other officers, and some of the men for that matter, who
had known him in childhood called him Bob. He was but little older than
Henry, and his earlier youth, before removal to Wyoming, had been passed
in Connecticut, a country that was to the colonials thickly populated
and containing great towns, such as Hartford and New Haven.

A third close friend whom they soon found was a man unlike any other
that they had ever seen. His name was Cornelius Heemskerk. Holland was
his birthplace, but America was his nation. He was short and extremely
fat, but he had an agility that amazed the five when they first saw it
displayed. He talked much, and his words sounded like grumbles, but
the unctuous tone and the smile that accompanied them indicated to the
contrary. He formed for Shif'less Sol an inexhaustible and entertaining
study in character.


"I ain't quite seen his like afore," said the shiftless one to Paul.
"First time I run acrost him I thought he would tumble down among the
first bushes he met. 'Stead o' that, he sailed right through 'em, makin'
never a trip an' no noise at all, same ez Long Jim's teeth sinkin' into
a juicy venison steak."

"I've heard tell," said Long Jim, who also contemplated the prodigy,
"that big, chunky, awkward-lookin' things are sometimes ez spry ez you.
They say that the Hipperpotamus kin outrun the giraffe across the sands
uv Afriky, an' I know from pussonal experience that the bigger an'
clumsier a b'ar is the faster he kin make you scoot fur your life. But
he's the real Dutch, ain't he, Paul, one uv them fellers that licked the
Spanish under the Duke uv Alivy an' Belisarry?"

"Undoubtedly," replied Paul, who did not consider it necessary to
correct Long Jim's history, "and I'm willing to predict to you, Jim
Hart, that Heemskerk will be a mighty good man in any fight that we may
have."

Heemskerk rolled up to them. He seemed to have a sort of circular
motion like that of a revolving tube, but he kept pace with the others,
nevertheless, and he showed no signs of exertion.

"Don't you think it a funny thing that I, Cornelius Heemskerk, am here?"
he said to Paul.

"Why so, Mr. Heemskerk?" replied Paul politely. "Because I am a
Dutchman. I have the soul of an artist and the gentleness of a baby. I,
Cornelius Heemskerk, should be in the goot leetle country of Holland
in a goot leetle house, by the side of a goot leetle canal, painting
beautiful blue china, dishes, plates, cups, saucers, all most beautiful,
and here I am running through the woods of this vast America, carrying
on my shoulder a rifle that is longer than I am, hunting the red Indian
and hunted by him. Is it not most rediculous, Mynheer Paul?"

"I think you are here because you are a brave man, Mr. Heemskerk,"
replied Paul, "and wish to see punishment inflicted upon those who have
committed great crimes."

"Not so! Not so!" replied the Dutchman with energy. "It is because I am
one big fool. I am not really a big enough man to be as big a fool as I
am, but so it is! so it is!" Shif'less Sol regarded him critically, and
then spoke gravely and with deliberation: "It ain't that, Mr. Heemskerk,
an' Paul ain't told quite all the truth, either. I've heard that the
Dutch was the most powerfullest fightin' leetle nation on the globe;
that all you had to do wuz to step on the toe uv a Dutchman's wooden
shoe, an' all the men, women, an' children in Holland would jump right
on top o' you all at once. Lookin' you up an' lookin' you down, an'
sizin' you up, an' sizin you down, all purty careful, an' examinin' the
corners O' your eyes oncommon close, an' also lookin' at the way you set
your feet when you walk, I'm concludin' that you just natcherally love a
fight, an' that you are lookin' fur one."

But Cornelius Heemskerk sighed, and shook his head.

"It is flattery that you give me, and you are trying to make me brave
when I am not," he said. "I only say once more that I ought to be in
Holland painting blue plates, and not here in the great woods holding on
to my scalp, first with one hand and then with the other."

He sighed deeply, but Solomon Hyde, reader of the hearts of men, only
laughed.

Colonel Butler's force stopped about three o'clock for food and a little
rest, and the five, who had not slept since the night before, caught
a few winks. But in less than an hour they were up and away again. The
five riflemen were once more well in advance, and with them were Taylor
and Heemskerk, the Dutchman, grumbling over their speed, but revolving
along, nevertheless, with astonishing ease and without any sign of
fatigue. They discovered no indications of Indian scouts or trails, and
as the village now was not many miles away, it confirmed Henry in his
belief that the Iroquois, with their friends, the Wyandots, would not
stay to give battle. If Thayendanegea and Timmendiquas were prepared
for a strong resistance, the bullets of the skirmishers would already be
whistling through the woods.

The waning evening grew colder, twilight came, and the autumn leaves
fell fast before the rising wind. The promise of the night was dark,
which was not bad for their design, and once more the five-now the seven
approached Oghwaga. From the crest of the very same hill they looked
down once more upon the Indian houses.

"It is a great base for the Iroquois," said Henry to Heemskerk, "and
whether the Indians have laid an ambush or not, Colonel Butler must
attack."

"Ah," said Heemskerk, silently moving his round body to a little higher
point for a better view, "now I feel in all its fullness the truth that
I should be back in Holland, painting blue plates."

Nevertheless, Cornelius Heemskerk made a very accurate survey of the
Iroquois village, considering the distance and the brevity of the time,
and when the party went back to Colonel Butler to tell him the way was
open, he revolved along as swiftly as any of them. There were also many
serious thoughts in the back of his head.

At nine o'clock the little colonial force was within half a mile of
Oghwaga, and nothing had yet occurred to disclose whether the Iroquois
knew of their advance. Henry and his comrades, well in front, looked
down upon the town, but saw nothing. No light came from an Indian
chimney, nor did any dog howl. Just behind them were the troops in loose
order, Colonel Butler impatiently striking his booted leg with a switch,
and William Gray seeking to restrain his ardor, that he might set a good
example to the men.

"What do you think, Mr. Ware?" asked Colonel Butler.

"I think we ought to rush the town at once."

"It is so!" exclaimed Heemskerk, forgetting all about painting blue
plates.

"The signal is the trumpet; you blow it, Captain Gray, and then we'll
charge."

William Gray took the trumpet from one of the men and blew a long,
thrilling note. Before its last echo was ended, the little army rushed
upon the town. Three or four shots came from the houses, and the
soldiers fired a few at random in return, but that was all. Indian
scouts had brought warning of the white advance, and the great chiefs,
gathering up all the people who were in the village, had fled. A
retreating warrior or two had fired the shots, but when the white men
entered this important Iroquois stronghold they did not find a single
human being. Timmendiquas, the White Lightning of the Wyandots, was
gone; Thayendanegea, the real head of the Six Nations, had slipped away;
and with them had vanished the renegades. But they had gone in haste.
All around them were the evidences. The houses, built of wood, were
scores in number, and many of them contained furniture such as a
prosperous white man of the border would buy for himself. There were
gardens and shade trees about these, and back of them, barns, many of
them filled with Indian corn. Farther on were clusters of bark lodges,
which had been inhabited by the less progressive of the Iroquois.

Henry stood in the center of the town and looked at the houses misty
in the moonlight. The army had not yet made much noise, but he was
beginning to hear behind him the ominous word, "Wyoming," repeated more
than once. Cornelius Heemskerk had stopped revolving, and, standing
beside Henry, wiped his perspiring, red face.

"Now that I am here, I think again of the blue plates of Holland,
Mr. Ware," he said. "It is a dark and sanguinary time. The men whose
brethren were scalped or burned alive at Wyoming will not now spare the
town of those who did it. In this wilderness they give blow for blow, or
perish."

Henry knew that it was true, but he felt a certain sadness. His heart
had been inflamed against the Iroquois, he could never forget Wyoming or
its horrors; but in the destruction of an ancient town the long labor
of man perished, and it seemed waste. Doubtless a dozen generations of
Iroquois children had played here on the grass. He walked toward the
northern end of the village, and saw fields there from which recent corn
had been taken, but behind him the cry, "Wyoming!" was repeated louder
and oftener now. Then he saw men running here and there with torches,
and presently smoke and flame burst from the houses. He examined the
fields and forest for a little distance to see if any ambushed foe might
still lie among them, but all the while the flame and smoke behind him
were rising higher.

Henry turned back and joined his comrades. Oghwaga was perishing. The
flames leaped from house to house, and then from lodge to lodge. There
was no need to use torches any more. The whole village was wrapped in
a mass of fire that grew and swelled until the flames rose above the
forest, and were visible in the clear night miles away.

So great was the heat that Colonel Butler and the soldiers and scouts
were compelled to withdraw to the edge of the forest. The wind rose and
the flames soared. Sparks flew in myriads, and ashes fell dustily on the
dry leaves of the trees. Bob Taylor, with his hands clenched tightly,
muttered under his breath, "Wyoming! Wyoming!"

"It is the Iroquois who suffer now," said Heemskerk, as he revolved
slowly away from a heated point.

Crashes came presently as the houses fell in, and then the sparks would
leap higher and the flames roar louder. The barns, too, were falling
down, and the grain was destroyed. The grapevines were trampled under
foot, and the gardens were ruined. Oghwaga, a great central base of the
Six Nations, was vanishing forever. For four hundred years, ever since
the days of Hiawatha, the Iroquois had waxed in power. They had ruled
over lands larger than great empires. They had built up political and
social systems that are the wonder of students. They were invincible in
war, because every man had been trained from birth to be a warrior, and
now they were receiving their first great blow.

From a point far in the forest, miles away, Thayendanegea, Timmendiquas,
Hiokatoo, Sangerachte, "Indian" Butler, Walter Butler, Braxton Wyatt,
a low, heavybrowed Tory named Coleman, with whom Wyatt had become very
friendly, and about sixty Iroquois and twenty Tories were watching a
tower of light to the south that had just appeared above the trees. It
was of an intense, fiery color, and every Indian in that gloomy band
knew that it was Oghwaga, the great, the inviolate, the sacred, that was
burning, and that the men who were doing it were the white frontiersmen,
who, his red-coated allies had told him, would soon be swept forever
from these woods. And they were forced to stand and see it, not daring
to attack so strong and alert a force.

They sat there in the darkness among the trees, and watched the column
of fire grow and grow until it seemed to pierce the skies. Timmendiquas
never said a word. In his heart, Indian though he was, he felt that
the Iroquois had gone too far. In him was the spirit of the farseeing
Hiawatha. He could perceive that great cruelty always brought
retaliation; but it was not for him, almost an alien, to say these
things to Thayendanegea, the mighty war chief of the Mohawks and the
living spirit of the Iroquois nation.

Thayendanegea sat on the stump of a tree blown down by winter storms.
His arms were folded across his breast, and he looked steadily toward
that red threatening light off there in the south. Some such idea as
that in the mind of Timmendiquas may have been passing in his own. He
was an uncommon Indian, and he had had uncommon advantages. He had not
believed that the colonists could make head against so great a kingdom
as England, aided by the allied tribes, the Canadians, and the large
body of Tories among their own people. But he saw with his own eyes the
famous Oghwaga of the Iroquois going down under their torch.

"Tell me, Colonel John Butler," he said bitterly, "where is your great
king now? Is his arm long enough to reach from London to save our town
of Oghwaga, which is perhaps as much to us as his great city of London
is to him?"

The thickset figure of "Indian" Butler moved, and his swart face flushed
as much as it could.

"You know as much about the king as I do, Joe Brant," he replied. "We
are fighting here for your country as well as his, and you cannot say
that Johnson's Greens and Butler's Rangers and the British and Canadians
have not done their part."

"It is true," said Thayendanegea, "but it is true, also, that one must
fight with wisdom. Perhaps there was too much burning of living men at
Wyoming. The pain of the wounded bear makes him fight the harder, and
it, is because of Wyoming that Oghwaga yonder burns. Say, is it not so,
Colonel John Butler?"

"Indian" Butler made no reply, but sat, sullen and lowering. The Tory,
Coleman, whispered to Braxton Wyatt, but Timmendiquas was the only one
who spoke aloud.

"Thayendanegea," he said, "I, and the Wyandots who are with me, have
come far. We expected to return long ago to the lands on the Ohio, but
we were with you in your village, and now, when Manitou has turned his
face from you for the time, we will not leave you. We stay and fight by
your side."

Thayendanegea stood up, and Timmendiquas stood up, also.

"You are a great chief, White Lightning of the Wyandots," he said, "and
you and I are brothers. I shall be proud and happy to have such a mighty
leader fighting with me. We will have vengeance for this. The power of
the Iroquois is as great as ever."

He raised himself to his full height, pointing to the fire, and the
flames of hate and resolve burned in his eyes. Old Hiokatoo, the most
savage of all the chiefs, shook his tomahawk, and a murmur passed
through the group of Indians.

