the right blackstrap goes round from lip to lip.

But where was the mermaid in those delightful times? At a certain
window near the centre of the village appeared a pretty display of
gingerbread men and horses, picture-books and ballads, small
fish-hooks, pins, needles, sugarplums and brass thimbles--articles on
which the young fishermen used to expend their money from pure
gallantry. What a picture was Susan behind the counter! A slender
maiden, though the child of rugged parents, she had the slimmest of
all waists, brown hair curling on her neck, and a complexion rather
pale except when the sea-breeze flushed it. A few freckles became
beauty-spots beneath her eyelids.--How was it, Susan, that you talked
and acted so carelessly, yet always for the best, doing whatever was
right in your own eyes, and never once doing wrong in mine, nor
shocked a taste that had been morbidly sensitive till now? And whence
had you that happiest gift of brightening every topic with an unsought
gayety, quiet but irresistible, so that even gloomy spirits felt your
sunshine and did not shrink from it? Nature wrought the charm. She
made you a frank, simple, kind-hearted, sensible and mirthful girl.
Obeying Nature, you did free things without indelicacy, displayed a
maiden's thoughts to every eye, and proved yourself as innocent as
naked Eve.--It was beautiful to observe how her simple and happy
nature mingled itself with mine. She kindled a domestic fire within my
heart and took up her dwelling there, even in that chill and lonesome
cavern hung round with glittering icicles of fancy. She gave me warmth
of feeling, while the influence of my mind made her contemplative. I
taught her to love the moonlight hour, when the expanse of the
encircled bay was smooth as a great mirror and slept in a transparent
shadow, while beyond Nahant the wind rippled the dim ocean into a
dreamy brightness which grew faint afar off without becoming gloomier.
I held her hand and pointed to the long surf-wave as it rolled calmly
on the beach in an unbroken line of silver; we were silent together
till its deep and peaceful murmur had swept by us. When the Sabbath
sun shone down into the recesses of the cliffs, I led the mermaid
thither and told her that those huge gray, shattered rocks, and her
native sea that raged for ever like a storm against them, and her own
slender beauty in so stern a scene, were all combined into a strain of
poetry. But on the Sabbath-eve, when her mother had gone early to bed
and her gentle sister had smiled and left us, as we sat alone by the
quiet hearth with household things around, it was her turn to make me
feel that here was a deeper poetry, and that this was the dearest hour
of all. Thus went on our wooing, till I had shot wild-fowl enough to
feather our bridal-bed, and the daughter of the sea was mine.

I built a cottage for Susan and myself, and made a gateway in the form
of a Gothic arch by setting up a whale's jaw-bones. We bought a heifer
with her first calf, and had a little garden on the hillside to supply
us with potatoes and green sauce for our fish. Our parlor, small and
neat, was ornamented with our two profiles in one gilt frame, and with
shells and pretty pebbles on the mantelpiece, selected from the sea's
treasury of such things on Nahant Beach. On the desk, beneath the
looking-glass, lay the Bible, which I had begun to read aloud at the
book of Genesis, and the singing-book that Susan used for her evening
psalm. Except the almanac, we had no other literature. All that I
heard of books was when an Indian history or tale of shipwreck was
sold by a pedler or wandering subscription-man to some one in the
village, and read through its owner's nose to a slumbrous auditory.

Like my brother-fishermen, I grew into the belief that all human
erudition was collected in our pedagogue, whose green spectacles and
solemn phiz as he passed to his little schoolhouse amid a waste of
sand might have gained him a diploma from any college in New England.
In truth, I dreaded him.--When our children were old enough to claim
his care, you remember, Susan, how I frowned, though you were pleased
at this learned man's encomiums on their proficiency. I feared to
trust them even with the alphabet: it was the key to a fatal treasure.
But I loved to lead them by their little hands along the beach and
point to nature in the vast and the minute--the sky, the sea, the
green earth, the pebbles and the shells. Then did I discourse of the
mighty works and coextensive goodness of the Deity with the simple
wisdom of a man whose mind had profited by lonely days upon the deep
and his heart by the strong and pure affections of his evening home.
Sometimes my voice lost itself in a tremulous depth, for I felt his
eye upon me as I spoke. Once, while my wife and all of us were gazing
at ourselves in the mirror left by the tide in a hollow of the sand, I
pointed to the pictured heaven below and bade her observe how religion
was strewn everywhere in our path, since even a casual pool of water
recalled the idea of that home whither we were travelling to rest for
ever with our children. Suddenly your image, Susan, and all the little
faces made up of yours and mine, seemed to fade away and vanish around
me, leaving a pale visage like my own of former days within the frame
of a large looking-glass. Strange illusion!

My life glided on, the past appearing to mingle with the present and
absorb the future, till the whole lies before me at a glance. My
manhood has long been waning with a stanch decay; my earlier
contemporaries, after lives of unbroken health, are all at rest
without having known the weariness of later age; and now with a
wrinkled forehead and thin white hair as badges of my dignity I have
become the patriarch--the uncle--of the village. I love that name: it
widens the circle of my sympathies; it joins all the youthful to my
household in the kindred of affection.

Like Uncle Parker, whose rheumatic bones were dashed against Egg Rock
full forty years ago, I am a spinner of long yarns. Seated on the
gunnel of a dory or on the sunny side of a boat-house, where the
warmth is grateful to my limbs, or by my own hearth when a friend or
two are there, I overflow with talk, and yet am never tedious. With a
broken voice I give utterance to much wisdom. Such, Heaven be praised!
is the vigor of my faculties that many a forgotten usage, and
traditions ancient in my youth, and early adventures of myself or
others hitherto effaced by things more recent, acquire new
distinctness in my memory. I remember the happy days when the haddock
were more numerous on all the fishing-grounds than sculpins in the
surf--when the deep-water cod swam close in-shore, and the dogfish,
with his poisonous horn, had not learnt to take the hook. I can number
every equinoctial storm in which the sea has overwhelmed the street,
flooded the cellars of the village and hissed upon our kitchen hearth.
I give the history of the great whale that was landed on Whale Beach,
and whose jaws, being now my gateway, will last for ages after my
coffin shall have passed beneath them. Thence it is an easy digression
to the halibut--scarcely smaller than the whale--which ran out six
codlines and hauled my dory to the mouth of Boston harbor before I
could touch him with the gaff.

If melancholy accidents be the theme of conversation, I tell how a
friend of mine was taken out of his boat by an enormous shark, and the
sad, true tale of a young man on the eve of marriage who had been nine
days missing, when his drowned body floated into the very pathway on
Marble-head Neck that had often led him to the dwelling of his bride,
as if the dripping corpse would have come where the mourner was. With
such awful fidelity did that lover return to fulfil his vows! Another
favorite story is of a crazy maiden who conversed with angels and had
the gift of prophecy, and whom all the village loved and pitied,
though she went from door to door accusing us of sin, exhorting to
repentance and foretelling our destruction by flood or earthquake. If
the young men boast their knowledge of the ledges and sunken rocks, I
speak of pilots who knew the wind by its scent and the wave by its
taste, and could have steered blindfold to any port between Boston and
Mount Desert guided only by the rote of the shore--the peculiar sound
of the surf on each island, beach and line of rocks along the coast.
Thus do I talk, and all my auditors grow wise while they deem it
pastime.

I recollect no happier portion of my life than this my calm old age.
It is like the sunny and sheltered slope of a valley where late in the
autumn the grass is greener than in August, and intermixed with golden
dandelions that had not been seen till now since the first warmth of
the year. But with me the verdure and the flowers are not frost-bitten
in the midst of winter. A playfulness has revisited my mind--a
sympathy with the young and gay, an unpainful interest in the business
of others, a light and wandering curiosity--arising, perhaps, from the
sense that my toil on earth is ended and the brief hour till bedtime
may be spent in play. Still, I have fancied that there is a depth of
feeling and reflection under this superficial levity peculiar to one
who has lived long and is soon to die.

Show me anything that would make an infant smile, and you shall behold
a gleam of mirth over the hoary ruin of my visage. I can spend a
pleasant hour in the sun watching the sports of the village children
on the edge of the surf. Now they chase the retreating wave far down
over the wet sand; now it steals softly up to kiss their naked feet;
now it comes onward with threatening front, and roars after the
laughing crew as they scamper beyond its reach. Why should not an old
man be merry too, when the great sea is at play with those little
children? I delight, also, to follow in the wake of a pleasure-party
of young men and girls strolling along the beach after an early supper
at the Point. Here, with handkerchiefs at nose, they bend over a heap
of eel-grass entangled in which is a dead skate so oddly accoutred
with two legs and a long tail that they mistake him for a drowned
animal. A few steps farther the ladies scream, and the gentlemen make
ready to protect them against a young shark of the dogfish kind
rolling with a lifelike motion in the tide that has thrown him up.
Next they are smit with wonder at the black shells of a wagon-load of
live lobsters packed in rock-weed for the country-market. And when
they reach the fleet of dories just hauled ashore after the day's
fishing, how do I laugh in my sleeve, and sometimes roar outright, at
the simplicity of these young folks and the sly humor of the
fishermen! In winter, when our village is thrown into a bustle by the
arrival of perhaps a score of country dealers bargaining for frozen
fish to be transported hundreds of miles and eaten fresh in Vermont or
Canada, I am a pleased but idle spectator in the throng. For I launch
my boat no more.

When the shore was solitary, I have found a pleasure that seemed even
to exalt my mind in observing the sports or contentions of two gulls
as they wheeled and hovered about each other with hoarse screams, one
moment flapping on the foam of the wave, and then soaring aloft till
their white bosoms melted into the upper sunshine. In the calm of the
summer sunset I drag my aged limbs with a little ostentation of
activity, because I am so old, up to the rocky brow of the hill. There
I see the white sails of many a vessel outward bound or homeward from
afar, and the black trail of a vapor behind the Eastern steamboat;
there, too, is the sun, going down, but not in gloom, and there the
illimitable ocean mingling with the sky, to remind me of eternity.

But sweetest of all is the hour of cheerful musing and pleasant talk
that comes between the dusk and the lighted candle by my glowing
fireside. And never, even on the first Thanksgiving-night, when Susan
and I sat alone with our hopes, nor the second, when a stranger had
been sent to gladden us and be the visible image of our affection, did
I feel such joy as now. All that belongs to me are here: Death has
taken none, nor Disease kept them away, nor Strife divided them from
their parents or each other; with neither poverty nor riches to
disturb them, nor the misery of desires beyond their lot, they have
kept New England's festival round the patriarch's board. For I am a
patriarch. Here I sit among my descendants, in my old arm-chair and
immemorial corner, while the firelight throws an appropriate glory
round my venerable frame.--Susan! My children! Something whispers me
that this happiest hour must be the final one, and that nothing
remains but to bless you all and depart with a treasure of recollected
joys to heaven. Will you meet me there? Alas! your figures grow
indistinct, fading into pictures on the air, and now to fainter
outlines, while the fire is glimmering on the walls of a familiar
room, and shows the book that I flung down and the sheet that I left
half written some fifty years ago. I lift my eyes to the
looking-glass, and perceive myself alone, unless those be the
mermaid's features retiring into the depths of the mirror with a
tender and melancholy smile.

Ah! One feels a chilliness--not bodily, but about the heart--and,
moreover, a foolish dread of looking behind him, after these pastimes.
I can imagine precisely how a magician would sit down in gloom and
terror after dismissing the shadows that had personated dead or
distant people and stripping his cavern of the unreal splendor which
had changed it to a palace.

And now for a moral to my reverie. Shall it be that, since fancy can
create so bright a dream of happiness, it were better to dream on from
youth to age than to awake and strive doubtfully for something real?
Oh, the slight tissue of a dream can no more preserve us from the
stern reality of misfortune than a robe of cobweb could repel the
wintry blast. Be this the moral, then: In chaste and warm affections,
humble wishes and honest toil for some useful end there is health for
the mind and quiet for the heart, the prospect of a happy life and the
fairest hope of heaven.




THE AMBITIOUS GUEST.


One September night a family had gathered round their hearth and piled
it high with the driftwood of mountain-streams, the dry cones of the
pine, and the splintered ruins of great trees that had come crashing
down the precipice. Up the chimney roared the fire, and brightened the
room with its broad blaze. The faces of the father and mother had a
sober gladness; the children laughed. The eldest daughter was the
image of Happiness at seventeen, and the aged grandmother, who sat
knitting in the warmest place, was the image of Happiness grown old.
They had found the "herb heart's-ease" in the bleakest spot of all New
England. This family were situated in the Notch of the White Hills,
where the wind was sharp throughout the year and pitilessly cold in
the winter, giving their cottage all its fresh inclemency before it
descended on the valley of the Saco. They dwelt in a cold spot and a
dangerous one, for a mountain towered above their heads so steep that
the stones would often rumble down its sides and startle them at
midnight.

The daughter had just uttered some simple jest that filled them all
with mirth, when the wind came through the Notch and seemed to pause
before their cottage, rattling the door with a sound of wailing and
lamentation before it passed into the valley. For a moment it saddened
them, though there was nothing unusual in the tones. But the family
were glad again when they perceived that the latch was lifted by some
traveller whose footsteps had been unheard amid the dreary blast which
heralded his approach and wailed as he was entering and went moaning
away from the door.

Though they dwelt in such a solitude, these people held daily converse
with the world. The romantic pass of the Notch is a great artery
through which the life-blood of internal commerce is continually
throbbing between Maine on one side and the Green Mountains and the
shores of the St. Lawrence on the other. The stage-coach always drew
up before the door of the cottage. The wayfarer with no companion but
his staff paused here to exchange a word, that the sense of loneliness
might not utterly overcome him ere he could pass through the cleft of
the mountain or reach the first house in the valley. And here the
teamster on his way to Portland market would put up for the night,
and, if a bachelor, might sit an hour beyond the usual bedtime and
steal a kiss from the mountain-maid at parting. It was one of those
primitive taverns where the traveller pays only for food and lodging,
but meets with a homely kindness beyond all price. When the footsteps
were heard, therefore, between the outer door and the inner one, the
whole family rose up, grandmother, children and all, as if about to
welcome some one who belonged to them, and whose fate was linked with
theirs.

The door was opened by a young man. His face at first wore the
melancholy expression, almost despondency, of one who travels a wild
and bleak road at nightfall and alone, but soon brightened up when he
saw the kindly warmth of his reception. He felt his heart spring
forward to meet them all, from the old woman who wiped a chair with
her apron to the little child that held out its arms to him. One
glance and smile placed the stranger on a footing of innocent
familiarity with the eldest daughter.

"Ah! this fire is the right thing," cried he, "especially when there
is such a pleasant circle round it. I am quite benumbed, for the Notch
is just like the pipe of a great pair of bellows; it has blown a
terrible blast in my face all the way from Bartlett."

"Then you are going toward Vermont?" said the master of the house as
he helped to take a light knapsack off the young man's shoulders.

"Yes, to Burlington, and far enough beyond," replied he. "I meant to
have been at Ethan Crawford's to-night, but a pedestrian lingers along
such a road as this. It is no matter; for when I saw this good fire
and all your cheerful faces, I felt as if you had kindled it on
purpose for me and were waiting my arrival. So I shall sit down among
you and make myself at home."

The frank-hearted stranger had just drawn his chair to the fire when
something like a heavy footstep was heard without, rushing down the
steep side of the mountain as with long and rapid strides, and taking
such a leap in passing the cottage as to strike the opposite
precipice. The family held their breath, because they knew the sound,
and their guest held his by instinct.

"The old mountain has thrown a stone at us for fear we should forget
him," said the landlord, recovering himself. "He sometimes nods his
head and threatens to come down, but we are old neighbors, and agree
together pretty well, upon the whole. Besides, we have a sure place of
refuge hard by if he should be coming in good earnest."

Let us now suppose the stranger to have finished his supper of bear's
meat, and by his natural felicity of manner to have placed himself on
a footing of kindness with the whole family; so that they talked as
freely together as if he belonged to their mountain-brood. He was of a
proud yet gentle spirit, haughty and reserved among the rich and
great, but ever ready to stoop his head to the lowly cottage door and
be like a brother or a son at the poor man's fireside. In the
household of the Notch he found warmth and simplicity of feeling, the
pervading intelligence of New England, and a poetry of native growth
which they had gathered when they little thought of it from the
mountain-peaks and chasms, and at the very threshold of their romantic
and dangerous abode. He had travelled far and alone; his whole life,
indeed, had been a solitary path, for, with the lofty caution of his
nature, he had kept himself apart from those who might otherwise have
been his companions. The family, too, though so kind and hospitable,
had that consciousness of unity among themselves and separation from
the world at large which in every domestic circle should still keep a
holy place where no stranger may intrude. But this evening a prophetic
sympathy impelled the refined and educated youth to pour out his heart
before the simple mountaineers, and constrained them to answer him
with the same free confidence. And thus it should have been. Is not
the kindred of a common fate a closer tie than that of birth?

The secret of the young man's character was a high and abstracted
ambition. He could have borne to live an undistinguished life, but not
to be forgotten in the grave. Yearning desire had been transformed to
hope, and hope, long cherished, had become like certainty that,
obscurely as he journeyed now, a glory was to beam on all his pathway,
though not, perhaps, while he was treading it. But when posterity
should gaze back into the gloom of what was now the present, they
would trace the brightness of his footsteps, brightening as meaner
glories faded, and confess that a gifted one had passed from his
cradle to his tomb with none to recognize him.

"As yet," cried the stranger, his cheek glowing and his eye flashing
with enthusiasm--"as yet I have done nothing. Were I to vanish from
the earth to-morrow, none would know so much of me as you--that a
nameless youth came up at nightfall from the valley of the Saco, and
opened his heart to you in the evening, and passed through the Notch
by sunrise, and was seen no more. Not a soul would ask, 'Who was he?
Whither did the wanderer go?' But I cannot die till I have achieved my
destiny. Then let Death come: I shall have built my monument."

There was a continual flow of natural emotion gushing forth amid
abstracted reverie which enabled the family to understand this young
man's sentiments, though so foreign from their own. With quick
sensibility of the ludicrous, he blushed at the ardor into which he
had been betrayed.

"You laugh at me," said he, taking the eldest daughter's hand and
laughing himself. "You think my ambition as nonsensical as if I were
to freeze myself to death on the top of Mount Washington only that
people might spy at me from the country roundabout. And truly that
would be a noble pedestal for a man's statue."

"It is better to sit here by this fire," answered the girl, blushing,
"and be comfortable and contented, though nobody thinks about us."

"I suppose," said her father, after a fit of musing, "there is
something natural in what the young man says; and if my mind had been
turned that way, I might have felt just the same.--It is strange,
wife, how his talk has set my head running on things that are pretty
certain never to come to pass."

"Perhaps they may," observed the wife. "Is the man thinking what he
will do when he is a widower?"

"No, no!" cried he, repelling the idea with reproachful kindness.
"When I think of your death, Esther, I think of mine too. But I was
wishing we had a good farm in Bartlett or Bethlehem or Littleton, or
some other township round the White Mountains, but not where they
could tumble on our heads. I should want to stand well with my
neighbors and be called squire and sent to General Court for a term or
two; for a plain, honest man may do as much good there as a lawyer.
And when I should be grown quite an old man, and you an old woman, so
as not to be long apart, I might die happy enough in my bed, and leave
you all crying around me. A slate gravestone would suit me as well as
a marble one, with just my name and age, and a verse of a hymn, and
something to let people know that I lived an honest man and died a
Christian."

"There, now!" exclaimed the stranger; "it is our nature to desire a
monument, be it slate or marble, or a pillar of granite, or a glorious
memory in the universal heart of man."

"We're in a strange way to-night," said the wife, with tears in her
eyes. "They say it's a sign of something when folks' minds go
a-wandering so. Hark to the children!"

They listened accordingly. The younger children had been put to bed in
another room, but with an open door between; so that they could be
heard talking busily among themselves. One and all seemed to have
caught the infection from the fireside circle, and were outvying each
other in wild wishes and childish projects of what they would do when
they came to be men and women. At length a little boy, instead of
addressing his brothers and sisters, called out to his mother.

"I'll tell you what I wish, mother," cried he: "I want you and father
and grandma'm, and all of us, and the stranger too, to start right
away and go and take a drink out of the basin of the Flume."

Nobody could help laughing at the child's notion of leaving a warm bed
and dragging them from a cheerful fire to visit the basin of the
Flume--a brook which tumbles over the precipice deep within the Notch.

The boy had hardly spoken, when a wagon rattled along the road and
stopped a moment before the door. It appeared to contain two or three
men who were cheering their hearts with the rough chorus of a song
which resounded in broken notes between the cliffs, while the singers
hesitated whether to continue their journey or put up here for the
night.

"Father," said the girl, "they are calling you by name."

But the good man doubted whether they had really called him, and was
unwilling to show himself too solicitous of gain by inviting people to
patronize his house. He therefore did not hurry to the door, and, the
lash being soon applied, the travellers plunged into the Notch, still
singing and laughing, though their music and mirth came back drearily
from the heart of the mountain.

"There, mother!" cried the boy, again; "they'd have given us a ride to
the Flume."

Again they laughed at the child's pertinacious fancy for a
night-ramble. But it happened that a light cloud passed over the
daughter's spirit; she looked gravely into the fire and drew a breath
that was almost a sigh. It forced its way, in spite of a little
struggle to repress it. Then, starting and blushing, she looked
quickly around the circle, as if they had caught a glimpse into her
bosom. The stranger asked what she had been thinking of.

"Nothing," answered she, with a downcast smile; "only I felt lonesome
just then."

"Oh, I have always had a gift of feeling what is in other people's
hearts," said he, half seriously. "Shall I tell the secrets of yours?
For I know what to think when a young girl shivers by a warm hearth
and complains of lonesomeness at her mother's side. Shall I put these
feelings into words?"

"They would not be a girl's feelings any longer if they could be put
into words," replied the mountain-nymph, laughing, but avoiding his
eye.

All this was said apart. Perhaps a germ of love was springing in their
hearts so pure that it might blossom in Paradise, since it could not
be matured on earth; for women worship such gentle dignity as his, and
the proud, contemplative, yet kindly, soul is oftenest captivated by
simplicity like hers. But while they spoke softly, and he was watching
the happy sadness, the lightsome shadows, the shy yearnings, of a
maiden's nature, the wind through the Notch took a deeper and drearier
sound. It seemed, as the fanciful stranger said, like the choral
strain of the spirits of the blast who in old Indian times had their
dwelling among these mountains and made their heights and recesses a
sacred region. There was a wail along the road as if a funeral were
passing. To chase away the gloom, the family threw pine-branches on
their fire till the dry leaves crackled and the flame arose,
discovering once again a scene of peace and humble happiness. The
light hovered about them fondly and caressed them all. There were the
little faces of the children peeping from their bed apart, and here
the father's frame of strength, the mother's subdued and careful mien,
the high-browed youth, the budding girl and the good old grandam,
still knitting in the warmest place.

The aged woman looked up from her task, and with fingers ever busy was
the next to speak.

"Old folks have their notions," said she, "as well as young ones.
You've been wishing and planning and letting your heads run on one
thing and another till you've set my mind a-wandering too. Now, what
should an old woman wish for, when she can go but a step or two before
she comes to her grave? Children, it will haunt me night and day till
I tell you."

"What is it, mother?" cried the husband and wife at once.

Then the old woman, with an air of mystery which drew the circle
closer round the fire, informed them that she had provided her
grave-clothes some years before--a nice linen shroud, a cap with a
muslin ruff, and everything of a finer sort than she had worn since
her wedding-day. But this evening an old superstition had strangely
recurred to her. It used to be said in her younger days that if
anything were amiss with a corpse--if only the ruff were not smooth or
