messenger, hurrying up fresh men, still driving the whole Mexican army
against the Alamo. He shouted orders incessantly, although he remained
safe within the shelter of the battery.

Ned felt an immense joy. He had seen the attack beaten off at three
points. A force of twenty to one had been compelled to recoil. His heart
swelled with pride in those friends of his. But they were so few in
number! Even now the Mexican masses were reforming. The officers were
among them, driving them forward with threats and blows. The great ring
of Mexican cavalry, intended to keep any of the Texans from escaping,
also closed in, driving their own infantry forward to the assault.

Ned's heart sank as the whole Mexican army, gathering now at the
northern or lower wall, rushed straight at the barrier. But the deadly
fire of the rifles flashed from it, and their front line went down.
Again they recoiled, and again the cavalry closed in, holding them to
the task.

There was a pause of a few moments. The town had been silent for a long
time, and the Mexican soldiers themselves ceased to shout. Clouds of
smoke eddied and drifted about the buildings. The light of the morning,
first gray, then silver, turned to gold. The sun, now high above the
earth's rim, poured down a flood of rays.

Everything stood out sharp and clear. Ned saw the buildings of the Alamo
dark against the sun, and he saw men on the walls. He saw the Mexican
columns pressed together in one great force, and he even saw the still
faces of many who lay silent on the plain.

He knew that the Mexicans were about to charge again, and his feeling of
exultation passed. He no longer had hope that the defenders of the Alamo
could beat back so many. He thought again how few, how very few, were
the Texans.

The silence endured but a moment or two. Then the Mexicans rushed
forward in a mighty mass at the low northern wall, the front lines
firing as they went. Flame burst from the wall, and Ned heard once more
the deadly crackle of the Texan rifles. The ground was littered by the
trail of the Mexican fallen, but, driven by their officers, they went
on.

Ned saw them reach the wall and plant the scaling ladders, many of them.
Scores of men swarmed up the ladders and over the wall. A heavy division
forced its way into the redoubt through the sallyport, and as Ned saw he
uttered a deep gasp. He knew that the Alamo was doomed. And the Mexicans
knew it, too. The shrill screaming of the women began again from the
flat roofs of the houses, and shouts burst from the army also.

"We have them! We have them!" cried Santa Anna, exultant and excited.

Sheets of flame still burst from the Alamo, and the rifles still poured
bullets on the swarming Mexican forces, but the breach had been made.
The Mexicans went over the low wall in an unbroken stream, and they
crowded through the sallyport by hundreds. They were inside now, rushing
with the overwhelming weight of twenty to one upon the little garrison.
They seized the Texan guns, cutting down the gunners with lances and
sabers, and they turned the captured cannon upon the defenders.

Some of the buildings inside the walls were of adobe, and they were soon
shattered by the cannon balls. The Texans, covered with smoke and dust
and the sweat of battle, were forced back by the press of numbers into
the convent yard, and then into the church and hospital. Here the cannon
and rifles in hundreds were turned upon them, but they still fought.
Often, with no time to reload their rifles, they clubbed them, and drove
back the Mexican rush.

The Alamo was a huge volcano of fire and smoke, of shouting and death.
Those who looked on became silent again, appalled at the sights and
sounds. The smoke rose far above the mission, and caught by a light
wind drifted away to the east. The Mexican generals brought up fresh
forces and drove them at the fortress. A heavy column, attacking on the
south side, where no defenders were now left, poured over a stockade and
crowded into the mission. The circle of cavalry about the Alamo again
drew closer, lest any Texan should escape. But it was a useless
precaution. None sought flight.

In very truth, the last hope of the Alamo was gone, and perhaps there
was none among the defenders who did not know it. There were a few wild
and desperate characters of the border, whom nothing in life became so
much as their manner of leaving it. In the culminating moment of the
great tragedy they bore themselves as well as the best.

Travis, the commander, and Bonham stood in the long room of the hospital
with a little group around them, most of them wounded, the faces of all
black with powder smoke. But they fought on. Whenever a Mexican appeared
at the door an unerring rifle bullet struck him down. Fifty fell at that
single spot before the rifles, yet they succeeded in dragging up a
cannon, thrust its muzzle in at the door and fired it twice loaded with
grape shot into the room.

The Texans were cut down by the shower of missiles, and the whole place
was filled with smoke. Then the Mexicans rushed in and the few Texans
who had survived the grape shot fell fighting to the last with their
clubbed rifles. Here lay Travis of the white soul and beside him fell
the brave Bonham, who had gone out for help, and who had returned to die
with his comrades. The Texans who had defended the room against so many
were only fifteen in number, and they were all silent now. Now the whole
attack converged on the church, the strongest part of the Alamo, where
the Texans were making their last stand. The place was seething with
fire and smoke, but above it still floated the banner upon which was
written in great letters the word, "Texas."

The Mexicans, pressing forward in dense masses, poured in cannon balls
and musket balls at every opening. Half the Texans were gone, but the
others never ceased to fire with their rifles. Within that raging
inferno they could hardly see one another for the smoke, but they were
all animated by the same purpose, to fight to the death and to carry as
many of their foes with them as they could.

Evans, who had commanded the cannon, rushed for the magazine to blow up
the building. They had agreed that if all hope were lost he should do
so, but he was killed on his way by a bullet, and the others went on
with the combat.

Near the entrance to the church stood a great figure swinging a clubbed
rifle. His raccoon skin cap was lost, and his eyes burned like coals of
fire in his swarthy face. It was Crockett, gone mad with battle, and the
Mexicans who pressed in recoiled before the deadly sweep of the clubbed
rifle. Some were awed by the terrific figure, dripping blood, and wholly
unconscious of danger.

"Forward!" cried a Mexican officer, and one of his men went down with a
shattered skull. The others shrank back again, but a new figure pressed
into the ring. It was that of the younger Urrea. At the last moment he
had left the cavalry and joined in the assault.

"Don't come within reach of his blows!" he cried. "Shoot him! Shoot
him!"

He snatched a double-barreled pistol from his own belt and fired twice
straight at Crockett's breast. The great Tennesseean staggered, dropped
his rifle and the flame died from his eyes. With a howl of triumph his
foes rushed upon him, plunged their swords and bayonets into his body,
and he fell dead with a heap of the Mexican slain about him.

A bullet whistled past Urrea's face and killed a man beyond him. He
sprang back. Bowie, still suffering severe injuries from a fall from a
platform, was lying on a cot in the arched room to the left of the
entrance. Unable to walk, he had received at his request two pistols,
and now he was firing them as fast as he could pull the triggers and
reload.

"Shoot him! Shoot him at once!" cried Urrea.

His own pistol was empty now, but a dozen musket balls were fired into
the room. Bowie, hit twice, nevertheless raised himself upon his elbow,
aimed a pistol with a clear eye and a steady hand, and pulled the
trigger. A Mexican fell, shot through the heart, but another volley of
musket balls was discharged at the Georgian. Struck in both head and
heart he suddenly straightened out and lay still upon the cot. Thus died
the famous Bowie.

Mrs. Dickinson and her baby had been hidden in the arched room on the
other side for protection. The Mexicans killed a Texan named Walters at
the entrance, and, wild with ferocity, raised his body upon a half dozen
bayonets while the blood ran down in a dreadful stream upon those who
held it aloft.

Urrea rushed into the room and found the cowering woman and her baby.
The Mexicans followed, and were about to slay them, too, when a gallant
figure rushed between. It was the brave and humane Almonte. Sword in
hand, he faced the savage horde. He uttered words that made Urrea turn
dark with shame and leave the room. The soldiers were glad to follow.

At the far end of the church a few Texans were left, still fighting
with clubbed rifles. The Mexicans drew back a little, raised their
muskets and fired an immense shattering volley. When the smoke cleared
away not a single Texan was standing, and then the troops rushed in with
sword and bayonet.

It was nine o'clock in the morning, and the Alamo had fallen. The
defenders were less than nine score, and they had died to the last man.
A messenger rushed away at once to Santa Anna with the news of the
triumph, and he came from the shelter, glorying, exulting and crying
that he had destroyed the Texans.

Ned followed the dictator. He never knew exactly why, because many of
those moments were dim, like the scenes of a dream, and there was so
much noise, excitement and confusion that no one paid any attention to
him. But an overwhelming power drew him on to the Alamo, and he rushed
in with the Mexican spectators.

Ned passed through the sallyport and he reeled back aghast for a moment.
The Mexican dead, not yet picked up, were strewn everywhere. They had
fallen in scores. The lighter buildings were smashed by cannon balls and
shells. The earth was gulleyed and torn. The smoke from so much firing
drifted about in banks and clouds, and it gave forth the pungent odor of
burned gunpowder.

The boy knew not only that the Alamo had fallen, but that all of its
defenders had fallen with it. The knowledge was instinctive. He had been
with those men almost to the last day of the siege, and he had
understood their spirit.

He was not noticed in the crush. Santa Anna and the generals were
running into the church, and he followed them. Here he saw the Texan
dead, and he saw also a curious crowd standing around a fallen form. He
pressed into the ring and his heart gave a great throb of grief.

It was Crockett, lying upon his back, his body pierced by many wounds.
Ned had known that he would find him thus, but the shock, nevertheless,
was terrible. Yet Crockett's countenance was calm. He bore no wounds in
the face, and he lay almost as if he had died in his bed. It seemed to
Ned even in his grief that no more fitting death could have come to the
old hero.

Then, following another crowd, he saw Bowie, also lying peacefully in
death upon his cot. He felt the same grief for him that he had felt for
Crockett, but it soon passed in both cases. A strange mood of exaltation
took its place. They had died as one might wish to die, since death must
come to all. It was glorious that these defenders of the Alamo, comrades
of his, should have fallen to the last man. The full splendor of their
achievement suddenly burst in a dazzling vision before him. Texans who
furnished such valor could not be conquered. Santa Anna might have
twenty to one or fifty to one or a hundred to one, in the end it would
not matter.

The mood endured. He looked upon the dead faces of Travis and Bonham
also, and he was not shaken. He saw others, dozens and dozens whom he
knew, and the faces of all of them seemed peaceful to him. The shouting
and cheering and vast chatter of the Mexicans did not disturb him. His
mood was so high that all these things passed as nothing.

Ned made no attempt to escape. He knew that while he might go about
almost as he chose in this crowd of soldiers, now disorganized, the ring
of cavalry beyond would hold him. The thought of escape, however, was
but little in his mind just then. He was absorbed in the great tomb of
the Alamo. Here, despite the recent work of the cannon, all things
looked familiar. He could mark the very spots where he had stood and
talked with Crockett or Bowie. He knew how the story of the immortal
defence would spread like fire throughout Texas and beyond. When he
should tell how he had seen the faces of the heroes, every heart must
leap.

He wandered back to the church, where the curious still crowded. Many
people from the town, influential Mexicans, wished to see the terrible
Texans, who yet lay as they had fallen. Some spoke scornful words, but
most regarded them with awe. Ned looked at Crockett for the second time,
and a hand touched him on the shoulder. It was Urrea.

"Where are your Texans now?" he asked.

"They are gone," replied Ned, "but they will never be forgotten." And
then he added in a flash of anger. "Five or six times as many Mexicans
have gone with them."

"It is true," said the young Mexican thoughtfully. "They fought like
cornered mountain wolves. We admit it. And this one, Crockett you call
him, was perhaps the most terrible of them all. He swung his clubbed
rifle so fiercely that none dared come within its reach. I slew him."

"You?" exclaimed Ned.

"Yes, I! Why should I not? I fired two pistol bullets into him and he
fell."

He spoke with a certain pride. Ned said nothing, but he pressed his
teeth together savagely and his heart swelled with hate of the sleek and
triumphant Urrea.

"General Santa Anna, engrossed in much more important matters, has
doubtless forgotten you," continued the Mexican, "but I will see that
you do not escape. Why he spares you I know not, but it is his wish."

He called to two soldiers, whom he detailed to follow Ned and see that
he made no attempt to escape. The boy was yet so deeply absorbed in the
Alamo that no room was left in his mind for anything else. Nor did he
care to talk further with Urrea, who he knew was not above aiming a
shaft or two at an enemy in his power. He remained in the crowd until
Santa Anna ordered that all but the troops be cleared from the Alamo.

Then, at the order of the dictator, the bodies of the Texans were taken
without. A number of them were spread upon the ground, and were covered
with a thick layer of dry wood and brush. Then more bodies of men and
heaps of dry wood were spread in alternate layers until the funeral pile
was complete.

Young Urrea set the torch, while the Mexican army and population looked
on. The dry wood flamed up rapidly and the whole was soon a pyramid of
fire and smoke. Ned was not shocked at this end, even of the bodies of
brave men. He recalled the stories of ancient heroes, the bodies of whom
had been consumed on just such pyres as this, and he was willing that
his comrades should go to join Hercules, Hector, Achilles and the rest.

The flames roared and devoured the great pyramid, which sank lower, and
at last Ned turned away. His mood of exaltation was passing. No one
could remain keyed to that pitch many hours. Overwhelming grief and
despair came in its place. His mind raged against everything, against
the cruelty of Santa Anna, who had hoisted the red flag of no quarter,
against fate, that had allowed so many brave men to perish, and against
the overwhelming numbers that the Mexicans could always bring against
the Texans.

He walked gloomily toward the town, the two soldiers who had been
detailed as guards following close behind him. He looked back, saw the
sinking blaze of the funeral pyre, shuddered and walked on.

San Antonio de Bexar was rejoicing. Most of its people, Mexican to the
core, shared in the triumph of Santa Anna. The terrible Texans were
gone, annihilated, and Santa Anna was irresistible. The conquest of
Texas was easy now. No, it was achieved already. They had the dictator's
own word for it that the rest was a mere matter of gathering up the
fragments.

Some of the graver and more kindly Mexican officers thought of their own
losses. The brave and humane Almonte walked through the courts and
buildings of the Alamo, and his face blanched when he reckoned their
losses. A thousand men killed or wounded was a great price to pay for
the nine score Texans who were sped. But no such thoughts troubled Santa
Anna. All the vainglory of his nature was aflame. They were decorating
the town with all the flags and banners and streamers they could find,
and he knew that it was for him. At night they would illuminate in his
honor. He stretched out his arm toward the north and west, and murmured
that it was all his. He would be the ruler of an empire half the size of
Europe. The scattered and miserable Texans could set no bounds to his
ambition. He had proved it.

He would waste no more time in that empty land of prairies and plains.
He sent glowing dispatches about his victory to the City of Mexico and
announced that he would soon come. His subordinates would destroy the
wandering bands of Texans. Then he did another thing that appealed to
his vanity. He wrote a proclamation to the Texans announcing the fall of
the Alamo, and directing them to submit at once, on pain of death, to
his authority. He called for Mrs. Dickinson, the young wife, now widow,
whom the gallantry of Almonte had saved from massacre in the Alamo. He
directed her to take his threat to the Texans at Gonzales, and she
willingly accepted. Mounting a horse and alone save for the baby in her
arms, she rode away from San Antonio, shuddering at the sight of the
Mexicans, and passed out upon the desolate and dangerous prairies.

The dictator was so absorbed in his triumph and his plans for his
greater glory that for the time he forgot all about Ned Fulton, his
youthful prisoner, who had crossed the stream and who was now in the
town, attended by the two peons whom Urrea had detailed as his guards.
But Ned had come out of his daze, and his mind was as keen and alert as
ever. The effects of the great shock of horror remained. His was not a
bitter nature, but he could not help feeling an intense hatred of the
Mexicans. He was on the battle line, and he saw what they were doing. He
resolved that now was his time to escape, and in the great turmoil
caused by the excitement and rejoicing in San Antonio he did not believe
that it would be difficult.

He carefully cultivated the good graces of the two soldiers who were
guarding him. He bought for them mescal and other fiery drinks which
were now being sold in view of the coming festival. Their good nature
increased and also their desire to get rid of a task that had been
imposed upon them. Why should they guard a boy when everybody else was
getting ready to be merry?

They went toward the Main Plaza, and came to the Zambrano Row, where the
Texans had fought their way when they took San Antonio months before.
Ned looked up at the buildings. They were still dismantled. Great holes
were in the walls and the empty windows were like blind eyes. He saw at
once that their former inhabitants had not yet returned to them, and
here he believed was his chance.

When they stood beside the first house he called the attention of his
guards to some Mexican women who were decorating a doorway across the
street. When they looked he darted into the first of the houses in the
Zambrano Row. He entered a large room and at the corner saw a stairway.
He knew this place. He had been here in the siege of San Antonio by the
Texans, and now he had the advantage over his guards, who were probably
strangers.

He rushed for the staircase and, just as he reached the top, one of the
guards, who had followed as soon as they noticed the flight of the
prisoner, fired his musket. The discharge roared in the room, but the
bullet struck the wall fully a foot away from the target. Ned was on the
second floor, and out of range the next moment. He knew that the
soldiers would follow him, and he passed through the great hole, broken
by the Texans, into the next house.

Here he paused to listen, and he heard the two soldiers muttering and
breathing heavily. The distaste which they already felt for their task
had become a deep disgust. Why should they be deprived of their part in
the festival to follow up a prisoner? What did a single captive amount
to, anyhow? Even if he escaped now the great, the illustrious Santa
Anna, whose eyes saw all things, would capture him later on when he
swept all the scattered Texans into his basket.

Ned went from house to house through the holes broken in the party
walls, and occasionally he heard his pursuers slouching along and
grumbling. At the fourth house he slipped out upon the roof, and lay
flat near the stone coping.

He knew that if the soldiers came upon the roof they would find him, but
he relied upon the mescal and their lack of zeal. He heard them once
tramping about in the room below him, and then he heard them no more.

Ned remained all the rest of the afternoon upon the roof, not daring to
leave his cramped position against the coping. He felt absolutely safe
there from observation, Mexicans would not be prowling through
dismantled and abandoned houses at such a time. Now and then gay shouts
came from the streets below. The Mexicans of Bexar were disturbed little
by the great numbers of their people who had fallen at the Alamo. The
dead were from the far valleys of Mexico, and were strangers.

Ned afterward thought that he must have slept a little toward twilight,
but he was never sure of it. He saw the sun set, and the gray and silent
Alamo sink away into the darkness. Then he slipped from the roof,
anxious to be away before the town was illuminated. He had no difficulty
at all in passing unnoticed through the streets, and he made his way
