when I look at Olga I think she is the more beautiful, but when I see
them together I think they are equally beautiful."

They giggled and nudged each other.

"You are the man who rode the young count's horse," said Ilse, who took
the lead in talk as brunettes usually do, "and I hope you will pardon
our forwardness in wishing to look at so wonderful a person."

There was a wicked little glint in her eye, but John only smiled again.

"I was lucky," he said.

"We saw you," said Olga. "We were standing on the edge of the lower
terrace when you sprang into the saddle. We were sure you would be
killed."

"But we were glad you were not," said Ilse. "We were pleased when we saw
you riding the great black horse directly back to the castle. Do you
mean to stay here all the time?"

"Where there is so much beauty and wit I should like to remain," replied
John with increasing gallantry, still holding his cap in his hands, "but
who can tell where he will be a week hence in times like these?"

Again they laughed and nudged each other. Ilse had a shrewd and
observant mind.

"Your German has a French accent," she said.

"I was born in a land that was once French--Lorraine--so my blood is
French by descent, although I am wholly German in loyalty and in
feeling. But I'm not the first person of French blood that you ever saw,
am I?"

He asked the question in a careless tone, but he awaited the answer with
anxiety.

"Oh, no," replied Ilse. "Many people come to the great castle of
Zillenstein. Two Frenchwomen are here now, spies, terrible spies they
say, but I can scarce believe it, at least of the young one,
Mademoiselle Julie, who is so beautiful, and who speaks to us so
gently."

"But it may be true of the other of low degree, the surly Suzanne," said
blond Olga.

"At least, they're where they can't get back to France as long as this
war lasts," said John, looking up at the formidable castle. "It seems a
sad thing to me that women should be spies. It isn't right."

He spoke in his most engaging manner. Again his frank look and
attractive smile were winning him friends where he needed friends most.
He saw, too, that he was on a subject that interested the maids. Once
more fortune was favoring him who wooed her so boldly.

"But," said the blond and substantial Olga, "I think the beautiful
Mademoiselle Lannes is in no danger. The prince himself loves her and
would marry her. We can see it, can we not Ilse?"

"At least we think it."

"We know it. And His Highness might search Europe and not find a woman
more beautiful. She has the most wonderful hair, pure gold, with little
touches of copper, when the firelight or the sunlight is deep upon it,
and when loosed it falls to her knees. I have seen it."

"And marvelous blue eyes," said Ilse. "A dark blue like the waters of
our mountain lakes. Oh, no, the Prince of Auersperg can never punish
her!"

John laughed.

"This French spy seems more dangerous as a captive than free," he said.

"That is so," said Ilse, seriously. "If Prince Karl of Auersperg,
powerful as he is, were disposed to punish her, the others would not let
him."

"What others?"

"The young Count Kratzek, the relative of the prince. He loves her, too,
and he scarcely seeks to hide it. And Count Pappenheim, who is of kin to
the emperor, worships her beauty."

"The lady must be Psyche herself," said John.

But not knowing who Psyche was, they shook their heads.

"And that is not all," continued Ilse. "A Prussian prince was here, a
fine and gallant man, tall and young. He, too, is at the feet of the
lovely Mademoiselle Julie. I heard him say that he had seen her before
she was brought to Zillenstein."

John's pulses suddenly beat hard. He knew instinctively the identity of
the Prussian prince, but he asked quietly:

"What was the man from Prussia called?"

"Prince Wilhelm von Arnheim. I was present when he first saw here the
beautiful Mademoiselle Julie. He bent before her and kissed her hand,
as if she were a princess herself. The look that he gave her was full of
love, and it was also most respectful. I, Ilse Brandt, know."

"I've no doubt of it, because you've received many such looks yourself,
beautiful Ilse," said John.

"There she is now! At the window!" exclaimed Olga.

John looked at once, and his heart leaped within him. Julie stood framed
in a window, high up in the new part of the castle. The light seemed to
fall upon her, as one turns it in a flood upon a picture, and her figure
was in the center of a glow that brought out the coppery touches in the
wonderful golden hair, that was the marvel of everybody. She seemed to
be gazing wistfully over the misty mountains, and John's heart was full
of yearning.

"I can't believe," said Ilse, "that she is a spy or has ever been a spy.
She has not the look, nor the manner. When the Prince von Arnheim was
here they gave a great dinner, and Prince Karl bade her come to it. I
took her a beautiful dress of his niece, who is away in Vienna. I
thought she would refuse, but she said that she would come as Prince
Karl requested. I was her maid, I dressed her and she was very
beautiful. She went to the dinner, and the aged Lady Ursula, the cousin
and dependent of the prince, sat with her."

"What happened?" asked John in a low voice.

"I think it was their intention at first to remind her that she was a
prisoner. Prince Karl is a hard and stern man, and he would bend her to
his will, but the Prince Wilhelm frowned upon them all, and the Count
Kratzek was also most respectful."

"They had brought her to complete their triumph and instead the triumph
was hers," John could not keep from saying.

"It is so," admitted Ilse. "They were abashed before her, and at the
last when they drank a toast to the glorious victory of our German race,
she withheld her glass, and then, taking a sip of the wine, she said she
wished with all her heart, as long as it should beat in her body, for
the triumph of France. That, too, I saw, and while I do not wish for the
triumph of France it was thrilling to see but one and a girl defying so
many strong men."

"I wish I had been there to see," murmured John.

"What did you say?" asked Olga.

"That only a very brave woman could have done such a thing."

"She is brave. She does not fear any of them, and the woman Suzanne with
her has a tiger's temper."

"But she loves the young mademoiselle. One can see that," said Ilse,
"and she will guard her."

John wished to know what had become of Antoine, but he did not dare ask
pointed questions. Julie left the window presently and the light went
with her. The sunlight was dying now on the eastern mountains, but a
great happiness came to him. He had found her. The footsteps of the
crusader had been guided aright. His star had led him on through many
dangers, and his spirit was high with hope.

It was, perhaps, well that the growing twilight kept Ilse and Olga from
seeing the glow in his eyes, but it was time for the two to go, and,
laughing and supporting each other in what they considered a mild
flirtation, they disappeared within the castle. John sent a smile after
them. They were good girls and he knew that he had made two valuable
friends who would tell him all that was happening to Julie in
Zillenstein.

He went back to the stables and plunged anew into his work with a zeal
and skill that aroused the admiration of Walther. His knowledge of
horses was most useful to him now, and, as he had also learned much
about automobiles in his campaigning, he volunteered to help with them
too. He saw the great limousine in which the prince himself had
traveled, and he helped two of the hostlers to clean it. Walther growled
as he looked on.

"When I was a lad," he said, "the magnificent, living horse was king at
Zillenstein. Now it's a machine that can't either think or feel."

"We can't fight the times, Herr Walther," said John, cheerfully. "The
automobile like the railway has come to stay."

"I suppose so, but the noble Count Kratzek returns. Take his horse."

John went forward and held the bridle after the young Austrian had
dismounted. Kratzek had a fine color from his ride, and he seemed to
John to be completely well of his wound. He handed the young peasant who
was holding his horse half a krone, and then walked briskly into the
castle.

John put the little silver piece in his pocket, after having touched
his cap, and led the horse into the stable. He did not feel humiliated.
He found something humorous in receiving a tip of ten cents from the man
whose life he had saved. He unsaddled the horse, put him in his stall,
rubbed him down, and came forth to receive the unqualified praise of
Walther.

"You, Castel," he said, "you're a fiend for work. I can see that. Most
of my men look upon work as an enemy. They run from it and hide from it.
Now, come you to the kitchen and you shall eat well in reward."

The great kitchen for the servants and retainers, who were many, was in
the basement of the castle and John, his appetite sharp from the day's
work, ate bountifully. The obvious fact that he had already won the
regard of Walther, a man of importance, inspired respect for him, and
once the brunette Ilse, flitting through the kitchen, gave him a glance
of approval.

He slept that night in a little room above the horses, but first he saw
the moon rise over Zillenstein, the valley and the mountain, a vast
panorama, white and cold. He did not know what his next step was to be.
He did not know how he was to communicate with Julie, but he had an
implicit confidence in the Providence that had guided him so far and so
well.

Three days went by and he did not yet find the way, but he saw Julie
once more at the window and yet another time walking on the terrace in
front of the castle accompanied by Suzanne. He was walking Pappenheim's
restive horse back and forth and he was not a hundred feet from her, but
he knew no sign to make. The air was cold then, and she was wrapped in
the long, dark red cloak that he knew. A hood also of dark red covered
her head, but tiny curls of the marvelous golden hair escaped from it,
their glowing color deepening by contrast the pallor of her lovely face.
Again John's heart, overflowing with pity and love, yearned for her.

The crusader worships that which he seeks. John had come to the end of
his search, but apparently the way of rescue was as hard as ever. He saw
her, but he could not speak to her, and there was no way to let her know
that he was near. Suzanne, dark, grim and powerful, walked a step or two
behind her, watching over her with a love that was ready for any
sacrifice. John felt a deep respect for this faithful and taciturn woman
of Normandy, and he was devoutly glad that she was there to be a comfort
and support to Julie in these trying days.

As John walked the horse up and down, the maid, Ilse, passing on an
errand, stopped and spoke to him.

"It's the French spy and her maid," she said. "They allow her to take
the air twice a day upon the terrace. I can't think that she is merely a
spy. It must be something political, too high for such as you and me to
understand. Perhaps she is a great French lady who is held as a hostage.
Do they do such things in war now, Jean Castel?"

"I think so."

"Prince Karl sends her flowers this morning. See, Olga comes with them,
but she does not speak French, nor do I. She will not know from whom
they come."

Often the great opportunity appears when it is least expected. A trifle
may open the way and John, quick as lightning, saw and seized his
chance. Throwing the reins of the now quiet horse over a pillar he said:

"I know French, as I come from Lorraine. Let me take them."

Without waiting for her assent he took the flowers from the hand of the
willing Olga and walked boldly across the terrace to Julie, who was
looking over the valley. Bending the knee he offered the flowers,
saying:

"Prince Karl sends you these, Mademoiselle Lannes."

She started a little at the sound of his voice and he continued in a
lower tone:

"Julie, I've come across Germany for you. Make no sign. I'm here to save
you. I'm a groom in the prince's stables!"

He saw the delicate color like the first flush of dawn overspread her
face, and a light that had never shone for any other spring into her
eyes. All the hardships that he had endured, all the dangers that he had
run were as nothing now.

"John," she exclaimed, in a voice tremulous with fear for him, not for
herself, "you must leave Zillenstein at once! Your life is not safe here
for a moment!"

"When I go you go with me," he said.

They had spoken rapidly in whispers and not even Suzanne had noticed.
Accustomed now to the servants in the castle she had merely seen a young
peasant bringing flowers from the prince to her mistress. They had been
brought before and there was nothing unusual about it.

"Tell the prince that I thank him," said Julie, aloud, but in
indifferent tones.

John bowed and walked back toward the horse, his heart beating hard with
triumph and joy.




CHAPTER XI

THE EFFICIENT HOSTLER


When John Scott returned to the stables his pulses were still throbbing
with joy and he trod the grass of the Elysian Fields. Young love is pure
and noble, a spontaneous emotion that has nothing in it of calculation,
and the wild and strange setting of his romance merely served to deepen
his feelings.

He was the young crusader again, a knight coming to rescue his lady from
the hands of the infidels. He had made the impossible possible. He had
seen her and spoken with her, and despite his peasant clothes and his
position of a menial that he had willingly taken, she had known him at
once. He had seen the deep color flushing into her face and the light
like the first arrow of dawn spring into her eyes, and he knew that he
had not come in vain.

He put so much vigor into his work, and he whistled and sang, low but so
joyously that the stolid Walther took notice.

"Why are you so happy, you Castel?" he asked.

"I've seen the sun, Herr Walther."

"There is nothing uncommon about that. The sun has risen every morning
for a million years and more."

"But not this sun, Herr Walther. It never rose before and it's the
brightest and most glorious of them all."

Walther looked up at the sun. It was in truth bright, casting a golden
glow over all the mountains, but he saw nothing new about it.

"It's a fine sun, as you say," he said, "but it's the same as ever. Ah,
you're French after all--in blood, I mean, I don't question your
loyalty--and you see things that are not. Too much imagination, Castel.
