(pro. pre-sizh'un), accuracy, exactness.



NOTE.--This incident is said to have taken place on the railway following
the valley of the Vistula. River, in Prussia, from Dantzic to Bromberg.
The cities mentioned are all in Prussia, excepting Stockholm, which is the
capital of Sweden.



LXX. THE HERITAGE.

James Russell Lowell (b. 1819, d.1891) was born in Cambridge, Mass., and
was graduated from Harvard College. He entered the profession of law; but,
in 1843, turned aside to publish "The Pioneer, a Literary and Critical
Magazine." In 1855 he was appointed professor of Belles-lettres in Harvard
College. From 1877 to 1885 he was U.S. Minister, first to Spain,
afterwards to Great Britain. Lowell's powers as a writer were very
versatile, and his poems range from the most dreamy and imaginative to the
most trenchant and witty. Among his most noted poetical works are "The
Biglow Papers," "A Fable for Critics," "The Vision of Sir Launfal," "The
Cathedral," and "The Legend of Brittany;" while "Conversations on some of
the Old Poets," "Among my Books," and "My Study Windows," place him in the
front rank as an essayist.

1. The rich man's son inherits lands,
     And piles of brick, and stone, and gold,
   And he inherits soft white hands,
     And tender flesh that fears the cold,
     Nor dares to wear a garment old;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   One scarce would wish to hold in fee.

2. The rich man's son inherits cares;
     The bank may break, the factory burn,
   A breath may burst his bubble shares,
     And soft white hands could hardly earn
     A living that would serve his turn;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   One scarce would wish to hold in fee.

3. The rich man's son inherits wants,
     His stomach craves for dainty fare;
   With sated heart, he hears the pants
     Of toiling hinds with brown arms bare!
     And wearies in his easy-chair;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   One scarce would wish to hold in fee.

4. What doth the poor man's son inherit?
     Stout muscles and a sinewy heart,
   A hardy frame, a hardier spirit;
     King of two hands, he does his part
     In every useful toil and art;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   A king might wish to hold in fee.

5. What doth the poor man's son inherit?
     Wishes o'erjoyed with humble things,
   A rank adjudged by toil-won merit,
     Content that from employment springs,
     A heart that in his labor sings;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   A king might wish to hold in fee.

6. What doth the poor man's son inherit?
     A patience learned of being poor,
   Courage, if sorrow come, to bear it,
     A fellow-feeling that is sure
     To make the outcast bless his door;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   A king might wish to hold in fee.

7. O rich man's son! there is a toil
     That with all others level stands:
   Large charity doth never soil,
     But only whiten soft, white hands,--
     This is the best crop from thy lands;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   Worth being rich to hold in fee.

8. O poor man's son! scorn not thy state;
     There is worse weariness than thine
   In merely being rich and great:
     Toil only gives the soul to shine,
     And makes rest fragrant and benign;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   Worth being poor to hold in fee.

9. Both, heirs to some six feet of sod,
     Are equal in the earth at last;
   Both, children of the same dear God,
     Prove title to your heirship vast
     By record of a well-filled past;
   A heritage, it seems to me,
   Well worth a life to hold in fee.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Her'it-age, that which is inherited, or taken by descent,
from an ancestor. 3. Sat'ed, surfeited, glutted. Hinds, peasants,
countrymen. 5. Ad-judged', decided, determined. 8. Be-nign' (pro.
be-nin'), having healthful qualities, wholesome.


NOTES.--1. To hold in fee, means to have as an inheritance. 9. Prove
title. That is, to prove the right of ownership.



LXXI. NO EXCELLENCE WITHOUT LABOR.

William Wirt (b. 1772, d. 1834) was born in Bladensburg, Md. He was
admitted to the bar in 1799, and afterwards practiced law, with eminent
success, at Richmond and Norfolk, Va. He was one of the counsel for the
prosecution in the trial of Aaron Burr for treason. From 1817 to 1829 he
was attorney-general for the United States. In 1803 he published the
"Letters of a British Spy," a work which attracted much attention, and in
1817 a "Life of Patrick Henry."

1. The education, moral and intellectual, of every individual, must be
chiefly his own work. Rely upon it that the ancients were right; both in
morals and intellect we give the final shape to our characters, and thus
become, emphatically, the architects of our own fortune. How else could it
happen that young men, who have had precisely the same opportunities,
should be continually presenting us with such different results, and
rushing to such opposite destinies?

2. Difference of talent will not solve it, because that difference is very
often in favor of the disappointed candidate. You will see issuing from
the walls of the same college, nay, sometimes from the bosom of the same
family, two young men, of whom one will be admitted to be a genius of high
order, the other scarcely above the point of mediocrity; yet you will see
the genius sinking and perishing in poverty, obscurity, and wretchedness;
while, on the other hand, you will observe the mediocre plodding his slow
but sure way up the hill of life, gaining steadfast footing at every step,
and mounting, at length, to eminence and distinction, an ornament to his
family, a blessing to his country.

3. Now, whose work is this? Manifestly their own. They are the
architects of their respective fortunes. The best seminary of
learning that can open its portals to you can do no more than to
afford you the opportunity of instruction; but it must depend, at
last, on yourselves, whether you will be instructed or not, or to
what point you will push your instruction.

4. And of this be assured, I speak from observation a certain truth: THERE
IS NO EXCELLENCE WITHOUT GREAT LABOR. It is the fiat of fate, from which
no power of genius can absolve you.

5. Genius, unexerted, is like the poor moth that flutters around a candle
till it scorches itself to death. If genius be desirable at all, it is
only of that great and magnanimous kind, which, like the condor of South
America, pitches from the summit of Chimborazo, above the clouds, and
sustains itself at pleasure in that empyreal region with an energy rather
invigorated than weakened by the effort.

6. It is this capacity for high and long-continued exertion, this vigorous
power of profound and searching investigation, this careering and
wide-spreading comprehension of mind, and these long reaches of thought,
that

   "Pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon,
   Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
   And pluck up drowned honor by the locks;"

this is the prowess, and these the hardy achievements, which are to enroll
your names among the great men of the earth.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Mor'al, relating to duty or obligation. Ar'-chi-tects,
builders, makers. Des'ti-ny, ultimate fate, appointed condition. 2.
Can'di-date, one who seeks after some honor or office. Gen'ius (pro.
jen'yus), a man of superior intellectual powers. Me-di-oc'ri-ty, a middle
state or degree of talents. Me'di-o-cre (pro. me'di-o-kr), a man of
moderate talents. 3. Re-spec'tive, particular, own. 4. Ab-solve', set
free, release from. Fi'at, a decree. 5. Con'-dor, a large bird of the
vulture family. Em-pyr'e-al, relating to the highest and purest region of
the heavens. 6. Ca-reer'ing, moving rapidly. Prow'ess (pro. prou'es),
bravery, boldness.


NOTES.--5. Chimborazo (pro. chim-bo-ra'zo), is an extinct volcano in
Ecuador, whose height is 20,517 feet above the sea.

6. The quotation is from Shakespeare's "King Henry IV," Part I, Act II
Scene 3.



LXXII. THE OLD HOUSE CLOCK.

1. Oh! the old, old clock of the household stock,
     Was the brightest thing, and neatest;
   Its hands, though old, had a touch of gold,
     And its chimes rang still the sweetest;
   'T was a monitor, too, though its words were few,
     Yet they lived, though nations altered;
   And its voice, still strong, warned old and young,
     When the voice of friendship faltered:
   "Tick! tick!" it said, "quick, quick, to bed:
     For ten I've given warning;
   Up! up! and go, or else you know,
     You'll never rise soon in the morning!"

2. A friendly voice was that old, old clock,
     As it stood in the corner smiling,
   And blessed the time with merry chime,
     The wintry hours beguiling;
   But a cross old voice was that tiresome clock,
     As it called at daybreak boldly;
   When the dawn looked gray o'er the misty way,
     And the early air looked coldly:
   "Tick! tick!" it said, "quick out of bed:
     For five I've given warning;
   You'll never have health, you'll never have wealth,
     Unless you're up soon in the morning!"

3. Still hourly the sound goes round and round,
     With a tone that ceases never:
   While tears are shed for bright days fled,
     And the old friends lost forever!
   Its heart beats on, though hearts are gone
     That beat like ours, though stronger;
   Its hands still move, though hands we love
     Are clasped on earth no longer!
   "Tick! tick!" it said, "to the churchyard bed,
     The grave hath given warning;
   Up! up! and rise, and look at the skies,
     And prepare for a heavenly morning!"



LXXIII. THE EXAMINATION

Daniel Pierce Thompson (b. 1193, d. 1868) was born at Charlestown, Mass.,
but soon removed with his father to Vermont, where he lived until twenty
years of age, on a farm. His means of schooling were most limited, but he
was very ambitious and seized every opportunity. By his own efforts he
earned enough money to carry him through Middlebury College, where he
graduated in 1820. He then went to Virginia as private tutor, and while
there was entered at the bar. He shortly returned to Vermont, and opened a
law office in Montpelier. In time he was elected a judge, and later
secretary of state. From his college days Mr. Thompson was a writer for
the various magazines. Among his novels may be mentioned "Locke Amsden,
the Schoolmaster," "May Martin, or the Money Diggers," "The Green Mountain
Boys," and "The Rangers, or the Tory's Daughter."

1. "Have you any questions to ask me in the other branches, sir?" asked
Locke.

"Not many," replied Bunker. "There is reading, writing, grammar, etc.,
which I know nothing about; and as to them, I must, of course, take you by
guess, which will not be much of a guess, after all, if I find you have
thought well on all other matters. Do you understand philosophy?"

2. "To what branch of philosophy do you allude, sir?"

"To the only branch there is."

"But you are aware that philosophy is divided into different kinds; as,
natural, moral, and intellectual."

"Nonsense! philosophy is philosophy, and means the study of the reasons
and causes of the things which we see, whether it be applied to a crazy
man's dreams, or the roasting of potatoes. Have you attended to it?"

"Yes, to a considerable extent, sir."

3. "I will put a question or two, then, if you please. What is the reason
of the fact, for it is a fact, that the damp breath of a person blown on a
good knife and on a bad one, will soonest disappear from the well-tempered
blade?"

"It may be owing to the difference in the polish of the two blades,
perhaps." replied Locke.

4. "Ah! that is an answer that don't go deeper than the surface," rejoined
Bunker, humorously. "As good a thinker as you evidently are, you have not
thought on this subject, I suspect. It took me a week, in all, I presume,
of hard thinking, and making experiments at a blacksmith's shop, to
discover the reason of this. It is not the polish; for take two blades of
equal polish, and the breath will disappear from one as much quicker than
it does from the other, as the blade is better. It is because the material
of the blade is more compact or less porous in one case than in the other.


5. "In the first place, I ascertained that the steel was, made more
compact by being hammered and tempered, and that the better it was
tempered the more compact it would become; the size of the pores being
made, of course, less in the same proportion. Well, then, I saw the reason
I was in search of, at once. For we know a wet sponge is longer in drying
than a wet piece of green wood, because the pores of the first are bigger.
A seasoned or shrunk piece of wood dries quicker than a green one, for the
same reason.

6. "Or you might bore a piece of wood with large gimlet holes, and another
with small ones, fill them both with water, and let them stand till the
water evaporated, and the difference of time it would take to do this
would make the case still more plain. So with the blades: the vapor
lingers longest on the worst wrought and tempered one, because the pores,
being larger, take in more of the wet particles, and require more time in
drying."

7. "Your theory is at least a very ingenious one," observed Locke, "and I
am reminded by it of another of the natural phenomena, of the true
explanation of which I have not been able to satisfy myself. It is this:
what makes the earth freeze harder and deeper under a trodden path than
the untrodden earth around it? All that I have asked, say it is because
the trodden earth is more compact. But is that reason a sufficient one?"

8. "No," said Bunker, "but I will tell you what the reason is, for I
thought that out long ago. You know that, in the freezing months, much of
the warmth we get is given out by the earth, from which, at intervals, if
not constantly, to some extent, ascend the warm vapors to mingle with and
moderate the cold atmosphere above.

9. "Now these ascending streams of warm air would be almost wholly
obstructed by the compactness of a trodden path, and they would naturally
divide at some distance below it, and pass up through the loose earth on
each side, leaving the ground along the line of the path, to a great depth
beneath it, a cold, dead mass, through which the frost would continue to
penetrate, unchecked by the internal heat, which, in its unobstructed
ascent on each side, would be continually checking or overcoming the frost
in its action on the earth around.

10. "That, sir, is the true philosophy of the case, you may depend upon
it. But we will now drop the discussion of these matters; for I am
abundantly satisfied that you have not only knowledge enough, but that you
can think for yourself. And now, sir, all I wish to know further about you
is, whether you can teach others to think, which is half the battle with a
teacher. But as I have had an eye on this point, while attending to the
others, probably one experiment, which I will ask you to make on one of
the boys here, will be all I shall want."

"Proceed, sir," said the other.

11. "Ay, sir," rejoined Bunker, turning to the open fireplace, in which
the burning wood was sending up a column of smoke, "there, you see that
smoke rising, don't you? Well, you and I know the, reason why smoke goes
upward, but my youngest boy does not, I think. Now take your own way, and
see if you can make him understand it."

12. Locke, after a moment's reflection, and a glance round the room for
something to serve for apparatus, took from a shelf, where he had espied a
number of articles, the smallest of a set of cast-iron cart boxes, as are
usually termed the round hollow tubes in which the axletree of a carriage
turns. Then selecting a tin cup that would just take in the box, and
turning into the cup as much water as he judged, with the box, would fill
it, he presented them separately to the boy, and said,

"There, my lad, tell me which of these is the heavier."

13. "Why, the cart box, to be sure," replied the boy, taking the cup,
half-filled with water, in one hand, and the hollow iron in the other.

"Then you think this iron is heavier than as much water as would fill the
place of it, do you?" resumed Locke.

"Why, yes, as heavy again, and more too--I know it is," promptly said the
boy.

14. "Well, sir, now mark what I do," proceeded the former, dropping into
the cup the iron box, through the hollow of which the water instantly rose
to the brim of the vessel.

"There, you saw that water rise to the top of the cup, did you?"

"Yes, I did."

"Very well, what caused it to do so?"

15. "Why, I know well enough, if I could only think: why, it is because
the iron is the heavier, and as it comes all around the water so it can't
get away sideways, it is forced up."

"That is right; and now I want you to tell what makes that smoke rise up
the chimney."

16. "Why,--I guess," replied the boy, hesitating, "I guess,--I guess I
don't know."

"Did you ever get up in a chair to look on some high shelf, so that your
head was brought near the ceiling of a heated room, in winter? and did you
notice any difference between the air up there and the air near the
floor?"

17. "Yes, I remember I have, and found the air up there as warm as
mustard; and when I got down, and bent my head near the floor to pick up
something, I found it as cold as could be."

"That is ever the case; but I wish you to tell me how the cold air always
happens to settle down to the lower part of the room, while the warm air,
somehow, at the same time, gets above."

18. "Why, why, heavy things settle down, and the cold air--yes, yes,
that's it, I am sure--the cold air is heavier, and so settles down, and
crowds up the warm air."

"Very good. You then understand that cold air is heavier than the heated
air, as that iron is heavier than the water; so now we will go back to the
main question--what makes the smoke go upwards?"

19. "Oh! I see now as plain as day; the cold air settles down all round,
like the iron box, and drives up the hot air as fast as the fire heats it,
in the middle, like the water; and so the hot air carries the smoke along
up with it, just as feathers and things in a whirlwind. Well! I have found
out what makes smoke go up--is n't it curious?"

20. "Done like a philosopher!" cried Bunker. "The thing is settled. I will
grant that you are a teacher among a thousand. You can not only think
yourself, but can teach others to think; so you may call the position
yours as quick as you please."


DEFINITIONS.--2. In-tel-lec'tu-al, treating of the mind. 3. Tem'-pered,
brought to a proper degree of hardness. 4. Com-pact', closely and firmly
united, solid, dense. 4. Por'ous, full of pores or minute openings. 6.
E-vap'o-rat-ed, passed off in vapor. 7. In-gen'ious (pro. in-jen'yus),
well formed, skillful. 7. Phe-nom'e-non, whatever is presented to the eye.
8. In'ter-vals, spaces of time. 12. Ap-pa-ra'tus, utensils for performing
experiments.


NOTE.--Locke Amsden is represented as a bright young student in search of
a position as teacher of a district school in Vermont. Mr. Buuker, the
"Examining Committee," is a queer, shrewd old farmer, who can neither read
nor write, but by careful observation has picked up a large amount of
valuable information. The story opens in the midst of the examination.



LXXIV. THE ISLE OF LONG AGO.

Benjamin Franklin Taylor (b. 1819, d. 1887) was born at Lowville, N.Y. He
graduated at Madison University, of which his father was president. In
1845 he published "Attractions of Language." For many years he was
literary editor of the "Chicago Journal." Mr. Taylor wrote considerably
for the magazines, was the author of many well-known favorite pieces both
in prose and verse, and achieved success as a lecturer.

1. Oh, a wonderful stream is the river of Time,
     As it runs through the realm of tears,
   With a faultless rhythm and a musical rhyme,
