    And here and there a lusty trout,
      And here and there a grayling,

    And here and there a foamy flake
      Upon me, as I travel
    With many a silvery waterbreak
      Above the golden gravel,

    And draw them all along, and flow
      To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and men may go,
      But I go on for ever.

    I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
      I slide by hazel covers;
    I move the sweet forget-me-nots
      That grow for happy lovers.

    I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
      Among my skimming swallows;
    I make the netted sunbeam dance
      Against my sandy shallows.

    I murmur under moon and stars
      In brambly wildernesses;
    I linger by my shingly bars;
      I loiter round my cresses;

    And out again I curve and flow
      To join the brimming river,
    For men may come and men may go,
      But I go on for ever.

TENNYSON




As good almost kill a man as kill a good book. Many a man lives a burden
to the earth, but a good book is the precious life blood of a
master-spirit.

MILTON




"DO SEEK THEIR MEAT FROM GOD"


There was a solitary cabin in the thick of the woods a mile or more from
the nearest neighbour, a substantial frame house in the midst of a large
and well-tilled clearing. The owner of the cabin, a shiftless fellow who
spent his days for the most part at the corner tavern three miles
distant, had suddenly grown disgusted with a land wherein one must work
to live, and had betaken himself with his seven-year-old boy to seek
some more indolent clime.

The five-year-old son of the prosperous owner of the frame house and the
older boy had been playmates. The little boy, unaware of his comrade's
departure, had stolen away, late in the afternoon, along the lonely
stretch of wood road, and had reached the cabin only to find it empty.
As the dusk gathered, he grew afraid to start for home and crept
trembling into the cabin, whose door would not stay shut. Desperate with
fear and loneliness, he lifted up his voice piteously. In the terrifying
silence, he listened hard to hear if anyone or anything were coming.
Then again his shrill childish wailings arose, startling the unexpectant
night, and piercing the forest depths, even to the ears of two great
panthers which had set forth to seek their meat from God.

The lonely cabin stood some distance, perhaps a quarter of a mile, back
from the highway connecting the settlements. Along this main road a man
was plodding wearily. All day he had been walking, and now as he neared
home his steps began to quicken with anticipation of rest. Over his
shoulder projected a double-barrelled fowling-piece, from which was
slung a bundle of such necessities as he had purchased in town that
morning. It was the prosperous settler, the master of the frame house,
who had chosen to make the tedious journey on foot.

He passed the mouth of the wood road leading to the cabin and had gone
perhaps a furlong beyond, when his ears were startled by the sound of a
child crying in the woods. He stopped, lowered his burden to the road,
and stood straining ears and eyes in the direction of the sound. It was
just at this time that the two panthers also stopped, and lifted their
heads to listen. Their ears were keener than those of the man, and the
sound had reached them at a greater distance.

Presently the settler realized whence the cries were coming. He called
to mind the cabin; but he did not know the cabin's owner had departed.
He cherished a hearty contempt for the drunken squatter; and on the
drunken squatter's child he looked with small favour, especially as a
playmate for his own boy. Nevertheless he hesitated before resuming his
journey.

"Poor little fellow!" he muttered, half in wrath. "I reckon his precious
father's drunk down at 'the Corners,' and him crying for loneliness!"
Then he re-shouldered his burden and strode on doggedly.

But louder, shriller, more hopeless and more appealing, arose the
childish voice, and the settler paused again, irresolute, and with
deepening indignation. In his fancy he saw the steaming supper his wife
would have awaiting him. He loathed the thought of retracing his steps,
and then stumbling a quarter of a mile through the stumps and bog of the
wood road. He was foot-sore as well as hungry, and he cursed the
vagabond squatter with serious emphasis; but in that wailing was a
terror which would not let him go on. He thought of his own little one
left in such a position, and straightway his heart melted. He turned,
dropped his bundle behind some bushes, grasped his gun, and made speed
back for the cabin.

"Who knows," he said to himself, "but that drunken idiot has left his
youngster without a bite to eat in the whole miserable shanty? Or maybe
he's locked out, and the poor little beggar's half scared to death.
_Sounds_ as if he was scared;" and at this thought the settler quickened
his pace.

As the hungry panthers drew near the cabin, and the cries of the lonely
child grew clearer, they hastened their steps, and their eyes opened to
a wider circle, flaming with a greener fire. It would be thoughtless
superstition to say the beasts were cruel. They were simply keen with
hunger, and alive with the eager passion of the chase. They were not
ferocious with any anticipation of battle, for they knew the voice was
the voice of a child, and something in the voice told them the child was
solitary. Theirs was no hideous or unnatural rage, as it is the custom
to describe it. They were but seeking with the strength, the cunning,
the deadly swiftness given them to that end, the food convenient for
them. On their success in accomplishing that for which nature had so
exquisitely designed them, depended not only their own, but the lives of
their blind and helpless young, now whimpering in the cave on the slope
of the moon-lit ravine. They crept through a wet alder thicket, bounded
lightly over the ragged brush fence, and paused to reconnoitre on the
edge of the clearing, in the full glare of the moon. At the same moment,
the settler emerged from the darkness of the wood road on the opposite
side of the clearing. He saw the two great beasts, heads down and snouts
thrust forward, gliding toward the open cabin door.

For a few moments the child had been silent. Now his voice rose again in
pitiful appeal, a very ecstasy of loneliness and terror. There was a
note in the cry that shook the settler's soul. He had a vision of his
own boy, at home with his mother, safe-guarded from even the thought of
peril. And here was this little one left to the wild beasts! "Thank God!
Thank God I came!" murmured the settler, as he dropped on one knee to
take a surer aim. There was a loud report (not like the sharp crack of a
rifle), and the female panther, shot through the loins, fell in a heap,
snarling furiously and striking with her fore-paws.

The male walked around her in fierce and anxious amazement. Presently,
as the smoke lifted, he discerned the settler kneeling for a second
shot. With a high screech of fury, the lithe brute sprang upon his
enemy, taking a bullet full in his chest without seeming to know he was
hit. Ere the man could slip in another cartridge the beast was upon him,
bearing him to the ground and fixing keen fangs in his shoulder. Without
a word, the man set his strong fingers desperately into the brute's
throat, wrenched himself partly free, and was struggling to rise, when
the panther's body collapsed upon him all at once, a dead weight which
he easily flung aside. The bullet had done its work just in time.

Quivering from the swift and dreadful contest, bleeding profusely from
his mangled shoulder, the settler stepped up to the cabin door and
peered in. He heard sobs in the darkness.

"Don't be scared, sonny," he said, in a reassuring voice. "I'm going to
take you home along with me. Poor little lad, _I'll_ look after you, if
folks that ought to don't."

Out of the dark corner came a shout of delight, in a voice which made
the settler's heart stand still. "_Daddy_, Daddy," it said, "I _knew_
you'd come. I was so frightened when it got dark!" And a little figure
launched itself into the settler's arms, and clung to him trembling. The
man sat down on the threshold and strained the child to his breast. He
remembered how near he had been to disregarding the far-off cries, and
great beads of sweat broke out upon his forehead.

Not many weeks afterwards the settler was following the fresh trail of a
bear which had killed his sheep. The trail led him at last along the
slope of a deep ravine, from whose bottom came the brawl of a swollen
and obstructed stream. In the ravine he found a shallow cave, behind a
great white rock. The cave was plainly a wild beast's lair, and he
entered circumspectly. There were bones scattered about, and on some dry
herbage in the deepest corner of the den, he found the dead bodies of
two small panther cubs.

CHARLES G. D. ROBERTS: "Earth's Enigmas."
(Adapted)




    So nigh is grandeur to our dust,
      So near is God to man,
    When Duty whispers low, "_Thou must_,"
      The youth replies, "_I can_."

EMERSON




A SONG OF THE SEA


    The Sea! the Sea! the open Sea!
    The blue, the fresh, the ever free!
    Without a mark, without a bound,
    It runneth the earth's wide regions 'round;
    It plays with the clouds; it mocks the skies;
    Or like a cradled creature lies.

    I'm on the Sea! I'm on the Sea!
    I am where I would ever be;
    With the blue above, and the blue below,
    And silence wheresoe'er I go;
    If a storm should come and awake the deep,
    What matter? _I_ shall ride and sleep.

    I love (oh! _how_ I love) to ride
    On the fierce, foaming, bursting tide,
    When every mad wave drowns the moon,
    Or whistles aloft his tempest tune,
    And tells how goeth the world below,
    And why the south-west blasts do blow.

    I never was on the dull, tame shore,
    But I loved the great Sea more and more,
    And backwards flew to her billowy breast,
    Like a bird that seeketh its mother's nest;
    And a mother she _was_ and _is_ to me;
    For I was born on the open Sea.

    The waves were white, and red the morn,
    In the noisy hour when I was born;
    And the whale it whistled, the porpoise rolled
    And the dolphins bared their backs of gold;
    And never was heard such an outcry wild
    As welcomed to life the Ocean-child!

    I've lived since then, in calm and strife,
    Full fifty summers a sailor's life,
    With wealth to spend, and a power to range,
    But never have sought nor sighed for change;
    And Death whenever he comes to me,
    Shall come on the wide unbounded Sea!

B. W. PROCTER: ("Barry Cornwall")




LITTLE DAFFYDOWNDILLY

    "I slept, and dreamed that life was beauty;
    I woke, and found that life was duty."


Daffydowndilly was so called because in his nature he resembled a
flower, and loved to do only what was beautiful and agreeable, and took
no delight in labour of any kind. But while Daffydowndilly was yet a
little boy, his mother sent him away from his pleasant home, and put him
under the care of a very strict schoolmaster, who went by the name of
Mr. Toil. Those who knew him best affirmed that this Mr. Toil was a
very worthy character; and that he had done more good, both to children
and grown people, than anybody else in the world.

Certainly he had lived long enough to do a great deal of good; for, if
all stories be true, he had dwelt upon earth ever since Adam was driven
from the garden of Eden.

Nevertheless, Mr. Toil had a severe and ugly countenance, especially for
such little boys or big men as were inclined to be idle; his voice, too,
was harsh; and all his ways and customs seemed very disagreeable to our
friend Daffydowndilly. The whole day long this terrible schoolmaster sat
at his desk overlooking the scholars, or stalked about the school-room
with a certain awful birch rod in his hand. Now came a rap over the
shoulders of a boy whom Mr. Toil had caught at play; now he punished a
whole class who were behindhand with their lessons; and, in short,
unless a lad chose to attend quietly and constantly to his book, he had
no chance of enjoying a quiet moment in the school-room of Mr. Toil.

"This will never do for me," thought Daffydowndilly.

Now the whole of Daffydowndilly's life had hitherto been passed with his
dear mother, who had a much sweeter face than old Mr. Toil, and who had
always been very indulgent to her little boy. No wonder, therefore, that
poor Daffydowndilly found it a woeful change to be sent away from the
good lady's side and put under the care of this ugly-visaged
schoolmaster, who never gave him any apples or cakes, and seemed to
think that little boys were created only to get lessons.

"I can't bear it any longer," said Daffydowndilly to himself, when he
had been at school about a week. "I'll run away and try to find my dear
mother; and, at any rate, I shall never find anybody half so
disagreeable as this old Mr. Toil!"

So the very next morning, off started poor Daffydowndilly, and began his
rambles about the world, with only some bread and cheese for his
breakfast, and very little pocket-money to pay his expenses. But he had
gone only a short distance when he overtook a man of grave and sedate
appearance, who was trudging at a moderate pace along the road.

"Good-morning, my lad," said the stranger; and his voice seemed hard and
severe, but yet had a sort of kindness in it. "Whence do you come so
early, and whither are you going?"

Little Daffydowndilly was a boy of a very ingenuous disposition, and had
never been known to tell a lie in all his life. Nor did he tell one now.
He hesitated a moment or two, but finally confessed that he had run away
from school, on account of his great dislike for Mr. Toil; and that he
was resolved to find some place in the world where he should never see
or hear of the old schoolmaster again.

"Oh, very well, my little friend!" answered the stranger. "Then we will
go together; for I, likewise, have had a good deal to do with Mr. Toil,
and should be glad to find some place where he was never heard of."

Our friend Daffydowndilly would have been better pleased with a
companion of his own age, with whom he might have gathered flowers along
the road-side, or have chased butterflies, or have done many other
things to make the journey pleasant. But he had wisdom enough to
understand that he should get along through the world much easier by
having a man of experience to show him the way. So he accepted the
stranger's proposal, and they walked on very sociably together.

They had not gone far, when the road passed by a field where some
haymakers were at work, mowing down the tall grass and spreading it out
in the sun to dry. Daffydowndilly was delighted with the sweet smell of
the new-mown grass, and thought how much pleasanter it must be to make
