"Extremely well. Much better than I did, at the time."

"Do you remember how long he arrived before the steamer started?"

"Not very long, sir, though I really cannot tell you how long it was."

"After you were cut off, I suppose?"

"Certainly it was, but I cannot say how long."

"No one else, here, would know more about it than you do?"

"No, sir; I should think not. But you can ask them."

He called up some of the other workmen. All knew that a white officer,
of Hicks Pasha's army, was said to have returned. One of them
remembered that he had come down once, with Gordon, to see about some
repairs required to the engines of a steamer; but he had never heard
his name, nor could he recall his personal appearance, except that he
seemed to be a man about thirty. But he remembered once seeing him,
again, on board Stewart's steamer; as they had been working at her
engines, just before she started.

After thanking the foreman, Gregory returned to the hut, where he and
two other officers of Hunter's staff had taken up their quarters. He
was profoundly depressed. This white man might well have been his
father; but if so, it was even more certain than before that he had
fallen. He knew what had been the fate of Stewart's steamer, the
remains of which he had seen at Hebbeh. The Colonel, and all with him,
had accepted the invitation of the treacherous sheik of that village,
and had been massacred. He would at least go there, and endeavour to
learn, from some of the natives, the particulars of the fate of those
on board; and whether it was possible that any of the whites could have
escaped.

After sitting for some time, in thought, he went to General Hunter's
quarters, and asked to see him. The General listened, sympathetically,
to his story.

"I never, for a moment, thought that your father could have escaped,"
he said; "but from what you tell me, it is possible that he did so,
only to perish afterwards. But I can well understand how, having learnt
so much, you should be anxious to hear more. Certainly, I will grant
your request for leave to go down to Hebbeh. As you know, that place
was taken and destroyed, by the river column under Earle; or rather
under Brackenbury, for Earle had been killed in the fight at Kirkeban.
Numerous relics were found of the massacre, but the journal Stewart was
known to have kept was not among them. Had it been there it would, no
doubt, have mentioned the survivor of Hicks's army, who was coming down
the river with him.

"The place was deserted when Brackenbury arrived. It certainly was so,
when we came up. Since then, some of the inhabitants have probably
returned; and may know of places where plunder was hidden away, on the
approach of Brackenbury's column. No doubt the offer of a reward would
lead to their production.

"You may not have to be absent long. The British regiments are to go
down at once, and several steamers will start tomorrow. I will give you
an order to go with them. You will have no difficulty in getting back,
for the Sirdar has already decided that the railway is to be carried
on, at once, from Atbara to Khartoum; and has, I believe, telegraphed
this morning that material and stores are to be sent up, at once. Most
of these will, no doubt, be brought on by rail; but grain, of which
large quantities will be required, for the use of our troops and of the
population of the town, will come on by water.

"But, no doubt, your quickest way back will be to ride to Abu Hamed,
and take the train up to Atbara."

"I will be back as soon as I can, General. I am much obliged to you,
for letting me go."

"I will tell the Sirdar that I have given you leave, and why. It is not
absolutely necessary, but it is always well that one's name should be
kept to the front."

The next day, Gregory saw the General again.

"I mentioned, to the Sirdar, that you wanted a fortnight's leave, and
told him why. He simply nodded, and said, 'Let him have a month, if he
wants it.'

"He had other things to think of; for, this morning, a small Dervish
steamer came down the White Nile. They had the Khalifa's flag flying,
and had not heard of what had taken place, till one of the gunboats ran
alongside her. Of course she surrendered, at once.

"It is a curious story they told. They left Omdurman a month ago with
the Sapphire, which carried five hundred men. The object of the voyage
was to collect grain. When they reached the old station of Fashoda,
they had been fired upon by black troops, with some white men among
them, who had a strange flag flying. The firing was pretty accurate,
for they had forty men killed and wounded; and the emir in command had
disembarked, and encamped his troops from the Sapphire on the opposite
bank, and had sent the small steamer back, to ask the Khalifa for
orders.

"The story seemed so strange, and improbable, that I went down with the
Sirdar to the boat, which had been brought alongside. There was no
doubt that it had been peppered with balls. Some of the General's staff
cut one of the bullets out of the woodwork, and these fully confirmed
the story. They were not leaden balls, or bits of old iron, but conical
nickel bullets. They could only have been fired from small-bore rifles,
so there were certainly white men at Fashoda. Of course, no one can
form any opinion as to who they are, or where they come from. They may
be Belgians from the Congo. They may--but that is most improbable--be
an expeditionary party of Italians. But Italy is withdrawing, and not
pushing forward, so I think it is out of the question that they are
concerned in the matter.

"The question seems to lie between Belgians and French, unless an
expedition has been sent up from our possessions on the great lakes.
The Dervishes in the steamer can only say that the flag is not at all
like ours; but as their ignorance of colour is profound, they give all
sorts of contradictory statements. Anyhow, it is a serious matter.
Certainly, no foreign power has any right to send an expedition to the
Nile; and as certainly, if one of them did so, our government would not
allow them to remain there; for, beyond all question, Fashoda is an
Egyptian station, and within Egyptian territory; which is, at present,
as much as to say that a foreign power, established there, would be
occupying our country."

"It seems an extraordinary proceeding, sir."

"Very extraordinary. If it were not that it seems the thing has
absolutely been done, it would seem improbable that any foreign power
could take such an extraordinary, and unjustifiable, course. It is
lucky for them, whoever they are, that we have smashed up the
Dervishes; for they would have made very short work of them, and the
nation that sent them would probably never have known their fate."



Chapter 16: A Voice From The Dead.


That afternoon, Gregory heard that orders had been issued for five of
the gunboats to start up the river, the first thing in the morning;
that the Sirdar himself was going, and was to take up five hundred men
of the 11th Soudanese. An order was also issued that all correspondents
were to leave, the next day, for Cairo. Gregory had met one of them,
that evening.

"So you are all off, I hear, Mr. Pearson?"

"Yes; we did have a sort of option given us, but it was really no
choice at all. We might go down instantly, or we must stay till the
last of the white troops had gone down. That may be a very long time,
as there is no saying what may come of this Fashoda business. Besides,
the Khalifa has fairly escaped; and if, out of the sixty thousand men
with him, some thirty thousand got off, they may yet rally round him:
and, in another two or three months, he may be at the head of as large
a force as ever. I don't think, after the way the Egyptians fought the
other day, there will be any need for white troops to back them. Still,
it is likely that a battalion or two may be left. However, we had
practically to choose between going at once, or waiting at least a
month; and you may be sure that the censorship would be put on, with a
round turn, and that we should not be allowed to say a word of the
Fashoda business, which would be the only thing worth telegraphing
about. So we have all voted for going.

"Of course, we understand that this pressure has been put upon us, on
account of this curious affair at Fashoda. Fortunately, none of us are
sorry to be off. There is certain to be a pause, now, for some time;
and one does not want to be kicking one's heels about, in this ghastly
town; and though it is rather sharp and peremptory work, I cannot say
that I think the Sirdar is wrong. Whoever these men may be, they must
go, that is certain; but of course it will be a somewhat delicate
business, and France--that is, if they are Frenchmen who are there--is
sure to be immensely sore over the business; and it is certainly very
desirable that nothing should be written, from here, that could
increase that feeling. I have no doubt the Sirdar telegraphed home, for
instructions, as soon as he got the news of the affair; and I imagine
that his going up in the morning, with five gunboats, is proof that he
has already received instructions of some sort.

"I hope this force is not French. The feeling against us is
tremendously strong, in France, and they certainly will not like
backing down; but they will have to do that or fight and, with all
their big talk, I don't think they are ready to risk a war with us;
especially as, though their occupation of Fashoda would be an immense
annoyance to us, it would be of no possible utility to them.

"By the way, we have all got to sell our horses. There is no
possibility of taking them down, and it is a question of giving them
away, rather than of selling; for, of course, the officers of the
British regiments do not want to buy. I have a horse for which I gave
twenty-five pounds, at Cairo. You are welcome to him. You can give me a
couple of pounds, for the saddle and things."

"I am very much obliged to you, but it would be robbery."

"Not at all. If you won't take him, I shall have him shot, tonight. A
horse could not possibly pick up food here, and would die of starvation
without a master; and it would be still more cruel to give him to a
native, for they are brutal horse masters."

"Well, in that case I shall be glad, indeed, to have him; and I am
extremely obliged to you."

"That is right. If you will send your man round, I will hand it over to
him."

"As you are going tomorrow, it is likely that I shall go with you; for
I am going down, also, as far as Abu Hamed, for ten days."

"That will be pleasant, though I do not know that it will be so for
you; for I own the majority of us are rather sour-tempered, at present.
Though we may be glad enough to go, one does not care to be sent off at
a moment's notice, just as fractious children are turned out of a room,
when their elders want a private chat. However, for myself, I am not
inclined to grumble. I want to go, and therefore I do not stand on the
order of going."

Later, General Hunter gave Gregory an order, for a passage in a steamer
on which the correspondents of the various newspapers were going down.

"What shall we take, master?" Zaki asked.

"Just the clothes we stand in, Zaki. I have got a couple of the Dervish
Remingtons, and several packets of ammunition. I will take them, and I
can get four more. We will take them all down, as we know the people
about Hebbeh are not disposed to be friendly. I don't suppose, for a
minute, that they are likely to show any hostile feeling; for you may
be sure that the fall of Omdurman has spread, by this time, over the
whole land, and they will be on their best behaviour. Still, it is just
as well to be able to defend ourselves, and I shall engage four men at
Abu Hamed to go with us. I shall leave all my kit here."

It was a pleasant run down the river, to Atbara. The correspondents
were all heartily glad to be on their way home; and the irritation they
had at first felt, at being so suddenly ordered away, at the moment
when so unexpected and interesting a development occurred, had
subsided. They had witnessed one of the most interesting battles ever
fought, had seen the overthrow of the Mahdi, and were looking forward
to European comforts and luxuries again.

At Atbara all left the steamer, which was to take in stores, and go up
again at once; and proceeded, by a military train, with the first of
the returned European regiments.

At Abu Hamed, Gregory left them. His first enquiry was whether any
boats were going down the river. He learned that several native craft
were leaving, and at once engaged a passage in one of them to Hebbeh.
He had no difficulty, whatever, in engaging four sturdy Arabs from
among those who were listlessly hanging round the little station. While
he was doing this, Zaki bought food for six men, for a week; and in
less than two hours from his arrival at Abu Hamed, Gregory was on
board.

The boat at once dropped down the river and, as the current was running
strongly, they were off Hebbeh next morning, at eight o'clock. A boat
put off, and took Gregory and his party ashore. As they were seen to
land, the village sheik at once came down to them.

"Is there anything I can do for my lord?" he asked.

"Yes; I have come here to ascertain whether any of those, who were
present at the attack upon the party who landed from the steamer over
there, are still living here. There is no question of punishment. On
the contrary, I have come here to obtain information as to some private
matters, and anyone who can give me that information will be well
rewarded."

"There are but three men alive who were here at the time, my lord.
There were more, but they fled when the boats with the white troops
came up, from Merawi. I believe they went to the Dervish camp at
Metemmeh.

"The three here are quiet and respectable men. They were asked many
questions, and guided the white officers to the place where Wad Etman
stood--it was there that those who landed from the steamer first
rested--and to the place where the great house of Suleiman Wad Gamr,
Emir of Salamat, stood.

"It was there that the much to be regretted attack on the white men was
made. When the white army came up, six months afterwards, they blew up
the house, and cut down all the palm trees in the village."

"I was with the force that came up from Merawi, last year. Will you
bring me the three men you speak of? I would question them, one by one.
Assure them that they need not be afraid of answering truthfully, even
if they themselves were concerned in the attack upon the white
officers, and the crew of the steamer, for no steps will be taken
against them. It is eighteen years since then; and, no doubt, their
houses were destroyed and their groves cut down, when the British
column came here and found the place deserted. I am ready to reward
them, if I obtain the information I require from them."

The three men were presently brought to the spot where Gregory had
seated himself, in the shade of one of the huts. Zaki stood beside him,
and the four armed men took post, a short distance away.

The first called up was a very old man. In reply to Gregory's
questions, he said:

"I was already old when the steamboat ran ashore. I took no hand in the
business; the white men had done me no harm, while the followers of the
Mahdi had killed many of my family and friends. I heard what was going
to be done, and I stayed in my house. I call upon Allah to witness that
what I say is true!"

"Do you know if any remains of that expedition are still in existence?"

"No, my lord. When the white troops came here, some months afterwards,
I fled, as all here did; but I know that, before they destroyed Wad
Gamr's house, they took away some boxes of papers that had been brought
ashore from the ship, and were still in the house. I know of nothing
else. The clothes of the men on board the steamboat were divided among
those who took part in the attack, but there was little booty."

Gregory knew that, at Wad Gamr's house, but few signs of the tragedy
had been found when General Brackenbury's troops entered. Bloodstained
visiting cards of Stewart's, a few scraps of paper, and a field glass
had, alone, been discovered, besides the boxes of papers.

The next man who came up said that he had been with the party who fell
upon the engineers and crew of the boat, by the riverside.

"I was ordered to kill them," he said. "Had I not done so, I should
have been killed, myself."

"Do you know whether any booty was hidden away, before the English
came?"

"No, my lord, there was no booty taken. No money was found on board the
steamer. We stripped her of the brass work, and took the wood ashore,
to burn. The sheik gave us a dollar and a half a man, for what we had
done. There may have been some money found on the ship, but as his own
men were on board first, and took all that they thought of value, I
have naught to say about it."

"And you never heard of anything being hidden, before the British
troops arrived?"

The Arab shook his head.

"No, my lord, but there may have been, though I never heard of it. I
went and fought at Kirkeban; and when we were beaten, I fled at once to
Berber, and remained there until the white troops had all gone down the
country."

"I may want to question you again tomorrow," Gregory said. "Here are
two dollars. I shall give you as much more, if I want you again."

The third man was then called up. He was evidently in fear.

"Do not be afraid to answer me truly," Gregory said. "If you do so, no
harm will come to you, whatever share you may have had in the affair.
But if you answer falsely, and the truth is afterwards discovered, you
will be punished. Now, where were you when this business took place?"

"We were all ordered, by Wad Gamr, to gather near his house; and, when
the signal was given, we were to run in and kill the white men. We saw
them go up to the house. They had been told to leave their arms behind
them. One of the sheik's servants came out and waved his arms, and we
ran in and killed them."

"What happened then?"

"We carried the bodies outside the house. Then we took what money was
found in their pockets, with watches and other things, in to the sheik;
and he paid us a dollar and a half a head, and said that we could have
their clothes. For my share, I had a jacket belonging to one of them.
When I got it home, I found that there was a pocket inside, and in it
was a book partly written on, and many other bits of paper."

"And what became of that?" Gregory asked, eagerly.

"I threw it into a corner. It was of no use to me. But when the white
troops came up in the boats, and beat us at Kirkeban, I came straight
home and, seeing the pocketbook, took it and hid it under a rock; for I
thought that when the white troops got here, they would find it, and
that they might then destroy the house, and cut down my trees. Then I
went away, and did not come back until they had all gone."

"And where is the pocketbook, now?"

"It may be under the rock where I hid it, my lord. I have never thought
of it, since. It was rubbish."

"Can you take me to the place?"

"I think so. It was not far from my house. I pushed it under the first
great rock I came to, for I was in haste; and wanted to be away before
the white soldiers, on camels, could get here."

"Did you hear of any other things being hidden?"

"No. I think everything was given up. If this thing had been of value I
should, perhaps, have told the sheik; but as it was only written
papers, and of no use to anyone, I did not trouble to do so."

"Well, let us go at once," Gregory said, rising to his feet. "Although
of no use to you, these papers may be of importance."

Followed by Zaki and the four men, Gregory went to the peasant's house,
which stood a quarter of a mile away.

"This is not the house I lived in, then," the man said. "The white
troops destroyed every house in the village; but, when they had gone, I
built another on the same spot."

The hill rose steeply, behind it. The peasant went on, till he stopped
at a large boulder.

"This was the rock," he said, "where I thrust it under, as far as my
arm would reach. I pushed it in on the upper side."

The man lay down.

"It was just about here," he said.

"It is here, my lord. I can just feel it, but I cannot get it out. I
pushed it in as far as the tips of my fingers could reach it."

"Well, go down and cut a couple of sticks, three or four feet long."

In ten minutes, the man returned with them.

"Now take one of them and, when you feel the book, push the stick along
its side, until it is well beyond it. Then you ought to be able to
scrape it out. If you cannot do so, we shall have to roll the stone
over. It is a big rock, but with two or three poles, one ought to be
able to turn it over."

After several attempts, however, the man produced the packet. Gregory
opened it, with trembling hands. It contained, as the man had said, a
large number of loose sheets, evidently torn from a pocketbook, and all
covered with close writing.

He opened the book that accompanied them. It was written in ink, and
the first few words sufficed to tell him that his search was over. It
began:

"Khartoum. Thank God, after two years of suffering and misery, since
the fatal day at El Obeid, I am once again amongst friends. It is true
that I am still in peril, for the position here is desperate. Still,
the army that is coming up to our help may be here in time; and even if
they should not do so, this may be found when they come, and will be
given to my dear wife at Cairo, if she is still there. Her name is Mrs.
Hilliard, and her address will surely be known, at the Bank."

"These are the papers I was looking for," he said to Zaki. "I will tell
you about them, afterwards."

He handed ten dollars to the native, thrust the packet into his breast
pocket, and walked slowly down to the river. He had never entertained
any hope of finding his father, but this evidence of his death gave him
a shock.

His mother was right, then. She had always insisted there was a
possibility that he might have escaped the massacre at El Obeid. He had
done so. He had reached Khartoum. He had started, full of hope of
seeing his wife and child, but had been treacherously massacred, here.

He would not, now, read this message from the grave. That must be
reserved for some time when he was alone. He knew enough to be able to
guess the details--they could not be otherwise than painful. He felt
almost glad that his mother was not alive. To him, the loss was
scarcely a real one. His father had left him, when an infant. Although
his mother had so often spoken of him, he had scarcely been a reality
to Gregory; for when he became old enough to comprehend the matter, it
seemed to him certain that his father must have been killed. He could,
then, hardly understand how his mother could cling to hope.

His father had been more a real character to him, since he started from
Cairo, than ever before. He knew the desert, now, and its fierce
inhabitants. He could picture the battle and since the fight at
Omdurman he had been able to see, before him, the wild rush on the
Egyptian square, the mad confusion, the charge of a handful of white
officers, and the one white man going off, with the black battalion
that held together.

If, then, it was a shock to him to know how his father had died, how
vastly greater would it have been, to his mother! She had pictured him
as dying suddenly, fighting to the last, and scarce conscious of pain
till he received a fatal wound. She had said, to Gregory, that it was
better to think of his father as having died thus, than lingering in
hopeless slavery, like Neufeld; but it would have been agony to her to
know that he did suffer for two years, that he had then struggled on
through all dangers to Khartoum, and was on his way back, full of hope
and love for her, when he was treacherously murdered.

The village sheik met him, as he went down.

"You have found nothing, my lord?"

"Nothing but a few old papers," he said.

"You will report well of us, I hope, to the great English commander?"

"I shall certainly tell him that you did all in your power to aid me."

He walked down towards the river. One of the men, who had gone on while
he had been speaking to the sheik, ran back to meet him.

"There is a steamer coming up the river, my lord."

"That is fortunate, indeed," Gregory exclaimed. "I had intended to
