
His bones were interred in Mexico.  During the civil wars of the last
century, his bones were taken away and hidden.  It is reported that
only the other day the place of his sepulchre had been discovered.
Some monument to his memory should be erected to {224} match the statue
of Guatemoc, which is one of the principal adornments of Mexico.

As is well said by William H. Johnson: "To the honor of Spain be it
said, her rule in Mexico was firm and kind.  The Indians became
thoroughly incorporated into the national life, enjoying the
opportunities of advancement as Spaniards.  In the present Republic of
Mexico the greatest name has been that of Benito Juarez, the president
who upheld the national cause during the French-Austrian usurpation.
He was of pure Aztec blood.  Porfirio Diaz, the gallant soldier who led
the army of the Republic during the same trying period, and who, as its
president, is a model of a strong and wise ruler, is also, in part, a
descendant of the ancient race."

With the following tributes to the great captain the story of his
amazing adventures is ended.  Says Helps:

"He was the mighty conqueror of one of the most compact and
well-ordered barbaric nations of the world--a conqueror who, with a few
hundreds of his fellow-countrymen, not all of them his partisans,
overcame hundreds of thousands of fanatic and resolute men fighting
against him with immense resources, and with a resolution nearly equal
to his own.  Let us give him the benefit of his sincere belief in
Christianity, and his determination to substitute that beneficent
religion for the hideous and cruel superstition of the people he was
resolved to conquer.  And let us echo the wish of that good common
soldier, Bernal Diaz, who, though having his grievances against Cortes,
as all of the other _Conquistadores_ thought they had, could yet, after
watching every turn in the fortunes of the great Marquis, and knowing
almost every sin {225} that he had committed, write most tenderly of
the great captain whose plume he had so often followed to victory.

"After saying that, subsequently to the conquest of Mexico, Cortes had
not had good fortune either in his Californian or his Honduras
expedition, or indeed in anything else he had undertaken, Bernal Diaz
adds, 'Perhaps it was that he might have felicity in heaven.  And I
believe it was so, for he was an honorable cavalier, and a devoted
worshipper of the Virgin, the Apostle St. Peter and other Saints.  May
God pardon his sins, and mine too, and give me a righteous ending,
which things are of more concern than the conquests and victories that
we had over the Indians.'"

Writes MacNutt:

"His sagacity, his foresight, and his moderation have caused critical
historians to rank him higher as a statesman than as a soldier.  In
virtue of his pre-eminent qualities both as a statesman and as a
general, as well as because of the enduring importance of his conquest,
Fernando Cortes occupies an uncontested place amongst the heroes of the
nations."

However we may sympathize with the Aztecs, we cannot escape from the
fact that it was much better that there should be a Spanish rule
instead of an Aztec rule in Mexico, and that the civilization of the
former should supplant the so-called civilization of the latter.  That
does not prevent us from wishing that the supersession might not have
been so harsh and ruthless, but in view of the times, and the men, both
Aztecs and Christians, it was not to be expected.

Personally, I love the memory of Guatemoc for his heroism and his
devotion.  I also have a warm feeling {226} for Cortes.  It is true, as
has been stated, that he was a child of his age, but he was the best
child of his age, and it was not his fault altogether that in some
respects it was the worst age.  The Spanish rule in Mexico was better
than the Spanish rule in Peru, and Cortes and his successors, by the
side of Pizarro and his successors, were almost angels of light.

I close with these noble words of John Fiske in his great and highly
valued _Discovery of North America_:

"A great deal of sentimental ink has been shed over the wickedness of
the Spaniards in crossing the ocean and attacking people who had never
done them any harm, overturning and obliterating a 'splendid
civilization,' and more to the same effect.  It is undeniable that
unprovoked aggression is an extremely hateful thing, and many of the
circumstances attendant upon the Spanish conquest in America were not
only heinous in their atrocity, but were emphatically condemned, as we
shall presently see, by the best moral standards of the sixteenth
century.  Yet if we are to be guided by strict logic, it would be
difficult to condemn the Spaniards for the mere act of conquering
Mexico without involving in the same condemnation our own forefathers
who crossed the ocean and overran the territory of the United States
with small regard for the proprietary rights of Algonquins, or
Iroquois, or red men of any sort.  Our forefathers, if called upon to
justify themselves, would have replied that they were founding
Christian states and diffusing the blessings of a higher civilization;
and such, in spite of much alloy in the motives and imperfection in the
performance, was certainly the case.  Now if we would not lose or
distort the historical perspective, we must bear in mind that the
Spanish conquerors would have returned {227} exactly the same answer.
If Cortes were to return to the world and pick up some history book in
which he is described as a mere picturesque adventurer, he would feel
himself very unjustly treated.  He would say that he had higher aims
than those of a mere fighter and gold-hunter; and so doubtless he had.
In the complex tangle of motives that actuated the mediaeval
Spaniard--and in his peninsula we may apply the term mediaeval to later
dates than would be proper in France or Italy--the desire of extending
the dominion of the Church was a very real and powerful incentive to
action.  The strength of the missionary and crusading spirit in Cortes
is seen in the fact that where it was concerned, and there only, was he
liable to let zeal overcome prudence.

"There can be no doubt that, after making all allowances, the Spaniards
did introduce a better state of society into Mexico than they found
there.  It was high time that an end should be put to those hecatombs
of human victims, slashed, torn open and devoured on all the little
occasions of life.  It sounds quite pithy to say that the Inquisition,
as conducted in Mexico, was as great an evil as the human sacrifices
and the cannibalism; but it is not true.  Compared with the ferocious
barbarism of ancient Mexico, the contemporary Spanish modes of life
were mild, and this, I think, helps further to explain the ease with
which the country was conquered.  In a certain sense the prophecy of
Quetzalcoatl was fulfilled and the coming of the Spaniards did mean the
final dethronement of the ravening Tezcatlipoca.  The work of the noble
Franciscan and Dominican monks who followed closely upon Cortes, and
devoted their lives to the spiritual welfare of the Mexicans, is a more
attractive {228} subject than any picture of military conquest.  To
this point I shall return hereafter, when we come to consider the
sublime character of Las Casas.  For the present we may conclude in the
spirit of one of the noble Spanish historians, Pedro de Cieza de Leon,
and praise God, that the idols are cast down."



[1] Cortes applies this name to the province in which the city, called
by him Temixtitan, more properly Tenochtitlan, but now Mexico, was
situated.  Throughout this article the curious spelling of the great
conqueror is retained as he wrote.

[2] This is the plant known in this country under the name of the
_Century Plant_, which is still much cultivated in Mexico for the
purposes mentioned by Cortes.  It usually flowers when eight or ten
years old.

[3] The original has the word _Mesquitas_, mosques; but as the term is
applied in English exclusively to Mohammedan places of worship, one of
more general application is used in the translation.

[4] The title invariably given to Muteczuma (or Montezuma) in these
dispatches is simply Senor, in its sense of Lord or (to use an Indian
word) Cacique; which is also given to the chiefs or governors of
districts or provinces, whether independent or feudatories.  The title
of Emperador (Emperor), how generally applied to the Mexican ruler, is
never conferred on him by Cortes, nor any other implying royality,
although in the beginning of this despatch, he assures Charles V. that
the country is extensive enough to constitute an empire.

[5] Two hundred and fifty pounds weight.

[6] I am not ignorant that it has been asserted that Montezuma received
the rite of baptism at the hands of his Christian captors.  See
Bustamante's notes on Chimalpain's Translation of Gomara (_Historia de
las Conquistas de Hernando Cortes_.  Carlos Maria de Bustamante.
Mexico, 1826, p. 287).  But the objection raised by Torquemada--the
silence of some of the best authorities, such as Oviedo, Ixlilxochitl,
_Histoire des Chichimeques_, and of Cortes himself; and, on the other
hand, the distinctly opposing testimony of Bernal Diaz (see cap. 127),
and the statement of Herrera, who asserts that Montezuma, at the hour
of his death, refused to quit the religion of his fathers.  ("No se
queria apartar de la Religion de sus Padres."  _Hist. de las Indias_,
dec. II. lib. x, cap. 10), convinces me that no such baptism took place.

[7] These gates they had made themselves.  The Aztecs had not learned
the art of making gates or doors.  The exits and entrances of their
houses were closed, if at all with portieres.

[8] It is growing very old and is badly decayed.  The newspapers report
that efforts are being made by experts to try a course of treatment
which will preserve this venerable and interesting forest relic,
already nearly four hundred years old, but it is not believed that
success will attend their endeavors.

[9] "Tlaltelulco" was the quarter of the town where the market was
situated.

[10] Archbishop Lorenzana, in his note on this passage, greatly extols
the pious fervor of Cortes, who, he says, "whether in the field or on
the causeway, in the midst of the enemy or toiling by night or day,"
never omitted the celebration of the mass.

[11] They were Andres de Tapia and George de Alvarado, a brother of the
more famous Pedro, Tonatiuh.

[12] Antonio de Quinones was the captain and Francisco de Olea, the
youth, according to Gomara; who says that the latter cut off at one
blow the arms of the men that had seized Cortes, and was himself
immediately slain by the enemy.  Cortes was then rescued by
Quinones.--_Cron. Nuev. Esp._ cap., 138.

[13] I wonder where it is!  There may be a great amount of it somewhere.




{231}

PART II

OTHER TALES OF ADVENTURE


I

The Yarn of the _Essex_, Whaler

Among marine disasters there is none more extraordinary in character or
more appalling in consequence, than the loss of the whaleship _Essex_.

The _Essex_ was a well-found whaler of two hundred and thirty-eight
tons.  James Pollard was her captain, with Owen Chase and Matthew Joy
as mates.  Six of her complement of twenty were Negroes.  Thoroughly
overhauled and provisioned for two and one-half years, on the 17th of
August, 1819, she took her departure from Nantucket.  On the 17th of
January, 1820, she reached St. Mary's Island, off the coast of Chili,
near Conception, a noted whaling ground.

They cruised off these coasts for some time, being lucky enough to take
several large whales, and finally, the season being over, having about
one thousand barrels of oil in the hold, they struck boldly westward.
On the 16th of November, being a few minutes south of the line in Long.
118 degrees W., a school of sperm whales was sighted, and three boats
were lowered in chase.

Chase, the mate--the first mate is always the mate _par
excellence_--soon got fast to a huge bull-whale who, when he felt the
deadly harpoon in his vitals, swiftly turned and struck the whale-boat
a terrific blow with his tail, smashing it into kindling wood and
hurling the men in every direction.  After that {232} splendid
exhibition of power, he got away scot-free save for the rankling iron
and the dangling line which he took with him.  The boat's crew were
picked up, no one being much the worse for the encounter, strange to
say, and were brought back to the ship by the other boats.

On the 20th of November, being then just about 40 minutes south of the
equator, and in Long. 119 degrees W., at eight o'clock in the morning
the lookout at the masthead shouted the welcome signal:

"There she blows!"

It was evident that they were in the presence of a large school.  The
ship was headed toward them, and when within half a mile the mainyard
was backed, and three boats, under the charge of the captain and the
first and second mates, respectively, were lowered.  Their only other
boat was a spare one, lashed amidships on chocks.

Arriving at the spot where they had been sighted at the ship, the men
discovered that the whales had sounded and vanished.  The boats,
thereupon, separated widely, and the men lay on their oars and waited.
Presently a great bull rose lazily, spouting in front of the mate's
boat, and lay idly wallowing in the tumbling sea.  Approaching
cautiously, the harpooneer drove in the terrible weapon.

In his agony, the great cetacean, instead of sounding, threw himself
blindly toward the boat.  So close were they, and so unexpected was the
whale's movement in spite of his vast bulk, that, although the order,
"Stern all!" had been promptly given, they were unable to win clear of
him.  The tip of his massive tail, as he thrashed about in his rage,
struck the side of the light, clinker-built boat and smashed a hole in
it.  Then the whale started to run, towing the boat, which {233}
immediately began to fill with water under the terrible drag to which
it was subjected.  There was nothing to do but cut the line.  Two or
three jackets were stuffed into the aperture, and while some bailed,
the others rowed back to the ship.  The captain's and second mate's
boats, meanwhile, were seeking the school, which had risen and was
swimming away from the ship.

As soon as the wrecked boat was run up to the davits, the mate swung
the mainyard and got under way, following the other boats.  He first
determined to break out the spare boat, but after investigating the
damaged boat, he concluded that he could save time by nailing a patch
of canvas over the broken place, which would serve temporarily to keep
out the water, in case they went in search of another whale in her.
While he was about this, an immense sperm-whale, about eighty-five feet
long, "breached"--that is, coming from a great depth, he shot out of
the water his whole length and then fell back with a tremendous
splash--about fifty fathoms from the ship.  After he fell back, he
spouted three or four times, sounded, and once more appeared, this time
about a ship's length off the weather bow of the Essex.  Evidently, it
was the whale they had just struck.  He was angry, and he meant
business, for as soon as he came to the surface he started for the ship.

Under the light air the vessel was making about three knots.  The whale
was going at the same speed.  The mate saw at once that if he did not
change his course, the whale would strike his ship.  Dropping the
hammer, he shouted to the boy at the helm to put it hard up, and
himself sprang across the deck to reenforce his order.  The unwieldy
ship paid off slowly, {234} and before her head had been fairly turned
to leeward the whale deliberately rammed her right under the forechains.

The concussion was terrible.  The ship came to a dead stop, as if she
had run upon a rock, while the whale bumped along under the keel.  Some
of those aboard were thrown to the deck.  The masts quivered and
buckled under the shock, but fortunately nothing was carried away.  The
onset was so unexpected that the men were dazed for a moment.  When the
mate recovered his wits, he immediately sounded the well, and found
that the ship was leaking badly.  He then ordered the men to the pumps,
and set signals for the recall of the boats, each of which had got fast
to a whale.

[Illustration: "The Ship Came to a Dead Stop"]

In spite of all they could do, the ship began settling rapidly by the
head.  She was badly stove in, and making water fast.  While some of
the men toiled at the pumps, others cleared away the extra boat.  There
was no longer time to repair the other.  At this juncture one of the
men discovered the same whale about two hundred and fifty fathoms to
leeward.  He was in a fit of convulsive rage terrible to look upon;
leaping, turning, writhing, threshing about in the water, beating it
with his mighty tail and great flukes, thundering upon it with all his
force, and all the while opening and shutting his enormous jaws,
"smiting them together," in the words of the mate, as if distracted
with wrath and fury.

There was no time to watch the whale in the exigency of their peril,
and observing him start out with great velocity to cross the bows of
the ship to leeward, the men turned their attention to the more serious
duty at the pumps and the boat.  But a few moments had {235} elapsed,
when another man forward observed the whale again.

[Illustration: "The Killing of Alexander Hamilton by Aaron Burr, at
Weehawken, New Jersey, July 11, 1804"]

"Here he is!" he shouted.  "He's making for us again."

The great cachalot was now directly ahead, about two hundred fathoms
away, and coming down upon them with twice his ordinary speed.  The
surf flew in all directions about him.  "His course was marked by a
white foam a rod in width which he made with the continual thrashing of
this tail."  His huge head, boneless but almost as solid and as hard as
the inside of a horse's hoof, most admirably designed for a
battering-ram, was almost half out of the water.  The mate made one
desperate attempt to get out of his way.  Again the helm was put up and
the men ran to the braces, but the water-laden ship, already well down
by the head, and more sluggish than ever, had fallen off only one point
when the whale leaped upon her with demoniac energy, and--so it
