a circular basin, small but deep, and set round with stones, some of
which were covered with slimy moss, the others naked, and of variegated
hue, reddish, white, and brown.  The bottom was covered with coarse sand,
which sparkled in the lonely sunbeam, and seemed to illuminate the spring
with an unborrowed light.  In one spot, the gush of the water violently
agitated the sand, but without obscuring the fountain, or breaking the
glassiness of its surface.  It appeared as if some living creature were
about to emerge--the Naiad of the spring, perhaps--in the shape of a
beautiful young woman, with a gown of filmy water-moss, a belt of
rainbow-drops, and a cold, pure, passionless countenance.  How would the
beholder shiver, pleasantly, yet fearfully, to see her sitting on one of
the stones, paddling her white feet in the ripples, and throwing up
water, to sparkle in the sun!  Wherever she laid her hands on grass and
flowers, they would immediately be moist, as with morning dew.  Then
would she set about her labors, like a careful housewife, to clear the
fountain of withered leaves, and bits of slimy wood, and old acorns from
the oaks above, and grains of corn left by cattle in drinking, till the
bright sand, in the bright water, were like a treasury of diamonds.  But,
should the intruder approach too near, he would find only the drops of a
summer shower glistening about the spot where he had seen her.

Reclining on the border of grass, where the dewy goddess should have
been, I bent forward, and a pair of eyes met mine within the watery
mirror.  They were the reflection of my own.  I looked again, and lo!
another face, deeper in the fountain than my own image, more distinct in
all the features, yet faint as thought.  The vision had the aspect of a
fair young girl, with locks of paly gold.  A mirthful expression laughed
in the eyes and dimpled over the whole shadowy countenance, till it
seemed just what a fountain would be, if, while dancing merrily into the
sunshine, it should assume the shape of woman.  Through the dim rosiness
of the cheeks, I could see the brown leaves, the slimy twigs, the acorns,
and the sparkling sand.  The solitary sunbeam was diffused among the
golden hair, which melted into its faint brightness, and became a glory
round that head so beautiful!

My description can give no idea how suddenly the fountain was thus
tenanted, and how soon it was left desolate.  I breathed; and there was
the face!  I held my breath; and it was gone!  Had it passed away, or
faded into nothing?  I doubted whether it had ever been.

My sweet readers, what a dreamy and delicious hour did I spend, where
that vision found and left me!  For a long time I sat perfectly still,
waiting till it should reappear, and fearful that the slightest motion,
or even the flutter of my breath, might frighten it away.  Thus have I
often started from a pleasant dream, and then kept quiet, in hopes to
wile it back.  Deep were my musings, as to the race and attributes of
that ethereal being.  Had I created her?  Was she the daughter of my
fancy, akin to those strange shapes which peep under the lids of
children's eyes?  And did her beauty gladden me, for that one moment, and
then die?  Or was she a water-nymph within the fountain, or fairy, or
woodland goddess peeping over my shoulder, or the ghost of some forsaken
maid, who had drowned herself for love?  Or, in good truth, had a lovely
girl, with a warm heart, and lips that would bear pressure, stolen softly
behind me, and thrown her image into the spring?

I watched and waited, but no vision came again.  I departed, but with a
spell upon me, which drew me back, that same afternoon, to the haunted
spring.  There was the water gushing, the sand sparkling, and the sunbeam
