will, as soon as we have finished, be on the march. Jim will go on
ahead at once, as we agreed; and he tells me will get to the stream
where the horses are before night, and will start out with them at
once, so that we may be able to meet them tomorrow, early. I fancy
our water bottles are all getting very low, but we can hold on for
today."

As soon as he had finished eating, Jim started off at a run, which
Reuben knew he would keep up for hours. The body of young Phillips
was buried; and then, collecting the flock and driving it before
them, the rest started upon their return. The sheep could not
travel fast, for many of them were footsore with their hurried
journey; but they had found plenty of nourishment in the grass at
the bottoms, and in the foliage of the bushes and, being so
supplied, had suffered little from thirst.

Jim, before starting, had pointed out the exact line they were to
follow, and this they kept by compass. With only one or two short
halts, they kept on until nightfall and, leaving the sheep in a
grassy bottom, lit their fire on the crest above it, in order that
its flame might serve as a guide to Jim, should he get back with
the horses before daylight.

There was but little talking, before each stretched himself at
length before the fire. They had been twenty-four hours without
sleep, and all were now suffering severely from thirst. The last
drops in the water bottles had been emptied, early in the day; and
they were parched not only by the heat of the sun, but by the
stifling dust raised by the flock as they travelled.

There had been but little supper eaten. Indeed, most of them
contented themselves with chewing pieces of raw meat, to satisfy
their thirst rather than their hunger. Although they had no fear of
the return of the natives, Reuben thought it only prudent to keep
watch, and each of the party had half an hour on sentry duty.

The day was just beginning to break, when the man on guard
exclaimed:

"I can hear the trampling of horses!"

The news brought everyone to their feet, and in a few minutes the
two constables and Jim rode up, driving before them the horses of
the rest of the party.

"Well done, Jim!" Reuben exclaimed. "Now, the first thing, get one
of the water skins off."

One of the skins was unfastened in a minute and, after copious
draughts, everyone felt refreshed and ready for work again.

"We cannot start for a few hours," Reuben said. "The horses must
have come over forty miles, and won't be fit to travel till the
afternoon; fortunately there is plenty of grass for them in the
bottom. And now that my thirst is allayed, I begin to discover that
I am hungry."

There was a general chorus of assent. The fire was made up again.
The men went down to the bottom, and killed and brought up a sheep;
and all were soon engaged in making up for their twenty-four hours'
fast.

In the afternoon a start was made; but although they travelled all
night, they did not reach the stream until the following afternoon,
as they were obliged to accommodate their pace to that of the
sheep. The following morning Reuben rode forward to the
settlements, leaving Mr. Blount, with two of his friends, to come
on with the flock at his leisure.

At the first farm he reached Reuben heard that, as he feared, the
bush rangers had taken advantage of so many of the settlers being
away to recommence their attacks. At the first two houses they
visited, they had found the inmates on the watch, and had moved off
without making any attack. At the third they had surprised and
killed a settler, his wife, and two hired men, and had sacked and
burned the house. Reuben learned that some of the police had gone
off in pursuit.

Leaving his horse to the care of the settler, Reuben borrowed a
fresh animal and rode off to the scene of the outrage, which was
some thirty miles distant. Just as he arrived there he met the
party of eight police, who had been in pursuit of the bush rangers,
and they reported that they had lost all trace of them.

For the next two or three weeks Reuben did not return to his
headquarters, spending the time in riding from station to station,
with a small party of police, and urging upon the settlers the
necessity not only of strongly barricading their houses, but of
keeping a watch by turns; as the bush rangers seldom attack a
place, unless they can gain the advantage of a surprise.

As nothing had been heard of the bush rangers, Reuben determined to
return to his barrack. He was spending the last night at Dick
Caister's when, just as they were about to turn in, the sound of a
horse's hoofs, at full gallop, was heard.

"Something is the matter," Dick said. "Men don't ride like that, at
night, for nothing."

He went to the door and opened it, just as the horseman stopped in
front.

"Quick, Caister!" the man said as he leaped down, "the bush rangers
are not fifty yards behind."

And indeed, the sound of the trampling of other horses sounded
close behind.

"Come in, come in!" Dick cried. "Ah! Is it you, Shillito? Never
mind the horse, he must look after himself. Luckily the captain's
here, and we will give it them hot. Just run round and see that all
the shutters are fastened."

As Dick spoke he was barring the door, and he now shouted at the
top of his voice to the two hired men, who were in bed upstairs;
but before any answer could be returned, there was a thundering
knocking at the door.

"What is it?" Dick shouted.

"Open the door, and be quick about it, or it will be worse for you.
We want that chap that's just ridden up, and we mean to have him,
so he had best come out at once. If you don't open the door at
once, we will cut the throats of every soul in the house."

"You have got to get at our throats first, my fine fellow," Dick
said jeeringly.

The knocking was at once renewed, but with greater violence.

"The door's a strong one," Dick said to Reuben, "and it will stand
a good deal of that sort of thing; but we may as well move the
table and benches up against it, then we can see how things stand."

Reuben had been busy taking down the guns, which hung over the
fireplace; dropping a ramrod into them to see that they were
charged, and putting fresh caps on to the nipples. His own rifle
stood in the corner; and was, he knew, ready for service.

"What arms have you altogether, Caister?"

"I have that rifle and double-barrel gun. Both my hands have got
muskets; I got them up from Sydney, a few months back."

The two men now came running down from above, each with his musket.

"Where is Jim?" Reuben said, looking round.

"He went out about ten minutes ago," Dick said. "I fancy he went to
look after your horse. He takes as much care of that animal as if
it were a child."

"I hope they won't find him in the stable, and cut his throat,"
Reuben said. "He is wonderfully faithful and attached to me. I
would not have harm come to him, for anything.

"Now, I will go upstairs and reconnoitre. Now those fellows have
left off knocking at the door, they are a good deal more dangerous
than when they were kicking up all the row."

"Mind how you show yourself, captain, as likely enough one of them
is on the watch, expecting that we should be sure, sooner or later,
to take a look out of that window. So keep well back. The night is
pretty light, so I expect you will be able to make them out."

"Can we get a view of the stable from that window?"

"Yes," Dick replied, "I rather had that in my mind's eye, when I
put the stable up. It's always a good thing, men knowing that their
master can have an eye upon them, when they least expect it. Why do
you ask?"

"Because if the window commands the stable door, we can prevent
them getting the horses out."

"Yes," Dick said, "after losing two in that last affair, it would
be a serious matter to have the rest of them carried off."

Reuben went up the stairs and made his way towards the window,
standing a short distance back. He could see no one moving about in
the yard, and he was about to move close to it, when a tremendous
crash took place below, followed by loud shouts. He ran downstairs
again.

The bush rangers had moved round to the back of the house and,
there picking up a young tree which had been brought in, to saw up
into billets for firewood, they used it as a battering ram against
one of the shutters; and at the very first blow broke it off its
hinges, and then made a rush at the window. Two shots rang out
almost together; and then, firing a hasty volley into the window,
the bush rangers began to climb in. But by this time Reuben had
arrived, and the sharp cracks of his pistols rang out.

"They have got the police here!" one of the men exclaimed, as he
caught a sight of Reuben's uniform.

"Draw off, lads, I expect it's that accursed captain," another
voice exclaimed. "He's always riding about, with nobody but that
black fellow with him. He has got to go down, that fellow has, or
he will give us no end of trouble; but draw off from that window,
for a moment."

"What will they do next, I wonder?" Dick Caister said as, leaving
the two hands to guard the window, he returned into the other room
with Reuben.

"I rather expect they are going to try to burn us out. We must keep
them from that, if we can.

"Mr. Shillito, will you go up to the upper room, and keep an eye on
the stables? Shoot down anyone who may pass your line of sight.

"Haven't you got any loopholes, Caister?"

"Yes, of course I have," Dick replied. "I had forgotten all about
them. Yes, there are two loopholes in the logs in each side of the
house, upstairs. They have been shut up by wisps of straw, ever
since the house was built."

Giving strict orders, to the two men, to shout instantly if anyone
moved near the window, the two young men went upstairs.

"Have you seen anything, Shillito?"

"Not a thing. One would almost think that they have bolted."

"They will hardly do that, I fancy," Reuben said. "There are ten or
twelve of them, but I think one or two must have got a bullet in
them."

"I wish they would come on," Dick said, as he pulled out the straw
from the loopholes.

Reuben went to them all in succession, and looked out, but nothing
could be seen of their assailants. Presently, however, a number of
dark figures appeared, each bearing a burden.

"They have been cutting brush wood!" Reuben exclaimed. "I was
right, you see. They are going to try to smoke or burn us out. Now
I think it's time to give them a lesson."

"Look, look!"

The exclamation was excited by a sudden glare of light, on the
other side of the stables.

"The scoundrels have set fire to the stables!" Shillito said.

"What shall we do--make a sally?" Caister asked. "I am ready for
it, if you think right."

"No," Reuben said, "they would only shoot us down as we come out.
They must guess that some of us are up at this window, or they
would try to carry the horses off, instead of destroying them.

"I only wish we were on the poor beasts' backs. We would go for
them, though they were twice as many.

"I don't see the others now--they must have gone round to the other
side of the house."

Scarcely had Reuben taken up his station, at one of the loopholes
behind, than he again saw the dark figures. He took steady aim and
fired. There was a sharp cry, and one of the fellows fell to the
ground. The others at once threw down their burdens, and fled.
Three minutes later there was a shout.

"Look here, you policeman, and you, Caister, you shall pay dearly
for this night's work. I swear it, and Bill Fothergill never
forgets his word in that way. It's your turn, this time. It will be
mine the next, and when it is, take care."

The only reply was a shot from Reuben, aimed in the direction from
which the voice came. A minute later there was a trampling of
horses.

"They are gone!" Shillito exclaimed.

"Perhaps it is only a trick, to draw us out," Dick suggested.

"No, I don't think it's that," Reuben said. "They are not strong
enough to send a party off, and to attack us with the rest. No, I
think they have gone. They know that we can't follow them.

"They have taken good care of that," he added bitterly, as he
glanced at the stables, which were now a sheet of flame. "However,
we will look round and see."

The three men descended to the room below and, being joined by the
two hands, removed the furniture piled against the door, and threw
it open.

"We mustn't go round to that side of the house, so as to get into
the glare of the fire, till we have looked round," Reuben said. "I
believe they are all gone; but they may have left a couple of them
lurking, somewhere about, to pick us off when we show in the light.

"I will take one of your hands, Caister, and scout round on one
side. Do you three go the other side."

A quarter of an hour later the two parties met near the stables,
where the fire was now burning low. The roof had fallen in, and
only some of the uprights were erect, with flicking flames licking
them as they stood glowing above the mass of still blazing debris.

"I wonder whether that poor fellow is under that?" Reuben said.

"I hope not, indeed. I fancy he must have got away. He might have
slipped off when they first rode up. He may be hiding somewhere
round, afraid to come near till he knows how matters have turned
out."

So saying, he gave a loud cooey. They stood silent for a minute,
but no answer came back.

"There is nothing to be done, till morning," Dick said, "and it's
no use hanging about here. Before it gets light I will start for
Watson's. There are two of your men there; and they, with the two
Watsons and ourselves, can set out after these fellows, if you are
agreeable. That is, as soon as we get hold of some horses."

"I hardly think I shall be justified in taking you," Reuben said,
as he walked back towards the house. "These scoundrels are all
armed to the teeth, and they are first-rate shots. They know every
foot of the country, and against anything like equal numbers they
would make a desperate fight of it, even if they did not thrash us.
Of course, in anything like an equal number of my own men I should
not hesitate, but I don't think it will be fair for you settlers to
undertake such a service as that."

"Listen!" Shillito exclaimed, "they are coming back again."

Surely enough, on the night air the sound of horses, galloping at
full speed, could be heard.

"I don't think it can be them," Reuben said. "They would have no
motive in coming back, after they once rode off. They would know we
should be ready for them."

"I don't see who else it can be. At any rate, all our guns are
loaded; and if it is them, all the better."

Suddenly a loud cooey was heard.

"That's Jim!" Reuben exclaimed. "I should know his call among a
thousand. He must have made off to get help at once, but I don't
know how he can have done it in time."

"Why, it's the Watsons and my men!" he exclaimed, as the party rode
up into the light.

"All safe?" one of the settlers cried, as he jumped from his horse.

"All safe, thank God," Reuben replied. "Did Jim bring you news that
we were attacked?"

"Yes; fortunately we were sitting up late, talking, when he rode
up; so there was not a minute lost."

"Rode up!" Reuben repeated, in surprise; "why, where did you get a
horse, Jim?"

"Rode master's horse," Jim said.

"What!" Reuben exclaimed in delight, "what, is Tartar safe? I was
afraid his body was under those ruins. Why, how did you get him
out?"

"Jim was in de stable, sah, when bush ranger ride up. De horses was
stamping, and I not hear dem till dey come quite close, den it was
too late to run out.

"De moment dat dey began to make bobbery at door, I opened stable
door and bring out de three horses."

"What! Did you get mine out, too?" Dick shouted. "Jim, you are a
trump, and no mistake."

"Den," Jim went on, paying no attention to the interruption, "me
led de other two hosses little way, and let them go loose, sure not
go far from home; and I jump on Tartar, and ride like de debel to
Watson's for de police."

"Well done, Jim. You have done capitally. Now let us talk over what
we had better do."

The party re-entered the house. Fresh wood was thrown on to the
fire, and one of Dick's hands proceeded to put food on the table,
and prepare tea, while the others consulted what course should be
pursued.

It was agreed, at once, that more aid would be necessary, before
they could think of attacking the bush rangers; but all were ready
to join in the hunt for them. Therefore it was decided that Dick
Shillito and the two Watsons should each ride, at once, to
neighbouring stations to bring aid. At one of the stations two more
