stolen to your waking ear from some gray tower, that stood within the
precincts of your dream.  While yet in suspense, another clock flings
its heavy clang over the slumbering town, with so full and distinct a
sound, and such a long murmur in the neighboring air, that you are
certain it must proceed from the steeple at the nearest corner.  You
count the strokes--one--two, and there they cease, with a booming
sound, like the gathering of a third stroke within the bell.

If you could choose an hour of wakefulness out of the whole night, it
would be this.  Since your sober bedtime, at eleven, you have had rest
enough to take off the pressure of yesterday's fatigue; while before
you, till the sun comes from "far Cathay" to brighten your window,
there is almost the space of a summer night; one hour to be spent in
thought, with the mind's eye half shut, and two in pleasant dreams,
and two in that strangest of enjoyments, the forgetfulness alike of
joy and woe.  The moment of rising belongs to another period of time,
and appears so distant, that the plunge out of a warm bed into the
frosty air cannot yet be anticipated with dismay.  Yesterday has
already vanished among the shadows of the past; to-morrow has not yet
emerged from the future.  You have found an intermediate space, where
the business of life does not intrude; where the passing moment
lingers, and becomes truly the present; a spot where Father Time, when
he thinks nobody is watching him, sits down by the wayside to take
breath.  O that he would fall asleep, and let mortals live on without
growing older!

Hitherto you have lain perfectly still, because the slightest motion
would dissipate the fragments of your slumber.  Now, being irrevocably
awake, you peep through the half-drawn window-curtain, and observe
that the glass is ornamented with fanciful devices in frostwork, and
that each pane presents something like a frozen dream.  There will be
time enough to trace out the analogy, while waiting the summons to
breakfast.  Seen through the clear portion of the glass, where the
silvery mountain-peaks of the frost scenery do not ascend, the most
conspicuous object is the steeple, the white spire of which directs
you to the wintry lustre of the firmament.  You may almost distinguish
the figures on the clock that has just told the hour.  Such a frosty
sky, and the snow-covered roofs, and the long vista of the frozen
street, all white, and the distant water hardened into rock, might
make you shiver, even under four blankets and a woollen comforter.
Yet look at that one glorious star!  Its beams are distinguishable
from all the rest, and actually cast the shadow of the casement on the
bed, with a radiance of deeper hue than moonlight, though not so
accurate an outline.

You sink down and muffle your head in the clothes, shivering all the
while, but less from bodily chill than the bare idea of a polar
atmosphere.  It is too cold even for the thoughts to venture abroad.
You speculate on the luxury of wearing out a whole existence in bed,
like an oyster in its shell, content with the sluggish ecstasy of
inaction, and drowsily conscious of nothing but delicious warmth, such
as you now feel again.  Ah! that idea has brought a hideous one in its
train.  You think how the dead are lying in their cold shrouds and
narrow coffins, through the drear winter of the grave, and cannot
persuade your fancy that they neither shrink nor shiver, when the snow
is drifting over their little hillocks, and the bitter blast howls
against the door of the tomb.  That gloomy thought will collect a
