together!  One walks in black attire, with a measured step, and a heavy
brow, and his thoughtful eyes bent down, while the gay little girl trips
lightly along, as if she were forced to keep hold of my hand, lest her
feet should dance away from the earth.  Yet there is sympathy between us.
If I pride myself on anything, it is because I have a smile that children
love; and, on the other hand, there are few grown ladies that could
entice me from the side of little Annie; for I delight to let my mind go
hand in hand with the mind of a sinless child.  So, come, Annie; but if I
moralize as we go, do not listen to me; only look about you, and be
merry!

Now we turn the corner.  Here are hacks with two horses, and
stage-coaches with four, thundering to meet each other, and trucks and
carts moving at a slower pace, being heavily laden with barrels from the
wharves, and here are rattling gigs, which perhaps will be smashed to
pieces before our eyes.  Hitherward, also, comes a man trundling a
wheelbarrow along the pavement.  Is not little Annie afraid of such a
tumult?  No; she does not even shrink closer to my side, but passes on
with fearless confidence, a happy child amidst a great throng of grown
people, who pay the same reverence to her infancy that they would to
extreme old age.  Nobody jostles her; all turn aside to make way for
little Annie; and, what is most singular, she appears conscious of her
claim to such respect.  Now her eyes brighten with pleasure!  A
street-musician has seated himself on the steps of yonder church, and
pours forth his strains to the busy town, a melody that has gone astray
among the tramp of footsteps, the buzz of voices, and the war of passing
wheels.  Who heeds the poor organ-grinder?  None but myself and little
Annie, whose feet begin to move in unison with the lively tune, as if she
were loath that music should be wasted without a dance.  But where would
Annie find a partner?  Some have the gout in their toes, or the
rheumatism in their joints; some are stiff with age; some feeble with
disease; some are so lean that their bones would rattle, and others of
such ponderous size that their agility would crack the flagstones; but
many, many have leaden feet, because their hearts are far heavier than
lead.

It is a sad thought that I have chanced upon.  What a company of dancers
should we be!  For I, too, am a gentleman of sober footsteps, and
therefore, little Annie, let us walk sedately on.

It is a question with me, whether this giddy child, or my sage self, have
most pleasure in looking at the shop-windows.  We love the silks of sunny
hue, that glow within the darkened premises of the spruce drygoods' men;
we are pleasantly dazzled by the burnished silver, and the chased gold,
the rings of wedlock and the costly love-ornaments, glistening at the
window of the jeweller; but Annie, more than I, seeks for a glimpse of
her passing figure in the dusty looking-glasses at the hardware stores.
All that is bright and gay attracts us both.

Here is a shop to which the recollections of my boyhood, as well as
present partialities, give a peculiar magic.  How delightful to let the
fancy revel on the dainties of a confectioner; those pies, with such
white and flaky paste, their contents being a mystery, whether rich
mince, with whole plums intermixed, or piquant apple, delicately
rose-flavored; those cakes, heart-shaped or round, piled in a lofty
pyramid; those sweet little circlets, sweetly named kisses; those dark,
majestic masses, fit to be bridal-loaves at the wedding of an heiress,
mountains in size, their summits deeply snow-covered with sugar!  Then
the mighty treasures of sugar-plums, white and crimson and yellow, in
large glass vases; and candy of all varieties; and those little cockles,
or whatever they are called, much prized by children for their sweetness,
and more for the mottoes which they enclose, by love-sick maids and
bachelors!  O, my mouth waters, little Annie, and so doth yours; but we
will not be tempted, except to an imaginary feast; so let us hasten
onward, devouring the vision of a plum-cake.

Here are pleasures, as some people would say, of a more exalted kind,
