They converse but little, and only in whispers.  The night is profoundly
still.  The slightest sound, a word uttered above their breath, might
betray them.

They can distinctly hear the talk of the lancers left below.  Hamersley,
who understands their tongue, can make out their conversation.  It is
for the most part ribald and blasphemous, boasts of their _bonnes
fortunes_ with the damsels of the Del Norte, commingled with curses at
this ill-starred expedition that for a time separates them from their
sweethearts.

Among them appears a gleam greater than the ignited tips of their
cigarittos.  'Tis the light of a candle which they have stuck up over a
serape spread along the earth.  Several are seen clustering around it;
while their conversation tells that they are relieving the dull hours
with a little diversion.  They are engaged in gambling, and ever and
anon the cries, "_Soto en la puerta_!" "_Cavallo mozo_!" ascending in
increased monotone, proclaim it to be the never-ending national game of
monte.

Meanwhile Uraga, with the larger body of the lancers, has got down into
the glen, and is making way towards the point aimed at.  He proceeds
slowly and with caution.  This for two distinct reasons--the sloping
path is difficult even by day, at night requiring all the skill of
experienced riders to descend it.  Still with the traitor at their head,
who knows every step, they gradually crawl down the cliff, single file,
again forming "by twos" as they reach the more practicable causeway
below.

Along this they continue to advance in silence and like caution.
Neither the lancer colonel nor his lieutenant has forgotten the terrible
havoc made among the Tenawas by the two men who survived that fearful
affray, and whom they may expect once more to meet.  They know that both
have guns--the traitor has told them so--and that, as before, they will
make use of them.  Therefore Uraga intends approaching stealthily, and
taking them by surprise.  Otherwise he may himself be the first to
fall--a fate he does not wish to contemplate.  But there can be no
danger, he fancies as he rides forward.  It is now the mid-hour of
night, a little later, and the party to be surprised will be in their
beds.  If all goes well he may seize them asleep.

So far everything seems favourable.  No sound comes from the direction
of the lonely dwelling, not even the bark of a watch dog.  The only
noises that interrupt the stillness of the night are the lugubrious cry
of the coyote and the wailing note of the whip-poor-will; these, at
intervals blending with the sweeter strain of the tzenzontle--the
Mexican nightingale--intermittently silenced as the marching troop
passes near the spot where it is perched.

Once more, before coming in sight of the solitary jacal, Uraga commands
a halt.  This time to reconnoitre, not to rest or stay.  The troopers
sit in their saddles, with reins ready to be drawn; like a flock of
vultures about to unfold their wings for the last swoop upon their
victims--to clutch, tear, kill, do with them as they may wish!



CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

A BLOODLESS CAPTURE.

A house from which agreeable guests have just taken departure is rarely
cheerful.  The reverse, if these have been very agreeable--especially on
the first evening after.

The rude sheiling which gives shelter to the refugees is no exception.
Everyone under its roof is afflicted with low spirits, some of them
sad--two particularly so.

Thus has it been since the early hour of daybreak, when the guests
regretted spoke the parting speech.

In the ears of Adela Miranda, all day long, has been ringing that
painful word, "Adios!" while thoughts about him who uttered it have been
agitating her bosom.

Not that she has any fear of his fealty, or that he will prove traitor
to his troth now plighted.  On the contrary, she can confide in him for
that, and does--fully, trustingly.

Her fears are from a far different cause; the danger he is about to
dare.

Conchita, in like manner, though in less degree, has her apprehensions.
The great Colossus who has captured her heart, and been promised her
hand, may never return to claim it.  But, unacquainted with the risk he
is going to run, the little mestiza has less to alarm her, and only
contemplates her lover's absence, with that sense of uncertainty common
to all who live in a land where every day has its dangers.

Colonel Miranda is discomforted too.  Never before since his arrival in
the valley have his apprehensions been so keen.  Hamersley's words,
directing suspicion to the peon, Manuel, have excited them.  All the
more from his having entertained something of this before.  And now
still more, that his messenger is three days overdue from the errand on
which he has sent him.

At noon he and Don Prospero again ascend to the summit of the pass, and
scan the table plain above--to observe nothing upon it, either
westwardly or in any other direction.  And all the afternoon has one or
the other been standing near the door of the jacal, with a lorgnette
levelled up the ravine through which the valley is entered from above.

Only as the shades of night close over them do they desist from this
vigil, proving fruitless.

Added to the idea of danger, they have another reason for desiring the
speedy return of the messenger.  Certain little luxuries he is expected
to bring--among the rest a skin or two of wine and a few boxes of
cigars.  For neither the colonel himself nor the ex-army surgeon are
anchorites, however much they have of late been compelled to the habit.
Above all, they need tobacco, their stock being out; the last ounce
given to their late guests on leaving.

These are minor matters, but yet add to the cheerlessness of the time
after the strangers have gone.  Not less at night, when more than ever
one feels a craving for the nicotian weed, to consume it in some way--
pipe, cigar, or cigaritto.

As the circle of three assemble in their little sitting-room, after a
frugal supper, tobacco is the Colonel's chief care, and becomes the
first topic of conversation.

"Carramba!" he explains, as if some new idea had entered his head, "I
couldn't have believed in a man suffering so much from such a trifling
cause."

"What are you referring to?" interrogates the doctor.

"The thing you're thinking of at this moment, _amigo mio_.  I'll make a
wager it's the same."

"As you know, colonel, I never bet."

"Nor I upon a certainty, as in this case it would be.  I know what your
mind's bent upon--tobacco."

"I confess it, colonel.  I want a smoke, bad as ever I did in my life."

"Sol."

"But why don't you both have it, then?"

It is Adela who thus innocently interrogates.

"For the best of all reasons," rejoins her brother.  "We haven't the
wherewith."

"What! no cigarittos?  I saw some yesterday on one of the shelves."

"But not to day.  At this moment there isn't a pinch of tobacco within
twenty miles of where we sit, unless our late guests have made a very
short day's march.  I gave them the last I had to comfort them on the
journey."

"Yes, senorita," adds the doctor, "and something quite as bad, if not
worse.  Our bottles are empty.  The wine is out as well as the weed."

"In that," interrupts the Colonel, "I'm happy to say you're mistaken.
It's not so bad as you think, doctor.  True, the pigskin has collapsed;
for the throat of the huge Texan was as difficult to saturate as the
most parched spot on the Staked Plain.  Finding it so, I took occasion
to abstract a good large gourd, and set it surreptitiously aside.  I did
that to meet emergencies.  As one seems to have arisen, I think the
hidden treasure may now be produced."

Saying this, the colonel steps out of the room, soon returning with a
large calabash bottle.

Conchita is summoned, and directed to bring drinking cups, which she
does.

Miranda, pouring out the wine says,--

"This will cheer us; and, in truth, we all need cheering.  I fancy
there's enough to last us till Manuel makes his reappearance with a
fresh supply.  Strange his not having returned.  He's had time to do all
his bargainings and been back three days ago.  I hoped to see him home
before our friends took departure, so that I could better have provided
them for their journey.  They'll stand a fair chance of being famished."

"No fear of that," puts in Don Prospero.

"Why do you say so, doctor?"

"Because of the rifle I gave to Senor Gualtero.  With it he will be able
to keep both provisioned.  'Tis marvellous how he can manage it.  He has
killed bits of birds without spoiling their skins or even ruffling a
feather.  I'm indebted to him for some of my best specimens.  So long as
he carries a gun, with ammunition to load it, you need have no fear he
or his companion will perish from hunger, even on the Llano Estacado."

"About that," rejoins Miranda, "I think we need have no uneasiness.
Beyond lies the thing to be apprehended--not on the desert, but amid
cultivated fields, in the streets of towns, in the midst of so-called
civilisation.  There will be their real danger."

For some time the three are silent, their reflections assuming a sombre
hue, called forth by the colonel's words.

But the doctor, habitually light-hearted, soon recovers, and makes an
effort to imbue the others with cheerfulness like his own.

"Senorita," he says, addressing himself to Adela, "your guitar, hanging
there against the wall, seems straining its strings as if they longed
for the touch of your fair fingers.  You've been singing every night for
the last month, delighting us all I hope you won't be silent now that
your audience is reduced, but will think it all the more reason for
bestowing your favours on the few that remain."

To the gallant speech of pure Castilian idiom, the young lady answers
with a smile expressing assent, at the same time taking hold of her
guitar.  As she reseats herself, and commences tuning the instrument, a
string snaps.

It seems an evil omen; and so all three regard it, though without
knowing why.  It is because, like the strings of the instrument, their
hearts are out of tune, or rather attuned to a presentiment which
oppresses them.

The broken string is soon remedied by a knot; this easily done.  Not so
easy to restore the tranquillity of thought disturbed by its breaking.

No more does the melancholy song which succeeds.  Even to that far land
has travelled the strain of the "Exile of Erin."  Its appropriateness to
their own circumstances suggesting itself to the Mexican maiden, she
sings--

  Sad is my fate, said the heart-broken stranger,
  The wild deer and wolf to the covert can flee,
  But I have no refuge from famine and danger,
  A home and a country remain not to me.

"Dear Adela!" interrupts Miranda.  "That song is too sad.  We're already
afflicted with its spirit.  Change it for one more cheerful.  Give us a
lay of the Alhambra--a battle-song of the Cid or the Campeador--
something patriotic and stirring."

Obedient to her brother's request, the young girl changes tune and song,
now pouring forth one of those inimitable lays for which the language of
Cervantes is celebrated.

Despite all, the heaviness of heart remains, pressing upon those who
listen as on her who sings.  Adela's voice appears to have lost its
accustomed sweetness, while the strings of her guitar seem equally out
of tune.

All at once, while in the middle of her song, the two bloodhounds, that
have been lying on the floor at her feet, start from their recumbent
position, simultaneously giving utterance to a growl, and together rush
out through the open door.

The singing is instantly brought to an end; while Don Valerian and the
doctor rise hastily from their chairs.

The bark of watch-dog outside some quiet farmhouse, amidst the homes of
civilisation, can give no idea of the startling effect which the same
sound calls forth on the far Indian frontier--nothing like the alarm
felt by the dwellers in that lone ranche.  To add to it, they hear a
hoof striking on the stones outside--that of either horse or mule.  It
cannot be Lolita's; the mustang mare is securely stalled, and the
hoof-stroke comes not from the stable.  There are no other animals.
Their late guests have taken away the two saddle mules, while the _mulas
de carga_ are with the messenger, Manuel.

"It's he come back!" exclaims the doctor.  "We ought to be rejoiced
instead of scared.  Come, Don Valerian! we shall have our smoke yet
before going to bed."

"It's not Manuel," answers Miranda.  "The dogs would have known him
before this.  Hear how they keep on baying!  Ha! what's that?  Chico's
voice!  Somebody has caught hold of him!"

A cry from the peon outside, succeeded by expostulations, as if he was
struggling to escape--his voice commingled with shrill screams from
Conchita--are sounds almost simultaneous.

Don Valerian strides back into the room and lays hold of his sword, the
doctor clutching at the first weapon that presents itself.

But weapons are of no avail where there are not enough hands to wield
them.

Into the cabin lead two entrance doors--one front, the other back--and
into both is seen pouring a stream of armed men, soldiers in uniform.

Before Miranda can disengage his sword from its scabbard, a perfect
_chevaux-de-frise_ of lance-points are within six inches of his breast,
while the doctor is similarly menaced.

Both perceive that resistance will be idle.  It can only end in their
instant impalement.

"Surrender, rebels!" cries a voice rising above the din.

"Drop your weapons, and at once, if you wish your lives spared!
Soldiers, disarm them!"

Miranda recognises the voice.  Perhaps, had he done so sooner, he would
have held on to his sword, and taken the chances of a more protracted
and desperate resistance.

It is too late.  As the weapon is wrested from his grasp, he sees
standing before him the man of all others he has most reason to fear--
Gil Uraga!



CHAPTER FIFTY THREE.

A SLEEPLESS NIGHT.

All night long Hamersley and the hunter remain upon the summit of the
mound.  It is a night of dread anxiety, seeming to them an age.

They think not of taking sleep--they could not.  There is that in their
minds that would keep them wakeful if they had not slept for a week.
Time passing does not lessen their suspense.  On the contrary, it grows
keener, becoming an agony almost unendurable.

To escape from it, Hamersley half forms the resolution to descend the
hill and endeavour to steal past the sentinels.  If discovered, to
attack them boldly, and attempt cutting a way through; then on into the
valley, and take such chances as may turn up for the rescue of the
refugees.

Putting it to his companion, the latter at once offers opposing counsel.
It would be more than rashness--sheer madness.  At least a dozen
soldiers have been left on picket at the summit of the pass.  Standing
or sitting, they are scattered all over the ground.  It would be
impossible for anyone going down the gorge to get past them unperceived;
and for two men to attack twelve, however courageous the former and
cowardly the latter, the odds would be too great.

"I wouldn't mind it for all that," says Walt, concluding his response to
the rash proposal, "ef thar war nothin' more to be did beyont.  But thar
is.  Even war we to cut clar through, kill every skunk o' 'em, our work
'ud be only begun.  Thar's two score to meet us below.  What ked we do
wi' 'em?  No, Frank; we mout tackle these twelve wi' some sort o'
chance, but two agin forty!  It's too ugly a odds.  No doubt we ked drop
a good grist o' 'em afore goin' under, but in the eend they'd git the
better o' us--kill us to a sartinty."

"It's killing me to stay here.  Only to think what the ruffians may be
doing at this moment!  Adela--"

"Don't gie yur mind to thinkin' o' things now.  Keep your thoughts for
what we may do arterward.  Yur Adela ain't goin' to be ate up that
quick, nor yet my Concheeter.  They'll be tuk away 'long wi' t'others as
prisoners.  We kin foller, and trust to some chance o' bein' able to git
'em out o' the clutches o' the scoundrels."

Swayed by his comrade's counsel, somewhat tranquillised by it, Hamersley
resigns himself to stay as they are.  Calmer reflection convinces him
there is no help for it.  The alternative, for an instant entertained,
would be to rush recklessly on death, going into its very jaws.

They lie along the ground listening, now and then standing up and
peering through the branches at the sentries below.  For a long while
they hear nothing save the calls of the card-players, thickly
interlarded with _carajoz, chingaras_, and other blasphemous
expressions.  But just after the hour of midnight other sounds reach
their ears, which absorb all their attention, taking it away from the
gamesters.

Up out of the valley, borne upon the buoyant atmosphere, comes the
baying of bloodhounds.  In echo it reverberates along the facade of the
cliff, for a time keeping continuous.  Soon after a human voice, quickly
followed by a second; these not echoes or repetitions of the same; for
one is the coarse guttural cry of a man, the other a scream in the
shrill treble of of a woman.  The first is the shout of surprise uttered
by Chico, the second the shriek of alarm sent forth by Conchita.

With hearts audibly beating, the listeners bend their ears to catch what
may come next, both conjecturing the import of the sounds that have
already reached them, and this with instinctive correctness.  Walt is
the first to give speech to his interpretation of it.

"They're at the shanty now," he says, in a whisper.  "The two houn's guv
tongue on hearin' 'em approach.  That fust shout war from the Injun
Cheeko; and the t'other air hern--my gurl's.  Durnation! if they hurt
but a he'r o' her head--Wagh! what's the use o' my threetenin'?"

As if seeing his impotence, the hunter suddenly ceases speech, again
setting himself to listen.  Hamersley, without heeding him, is already
in this attitude.

And now out of the valley arise other sounds, not all of them loud.  The
stream, here and there falling in cataracts, does something to deaden
them.  Only now and then there is the neigh of a horse, and
intermittently the bark of one of the bloodhounds, as if these animals
had yielded, but yet remain hostile to the intruders.  They hear human
voices, too, but no shout following that of Chico, and no scream save
the one sent up by Conchita.

There is loud talk, a confusion of speakers, but no report of firearms.
This last is tranquillising.  A shot at that moment heard by Hamersley
would give him more uneasiness than if the gun were aimed at himself.

"Thank God!" he gasps out, after a long spell of listening, "Miranda has
made no resistance.  He's seen it would be no use, and has quietly
surrendered.  I suppose it's all over now, and they are captives."

"Wal, better thet than they shed be corpses," is the consolatory
reflection of the hunter.  "So long as thar's breath left in thar bodies
we kin hev hope, as I sayed arready.  Let's keep up our hearts by
thinkin' o' the fix we war in atween the wagguns, an' arterwards thet
scrape in the cave.  We kim clar out o' both in a way we mout call
mirakelous, an' we may yit git them clar in someat the same fashion.
'Slong's I've got my claws roun' the stock o' a good gun, wi' plenty o'
powder and lead, I ain't a-goin' to deespar.  We've both got that,
tharfor niver say die!"

The hunter's quaint speech is encouraging; but for all, it does not
hinder him and his comrade from soon after returning to a condition of
despondency, if not actual despair.

A feeling which holds possession of them till the rising of the sun, and
on till it reaches meridian.

When the day breaks, with eyes anxiously scrutinising, they look down
into the valley.  A mist hangs over the stream, caused by the spray of
its cataracts.

Lifting at length, there is displayed a scene not very different from
what they have been expecting.

Around the ranche they see horses picketed and soldiers moving among
them or standing in groups apart; in short, a picture of military life
in "country quarters."

Their point of view is too far off to identify individual forms or note
the exact action carried on.  This last, left to conjecture, is filled
up by fancies of the most painful kind.

For long hours are they constrained to endure them--up to that of noon.
Then, the notes of a bugle, rising clear above the hissing of the
cascades, foretell a change in the spectacle.  It is the call, "Boots
and saddles!"  The soldiers are seen caparisoning their horses and
standing by the stirrup.

Another blast gives the order to "Mount!"  Soon after, the "Forward!"
Then the troop files off from the front of the jacal, disappearing under
the trees like a gigantic glittering serpent.  The white drapery of a
woman's dress is seen fluttering at its head, as if the reptile had
seized upon some tender prey--a dove from the cote--and was bearing it
off to its slimy lair.

For another half-hour the two men on the mound wait with nervous
impatience.  It requires this time to make the ascent from the centre of
the valley to the upper plain.  After entering among the trees, the
soldiers and their captives are out of sight; but the clattering of
their horses' hoofs can be heard as they strike upon the rock-strewn
path.  Once or twice a trumpet sound proclaims their movements upon the
march.

At length the head of the troop appears, the leading files following one
after the other along the narrow ledge.  As they approach the summit of
the pass the track widens, admitting a formation "by twos."  At the
trumpet call they change to this, a single horseman riding at their
head.

He is now near enough for his features to be distinguished, and
Hamersley's heart strikes fiercely against his ribs as he recognises
them.  If he had any doubt before, it is set at rest now.  He sees Gil
Uraga, certain of his being the man who caused the destruction of his
caravan.  His own horse, ridden by the robber, is proof conclusive of
the crime.

He takes note that the lancer colonel is dressed in splendid style, very
