desperately against their countrymen and co-religionists. Examples
of treachery, such as that exhibited by the two Pathans who fired
their guns, to warn their countrymen of the British advance up the
Spingawi Pass, are almost unknown.

It was, then, with a feeling of joy that Yossouf related, to his
English friends, the news of the defeat of the Afghan army.
Throughout the Hindoo quarter there was deep, but suppressed,
gladness at the news of the British victory; and this increased
when, as the night went on, it was known that the Afghan army was
totally dispersed, that the troops remaining in Cabul had fled, and
that the city was virtually open for the entrance of the English.

When, on the 12th--with bands playing, and colors displayed--the
British troops marched through Cabul, Will would fain have gone out
and joined his countrymen. But the Parsee pointed out, to him, that
this would draw the attention of the Afghans to the fact that he
had been concealed by him; and that in case, at any time, the
British should evacuate Cabul and return to India, he would be a
marked man for the vengeance of the Afghans. Will therefore wrapped
up in a long cloak and, accompanied by Yossouf and the Parsee, left
the house after dark and, proceeding to the gate, walked out to the
Bala-Hissar.

Explaining who he was, Will was soon passed through the sentries
which had been set, at nightfall; and was conducted to the quarters
of the general. The latter was greatly surprised when he was told
that an English soldier, who had been present at the attack upon
the mission, wished to speak to him; and at once ordered Will to be
brought before him. Great was his surprise when he learned, from
the young soldier, that he had fought under him at the taking of
Peiwar-Khotal and, having been made prisoner near Ali-Kheyl, had
been brought to Cabul; and had joined the party of Sir Lewis
Cavagnari, on its arrival at that city. Still more that, having
been in the residency when the attack upon it was commenced by the
Heratee soldiery, he had managed to escape from the massacre of
that night.

After having first heard a complete outline of Will's story, the
general called in several of his staff--who had just finished
dinner--and then requested Will to give a full and detailed
description of his adventures. After he had concluded, Yossouf and
the Parsee were called in, and the general warmly expressed his
gratification at the kindness that they had shown to a wounded
English soldier, at the risk of their lives. He ordered that a
handsome present should be made to Yossouf, and told the Parsee to
call again in the morning, when the quartermaster general would be
told to arrange, with him, for the supply of such articles as the
country afforded for the use of the troops.

"Your regiment," he said to Will, "is, at present, at Jellalabad.
Whether it will come up here I do not yet know but, in the
meantime, you will be promoted to the rank of sergeant--which is
the least we can do, after what you have gone through--and you will
take your place with my staff orderly sergeants."

He then sent for one of the sergeants and gave Will into his
charge, telling him he would speak further with him, when he had
arranged the pressing business which the occupation of Cabul
entailed upon him.

Yossouf remained with Will, being--at his urgent request--placed
upon the roll as a native follower, of whom a considerable number
accompany each regiment in India. His duties were but nominal for,
when Will's story was well known, Yossouf became a most popular
character among the sergeants of the staff. The money which he had
received--in the first place from the Ameer, and now from General
Roberts--would secure his future. In Afghanistan animals are cheap;
and the owner of a small herd of oxen, sheep, or even goats is
regarded by his neighbors as a wealthy man. Therefore Yossouf
would, on the departure of the British, be able to settle down in a
position of comparative affluence.

Two days later General Roberts, being one evening disengaged, sent
for William Gale. He had been much struck with the bearing and
manner of the young soldier, and now requested him to give him a
full history of his antecedents.

"You have had a curious and eventful history," he said, when the
young sergeant had finished, "and appear to have conducted yourself
with great discretion, readiness, and courage. From what you tell
me of your conversation with Colonel Shepherd, I have no doubt that
he formed the same impression that I do, from your manner and
appearance--that you are of a respectable, if not of good
family--and I trust that you will some day discover a clue to your
parents. It seems to me that, had the authorities of the place
where you were left properly bestirred themselves, they ought to
have been able to find out who you are.

"However, that is not to the point, now. It is sufficient for me
that, from your manner and address, you would not be out of place
in any position. I shall, of course, report the fact of your having
fought by Major Cavagnari's side, in the attack upon him here; and
shall strongly recommend that a commission be granted you. I am
sure that, from your conduct hitherto, you will never do discredit
to any position in which you may find yourself.

"Say nothing to your fellow sergeants of what I have told you. It
is possible--although not probable--that my recommendation may not
be acted upon and, at any rate, some months must elapse before an
answer can be received."

William Gale returned to his quarters in a state of extreme
delight. The communication which General Roberts had made to him
was altogether beyond his hopes. He had, indeed, from the very day
that he enlisted, often hoped that, some time or other, he might
win for himself a commission; and take his place in the rank to
which he had, from his childhood, believed that he was, by birth,
entitled. The words and manner of his colonel had encouraged this
hope, but he had never dreamed that his promotion might be attained
so soon. It was but a year since he had enlisted, and five was the
very earliest at which he had even dreamed that a commission might
possibly be gained.

The next day he had been sent from the orderly room with a note to
the colonel of the 67th, which was the regiment now in quarters in
the Bala-Hissar; the rest of the force being encamped in the plain,
below. As he was walking across the open, he was suddenly hurled to
the ground with tremendous violence and, at the same moment, a roar
as loud as that of thunder sounded in his ears. Bewildered and half
stunned, he rose to his feet; while showers of stones, beams, and
other debris fell around him.

Illustration: One of the Gunpowder Magazines had Exploded.

One of the gunpowder magazines had exploded. It had been known that
very large quantities of powder were stored in various buildings at
the Bala-Hissar and, at the moment of the explosion, a body of
engineers, under Captain Shafto, were examining the buildings in
which it was stored, and making preparation for the removal of the
powder. Singularly enough, no soldiers of the 67th were killed but,
of the Ghoorkas, who were on guard at the arsenal at the time,
twelve were killed and seven wounded. Shafto was, unfortunately,
killed.

The 67th were at once called out, and set to work to extinguish the
flames which had been kindled by the explosion--great damage being
done. The southern wall of the arsenal had been blown down, and
several buildings set on fire. Explosion followed explosion, and
the work of extinguishing the flames was an extremely dangerous
one.

In the afternoon another magazine blew up. Fortunately, no troops
were in its neighborhood at the time; but four Afghans were killed,
and several soldiers hurt, at a distance of three or four hundred
yards from the spot. Although it was never proved, it was strongly
believed that these explosions were caused by the Afghans and--as
large quantities of powder still remained in the Bala-Hissar--it
was determined that, for the present, the place should be
evacuated. The general therefore, with his staff and the regiment
in garrison, left the place and joined the camp in the plain.

The little force at Cabul was now isolated. Troops were slowly
coming up the Khyber Pass to Jellalabad; where a division was to be
formed, destined in the spring to join the force at Cabul, should
it be necessary to carry on further operations.

Between Cabul and the Shatur-Gardan the natives were in a restless
and excited state. Two attacks, by 3000 men, had been made on the
garrison holding the crest of the latter position--three hundred in
number. These bravely sallied out, attacked the enemy in the open,
and killed large numbers of them. Still, great numbers of the
tribesmen were gathered round; and General Gough, with the 5th
Punjaubee Cavalry, the 5th Punjaubee Infantry, and four guns, was
therefore sent from Cabul to bring down, from the Shatur-Gardan,
the garrison and all the stores accumulated there. The pass, which
would shortly be closed by snow, was then to be deserted.

Several executions now took place, at Cabul, of men who were proved
to have shared in the attack on the embassy. Some of the leading
men of the place, who had instigated the troops to the attack, were
among those executed. Many of the villagers were also hung, for
shooting at detached bodies of our troops. A proclamation had been
issued by the general, on his first arrival, warning the people
that any attempt against our authority would be severely punished;
forbidding the carrying of weapons within the streets of Cabul, or
within a distance of five miles of the city gates; and offering a
reward for all arms belonging to the Afghan troops which should be
given up, and for the surrender of any person, whether soldier or
civilian, concerned in the attack on the embassy.

The position of the British force, at Cabul, was that of a body
holding only the ground they occupied, in the midst of a bitterly
hostile country. The Ameer was powerless and, indeed, his goodwill
was more than doubtful. He had, from his arrival in the camp, been
regarded as a prisoner--although treated with courtesy--and after
the battle of Chaurasia--feeling his own impotence, and being
viewed with hostility by both parties--he resigned his position as
Ameer, and asked to be sent to India, which was done. The
abdication of the Ameer really took place on the day the troops
entered Cabul, but it was not publicly known until the end of the
month; as nothing could be done, on the subject, until his desire
was communicated to the Indian authorities, and their views
concerning it ascertained.

From the moment of his arrival at Cabul, General Roberts had set to
work to prepare for the winter. He would, for four or five months,
be entirely cut off; and would have to rely upon himself, alone. He
had before him the terrible catastrophe which had, on the same
ground, befallen General Elphinstone's army; and knew that it was
possible--and indeed probable--that, with the memory of that
success before them, the Afghans would unite in another great
effort to annihilate the little force shut up in the heart of their
country.

Fortunately he had, in the Ameer's barracks at Sherpur, a position
which he was confident he could hold against any attacks that could
be made upon him. These extensive barracks had been erected by
Sheer-Ali for the use of his cavalry, but had never been used. They
consisted of a large square, three sides of which were surrounded
by a lofty wall--an isolated and rocky, steep hill rising at the
back, and closing the fourth side. The buildings were amply large
enough to contain the whole of General Roberts' force; and there
was abundant room for the stores, baggage animals, and wagons.

The only fault was, indeed, that the extent of wall to be defended
was too long for the force at his disposal. Round two sides the
outer wall was complete but, on the third, it had not been taken to
its full height, nor had it been continued so as to join the hill
behind it.

Great efforts were made to bring in sufficient provisions and
forage for the winter; and expeditions were made up the Logan,
Maidan, and other valleys for the purpose. Winter was fast setting
in. Snow had begun to fall upon the hills, and ice formed on the
pools, every night. The natives of the valleys near were ready
enough to sell their grain, straw, and fuel; but few supplies came
in from a distance, as armed bands stopped all supplies on their
way. However, a sufficient amount of food and fuel was obtained,
and stored in Sherpur. Grain, too, was procured for the winter; and
the only article of which the supply was insufficient was chopped
straw, of which a very large quantity was required.

The attitude of the natives grew daily more hostile. Their priests
were preaching a revolt to the death, and recalling to the people
how their fathers had annihilated a British force, thirty years
before. Urged alike by fanaticism and a desire for plunder, the
natives over the whole country were seething with excitement; and
General Roberts saw that a crisis was approaching. The Afghans
could assemble at least 100,000 men; and among these would be
included all the troops of the Ameer's disbanded armies, armed with
weapons equal to our own, and burning to revenge the defeats which
had been inflicted upon them. To oppose them the English general
had less than 6000 men.

But though prepared for trouble, the storm, when it came, burst
suddenly upon the English. The enemy were known to be collecting in
great numbers, in the Maidan valley, and two columns were sent out
to attack them. One was commanded by Macpherson, the other by
Baker. Although they were to strike simultaneously at the enemy,
their route of march lay up different valleys--with a lofty
mountain range between them--so they could in no way cooperate with
each other. After they had started, General Massy was directed to
move out, with a small force of cavalry and a battery of horse
artillery, and cooperate with General Macpherson.

An hour after the cavalry had started General Roberts, himself,
rode out. He was accompanied by his usual escort, and by two
mounted orderly sergeants. One of these was William Gale. They had
only proceeded a short distance when they heard, some distance
ahead of them, the guns of the Royal Horse Artillery--with
Massy--at work; and the general at once rode forward, at a gallop.

General Macpherson had found Mahomed Jan--one of the principal
leaders of the Afghans--with 10,000 men, near Chardeh. A fight
ensued. The guns shelled the enemy, but the water courses prevented
the cavalry with Macpherson acting; and Mahomed Jan, moving across
the hills, placed himself between Macpherson and Cabul. Shortly
afterwards General Massy--who had with him three troops of the 9th
Lancers, and forty-four men of the 14th Bengal Lancers, with four
guns under Major Smith-Wyndham--came in sight of a portion of
Mahomed Jan's force. It was clear that these had, in some way,
interposed themselves between the little force and Macpherson's
column; and Massy supposed that they were a party of fugitives,
flying before the force of Macpherson or Baker.

As they came streaming down the hill, he got his guns into action.
After a few shells had been fired, the enemy advanced in full
force. Four thousand men were extended in the shape of a crescent,
advancing in fairly good order; while behind was an irregular mob,
of some six thousand men.

The ground upon which General Massy found himself, at this time,
was singularly unfitted for the action of artillery. It was cut up
by deep water courses, and anything like rapidity of movement was
impossible. It would have been prudent had Massy--when he saw how
large was the force opposed to him--at once retired, until he came
to ground where his guns could be rapidly maneuvered but, relying
upon the effect of the shell, he remained in the position in which
he had first discovered the enemy. The shell pitched rapidly into
the thick of the Afghans, but no effect was produced in checking
their advance. They did not waver for a moment, but came steadily
on. The enemy's bullets were now dropping fast among the cavalry
and guns. Thirty of the 9th Lancers were dismounted, and opened
fire with their Martini carbines; but the enemy were too numerous
to be checked by so small a body of men.

At this moment, Sir Frederick Roberts arrived upon the spot. The
position was serious and, to retire the guns in safety, it was
absolutely necessary to check the advance of the enemy. General
Roberts therefore ordered Massy to send his cavalry at the enemy.
Colonel Cleland led a squadron of the 9th full at the advancing
mass, the Bengal Lancers following; while Captain Gough, with his
troop of the 9th, charged the enemy's left flank--but even the
charge of Balaclava was scarcely more desperate than this. Two
hundred and twenty men, however gallant, could not be expected to
conquer 10,000.

The three bodies of cavalry charged, at full speed, into the midst
of the enemy's infantry; who received them with a terrible fire,
which killed many horses and men. The impetus of the charge bore
down the leading ranks of the Afghans, and the cavalry tore their
way through the mass, until their progress was blocked by sheer
weight of numbers. A desperate melee took place--the troopers
fighting with their sabers, the Afghans with knives, and clubbed
muskets. Many of the soldiers were struck from their horses. Some
were dragged to their feet again, by their comrades; others were
killed upon the ground.

The chaplain of the force--the Reverend Mr. Adams--had accompanied
the troopers in the charge and, seeing a man jammed under a fallen
horse, he leaped from his saddle and extricated him; and brought
him off, in spite of the attack of several Afghans. For this act of
bravery he received the Victoria Cross, being the first chaplain in
the army who had ever obtained that decoration.

When the dust raised by the charging squadrons had subsided, it was
seen that the enemy were still advancing. The Lancers had fallen
back and, as the men galloped in, they rallied behind Captain
Gough's troop; which had kept best together, and had formed up
again between the guns and the enemy. Lieutenants Hersee and
