The soil, already frozen for weeks  past, is prepared to
sustain whatever burden may be laid  upon it; and, to a northern eye,
the landscape will lose  its melancholy bleakness and acquire a beauty
of its own,  when Mother Earth, like her children, shall have put on
the fleecy garb of her winter's wear.  The cloud-spirits  are slowly
weaving her white mantle. As yet, indeed,  there is barely a rime like
hoarfrost over the brown surface of the street; the withered green of
the grass-plat is still discernible; and the slated roofs of the
houses do but begin to look gray, instead of black.  All the snow that
has yet fallen within the circumference of my view, were it heaped up
together, would hardly equal the hillock of a grave.  Thus gradually,
by silent and stealthy influences, are great changes wrought.  These
little snow-particles, which the storm-spirit flings by handfuls
through the air, will bury the great earth under their accumulated
mass, nor permit her to behold her sister sky again for dreary months.
We, likewise, shall lose sight of our mother's familiar visage, and
must content ourselves with looking heavenward the oftener.

Now, leaving the storm to do his appointed office, let us sit down,
pen in hand, by our fireside.  Gloomy as it may seem, there is an
influence productive of cheerfulness, and favorable to imaginative
thought, in the atmosphere of a snowy day.  The native of a southern
clime may woo the muse beneath the heavy shade of summer foliage,
reclining on banks of turf, while the sound of singing birds and
warbling rivulets chimes in with the music of his soul.  In our brief
summer, I do not think, but only exist in the vague enjoyment of a
dream.  My hour of inspiration--if that hour ever comes--is when the
green log hisses upon the hearth, and the bright flame, brighter for
the gloom of the chamber, rustles high up the chimney, and the coals
drop tinkling down among the growing heaps of ashes.  When the
casement rattles in the gust, and the snow-flakes or the sleety
raindrops pelt hard against the window-panes, then I spread out my
sheet of paper, with the certainty that thoughts and fancies will
gleam forth upon it, like stars at twilight, or like violets in
May,--perhaps to fade as soon.  However transitory their glow, they
at least shine amid the darksome shadow which the clouds of the outward
sky fling through the room.  Blessed, therefore, and reverently welcomed
by me, her true-born son, be New England's winter, which makes us, one
and all, the nurslings of the storm, and sings a familiar lullaby even
in the wildest shriek of the December blast.  Now look we forth again,
and see how much of his task the storm-spirit has done.

Slow and sure!  He has the day, perchance the week, before him, and
may take his own time to accomplish Nature's burial in snow. A smooth
mantle is scarcely yet thrown over the withered grass-plat, and the
dry stalks of annuals still thrust themselves through the white
surface in all parts of the garden.  The leafless rose-bushes stand
shivering in a shallow snow-drift, looking, poor things! as
disconsolate as if they possessed a human consciousness of the dreary
scene.  This is a sad time for the shrubs that do not perish with the
summer; they neither live nor die; what they retain of life seems but
the chilling sense of death.  Very sad are the flower shrubs in
midwinter!  The roofs of the houses are now all white, save where the
eddying wind has kept them bare at the bleak corners.  To discern the
real intensity of the storm, we must fix upon some distant object,--as
yonder spire,-and observe how the riotous gust fights with the
descending snow throughout the intervening space.  Sometimes the
entire prospect is obscured; then, again, we have a distinct, but
transient glimpse of the tall steeple, like a giant's ghost; and now
