would have harmonised better with a promise to give them jam-tart and
cream.  "It's vacation time just now, and the schoolmaster's away for a
holiday.  When he comes back you'll have to cultivate mind as well as
soil, my boys, for I've come under an obligation to look after your
education, and even if I hadn't, I'd do it to satisfy my own
conscience."

The _couleur-de-rose_ with which Bob and Tim had begun to invest their
future faded perceptibly on hearing this.  The viands, however, were so
good that it did not disturb them very much.  They ate away heartily,
and in silence.  Little Martha was not less diligent, for she had been
busy all the morning in the dairy and kitchen, playing, rather than
working, at domestic concerns, yet in her play doing much real work, and
acquiring useful knowledge, as well as an appetite.

After dinner the farmer rose at once.  He was one of those who find it
unnecessary either to drink or smoke after meals.  Indeed, strong drink
and tobacco were unknown in his house, and, curiously enough, nobody
seemed to be a whit the worse for their absence.  There were some
people, indeed, who even went the length of asserting that they were all
the better for their absence!

"Now for the hard work I promised you, boys; come along."



CHAPTER TWENTY.

OCCUPATIONS AT BRANKLY FARM.

The farmer led our two boys through a deliciously scented pine-wood at
the rear of his house, to a valley which seemed to extend and widen out
into a multitude of lesser valleys and clumps of woodland, where
lakelets and rivulets and waterfalls glittered in the afternoon sun like
shields and bands of burnished silver.

Taking a ball of twine from one of his capacious pockets, he gave it to
Bobby along with a small pocket-book.

"Have you got clasp-knives?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," said both boys, at once producing instruments which were
very much the worse for wear.

"Very well, now, here is the work I want you to do for me this
afternoon.  D'you see the creek down in the hollow yonder--about half a
mile off?"

"Yes, yes, sir."

"Well, go down there and cut two sticks about ten feet long each; tie
strings to the small ends of them; fix hooks that you'll find in that
pocket-book to the lines.  The creek below the fall is swarming with
fish; you'll find grasshoppers and worms enough for bait if you choose
to look for 'em.  Go, and see what you can do."

A reminiscence of ancient times induced Bobby Frog to say "Walke-e-r!"
to himself, but he had too much wisdom to say it aloud.  He did,
however, venture modestly to remark--

"I knows nothink about fishin', sir.  Never cotched so much as a eel
in--"

"When I give you orders, _obey_ them!" interrupted the farmer, in a tone
and with a look that sent Bobby and Tim to the right-about double-quick.
They did not even venture to look back until they reached the pool
pointed out, and when they did look back Mr Merryboy had disappeared.

"Vell, I say," began Bobby, but Tim interrupted him with, "Now, Bob, you
_must_ git off that 'abit you've got o' puttin' v's for double-u's.
Wasn't we told by the genl'm'n that gave us a partin' had-dress that
we'd never git on in the noo world if we didn't mind our p's and q's?
An' here you are as regardless of your v's as if they'd no connection
wi' the alphabet."

"Pretty cove _you_ are, to find fault wi' _me_," retorted Bob, "w'en
you're far wuss wi' your haitches--a-droppin' of 'em w'en you shouldn't
ought to, an' stickin' of 'em in where you oughtn't should to.  Go along
an' cut your stick, as master told you."

The sticks were cut, pieces of string were measured off, and hooks
attached thereto.  Then grasshoppers were caught, impaled, and dropped
into a pool.  The immediate result was almost electrifying to lads who
had never caught even a minnow before.  Bobby's hook had barely sunk
when it was seized and run away with so forcibly as to draw a tremendous
"Hi! hallo!! ho!!!  I've got 'im!!!" from the fisher.

"Hoy! hurroo!!" responded Tim, "so've I!!!"

Both boys, blazing with excitement, held on.

The fish, bursting, apparently, with even greater excitement, rushed
off.

"He'll smash my stick!" cried Bob.

"The twine's sure to go!" cried Tim.  "Hold o-o-on!"

This command was addressed to his fish, which leaped high out of the
pool and went wriggling back with a heavy splash.  It did not obey the
order, but the hook did, which came to the same thing.

"A ten-pounder if he's a' ounce," said Tim.

"You tell that to the horse--hi ho! stop that, will you?"

But Bobby's fish was what himself used to be--troublesome to deal with.
It would not "stop that."

It kept darting from side to side and leaping out of the water until, in
one of its bursts, it got entangled with Tim's fish, and the boys were
obliged to haul them both ashore together.

"Splendid!" exclaimed Bobby, as they unhooked two fine trout and laid
them on a place of safety; "At 'em again!"

At them they went, and soon had two more fish, but the disturbance
created by these had the effect of frightening the others.  At all
events, at their third effort their patience was severely tried, for
nothing came to their hooks to reward the intense gaze and the nervous
readiness to act which marked each boy during the next half-hour or so.

At the end of that time there came a change in their favour, for little
Martha Mild appeared on the scene.  She had been sent, she said, to work
with them.

"To play with us, you mean," suggested Tim.

"No, father said work," the child returned simply.

"It's jolly work, then!  But I say, old 'ooman, d'you call Mr Merryboy
father?" asked Bob in surprise.

"Yes, I've called him father ever since I came."

"An' who's your real father?"

"I have none.  Never had one."

"An' your mother?"

"Never had a mother either."

"Well, you air a curiosity."

"Hallo!  Bob, don't forget your purliteness," said Tim.  "Come, Mumpy;
father calls you Mumpy, doesn't he?"

"Yes."

"Then so will I.  Well, Mumpy, as I was goin' to say, you may come an'
_work_ with my rod if you like, an' we'll make a game of it.  We'll play
at work.  Let me see where shall we be?"

"In the garden of Eden," suggested Bob.

"The very thing," said Tim; "I'll be Adam an' you'll be Eve, Mumpy."

"Very well," said Martha with ready assent.

She would have assented quite as readily to have personated Jezebel or
the Witch of Endor.

"And I'll be Cain," said Bobby, moving his line in a manner that was
meant to be persuasive.

"Oh!" said Martha, with much diffidence, "Cain was wicked, wasn't he?"

"Well, my dear Eve," said Tim, "Bobby Frog is wicked enough for
half-a-dozen Cains.  In fact, you can't cane him enough to pay him off
for all his wickedness."

"Bah! go to bed," said Cain, still intent on his line, which seemed to
quiver as if with a nibble.

As for Eve, being as innocent of pun-appreciation as her great original
probably was, she looked at the two boys in pleased gravity.

"Hi!  Cain's got another bite," cried Adam, while Eve went into a state
of gentle excitement, and fluttered near with an evidently strong desire
to help in some way.

"Hallo! got 'im again!" shouted Tim, as his rod bent to the water with
jerky violence; "out o' the way, Eve, else you'll get shoved into
Gihon."

"Euphrates, you stoopid!" said Cain, turning his Beehive training to
account.  Having lost his fish, you see, he could afford to be critical
while he fixed on another bait.

But Tim cared not for rivers or names just then, having hooked a "real
wopper," which gave him some trouble to land.  When landed, it proved to
be the finest fish of the lot, much to Eve's satisfaction, who sat down
to watch the process when Adam renewed the bait.

Now, Bobby Frog, not having as yet been quite reformed, and, perhaps,
having imbibed some of the spirit of his celebrated prototype with his
name, felt a strong impulse to give Tim a gentle push behind.  For Tim
sat in an irresistibly tempting position on the bank, with his little
boots overhanging the dark pool from which the fish had been dragged.

"Tim," said Bob.

"Adam, if you please--or call me father, if you prefer it!"

"Well, then, father, since I haven't got an Abel to kill, I'm only too
'appy to have a Adam to souse."

Saying which, he gave him a sufficient impulse to send him off!

Eve gave vent to a treble shriek, on beholding her husband struggling in
the water, and Cain himself felt somewhat alarmed at what he had done.
He quickly extended the butt of his rod to his father, and dragged him
safe to land, to poor Eve's inexpressible relief.

"What d'ee mean by that, Bob?" demanded Tim fiercely, as he sprang
towards his companion.

"Cain, if you please--or call me son, if you prefers it," cried Bob, as
he ran out of his friend's way; "but don't be waxy, father Adam, with
your own darlin' boy.  I couldn't 'elp it.  You'd ha' done just the same
to me if you'd had the chance.  Come, shake 'ands on it."

Tim Lumpy was not the boy to cherish bad feeling.  He grinned in a
ghastly manner, and shook the extended hand.

"I forgive you, Cain, but please go an' look for Abel an' pitch into
_him_ w'en next you git into that state o' mind, for it's agin
common-sense, as well as history, to pitch into your old father so."
Saying which, Tim went off to wring out his dripping garments, after
which the fishing was resumed.

"Wot a remarkable difference," said Bobby, breaking a rather long
silence of expectancy, as he glanced round on the splendid landscape
which was all aglow with the descending sun, "'tween these 'ere diggin's
an' Commercial Road, or George Yard, or Ratcliff 'Ighway.  Ain't it,
Tim?"

Before Tim could reply, Mr Merryboy came forward.

"Capital!" he exclaimed, on catching sight of the fish; "well done,
lads, well done.  We shall have a glorious supper to-night.  Now, Mumpy,
you run home and tell mother to have the big frying-pan ready.  She'll
want your help.  Ha!" he added, turning to the boys, as Martha ran off
with her wonted alacrity, "I thought you'd soon teach yourselves how to
catch fish.  It's not difficult here.  And what do you think of Martha,
my boys?"

"She's a trump!" said Bobby, with decision.

"Fust rate!" said Tim, bestowing his highest conception of praise.

"Quite true, lads; though why you should say `fust' instead of
first-rate, Tim, is more than I can understand.  However, you'll get
cured of such-like queer pronunciations in course of time.  Now, I want
you to look on little Mumpy as your sister, and she's a good deal of
your sister too in reality, for she came out of that same great nest of
good and bad, rich and poor--London.  Has she told you anything about
herself yet?"

"Nothin', sir," answered Bob, "'cept that when we axed--asked, I mean--I
ax--ask your parding--she said she'd neither father nor mother."

"Ah! poor thing; that's too true.  Come, pick up your fish, and I'll
tell you about her as we go along."

The boys strung their fish on a couple of branches, and followed their
new master home.

"Martha came to us only last year," said the farmer.  "She's a little
older than she looks, having been somewhat stunted in her growth, by bad
treatment, I suppose, and starvation and cold in her infancy.  No one
knows who was her father or mother.  She was `found' in the streets one
day, when about three years of age, by a man who took her home, and made
use of her by sending her to sell matches in public-houses.  Being
small, very intelligent for her years, and attractively modest, she
succeeded, I suppose, in her sales, and I doubt not the man would have
continued to keep her, if he had not been taken ill and carried to
hospital, where he died.  Of course the man's lodging was given up the
day he left it.  As the man had been a misanthrope--that's a hater of
everybody, lads--nobody cared anything about him, or made inquiry after
him.  The consequence was, that poor Martha was forgotten, strayed away
into the streets, and got lost a second time.  She was picked up this
time by a widow lady in very reduced circumstances, who questioned her
closely; but all that the poor little creature knew was that she didn't
know where her home was, that she had no father or mother, and that her
name was Martha.

"The widow took her home, made inquiries about her parentage in vain,
and then adopted and began to train her, which accounts for her having
so little of that slang and knowledge of London low life that you have
so much of, you rascals!  The lady gave the child the pet surname of
Mild, for it was so descriptive of her character.  But poor Martha was
not destined to have this mother very long.  After a few years she died,
leaving not a sixpence or a rag behind her worth having.  Thus little
Mumpy was thrown a third time on the world, but God found a protector
for her in a friend of the widow, who sent her to the Refuge--the
Beehive as you call it--which has been such a blessing to you, my lads,
and to so many like you, and along with her the 10 pounds required to
pay her passage and outfit to Canada.  They kept her for some time and
trained her, and then, knowing that I wanted a little lass here, they
sent her to me, for which I thank God, for she's a dear little child."

The tone in which the last sentence was uttered told more than any words
could have conveyed the feelings of the bluff farmer towards the little
gem that had been dug out of the London mines and thus given to him.

Reader, they are prolific mines, those East-end mines of London!  If you
doubt it, go, hear and see for yourself.  Perhaps it were better advice
to say, go and dig, or help the miners!

Need it be said that our waifs and strays grew and flourished in that
rich Canadian soil?  It need not!  One of the most curious consequences
of the new connection was the powerful affection that sprang up between
Bobby Frog and Mrs Merryboy, senior.  It seemed as if that jovial old
lady and our London waif had fallen in love with each other at first
sight.  Perhaps the fact that the lady was intensely appreciative of
fun, and the young gentleman wonderfully full of the same, had something
to do with it.  Whatever the cause, these two were constantly flirting
with each other, and Bob often took the old lady out for little rambles
in the wood behind the farm.

There was a particular spot in the woods, near a waterfall, of which
this curious couple were particularly fond, and to which they frequently
resorted, and there, under the pleasant shade, with the roar of the fall
for a symphony, Bob poured out his hopes and fears, reminiscences and
prospects into the willing ears of the little old lady, who was so very
small that Bob seemed quite a big man by contrast.  He had to roar
almost as loud as the cataract to make her hear, but he was well
rewarded.  The old lady, it is true, did not speak much, perhaps because
she understood little, but she expressed enough of sympathy, by means of
nods, and winks with her brilliant black eyes, and smiles with her
toothless mouth, to satisfy any boy of moderate expectations.

And Bobby _was_ satisfied.  So, also, were the other waifs and strays,
not only with old granny, but with everything in and around their home
in the New World.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

TREATS OF ALTERED CIRCUMSTANCES AND BLUE-RIBBONISM.

Once again we return to the great city, and to Mrs Frog's poor lodging.

But it is not poor now, for the woman has at last got riches and joy--
such riches as the ungodly care not for, and a joy that they cannot
understand.

It is not all riches and joy, however.  The Master has told us that we
shall have "much tribulation."  What then?  Are we worse off than the
unbelievers?  Do _they_ escape the tribulation?  It is easy to prove
that the Christian has the advantage of the worldling, for, while both
have worries and tribulation without fail, the one has a little joy
along with these--nay, much joy if you choose--which, however, will end
with life, if not before; while the other has joy unspeakable and full
of glory, which will increase with years, and end in absolute felicity!

Let us look at Mrs Frog's room now, and listen to her as she sits on
one side of a cheerful fire, sewing, while Hetty sits on the other side,
similarly occupied, and Matty, _alias_ Mita, lies in her crib sound
asleep.

It is the same room, the same London atmosphere, which no moral
influence will ever purify, and pretty much the same surroundings, for
Mrs Frog's outward circumstances have not altered much in a worldly
point of view.  The neighbours in the court are not less filthy and
violent.  One drunken nuisance has left the next room, but another
almost as bad has taken his place.  Nevertheless, although not altered
much, things are decidedly improved in the poor pitiful dwelling.
Whereas, in time past, it used to be dirty, now it is clean.  The table
is the same table, obviously, for you can see the crack across the top
caused by Ned's great fist on that occasion when, failing rather in
force of argument while laying down the law, he sought to emphasise his
remarks with an effective blow; but a craftsman has been at work on the
