
"The Castle of Jauf, whose grey ruins may still be seen on a wooded
height in the high country of the Rhine, was at that time a stately
pile, with battlements, towers, and walls of massive strength; but it
was uninhabited even then, and in the country round strange tales were
told of sights and sounds which issued from it, not only at night, but
even during the day.  Spirits were said to hold their meetings there,
and the place was shunned by all mankind.

"Sir Kurd, however, knew nothing of these tales; he had come from a
great distance, and beyond inquiring his way, and ordering his necessary
food, had held no communication with the peasantry, whose dialect was
with difficulty understood either by his servant or himself.  As he came
within some hours of Jauf, he desired his servant to proceed to the
castle of a baron whom he had met in the wars in Belgium, and who lived
at no great distance, while he himself turned into the forest in hopes
of meeting with some adventure.  On he rode, through the pleasant oak
woods, and by many a wild crag; but he at last found that he had
wandered out of the direction he meant to have taken, and had no idea
where he was, or which way he ought to turn to find his friend's castle;
but he comforted himself with the old proverb, `that every road leads to
Rome, and even out of the labyrinth you will reach your destination.'

"The last ray of sunset had disappeared as Sir Kurd entered a wide
valley, and faintly through the deepening gloom descried a large
building, standing on a height at its further end--it was the Castle of
Jauf.  His horse was tired, and he himself both weary and hungry; he
therefore determined on going to the castle, and asking for food and
shelter for the night.  He rode slowly up the hill on which the castle
stood; but as he came near the walls, the darkness increased so suddenly
that it was with difficulty he found the entrance to the court.  He
called loudly, but no servant appeared at his summons.  His shout was
given back by a dull echo from the walls, within which night and
solitude alone seemed to reign.  The court was full with long grass; he
led his horse across it to a tall silver pine, whose outline he could
faintly trace through the darkness, bound him to it, and then sat down
to rest.  After a little time he looked up,--and see!  A light shone
from one of the windows!  He rose quickly, found a door, and felt his
way up the narrow spiral staircase.  At the top of the staircase was a
door, which he opened, and found himself in a large baronial hall; but
he hesitated to advance when he saw that the only person in it was a
girl, who sat by the long table.  She wore a black dress, and a string
of large pearls confined her soft brown hair; and her attention was so
absorbed in a large book which was open before her, and which she read
by the light of a lamp, that she did not seem to be aware of the
knight's entrance.  She was very lovely, and her expression told of a
gentle heart; but she was pale as a cloud, and some deep sorrow seemed
to have robbed her cheek of its roses.

"`Noble lady, I greet you well,' said the knight, at length.

"She looked up, and thanked him silently by a gentle inclination of her
head.  He continued:--

"`In my journey through this wood I have lost my way; may I ask for some
food and a night's lodging?'

"She rose, and with noiseless step left the hall, returning presently
with two dishes, one of venison, another of wild fowl; these she placed
on the table, and again retiring, brought a goblet of sparkling red
wine.  Having arranged everything, she signed to Sir Kurd to eat,
accompanying the sign with a sad smile.  He very willingly accepted her
invitation; and though he found that both bread and salt had been
forgotten, his modesty prevented his asking for them.  It seemed
strange, too, that not a single word had escaped the maiden's lips, and
he dared not speak to her.  But the spirit of the generous wine, which
came from the sunny hills of Burgundy, began to assert its power over
him, and prompted him to speak as follows:--

"Much-honoured lady, may I be allowed one question?"

"She bent her head.

"I suppose you are the daughter of the house?"

"Again she bowed.

"`And who are your parents?'

"She turned to the wall of the apartment, on which hung many portraits
of knights and ladies; and pointing to the two last, she said, in a
voice so soft, so melodious, that it seemed like the sighing of an
Aeolian harp--

"`I am the last of my race.'

"`Here,' thought Sir Kurd, `this may turn out as good an adventure as
ever knight met with in an out-of-the-way part of the world.  To be
sure, they sometimes won a princess, sometimes a wicked fairy; but this
maiden pleases me, and it is a splendid castle.  Ah, poor thing! no
doubt it is grief at the loss of her parents which has paled her cheek.
Perhaps I may find means of comforting her.'

"He advanced, took her hand, and said--

"`Believe me, lady, I grieve to hear that death has so early robbed you
of your parents; but ladies require the protection of knights.  Have
you--pardon the liberty I take--have you chosen one to make you happy?'

"She shook her head.  He continued, modestly--

"`In that case, may Kurd von Stein--whose name may have been heard even
here as that of a trusty Knight of the Empire, and as having
distinguished himself in many wars--may Kurd von Stein offer you his
heart and hand?'

"A gleam of pleasure lighted up the pale face of the girl; such a one as
you may have seen pass over a meadow when the moon shone suddenly from
behind a cloud.  She rose, and from a cupboard brought two gold-rings,
set in black, and a wreath of sweet rosemary, [See Note 1.] which she
twisted amongst the pearls in her hair.  She signed to the knight to
follow, and went towards the door.  As he passed down the hall, he
wondered that neither male nor female attendants were to be seen; but at
that moment the door was thrown open by two old men in full holiday
suit.  Their robes were white, and richly embroidered with gold; their
black barettes had large silver ornaments.  They placed themselves on
either side of the knight and lady, and with them descended the long
flight of stairs, on which Sir Kurd's step alone was heard; the others
seemed rather to glide than walk.

"Sir Kurd began to feel very uncomfortable; he did not like the style of
thing at all, and half repented of having pledged himself; but it was
now too late to retract, and an irresistible power seemed to draw him
onwards.  The old men led them to the castle chapel.  Lights already
burned on the high altar; monuments of gleaming white marble, ornamented
with weapons and golden inscriptions, rose on all sides.  It was before
one of these that the lady stopped; the iron figure of a bishop rested
on it; the eyes were closed, the hands folded.  She touched the figure;
it instantly rose, and the eyes sparkled, as you may have seen the
northern lights sparkle through the keen air of a winter night.  He went
to the altar, and standing before the bridal pair, said, in a deep and
solemn voice--

"`Say, Sir Kurd von Stein, will you wed with the noble and honourable
Lady Bertha von Windeck?'

"As the leaves of the aspen and tremulous poplar shiver when a chilly
breeze touches them, so trembled the knight as the lady passed her arm
round him.  He tried to say--he did not quite know what; but he could
not utter a sound, his very blood seemed curdled in his veins.  Hark!--
the crowing of a cock.  A storm swept through the chapel, and the castle
trembled to its very foundations.  In an instant all had vanished, and
Sir Kurd sank down in a swoon.  On coming to himself, he lay--where?
Amongst the long grass in the castle court, under the spreading branches
of the silver pine, and by his side stood his faithful charger, while
the cold grey light of morning began to appear in the east.

"`Was it a dream?  Did I really see these awful sights?' said the knight
to himself; and still the cock crew on.

"Sir Kurd mounted his horse, quickly left the castle, and, without
looking behind him, rode towards the spot where the cock was yet
crowing.  He soon reached a hospitable farm-house, standing amongst the
meadows in the valley, by the side of a clear stream.  Here he
dismounted, just as the sun rose, and while partaking of a hearty
breakfast, of which he stood in great need, he related to the farmer all
his adventures of the past night, who, in his turn, told many others of
the same sort.  Sir Kurd found that his servant had been unable to reach
the castle to which he had sent him, and had spent the night at the
farm; so they soon after started together, the knight feeling most
thankful to be rid of his ghostly bride."

Charles's story met with perhaps more applause even than it deserved.
He confessed that it was a very free translation of a German tale he had
read somewhere, but it was not admired the less for all that.

Two days after this a carriage drove up to the door, and out of it
stepped Buttar and Ellis.  Ernest knew nothing of their coming.  It was
a surprise his father wished to give him.  The boys were delighted to
meet each other, and kept shaking hands till they nearly dislocated each
other's wrists.  Buttar, who had come from a distance, had picked up
Ellis on the way.  The parents of the latter were glad to have him with
a companion like Ernest, from whom, from his account, they believed he
could reap so much benefit.

Not long after another carriage arrived, and great was the delight of
all parties when Lemon and Tom Bouldon's faces were seen looking out of
the window.

"This is jolly!--how delightful!--how capital!--what fun!" were some of
the exclamations which escaped the boys' lips as they shook hands with
each other.

"And the frost has begun here, as I suppose it had with you," added
Ernest.  "And the gardener says he is certain that the ponds will bear
to-morrow, and if they do, we shall have some magnificent skating.
There is not a particle of snow on the ice, and when it set there was a
perfect calm, so that it is as smooth--as smooth--what shall I say?--as
ice can be.  Oh, we shall have some first-rate skating, and hockey,
perhaps, and sleighing also, such as people have in Canada.  John has
had a sleigh built, such as he saw when he went over there in the last
long vacation.  He proposes to drive young Hotspur in it.  We shall fly
over the ground at a tremendous rate if he does.  There isn't a horse in
the country like young Hotspur for going.  My pony, whom we call
Larkspur, is first-rate of his sort; but when I am riding out with any
one mounted on young Hotspur I feel just as if I was on board a small
yacht with the `Alarm' or one of those large fast racing cutters in
company.  You have all brought your skates I hope.  If you have not, I
dare say we have some spare ones which will fit you.  We have had them
given to us at different times, and most of my brothers have outgrown
theirs, so that I have no doubt we shall find enough.  Oh, Ellis, do you
say that you cannot skate?  Never mind, you will soon learn.  You have
learned many things more difficult.  I'll undertake that you will be
quite at home on your skates in the course of a week."

So Ernest ran on, as he conducted his friends round the house, to
exhibit to them its numberless attractions, and to show them their
rooms.  They could not fail to be pleased, for the house, although not
fitted up with anything like luxury, contained within itself abundance
of objects to afford amusement and instruction to the inmates when
confined by bad weather.

There was a first-rate library, in the first place, and a very
interesting museum, illustrating all parts of the world.  The articles
in it were well arranged, and every one had a clearly written and full
description attached to it.  The articles from each country were placed
together, and the countries were arranged according to their respective
quarters of the globe.  There were good maps, and many pictures
illustrating the scenery or habits and customs of the inhabitants.  Many
hours might be passed profitably in it, which is not often the case with
museums.  At all events, I have never found that I could carry away much
information from one.  At the same time, I own that I think very likely
I may have a more correct notion of the forms of animals, and of the
shape of boats and buildings of foreign countries, than I should possess
had I not visited the British Museum, and others of less note.  The most
advantageous way of visiting a general museum is to go with a definite
object each time, and to attend exclusively to that object.  I have
never seen a museum better arranged than that which had been formed by
Mr Bracebridge, aided by his sons, who were great collectors for it,
and accordingly took a warm interest in its success.  However, not only
studiously disposed people found amusement in the house.  There was a
billiard table, and foils, and boxing-gloves, and single-sticks, and
basket-sticks, and implements for all sorts of less athletic games at
which ladies can play.

"Why, Ernest, you live in a perfect paradise of a home," exclaimed
Buttar, as at last they reached the sleeping-rooms which Mrs
Bracebridge had appropriated to her young guests.

"My father and mother make it so," said Ernest, enthusiastically.  "They
regulate everything so well, and yet we have such perfect liberty.  Our
father trusts us entirely.  He tells us that there are certain things
which he does not wish us to do--sometimes he gives us his reasons, and
very good ones they are; at other times he gives no reason, but simply
says we are not to do certain other things, and we know that his reasons
are good, so we do not think of doing them.  Frequently he leaves us to
act according to our discretion, and gives us only general rules for our
guidance."

Buttar could thoroughly appreciate the advantages his friend possessed,
for they were advantages of no ordinary kind, and were the cause of the
superiority he possessed over the greater number of his companions.

What a merry evening that was on which the boys arrived!  Lemon had met
Charles Bracebridge in Germany, though it was only just before the
holidays he discovered that Ernest was his brother.  He now came more
especially to visit him.  He was of a more suitable age than Ernest for
a companion.

There was a Christmas-tree loaded with really useful prizes, so that all
the boys were glad enough to obtain some of them, and their distribution
caused great fun; then they had a most uproarious game of blindman's
buff.  Some of them dressed up in all sorts of costumes, so that when
they were caught, the blind man could not tell who they were.

Bouldon made a capital blind man.  He rushed furiously here and there,
over everybody and everything, never minding where he went, shrieking
with laughter all the time, but keeping his hands well out before his
head, so that he ran no chance of knocking it against the wall.  More
than once Tom came head over heels down on the ground; but amid the
shouts of laughter, in which he himself heartily joined, having stood on
his head for a minute, he leaped up, and made a desperate dash at some
of the players.  At last he caught Buttar, who also made a very amusing
blind man, and though he suffered several mishaps, never for a moment
lost his temper.

Among Buttar's very many good qualities, a fine temper was one.  Nothing
ever put him out, though he was often much tried.  He was good-tempered
by nature, but he was also good-tempered from principle.  He knew how
wrong it is to lose temper, and he despised the frivolous excuses often
made by people for doing so.  The game of blindman's buff lasted a
wonderfully long time.  At last the ladies began to think that it had
become almost too boisterous, and Lemon, who was a capital hand at
starting games, proposed the game of "baste the bear."

"What's that?" asked Buttar.  "In all my experience I never heard of
that game."

"I'll show you, then.  Who knows it?  Do any of you?"

Tom Bouldon acknowledged that he did.

"Very well, Tom; you must be the first bear.  I'll be your keeper," said
Lemon.  "Properly speaking, everybody ought to draw lots as to who
should be bear, and the bear selects his keeper.  However, we will
suppose that preliminary got over.  All the rest of the company are to
tie their handkerchiefs into knots, with which to baste the bear.  Now,
I, as keeper, will fasten a rope round the waist of the bear, leaving a
scope of about five feet.  We take our position within a circle of about
five feet in diameter, in the centre of the room.  Here the circle is
easily formed by tacking a little red tape down to the carpet.  If I, as
keeper, touch anybody without dragging the bear out of the ring, that
person must become bear, and may select his keeper; or if the bear
catches anybody by the legs, and holds him fast in the same way, he must
take the bear's place.  Now we are all ready.  Very well, then, hit away
with all your might."

Tom looked very lugubrious as, taking up his position, he saw the
preparations making for his basting.

"Oh, oh, oh!  Don't, kind gentlemen, hit hard," he cried out in piteous
accents; and then in a deep tone he added, "if you do, to a certainty
I'll catch hold of some of you, and make you rue the day."

Nothing daunted by Tom's threats, the party began to attack him
vigorously; but they ran no little risk of being caught by Lemon, who
sprang out on them to the full length of the rope, now and then almost
pulling Tom out of his line; Bouldon also was very active, especially
when any of his schoolfellows came near him.  He growled and roared in a
very wild-beast-like way, sometimes springing at Ernest, sometimes at
Buttar or Ellis.  Frank, the midshipman, also came in for an equal share
of his attentions, and he seemed to consider that he was much on a par
