"The words of Send Warning are wise.  He is very old, and he is a
chief.  No use talk any more.  All braves go and eat a heap.  Tell
squaws bring up all ponies.  Get ready to cross river.  No lose time."

Murray was not a "general," and he had never studied war, but he knew
it would be a good thing to have deep water between that camp and any
assailants instead of behind it.  Many Bears was a chief of great
experience, but it had never occurred to him that it would cost him all
his horses if he should be beaten in a fight with a river behind him.
The blunder was remedied now with a rapidity which astonished even
Murray, for he had not known how good a ford there was right there.

"Hope the Lipans won't find that out," he said to himself.  "They'll
think twice before they try to swim their horses.  I've given these
fellows good advice.  May prevent a battle.  But if one should come,
how could I fight the Lipans?  What am I doing in an Apache camp
anyhow?  Steve and I must make haste out of this."

And then a puzzled, pained, anxious look came over his wrinkled face,
and he seemed to be looking around him very wistfully indeed, as if he
wanted to see somebody.

"Not to-night, perhaps; but I'll see her again in the morning.  Steve
and I must get away to-morrow.  It'll be easy enough to give him his
directions, and I can find Two Knives and his braves in a few hours."

Murray was a good deal upset by something or other, and it may be he
had not quite made up his own mind what his difficulty might be.

As the deepening gloom of the evening settled slowly down he stood
beside Many Bears on the bank of the river, and watched the young
braves drive in the last squads of ponies from their pasturage and urge
them across the ford.  He had no idea how much quiet fun Steve and his
friend Red Wolf had already enjoyed in a very similar occupation.  The
squaws had insisted upon making all the boys and girls who were big
enough swim instead of going over on pony-back, and the youngsters in
their turn had revenged themselves by doing all the mischievous pranks
they knew.

Old Too Many Toes had been conspicuous in shoving small Indians into
the water, and when at last she finished packing her little borrowed
mule and a borrowed pony, there was a perfect swarm of "divers and
duckers" around her.  The water came well up the sides of the little
mule, and she would not have minded that if the boys had been willing
it should go no higher.

Even the solemn face of Many Bears himself expanded into a chuckle of
dignified fun.

"Ugh!  Squaw scold.  Get spattered."

"Look!" said Red Wolf at the same instant.  "Drop baby."

Not her pappoose, for it was safe under her blanket, but her
three-year-old girl had slipped from behind her, and the river was
sweeping it down stream.

"It will be drowned!" exclaimed Steve, in some excitement.

"No.  Apache baby never sink.  Swim a heap.  Look!"

Steve looked, and there was no question but what the queer little thing
was paddling bravely, and not even showing fear.  To be sure, the
current was carrying it away, but Steve now saw that three or four
older boys and girls were swimming around it and were ready to give it
all the help needed.

For all that, the wrath and anxiety of Too Many Toes exhibited itself
in a torrent of long words.

Steve had learned among the Lipans that the red men have a great deal
of fun in their compositions, but he was almost surprised to hear Red
Wolf say, "Squaw talk big rain.  Fall in river.  Have freshet then.
Lipans can't follow Apaches."

If talk could have raised the river, the chatter of nearly two hundred
squaws of all ages, added to the scolding of Too Many Toes, would have
made a torrent of it.

And yet a number of the squaws, wives and daughters of men of character
and station attended to the business of fording the stream with the
silence and gravity of the most dignified white matrons.

Dolores would have scorned putting herself on a level with such a squaw
as Too Many Toes, even in the use of her tongue; and as for Ni-ha-be
and Rita, they never forgot for a moment whose family they belonged to.

"Rita," said Ni-ha-be, as they rode down to the river, "your blanket is
loose.  Red Wolf and Knotted Cord are watching us."

"Send Warning is not there."

"No, of course not.  He is with the chiefs.  Don't let them see we are
looking at them."

"I'm not looking at them."

"Neither am I.  I don't care for Red Wolf either."

"And I don't care whether Knotted Cord sees me or not.  I wish I could
talk with Send Warning."

"What for?"

"To ask about the talking leaves."

"Knotted Cord could tell you.  He is a pale-face."

"He is a mere boy.  Send Warning's head is very white."

"Look out, Rita.  Your horse's feet are slipping."

Ni-ha-be had better have been attending to the feet of her own pretty
mustang.  The ford was not very wide just there, and the two girls were
compelled to get a little out of the way of the two mules loaded with
lodge-poles.

Alas for the vanity of the chiefs self-confident daughter!

Her horse's fore-feet went over the ledge, and in an instant more she
was floundering in the river, while every squaw and young Indian who
could see her broke out into merry laughter.

It was well, perhaps, that she slipped from the ford on the up-stream
side, but it was clear that she did not need a bit of help from
anybody.  No Apache girl of her age ever needed to be taught to swim.
It was quite a credit to her, indeed, in the eyes of Steve Harrison,
that she should so promptly catch her mustang by the head, turn it to
the ledge, find her own footing on the rock, and encourage the unlucky
quadruped to follow.

Then, although the water was at her shoulders, she managed, all
dripping as she was, to clamber into the saddle again.  It was so
dreadfully provoking.  She had heard Red Wolf laugh.

"Rita, did you look at them?"

"Look at whom?  I was looking at you."

"Did they both laugh?  Or was it only Red Wolf?"

"I don't know."

"Go on!  Go on!  Too Many Toes is saying something about me.  She says
it is her ford, and I fell in because I did not know where it was.
Hurry on, Rita."

It was a sad blow to the pride of poor Ni-ha-be, but it need not have
been.  Any girl in the world might have had just such an accident
befall her, but not a great many could have helped themselves out of it
so skilfully and so bravely.  That was precisely what Steve Harrison
had been thinking, and he had not joined at all in the laughter of Red
Wolf.

It had been the chief's order that the lodges should be set up on the
safe side of the ford, and so there was work enough before the squaws.
Even some of the younger braves were called upon to lend a hand, and in
less than an hour's time there was a very respectable Indian village.
Lodges, ponies, fires, dogs, everything belonging to an Apache
hunting-camp was there, and between them and any probable danger the
river was rolling now, and the Lipans did not know where to look for
the ford.

"Ni-ha-be," exclaimed Dolores, sharply, a little later, "go into lodge.
Too late for young squaw.  What will the great chief say?"

"It is early yet."

"Go in.  Lipans come and carry you off.  Old pale-face see you, and say
foolish young squaw.  Not know enough to keep dry.  Fall off pony.
Ugh!"

That was a sharp hit, and Ni-ha-be obeyed Dolores rather than stay for
another reminder of her ducking, but Rita followed her very slowly.

"If I could see him again," she murmured, "I feel sure he would speak
to me.  I don't care what they say.  Dolores may scold as much as she
pleases.  I will ask Send Warning about those words, and all about
those pictures."

She little guessed that at that very moment Murray was saying to Steve
Harrison,

"Yes, Steve, she's pure white, but she's Indianized.  Talks Indian.
Thinks Indian.  Don't know she's white."

CHAPTER XXII

To-la-go-do-de had all the pride of an Indian chief, but he had good
reasons for respecting Captain Skinner.  He had seen him handle his men
in a fight, and he had talked with him afterward, and he knew that he
had not beaten the Captain in either case.  Now, therefore, that they
were to go on a war-path together, he was not at all above a
consultation with so wise and brave a leader.

For his own part, he had decided upon the right policy to follow.  He
had told his older warriors, "The pale-faces are cunning.  The Lipans
must be wise.  Suppose the Apaches kill many pale-faces.  Ugh!  Good.
Lipans kill rest of them very easy.  Not so many to kill."

He was right about the Captain's "cunning," for it was a good deal like
his own "wisdom," and it had been expressed to his men in the same way.

"The Apaches are strong enough to beat them and us too, and they'll be
on the lookout.  We mustn't throw ourselves away, boys.  We must get
separated somehow.  There won't be enough Lipans left to follow us far."

He and Two Knives, therefore, had about the same object in view when
they rode out together in advance of their combined force after supper.
The sun was setting, but it would be a good while yet before dark.

The miners were all mounted, and nobody would have guessed how much
extra weight they were carrying.  They were drawn up now in a close
rank in front of their little camp, in which they had not left a single
guard.  Two Knives asked about that.

"What for?" replied Skinner.  "What good to leave men?  If the Lipans
want to rob wagon they kill the men we leave.  Suppose Lipans do as
they agree, camp safe?  No.  It will take all the men we've got to
fight the Apaches."

That was good-sense, and Two Knives only said "Ugh!" to it; but his
next question meant more.

"How about fight?  Tell chief what do."

"No, I won't.  It's your fight more than mine.  If you want us to go
ahead, we will go.  If you say we are to keep back and let you go
ahead, all right.  If we say we want to do anything you will think it
is crooked.  Better not say.  You say."

The chief had been expecting to hear some plan of action, and to find
something "crooked" in it.  Captain Skinner had beaten him at once and
completely.

"Then you ride along with Lipans."

"No.  The hearts of your young braves are hot and bitter.  My men are
angry.  Must keep apart.  Have fight among ourselves.  No good."

There was no denying the good-sense of that, and Two Knives had no fear
at all but what his pale-face allies would come back after their wagon,
extra horses and mules.  Of course they would stick to property for
which they had shown themselves so ready to fight, and he could not
suspect that they now had the best part of it carefully stowed away
around them.

"Ugh!  Pale-faces can't go ahead.  Not stay behind.  What then?"

"You say.  We go."

"Ride left hand, then.  Away off there.  Not too far.  We go this way.
Both find Apaches.  Come together then."

"All right.  That'll suit us.  Send some braves along to see that we
don't run away."

Two Knives would have done so if Captain Skinner had not asked for it;
but he instantly suspected a cunning plot for the destruction of as
many braves as he might send, and he replied,

"Ugh!  No good.  Pale-faces take care of themselves to-night."

So both of them got what they wanted.

Two Knives believed that by keeping to the right he should make a
circuit and surprise the Apache camp, while the miners would be sure to
meet any outlying force by riding toward it in a straight line.

Captain Skinner's one idea was to get as far as possible from the
Lipans, he hardly cared in what direction.  To the "left" was also to
the southward, and so he was better off than he had hoped for.

"Go slow, boys," he said to his men.  "We must go right across every
stream we come to.  The more water we can put behind us the better."

The Lipans also advanced with caution at first, keenly watching the
distrusted miners until they were hidden from them by the rolls of the
prairie and the increasing darkness.

"Cap," said Bill, as they rode along, "why can't we turn now and win
back the camp?"

"Yes, we could do it.  And win another fight and lose some more men.
Perhaps all of us.  I'm not in any hurry for that."

The line on which the Captain was leading them slanted away more and
more toward the south, but not so much as yet that it need have aroused
the suspicions of To-la-go-to-de's keen-eyed spies who were keeping
track of them.

They reached a good-sized brook, and the moment they were over it the
Captain shouted,

"That gets bigger, or it runs into something before it's gone far.
That's our chance, boys."

Nothing could be surer, for all the brooks in the world do that very
thing.

Besides, that brook was running in the direction in which the miners
wanted to go, and they now pushed forward more rapidly.

"If I knew where the Apache village was," said the Captain, "I'd go
near enough to see if we could pick up some ponies.  But we won't waste
any time looking for it."

The men had plenty of comments to make, but not one of them was willing
to set up his own judgment against that of the ragged little Captain.
