pillowed beside that of the corpse, and her hair mingling with his
dark locks.  A creature of hope and joy, the first draught of sorrow
had bewildered her.

"Edith!" cried her rival.

Edith groaned, as with a sudden compression of the heart; and removing
her cheek from the dead youth's pillow, she stood upright, fearfully
encountering the eyes of the lofty girl.

"Wilt thou betray me?" said the latter, calmly.

"Till the dead bid me speak, I will be silent," answered Edith. "Leave
us alone together!  Go, and live many years, and then return, and tell
me of thy life.  He, too, will be here!  Then, if thou tellest of
sufferings more than death, we will both forgive thee."

"And what shall be the token?" asked the proud girl, as if her heart
acknowledged a meaning in these wild words.

"This lock of hair," said Edith, lifting one of the dark, clustering
curls, that lay heavily on the dead man's brow.

The two maidens joined their hands over the bosom of the corpse, and
appointed a day and hour, far, far in time to come, for their next
meeting in that chamber.  The statelier girl gave one deep look at the
motionless countenance, and departed,--yet turned again and trembled,
ere she closed the door, almost believing that her dead lover frowned
upon her.  And Edith, too!  Was not her white form fading into the
moonlight?  Scorning her own weakness, she went forth, and perceived
that a negro slave was waiting in the passage, with a wax light, which
he held between her face and his own, and regarded her, as she
thought, with an ugly expression of merriment.  Lifting his torch on
high, the slave lighted her down the staircase, and undid the portal
of the mansion.  The young clergyman of the town had just ascended the
steps, and bowing to the lady, passed in without a word.


Years, many years rolled on; the world seemed new again, so much older
was it grown, since the night when those pale girls had clasped their
hands across the bosom of the corpse.  In the interval, a lonely woman
had passed from youth to extreme age, and was known by all the town,
as the  "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet."  A taint of insanity had
affected her whole life, but so quiet, sad, and gentle, so utterly
free from violence, that she was suffered to pursue her harmless
fantasies, unmolested by the world, with whose business or pleasures
she had naught to do.  She dwelt alone, and never came into the
daylight, except to follow funerals.  Whenever a corpse was borne
along the street, in sunshine, rain, or snow, whether a pompous train,
of the rich and proud, thronged after it, or few and humble were the
mourners, behind them came the lonely woman, in a long, white garment,
which the people called her shroud.  She took no place among the
kindred or the friends, but stood at the door to hear the funeral
prayer, and walked in the rear of the procession, as one whose earthly
charge it was to haunt the house of mourning, and be the shadow of
affliction, and see that the dead were duly buried.  So long had this
been her custom, that the inhabitants of the town deemed her a part of
every funeral, as much as the coffin pall, or the very corpse itself,
and augured ill of the sinner's destiny, unless the  "Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet" came gliding, like a ghost, behind.  Once, it is said,
she affrighted a bridal party, with her pale presence, appearing
suddenly in the illuminated hall, just as the priest was uniting a
false maid to a wealthy man, before her lover had been dead a year.
Evil was the omen to that marriage!  Sometimes she stole forth by
moonlight, and visited the graves of venerable Integrity, and wedded
Love, and virgin Innocence, and every spot where the ashes of a kind
and faithful heart were mouldering. Over the hillocks of those favored
dead would she stretch out her arms, with a gesture, as if she were
scattering seeds; and many believed that she brought them from the
garden of Paradise; for the graves, which she had visited, were green
beneath the snow, and covered with sweet flowers from April to
November.  Her blessing was better than a holy verse upon the
tombstone.  Thus wore away her long, sad, peaceful, and fantastic
life, till few were so old as she, and the people of later generations
wondered how the dead had ever been buried, or mourners had endured
their grief, without the  "Old Maid in the Winding Sheet."

Still, years went on, and still she followed funerals, and was not yet
summoned to her own festival of death.  One afternoon, the great
street of the town was all alive with business and bustle, though the
sun now gilded only the upper half of the church-spire, having left
