
PERORATION OF OPENING SPEECH AGAINST WARREN HASTINGS


1. In the name of the Commons of England, I charge all this villainy
upon Warren Hastings, in this last moment of my application to you.

2. My Lords, what is it that we want here to a great act of national
justice. Do we want a cause, my Lords? You have the cause of oppressed
princes, of undone women of the first rank, of desolated provinces,
and of wasted kingdoms.

3. Do you want a criminal, my Lords? When was there so much iniquity
ever laid to the charge of any one? No, my Lords, you must not look to
punish any other such delinquent from India. Warren Hastings has not
left substance enough in India to nourish such another delinquent.

4. My Lords, is it a prosecutor you want? You have before you the
Commons of Great Britain as prosecutors; and I believe, my Lords, that
the sun, in his beneficent progress round the world, does not behold a
more glorious sight than that of men, separated from a remote people
by the material bounds and barriers of nature, united by the bond of a
social and moral community--all the Commons of England resenting, as
their own, the indignities and cruelties that are offered to all the
people of India.

5. Do we want a tribunal? My Lords, no example of antiquity, nothing
in the modern world, nothing in the range of human imagination, can
supply us with a tribunal like this. My Lords, here we see virtually,
in the mind's eye, that sacred majesty of the Crown, under whose
authority you sit and whose power you exercise. We have here all the
branches of the royal family, in a situation between majesty and
subjection, between the sovereign and the subject--offering a pledge
in that situation, for the support of the rights of the Crown and the
liberties of the people, both which extremities they touch.

6. My Lords, we have a great hereditary peerage here; those who have
their own honour, the honour of their ancestors, and of their
posterity, to guard, and who will justify, as they always have
justified, that precision in the Constitution by which justice is made
an hereditary office. My Lords, we have here a new nobility, who have
risen and exalted themselves by various merits, by great civil and
military services, which have extended the fame of this country from
the rising to the setting sun. My Lords, you have here, also, the
lights of our religion; you have the bishops of England. My Lords, you
have that true image of the primitive church in its ancient form, in
its ancient ordinances, purified from the superstitions and vices
which a long succession of ages will bring upon the best institutions.

7. My Lords, these are the securities which we have in all the
constituent parts of the body of this House. We know them, we reckon,
we rest upon them, and commit safely the interests of India and of
humanity into your hands. Therefore, it is with confidence that,
ordered by the Commons, I impeach Warren Hastings, Esquire, of high
crimes and misdemeanours. I impeach him in the name of the Commons of
Great Britain in Parliament assembled, whose parliamentary trust he
has betrayed. I impeach him in the name of all the Commons of Great
Britain, whose national character he has dishonoured. I impeach him in
the name of the people of India, whose laws, rights, and liberties he
has subverted, whose property he has destroyed, whose country he has
laid waste and desolate. I impeach him in the name and by virtue of
those eternal laws of justice which he has violated. I impeach him in
the name of human nature itself, which he has cruelly outraged,
injured and oppressed, in both sexes, in every age, rank, situation,
and condition of life.

   --_Edmund Burke_


  What effect would the solemnity of the occasion and the
  gravity of the accusation have on the Quality of the
  speaker's voice? (Introduction, p. 34.)

  Par. 2. CAUSE. What words in Pars. 3, 4, and 5 are
  emphatic through contrast with this word? Point out
  similar contrasts in Par. 6.

  Account for the Inflection on the various questions.

  How are the Climaxes in Pars. 2, 5, and 7 interpreted
  vocally? (Introduction, p. 31.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SONG MY PADDLE SINGS


  West wind, blow from your prairie nest,
  Blow from the mountains, blow from the west.
  The sail is idle, the sailor too;
  O! wind of the west, we wait for you.
  Blow, blow!                                                          5
  I have wooed you so,
  But never a favour you bestow.
  You rock your cradle the hills between,
  But scorn to notice my white lateen.

  I stow the sail, unship the mast:                                   10
  I wooed you long, but my wooing's past;
  My paddle will lull you into rest.
  O! drowsy wind of the drowsy west,
  Sleep, sleep,
  By your mountain steep,                                             15
  Or down where the prairie grasses sweep!
  Now fold in slumber your laggard wings,
  For soft is the song my paddle sings.

  August is laughing across the sky,
  Laughing while paddle, canoe, and I,                                20
  Drift, drift,
  Where the hills uplift
  On either side of the current swift.

  The river rolls in its rocky bed;
  My paddle is plying its way ahead                                   25
  Dip, dip,
  While the waters flip
  In foam as over their breast we slip.

  And oh, the river runs swifter now;
  The eddies circle about my bow.                                     30
  Swirl, swirl!
  How the ripples curl
  In many a dangerous pool awhirl!

  And forward far the rapids roar,
  Fretting their margin for evermore.                                 35
  Dash, dash,
  With a mighty crash,
  They seethe, and boil, and bound, and splash.

  Be strong, O paddle! be brave, canoe!
  The reckless waves you must plunge into.                            40
  Reel, reel,
  On your trembling keel,
  But never a fear my craft will feel.

  We've raced the rapid, we're far ahead!
  The river slips through its silent bed.                             45
  Sway, sway,
  As the bubbles spray
  And fall in tinkling tunes away.

  And up on the hills against the sky,
  A fir-tree rocking its lullaby,                                     50
  Swings, swings,
  Its emerald wings,
  Swelling the song that my paddle sings.

      --_E. Pauline Johnson (Tekahionwake)_
            (_By arrangement with the Author_)


  By examples from the above poem show to what extent
  Imitation enters into vocal expression. (Introduction,
  pp. 4-6.)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE DEFENCE OF THE BRIDGE

From "Horatius"


  ... The Consul's brow was sad,
    And the Consul's speech was low,
  And darkly looked he at the wall
    And darkly at the foe.
  "Their van will be upon us                                           5
    Before the bridge goes down;
  And if they once may win the bridge,
    What hope to save the town?"

  Then out spake brave Horatius,
    The Captain of the Gate:                                          10
  "To every man upon this earth
    Death cometh soon or late.
  And how can man die better
    Than facing fearful odds,
  For the ashes of his fathers,                                       15
    And the temples of his gods?

  "Hew down the bridge, Sir Consul,
    With all the speed ye may;
  I, with two more to help me,
    Will hold the foe in play.                                        20
  In yon straight path a thousand
    May well be stopped by three.
  Now who will stand on either hand,
  And keep the bridge with me?"

  Then out spake Spurius Lartius,--                                   25
    A Ramnian proud was he,--
  "Lo, I will stand at thy right hand,
    And keep the bridge with thee."
  And out spake strong Herminius,--
    Of Titian blood was he,--                                         30
  "I will abide on thy left side,
    And keep the bridge with thee."

  "Horatius," quoth the Consul,
    "As thou sayest, so let it be."
  And straight against that great array                               35
    Forth went the dauntless Three.
  For Romans in Rome's quarrel
    Spared neither land nor gold,
  Nor son nor wife, nor limb nor life,
    In the brave days of old.                                         40

  Then none was for a party;
    Then all were for the state;
  Then the great man helped the poor,
    And the poor man loved the great:
  Then lands were fairly portioned;                                   45
    Then spoils were fairly sold:
  The Romans were like brothers
    In the brave days of old.

  Now, Roman is to Roman
    More hateful than a foe,                                          50
  And the Tribunes beard the high,
    And the Fathers grind the low.
  As we wax hot in faction,
    In battle we wax cold:
  Wherefore men fight not as they fought                              55
    In the brave days of old.

  Now while the Three were tightening
    Their harness on their backs,
  The Consul was the foremost man
    To take in hand an axe:                                           60
  And Fathers mixed with Commons
    Seized hatchet, bar, and crow,
  And smote upon the planks above,
    And loosed the props below.

  Meanwhile the Tuscan army,                                          65
    Right glorious to behold,
  Came flashing back the noonday light,
  Rank behind rank, like surges bright
    Of a broad sea of gold.
  Four hundred trumpets sounded                                       70
    A peal of warlike glee,
  As that great host with measured tread,
  And spears advanced, and ensigns spread,
  Rolled slowly towards the bridge's head,
    Where stood the dauntless Three.                                  75

  The Three stood calm and silent,
    And looked upon the foes,
  And a great shout of laughter
    From all the vanguard rose:
  And forth three chiefs came spurring                                80
    Before that deep array;
  To earth they sprang, their swords they drew,
  And lifted high their shields, and flew
    To win the narrow way;

  Aunus from green Tifernum,                                          85
    Lord of the Hill of Vines;
  And Seius, whose eight hundred slaves
    Sicken in Ilva's mines;
  And Picus, long to Clusium
    Vassal in peace and war,                                          90
  Who led to fight his Umbrian powers
  From that gray crag where, girt with towers,
  The fortress of Nequinum lowers
    O'er the pale waves of Nar.

  Stout Lartius hurled down Aunus                                     95
    Into the stream beneath;
  Herminius struck at Seius,
    And clove him to the teeth;
  At Picus brave Horatius
    Darted one fiery thrust;                                         100
  And the proud Umbrian's gilded arms
    Clashed in the bloody dust.

  Then Ocnus of Falerii
    Rushed on the Roman Three;
  And Lausulus of Urgo,                                              105
    The rover of the sea;
  And Aruns of Volsinium,
    Who slew the great wild boar,
  The great wild boar that had his den
  Amidst the reeds of Cosa's fen,                                    110
  And wasted fields, and slaughtered men,
    Along Albinia's shore.

  Herminius smote down Aruns;
    Lartius laid Ocnus low;
  Right to the heart of Lausulus                                     115
    Horatius sent a blow.
  "Lie there," he cried, "fell pirate!
    No more, aghast and pale,
  From Ostia's walls the crowd shall mark
  The track of thy destroying bark.                                  120
  No more Campania's hinds shall fly
  To woods and caverns when they spy
    Thy thrice accursed sail."

  But now no sound of laughter
    Was heard among the foes.                                        125
  A wild and wrathful clamour
    From all the vanguard rose.
  Six spears' lengths from the entrance
    Halted that deep array,
  And for a space no man came forth                                  130
    To win the narrow way.

  But hark! the cry is Astur:
    And lo! the ranks divide,
  And the great Lord of Luna
    Comes with his stately stride.                                   135
  Upon his ample shoulders
    Clangs loud the fourfold shield,
  And in his hand he shakes the brand
    Which none but he can wield.

  He smiled on those bold Romans                                     140
    A smile serene and high;
  He eyed the flinching Tuscans,
    And scorn was in his eye.
  Quoth he: "The she-wolf's litter
    Stand savagely at bay;                                           145
  But will ye dare to follow
    If Astur clears the way?"

  Then, whirling up his broadsword
    With both hands to the height,
  He rushed against Horatius,                                        150
    And smote with all his might.
  With shield and blade Horatius
    Right deftly turned the blow.
  The blow, though turned, came yet too nigh;
  It missed his helm, but gashed his thigh:                          155
  The Tuscans raised a joyful cry
    To see the red blood flow.

  He reeled, and on Herminius
    He leaned one breathing-space;
  Then, like a wild cat mad with wounds,                             160
    Sprang right at Astur's face.
  Through teeth, and skull, and helmet,
    So fierce a thrust he sped,
  The good sword stood a hand-breadth out
    Behind the Tuscan's head.                                        165

  And the great Lord of Luna
    Fell at that deadly stroke,
  As falls on Mount Alvernus
    A thunder-smitten oak.
  Far o'er the crashing forest                                       170
    The giant arms lie spread;
  And the pale augurs, muttering low,
    Gaze on the blasted head.

  On Astur's throat Horatius
    Right firmly pressed his heel,                                   175
  And thrice and four times tugged amain,
    Ere he wrenched out the steel.
  "And see," he cried, "the welcome,
    Fair guests, that waits you here!
  What noble Lucumo comes next,                                      180
    To taste our Roman cheer?"

  But at his haughty challenge
    A sullen murmur ran,
  Mingled of wrath, and shame, and dread,
    Along that glittering van.                                       185
  There lacked not men of prowess,
    Nor men of lordly race;
  For all Etruria's noblest
    Were round the fatal place.
  But all Etruria's noblest                                          190
    Felt their hearts sink to see
  On the earth the bloody corpses,
    In the path the dauntless Three.

  Yet one man for one moment
    Strode out before the crowd;                                     195
  Well known was he to all the Three,
    And they gave him greeting loud.
  "Now welcome, welcome, Sextus!
    Now welcome to thy home!
  Why dost thou stay, and turn away?                                 200
    Here lies the road to Rome."

  Thrice looked he at the city;
    Thrice looked he at the dead;
  And thrice came on in fury,
    And thrice turned back in dread;                                 205
  And, white with fear and hatred,
    Scowled at the narrow way
  Where, wallowing in a pool of blood,
    The bravest Tuscans lay.

  But meanwhile axe and lever                                        210
    Have manfully been plied;
  And now the bridge hangs tottering
    Above the boiling tide.
  "Come back, come back, Horatius!"
    Loud cried the Fathers all.                                      215
