
"So the disguises are pretty good?" Ralph said, smiling.

"Impossible!" the colonel exclaimed. "Do my eyes or my ears deceive
me? Can it really be--?"

"It's us, sure enough, colonel; and now, I suppose we may as well
sit down."

So saying, the boys took their seats at the table; but Colonel
Tempe still looked from one to the other, in astonishment.

"Wonderful!" he at last said, "wonderful! Even now I know who it
is, I do not see the faintest possible resemblance.

"Percy is, of course, less altered than you are, Ralph, because he
is still young looking; but even now I should not recognize him. As
for you, with that wonderful head of hair, and that beard, you look
fifty; and as unlike yourself as possible. Upon my word, if it were
anywhere else but here in Tours--where there are all sorts of
oddities--I should be ashamed, as a colonel in the army, to sit
down to table with you."

"You are a little ashamed, as it is," Ralph laughed. "We had not
intended to come out in our new character, so soon; but when my
hair was once done, you see, it was impossible to go about in
uniform."

"But what in the world have you done with your hair?" the colonel
said, examining him closely; for Ralph had taken off his fur cap
and laid it beside him. "You have not got a wig on; and yet, all
that frizzly bunch cannot be your own."

Ralph explained how it was managed, and added:

"And now, colonel, that you have recovered from your surprise, let
us have breakfast."

Breakfast was ordered, to which the boys did full justice; but
Colonel Tempe was still getting on but slowly, for he could not
take his eyes off Ralph's face.

"Will all that frizzle keep in?" he asked, presently.

"Yes; the man said that the false hair--which is the greater
portion of it--will keep as well for a week; and we have got a
small curling iron, so we can beautify ourselves up when we like."

"Well, boys, I have no doubt, now, that you will be able to get as
far as Versailles; as to getting through, that's another
matter--but if anyone can, you will, I am convinced."

"I have not much doubt about it, colonel," Ralph said. "I seem to
see my way quite clearly into Paris. Much more clearly, indeed,
than I do to getting out again."

"Oh, it does not matter about getting out again, boys. You can stop
quietly in there, until the end of the siege."

"That is just what we don't want to do," Percy said. "Would you
kindly ask them to put into the dispatches a request that we may be
sent out again, by the first balloon that comes? We have no fancy,
either of us, for eating rats and cats; which I suppose is what it
will come to, before it is over."

"I will see to it, boys," the colonel said, smiling; "but really, I
should advise your staying there. You have done all--and more
than--your share of work."

The boys shook their heads; and it was arranged that, if they got
in, they should come out again in a balloon.

The next morning, the boys were up at half-past four and, at
half-past five, were at the Prefecture. Colonel Tempe sent in his
name to the minister, and they were at once admitted. Gambetta was
at his writing table.

"Good morning, Colonel Tempe," he said, cordially; and then added,
in some surprise, "who are these men you have with you, and where
are your young Englishmen? I hope they will not be late."

"These are they," the colonel said, smiling.

"They are who?" Gambetta said, puzzled. "I do not understand you,
colonel."

"These are the Lieutenants Barclay," Colonel Tempe said.

The minister looked from the colonel to the two boys, and back
again.

"Do you mean to say--?" he began, incredulously.

"Yes, sir, it is us," Ralph said; "and I do not think there is much
fear of our being recognized."

"So little that I do not recognize you, now.

"There is no mistake, colonel?" he said, gravely; "no
mystification? You give me your pledge, and assurance, that these
are the officers who have volunteered for this duty? Remember, any
mistake might be fatal."

"These are certainly the Barclays, sir. I give you my word."

"It is a marvelous disguise," Gambetta said, his doubts now laid at
rest; "and does them immense credit.

"There are the dispatches, gentlemen. They are done up in these two
quills, and sealed. They are of the utmost importance; and must
not, at any hazard, fall into the hands of the enemy. The
dispatches are in duplicate so that, in case one only gets in, the
purpose is served.

"This is a circular letter, to all maires and other French
authorities, ordering them to give you every possible assistance.

"This is a special note, to the Maire of Melun.

"Here is a letter to General Aurelles, at Orleans. If he is not in
when you arrive, the chief of his staff will do. He is ordered to
send a staff officer with you, through the lines, as far as you
require him. The horses are in the train.

"Now, goodbye. I wish you a very good future, for you are gallant
young fellows."

So saying, he shook them warmly by the hand; and they hurried off
to the train.



Chapter 15: The Expedition.


A special telegram had been sent forward from Tours to station
master at Orleans, to request him to order the two horses, sent
forward in the train, to be got out of their boxes without any loss
of time; and to do anything else which the owners of the horses
required. Accordingly, as the train was waiting outside the
station, the guard came round and asked at each carriage for the
owners of the horses. He appeared a little surprised, when two Jews
answered the inquiry; as he had expected that they were officers of
high rank, and importance.

"The compliments of the stationmaster," he said, "and is there
anything he can do with the horses?"

"Yes," Ralph said. "Give my compliments to the station master; and
say that I shall be much obliged if he will get them out of the
horse boxes, without loss of time, and send them on at once to the
headquarters of General Aurelles. We will go on at once, in a
vehicle."

Five minutes afterwards the train drew up at the platform, and the
guard ran up.

"This way, gentlemen. A carriage is engaged."

Upon arriving at headquarters they found that--owing to the
forethought of Colonel Tempe--they were expected for, upon sending
in their names, they were at once admitted; although several
officers, of all grades, were waiting in the anteroom.

The colonel of the staff gave a movement of surprise.

"There is some mistake here," he said, to the orderly who had shown
them in; "I ordered the Lieutenants Barclay to be admitted."

"These are the gentlemen who gave me the card, colonel," the
orderly answered.

"It is so," Ralph said. "If you will favor us with a moment alone,
we will explain the matter to you."

The colonel led the way into a small cabinet, adjoining.

"We are bearers of dispatches, for General Trochu," Ralph said;
"and have disguised ourselves, to endeavor to pass through the
German lines."

"Oh, is that it?" the colonel said. "I must really apologize; but
no one," he said, smiling, "could recognize you, in that disguise,
to be French officers. Before we speak further, I must ask you for
some proof that you are what you state yourselves to be; for at
present I have only your cards."

"Here is our letter from Monsieur Gambetta to General Aurelles,"
Ralph said. "It is directed to be opened by you, should he be
absent."

"That is all right," the colonel said, when he had read it. "My
surprise at your appearance was natural, for the telegram we
received this morning only said:

"'The two Lieutenants Barclay will arrive, by six o'clock train.
Their business is most important. Have a well-mounted officer of
staff ready to accompany them through lines.'

"I thought, of course, that you had orders to report on position of
troops; and felt, I admit, rather angry that Gambetta should wish
to send subaltern officers to inspect matters concerning which he
has full reports.

"You wish, of course, to go on at once?"

"Our horses will be here in five minutes," Ralph said, "and we wish
to get as far as possible, tonight. We mean to cross the Loing at
Montargis, and get as far as we can, tonight; so as to arrive
either at Meaux, or Melun, tomorrow evening. We should, of course,
prefer Melun, as being much the shortest route towards Versailles.
We shall, of necessity, be guided by the position of the Germans."

"You have not breakfasted, of course?" the colonel said. "I was
just going to sit down, when you came in; for I go out to the front
at ten, and it is half-past nine, now. You will have no chance of
getting anything, before you arrive at Montargis.

"I can introduce you to the officer who will accompany you."

The boys readily accepted the invitation, and at once followed the
colonel into another room; where breakfast was laid, and several
officers of the staff were waiting for the arrival of the colonel,
to begin. There was a general look of surprise, when he entered
with two strange-looking Jews; which was not a little increased
when he said:

"Gentlemen, the Lieutenants Barclay. You look surprised; but your
astonishment will cease when I tell you that they are upon an
important mission, and do not look like themselves. And now to
table, for they have to start in ten minutes.

"Captain Duprat, let me make you specially acquainted with these
gentlemen. They are bound for Montargis, and you will see them
through our outposts."

In another quarter of an hour, the boys were issuing from the
streets of Orleans; and were soon going along, at a hand gallop, by
the road along the banks of the Loire; while to the north stretched
the flat and densely-wooded country known as the Forest of Orleans.
As far as Chateauneuf they kept near the river. Here they halted
half an hour, to give breathing time to their horses; then started
again, and rode fast to Bellegarde. Here was the last post of
regular troops, but Cathlineau's franc tireurs were scattered
throughout the country, as far as Montargis; and it would have been
more difficult for the Barclays to have passed through them than
through the regular troops, as they had less respect for passes.

After another halt, they again started; and Captain Duprat
accompanied them as far as Montargis, where there was a small body
of franc tireurs. Captain Duprat's orders were to sleep at
Montargis, and then return to Chateauneuf the next day.

The boys felt rather stiff and tired, as they rode into Montargis;
for they had not been on horseback since the day when they were
taken prisoners, in the Vosges, and they had ridden forty miles
since breakfast. They would, however, have willingly pushed on
another twenty miles; but their horses had even a longer day's work
before them, on the morrow.

Being accompanied by a staff officer, no questions whatever were
asked them and, after a good dinner at the hotel, they went to the
Maire, to inquire whether he could tell them as to the advanced
posts of the Germans. This functionary--like such functionaries in
general--could give them but slight information but, as far as he
knew, there were no German troops on the right bank of the Loing,
south of its junction with the Yonne. Beyond the Yonne they were
scattered pretty thickly, everywhere.

At daybreak the next morning, they started. Captain Duprat turned
his horse's head westward again, while the Barclays rode north.
Their pace was rapid; as they never drew rein, except at villages,
to ask whether the Prussians had been heard of. They heard of
parties at Lorrez, and Cheroy; but as they kept through by-lanes,
and as the country was thickly wooded, the risk was--at
present--small. They had with them an excellent map, which enabled
them to follow the smallest footpaths.

At eleven o'clock, they stopped at the little hamlet of Montarlet.
There they breakfasted, and gave the horses an hour's rest while
they consulted with the Maire. He was a miller, and turned out a
shrewd fellow; entering into the matter with great warmth. He
advised them to ford the Yonne between Montereau and its junction
with the Loing; to keep to the woods for ten miles, and then to
turn to the left, and to cross the Seine--at one of the numerous
fords there--into the Forest of Fontainebleau; and they would then
find themselves between that town and Melun, and could ride boldly
into Melun, as if they had come from Fontainebleau.

"I know every foot of the country," he said, "and will guide you,
till you are safely across the Seine. If we should, by any chance,
fall upon a patrol of the enemy, it will be simple enough to say
that I am a miller of Montarlet; and that you have shown me your
permission to travel about, through the German line; and have asked
me to guide you, by the shortest way, to Melun."

They had every reason to be thankful to their guide, for they found
that there were a great many scattered parties of Uhlans about. By
dint of making detours through woods, however, they succeeded in
striking the Seine, at Fontaine le Port, without once meeting them.

This village was, however, occupied by some half-dozen cavalry; and
it was impossible to pass the river, unseen by them. The Barclays
thanked, very warmly, their friend the Maire, and promised to
mention his conduct, upon their return to Tours; and then, saying
goodbye to him, rode into the village alone. The sergeant of Uhlans
came to the door of the principal cabaret, and looked out.

"Good day," Ralph said, in German, reining up his horse. "Is it
here that I cross the river, for Fontainebleau? They told me, at Le
Chatelet, that it was shorter than going round by the main road."

"Yes, you are right here," the sergeant said. "Have you passes?"

"Oh yes," Ralph said, laughing. "It would have been no easy matter
to get from Frankfort here, without them."

So saying, he pulled out the Prussian permit.

"That is right," the sergeant said. "Your horses look very done."

"We have ridden from Coulommiers through Rozoy, and Normant."

"It would have been an easier road to have gone from Normant
through Melun," the sergeant said. And he took out a map, and
examined it. "No, I see le Chatelet is a more direct line."

"We have time to wait an hour," Ralph said, turning to Percy; "and
it will be better for our beasts. See that they are rubbed down,
and fed."

The sergeant gave a peremptory shout, and the master of the wine
shop ran out. The sergeant pointed to the horses.

"Do you speak French?" he asked Ralph.

"No," Ralph said, "but my son does.

"Aaron, tell him to rub them down, and feed them well; and see to
it, yourself. These dogs are capable of cheating even a horse."

Ralph then entered the cabaret, and called for some bread and
cheese and a bottle of the best wine, with three glasses. The
Prussian sergeant sat down with them, and talked of Germany for an
hour. Then they started again, crossed the river and, an hour and a
half later, entered Melun. Here, as they came in by the road from
Fontainebleau--which was held in force by the Germans--no question
was asked.

They rode their tired horses through the streets, until they saw a
quiet hotel. Riding into the yard, they told the hostler to put up
their horses, and to clean and feed them well; enforcing their
request with a five-franc piece. They then entered the hotel, and
found that they could have beds; as the number of German officers
quartered upon this house was smaller than usual, owing to the
greater portion of the troops having been pushed on, to reinforce
Von der Tann.

It was now half-past five, and was already dusk. They therefore
went at once to the Maire; to whom they presented Gambetta's
letter, and requested his assistance in purchasing a van, with a
pair of good strong horses, at once.

"It will be next to impossible to get horses," the Maire said, "but
I will do my best. I have two carriage horses, of good breed; but I
fear, if I were to let you have them, the Prussians might remark
it."

"We have two first-rate animals," Ralph said, "from Gambetta's own
stables. They have carried us a hundred miles, since breakfast time
yesterday. They are likely to be at least as good as yours are,
only they want a few days' rest. Will you exchange?"

"Certainly," the Maire said, at once. "If any inquiries were to be
made about it, I need make no secret of that transaction.

"As for the covered cart, I will send round at once to those of my
neighbors who have one; and as you are ready to pay for it, and as
the Prussians are requisitioning them without payment, you can rely
upon having one tomorrow morning, ready for your start. I will send
a note round to you, tonight, to tell you where it is, at present."

"We had better go now to the German commandant's office, and get
our passes countersigned. When that is done, we shall be all right
for Versailles."

"Yes, I should advise you to do that," the Maire said. "You will
not have much difficulty. They are civil enough about passes, and
matters of that kind. Will you mention you have seen me?"

"Not unless any question is asked about horses; in which case we
should of course mention that--hearing you had a pair of horses,
and ours requiring rest--we had changed with you."

They now went boldly to the orderly room. An officer was on duty.

"Will you please to visa this for Versailles?" Ralph said, in
German.

The officer took it, glanced at it, and at them.

"The last visa I see was at Meaux, a fortnight since."

"We have been traveling on horseback, since," Ralph said; "and have
had no occasion to have it visaed, as it has always passed us
without trouble. As we are now going to Versailles, with a wagon,
we thought it better to have the pass visaed here."

"Where have you come from, now?"

"From Fontainebleau," Ralph said. "We have been down to Pithiviers,
and I sent off four wagon loads of things from there, for the
frontier."

"Your best way is through Corbeil, and Longjumeau," the officer
said, handing back the paper.

"Thank you, sir," Ralph replied, "that is the way we are intending
to go."

In the evening, the Maire himself came in to look at the horses;
and told them that he had obtained a good light-covered wagon, with
springs, which had been used for the removal of furniture. The
price was a thousand francs.
