
"Stop," exclaimed Frank in a low voice; "I've got no harm except to my
left leg.  It's broken, I think.  There's no use of lifting me till you
get a cab.  I'll go straight home, if--" He fainted as he spoke.

"Run for a cab, Willie," said Fred Auberly.

Willie was off in a moment.  At the same instant, a messenger was
despatched for Dr Offley, and in a short time after that, Frank
Willders was lying on his mother's sofa, with his left leg broken below
the knee.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

MR JAMES AUBERLY.

With a very stiff cravat, and a dreadfully stiff back, and a painfully
stiff aspect, Mr James Auberly sat by the side of a couch and nursed
his sick child.

Stiff and starched and stern though he was, Mr Auberly, had a soft
point in his nature, and this point had been reached at last, for
through all the stiffness and starch there shone on his countenance an
expression of deep anxiety as he gazed at Loo's emaciated form.

Mr Auberly performed the duties of a nurse awkwardly enough, not being
accustomed to such work, but he did them with care and with an evident
effort to please, which made a deep impression on the child's heart.

"Dear papa," she said, after he had given her a drink and arranged her
coverings.  "I want you to do me a favour."  She said this timidly, for
she knew from past experience that her father was not fond of granting
favours, but since her illness he had been so kind to her that she felt
emboldened to make her request.

"I will do it, dear," said the stiff man, bending, morally as well as
physically, as he had never bent before--for the prospect of Loo's death
had been presented to him by the physicians.  "I will do it, dear, if I
can, and if the request be reasonable."

"Oh, then, do forgive Fred, and let him be an artist!" cried Loo,
eagerly stretching out one of her thin hands.

"Hush, darling," said Mr Auberly, with a look of distress; "you must
not excite yourself so.  I have forgiven Fred long ago, and he has
become an artist in spite of my objections."

"Yes, but let him come home, I mean, and be happy with us again as he
used to be, and go to the office with you," said Loo.

Mr Auberly replied somewhat coldly to this that Fred was welcome to
return home if he chose, but that his place in the office had been
filled up.  Besides, it was impossible for him to be both a painter and
a man of business, he said, and added that Loo had better not talk about
such things, because she did not understand them.  All he could say was
that he was willing to receive Fred, if Fred was willing to return.  He
did not say, however, that he was willing to restore Fred to his former
position in regard to his fortune, and as Loo knew nothing about her
brother having been disinherited, she felt that she must be satisfied
with this cold concession.

"Can you not ask some other favour, such as I could grant?" said Mr
Auberly, with a smile, which was not nearly so grim as it used to be
before "the fire."  (The family always talked of the burning of Mr
Auberly's house as "the fire," to the utter repudiation of all other
fires--the great one of monumental fame included.)

Loo meditated some time before replying.

"Oh, yes," she exclaimed suddenly, "I _have_ another favour to ask.  How
stupid of me to forget it.  I want you very much to go and see a fairy
that lives--"

"A fairy, Loo!" said Mr Auberly, while a shade of anxiety crossed his
face.  "You--you are rather weak just now; I must make you be quiet, and
try to sleep, if you talk nonsense, dear."

"It's not nonsense," said Loo, again stretching out the thin hand, which
her father grasped, replaced under the coverings, and held there; "it's
quite true, papa," she continued energetically! "it _is_ a fairy I want
you to go and see--she's a pantomime fairy, and lives somewhere near
London Bridge, and she's been very ill, and is so poor that they say
she's dying for want of good food."

"Who told you about her, Loo?"

"Willie Willders," she replied, "he has been to see her and her father
the clown a good many times."

Mr Auberly, frowned, for the name of Willie Willders did not sound
pleasantly in his ears.

"_Do_ go to see her, pray, dear papa," pleaded Loo with much
earnestness, "and give her some money.  You know that darling mamma
said, just before she was taken away," (the poor child persistently
refused to use the expression "when she died"), "she wanted you to take
me sometimes to see poor people when they were sick, and I've often
thought of that since--especially when I have come to the verse in my
Bible which tells me to `consider the poor,' and I have often--oh, so
very often--longed to go, but you were always so busy, dear papa, that
you never had time, you know," (the stiff man winced a little at this)
"but you seem to have more time now, papa, and although I'm too weak to
go with you, I thought I would ask you to go to see this poor fairy, and
tell her I will go to see her some day--if--if God makes me strong
again."

The stiff man winced still more at this, but it was only a momentary
wince, such as a man gives when he gets a sudden and severe twinge of
toothache.  It instantly passed away.  Still, as in the case of
toothache, it left behind an uneasy impression that there might be
something very sharp and difficult to bear looming in the not distant
future.

Mr Auberly had covered his face with his hand, and leant his elbow on
the head of the couch.  Looking up quickly with a smile--still tinged
with grimness, for evil habits and their results are not to be got rid
of in a day--he said:

"_Well_, Loo, I will go to see this fairy if it will please you; but
somewhere near London Bridge is not a very definite address."

"Oh, but Willie Willders knows it," said Loo.

"But where is Willie Willders?" objected her father.

"Perhaps at home; perhaps at Mr Tippet's place."

"Well, we shall soon find out," said Mr Auberly, rising and ringing the
bell.

Hopkins answered the summons.

Stiff, thin, tall, sedate, powdered, superfine Hopkins, how different
from the personage we saw but lately plunging like a maniac at the
fire-bell!  Could it have been thee, Hopkins?  Is it possible that
anything so spruce, dignified, almost stately, could have fallen so very
low?  We fear it is too true, for human nature not unfrequently
furnishes instances of tremendous contrast, just as material nature
sometimes furnishes the spectacle of the serene summer sky being
engulfed in the black thunderstorm!

"Hopkins!" said Mr Auberly, handing him a slip of paper, "go to this
address and ask for the boy William Willders; if he is there, bring him
here immediately; if not, find out where he is, search for him, and
bring him here without delay.  Take a cab."

Hopkins folded the paper delicately with both his little fingers
projecting very much, as though they wished it to be distinctly
understood that they had no connection whatever with the others, and
would not on any account assist the low-born and hard-working
forefingers and thumbs in such menial employment.  Hopkins's nose
appeared to be affected with something of the same spirit.  Then Hopkins
bowed--that is to say, he broke across suddenly at the middle, causing
his stiff upper man to form an obtuse angle with his rigid legs for one
moment, recovered his perpendicular--and retired.

Oh!  Hopkins, how difficult to believe that thy back was once as round
as a hoop, and thy legs bent at acute angles whilst thou didst lay
violent hands on--well, well; let bygones be bygones, and let us all, in
kindness to thee, learn the song which says--

  "Teach, O teach me to forget."

Hailing a cab with the air of six emperors rolled into one, Hopkins
drove to Mr Tippet's residence, where he learned that Willie had gone
home, so he followed him up, and soon found himself at Notting Hill
before the door of Mrs Willders' humble abode.  The door was opened by
Willie himself, who stared in some surprise at the stately visitor.

"Is William Willders at 'ome?" said Hopkins.

"I rather think he is," replied Willie, with a grin; "who shall I say
calls on him--eh?  You'd better send up your card."

Hopkins frowned, but, being a good-natured man, he immediately smiled,
and said he would walk in.

"I think," said Willie, interposing his small person in the way, "that
you'd as well stop where you are, for there's a invalid in the
drawing-room, and all the other rooms is engaged 'cept the kitchen,
which of course I could not show _you_ into.  Couldn't you deliver your
message?  I could manage to carry it if it ain't too heavy."

In a state of uncertainty as to how far this was consistent with his
dignity, Hopkins hesitated for a moment, but at length delivered his
message, with which Willie returned to the parlour.

Here, on the little sofa, lay the tall form of Frank Willders, arrayed
in an old dressing-gown, and with one of his legs bandaged up and
motionless.  His face was pale, and he was suffering great pain, but a
free-and-easy smile was on his lips, for beside him sat a lady and a
young girl, the latter of whom was afflicted with strong sympathy, but
appeared afraid to show it.  Mrs Willders, with a stocking and
knitting-wires in her hands, sat on a chair at the head of the bed,
looking anxious, but hopeful and mild.  An open Bible which lay on a
small table at her side, showed how she had been engaged before the
visitors entered.

"My good sir," said the lady, with much earnestness of voice and manner,
"I assure you it grieves me to the heart to see you lying in this state,
and I'm quite sure it grieves Emma too, and all your friends.  When I
think of the risks you run and the way you dash up these dreadful fire--
fire--things--what-d'ye-call-ums.  What _do_ you call them?"

"Fire-escapes, ma'am," answered Frank, with a smile.

"Ah, fire-escapes (how you ever come down them alive is a mystery to me,
I'm sure!)  But as I was saying, it makes one shudder to think of; and--
and--how does your leg feel _now_?" said Miss Tippet, forgetting what
she had intended to say.

"Pretty well," replied Frank; "the doctor tells me it has broken without
splintering, and that I'll be all right in a few weeks, and fit for duty
again."

"Fit for duty, young man!" exclaimed Miss Tippet; "do you mean to say
that you will return to your dreadful profession when you recover?  Have
you not received warning enough?"

"Why, madam," said Frank, "some one must look after the fires, you know,
else London would be in ashes in a few months; and I like the work."

"Like the work!" cried Miss Tippet, in amazement; "like to be almost
smoked to death, and burned alive, and tumbled off roofs, and get upset
off what's-its-names, and fall down fire--fire--things, and break all
your legs and arms!"

"Well--no, I don't like all that," said Frank, laughing; "but I like the
vigour and energy that are called forth in the work, and I like the
object of the work, which is to save life and property.  Why," exclaimed
Frank enthusiastically, "it has all the danger and excitement of a
soldier's life without the bloody work, and with better ends in view."

"Nay, nay, Frank," said the peaceful Mrs Willders, "you must not say
`better ends,' because it is a great and glorious thing to defend one's
native land."

"A very just observation," said Miss Tippet, nodding approval.

"Why, mother, who would have expected to hear _you_ standing up for the
red-coats in this fashion?" said Frank.

"I stand up for the blue-jackets too," observed Mrs Willders meekly;
"they fight for their country as well."

"True, mother," rejoined Frank; "but I did not refer to ultimate ends, I
only thought of the immediate results in connection with those engaged.
The warrior fights, and, in so doing, destroys life and property.  The
fireman fights, and in doing so protects and preserves both."

"Hear! hear!" interrupted Willie; "but the copy-book says `Comparisons
are _odiows_!' don't it?  Mother, here's a fathom and two inches or so
of humanity as wants me to go with him to Mr Auberly.  I s'pose Frank
can get along without me for a little while--eh?"

"Certainly, my son; why does he want you?"

"Don't know.  P'raps he's goin' to offer to make me his secretary.  But
you don't seem at all alarmed at the prospect of my being carried off by
a flunkey."

"You'll come back, dearie, I doubt not."

"Don't you?  Oh, very well; then I'll just look after myself.  If I
don't return, I'll advertise myself in the _Times_.  Good-bye."

Willie returned to the door and announced that he was ready to go.

"But where is William?" asked Hopkins.

"Mister William Willders stands before you," said the boy, placing his
hand on his heart and making a bow.  "Come now, Long-legs," he added,
seizing Hopkins by the arm and pushing him downstairs and into the cab.
Leaping in after him he shut the door with a bang.  "Now then, cabby,
all right, Beverly Square, full split; sixpence extra if you do it
within the half!"

Away they went, and in a few seconds were in the Mall driving at a
rattling pace.

"See that house?" asked Willie, so suddenly as to startle Hopkins, who
was quite overwhelmed by the vigour and energy of his young companion.

"Eh! which! the one with the porch before the door?"

"No, no, stoopid! the old red-brick house with the limbs of a vine all
over the front of it, and the skeleton of a Virginia creeper on the
wall."

"Yes, I see it," said Hopkins, looking out.

"Ah, a friend o' mine lives there.  I'm on wisitin' terms there, I am.
Now then, mind your eye, pump-handle," cried Willie; "the turn's rather
sharp--hallo!"

As they swung round into the Bayswater Road the cab came in contact with
a butcher's cart, which, being the lighter vehicle, was nearly upset.
No serious damage resulted, however, and soon after they drew up at the
door of the house next Mr Auberly's; for that gentleman still occupied
the residence of his friend.

"Master Willders," said Hopkins, ushering him into the presence of Mr
Auberly, who still sat at the head of the couch.

Willie nodded to Loo and then to her father.

"Boy," said the latter, beckoning Willie to approach, "my daughter
wishes me to go and visit a poor family near London Bridge.  She tells
me you know their name and address."

"The fairy, you know," said Loo, explaining.

"Ah, the Cattleys," answered Willie.

"Yes," resumed Mr Auberly.  "Will you conduct me to their abode?"

In some surprise Willie said that he would be happy to do so, and then
asked Loo how she did.

While Mr Auberly was getting ready, Willie was permitted to converse
with Loo and Mrs Rose, who was summoned to attend her young mistress.
Presently Mr Auberly returned, bade Mrs Rose be very careful of the
invalid, and then set off with Willie.

At first the boy felt somewhat awed by the remarkably upright figure
that stalked in silence at his side, but as they continued to thread
their way through the streets he ventured to attempt a little
conversation.

"Weather's improvin', sir," said Willie, looking up.  "It is," replied
Mr Auberly, looking down in surprise at the boldness of his small
guide.

"Good for the country, sir," observed Willie.

Mr Auberly, being utterly ignorant of rural matters, thought it best to
say nothing to this.

We may add that Willie knew just as little (or as much), and had only
ventured the remark because he had often heard it made in every possible
variety of weather, and thought that it would be a safe observation,
replete, for all he knew to the contrary, with hidden wisdom.

There was silence after this for some time.

"D'you know Mr Tippet well, sir?" inquired Willie suddenly.

"Ye--yes; oh yes, I know him _pretty_ well."

"Ah, he's a first-rater," observed Willie, with a look of enthusiasm;
"you've no notion what a trump he is.  Did you hear ever of his noo
machine for makin' artificial butter?"

"No," said Mr Auberly, somewhat impatiently.

"Ah, it's a wonderful invention, that is, sir."

