
"Okematan never speaks till he is sure--waugh!"

"H'm!  I'm not so sure o' _that_," muttered the boy to himself.

A few seconds put the matter at rest, for the voice of the Highlander
was heard, as they cautiously drew near, saying--

"Iss it _you_?"

"I think it is!" replied Archie; "why, man, where are you?  I can see
nothing."

"Wow! man, but I am gled," said Fergus; "just follow your nose, Archie,
an' you'll be all right."

Another moment, and the canoe was checked by Fergus, who had stepped
into the water to prevent its being injured against the stones.

"You better gie me the paddle, Archie, an' sit beside Little Bill.  It
iss tired o' paddlin' you will be by now."

"But where is Dan?" asked Archie as he complied with this request.

"That iss more than I can tell you, boy, but he's safe enough I doubt
not, for I heard him gie a cheer as he jamp into the wuds, an' it's
beyont the power o' a mortal Red-skin to chase an active man on a night
like this."

Thereupon Fergus gave a brief account of all that had happened after the
canoes were parted--as far as he knew it--and then an earnest council of
war was held as to what was the best course to pursue in the
circumstances.  Being the youngest brave, (for Little Bill was ignored
in this matter), Archie was invited to give his opinion first.  This was
well, because, being enthusiastic and irrepressible, he would probably
have given his opinion first at any rate.

"My opinion is," he said, promptly, "that we turn right-about, and go
back to find Dan, even though we should have to fight the whole
Saulteaux nation!"

"That iss well spoken," said Fergus with something of sarcasm in his
tone; "but as we hev only two guns amang us, a tomahawk, an' a knife or
two, without any claymores at all, I would like to know what we are to
fecht with?  Moreover, what is to become o' Little Bill when we are
fechtin'?  It iss _my_ opeenion that we put the command o' our
expeedition in the hands of Okematan, an' leave him to do what he thinks
best."

"Arch-ee is a true brave," said the Indian, "but he is young.  When the
wrinkles of age are on his brow he will be a great chief.  Okematan's
heart is with him to turn back and fight, but wisdom says, go to the
Settlement, get men, and return as fast as you can."

"Then the sooner we set about it the better, for when wan's mind is made
up, talk iss only lost time."

With that he shoved the canoe off into the stream, and paddling was
resumed with redoubled vigour.

They proceeded in silence till the blush of rosy day in the east
dispelled the intense darkness.  Then, pulling ashore, they kindled a
small fire, and, while the chief re-gummed the seams of the canoe, which
leaked a little, the others prepared and ate a hasty breakfast.

They were still engaged with this meal, and discussing, not very
hopefully, the possibility of reaching Red River Settlement and
returning in time to render relief to Dan--supposing that he should
require relief--when the sound of fast-dipping paddles was heard beyond
the bend of the river just below them.

Another moment, and four large canoes, each manned by eight men, swept
into view, their red sides glowing in the morning sun, and their
occupants driving the water behind them in foam by the vigour of their
strokes.

At first it was supposed that this was another band of Indians
proceeding, possibly, to join that from which they had just escaped; but
the fugitives were speedily undeceived by the appearance of the men as
they drew nearer.

"I would be thinkin' that the man in the bow o' the first canoe is
Antoine Dechamp," said Fergus, as he stood peering over the bushes at
the advancing brigade.

"I'm sure it's Dechamp.  I'd know him a mile off," said Archie.

"Ay, an' they hev got sight o' the smoke of our fire, too," added
Fergus.

"It is Dechamp," said Okematan, decisively, as he stepped into the open
and held up his hand to the new arrivals.

A cheer was raised by those in the canoes when the Cree chief was
recognised, and the flotilla, coming on at full speed, soon reached the
bank.

Explanations were speedily exchanged, and our fugitives learned that
news had been carried to the Settlement of the approach of the very band
of Saulteaux whom they had encountered, and a band of fiery young men,
led by Dechamp, had come out to meet them for the purpose of asking them
whether they meant their visit to be friendly, or whether they wished to
measure their strength with the men of Red River; as, if so, a sample
had come out for the express purpose of accommodating them!

On hearing the news that Okematan and Fergus had to give, the men--most
of whom were half-breeds connected with Cree families--gave a cheer and
voted for an immediate advance against the Saulteaux.  This, after very
brief palaver, was unanimously agreed to.

"You'll not object to return with us, I suppose?" asked Dechamp of
Fergus.

"Iss it objectin' to a fecht you will mean?"

"Well--it's not unlikely that there may be something of the sort going
if we meet."

"Did you ever hear of a McKay objectin' to a fecht, Antoine?"

Dechamp laughed.

"Well," he said, "I know Okematan won't object to turn back, and show us
the way to the place where he met the reptiles."

"Okematan was on his way to seek for help," said the Indian quietly.

Every one being agreed on this point, the whole band re-embarked, and
proceeded on their way up the river.  They advanced rapidly, for
although the stream was against them it was so sluggish as to be
scarcely appreciable, and by keeping near to the banks they were not
delayed by it at all.

Towards the afternoon the place where the struggle had taken place was
reached, but no Saulteaux were to be seen.  They had taken their
departure, and, from the fact that several small things belonging to
them had been left behind, it seemed not unlikely that they had obtained
information of the expedition sent out against them, and had departed in
haste.

"It iss of no use," said Fergus, when this became evident, "for us to
keep up a stern-chase after them.  They have got too much of a start, so
it seems to me, boys, we could not do better than follow up the tracks
of Daniel Davidson an' make sure that he has got clear away from them."

To this proposal there was much objection at first, for it involved some
of the party quitting the canoes and journeying no one could tell how
far through the woods on foot.

"Besides," said one, "Dan is quite able to take care of himself, and if
he got off in the dark, as you tell us he did, there's not a man in the
Saulteaux nation could come up with him either in dark or light."

"That may be all fery true, my frund," returned Fergus, "nevertheless
I'm goin' to follow up his track, for it is sure that he took no
proveesions wi' him, an' it was too dark for me to see if he escaped wi'
his gun.  Dan is a strong man, but the strongest man will be findin'
himself in diffeeculties without grub.  It iss followin' up his trail I
will be doin', wi' some proveesions on my back, if wan or two o' you
will go wuth me."

"I will go," said Archie Sinclair, promptly, "if some o' you will
promise to take care o' Little Bill."

A laugh greeted this offer, and half-a-dozen of the men at once agreed
to take good care of the invalid.

"Moreover," said Dechamp, "whoever goes need not go further than the
Pine Portage.  The party on foot will have found out, before the canoes
reach that, whether Dan has got clear off, and they can rejoin the
canoes at the Portage.  So, Fergus, I'll join your party too.  Who else
will go?"

Okematan and Jacques Bourassin here stepped forward, but none of the
others seemed disposed to undertake the tramp.

"There iss enough of us--whatever," remarked the Highlander as he and
the others put some provisions into their wallets and shouldered their
guns.  "You will be our leader, Antoine Dechamp.  It iss yourself that
knows the outs an' ins o' the land better than any of us--except
Okematan, may be--but I dar' say he's not as weel acquaint wi' the Red
River woods as wi' the plains."

The chief bowed a dignified assent to this proposition, which, however,
he hardly understood.

Dechamp, being accustomed to lead, accepted the position at once,
stepped off on the trail of Dan, which had been made distinctly visible
when he went crashing through the underwood the day before.  Fergus
followed, and Bourassin came third.

"Now, then," said Archie, looking into the chief's face, "come along,
Oke.  You and I will form the rearguard, which is the position of danger
and honour in warfare o' this sort--at least if it isn't, it ought to
be.  Take care o' yourself, Little Bill.  We'll soon find Dan.
Good-bye."

So saying, the rearguard of the column vanished into the forest, and the
others, returning to their canoes, began to descend the river.

Archie was nearer the mark than he imagined when he said they would soon
find Dan.  The distance which it had taken our hero so long to traverse
in the dark was comparatively short, and the light was only beginning to
fade when they came to the edge of the wood where Dan had spent the
night.

Dechamp, of course, was first to come upon his encampment, and the
instant he entered it he observed the open space giving a view of the
plain beyond.  He also saw the wolf sitting on his haunches about two
hundred yards off.

Quick as the lightning flash his gun flew to his shoulder.  Dechamp was
a first-rate shot.  He fired, and, as we have seen, the wolf stretched
himself in death upon the plain.

Thus was Dan Davidson rescued at almost the eleventh hour.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

HOME-COMING AND BARGAINING.

The return of the hunting party to Red River Settlement was an
illustration of the uncertainty of all human affairs.  They went forth
rejoicing in all the strength of youth and manhood; they returned in
sorrow, with one at least of the strong men reduced to the last stage of
weakness.

We would not be understood to refer to this in a pessimistic spirit.  On
the contrary, the optimistic view suggests the very same idea of
uncertainty, though in a pleasant aspect; for does not many a day that
dawns in cloud and rain progress to brilliant sunshine? while equally
true it is that many a life which begins in sorrow culminates in joy.

Okematan, who was intensely philosophical and inquisitive, had been
carrying on a semi-speculative conversation with Billie on this very
subject while descending the Red River towards Prairie Cottage--much to
the perplexity of the invalid, who scarce knew how to answer the chief's
queries, and greatly to the interest of Archie, who wondered at Little
Bill's powers of reply.

"By the way," said Archie, "when you two have settled that knotty point,
will you tell me who is to take the news of Dan's accident to Mrs
Davidson?  We'll have to carry him up to the house, you know, on a
blanket 'tween two poles, an' she'll be sure to think that he's dead, or
has been killed, an' that'll half-kill _her_, it'll give her such a
fright.  Somebody will have to go on ahead and tell her."

"I will, if you like," said Billie; "if you'll only carry me up to the
garden gate and set me down, I can easily walk up the path."

This proposal had just been agreed to when the whole flotilla of canoes
paddled up alongside of the bank close under Prairie Cottage.

It was evening at the time.  The Davidson family was at supper, and as
the canoes had approached very quietly, with Dan in the leading one, no
person stood on the bank to welcome them.

"It's as well they don't know," said Archie, jumping on shore.  "Now,
Little Bill, come along, and I'll carry you to the gate while they're
arranging matters for Dan."

Seated at the foot of the family table was Peter Davidson.  He could see
the garden path through the window.

"Hallo! mother," he exclaimed, dropping his knife and fork, "there is
Little Bill or his ghost coming up the track."

"Impossible, Peter," said the good lady, with, however, a look of
anxiety which showed she believed that, or something else, to be quite
possible.

"Look for yourself, mother," cried Peter, springing up and running out.

"It _is_ Billie," said Jessie, reflecting her mother's anxiety; "what
can have brought them back so soon?"

Peter re-entered at the moment with Little Bill in his arms.  He set the
boy down and again ran out.

Taking the widow's trembling hand in both of his, Billie addressed her
as "mother," like the rest of the family.

"Dan has been hurt," he said, in his soft way, "and he's come home to
get well.  They will bring him up directly."

"Is he too ill to walk?" asked the widow.

"No, not too ill--but too weak," answered the matter-of-fact Billie.
"Indeed he is not ill at all, but he has lost a _heap_ of blood, for
they shot him."

Jessie waited to hear no more, but immediately followed Peter, and the
small servant Louise followed suit; leaving the widow in a half-fainting
condition with the boy.  But she did not remain long thus, for just then
old Duncan McKay entered by the back-door.

"It will be bad news you've been hearin', Mrs Davidson," he said, in
some surprise, pouring out a glass of water as he spoke, and
considerately handing it to the widow.

"Yes--O yes!  I've just heard that Dan has been shot."

"Bless my soul!" exclaimed the horrified old man, almost falling into a
chair.  "Iss--iss he tead?"

"No, thank God--only weak from loss of blood.  He'll be here directly."

"That iss goot news--whatever; for as long as there's life there's
hope."

Trying to comfort himself, as well as his friend, with this truism, the
old man staggered out of the house in search of those who had gone
before.

Soon a sad procession was seen coming up the path, led by Archie.  Four
men carried Dan on a rudely-extemporised litter.  His bloodless face and
lips gave him the appearance of death, but the glow in his eyes told of
still unexhausted life.

"I'll be all right, mother," he said feebly, as they laid him on his
bed.  "I only want food and rest.  Thank God--home at last!"

As he spoke, a quiet step was heard, and Elspie, with a face as pale as
his own, knelt by his bedside and took his hand.

That touch was the first impulse the youth received towards decided
recovery.  Old McKay perceived the change in his countenance.

"Yes, yes! ay, ay!" he exclaimed, pacing violently up and down the room,
"he wants nothin' but victuals an' rest--steaks an' shops, and plenty o'
whusky an' water--hot.  Don't be croodin' about him an' botherin' him.
Come away, and leave him to his mother, an' send for the doctor.  Has no
wan gone for him yet?"

"Yes; Peter has just started.  I heard the clatter of his horse's feet,"
said Jessie.

"It iss not the doctor that will put him right, whatever," muttered the
old man, as he left the room, followed by most of the family.

And the doctor himself held the same opinion; for he said, on returning
to the reception hall after seeing his patient--

"It will be a considerable time before he recovers, for the fountain of
life had been well-nigh drained when he fortunately extemporised that
tourniquet.  But there's no fear of him: all that he wants is food,
rest, and peace of mind."

"An' whusky, doctor," added old McKay.  "Don't forget the best pheesic;
an' I hev goot store of it, too, in my cellar at Ben Nevis."

"I'm not so sure about the whisky, Mr McKay," returned the doctor with
a laugh.  "I think we shall manage to pull him through without that."

The other requisites for recovery were applied without stint at Prairie
Cottage; for, despite the misfortune which had attended the cultivation
of the soil, the Davidsons had a little money, which enabled them to buy
provisions and other necessaries, obtainable from the Hudson Bay
Company, and thus tide over the disastrous year in greater comfort than
fell to the lot of many of the other settlers.

Thus Dan was well looked after.  His brother Peter found the food--at
least much of it--on the prairie and in the woods; his sister Jessie
cooked it; Louise helped, looked on, and learned; home afforded rest;
Elspie supplied the peace of mind--at least as much of it as it was
possible for a fellow-mortal to supply; and his mother superintended
all.  Add to this that Archie Sinclair cheered him with miscellaneous
gossip; that Little Bill read to him, or entertained him with serious
talk and grave speculation; that Andre Morel and his sister often
entertained him with song; that on such occasions Jenkins, the sailor,
