
"You will help me most by keeping entirely still," answered Shuffles,
as another fierce blast struck the sail, and required the skipper's
whole attention. Again the cutting spray blinded him, though, as any
other skilful boatman can, he was able to comprehend by the feeling the
motion of the boat.

"Shall I wipe your eyes again?" asked the young lady.

"If you please."

Gently, her eyes beaming with interest and sympathy, the lady wiped the
drops of water from his eyes. Though her companion said nothing, he did
not seem to regard the operation with much favor. Very likely he
thought it was quite unnecessary to wipe the skipper's eyes at every
fresh gust. Again he proposed to change places with her; but Shuffles
peremptorily forbade the movement, either because he thought the young
lady could wipe his eyes better than the young man, or because he was
afraid some accident would happen in making the change.

The storm rather increased than diminished in violence, and for an hour
Shuffles held on his course. The steamer had gone into Friedrichshafen,
though she had been obliged, in some of the fiercest blasts, to throw
her head up into the wind, and hold on till its fierceness subsided a
little. After every gust, the young lady wiped the eyes of her gallant
preserver, for as such she regarded him; and such he doubtless was, for
the boat would have gone to the bottom long before without his skilful
assistance. She soon learned to perform the kindly office without a
word, though the captain did not fail to thank her every time.

The boat did not make rapid progress; by keeping her close-hauled,
continually easing off the sheet, and touching her up, she made
considerable lee way. At the end of two hours, and when it was
beginning to grow dark, Shuffles found himself nearing the shore on the
north side of the lake. He must either make a harbor or go about on the
other tack. It was impossible to land on the exposed shore, against
which the waves were beating in the madness of their fury. He was at
least ten miles above the port to which he and his passenger wished to
go. Directly ahead of him was a point of land, which projected out into
the lake. Beyond it there was an indentation in the shore, within which
he might possibly find a partial shelter from the fury of the storm. It
was doubtful whether he could weather the point; but he did not wish to
tack, and stand farther out into the lake. The night was coming on, and
all his skill and courage could not insure the safety of the boat in
the darkness and on unknown waters.

Hauling in the sheet a little, he braced the craft sharp up, and
struggled with the elements to clear the headland. He looked anxiously
into the green waters for any shoals on the lee bow. Fortunately there
was no obstruction in his path, and the boat weathered the headland,
though without the fraction of a point to spare. Easing off the sheet,
he ran the boat into the bay, and in a few moments she was slightly
sheltered by the shore to the eastward. This friendly relief enabled
him to keep her away a little, and run for the head of the bay, where
he perceived an opening, which looked like the mouth of a river.

No longer cramped by the helm and the sheet, the boat flew on her
course, and Shuffles presently satisfied himself that the opening he
saw was really the mouth of a stream. He realized that the battle had
been fought and won, but he said nothing to his fellow voyagers, who
were silent and anxious. On sped the boat, and as the waves became less
furious, he gave her more sheet, and she darted into the still waters
of the river, which was not more than a hundred feet wide, and with
banks high enough to afford perfect protection to the storm-shaken
craft. As she rushed into the quiet stream, Shuffles let go the sheet,
and the boat gradually lost her headway. Putting the helm down, he ran
her gently upon the shore, and the grating of her keel upon the
gravelly bank was sweet music to the ears of the voyagers.

"You are all right now," said Shuffles, as he rose from his seat in the
stern sheets.

Almost for the first time since he boarded the sailboat, he looked into
the face of the young lady. Her clothing was thoroughly drenched by the
spray, and her face was moist as though she were a mermaid just emerged
from the depths of the ocean. But even in her present plight Shuffles
saw that she was a very pretty girl. She was shivering with cold, and
it was necessary to do something for her comfort.

"We are really safe," replied the lady, with a grateful smile. "We owe
our lives to you, sir."

"We are exceedingly grateful to you for your service," added the young
man.

"I am very glad to have had an opportunity to serve you," replied
Shuffles, addressing his words to the young lady.

"I shall remember you, and be grateful to you as long as I live,"
continued the lady, warmly, as she bestowed upon him an earnest look,
which a skilful observer would have interpreted as one of admiration.

"But where are we?" asked the young man.

"I don't know, except that we must be ten or a dozen miles to the
eastward of Friedrichshafen," answered Shuffles.

"What shall we do?" asked his male companion.

"There are probably houses not far distant. You had better go on shore,
and when you see one, let us know it."

"Perhaps you would prefer to go," suggested the young man, glancing at
the lady.

"Having worked hard in the boat, I prefer to rest a little while,"
replied Shuffles.

"Go, Sir William," added the lady, reproachfully.

Sir William! Captain Shuffles was rather taken aback to find he had
been sending a young baronet to look for a house; but then he regarded
himself as the peer of any baronet, and he did not apologize.

Sir William leaped over the bow of the boat to the shore, and climbed
up the bank. He cast a glance back at the companions of his voyage, and
then disappeared.

"I think you must be a sailor, sir," said the young lady, when her
friend had gone.

"I am, miss. I am; at least I ought to be, since I am the captain of a
ship."

"A captain--and so young! O, I know what you are!" exclaimed she. "You
belong to the American Academy Ship."

"I do."

"But I did not see you at the emperor's ball in Paris."

"No. I was absent on duty."

"I had the pleasure of dancing with a captain on that occasion."

"I was appointed on the first of this month," explained Shuffles.

"I know your uniform very well; and I am glad to see you. I am sure you
are worthy of your high position."

"Thank you, miss. You are very kind."

"I should have been at the bottom of Lake Constance at this moment, if
you had been less gallant and skilful."

"Perhaps not," replied Shuffles, wondering all the time who the young
lady was.

The hail of Sir William from the bank above interrupted the
conversation. The boat had grounded a rod from the bank of the stream,
and Shuffles gallantly bore the fair passenger to the shore in his
arms. Assisting her up the bank, the party soon reached a cottage a
short distance from the mouth of the river. The young nobleman
imperiously ordered great fires and refreshments. He spoke German
fluently, and his commands were promptly obeyed. The rain now poured
down in floods, and the party congratulated themselves upon escaping
this added discomfort.




CHAPTER XV.

LADY FEODORA AND SIR WILLIAM.


Hour after hour the storm-beaten party sat before a blazing fire in the
cottage of the German peasant. Their clothing was dry, and they were
quite comfortable. The only thing that disturbed them was the anxiety
of their friends at Friedrichshafen. Possibly something else disturbed
the young baronet, for the lady, ingenuous enough to talk and act as
she felt, seemed to be delighted with her gallant preserver. After they
entered the house, Shuffles heard Sir William call her Lady Feodora.
She also belonged to the nobility, and he soon learned that she was the
youngest daughter of the Earl of Blankville. Sir William's father was
dead, and though only eighteen, he was a baronet. They were travelling
with their friends.

Lady Feodora declared that she adored sailors, and Sir William was
afraid she spoke only the truth. They had been affianced by their
parents; but the young lady did not seem to feel a very deep interest
in the baronet; and on the other hand, she did seem to feel a deep
interest in the commander of the Young America. His courage, skill, and
energy had made a deep impression upon her; and the signal service he
had rendered called forth all her gratitude. She was only sixteen, and
perhaps had not judgment enough to see that it was perilous to cast
pleasant glances at a young American tar, and might disturb the
calculations of her prudent parents.

The wind howled, and the rain poured all night long; but the party were
in comfortable circumstances. They were too thankful to have escaped
the perils of the storm to complain of the rudeness of their quarters.
It was not possible to go to their friends either by water or by land,
till the tempest had abated, and they were disposed to make the best of
their situation.

"I was not aware that they had such heavy storms on these fresh-water
lakes," said Shuffles, after they had partaken of the simple fare set
before them by their host.

"Nor I," replied Lady Feodora. "If I had, I should not have gone so far
in an open boat. We went across the lake to Romanshorn, but Sir William
said he knew all about a boat."

"So I do, under ordinary circumstances," replied the baronet, rather
nettled at the implied censure.

"It was a very savage storm," added Shuffles.

"I never saw anything like it, even in the Channel," said Feodora. "But
you seemed to handle the boat just as easily as though the wind came
only in zephyrs."

She bestowed another glance of admiration upon the modest tar, who
explained that he had always been used to boats from his childhood, and
he felt more at home on the deck of a ship than he did in the parlor of
his father's house. They talked of the perils of the day till midnight.
A bed had been provided for the lady, but the two young gentlemen lay
on the floor before the fire. In the morning the clouds broke away, and
the sun rose bright and clear. The calm that follows the storm
prevailed upon the lake. The party ate their simple breakfast, and Sir
William paid liberally for their accommodations at the cottage.

The manner of reaching Friedrichshafen was thoroughly discussed. They
could go to Lindau, and take the steamer, or proceed in the sail-boat.
Sir William proposed to take Feodora with him, while Shuffles sailed
the boat back alone. The lady protested. She was not afraid to sail
back in the boat, if the captain would manage it; and this arrangement
was finally agreed upon, though the baronet was not at all pleased with
it. They embarked, and a little breeze came to their aid; but it was
eleven o'clock when they reached their destination.

"I do not know at what hotel our ship's company is stopping," said
Shuffles, as they landed.

"My friends are at the Deutschen Haus; and you must come there with
us," replied Lady Feodora. "My father and mother are there, and they
will be delighted to see you."

"Perhaps our people are there," added Shuffles.

They walked to the hotel named, and found that the American party was
there. As they approached the house, an elderly lady and gentleman
rushed down from the veranda, and grasped Feodora in their arms at the
same moment. They were her parents, and wept tears of joy over her safe
return.

"We thought you were lost," said the fond mother.

"I have sent boats in every direction to look for you," added the
father. "Mr. Lowington, the principal of the Marine Academy, who is
here with his students, assured me you were safe."

"I am safe, father, thanks to Captain Shuffles," replied Feodora,
turning to the young commander.

"His Lordship, the Earl of Blankville," interposed Sir William,
introducing the hero of the day.

The gentleman grasped the hand of Shuffles, and expressed his gratitude
in the warmest terms.

"We have heard part of the story, and we watched the boat till it
disappeared in the distance," added his lordship. "It was a terrible
hour for us all."

"Worse than death," sighed the countess, as she pressed her daughter to
her heart again.

"Mr. Lowington assured us that the young man who had so daringly thrown
himself into the boat would certainly take her to the shore. But we
could only hope, rather than believe."

"It was a heavy blow," said Shuffles.

"It was fearful!" exclaimed the earl, with a shudder, as he thought of
the anxiety and terror they had endured. "I owe you an everlasting debt
of gratitude."

"I only did what the occasion seemed to require of me, and I am as
thankful as any one can be, that I succeeded in getting the boat to the
shore," answered Shuffles.

"It was remarkably fortunate that you were at hand, for I don't believe
there is another person on the continent of Europe who could have
managed the matter so cleverly."

"Really, I think your lordship over-estimates my services."

By this time Mr. Lowington and the young America's party came out to
welcome Shuffles. They astonished him by giving three rousing cheers,
and the captain was again on the top of the wave of popularity. Mr.
Lowington said he was satisfied, at the time of it, that he would take
the boat to the shore, and save both of his passengers, so great was
his confidence in Shuffles. The earl acknowledged that his prediction
had been fully verified.

"You had a rough time, Shuffles," said the principal.

"Rather, sir;" and the affair was discussed at length.

"We have seen the town; but we cannot leave by train for Ulm till two
this afternoon. If there is anything here you wish to see, you must
improve your time," added Mr. Lowington.

"What is there to be seen?"

"Nothing but the Chateau of the King of Wuertemberg, and some old
buildings. But Mr. Mapps is about to give a lecture, from which you
shall be excused if you desire it."

"No, sir; I think I will hear the lecture," replied the captain, as he
followed the principal into the coffee-room, where all the students had
collected.

Lord Blankville's party had been informed of the lecture, and desired
to attend. Shuffles had hardly seated himself when they entered the
room. Lady Feodora had hastily made her toilet; but she looked like a
queen, and the captain could hardly believe she was the same person.
Those who had attended the emperor's ball in Paris recognized her, and
paid their respects. Ben Duncan declared she was as "stunning" as when
she wore her white ball-dress. Shuffles gave her a seat, and had the
courage to take one by her side, before Sir William could secure the
enviable position.

"Wuertemberg is a kingdom belonging to the Germanic Confederation," the
professor began. "It has an area of about seventy-eight hundred square
miles, varying but a few miles from that of the State of Massachusetts.
It has a population of one million seven hundred thousand, which during
the last ten years has diminished on account of the large emigration to
the United States. The government is an hereditary monarchy, and, like
so many English stock companies, 'limited.' Freedom of person and
property, liberty of speech, and liberty of conscience, are guaranteed
by the constitution; but liberty of the press, like the monarchy and
the stock companies, is also 'limited.' The legislature is composed of
two houses, the higher one being made up of princes and nobles. The
present king is Charles I., whose wife is the daughter of Czar Nicholas
I. of Russia. The royal family is quite numerous in its various
branches, and is connected by marriage with many of the royal houses of
Europe. The former Duchy of Wuertemberg was made a kingdom in 1806, by
Napoleon, after having been enlarged by the annexation of several
smaller states. Stuttgart, the capital, is also the largest town,
containing a population of fifty thousand. I close this lecture, which
I think has not been a very tedious one, with this remarkable fact: In
1840 there was not to be found an individual in the kingdom, above the
age of ten years, who could not read and write."

"Is that all?" asked Lady Feodora.

"That's all this time; but sometimes we have to take it for a couple of
hours," laughed Shuffles.

"I'm sure I wish he had said more. What do you do now?"

"We go to Ulm at two this afternoon. After that we go to Stuttgart,
Carlsruhe, Baden, and then down the Rhine."

"We must go with them, pa," added she, turning to the earl.

"We shall be ready to go to Ulm this afternoon in the same train,"
replied her father.

"I am delighted!" exclaimed Feodora. "I hope we shall go with you down
the Rhine."

Sir William, for some reason or other, did not hope so. In fact, he was
rather dumpy and morose.

"Possibly you will," suggested Shuffles.

"What a happy life you must lead, captain!"

"Perhaps you would not think so, if you were at sea with us, when we
have to stand watch in the night and the storm, whether it blows high
or blows low."

"But you are the captain."

"I was a seaman. It is nearly an hour till dinner time; and I think I
shall take a run down to the Chateau of the king. Of course you have
been there," said the captain, suggestively.

"I have, but I should be delighted to go again."

A carriage was called by the earl. It had seats for only four, and
