more of the lake till April; and this was to have been my first day upon
it!  Don't you pity me, Primrose?"

"O, to be sure!" answered Primrose, laughing.  "But, for your comfort,
we will listen to another of your old stories, such as you told us
under the porch, and down in the hollow, by Shadow Brook.  Perhaps I
shall like them better now, when there is nothing to do, than while
there were nuts to be gathered, and beautiful weather to enjoy."

Hereupon, Periwinkle, Clover, Sweet Fern, and as many others of the
little fraternity and cousinhood as were still at Tanglewood, gathered
about Eustace, and earnestly besought him for a story.  The student
yawned, stretched himself, and then, to the vast admiration of the
small people, skipped three times hack and forth over the top of a
chair, in order, as he explained to them, to set his wits in motion.

"Well, well, children," said he, after these preliminaries, "since you
insist, and Primrose has set her heart upon it, I will see what can be
done for you.  And, that you may know what happy days there were before
snowstorms came into fashion, I will tell you a story of the oldest of
all old times, when the world was as new as Sweet Fern's bran-new
humming-top.  There was then but one season in the year, and that was
the delightful summer; and but one age for mortals, and that was
childhood."

"I never heard of that before," said Primrose.

"Of course, you never did," answered Eustace.  "It shall be a story of
what nobody but myself ever dreamed of,--a Paradise of children,--and
how, by the naughtiness of just such a little imp as Primrose here, it
all came to nothing."

So Eustace Bright sat down in the chair which he had just been skipping
over, took Cowslip upon his knee, ordered silence throughout the
auditory, and began a story about a sad naughty child, whose name was
Pandora, and about her playfellow Epimetheus.  You may read it, word for
word, in the pages that come next.



THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN.

Long, long ago, when this old world was in its tender infancy, there was
a child, named Epimetheus, who never had either father or mother; and,
that he might not be lonely, another child, fatherless and motherless
like himself, was sent from a far country, to live with him, and be his
playfellow and helpmate.  Her name was Pandora.

The first thing that Pandora saw, when she entered the cottage where
Epimetheus dwelt, was a great box.  And almost the first question which
she put to him, after crossing the threshold, was this,--

"Epimetheus, what have you in that box?"

"My dear little Pandora," answered Epimetheus, "that is a secret, and
you must be kind enough not to ask any questions about it.  The box was
left here to be kept safely, and I do not myself know what it contains."

"But, who gave it to you?"  asked Pandora.  "And where did it come
from?"

"That is a secret, too," replied Epimetheus.

"How provoking!" exclaimed Pandora, pouting her lip.  "I wish the great
ugly box were out of the way!"

"O come, don't think of it, any more," cried Epimetheus.  "Let us run
out of doors, and have some nice play with the other children."

It is thousands of years since Epimetheus and Pandora were alive; and
the world, nowadays, is a very different sort of thing from what it was
in their time.  Then, everybody was a child.  There needed no fathers
and mothers to take care of the children; because there was no danger,
nor trouble of any kind, and no clothes to be mended, and there was
always plenty to eat and drink.  Whenever a child wanted his dinner, he
found it growing on a tree; and, if he looked at the tree in the
morning, he could see the expanding blossom of that night's supper; or,
at eventide, he saw the tender bud of to-morrow's breakfast.  It was a
very pleasant life indeed.  No labor to be done, no tasks to be studied;
nothing but sports and dances, and sweet voices of children talking, or
carolling like birds, or gushing out in merry laughter, throughout the
livelong day.

What was most wonderful of all, the children never quarrelled among
themselves; neither had they any crying fits; nor, since time first
began, had a single one of these little mortals ever gone apart into a
corner, and sulked.  O, what a good time was that to be alive in!  The
truth is, those ugly little winged monsters, called Troubles, which are
now almost as numerous as mosquitoes, had never yet been seen on the
earth.  It is probable that the very greatest disquietude which a child
had ever experienced was Pandora's vexation at not being able to
discover the secret of the mysterious box.

This was at first only the faint shadow of a Trouble; but, every day, it
grew more and more substantial, until, before a great while, the cottage
of Epimetheus and Pandora was less sunshiny than those of the other
children.

"Whence can the box have come?" Pandora continually kept saying to
herself and to Epimetheus.  "And what in the world can be inside of it?"

"Always talking about this box!" said Epimetheus, at last; for he had
grown extremely tired of the subject.  "I wish, dear Pandora, you would
try to talk of something else.  Come, let us go and gather some ripe
figs, and eat them under the trees, for our supper.  And I know a vine
that has the sweetest and juiciest grapes you ever tasted."

"Always talking about grapes and figs!" cried Pandora, pettishly.

"Well, then," said Epimetheus, who was a very good-tempered child, like a
multitude of children in those days, "let us run out and have a merry
time with our playmates."

"I am tired of merry times, and don't care if I never have any more!"
