all about it."

Lucy told the story of the various visits of the Federal bushwhackers to
the house, and how they had narrowly escaped death for refusing to
betray the Confederate officer who had come to the house for food. Her
recital was frequently interrupted by exclamations of indignation and
pity from her aunts.

"Well, aunts, after that," she went on, "you see it was impossible for
me to stop there any longer. No doubt they came back again a few hours
afterward and burned the house, and had I been found there I should have
been sure to be burned in it, so Chloe agreed with me that there was
nothing to do but to try and get through the lines and come to you.
There was no way of my getting my living at Nashville except by going
out as a help, and there might have been some difficulties about that."

"Quite right, my dear. It was clearly the best thing for you to come to
us--indeed, the only thing. But how in the world did you two manage to
travel alone all that distance and get through the Federal lines?"

"You see, we were not alone, aunts," Lucy said; "the Confederate officer
and his servant were coming through, and of course they took care of us.
We could never have got through alone, and as Chloe was with me we got
on very nicely; but we have been a long time getting through, for in
that fight, where he saved my life and killed five of the band, he had
his shoulder broken by a pistol bullet, and we had to stop in a
farmhouse near Mount Pleasant, and he was very ill for some time, but
the doctor who attended him was a true Southerner, and so we were quite
safe till he was able to move again."

"And who is this officer, Lucy?" Miss Kingston asked rather anxiously.

"He is a Virginian gentleman, auntie. His mother has large estates near
Richmond. He was in the cavalry with Stuart, and was made prisoner while
he was lying wounded and insensible, at Antietam; and I think, auntie,
that that--" and she hesitated--"some day we are going to be married."

"Oh, that's it, is it?" the old lady said kindly. "Well, I can't say
anything about that until I see him, Lucy. Now tell us the whole story,
and then we shall be better able to judge about it. I don't think, my
dear, that while you were traveling under his protection he ought to
have talked to you about such things."

"He didn't, auntie; not until we were half a mile from the station here.
I never thought he cared for me the least bit; he was just like a
brother to me--just like what Jack would have been if he had been
bringing me here."

"That's right, my dear; I am glad to hear it. Now, let us hear all about
it."

Lucy told the whole story of her escape and her adventures, and when she
had finished her aunts nodded to each other.

"That's all very satisfactory, Lucy. It was a difficult position to be
placed in, though I don't see how it was to be avoided, and the young
man really seems to have behaved very well. Don't you think so, Ada?"
The younger Miss Kingston agreed, and both were prepared to receive
Vincent with cordiality when he appeared.

The hour had been considerably exceeded when Vincent came to the door.
He felt it rather an awkward moment when he was ushered into the
presence of Lucy's aunts, who could scarcely restrain an exclamation of
surprise at his youth, for although Lucy had said nothing about his age,
they expected to meet an older man, the impression being gained from the
recital of his bravery in attacking singlehanded twelve men, and by the
manner in which he had piloted the party through their dangers.

"We are very glad to see you--my sister Ada and myself," Miss Kingston
said, shaking hands cordially with their visitor. "Lucy has been telling
us all about you; but we certainly expected from what you had gone
through that you were older."

"I am two or three years older than she is, Miss Kingston, and I have
gone through so much in the last three years that I feel older than I
am. She has told you, I hope, that she has been good enough to promise
to be my wife some day?"

"Yes, she has told us that, Mr. Wingfield; and although we don't know
you personally, we feel sure--my sister Ada and I--from what she has
told us of your behavior while you have been together that you are an
honorable gentleman, and we hope and believe that you will make her
happy."

"I will do my best to do so," Vincent said earnestly. "As to my
circumstances, I shall in another year come into possession of estates
sufficient to keep her in every comfort."

"I have no doubt that that is all satisfactory, Mr. Wingfield, and that
her father will give his hearty approval when he hears all the
circumstances of the case. Now, if you will go into the next room, Mr.
Wingfield, I will call her down"--for Lucy had run upstairs when she
heard Vincent knock.

"I dare say you will like a quiet talk together," she added smiling,
"for she tells me you have never been alone together since you started."

Lucy required several calls before she came down. A new shyness such as
she had never before felt had seized her, and it was with flushed cheeks
and timid steps that she at last came downstairs, and it needed an
encouraging--"Go in, you silly child, your lover will not eat you,"
before she turned the handle and went into the room where Vincent was
expecting her.

Vincent had telegraphed from the first station at which he arrived
within the limits of the Confederacy to his mother, announcing his safe
arrival there, and asking her to send money to him at Antioch. Her
letter in reply reached him three days after his arrival. It contained
notes for the amount he wrote for; and while expressing her own and his
sisters' delight at hearing he had safely reached the limits of the
Confederacy, she expressed not a little surprise at the out-of-the-way
place to which he had requested the money to be sent.

"We have been examining the maps, my dear boy," she said, "and find that
it is seventy or eighty miles out of your direct course, and we have
puzzled ourselves in vain as to why you should have made your way there.
The girls guess that you have gone there to deliver in person some
message from one of your late fellow-prisoners to his family. I am not
good at guessing, and am content to wait until you return home. We hope
that you will leave as soon as you get the remittance. We shall count
the hours until we see you. Of course we learned from a Yankee paper
smuggled through the lines that you had escaped from prison, and have
been terribly anxious about you ever since. We are longing to hear your
adventures."

A few hours after the receipt of this letter Vincent was on his way
home. It was a long journey. The distance was considerable, and the
train service greatly disordered and unpunctual. When within a few hours
of Richmond he telegraphed, giving the approximate time at which he
might be expected to arrive. The train, however, did not reach Richmond
until some hours later. The carriage was waiting at the station, and the
negro coachman shouted with pleasure at the sight of his young master.

"Missis and the young ladies come, sah; but de station-master he say de
train no arrive for a long time, so dey wait for you at de town house,
sah."

Dan jumped up beside the coachman and Vincent leaped into the carriage,
and a few minutes later he was locked in the arms of his mother and
sisters.

"You grow bigger and bigger, Vincent," his mother said after the first
greeting was over. "I thought you must have done when you went away
last, but you are two or three inches taller and ever so much wider."

"I think I have nearly done now, mother--anyhow as to height. I am about
six feet one."

"You are a dreadful trouble to us, Vincent," Annie said. "We have awful
anxiety whenever we hear of a battle being fought, and it was almost a
relief to us when we heard that you were in a Yankee prison. We thought
at least you were out of danger for some time; but since the news came
of your escape it has been worse than ever, and as week passed after
week without our hearing anything of you we began to fear that something
terrible had happened to you."

"Nothing terrible has happened at all, Annie. The only mishap I had was
getting a pistol bullet in my shoulder which laid me up for about six
weeks. There was nothing very dreadful about it," he continued, as
exclamations of alarm and pity broke from his mother and sister. "I was
well looked after and nursed. And now I will tell you my most important
piece of news, and then I will give you a full account of my adventures
from the time when Dan got me out of prison, for it is entirely to him
that I owe my liberty."

"Well, what is the piece of news?" Annie asked.

"Guess!" Vincent replied smiling.

"You have got promoted?" his mother said. He shook his head.

"Is it about a lady?" Annie asked.

Vincent smiled.

"Oh, Vincent, you are not engaged to be married! That would be too
ridiculous!" Vincent laughed and nodded.

"Annie is right, mother; I am engaged to be married." Mrs. Wingfield
looked grave, Rosie laughed, and Annie threw her arms round his neck and
kissed him.

"You dear, silly old boy:" she said. "I am glad, though it seems so
ridiculous. Who is she, and what is she like?"

"We needn't ask where she lives," Rosie said. "Of course it is in
Antioch, though how in the world you managed it all in the two or three
days you were there I can't make out."

Mrs. Wingfield's brow cleared. "At any rate, in that case, Vincent, she
is a Southerner. I was afraid at first it was some Yankee woman who had
perhaps sheltered you on your way."

"Is she older than you, Vincent?" Annie asked suddenly. "I shouldn't
like her to be older than you are."

"She is between sixteen and seventeen," Vincent replied, "and she is a
Southern girl, mother, and I am sure you will love her, for she saved my
life at the risk of her own, besides nursing me all the time I was ill."

"I have no doubt I shall love her, Vincent, for I think, my boy, that
you would not make a rash choice. I think you are young, much too young,
to be engaged; still, that is a secondary matter. Now tell us all about
it. We expected your story to be exciting, but did not dream that
love-making had any share in it."

Vincent accordingly told them the whole story of his adventures from the
time of his first meeting Dan in prison. When he related the episode of
Lucy's refusal to say whether he would return, although threatened with
instant death unless she did so, his narrative was broken by the
exclamations of his hearers.

"You need not say another word in praise of her," his mother said. "She
is indeed a noble girl, and I shall be proud of such a daughter."

"She must be a darling!" Annie exclaimed. "Oh, Vincent, how brave she
must be! I don't think I ever could have done that, with a pistol
pointing straight at you, and all those dreadful men round, and no hope
of a rescue; it's awful even to think of."

"It was an awful moment, as you may imagine," Vincent replied. "I shall
never forget the scene, or Lucy's steadfast face as she faced that man;
and you see at that time I was a perfect stranger to her--only a
fugitive Confederate officer whom she shielded from his pursuers."

"Go on, Vincent; please go on," Annie said. "Tell us what happened
next."

Vincent continued his narrative to the end, with, however, many
interruptions and questions on the part of the girls. His mother said
little, but sat holding his hand in hers.

"It has been a wonderful escape, Vincent," she said when he had
finished. "Bring your Lucy here when you like, and I shall be ready to
receive her as my daughter, and to love her for her own sake as well as
yours. She must be not only a brave but a noble girl, and you did
perfectly right to lose not a single day after you had taken her safely
home in asking her to be your wife. I am glad to think that some day the
Orangery will have so worthy a mistress. I will write to her at once.
You have not yet told us what she is like, Vincent."

"I am not good at descriptions, but you shall see her photograph when I
get it."

"What, haven't you got one now?"

"She had not one to give me. You see, when the troubles began she was
little more than a child, and since that time she has scarcely left
home, but she promised to have one taken at once and send it me, and
then, if it is a good likeness, you will know all about it."

"Mother, when you write to-night," Rosie said, "please send her your
photograph and ours, and say we all want one of our new relative that is
to be."

"I think, my dear, you can leave that until we have exchanged a letter
or two. You will see Vincent's copy, and can then wait patiently for
your own."

"And now, mother, I have told you all of my news; let us hear about
every one here. How are all the old house hands, and how is Dinah? Tony
is at Washington, I know, because I saw in the paper that he had made a
sudden attack upon Jackson."

Mrs. Wingfield's face fell.

"That is my one piece of bad news, Vincent. I wish you hadn't asked the
question until to-morrow, for I am sorry that anything should disturb
the pleasure of this first meeting; still as you have asked the question
I must answer it. About ten days ago a negro came, as I afterward heard
from Chloe, to the back entrance and asked for Dinah. He said he had a
message for her. She went and spoke to him, and then ran back and caught
up her child. She said to Chloe, 'I have news of my husband. I think he
is here. I will soon be back again.' Then she ran out, and has never
returned. We have made every inquiry we could, but we have not liked to
advertise for her, for it may be that she has met her husband, and that
he persuaded her to make off at once with him to Yorktown or Fortress
Monroe."

"This is bad news indeed, mother," Vincent said. "No, I do not think for
a moment that she has gone off with Tony. There could be no reason why
she should have left so suddenly without telling any one, for she knew
well enough that you would let her go if she wished it; and I feel sure
that neither she nor Tony would act so ungratefully as to leave us in
this manner. No, mother, I feel sure that this has been done by Jackson.
You know I told you I felt uneasy about her before I went. No doubt the
old rascal has seen in some Northern paper an account of his son having
been attacked in the streets of Washington, and recaptured by Tony, and
he has had Dinah carried off from a pure spirit of revenge. Well,
mother," he went on in answer to an appealing look from her, "I will not
put myself out this first evening of my return, and will say no more
about it. There will be plenty of time to take the matter up to-morrow.
And now about all our friends and acquaintances. How are they getting
on? Have you heard of any more of my old chums being killed since I was
taken prisoner at Antietam?"

It was late in the evening before Vincent heard all the news.
Fortunately, the list of casualties in the army of Virginia had been
slight since Antietam; but that battle had made many gaps among the
circle of their friends, and of these Vincent now heard for the first
time, and he learned too, that although no battle had been fought since
Antietam, on the 17th of September, there had been a sharp skirmish near
Fredericksburg, and that the Federal army, now under General Burnside,
who had succeeded McClellan, was facing that of Lee, near that town, and
that it was believed that they would attempt to cross the Rappahannock
in a few days.

It was not until he retired for the night that Vincent allowed his
thoughts to turn again to the missing woman. Her loss annoyed and vexed
him much more than he permitted his mother to see. In the first place,
the poor girl's eagerness to show her gratitude to him upon all
occasions, and her untiring watchfulness and care during his illness
from his wound, had touched him, and the thought that she was now
probably in the hands of brutal taskmasters was a real pain to him. In
the next place, he had, as it were, given his pledge to Tony that she
should be well cared for until she could be sent to join him. And what
should he say now when the negro wrote to claim her? Then, too, he felt
a personal injury that the woman should be carried off when under his
mother's protection, and he was full of indignation and fury at the
dastardly revenge taken by Jackson. Upon hearing the news he had at once
mentally determined to devote himself for some time to a search for
Dinah; but the news that a great battle was expected at the front
interfered with his plan. Now that he was back, capable of returning to
duty, his place was clearly with his regiment; but he determined that
while he would rejoin at once, he would as soon as the battle was over,
if he were unhurt, take up the search. His mother and sisters were
greatly distressed when at breakfast he told them that he must at once
report himself as fit for duty, and ready to join his regiment.

"I was afraid you would think so," Mrs. Wingfield said, while the girls
wept silently; "and much as I grieve at losing you again directly you
have returned, I can say nothing against it. You have gone through many
dangers, Vincent, and have been preserved to us through them all. We
will pray that you may be so to the end. Still, whether or not, I as a
Virginian woman cannot grudge my son to the service of my country, when
all other mothers are making the same sacrifice; but it is hard to give
you up when but yesterday you returned to us."


CHAPTER XV. FREDERICKSBURG.

As soon as breakfast was over Vincent mounted Wildfire--which had been
sent back after he had been taken prisoner, and rode into Richmond.
There he reported himself at headquarters as having returned after
escaping from a Federal prison, and making his way through the lines of
the enemy.

"I had my shoulder-bone smashed in a fight with some Yankees," he said,
"and was laid up in hiding for six weeks; but have now fairly recovered.
My shoulder, at times, gives me considerable pain, and although I am
desirous of returning to duty and rejoining my regiment until the battle
at Fredericksburg has taken place, I must request that three months'
leave be granted to me after that to return home and complete my cure,
promising of course to rejoin my regiment at once should hostilities
break out before the spring."

"We saw the news that you had escaped," the general said, "but feared,
as so long a time elapsed without hearing from you, that you had been
shot in attempting to cross the lines. Your request for leave is of
course granted, and a note will be made of your zeal in thus rejoining
on the very day after your return. The vacancy in the regiment has been
filled up, but I will appoint you temporarily to General Stuart's staff,
and I shall have great pleasure in to-day filling up your commission as
captain. Now let me hear how you made your escape. By the accounts
published in the Northern papers it seemed that you must have had a
confederate outside the walls."

Vincent gave a full account of his escape from prison and a brief sketch
of his subsequent proceedings, saying only that he was in the house of
some loyal people in Tennessee, when it was attacked by a party of
Yankee bushwhackers, that these were beaten off in the fight, but that
he himself had a pistol bullet in his shoulder. He then made his way on
until compelled by his wound to lay up for six weeks in a lonely
farmhouse near Mount Pleasant; that afterward in the disguise of a young
farmer he had made a long detour across the Tennessee river and reached
Georgia.

"When do you leave for the front, Captain Wingfield?"

"I shall be ready to start to-night, sir."

"In that case I will trouble you to come round here this evening. There
will be a fast train going through with ammunition for Lee at ten
o'clock, and I shall have a bag of despatches for him, which I will
trouble you to deliver. You will find me here up to the last moment. I
will give orders that a horse-box be put on to the train."

After expressing his thanks Vincent took his leave. As he left the
general's quarters, a young man, just alighting from his horse, gave a
shout of greeting.

"Why, Wingfield, it is good to see you! I thought you were pining again
in a Yankee dungeon, or had got knocked on the head crossing the lines.
Where have you sprung from, and when did you arrive?"

"I only got in yesterday after sundry adventures which I will tell you
about presently. When did you arrive from the front?"

"I came down a few days ago on a week's leave on urgent family
business," the young man laughed, "and I am going back again this
afternoon by the four o'clock train."

"Stay till ten," Vincent said, "and we will go back together. There is a
special train going through with ammunition, and as everything will make
way for that it will not be long behind the four o'clock, and likely
enough may pass it on the way. There is a horse-box attached to it, and
as I only take one horse there will be room for yours."

"I haven't brought my horse down," Harry Furniss said; "but I will
certainly go with you by the ten o'clock. Then we can have a long talk.
I don't think I have seen you since the day you asked me to lend you my
boat two years ago."

"Can you spare me two hours now?" Vincent asked. "You will do me a very
great favor if you will."

Harry Furniss looked at his watch. "It is eleven o'clock now; we have a
lot of people to lunch at half-past one, and I must be back by then."

"You can manage that easy enough," Vincent replied; "in two hours from
the time we leave here you can be at home."

"I am your man, then, Vincent. Just wait five minutes. I have to see
some one in here."

A few minutes later Harry Furniss came out again and mounted.

"Now which way, Vincent? and what is it you want me for?"
