the robber inside said softly: "Is it time?"

Any other slave but Morgiana, on finding a man in the jar instead of the
oil she wanted, would have screamed and made a noise; but she, knowing
the danger her master was in, bethought herself of a plan, and answered
quietly: "Not yet, but presently." She went to all the jars, giving
the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil. She now saw that her
master, thinking to entertain an oil merchant, had let thirty-eight
robbers into his house. She filled her oil pot, went back to the
kitchen, and, having lit her lamp, went again to the oil jar and filled
a large kettle full of oil. When it boiled she went and poured enough
oil into every jar to stifle and kill the robber inside. When this brave
deed was done she went back to the kitchen, put out the fire and the
lamp, and waited to see what would happen.

In a quarter of an hour the Captain of the robbers awoke, got up,
and opened the window. As all seemed quiet, he threw down some little
pebbles which hit the jars. He listened, and as none of his men seemed
to stir he grew uneasy, and went down into the yard. On going to the
first jar and saying, "Are you asleep?" he smelt the hot boiled oil, and
knew at once that his plot to murder Ali Baba and his household had been
discovered. He found all the gang was dead, and, missing the oil out of
the last jar, became aware of the manner of their death. He then forced
the lock of a door leading into a garden, and climbing over several
walls made his escape. Morgiana heard and saw all this, and, rejoicing
at her success, went to bed and fell asleep.

At daybreak Ali Baba arose, and, seeing the oil jars still there, asked
why the merchant had not gone with his mules. Morgiana bade him look
in the first jar and see if there was any oil. Seeing a man, he started
back in terror. "Have no fear," said Morgiana; "the man cannot harm
you: he is dead." Ali Baba, when he had recovered somewhat from his
astonishment, asked what had become of the merchant. "Merchant!" said
she, "he is no more a merchant than I am!" and she told him the whole
story, assuring him that it was a plot of the robbers of the forest, of
whom only three were left, and that the white and red chalk marks had
something to do with it. Ali Baba at once gave Morgiana her freedom,
saying that he owed her his life. They then buried the bodies in Ali
Baba's garden, while the mules were sold in the market by his slaves.

The Captain returned to his lonely cave, which seemed frightful to
him without his lost companions, and firmly resolved to avenge them by
killing Ali Baba. He dressed himself carefully, and went into the town,
where he took lodgings in an inn. In the course of a great many journeys
to the forest he carried away many rich stuffs and much fine linen, and
set up a shop opposite that of Ali Baba's son. He called himself Cogia
Hassan, and as he was both civil and well dressed he soon made friends
with Ali Baba's son, and through him with Ali Baba, whom he was
continually asking to sup with him. Ali Baba, wishing to return his
kindness, invited him into his house and received him smiling, thanking
him for his kindness to his son. When the merchant was about to take his
leave Ali Baba stopped him, saying: "Where are you going, sir, in such
haste? Will you not stay and sup with me?" The merchant refused, saying
that he had a reason; and, on Ali Baba's asking him what that was, he
replied: "It is, sir, that I can eat no victuals that have any salt
in them." "If that is all," said Ali Baba, "let me tell you that there
shall be no salt in either the meat or the bread that we eat to-night."
He went to give this order to Morgiana, who was much surprised. "Who is
this man," she said, "who eats no salt with his meat?" "He is an honest
man, Morgiana," returned her master; "therefore do as I bid you." But
she could not withstand a desire to see this strange man, so she helped
Abdallah to carry up the dishes, and saw in a moment that Cogia Hassan
was the robber Captain, and carried a dagger under his garment. "I am
not surprised," she said to herself, "that this wicked man, who intends
to kill my master, will eat no salt with him; but I will hinder his
plans."

She sent up the supper by Abdallah, while she made ready for one of the
boldest acts that could be thought on. When the dessert had been served,
Cogia Hassan was left alone with Ali Baba and his son, whom he thought
to make drunk and then to murder them. Morgiana, meanwhile, put on a
head-dress like a dancing-girl's, and clasped a girdle round her waist,
from which hung a dagger with a silver hilt, and said to Abdallah: "Take
your tabor, and let us go and divert our master and his guest." Abdallah
took his tabor and played before Morgiana until they came to the door,
where Abdallah stopped playing and Morgiana made a low courtesy. "Come
in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Hassan see what you can
do"; and, turning to Cogia Hassan, he said: "She's my slave and my
housekeeper." Cogia Hassan was by no means pleased, for he feared
that his chance of killing Ali Baba was gone for the present; but he
pretended great eagerness to see Morgiana, and Abdallah began to play
and Morgiana to dance. After she had performed several dances she drew
her dagger and made passes with it, sometimes pointing it at her own
breast, sometimes at her master's, as if it were part of the dance.
Suddenly, out of breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdallah with her
left hand, and, holding the dagger in her right hand, held out the tabor
to her master. Ali Baba and his son put a piece of gold into it, and
Cogia Hassan, seeing that she was coming to him, pulled out his purse to
make her a present, but while he was putting his hand into it Morgiana
plunged the dagger into his heart.

"Unhappy girl!" cried Ali Baba and his son, "what have you done to ruin
us?"

"It was to preserve you, master, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana.
"See here," opening the false merchant's garment and showing the dagger;
"see what an enemy you have entertained! Remember, he would eat no salt
with you, and what more would you have? Look at him! he is both the
false oil merchant and the Captain of the Forty Thieves."

Ali Baba was so grateful to Morgiana for thus saving his life that he
offered her to his son in marriage, who readily consented, and a few
days after the wedding was celebrated with greatest splendor.

At the end of a year Ali Baba, hearing nothing of the two remaining
robbers, judged they were dead, and set out to the cave. The door opened
on his saying: "Open Sesame!" He went in, and saw that nobody had been
there since the Captain left it. He brought away as much gold as he
could carry, and returned to town. He told his son the secret of
the cave, which his son handed down in his turn, so the children and
grandchildren of Ali Baba were rich to the end of their lives.(1)


(1) Arabian Nights.




HANSEL AND GRETTEL


Once upon a time there dwelt on the outskirts of a large forest a poor
woodcutter with his wife and two children; the boy was called Hansel and
the girl Grettel. He had always little enough to live on, and once, when
there was a great famine in the land, he couldn't even provide them with
daily bread. One night, as he was tossing about in bed, full of cares
and worry, he sighed and said to his wife: "What's to become of us? how
are we to support our poor children, now that we have nothing more for
ourselves?" "I'll tell you what, husband," answered the woman; "early
to-morrow morning we'll take the children out into the thickest part
of the wood; there we shall light a fire for them and give them each a
piece of bread; then we'll go on to our work and leave them alone. They
won't be able to find their way home, and we shall thus be rid of them."
"No, wife," said her husband, "that I won't do; how could I find it in
my heart to leave my children alone in the wood? The wild beasts would
soon come and tear them to pieces." "Oh! you fool," said she, "then we
must all four die of hunger, and you may just as well go and plane the
boards for our coffins"; and she left him no peace till he consented.
"But I can't help feeling sorry for the poor children," added the
husband.

The children, too, had not been able to sleep for hunger, and had heard
what their step-mother had said to their father. Grettel wept bitterly
and spoke to Hansel: "Now it's all up with us." "No, no, Grettel," said
Hansel, "don't fret yourself; I'll be able to find a way to escape, no
fear." And when the old people had fallen asleep he got up, slipped
on his little coat, opened the back door and stole out. The moon was
shining clearly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like bits of silver. Hansel bent down and filled his pocket
with as many of them as he could cram in. Then he went back and said to
Grettel: "Be comforted, my dear little sister, and go to sleep: God will
not desert us"; and he lay down in bed again.

At daybreak, even before the sun was up, the woman came and woke the two
children: "Get up, you lie-abeds, we're all going to the forest to fetch
wood." She gave them each a bit of bread and said: "There's something
for your luncheon, but don't you eat it up before, for it's all you'll
get." Grettel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the stones
in his pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.
After they had walked for a little, Hansel stood still and looked back
at the house, and this maneuver he repeated again and again. His father
observed him, and said: "Hansel, what are you gazing at there, and why
do you always remain behind? Take care, and don't lose your footing."
"Oh! father," said Hansel, "I am looking back at my white kitten, which
is sitting on the roof, waving me a farewell." The woman exclaimed:
"What a donkey you are! that isn't your kitten, that's the morning sun
shining on the chimney." But Hansel had not looked back at his kitten,
but had always dropped one of the white pebbles out of his pocket on to
the path.

When they had reached the middle of the forest the father said: "Now,
children, go and fetch a lot of wood, and I'll light a fire that you
may not feel cold." Hansel and Grettel heaped up brushwood till they had
made a pile nearly the size of a small hill. The brushwood was set fire
to, and when the flames leaped high the woman said: "Now lie down at the
fire, children, and rest yourselves: we are going into the forest to cut
down wood; when we've finished we'll come back and fetch you." Hansel
and Grettel sat down beside the fire, and at midday ate their little
bits of bread. They heard the strokes of the axe, so they thought their
father was quite near. But it was no axe they heard, but a bough he had
tied on a dead tree, and that was blown about by the wind. And when they
had sat for a long time their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell
fast asleep. When they awoke at last it was pitch dark. Grettel began
to cry, and said: "How are we ever to get out of the wood?" But Hansel
comforted her. "Wait a bit," he said, "till the moon is up, and then
we'll find our way sure enough." And when the full moon had risen he
took his sister by the hand and followed the pebbles, which shone like
new threepenny bits, and showed them the path. They walked on through
the night, and at daybreak reached their father's house again. They
knocked at the door, and when the woman opened it she exclaimed: "You
naughty children, what a time you've slept in the wood! we thought
you were never going to come back." But the father rejoiced, for
his conscience had reproached him for leaving his children behind by
themselves.

Not long afterward there was again great dearth in the land, and the
children heard their mother address their father thus in bed one night:
"Everything is eaten up once more; we have only half a loaf in the
house, and when that's done it's all up with us. The children must be
got rid of; we'll lead them deeper into the wood this time, so that
they won't be able to find their way out again. There is no other way
of saving ourselves." The man's heart smote him heavily, and he thought:
"Surely it would be better to share the last bite with one's children!"
But his wife wouldn't listen to his arguments, and did nothing but scold
and reproach him. If a man yields once he's done for, and so, because he
had given in the first time, he was forced to do so the second.

But the children were awake, and had heard the conversation. When the
old people were asleep Hansel got up, and wanted to go out and pick up
pebbles again, as he had done the first time; but the woman had barred
the door, and Hansel couldn't get out. But he consoled his little
sister, and said: "Don't cry, Grettel, and sleep peacefully, for God is
sure to help us."

At early dawn the woman came and made the children get up. They received
their bit of bread, but it was even smaller than the time before. On the
way to the wood Hansel crumbled it in his pocket, and every few minutes
he stood still and dropped a crumb on the ground. "Hansel, what are you
stopping and looking about you for?" said the father. "I'm looking back
at my little pigeon, which is sitting on the roof waving me a farewell,"
answered Hansel. "Fool!" said the wife; "that isn't your pigeon, it's
the morning sun glittering on the chimney." But Hansel gradually threw
all his crumbs on the path. The woman led the children still deeper into
the forest farther than they had ever been in their lives before. Then
a big fire was lit again, and the mother said: "Just sit down there,
children, and if you're tired you can sleep a bit; we're going into the
forest to cut down wood, and in the evening when we're finished we'll
come back to fetch you." At midday Grettel divided her bread with
Hansel, for he had strewn his all along their path. Then they fell
asleep, and evening passed away, but nobody came to the poor children.
They didn't awake till it was pitch dark, and Hansel comforted his
sister, saying: "Only wait, Grettel, till the moon rises, then we shall
see the bread-crumbs I scattered along the path; they will show us the
way back to the house." When the moon appeared they got up, but they
found no crumbs, for the thousands of birds that fly about the woods
and fields had picked them all up. "Never mind," said Hansel to Grettel;
"you'll see we'll find a way out"; but all the same they did not. They
wandered about the whole night, and the next day, from morning till
evening, but they could not find a path out of the wood. They were very
hungry, too, for they had nothing to eat but a few berries they found
growing on the ground. And at last they were so tired that their legs
refused to carry them any longer, so they lay down under a tree and fell
fast asleep.

On the third morning after they had left their father's house they set
about their wandering again, but only got deeper and deeper into the
wood, and now they felt that if help did not come to them soon they must
perish. At midday they saw a beautiful little snow-white bird sitting on
a branch, which sang so sweetly that they stopped still and listened to
it. And when its song was finished it flapped its wings and flew on in
front of them. They followed it and came to a little house, on the roof
of which it perched; and when they came quite near they saw that the
cottage was made of bread and roofed with cakes, while the window was
made of transparent sugar. "Now we'll set to," said Hansel, "and have a
regular blow-out.(1) I'll eat a bit of the roof, and you, Grettel,
can eat some of the window, which you'll find a sweet morsel." Hansel
stretched up his hand and broke off a little bit of the roof to see what
it was like, and Grettel went to the casement and began to nibble at it.
Thereupon a shrill voice called out from the room inside:

  "Nibble, nibble, little mouse,
  Who's nibbling my house?"

The children answered:

  "Tis Heaven's own child,
  The tempest wild,"

and went on eating, without putting themselves about. Hansel, who
thoroughly appreciated the roof, tore down a big bit of it, while
Grettel pushed out a whole round window-pane, and sat down the better
to enjoy it. Suddenly the door opened, and an ancient dame leaning on
a staff hobbled out. Hansel and Grettel were so terrified that they let
what they had in their hands fall. But the old woman shook her head and
said: "Oh, ho! you dear children, who led you here? Just come in and
stay with me, no ill shall befall you." She took them both by the hand
and let them into the house, and laid a most sumptuous dinner before
them--milk and sugared pancakes, with apples and nuts. After they had
finished, two beautiful little white beds were prepared for them, and
when Hansel and Grettel lay down in them they felt as if they had got
into heaven.


(1) He was a vulgar boy!


The old woman had appeared to be most friendly, but she was really an
old witch who had waylaid the children, and had only built the little
bread house in order to lure them in. When anyone came into her power
she killed, cooked, and ate him, and held a regular feast-day for the
occasion. Now witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but, like
beasts, they have a keen sense of smell, and know when human beings pass
by. When Hansel and Grettel fell into her hands she laughed maliciously,
and said jeeringly: "I've got them now; they sha'n't escape me." Early
in the morning, before the children were awake, she rose up, and when
she saw them both sleeping so peacefully, with their round rosy cheeks,
she muttered to herself: "That'll be a dainty bite." Then she seized
Hansel with her bony hand and carried him into a little stable, and
barred the door on him; he might scream as much as he liked, it did him
no good. Then she went to Grettel, shook her till she awoke, and
cried: "Get up, you lazy-bones, fetch water and cook something for your
brother. When he's fat I'll eat him up." Grettel began to cry bitterly,
but it was of no use; she had to do what the wicked witch bade her.

So the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Grettel got nothing but
crab-shells. Every morning the old woman hobbled out to the stable and
cried: "Hansel, put out your finger, that I may feel if you are getting
fat." But Hansel always stretched out a bone, and the old dame, whose
eyes were dim, couldn't see it, and thinking always it was Hansel's
finger, wondered why he fattened so slowly. When four weeks had passed
and Hansel still remained thin, she lost patience and determined to wait
no longer. "Hi, Grettel," she called to the girl, "be quick and get some
water. Hansel may be fat or thin, I'm going to kill him to-morrow and
cook him." Oh! how the poor little sister sobbed as she carried the
water, and how the tears rolled down her cheeks! "Kind heaven help us
now!" she cried; "if only the wild beasts in the wood had eaten us, then
at least we should have died together." "Just hold your peace," said the
old hag; "it won't help you."

Early in the morning Grettel had to go out and hang up the kettle full
of water, and light the fire. "First we'll bake," said the old dame;
"I've heated the oven already and kneaded the dough." She pushed Grettel
out to the oven, from which fiery flames were already issuing. "Creep
in," said the witch, "and see if it's properly heated, so that we can
shove in the bread." For when she had got Grettel in she meant to close
the oven and let the girl bake, that she might eat her up too. But
Grettel perceived her intention, and said: "I don't know how I'm to do
it; how do I get in?" "You silly goose!" said the hag, "the opening is
big enough; see, I could get in myself," and she crawled toward it, and
poked her head into the oven. Then Grettel gave her a shove that sent
her right in, shut the iron door, and drew the bolt. Gracious! how she
yelled, it was quite horrible; but Grettel fled, and the wretched old
woman was left to perish miserably.

Grettel flew straight to Hansel, opened the little stable-door, and
cried: "Hansel, we are free; the old witch is dead." Then Hansel sprang
like a bird out of a cage when the door is opened. How they rejoiced,
and fell on each other's necks, and jumped for joy, and kissed one
another! And as they had no longer any cause for fear, they went in the
old hag's house, and here they found, in every corner of the room, boxes
with pearls and precious stones. "These are even better than pebbles,"
said Hansel, and crammed his pockets full of them; and Grettel said:
"I too will bring something home," and she filled her apron full. "But
now," said Hansel, "let's go and get well away from the witch's wood."
When they had wandered about for some hours they came to a big lake.
"We can't get over," said Hansel; "I see no bridge of any sort or kind."
"Yes, and there's no ferry-boat either," answered Grettel; "but look,
there swims a white duck; if I ask her she'll help us over," and she
called out:

  "Here are two children, mournful very,
  Seeing neither bridge nor ferry;
  Take us upon your white back,
  And row us over, quack, quack!"


The duck swam toward them, and Hansel got on her back and bade his
little sister sit beside him. "No," answered Grettel, "we should be too
heavy a load for the duck: she shall carry us across separately." The
good bird did this, and when they were landed safely on the other side,
and had gone for a while, the wood became more and more familiar to
them, and at length they saw their father's house in the distance. Then
they set off to run, and bounding into the room fell on their father's
neck. The man had not passed a happy hour since he left them in the
wood, but the woman had died. Grettel shook out her apron so that the
pearls and precious stones rolled about the room, and Hansel threw down
one handful after the other out of his pocket. Thus all their troubles
were ended, and they lived happily ever afterward.

My story is done. See! there runs a little mouse; anyone who catches it
may make himself a large fur cap out of it.(1)


(1) Grimm.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED


A poor widow once lived in a little cottage with a garden in front of
it, in which grew two rose trees, one bearing white roses and the other
red. She had two children, who were just like the two rose trees; one
was called Snow-white and the other Rose-red, and they were the sweetest
and best children in the world, always diligent and always cheerful; but
Snow-white was quieter and more gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red loved
to run about the fields and meadows, and to pick flowers and catch
butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home with her mother and helped her
in the household, or read aloud to her when there was no work to do. The
two children loved each other so dearly that they always walked about
hand in hand whenever they went out together, and when Snow-white said,
"We will never desert each other," Rose-red answered: "No, not as long
as we live"; and the mother added: "Whatever one gets she shall share
with the other." They often roamed about in the woods gathering berries
and no beast offered to hurt them; on the contrary, they came up to them
in the most confiding manner; the little hare would eat a cabbage leaf
from their hands, the deer grazed beside them, the stag would bound past
them merrily, and the birds remained on the branches and sang to them
with all their might.

No evil ever befell them; if they tarried late in the wood and night
overtook them, they lay down together on the moss and slept till
morning, and their mother knew they were quite safe, and never felt
anxious about them. Once, when they had slept all night in the wood and
had been wakened by the morning sun, they perceived a beautiful child
in a shining white robe sitting close to their resting-place. The figure
got up, looked at them kindly, but said nothing, and vanished into the
wood. And when they looked round about them they became aware that they
had slept quite close to a precipice, over which they would certainly
have fallen had they gone on a few steps further in the darkness. And
when they told their mother of their adventure, she said what they had
seen must have been the angel that guards good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's cottage so beautifully clean
and neat that it was a pleasure to go into it. In summer Rose-red looked
after the house, and every morning before her mother awoke she placed
a bunch of flowers before the bed, from each tree a rose. In winter
Snow-white lit the fire and put on the kettle, which was made of brass,
but so beautifully polished that it shone like gold. In the evening when
the snowflakes fell their mother said: "Snow-white, go and close the
shutters," and they drew round the fire, while the mother put on her
spectacles and read aloud from a big book and the two girls listened and
sat and span. Beside them on the ground lay a little lamb, and behind
them perched a little white dove with its head tucked under its wings.

One evening as they sat thus cosily together someone knocked at the door
as though he desired admittance. The mother said: "Rose-red, open
the door quickly; it must be some traveler seeking shelter." Rose-red
hastened to unbar the door, and thought she saw a poor man standing in
the darkness outside; but it was no such thing, only a bear, who poked
his thick black head through the door. Rose-red screamed aloud and
sprang back in terror, the lamb began to bleat, the dove flapped its
wings, and Snow-white ran and hid behind her mother's bed. But the bear
began to speak, and said: "Don't be afraid: I won't hurt you. I am half
frozen, and only wish to warm myself a little." "My poor bear," said the
mother, "lie down by the fire, only take care you don't burn your fur."
Then she called out: "Snow-white and Rose-red, come out; the bear will
do you no harm; he is a good, honest creature." So they both came out of
their hiding-places, and gradually the lamb and dove drew near too, and
they all forgot their fear. The bear asked the children to beat the snow
a little out of his fur, and they fetched a brush and scrubbed him till
he was dry. Then the beast stretched himself in front of the fire, and
growled quite happily and comfortably. The children soon grew quite at
their ease with him, and led their helpless guest a fearful life. They
tugged his fur with their hands, put their small feet on his back, and
rolled him about here and there, or took a hazel wand and beat him
with it; and if he growled they only laughed. The bear submitted to
everything with the best possible good-nature, only when they went too
far he cried: "Oh! children, spare my life!

  "Snow-white and Rose-red,
  Don't beat your lover dead."

When it was time to retire for the night, and the others went to bed,
the mother said to the bear: "You can lie there on the hearth, in
heaven's name; it will be shelter for you from the cold and wet." As
soon as day dawned the children led him out, and he trotted over the
snow into the wood. From this time on the bear came every evening at
the same hour, and lay down by the hearth and let the children play what
pranks they liked with him; and they got so accustomed to him that the
door was never shut till their black friend had made his appearance.

When spring came, and all outside was green, the bear said one morning
