growing trees ascended a considerable distance up the mountain sides; and
rich level plains, or meadow-land, spread round the base of the
mountains, except at the point immediately opposite the large valley,
where a river seemed to carry the trees, as it were, along with it down
to the white sandy shore.  The mountain tops, unlike those of our Coral
Island, were sharp, needle-shaped, and bare, while their sides were more
rugged and grand in outline than anything I had yet seen in those seas.
Bloody Bill was beside me when the island first hove in sight.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, "I know that island well.  They call it Emo."

"Have you been here before, then?" I inquired.

"Ay, that I have, often, and so has this schooner.  'Tis a famous island
for sandal-wood.  We have taken many cargoes off it already, and have
paid for them too; for the savages are so numerous that we dared not try
to take it by force.  But our captain has tried to cheat them so often,
that they're beginnin' not to like us overmuch now.  Besides, the men
behaved ill the last time we were here; and I wonder the captain is not
afraid to venture.  But he's afraid o' nothing earthly, I believe."

We soon ran inside the barrier coral-reef, and let go our anchor in six
fathoms water, just opposite the mouth of a small creek, whose shores
were densely covered with mangroves and tall umbrageous trees.  The
principal village of the natives lay about half a mile from this point.
Ordering the boat out, the captain jumped into it, and ordered me to
follow him.  The men, fifteen in number, were well armed; and the mate
was directed to have Long Tom ready for emergencies.

"Give way, lads," cried the captain.

The oars fell into the water at the word, the boat shot from the
schooner's side, and in a few minutes reached the shore.  Here, contrary
to our expectation, we were met with the utmost cordiality by Romata, the
principal chief of the island, who conducted us to his house, and gave us
mats to sit upon.  I observed in passing that the natives, of whom there
were two or three thousand, were totally unarmed.

After a short preliminary palaver, a feast of baked pigs and various
roots was spread before us; of which we partook sparingly, and then
proceeded to business.  The captain stated his object in visiting the
island, regretted that there had been a slight misunderstanding during
the last visit, and hoped that no ill-will was borne by either party, and
that a satisfactory trade would be accomplished.

Romata answered that he had forgotten there had been any differences
between them, protested that he was delighted to see his friends again,
and assured them they should have every assistance in cutting and
embarking the wood.  The terms were afterwards agreed on, and we rose to
depart.  All this conversation was afterwards explained to me by Bill,
who understood the language pretty well.

Romata accompanied us on board, and explained that a great chief from
another island was then on a visit to him, and that he was to be
ceremoniously entertained on the following day.  After begging to be
allowed to introduce him to us, and receiving permission, he sent his
canoe ashore to bring him off.  At the same time he gave orders to bring
on board his two favourites, a cock and a paroquet.  While the canoe was
gone on this errand, I had time to regard the savage chief attentively.
He was a man of immense size, with massive but beautifully moulded limbs
and figure, only parts of which, the broad chest and muscular arms, were
uncovered; for, although the lower orders generally wore no other
clothing than a strip of cloth called _maro_ round their loins, the
chief, on particular occasions, wrapped his person in voluminous folds of
a species of native cloth made from the bark of the Chinese
paper-mulberry.  Romata wore a magnificent black beard and moustache, and
his hair was frizzed out to such an extent that it resembled a large
turban, in which was stuck a long wooden pin!  I afterwards found that
this pin served for scratching the head, for which purpose the fingers
were too short without disarranging the hair.  But Romata put himself to
much greater inconvenience on account of his hair, for we found that he
slept with his head resting on a wooden pillow, in which was cut a hollow
for the neck, so that the hair of the sleeper might not be disarranged.

In ten minutes the canoe returned, bringing the other chief, who
certainly presented a most extraordinary appearance, having painted one
half of his face red and the other half yellow, besides ornamenting it
with various designs in black!  Otherwise he was much the same in
appearance as Romata, though not so powerfully built.  As this chief had
never seen a ship before, except, perchance, some of the petty traders
that at long intervals visit these remote islands, he was much taken up
with the neatness and beauty of all the fittings of the schooner.  He was
particularly struck with a musket which was shown to him, and asked where
the white men got hatchets hard enough to cut the tree of which the
barrel was made!  While he was thus engaged, his brother chief stood
aloof, talking with the captain, and fondling a superb cock and a little
blue-headed paroquet, the favourites of which I have before spoken.  I
observed that all the other natives walked in a crouching posture while
in the presence of Romata.  Before our guests left us, the captain
ordered the brass gun to be uncovered and fired for their gratification;
and I have every reason to believe he did so for the purpose of showing
our superior power, in case the natives should harbour any evil designs
against us.  Romata had never seen this gun before, as it had not been
uncovered on previous visits, and the astonishment with which he viewed
it was very amusing.  Being desirous of knowing its power, he begged that
the captain would fire it.  So a shot was put into it.  The chiefs were
then directed to look at a rock about two miles out at sea, and the gun
was fired.  In a second the top of the rock was seen to burst asunder,
and to fall in fragments into the sea.

Romata was so delighted with the success of this shot, that he pointed to
a man who was walking on the shore, and begged the captain to fire at
him, evidently supposing that his permission was quite sufficient to
justify the captain in such an act.  He was therefore surprised, and not
a little annoyed, when the captain refused to fire at the native, and
ordered the gun to be housed.

Of all the things, however, that afforded matter of amusement to these
savages, that which pleased Romata's visitor most was the ship's pump.  He
never tired of examining it, and pumping up the water.  Indeed, so much
was he taken up with this pump, that he could not be prevailed on to
return on shore, but sent a canoe to fetch his favourite stool, on which
he seated himself, and spent the remainder of the day in pumping the
bilge-water out of the ship!

Next day the crew went ashore to cut sandal-wood, while the captain, with
one or two men, remained on board, in order to be ready, if need be, with
the brass gun, which was unhoused and conspicuously elevated, with its
capacious muzzle directed point blank at the chief's house.  The men were
fully armed as usual; and the captain ordered me to go with them, to
assist in the work.  I was much pleased with this order, for it freed me
from the captain's company, which I could not now endure, and it gave me
an opportunity of seeing the natives.

As we wound along in single file through the rich fragrant groves of
banana, cocoa-nut, bread-fruit, and other trees, I observed that there
were many of the plum and banian trees, with which I had become familiar
on the Coral Island.  I noticed also large quantities of taro-roots,
yams, and sweet potatoes, growing in enclosures.  On turning into an open
glade of the woods, we came abruptly upon a cluster of native houses.
They were built chiefly of bamboos, and were thatched with the large
thick leaves of the pandanus; but many of them had little more than a
sloping roof and three sides with an open front, being the most simple
shelter from the weather that could well be imagined.  Within these, and
around them, were groups of natives--men, women, and children--who all
stood up to gaze at us as we marched along, followed by the party of men
whom the chief had sent to escort us.  About half a mile inland we
arrived at the spot where the sandal-wood grew, and, while the men set to
work, I clambered up an adjoining hill to observe the country.

About mid-day, the chief arrived with several followers, one of whom
carried a baked pig on a wooden platter, with yams and potatoes on
several plantain leaves, which he presented to the men, who sat down
under the shade of a tree to dine.  The chief sat down to dine also; but,
to my surprise, instead of feeding himself, one of his wives performed
that office for him!  I was seated beside Bill, and asked him the reason
of this.

"It is beneath his dignity, I believe, to feed himself," answered Bill;
"but I daresay he's not particular, except on great occasions.  They've a
strange custom among them, Ralph, which is called _tabu_, and they carry
it to great lengths.  If a man chooses a particular tree for his god, the
fruit o' that tree is tabued to him; and if he eats it, he is sure to be
killed by his people, and eaten, of course, for killing means eating
hereaway.  Then, you see that great mop o' hair on the chief's head?
Well, he has a lot o' barbers to keep it in order; and it's a law that
whoever touches the head of a living chief or the body of a dead one, his
hands are tabued; so, in that way, the barbers' hands are always tabued,
and they daren't use them for their lives, but have to be fed like big
babies, as they are, sure enough!"

"That's odd, Bill.  But look there," said I, pointing to a man whose skin
was of a much lighter colour than the generality of the natives.  "I've
seen a few of these light-skinned fellows among the Fejeeans.  They seem
to me to be of quite a different race."

"So they are," answered Bill.  "These fellows come from the Tongan
Islands, which lie a long way to the eastward.  They come here to build
their big war-canoes; and as these take two, and sometimes four years, to
build, there's always some o' the brown-skins among the black sarpents o'
these islands."

"By the way, Bill," said I, "your mentioning serpents, reminds me that I
have not seen a reptile of any kind since I came to this part of the
world."

"No more there are any," said Bill, "if ye except the niggers themselves,
there's none on the islands, but a lizard or two and some sich harmless
things.  But I never seed any myself.  If there's none on the land,
however, there's more than enough in the water, and that minds me of a
wonderful brute they have here.  But, come, I'll show it to you."  So
saying, Bill arose, and, leaving the men still busy with the baked pig,
led me into the forest.  After proceeding a short distance we came upon a
small pond of stagnant water.  A native lad had followed us, to whom we
called and beckoned him to come to us.  On Bill saying a few words to
him, which I did not understand, the boy advanced to the edge of the
pond, and gave a low peculiar whistle.  Immediately the water became
agitated and an enormous eel thrust its head above the surface and
allowed the youth to touch it.  It was about twelve feet long, and as
thick round the body as a man's thigh.

"There," said Bill, his lip curling with contempt, "what do you think of
that for a god, Ralph?  This is one o' their gods, and it has been fed
with dozens o' livin' babies already.  How many more it'll get afore it
dies is hard to say."

"Babies?" said I, with an incredulous look

"Ay, babies," returned Bill.  "Your soft-hearted folk at home would say,
'Oh, horrible! impossible!' to that, and then go away as comfortable and
unconcerned as if their sayin' 'horrible! impossible!' had made it a lie.
But I tell you, Ralph, it's a _fact_.  I've seed it with my own eyes the
last time I was here, an' mayhap if you stop a while at this accursed
place, and keep a sharp look out, you'll see it too.  They don't feed it
regularly with livin' babies, but they give it one now and then as a
treat.  Bah! you brute!' cried Bill, in disgust, giving the reptile a
kick on the snout with his heavy boot, that sent it sweltering back in
agony into its loathsome pool.  I thought it lucky for Bill, indeed for
all of us, that the native youth's back happened to be turned at the
time, for I am certain that if the poor savages had come to know that we
had so rudely handled their god, we should have had to fight our way back
to the ship.  As we retraced our steps I questioned my companion further
on this subject.

"How comes it, Bill, that the mothers allow such a dreadful thing to be
done?"

"Allow it? the mothers _do_ it!  It seems to me that there's nothing too
fiendish or diabolical for these people to do.  Why, in some of the
islands they have an institution called the _Areoi_, and the persons
connected with that body are ready for any wickedness that mortal man can
devise.  In fact they stick at nothing; and one o' their customs is to
murder their infants the moment they are born.  The mothers agree to it,
and the fathers do it.  And the mildest ways they have of murdering them
is by sticking them through the body with sharp splinters of bamboo,
strangling them with their thumbs, or burying them alive and stamping
them to death while under the sod."

I felt sick at heart while my companion recited these horrors.

"But it's a curious fact," he continued, after a pause, during which we
walked in silence towards the spot where we had left our comrades,--"it's
a curious fact, that wherever the missionaries get a footin' all these
things come to an end at once, an' the savages take to doin' each other
good, and singin' psalms, just like Methodists."

"God bless the missionaries!" said I, while a feeling of enthusiasm
filled my heart, so that I could speak with difficulty.  "God bless and
prosper the missionaries till they get a footing in every island of the
sea!"

"I would say Amen to that prayer, Ralph, if I could," said Bill, in a
deep, sad voice; "but it would be a mere mockery for a man to ask a
blessing for others who dare not ask one for himself.  But, Ralph," he
continued, "I've not told you half o' the abominations I have seen durin'
my life in these seas.  If we pull long together, lad, I'll tell you
more; and if times have not changed very much since I was here last, it's
like that you'll have a chance o' seeing a little for yourself before
long."




CHAPTER XXV.


The Sandal-wood party--Native children's games, somewhat
surprising--Desperate amusements suddenly and fatally brought to a
close--An old friend recognised--News--Romata's mad conduct.

Next day the wood-cutting party went ashore again, and I accompanied them
as before.  During the dinner hour I wandered into the woods alone, being
disinclined for food that day.  I had not rambled far when I found myself
unexpectedly on the sea-shore, having crossed a narrow neck of land which
separated the native village from a large bay.  Here I found a party of
the islanders busy with one of their war-canoes, which was almost ready
for launching.  I stood for a long time watching this party with great
interest, and observed that they fastened the timbers and planks to each
other very much in the same way in which I had seen Jack fasten those of
our little boat.  But what surprised me most was its immense length,
which I measured very carefully, and found to be a hundred feet long; and
it was so capacious that it could have held three hundred men.  It had
the unwieldy out-rigger and enormously high stern-posts which I had
remarked on the canoe that came to us while I was on the Coral Island.
Observing some boys playing at games a short way along the beach, I
resolved to go and watch them; but as I turned from the natives who were
engaged so busily and cheerfully at their work, I little thought of the
terrible event that hung on the completion of that war-canoe.

Advancing towards the children, who were so numerous that I began to
think this must be the general play-ground of the village, I sat down on
a grassy bank under the shade of a plantain-tree, to watch them.  And a
happier or more noisy crew I have never seen.  There were at least two
hundred of them, both boys and girls, all of whom were clad in no other
garments than their own glossy little black skins, except the maro, or
strip of cloth round the loins of the boys, and a very short petticoat or
kilt on the girls.  They did not all play at the same game, but amused
themselves in different groups.

One band was busily engaged in a game exactly similar to our blind-man's-
buff.  Another set were walking on stilts, which raised the children
three feet from the ground.  They were very expert at this amusement and
seldom tumbled.  In another place I observed a group of girls standing
together, and apparently enjoying themselves very much; so I went up to
see what they were doing, and found that they were opening their eye-lids
with their fingers till their eyes appeared of an enormous size, and then
thrusting pieces of straw between the upper and lower lids, across the
eye-ball, to keep them in that position!  This seemed to me, I must
confess, a very foolish as well as dangerous amusement.  Nevertheless the
children seemed to be greatly delighted with the hideous faces they made.
I pondered this subject a good deal, and thought that if little children
knew how silly they seem to grown-up people when they make faces, they
would not be so fond of doing it.  In another place were a number of boys
engaged in flying kites, and I could not help wondering that some of the
games of those little savages should be so like to our own, although they
had never seen us at play.  But the kites were different from ours in
many respects, being of every variety of shape.  They were made of very
thin cloth, and the boys raised them to a wonderful height in the air by
means of twine made from the cocoa-nut husk.  Other games there were,
some of which showed the natural depravity of the hearts of these poor
savages, and made me wish fervently that missionaries might be sent out
to them.  But the amusement which the greatest number of the children of
both sexes seemed to take chief delight in, was swimming and diving in
the sea; and the expertness which they exhibited was truly amazing.  They
seemed to have two principal games in the water, one of which was to dive
off a sort of stage which had been erected near a deep part of the sea,
and chase each other in the water.  Some of them went down to an
extraordinary depth; others skimmed along the surface, or rolled over and
over like porpoises, or diving under each other, came up unexpectedly and
pulled each other down by a leg or an arm.  They never seemed to tire of
this sport, and, from the great heat of the water in the South Seas, they
could remain in it nearly all day without feeling chilled.  Many of these
children were almost infants, scarce able to walk; yet they staggered
down the beach, flung their round fat little black bodies fearlessly into
deep water, and struck out to sea with as much confidence as ducklings.

The other game to which I have referred was swimming in the surf.  But as
this is an amusement in which all engage, from children of ten to gray-
headed men of sixty, and as I had an opportunity of witnessing it in
perfection the day following, I shall describe it more minutely.

I suppose it was in honour of their guest that this grand swimming-match
was got up, for Romata came and told the captain that they were going to
engage in it, and begged him to "come and see."

"What sort of amusement is this surf swimming?" I inquired of Bill, as we
walked together to a part of the shore on which several thousands of the
natives were assembled.
