and soon returned leading them by the hand.

For some minutes all was a happy confusion, and Ibrahim took advantage
of it to fall on his knees before Aurora, and search in the fifth fold
of her dress for the missing coral bead. The Book of Spells had told the
truth; there it was, and as the chaplet was now complete the young man's
days of seeking were over.

In the midst of the general rejoicing Hassan alone bore a gloomy face.

'Alas!' he said, 'everyone is happy but the miserable being you see
before you. I have lost the only consolation in my grief, which was to
feel that I had a brother in misfortune!'

'Be comforted,' replied the Bassa; 'sooner or later the dervish who
stole the pink bag is sure to be found.'

Supper was then served, and after they had all eaten of rare fruits
which seemed to them the most delicious in the whole world, the Bassa
ordered the flask containing the elixir of love to be brought and the
young people to drink of it. Then their eyes shone with a new fire, and
they swore to be true to each other till death.

This ceremony was scarcely over when the clock struck one, and in an
instant Aurora and Argentine had vanished, and in the place where they
stood lay two watches. Silence fell upon all the company--they had
forgotten the enchantment; then the voice of Azemi was heard asking if
he might be allowed to take charge of the watches till the next day,
pledging his head to end their enchantment. With the consent of Sumi,
this was granted, and the Bassa gave Azemi a purse containing a thousand
sequins, as a reward for the services he had already rendered to them.
After this everybody went to his own apartment.

Azemi had never possessed so much money before, and never closed his
eyes for joy the whole night long. Very early he got up and went into
the garden, thinking how he could break the enchantment of the daughters
of Siroco. Suddenly the soft tones of a woman fell on his ear, and
peeping through the bushes he saw Tezila, who was arranging flowers in
her sister's hair. The rustling of the leaves caused Dely to start; she
jumped up as if to fly, but Azemi implored her to remain and begged her
to tell him what happened to them after the death of their lovers, and
how they had come to find the dervish.

'The punishment decreed to us by the Queen Okimpare,' answered Dely,
'was that we were to dance and sing in the midst of our sorrow, at a
great fete which was to be held that very day for all her people. This
cruel command nearly turned our brains, and we swore a solemn oath to
make all lovers as wretched as we were ourselves. In this design we
succeeded so well that in a short time the ladies of the capital came in
a body to Okimpare, and prayed her to banish us from the kingdom, before
their lives were made miserable for ever. She consented, and commanded
us to be placed on board a ship, with our slave Gouloucou.

'On the shore we saw an old man who was busily engaged in drowning
some little black pigs, talking to them all the while, as if they could
understand him.

'"Accursed race," said he, "it is you who have caused all the
misfortunes of him to whom I gave the magic bracelet. Perish all of
you!"

'We drew near from curiosity, and recognised in him the dervish who had
sheltered us on our first escape from the caravan.

'When the old man discovered who we were he was beside himself with
pleasure, and offered us a refuge in the cave where he lived. We gladly
accepted his offer, and to the cave we all went, taking with us the last
little pig, which he gave us as a present.

'"The Bassa of the Sea," he added, "will pay you anything you like to
ask for it."

'Without asking why it was so precious I took the pig and placed it in
my work bag, where it has been ever since. Only yesterday we offered
it to the Bassa, who laughed at us, and this so enraged us against the
dervish that we cut off his beard when he was asleep, and now he dare
not show himself.'

'Ah,' exclaimed the page, 'it is not fitting that such beauty should
waste itself in making other people miserable. Forget the unhappy past
and think only of the future. And accept, I pray you, this watch, to
mark the brighter hours in store.' So saying he laid the watch upon her
knee. Then he turned to Tezila. 'And you fair maiden, permit me to offer
you this other watch. True it is only of silver, but it is all I have
left to give. And I feel quite sure that you must have somewhere a
silver seal, that will be exactly the thing to go with it.'

'Why, so you have,' cried Dely; 'fasten your silver seal to your watch,
and I will hang my gold one on to mine.'

The seals were produced, and, as Azemi had guessed, they were the
talismans which the two Circassians had taken from Izif and Izouf,
mounted in gold and silver. As quick as lightning the watches slid
from the hands of Tezila and her sister, and Aurora and Argentine stood
before them, each with her talisman on her finger.

At first they seemed rather confused themselves at the change which had
taken place, and the sunlight which they had not seen for so long, but
when gradually they understood that their enchantment had come to an
end, they could find no words to express their happiness.

The Circassians could with difficulty be comforted for the loss of the
talismans, but Aurora and Argentine entreated them to dry their tears,
as their father, Siroco, who was governor of Alexandria, would not
fail to reward them in any manner they wished. This promise was soon
confirmed by Siroco himself, who came into the garden with the Bassa and
his two sons, and was speedily joined by the ladies of the family. Only
Hassan was absent. It was the hour in which he was condemned to bewail
his ebony hand.

To the surprise of all a noise was at this moment heard in a corner of
the terrace, and Hassan himself appeared surrounded by slaves, clapping
his hands and shouting with joy. 'I was weeping as usual,' cried he,
'when all at once the tears refused to come to my eyes, and on looking
down at my hand I saw that its blackness had vanished. And now, lovely
Zelida, nothing prevents me any longer from offering you the hand, when
the heart has been yours always.'

But though Hassan never thought of asking or caring what had caused his
cure, the others were by no means so indifferent. It was quite clear
that the little black pig must be dead--but how, and when? To this the
slaves answered that they had seen that morning a man pursued by three
others, and that he had taken refuge in the cavern which they had been
left to guard. Then, in obedience to orders, they had rolled a stone
over the entrance.

Piercing shrieks interrupted their story, and a man, whom the
Circassians saw to be the old dervish, rushed round the corner of the
terrace with the three Jews behind him. When the fugitive beheld so many
people collected together, he turned down another path, but the slaves
captured all four and brought them before their master.

What was the surprise of the Bassa when he beheld in the old dervish the
man who had given the chaplet, the copper plaque, and the bracelet to
his three sons. 'Fear nothing, holy father,' he said, 'you are safe with
me. But tell us, how came you here?'

'My lord,' explained the dervish, 'when my beard was cut off during my
sleep by the two Circassians, I was ashamed to appear before the eyes
of men, and fled, bearing with me the pink silk bag. In the night these
three men fell in with me, and we passed some time in conversation, but
at dawn, when it was light enough to see each other's faces, one of them
exclaimed that I was the dervish travelling with the two Circassians who
had stolen the talismans from the Jews. I jumped up and tried to fly
to my cave, but they were too quick for me, and just as we reached your
garden they snatched the bag which contained the little black pig and
flung it into the sea. By this act, which delivers your son, I would
pray you to forgive them for any wrongs they may have done you--nay
more, that you will recompense them for it.' The Bassa granted the holy
man's request, and seeing that the two Jews had fallen victims to the
charms of the Circassian ladies, gave his consent to their union, which
was fixed to take place at the same time as that of Izaf with the wise
Sumi. The Cadi was sent for, and the Jews exchanged the hats of their
race for the turbans of the followers of the Prophet. Then, after so
many misfortunes, the Bassa's three sons entreated their father to delay
their happiness no longer, and the six marriages were performed by the
Cadi at the hour of noon.

[Cabinet des Fees.]




The Jackal and the Spring


Once upon a time all the streams and rivers ran so dry that the animals
did not know how to get water. After a very long search, which had been
quite in vain, they found a tiny spring, which only wanted to be dug
deeper so as to yield plenty of water. So the beasts said to each other,
'Let us dig a well, and then we shall not fear to die of thirst;' and
they all consented except the jackal, who hated work of any kind, and
generally got somebody to do it for him.

When they had finished their well, they held a council as to who should
be made the guardian of the well, so that the jackal might not come near
it, for, they said, 'he would not work, therefore he shall not drink.'

After some talk it was decided that the rabbit should be left in charge;
then all the other beasts went back to their homes.

When they were out of sight the jackal arrived. 'Good morning! Good
morning, rabbit!' and the rabbit politely said, 'Good morning!' Then the
jackal unfastened the little bag that hung at his side, and pulled out
of it a piece of honeycomb which he began to eat, and turning to the
rabbit he remarked:

'As you see, rabbit, I am not thirsty in the least, and this is nicer
than any water.'

'Give me a bit,' asked the rabbit. So the jackal handed him a very
little morsel.

'Oh, how good it is!' cried the rabbit; 'give me a little more, dear
friend!'

But the jackal answered, 'If you really want me to give you some more,
you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your back, so that I
can pour it into your mouth.'

The rabbit did as he was bid, and when he was tied tight and popped on
his back, the jackal ran to the spring and drank as much as he wanted.
When he had quite finished he returned to his den.

In the evening the animals all came back, and when they saw the rabbit
lying with his paws tied, they said to him: 'Rabbit, how did you let
yourself be taken in like this?'

'It was all the fault of the jackal,' replied the rabbit; 'he tied me
up like this, and told me he would give me something nice to eat. It was
all a trick just to get at our water.'

'Rabbit, you are no better than an idiot to have let the jackal drink
our water when he would not help to find it. Who shall be our next
watchman? We must have somebody a little sharper than you!' and the
little hare called out, 'I will be the watchman.'

The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving
the little hare to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the
jackal came back. 'Good morning! good morning, little hare,' and the
little hare politely said, 'Good morning.'

'Can you give me a pinch of snuff?' said the jackal.

'I am so sorry, but I have none,' answered the little hare.

The jackal then came and sat down by the little hare, and unfastened his
little bag, pulling out of it a piece of honeycomb. He licked his lips
and exclaimed, 'Oh, little hare, if you only knew how good it is!'

'What is it?' asked the little hare.

'It is something that moistens my throat so deliciously,' answered the
jackal, 'that after I have eaten it I don't feel thirsty any more, while
I am sure that all you other beasts are for ever wanting water.'

'Give me a bit, dear friend,' asked the little hare.

'Not so fast,' replied the jackal. 'If you really wish to enjoy what
you are eating, you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your
back, so that I can pour it into your mouth.'

'You can tie them, only be quick,' said the little hare, and when he was
tied tight and popped on his back, the jackal went quietly down to the
well, and drank as much as he wanted. When he had quite finished he
returned to his den.

In the evening the animals all came back; and when they saw the little
hare with his paws tied, they said to him: 'Little hare, how did you let
yourself be taken in like this? Didn't you boast you were very sharp?
You undertook to guard our water; now show us how much is left for us to
drink!'

'It is all the fault of the jackal,' replied the little hare. 'He told
me he would give me something nice to eat if I would just let him tie my
hands behind my back.'

Then the animals said, 'Who can we trust to mount guard now?' And the
panther answered, 'Let it be the tortoise.'

The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving
the tortoise to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the jackal
came back. 'Good morning, tortoise; good morning.'

But the tortoise took no notice.

'Good morning, tortoise; good morning.' But still the tortoise pretended
not to hear.

Then the jackal said to himself, 'Well, to-day I have only got to manage
a bigger idiot than before. I shall just kick him on one side, and then
go and have a drink.' So he went up to the tortoise and said to him in a
soft voice, 'Tortoise! tortoise!' but the tortoise took no notice. Then
the jackal kicked him out of the way, and went to the well and began to
drink, but scarcely had he touched the water, than the tortoise seized
him by the leg. The jackal shrieked out: 'Oh, you will break my leg!'
but the tortoise only held on the tighter. The jackal then took his bag
and tried to make the tortoise smell the honeycomb he had inside; but
the tortoise turned away his head and smelt nothing. At last the jackal
said to the tortoise, 'I should like to give you my bag and everything
in it,' but the only answer the tortoise made was to grasp the jackal's
leg tighter still.

So matters stood when the other animals came back. The moment he saw
them, the jackal gave a violent tug, and managed to free his leg, and
then took to his heels as fast as he could. And the animals all said to
the tortoise:

'Well done, tortoise, you have proved your courage; now we can drink
from our well in peace, as you have got the better of that thieving
jackal!'

[Contes Populaires des Bassoutos, recueillis et traduits par E.
Jacottet. Paris: Leroux, editeur.]




The Bear


Once on a time there was a king who had an only daughter. He was so
proud and so fond of her, that he was in constant terror that something
would happen to her if she went outside the palace, and thus, owing to
his great love for her, he forced her to lead the life of a prisoner,
shut up within her own rooms.

The princess did not like this at all, and one day she complained about
it very bitterly to her nurse. Now, the nurse was a witch, though the
king did not know it. For some time she listened and tried to soothe the
princess; but when she saw that she would not be comforted, she said to
her: 'Your father loves you very dearly, as you know. Whatever you were
to ask from him he would give you. The one thing he will not grant you
is permission to leave the palace. Now, do as I tell you. Go to your
father and ask him to give you a wooden wheel-barrow, and a bear's skin.
When you have got them bring them to me, and I will touch them with my
magic wand. The wheel-barrow will then move of itself, and will take
you at full speed wherever you want to go, and the bear's skin will make
such a covering for you, that no one will recognise you.'

So the princess did as the witch advised her. The king, when he heard
her strange request, was greatly astonished, and asked her what she
meant to do with a wheel-barrow and a bear's skin. And the princess
answered, 'You never let me leave the house--at least you might grant me
this request' So the king granted it, and the princess went back to her
nurse, taking the barrow and the bear's skin with her.

As soon as the witch saw them, she touched them with her magic wand,
and in a moment the barrow began to move about in all directions. The
princess next put on the bear's skin, which so completely changed her
appearance, that no one could have known that she was a girl and not a
bear. In this strange attire she seated herself on the barrow, and in
a few minutes she found herself far away from the palace, and moving
rapidly through a great forest. Here she stopped the barrow with a sign
that the witch had shown her, and hid herself and it in a thick grove of
flowering shrubs.

Now it happened that the prince of that country was hunting with his
dogs in the forest. Suddenly he caught sight of the bear hiding among
the shrubs, and calling his dogs, hounded them on to attack it. But the
girl, seeing what peril she was in, cried, 'Call off your dogs, or they
will kill me. What harm have I ever done to you?' At these words, coming
from a bear, the prince was so startled that for a moment he stood
stock-still, then he said quite gently, 'Will you come with me? I will
take you to my home.'

'I will come gladly,' replied the bear; and seating herself on the
barrow it at once began to move in the direction of the prince's palace.
You may imagine the surprise of the prince's mother when she saw her son
return accompanied by a bear, who at once set about doing the house-work
better than any servant that the queen had ever seen.

Now it happened that there were great festivities going on in the palace
of a neighbouring prince, and at dinner, one day, the prince said to his
mother: 'This evening there is to be a great ball, to which I must go.'

And his mother answered, 'Go and dance, and enjoy yourself.'

Suddenly a voice came from under the table, where the bear had rolled
itself, as was its wont: 'Let me come to the ball; I, too, would like to
dance.'

But the only answer the prince made was to give the bear a kick, and to
drive it out of the room.

In the evening the prince set off for the ball. As soon as he had
started, the bear came to the queen and implored to be allowed to go to
the ball, saying that she would hide herself so well that no one would
know she was there. The kind-hearted queen could not refuse her.

