
"It never can be quite the old time again, but when you are back at the
old place it may be very near it."

She looked at him reproachfully.

"You think that I shall change my mind, Mark, but at heart you know
better. The day I am one and twenty I hope to carry out my intentions."

"Well, as I have told you before, Millicent, I cannot control your
actions, but I am at least master of my own. You can give away Crowswood
to whom you like, but at least you cannot compel me to take it. Make it
over to one of the hospitals if you like--that is within your power; but
it is not in your power to force me into the mean action of enriching
myself because you have romantic notions in your mind. I should scorn
myself were I capable of doing such an action. I wonder you think so
meanly of me as to suppose for a moment that I would do so."

"It is a great pity my father did not leave the property outright to
your father, then all this bother would have been avoided," she said
quietly. "I should still have had plenty to live upon without there
being any fear of being loved merely for my money."

"It would have been the same thing if he had," Mark said stubbornly.
"My father would not have taken it, and I am sure that I should not have
taken it after him; you are his proper heiress. I don't say if he had
left a son, and that son had been a second Bastow, that one would have
hesitated, for he would probably have gambled it away in a year, the
tenants might have been ruined, and the village gone to the dogs.
Every man has a right to disinherit an unworthy son, but that is a very
different thing from disinheriting a daughter simply from a whim. Well,
don't let us talk about it any more, Millicent. It is the only thing
that we don't agree about, and therefore it is best left alone."

The next day Mark established himself at an inn in Peckham, and for six
weeks made diligent inquiries, but without success. There were at least
a dozen men who lived quietly and rode or drove to their business in
town. Many of them were put aside as needing no investigation, having
been residents there for years. Some of the others he saw start or
return, but none of them corresponded in any way with the probable
appearance of the man for whom he was in search. During this time he
heard of several private coaches being held up on the road between Epsom
and London, and three burglaries took place at Streatham.

He then moved to Stockwell. Before proceeding there he had his horse
up again from Crowswood, and rode into Stockwell from the west. He was
dressed now as a small country squire, and had a valise strapped behind
his saddle. The inn there was a busy one.

"I want a room," he said, as he alighted. "I shall probably stay here a
few days."

Presently he had a talk with the landlord.

"I am on the lookout," he said, "for a little place near town. I have
come in for a small estate in the country, but I have no taste for
farming, and want to be within easy reach of town, and at the same
time to have a place with a paddock where I can keep my horse and live
quietly. I don't much care whether it is here or anywhere else within
a few miles of town, and I intend to ride about and see if I can find a
place that will suit me. I do not want to be nearer the town than this,
for I have not money enough to go the pace; still, I should like to be
near enough to ride or walk in whenever I have a fancy for it."

"I understand, sir. Of course there are plenty of places round here,
at Clapham and Tooting, and I may say Streatham, but most of them are
a deal too large for a bachelor, still I have no doubt you would find a
place to suit you without much difficulty. These sort of places are most
in request by London tradesmen who have given up business and want to
get a little way out of town and keep a gig. I should say there must be
a score of such people living round here. I am often asked about such
places, but I don't know of one to let just at the present moment.

"Still, there ought to be, for of late people have not cared so much
to come out here; there has been such a scare owing to highwaymen and
burglars, that men with wives and families don't fancy settling out of
town, though there aint much work about it, for to every one house that
is broken into there are thousands that are not, and besides, the houses
that these fellows try are large places, where there is plenty of silver
plate and a few gold watches, and perhaps some money to be had."

Mark soon made the acquaintance of the stablemen, and a few pints of
beer put them on good terms with him. Every day he took rides round the
neighborhood, going out early, stabling his horse, and after having a
chat with the ostlers, strolling round the place. Clapham, Ewell, and
Streatham were also visited.

"I know of a place that would just suit you," the ostler at the
Greyhound at Streatham said to him, on the occasion of his third visit
there; "but it is let; my old mother is the gentleman's housekeeper.
He took the place through me, for he rode up just as you have done, one
afternoon, nigh a year ago. He was from town, he was; he told me that
he had been going the pace too hard, and had to pull in, and wanted a
little place where he could keep his horse and live quiet for a time. I
told him of a place that I thought would suit him just outside the town,
and he called in the next day and told me he had taken it. 'Now,' he
said, 'I want a woman as house keeper; an old woman, you know. I cannot
be bothered with a young one. If you speak a civil word to a wench she
soon fancies you are in love with her. I want one who can cook a chop or
a steak, fry me a bit of bacon, and boil an egg and keep the place tidy.
I intend to look after my horse myself.'

"'Well, sir,' I said, 'there is my old mother. She is a widow, and it
is as much as she can do to keep off the parish. She is reckoned a tidy
cook and a good cleaner, and she could keep herself well enough if it
wasn't that she is so hard of hearing that many people don't care to
employ her.'

"'I don't care a rap about that,' he said. 'I shall not need to talk to
her except to tell her what I will have for dinner, and if she is deaf
she won't want to be away gossiping. Does she live near here?'

"'She lives in the town,' I said. 'I can fetch her down in half an
hour.'

"'That will do,' says he. 'I am going to have lunch. When I have, done I
will come out and speak with her.'

"Well, sir, he engaged her right off, and he tipped me a guinea for
finding the place for him, and there he has been ever since. It was a
lucky job for mother, for she says there never was a gentleman that gave
less trouble. He is a wonderful quiet man, and in general stops at home
all the day smoking and reading. He has a boy comes in two or three
times a week to work in the garden. Sometimes of an evening he rides up
to town. I expect he cannot keep away from the cards altogether."

"Is he an elderly man?" Mark asked.

"Lor', no, sir; under thirty, I should say. He is a free handed sort of
chap, and though he aint particular about his eating, he likes a bottle
of good wine, the old woman says, even if it is only with a chop. He
never rides past here and I happen to be outside without tossing me a
shilling to drink his health."

Mark went into the house and ordered lunch. It would not have done to
have asked any more questions or to have shown any special interest in
the matter, but he felt so excited that he could not have avoided doing
so had he waited longer with the ostler. After he had finished his meal
he strolled out again into the stable yard.

"Well," he said to the ostler, "can't you put me up to another good
thing, just as you told that gentleman you were speaking to me about?"

"There are two or three places that I know of that might suit you, sir.
There is a house on the hill. I know that it has got a paddock, but I
don't know how big it is; it is in general known as Hawleys--that is the
name of the last people who lived there. Anyone will tell you which is
the house. Then there is another place. You turn to the right the third
turning on the hill; it stands by itself two or three hundred yards
down; it has got a goodish bit of ground. There is only one house beyond
it; that is the one where my mother lives. That was an old farm once,
but this was built later. I believe the ground belonged to the farm. You
will know it by a big tree in front of it; it stands back forty feet or
so from the road."

"Where does the road lead to?"

"Well, sir, it aint much of a road beyond the next house; it is only
a lane, but you can get through that way into the main road, through
Tooting down into Balham, and on to Wimbledon."

"'I think I will go and have a look at both those places," Mark said.

"Will you take your horse, sir?"

"No; I suppose it is not much above half a mile?"

"About that, sir."

"Then I will walk; I shall not be likely to find anyone to hold my horse
there."

Mark had no difficulty in finding the house. It looked as if it had been
untenanted for some time, and in the window was a notice that for keys
and information applications were to be made at a shop in the High
Street. Well pleased to find that there was no one in the house, Mark
entered the gate and passed round into what at one time had been a
kitchen garden behind it; at the bottom of this was a field of three or
four acres.

The ground was separated by a hedge from that of the house beyond. This
was fully a hundred yards away. A well bred horse was grazing in the
field, a man smoking a pipe was watching a boy doing gardening work
behind the house. Mark remained for nearly an hour concealed behind
the hedge in hopes that he would come nearer. At the end of that time,
however, he went into the house, and after waiting another ten minutes
Mark also left, resisting the temptation to walk along the road and take
a closer look at it, for he felt that such a step would be dangerous,
for should the man notice anyone looking at the place his suspicions
might be aroused.

It was evident that the lane was very little used; in many cases the
grass grew across it. There were marks of horses' feet, but none of
wheels, and he concluded that when going up to town the man came that
way and rode quietly through Streatham, for the hoof prints all pointed
in that direction, and that on his return at night he came up the lane
from the other road.

"Well, master, what do you think of the houses?" the ostler asked on his
return to the inn.

"I have only been to the one in the lane that you spoke of, for I want
to get back to town. I had a good look at it, but it is rather a dreary
looking place, and evidently wants a lot of repairs before it can
be made comfortable. The next time that I am down I will look at the
other."

Mounting his horse, he rode at a rapid pace into London, and dismounted
at Bow Street.

"You have news, I see, Mr. Thorndyke," the chief said when he entered.

"I have, sir; I believe that I have marked the man down; at any rate, if
it is not he, it is a criminal of some sort--of that I have no doubt."

"That is good news indeed," the chief said. "Now tell me all about it."

Mark repeated the story the ostler had told him, and the result of his
own observations.

"You see," he said, "the man, whether Bastow or not, has clearly taken
the place for the purpose of concealment, for he can approach it by
the lane, which is a very unfrequented one, on his return from his
expeditions. He has taken on a deaf old woman who will not hear him ride
in at night, and will have no idea at what hours he comes home. Riding
out through the main street in the afternoon he would excite no notice,
and the story to the ostler would very well account for his taking the
house and for his habit of coming up here of an afternoon and returning
late. I thought it best to come back and tell you, and I will adopt any
plan that you suggest for his capture."

"You say that he has been there for nearly a year?"

"About a year, the ostler said."

"Then one of my men, at least, must have been very careless not to
have found him out long ago. Let me see;" and he took down a volume of
reports. "Streatham. Tomlinson has been here a fortnight making every
inquiry. 'No man of suspicious appearance or of unknown antecedents
here.'

"Humph! That is not the first time that Tomlinson has failed altogether
in his duty. However, that does not matter for the moment. What is your
own idea, Mr. Thorndyke?"

"My idea is that a couple of good men should go down with me to
Streatham, and that we should be always on the watch in High Street
until we see him ride past. Directly it is dark we will go to his house,
fasten the old woman up, and search it thoroughly. If we find stolen
property so much the better; but in any case we shall wait inside the
house until he returns, and as he comes in throw ourselves upon him
before he has time to draw a pistol. I should say it would be as well
the men should go down in a trap. There is an empty house next door, and
when we go to search the place we can leave the horse and trap inside
the gate. Directly we have him secure we can fetch up the trap, put him
in, and one of the men and myself can drive him back here, leaving the
other in charge of the house, which can then be searched again next
day."

"I think that will be a very good plan, and will avoid all unnecessary
fuss. I will send Malcolm and Chester down with you tomorrow. Where will
you meet them?"

"I should say that they had better put up at the Greyhound. I don't
suppose he will go out until six or seven o'clock, but they had better
be there earlier. One should station himself in the main street, the
other concealing himself somewhere beyond the fellow's house, for it is
likely enough that sometimes he may take the other way. I will go down
to the Greyhound at six, and will wait there until one of them brings me
news that he has left."

"I think you had better come in in the morning, and give your
instructions to the men; there will be less fear of any mistake being
made. I should say you had better put your horse up and come here on
foot; one can never be too careful when one is dealing with so crafty
a rogue as this; he certainly does not work with an accomplice, but for
all that he may have two or three sharp boys in his pay, and they may
watch this place by turns and carry him news of any stir about the
office."

"I will walk in," Mark replied. "It is no distance from Stockwell."

Mark slept but little that night. He had believed all along that he
should be finally successful, but the discovery had come so suddenly
that it had taken him completely by surprise. It might not be the man,
and he tried hard to persuade himself that the chances were against his
being so, so that he should not feel disappointed should it turn out
that it was some other criminal, for that the man was a criminal he had
not a shadow of doubt.

The next morning he was at the office early. The chief arrived half an
hour later, and the two officers were at once called in.

"You will go with Mr. Thorndyke," the chief said, "and he will give you
instructions. The capture is a very important one, and there must be no
mistake made. We believe the man to be Bastow. I think you were present
at his trial, Chester; he escaped from Sydney Convict Prison some
three years ago, and is, I believe, the author of many of the highway
robberies and burglaries that have puzzled us so. Of course, you will
take firearms, but if he is alone you will certainly have no occasion
to use them, especially as you will take him completely by surprise.
You will order a gig from Morden, and leave here about three o'clock. I
should say you had better get up as two countrymen who have been up
to market. However, Mr. Thorndyke will explain the whole matter to you
fully."

Mark then went off with the two officers to a private room, and went
into the whole matter with them.

"I think, Chester," he said, "that you had better watch in the High
Street, because you know the man. At least, you have seen him, and may
recognize him again."

"I think I should know him, however much he has changed. I took
particular notice of him at the trial, and thought what a hardened
looking young scamp he was. It is very seldom I forget a face when once
I have a thorough look at it, and I don't think I am likely to forget
his."

"Malcolm, I think you cannot do better than take your place in the
garden of the house next to his; it is a place that has stood empty for
many months, and there is no chance of anyone seeing you. His paddock
comes up to the garden, and you can, by placing yourself in the corner,
see him as he comes out into the lane. As soon as you see that he has
gone, come back to the Greyhound with the news. I shall be there, and
you will pick up Chester in the High Street as you come along; of course
you won't pretend to know me, but the mere fact of your coming back will
be enough to tell me that he has gone. As soon as it gets dark we will
pay our reckoning, and drive off in the gig, leaving it in the drive in
front of the house this side of his. I shall have strolled off before,
and shall be waiting for you there. If he does not come out by ten
o'clock we can give it up for tonight. You had better say that you have
changed your mind, and will take beds at the Greyhound; and the next
morning drive off in your gig and put up again at the inn at the other
end of the town, the White Horse. I will come over again at two o'clock
in the afternoon. You will bring handcuffs, and you had better also
bring a stout rope to tie him with."

When every detail had been arranged, Mark strolled to Dick Chetwynd's
lodgings.

"Well, Mark what has become of you? I have not seen you for the last two
months, and I hear that you have not been near Ingleston's crib since I
saw you."

"No, I have been away on business. You know I told you that I was
spending much of my time in endeavoring to hunt down my father's
murderer. I can tell you now that I have been working all the time with
the Bow Street people, and I think I know every thieves' slum in London
as well as any constable in the town."

"You don't say so, Mark! Well, I should not like such work as that. The
prize fighters are a pretty rough lot, but to go to such dens as those
is enough to make one shudder. But that does not explain where you have
been now."

"No. Well, having persuaded myself at last that his headquarters were
not in town, I have been trying the villages round, and I believe that I
have laid my hands on him at last."

"You don't say so, Mark! Well, I congratulate you heartily, both on your
having caught the fellow and for having got rid of such horrid work.
Where is he? Have you got him lodged in jail?"

"No, we are going to capture him tonight; or if not tonight, tomorrow
night. Two of the Bow Street officers are going down with me, and we
shall have him as he comes home from one of his expeditions either on
the highway or as a house breaker. If he does not go this evening we
shall wait until tomorrow, but at any rate, the first time that he goes
out we shall have him."

"I have got a special engagement for this evening, Mark, or I would
offer to go with you and lend you a hand, if necessary."

"There is no occasion for that, Dick. We shall take the fellow by
surprise as he goes into his own house, and have him handcuffed before
he can draw a pistol. Then, when we have got him fairly tied up, we
shall put him into a light cart that we shall have handy, and bring him
straight to Bow Street. To tell you the truth, I am so excited over the
thought that I do not know how I should have got through the day if I
had not come in to have a chat with you."

"I can quite understand that, old fellow. Well, the best thing we can do
is to take a stroll out and look at the fashions. It is early yet, but
just at present it is all the rage to turn out early. It will do me
good too, for I was at Ingleston's last night, and the smoke and row has
given me a headache. I shall really have to give up going there, except
when there is an important fight on. It is too much to stand, and the
tobacco is so bad that I am obliged to keep a suit of clothes for the
purpose. Let us be off at once."




CHAPTER XVI.


At four o'clock Mark put up his horse at the Greyhound, and chatted for
a quarter of an hour with the ostler, who had been making inquiries,
and had heard of one or two other houses in the neighborhood which were
untenanted. Mark then strolled up the town, exchanging a passing
glance with Chester, who, in a velveteen coat, low hat and gaiters, was
chatting with a wagoner going with a load of hay for the next morning's
market in London. He turned into an inn, called for a pint of the best
port, and sat down in the parlor at a table close to the window, so that
he could see all who went up or down. He entered into conversation with
two or three people who came in, and so passed the time till seven, when
he felt too restless to sit still longer, and went out into the street.

When he was halfway to the Greyhound he heard the sound of a horse's
hoofs behind him, and saw a quietly dressed man coming along at an easy
trot. Had it not been that he recognized the horse, he could not have
felt sure that its rider was the man whose coming he had been waiting
for, there being nothing in his appearance that would excite the
slightest suspicion that he was other than a gentleman of moderate means
and quiet taste, either returning from a ride or passing through on his
way to town. He had a well built and active figure, carried himself with
the ease of a thorough horseman, and nodded to one or two persons of his
acquaintance, and checking his horse at the principal butcher's, ordered
some meat to be sent in that evening.

Mark could trace no resemblance in the face to that of the young fellow
he remembered. It was a quiet and resolute one. If this were Bastow,
he had lost the sneering and insolent expression that was so strongly
impressed on his memory. It might be the man, but if so, he was greatly
changed. Mark's first impression was that it could not be Bastow; but
when he thought over the years of toil and confinement in the convict
prison, the life he had led in the bush, and the two years he had passed
since he returned home, he imagined that the insolence of youth might
well have disappeared, and been succeeded by the resolute daring and
dogged determination that seemed to be impressed on this fellow's face.

Mark paused fifty yards before he reached the inn. In a few minutes he
saw Chester coming along. There was no one else in sight.

"Is it Bastow?" he asked, as the officer came up.

"It's Bastow sure enough, sir. But he is so changed that if I had not
had him in my mind I should not have recognized him. I calculate that a
man who has gone through what he has would have lost the expression he
had as a boy. He must have learnt a lot in the convict prison, and
the fact that he headed the mutiny and escaped from the searchers and
managed to get home showed that he must have become a resolute and
desperate man. All those burglaries, and the way in which he has several
