invented for hundreds of years, and we don't know how to make it, and
we can't tell you. Do go straight home, dear Caesar, and let poor little
Britain alone.'

'But this other girl-child says--' said Caesar.

'All Jane's been telling you is what it's going to be,' Anthea
interrupted, 'hundreds and hundreds of years from now.'

'The little one is a prophetess, eh?' said Caesar, with a whimsical
look. 'Rather young for the business, isn't she?'

'You can call her a prophetess if you like,' said Cyril, 'but what
Anthea says is true.'

'Anthea?' said Caesar. 'That's a Greek name.'

'Very likely,' said Cyril, worriedly. 'I say, I do wish you'd give up
this idea of conquering Britain. It's not worth while, really it isn't!'

'On the contrary,' said Caesar, 'what you've told me has decided me to
go, if it's only to find out what Britain is really like. Guards, detain
these children.'

'Quick,' said Robert, 'before the guards begin detaining. We had enough
of that in Babylon.'

Jane held up the Amulet away from the sunset, and said the word. The
learned gentleman was pushed through and the others more quickly than
ever before passed through the arch back into their own times and the
quiet dusty sitting-room of the learned gentleman.


It is a curious fact that when Caesar was encamped on the coast of
Gaul--somewhere near Boulogne it was, I believe--he was sitting before
his tent in the glow of the sunset, looking out over the violet waters
of the English Channel. Suddenly he started, rubbed his eyes, and called
his secretary. The young man came quickly from within the tent.

'Marcus,' said Caesar. 'I have dreamed a very wonderful dream. Some
of it I forget, but I remember enough to decide what was not before
determined. Tomorrow the ships that have been brought round from the
Ligeris shall be provisioned. We shall sail for this three-cornered
island. First, we will take but two legions.

This, if what we have heard be true, should suffice. But if my dream be
true, then a hundred legions will not suffice. For the dream I dreamed
was the most wonderful that ever tormented the brain even of Caesar. And
Caesar has dreamed some strange things in his time.'


'And if you hadn't told Caesar all that about how things are now, he'd
never have invaded Britain,' said Robert to Jane as they sat down to
tea.

'Oh, nonsense,' said Anthea, pouring out; 'it was all settled hundreds
of years ago.'

'I don't know,' said Cyril. 'Jam, please. This about time being only
a thingummy of thought is very confusing. If everything happens at the
same time--'

'It CAN'T!' said Anthea stoutly, 'the present's the present and the
past's the past.'

'Not always,' said Cyril.

'When we were in the Past the present was the future. Now then!' he
added triumphantly.

And Anthea could not deny it.

'I should have liked to see more of the camp,' said Robert.

'Yes, we didn't get much for our money--but Imogen is happy, that's one
thing,' said Anthea. 'We left her happy in the Past. I've often seen
about people being happy in the Past, in poetry books. I see what it
means now.'

'It's not a bad idea,' said the Psammead sleepily, putting its head out
of its bag and taking it in again suddenly, 'being left in the Past.'

Everyone remembered this afterwards, when--



CHAPTER 11. BEFORE PHARAOH

It was the day after the adventure of Julius Caesar and the Little Black
Girl that Cyril, bursting into the bathroom to wash his hands for
dinner (you have no idea how dirty they were, for he had been playing
shipwrecked mariners all the morning on the leads at the back of the
house, where the water-cistern is), found Anthea leaning her elbows on
the edge of the bath, and crying steadily into it.

'Hullo!' he said, with brotherly concern, 'what's up now? Dinner'll be
cold before you've got enough salt-water for a bath.'

'Go away,' said Anthea fiercely. 'I hate you! I hate everybody!'

There was a stricken pause.

'_I_ didn't know,' said Cyril tamely.

'Nobody ever does know anything,' sobbed Anthea.

'I didn't know you were waxy. I thought you'd just hurt your fingers
with the tap again like you did last week,' Cyril carefully explained.

'Oh--fingers!' sneered Anthea through her sniffs.

'Here, drop it, Panther,' he said uncomfortably. 'You haven't been
having a row or anything?'

'No,' she said. 'Wash your horrid hands, for goodness' sake, if that's
what you came for, or go.'

Anthea was so seldom cross that when she was cross the others were
always more surprised than angry.

Cyril edged along the side of the bath and stood beside her. He put his
hand on her arm.

'Dry up, do,' he said, rather tenderly for him. And, finding that though
she did not at once take his advice she did not seem to resent it, he
put his arm awkwardly across her shoulders and rubbed his head against
her ear.

'There!' he said, in the tone of one administering a priceless cure for
all possible sorrows. 'Now, what's up?'

'Promise you won't laugh?'

'I don't feel laughish myself,' said Cyril, dismally.

'Well, then,' said Anthea, leaning her ear against his head, 'it's
Mother.'

'What's the matter with Mother?' asked Cyril, with apparent want of
sympathy. 'She was all right in her letter this morning.'

'Yes; but I want her so.'

'You're not the only one,' said Cyril briefly, and the brevity of his
tone admitted a good deal.

'Oh, yes,' said Anthea, 'I know. We all want her all the time. But I
want her now most dreadfully, awfully much. I never wanted anything so
much. That Imogen child--the way the ancient British Queen cuddled her
up! And Imogen wasn't me, and the Queen was Mother. And then her letter
this morning! And about The Lamb liking the salt bathing! And she bathed
him in this very bath the night before she went away--oh, oh, oh!'

Cyril thumped her on the back.

'Cheer up,' he said. 'You know my inside thinking that I was doing?
Well, that was partly about Mother. We'll soon get her back. If you'll
chuck it, like a sensible kid, and wash your face, I'll tell you about
it. That's right. You let me get to the tap. Can't you stop crying?
Shall I put the door-key down your back?'

'That's for noses,' said Anthea, 'and I'm not a kid any more than you
are,' but she laughed a little, and her mouth began to get back into its
proper shape. You know what an odd shape your mouth gets into when you
cry in earnest.

'Look here,' said Cyril, working the soap round and round between his
hands in a thick slime of grey soapsuds. 'I've been thinking. We've only
just PLAYED with the Amulet so far. We've got to work it now--WORK it
for all it's worth. And it isn't only Mother either. There's Father out
there all among the fighting. I don't howl about it, but I THINK--Oh,
bother the soap!' The grey-lined soap had squirted out under the
pressure of his fingers, and had hit Anthea's chin with as much force as
though it had been shot from a catapult.

'There now,' she said regretfully, 'now I shall have to wash my face.'

'You'd have had to do that anyway,' said Cyril with conviction. 'Now, my
idea's this. You know missionaries?'

'Yes,' said Anthea, who did not know a single one.

'Well, they always take the savages beads and brandy, and stays, and
hats, and braces, and really useful things--things the savages haven't
got, and never heard about. And the savages love them for their
kind generousness, and give them pearls, and shells, and ivory, and
cassowaries. And that's the way--'

'Wait a sec,' said Anthea, splashing. 'I can't hear what you're saying.
Shells and--'

'Shells, and things like that. The great thing is to get people to love
you by being generous. And that's what we've got to do. Next time we go
into the Past we'll regularly fit out the expedition. You remember how
the Babylonian Queen froze on to that pocket-book? Well, we'll take
things like that. And offer them in exchange for a sight of the Amulet.'

'A sight of it is not much good.'

'No, silly. But, don't you see, when we've seen it we shall know where
it is, and we can go and take it in the night when everybody is asleep.'

'It wouldn't be stealing, would it?' said Anthea thoughtfully, 'because
it will be such an awfully long time ago when we do it. Oh, there's that
bell again.'

As soon as dinner was eaten (it was tinned salmon and lettuce, and a jam
tart), and the cloth cleared away, the idea was explained to the others,
and the Psammead was aroused from sand, and asked what it thought would
be good merchandise with which to buy the affection of say, the Ancient
Egyptians, and whether it thought the Amulet was likely to be found in
the Court of Pharaoh.

But it shook its head, and shot out its snail's eyes hopelessly.

'I'm not allowed to play in this game,' it said. 'Of course I COULD find
out in a minute where the thing was, only I mayn't. But I may go so far
as to own that your idea of taking things with you isn't a bad one. And
I shouldn't show them all at once. Take small things and conceal them
craftily about your persons.'

This advice seemed good. Soon the table was littered over with things
which the children thought likely to interest the Ancient Egyptians.
Anthea brought dolls, puzzle blocks, a wooden tea-service, a green
leather case with Necessaire written on it in gold letters. Aunt
Emma had once given it to Anthea, and it had then contained scissors,
penknife, bodkin, stiletto, thimble, corkscrew, and glove-buttoner. The
scissors, knife, and thimble, and penknife were, of course, lost, but
the other things were there and as good as new. Cyril contributed lead
soldiers, a cannon, a catapult, a tin-opener, a tie-clip, and a tennis
ball, and a padlock--no key. Robert collected a candle ('I don't suppose
they ever saw a self-fitting paraffin one,' he said), a penny Japanese
pin-tray, a rubber stamp with his father's name and address on it, and a
piece of putty.

Jane added a key-ring, the brass handle of a poker, a pot that had held
cold-cream, a smoked pearl button off her winter coat, and a key--no
lock.

'We can't take all this rubbish,' said Robert, with some scorn. 'We must
just each choose one thing.'

The afternoon passed very agreeably in the attempt to choose from the
table the four most suitable objects. But the four children could not
agree what was suitable, and at last Cyril said--

'Look here, let's each be blindfolded and reach out, and the first thing
you touch you stick to.'

This was done.

Cyril touched the padlock.

Anthea got the Necessaire.

Robert clutched the candle.

Jane picked up the tie-clip.

'It's not much,' she said. 'I don't believe Ancient Egyptians wore
ties.'

'Never mind,' said Anthea. 'I believe it's luckier not to really choose.
In the stories it's always the thing the wood-cutter's son picks up in
the forest, and almost throws away because he thinks it's no good, that
turns out to be the magic thing in the end; or else someone's lost it,
and he is rewarded with the hand of the King's daughter in marriage.'

'I don't want any hands in marriage, thank you.' said Cyril firmly.

'Nor yet me,' said Robert. 'It's always the end of the adventures when
it comes to the marriage hands.'

'ARE we ready?' said Anthea.

'It IS Egypt we're going to, isn't it?--nice Egypt?' said Jane. 'I
won't go anywhere I don't know about--like that dreadful big-wavy
burning-mountain city,' she insisted.

Then the Psammead was coaxed into its bag. 'I say,' said Cyril suddenly,
'I'm rather sick of kings. And people notice you so in palaces. Besides
the Amulet's sure to be in a Temple. Let's just go among the common
people, and try to work ourselves up by degrees. We might get taken on
as Temple assistants.'

'Like beadles,' said Anthea, 'or vergers. They must have splendid
chances of stealing the Temple treasures.'

'Righto!' was the general rejoinder. The charm was held up. It grew big
once again, and once again the warm golden Eastern light glowed softly
beyond it.

As the children stepped through it loud and furious voices rang in their
ears. They went suddenly from the quiet of Fitzroy Street dining-room
into a very angry Eastern crowd, a crowd much too angry to notice them.
They edged through it to the wall of a house and stood there. The crowd
was of men, women, and children. They were of all sorts of complexions,
and pictures of them might have been coloured by any child with
a shilling paint-box. The colours that child would have used for
complexions would have been yellow ochre, red ochre, light red, sepia,
and indian ink. But their faces were painted already--black eyebrows
and lashes, and some red lips. The women wore a sort of pinafore with
shoulder straps, and loose things wound round their heads and shoulders.
The men wore very little clothing--for they were the working people--and
the Egyptian boys and girls wore nothing at all, unless you count
the little ornaments hung on chains round their necks and waists. The
children saw all this before they could hear anything distinctly.

Everyone was shouting so.
