"Find out what?" asked Annie a little soberly.

"Why, you see, I don't believe it's possible for any girl to be as sweet
as you look. I couldn't, I know. I've been trying these two days, and
I'm nearly worn out."

Annie's eyes opened wide with surprise; and she laughed merrily, as she
answered,--

"What can you mean! I'm glad enough if my face doesn't tell tales of
me."

"But mine does," said Jenny. "And then I'm so sure to tell all the rest
with my tongue. I do wish I knew what were your faults."

"My faults? What for?"

"I don't know. Seems to me, if I could think of your faults instead of
mine, it wouldn't be so hard to look sweet."

Annie could but see that there was more earnestness than fun in the
queer talk of her new acquaintance.

The truth was, that Jenny had been having almost as hard a struggle with
her tongue as Dick Lee with his, though not for the same reason. Before
many minutes she had frankly told Annie all about it, and she could not
have done that if she had not somehow felt that Annie's "sweetness" was
genuine.

The two girls were sure friends after that, much to the surprise of Mr.
Dabney Kinzer. He, indeed, had been too much occupied in caring for all
his guests, to pay especial attention to any one of them.

His mother had looked after him again and again, with eyes brimful of
pride and of commendation of the way in which he was acquitting himself
as "host."

Mrs. Foster herself remarked to her husband, who had now arrived,--

"Do you see that? Who would have expected as much from a raw, green
country boy?"

"But, my dear, don't you see? The secret of it is, that he's not
thinking of himself at all he's only anxious that his friends should
have a good time."

"That's it; but then, that, too, is a very rare thing in a boy of his
age."

"Dabney," exclaimed the lawyer in a louder tone of voice.

"Good-evening, Mr. Foster. I'm glad you've found room. The house isn't
half large enough."

"It'll do. I understand your ponies ran away with you to-day."

"They did come home in a hurry, that's a fact; but nobody was hurt."

"I fear there would have been, but for you. Do you start for Grantley
with the other boys, tomorrow?"

"Of course. Dick Lee and I need some one to take care of us. We never
have travelled so far before."

"On land, you mean. Is Dick here to-night?"

"Came and looked in, sir; but he got scared by the crowd, and went
home."

"Poor fellow! I don't wonder. Well, we will all do what we can for him."

Poor Dick Lee!

And yet, if Mr. Dabney Kinzer had known his whereabouts at that very
moment, he would half have envied him.

Dick's mother was in the kitchen, helping about the "refreshments;" but
she had not left home until she had compelled her son to dress himself
in his best,--white shirt, red necktie, shining shoes, and all; and she
had brought him with her, almost by force.

"You's goodnuff to go to de 'Cad'my and leab yer pore mother, an' I
reckon you's good nuff for de party."

Dick had actually ventured in from the kitchen, through the dining-room,
and as far as the door of the back parlor, where few would look.

How his heart did beat, as he gazed upon the merry gathering, a large
part of whom he had "known all his born days"!

But there was a side-door opening from that dining-room upon the long
piazza which Mrs. Kinzer had added to the old Morris mansion; and Dick's
hand was on the knob of that door, almost before he knew it.

Then he was out on the road to the landing; and in five minutes more he
was vigorously rowing the "Jenny" out through the inlet, towards the
bay.

His heart was not beating unpleasantly any longer; but as he shot out
from the narrow passage through the flags, and saw the little waves
laughing in the cool, dim starlight, he suddenly stopped rowing, leaned
on his oars, gave a great sigh of relief, and exclaimed,--

"Dar, I's safe now. I ain't got to say a word to nobody out yer. Wonder
'f I'll ebber git back from de 'Cad'my, an' ketch fish in dis yer bay.
Sho! Course I will. But goin' 'way's awful!"

Dab Kinzer thought he had never before known Jenny Walters to appear so
well as she looked that evening; and he must have been right, for good
Mrs. Foster said to Annie,--

"What a pleasant, kindly face your new friend has! You must ask her to
come and see us. She seems to be quite a favorite with the Kinzers."

"Have you known Dabney long?" Annie had asked of Jenny a little before
that.

"Ever since I was a little bit of a girl, and a big boy, seven or eight
years old, pushed me into the snow."

"Was it Dabney?"

"No; but Dabney was the boy that pushed him in for doing it, and then
helped me up. Dab rubbed his face with snow for him, till he cried."

"Just like him!" exclaimed Annie with emphasis. "I should think his
friends here will miss him."

"Indeed they will," said Jenny, and then she seemed disposed to be quiet
for a while.

The party could not last forever, pleasant as it was; and by the time
his duties as "host" were all done and over, Dabney was tired enough to
go to bed and sleep soundly. His arms were lame and sore from the strain
the ponies had given them; and that may have been the reason why he
dreamed, half the night, that he was driving runaway teams, and crashing
over rickety old bridges.

There was some reason for that; but why was it that every one of his
dream-wagons, no matter who else was in it, seemed to have Jenny Walters
and Annie Foster smiling at him from the back seat?

He rose later than usual next morning, and the house was all in its
customary order by the time he got down stairs.

Breakfast was ready also; and it was hardly over before Dab's great new
trunk was brought down into the front-door passage by a couple of the
farmhands.

"It's an hour yet to train-time," said Ham Morris; "but we might as well
get ready. We must be on hand in time."

What a long hour that was! And not even a chance given to Dab to run
down to the landing for a good-by look at the "Jenny" and "The Swallow."

His mother and Ham, and Miranda, and the girls, seemed to be all made up
of "good-by" that morning.

"Mother," said Dab.

"What is it, my dear boy?"

"That's it exactly. If you say 'dear boy' again, Ham Morris'll have to
carry me to the cars. I'm all kind o' wilted now."

Then they all laughed, and before they got through laughing they all
cried except Ham.

He put his hands in his pockets, and drew a long whistle.

The ponies were at the door now. The light wagon was a roomy one; but,
when Dab's trunk had been put in, there was barely room left for the
ladies, and Dab and Ham had to walk to the station.

"I'm kind o' glad of it," said Dab.

It was a short walk, and a silent one; but when they came in sight of
the platform, Dab exclaimed,--

"There they are,--all of them!"

"The whole party?"

"Why, the platform's as crowded as our house was last night."

Mrs. Kinzer and her daughters were already the centre of a talkative
crowd of young people; and Ford Foster and Frank Harley, with Joe and
Fuz Hart, were asking what had become of Dab, for the train was in
sight.

A moment later, as the puffing locomotive pulled up in front of the
water-tank, the conductor stepped out on the platform, exclaiming,--

"Look a-here, folks, this ain't right. If there was going to be a picnic
you ought to have sent word, and I'd have tacked on an extra car. You'll
have to pack in now, best you can."

He seemed much relieved when he found how small a part of that crowd
were to be his passengers.

"Dab," said Ford, "this is your send-off, not ours. You'll have to make
a speech."

Dab did want to say something; but he had just kissed his sisters and
his mother, and half a dozen of his school-girl friends had followed the
example of Jenny Walters; and then Mrs. Foster had kissed him, and Ham
Morris had shaken hands with him; and Dab could not have said a word to
have saved his life.

"Speech!" whispered Ford mischievously, as Dab stepped upon the
car-platform; but Dick Lee, who had just escaped from the tremendous hug
his mother had given him, and had got his breath again, came to his
friend's relief in the nick of time. Dick felt, as he afterwards
explained, that he "must shout, or he should go off;" and so, at the top
of his shrill voice he shouted,--

"Hurrah for Cap'n Kinzer! Dar ain't no better feller lef long shoah!"

And then, amid a chorus of cheers and laughter, and a grand waving of
white handkerchiefs, the engine gave a deep, hysterical cough, and
hurried the train away.

Three homesteads by the Long Island shore were lonely enough that
evening, and they were all likely to be lonelier still before they got
fairly accustomed to the continued absence of "those boys."

It was well understood that the Fosters had determined to prolong their
"summer in the country" until the arrival of cold weather, they had
found all things so pleasant; and the Kinzers were well pleased with
that, as Samantha remarked,--

"If it's only to compare letters. I do hope Dabney will write as soon as
he gets there, and tell us all about it."

"He will," said his mother; but Ham's face put on a somewhat doubtful
look.

"I'm not quite sure about Dab," he said slowly. "If things ain't just
right, he's the sort of boy that wouldn't say a word about it. Well, I
must say I liked what I saw of Mrs. Myers's notions about feeding
people."





CHAPTER XXV.

THE BOYS ON THEIR TRAVELS. A GREAT CITY, AND A GREAT DINNER.


The conductor of that train need not have been much alarmed at falling
in with a "picnic" of any moderate size, for he would have had room in
his train to seat a good part of it, at least.

The boys had no difficulty in getting seats "all together." That is,
they found four empty ones, two on each side, right opposite; and when
they had turned over the front seats, there they were. Ford and Frank
were facing Dabney and Dick on the right; and the two Hart boys were
facing each other on the left, each with a whole seat to himself.

Almost the first thing Joe did, after taking possession, was to lean
over, and whisper,--

"Look out, Fuz,--keep your secret."

"Catch me spoiling a good joke."

The other party seemed disposed to keep pretty quiet for a while; the
first break of any consequence, in the silence, coming when Ford Foster
exclaimed,--

"Dab, it was right along here."

"What was?"

"Where the pig had his collision with my train, first time I was over
here."

"Did you hear him squeal?" asked Frank, as he peered through the window.

"The pig? No; but you ought to have heard the engine squeal, when it saw
him coming."

The story had to be all told over again, of course, and did good service
in getting their thoughts in order for the trip before them. Up to the
mention of the pig, it had somehow seemed to Dab as if the
railway-platform at the station, and all the people on it, had kept
company with the train; and Frank Harley found himself calculating the
distance between that car and the "mission" at Rangoon in far-away
India.

As for Ford Foster, he stood in less need of any "pig" than the rest,
from the fact that he had a large-sized idea in his head.

He kept it there, too, until that train pulled up within reaching
distance of one of the Brooklyn ferries. Before them lay the swift tide
of the broad East River; and beyond that, with its borders of crowded
docks and bristling masts, lay the streets and squares, and swarmed the
multitudes, of the great city of New York.

"Ford," said Dabney, "you're captain this time. What are we to do now?"

"Well, if I ain't captain, I guess I'd better do a little steering. We
must give our checks to the expressman, and have our luggage carted over
to the Grand Central Depot."

"Will it be sure to get there in good time?"

"Of course it wouldn't if we were in any hurry; but our train doesn't
leave until three o'clock, and the express won't fail to have it there
before that."

Ford was all alive with the responsibilities of his position, as the
only boy in the party who had been born in the city, and had travelled
