"I wish I knew more than I do," said Robert in troubled tones,
"because I've a notion that the money with which you will pay my
tailor comes from the till of Master Benjamin Hardy. It's uncommon
strange that he does so much for me. I'm very grateful, but surely
there must be some motive behind it."

He glanced at Willet to see how he took his words, but the hunter
merely smiled, and Robert knew that the smile was a mask through which
he could not penetrate.

"Take the goods the gods provide thee," said the hunter.

"I will," said Robert, cheerfully, "since it seems I can't do anything
else."

And he did. His response to New York continued to be as vigorous as it
had been to Quebec, and while New York lacked some of the brilliancy,
some of the ultimate finish that, to his mind, had distinguished
Quebec, it was more solid, there was more of an atmosphere of
resource, and it was all vastly interesting. Charteris proved himself
a right true friend, and he opened for him whatever doors he cared to
enter that Mr. Hardy may have left unlocked. He was also thrown much
with Grosvenor, and the instinctive friendship between the two ripened
fast.

On the fifth day of his stay in New York a letter came out of the
wilderness from Wilton at Fort Refuge. It had been brought by an
Oneida runner to Albany, and was sent thence by post to New York.

Wilton wrote that time would pass rather heavily with them in the
little fortress, if the hostile Indians allowed it. Small bands now
infested that region, and the soldiers were continually making marches
against them. The strange man, whom they called Black Rifle, was of
vast help, guiding them and saving them from ambush.

Wilton wrote that he missed Philadelphia, which was certainly the
finest city outside of Europe, but he hoped to go back to it, seasoned
and improved by life in the woods. New York, where he supposed Robert
now to be, was an attractive town, in truth, a great port, but it had
not the wealth and cultivation of Philadelphia, as he hoped to show
Robert some day. Meanwhile he wished him well.

Robert smiled. He had pleasant memories of Wilton, Colden, Carson and
the others, and while he was making new friends he did not commit the
crime of forgetting old ones. It was his hope that he should meet them
all again, not merely after the war, but long before.

In his comings and goings among the great of their day Robert kept a
keen eye for the vision of St. Luc. He half hoped, half feared that
some time in the twilight or the full dusk of the night he would see
in some narrow street the tall figure wrapped in its great cloak. But
the chevalier did not appear, and Robert felt that he had not really
come as a spy upon the English army and its preparations. He must have
gone, days since.

He met Adrian Van Zoon three times, that is, he was in the same room
with him, although they spoke together only once. The merchant had in
his presence an air of detachment. He seemed to be one who continually
carried a burden, and a stripling just from the woods could not long
have a place, either favorable or unfavorable, in his memory. Robert
began to wonder if St. Luc had net been mistaken. What could a man
born and bred in France, and only in recent years an inhabitant of
Canada, know of Adrian Van Zoon of New York? What, above all, could he
know that would cause him to warn Robert against him? But this, like
all his other questions, disappeared in the enjoyments of the
moment. Nature, which had been so kind in giving to him a vivid
imagination, had also given with it an intense appreciation. He liked
nearly everything, and nearly everybody, he could see a rosy mist
where the ordinary man saw only a cloud, and just now New York was so
kind to him that he loved it all.

A week in the city and he attended a brilliant ball given by William
Walton in the Walton mansion, in Franklin Square, then the most
elaborate and costly home in North America. It was like a great
English country house, with massive brick walls and woodwork, all
imported and beautifully carved. The staircase in particular made of
dark ebony was the wonder of its day, and, in truth, the whole
interior was like that of a palace, instead of a private residence, at
that time, in America.

Robert enjoyed himself hugely. He realized anew how close was the
blood relationship among all those important families, and he was
already familiar with their names. The powerful sponsorship of Mr.
Hardy had caused them to take him in as one of their number, and for
that reason he liked them all the more. He was worldly wise enough
already to know that we are more apt to call a social circle snobbish
when we do not belong to it. Now, he was a welcome visitor at the best
houses in New York, and all was rose to him.

Adrian Van Zoon, who had not only wealth but strong connections, was
there, but, as on recent occasions he took no notice of Robert, until
late in the evening when the guests were dancing the latest Paris and
London dances in the great drawing-room. Robert was resting for a
little space and as he leaned against the wall the merchant drew near
him and addressed him with much courtesy.

"I fear, Mr. Lennox," he said, "that I have spoken to you rather
brusquely, for which I offer many apologies. It was due, perhaps, to
the commercial rivalries of myself and Mr. Hardy, in whose house you
are staying. It was but natural for me to associate you with him."

"I wish to be linked with him," said Robert, coldly. "I have a great
liking and respect for Mr. Hardy."

Mynheer Van Zoon laughed and seemed not at all offended.

"The answer of a lad, and a proper one for a lad," he said. "'Tis well
to be loyal to one's friends, and I must admit, too, that Mr. Hardy is
a man of many high qualities, a fact that a rivalry in business
extending over many years, has proved to me. He and I cannot become
friends, but I do respect him."

He had imparted some warmth to his tone, and his manner bore the
appearance of geniality. Robert, so susceptible to courtesy in others,
began to find him less repellent. He rejoined in the same polite
manner, and Mynheer Van Zoon talked to him a little while as a busy
man of middle age would speak to a youth. He asked him of his
experiences at Quebec, of which he had heard some rumor, and Robert,
out of the fullness of his mind, spoke freely on that subject.

"Is it true," asked Mynheer Van Zoon, "that David Willet in a duel
with swords slew a famous bravo?"

"It's quite true," replied Robert. "I was there, and saw it with my
own eyes. Pierre Boucher was the man's name, and never was a death
more deserved."

"Willet is a marvel with the sword."

"You knew him in his youth, Mynheer Van Zoon?"

"I did not say that. It is possible that I was thinking of some one
who had talked to me about him. But, whatever thought may have been in
my mind, David Willet and I are not likely to tread the same path. I
repeat, Master Lennox, that although my manner may have seemed to you
somewhat brusque in the past, I wish you well. Do you remain much
longer in New York?"

"Only a few days, I think."

"And you still find much of interest to see?"

"Enough to occupy the remainder of my time. I wish to see a bit of
Long Island, but tomorrow I go to Paulus Hook to find one Nicholas
Suydam and to carry him a message from Colonel William Johnson, which
has but lately come to me in the post. I suppose it will be easy to
get passage across the Hudson."

"Plenty of watermen will take you for a fare, but if you are familiar
with the oars yourself it would be fine exercise for a strong youth
like you to row over and then back again."

"It's a good suggestion, as I do row, and I think I'll adopt it."

Mynheer Van Zoon passed on a moment or two later, and Robert, with his
extraordinary susceptibility to a friendly manner, felt a pleasant
impression. Surely St. Luc, who at least was an official enemy, did
not know the truth about Van Zoon! And if the Frenchman did happen to
be right, what did he have to fear in New York, surrounded by friends?

The evening progressed, but Mynheer Van Zoon left early, and then in
the pleasures of the hour, surrounded by youth and brightness, Robert
forgot him, too. A banquet was served late, and there was such a
display of silver and gold plate that the British officers themselves
opened their eyes and later wrote letters to England, telling of the
amazing prosperity and wealth of New York, as proven by what they had
seen in the Walton and other houses.

Robert did not go back to the home of Mr. Hardy, until a very late
hour, and he slept late the next day. When he rose he found that all
except himself had gone forth for one purpose or another, but it
suited his own plan well, as he could now take the letter of Colonel
William Johnson to his friend, Master Nicholas Suydam, in Paulus
Hook. It was another dark, gloomy day, but clouds and cold had little
effect on his spirits, and when he walked along the shore of the North
River, looking for a boat, he met the chaff of the watermen with
humorous remarks of his own. They discouraged his plan to row himself
across, but being proud of his skill he clung to it, and, having
deposited two golden guineas as security for its return, he selected a
small but strong boat and rowed into the stream.

A sharp wind was blowing in from the sea, but he was able to manage
his little craft with ease, and, being used to rough water, he enjoyed
the rise and dip of the waves. A third of the way out and he paused
and looked back at New York, the steeple of St. George's showing
above the line of houses. He could distinguish from the mass other
buildings that he knew, and his heart suddenly swelled with affection
for this town, in which he had received such a warm welcome. He would
certainly live here, when the wars were over, and he could settle down
to his career.

Then he turned his eyes to the inner bay, where he saw the usual
amount of shipping, sloops, schooners, brigs and every other kind of
vessel known to the times. Behind them rose the high wooded shores of
Staten Island, and through the channel between it and Long Island
Robert saw other ships coming in. Truly, it was a noble bay,
apparently made for the creation of a great port, and already busy man
was putting it to its appointed use. Then he looked up the Hudson at
the lofty Palisades, the precipitous shores facing them, and his eyes
came back to the stream. Several vessels under full sail were steering
for the mouth of the Hudson, but he looked longest at a schooner,
painted a dark color, and very trim in her lines. He saw two men
standing on her decks, and two or three others visible in her rigging.

Evidently she was a neat and speedy craft, but he was not there to
waste his time looking at schooners. The letter of Colonel William
Johnson to Master Nicholas Suydam in Paulus Hook must be delivered,
and, taking up his oars, he rowed vigorously toward the hamlet on the
Jersey shore.

When he was about two-thirds of the way across he paused to look back
again, but the air was so heavy with wintry mists that New York did
not show at all. He was about to resume the oars once more when the
sound of creaking cordage caused him to look northward. Then he
shouted in alarm. The dark schooner was bearing down directly upon
him, and was coming very swiftly. A man on the deck whom he took to be
the captain shouted at him, but when Robert, pulling hard, shot his
boat ahead, it seemed to him that the schooner changed her course
also.

It was the last impression he had of the incident, as the prow of the
schooner struck his boat and clove it in twain. He jumped
instinctively, but his head received a glancing blow, and he did not
remember anything more until he awoke in a very dark and close
place. His head ached abominably, and when he strove to raise a hand
to it he found that he could not do so. He thought at first that it
was due to weakness, a sort of temporary paralysis, coming from the
blow that he dimly remembered, but he realized presently that his
hands were bound, tied tightly to his sides.

He moved his body a little, and it struck against wood on either
side. His feet also were bound, and he became conscious of a swaying
motion. He was in a ship's bunk and he was a prisoner of somebody. He
was filled with a fierce and consuming rage. He had no doubt that he
was on the schooner that had run him down, nor did he doubt either
that he had been run down purposely. Then he lay still and by long
staring was able to make out a low swaying roof above him and very
narrow walls. It was a strait, confined place, and it was certainly
deep down in the schooner's hold. A feeling of horrible despair seized
him. The darkness, his aching head, and his bound hands and feet
filled him with the worst forebodings. Nor did he have any way of
estimating time. He might have been lying in the bunk at least a week,
and he might now be far out at sea.

In misfortune, the intelligent and imaginative suffer most because
they see and feel everything, and also foresee further misfortunes to
come. Robert's present position brought to him in a glittering train
all that he had lost. Having a keen social sense his life in New York
had been one of continuing charm. Now the balls and receptions that
he had attended at great houses came back to him, even more brilliant
and vivid than their original colors had been. He remembered the many
beautiful women he had seen, in their dresses of silk or satin, with
their rosy faces and powdered hair, and the great merchants and feudal
landowners, and the British and American officers in their bright new
uniforms, talking proudly of the honors they expected to win.

Then that splendid dream was gone, vanishing like a mist before a
wind, and he was back in the swaying darkness of the bunk, hands and
feet bound, and head aching. All things are relative. He felt now if
only the cruel cords were taken off his wrists and ankles he could be
happy. Then he would be able to sit up, move his limbs, and his head
would stop aching. He called all the powers of his will to his
aid. Since he could not move he would not cause himself any increase
of pain by striving to do so. He commanded his body to lie still and
compose itself and it obeyed. In a little while his head ceased to
ache so fiercely, and the cords did not bite so deep.

Then he took thought. He was still sure that he was on board the
schooner that had run him down. He remembered the warning of St. Luc
against Adrian Van Zoon, and Adrian Van Zoon's suggestion that he row
his own boat across to Paulus Hook. But it seemed incredible. A
merchant, a rich man of high standing in New York, could not plan his
murder. Where was the motive? And, if such a motive did exist, a man
of Van Zoon's standing could not afford to take so great a risk. In
spite of St. Luc and his faith in him he dismissed it as an
impossibility. If Van Zoon had wished his death he would not have
been taken out of the river. He must seek elsewhere the reason of his
present state.

He listened attentively, and it seemed to him that the creaking and
groaning of the cordage increased. Once or twice he thought he heard
footsteps over his head, but he concluded that it was merely the
imagination. Then, after an interminable period of waiting, the door
to the room opened and a man carrying a ship's lantern entered,
followed closely by another. Robert was able to turn on his side and
stare at them.

The one who carried the lantern was short, very dark, and had gold
rings in his ears. Robert judged him to be a Portuguese. But his
attention quickly passed to the man behind him, who was much taller,
rather spare, his face clean shaven, his hard blue eyes set close
together. Robert knew instinctively that he was master of the ship.

"Hold up the lantern, Miguel," the tall man said, "and let's have a
look at him."

The Portuguese obeyed.

Then Robert felt the hard blue eyes fastened upon him, but he raised
himself as much as he could and gave back the gaze fearlessly.

"Well, how's our sailorman?" said the captain, laughing, and his
laughter was hideous to the prisoner.

"I don't understand you," said Robert.

"My meaning is plain enough, I take it."

"I demand that you set me free at once and restore me to my friends in
New York."

The tall man laughed until he held his sides, and the short man
laughed with him, laugh for laugh. Their laughter so filled Robert
with loathing and hate that he would have attacked them both had he
been unbound.

"Come now, Peter," said the captain at last. "Enough of your grand
manner. You carry it well for a common sailor, and old Nick himself
knows where you got your fine clothes, but here you are back among
your old comrades, and you ought to be glad to see 'em."

"What do you mean?" asked the astonished Robert.

"Now, don't look so surprised. You can keep up a play too long. You
know as well as we do that you're plain Peter Smith, an able young
sailorman, when you're willing, who deserted us in Baltimore three
months ago, and you with a year yet to serve. And here's your
particular comrade, Miguel, so glad to see you. When we ran your boat
down, all your own fault, too, Miguel jumped overboard, and he didn't
dream that the lad he was risking his life to save was his old
chum. Oh, 'twas a pretty reunion!  And now, Peter, thank Miguel for
bringing you back to life and to us."

A singular spirit seized Robert. He saw that he was at the mercy of
these men, who utterly without scruple wished for some reason to hold
him. He could be a player too, and perhaps more was to be won by being
a player.

"I'm sorry," he said, "but I was tempted by the follies of the land,
and I've had enough of 'em. If you'll overlook it and let the past be
buried, captain, you'll have no better seaman than Peter Smith.
You've always been a just but kind man, and so I throw myself on your
mercy."

The captain and Miguel exchanged astonished glances.

"I know you'll do it, captain," Robert went on in his most winning
tones, "because, as I've just said, you've always been a kind man,
especially kind to me. I suppose when I first signed with you that I
was as ignorant and awkward a land lubber as you ever saw. But your
patient teaching has made me a real sailor. Release me now, and I
think that in a few hours I will be fit to go to work again."

"Cut the lashings, Miguel," said the captain.

Miguel's sharp knife quickly severed them, and Robert sat up in the
bunk. When the blood began to flow freely in the veins, cut off
hitherto, he felt stinging pains at first, but presently heavenly
relief came. The captain and Miguel stood looking at him.

"Peter," said the captain, "you were always a lad of spirit, and I'm
glad to get you back, particularly as we have such a long voyage ahead
of us. One doesn't go to the coast of Africa, gather a cargo of slaves
and get back in a day."

In spite of himself Robert could not repress a shudder of horror. A
slaver and he a prisoner on board her! He might be gone a year or
more. Never was a lad in worse case, but somewhere in him was a spark
of hope that refused to be extinguished. He gave a more imperious
summons than ever to his will, and it returned to his aid.

"You've been kind to Peter Smith. Few captains would forgive what I've
done, but I'll try to make it up to you. How long are we out from New
York?"  he said.

"It might be an hour or it might be a day or what's more likely it
