
"You think then that we should try to meet the Mountain Wolf and his
rangers?"

"Of a certainty. As soon as Dagaeoga is strong enough. Now lie still, while
I scout through the forest. If no enemy is near I will heat the tea, and
then you must drink, and drink deep."

He made a wide circuit, and, coming back, lighted a little fire on which he
warmed the tea in the pot that he had taken from the village on an earlier
night. Then, under the insistence of Tayoga, Robert drank a quantity that
amounted to three cups, and soon fell into a deep sleep, from which he
awoke the next day with an appetite so sharp that he felt able to bite a
big piece out of a tree.

"I think I'll go hunt a buffalo, kill him and eat him whole," he said in a
large, round voice.

"If so Dagaeoga will have to roam far," said Tayoga sedately. "The buffalo
is not found east of the Alleghanies, as you well know."

"Of course I know it, but what are time and distance to a Samson like me? I
say I will go forth and slay a buffalo, unless I am fed at once and in
enormous quantities."

"Would a haunch of venison and a gallon of samp help Dagaeoga a little?"

"Yes, a little, they'd serve as appetizers for something real and
substantial to come."

"Then if you feel so strong and are charged so full of ambition you can
help cook breakfast. You have had an easy time, Dagaeoga, but life
henceforth will not be all eating and sleeping."

They had a big and pleasant breakfast together and Robert rejoiced in his
new vigor. It was wonderful to be so strong after having been so weak, it
was like life after death, and he was eager to start at once.

"It is a good thing to have been ill," he said, "because then you know how
fine it is to be well."

"But we will not depart before tomorrow," said the Onondaga decisively.

"And why?"

"Because you have lived long enough in the wilderness, Dagaeoga, to know
that one must always fight the weather. Look into the west, and you will
see a little cloud moving up from the horizon. It does not amount to much
at present, but it contains the seed of great things. It has been sent by
the Rain God, and it will not do yet for Dagaeoga, despite his new
strength, to travel in the rain."

Robert became anxious as he watched the little cloud, which seemed to swell
as he looked at it, and which soon assumed an angry hue. He knew that
Tayoga had told the truth. Coming out of his fever it would be a terrible
risk for him to become drenched.

"We will make a shelter such as we can in the dip where we built the fire,"
said Tayoga, "and now you can use your new strength as much as you will in
wielding a tomahawk."

They cut small saplings with utmost speed and speedily accomplished one of
the most difficult tasks of the border, making a rude brush shelter which
with the aid of their blankets would protect them from the storm. By the
time they had finished, the little cloud which had been at first a mere
signal had grown so prodigiously that it covered the whole heavens, and the
day became almost as dark as twilight. The lightning began to flash in
great, blazing strokes, and the thunder was so nearly continuous that the
earth kept up an incessant jarring. Then the rain poured heavily and Robert
saw Tayoga's wisdom. Although the shelter and his blanket kept the rain
from him he felt cold in the damp, and shivered as if with a chill.

"When the storm stops, which will not be before dark," said Tayoga, "I
shall go to the village and get you a heavy buffalo robe. They have some,
acquired in trade from the Indians of the western plains, and one of them
belongs to you. So, Dagaeoga, I will get it."

"Tayoga, you have taken too much risk for me already. I can make out very
well as I am, and suppose we start tonight in search of Rogers and Willet."

"I mean to have my way, because in this case my way is right. We work
together as partners, and the partnership becomes ineffective when one
member of it cannot endure the hardships of a long march, and perhaps of
battle. And has not Dagaeoga said that I am an accomplished burglar? I
prove it anew tonight. As soon as the rain ceases I will go to the village,
the great storehouse of our supplies."

The Onondaga spoke in a light tone with a whimsical inflection, but Robert
saw that he was intensely in earnest, and that it was not worth while for
him to say more. The great storm passed on to the southward, the rain sank
to a drizzle, but it was very cold in the forest, and Robert's teeth
chattered, despite every effort to control his body.

"I go, Dagaeoga," said Tayoga, "and I shall return with the great, warm
buffalo robe that belongs to you."

Then he melted without noise into the darkness and Robert was alone. He
knew the mission of the Onondaga to be a perilous one, but he did not doubt
his success. The cold drizzle fell on the shelter of brush and saplings,
and some of it seeped through. Now and then a drop found its way down his
neck, and it felt like ice. Physically he was very miserable, and it began
to depress his spirit. He hoped that Tayoga would not be long in obtaining
the buffalo robe.

The thunder moaned a little far to the south, and then died down entirely.
There were one or two stray flashes of lightning and then no more. He sank
into a sort of doze that was more like a stupor, from which he was awakened
by a dusky figure in the doorway of the little shelter. It was Tayoga, and
he bore a heavy dark bundle over his arm.

"I have brought the buffalo robe that belongs to you, Dagaeoga," he said
cheerfully. "It was in the lodge of the head chief of the village and I had
to wait until he went forth to greet Tandakora, who came with a band of his
warriors to claim shelter, food and rest. Then I took what was your own and
here it is, one of the finest I have ever seen."

He held up the great buffalo robe, tanned splendidly and rich in fur and
the sight of it made Robert's teeth stop chattering. He wrapped it around
his body and sufficient warmth came back.

"You're a marvel, Tayoga," he said. "Does the village contain anything else
that belongs to us?"

"Nothing that I can think of now. The rain will cease entirely in an hour,
and then we will start."

His prediction was right, and they set forth in the dark forest, Robert
wearing the great buffalo robe which stored heat and consequent energy in
his frame. But the woods were so wet, and it was so difficult to find a
good trail that they did not make very great progress, and when dawn came
they were only a few miles away. Robert's strength, however, stood the
test, and they dared to light a fire and have a warm breakfast. Much
refreshed they plunged on anew, hunting for friends who could not be much
more than motes in the wilderness. Robert hoped that some chance would
enable him to meet Willet, to whom he owed so much, and who stood in the
place of a father to him. It did not seem possible that the Great Bear
could have fallen in one of the numerous border skirmishes, which must have
been fought since his capture. He could not associate death with a man so
powerful and vital as Willet.

The day was bright and warm, and he took off the buffalo robe. It was quite
a weight to be carried, but he knew he would need it again when night came
and particularly if there were other storms. They saw many trails in the
afternoon and Tayoga was quite sure they were made by war bands. Nearly all
of them led southeast.

"The savages in the west and about the Great Lakes," he said, "have heard
of the victory at Oswego, and so they pour out to the French standard,
expecting many scalps and great spoils. Whenever the French win a triumph
it means more warriors for them."

"And may not some of the bands going to the war stumble on our own trail?"

"It is likely, Dagaeoga. But if it comes to battle see how much better it
is that you should be strong and able."

"Yes, I concede now, Tayoga, that it was right for us to wait as long as
we did."

The trails grew much more numerous as they advanced. Evidently swarms of
warriors were about them and before midday Tayoga halted.

"It will not be wise for us to advance farther," he said. "We must seek
some hiding place."

"Hark to that!" exclaimed Robert.

A breeze behind them bore a faint shout to his ear. Tayoga listened
intently, and it was repeated once.

"Pursuit!" he said briefly. "They have come by chance upon our trail. It
may be Tandakora himself and it is unfortunate. They will never leave us
now, unless they are driven back."

"Then we'd better turn back towards the north, as the thickest of the
swarms are sure to be to the south of us."

"It is so. Again the longest of roads becomes the safest for us, but we
will not make it wholly north, we will bear to the east also. I once left a
canoe, hidden in the edge of a lake there, and we may find it."

"What will we do with it if we find it?"

"Tandakora will not be able to follow the trail of a canoe. But now we must
press forward with all speed, Dagaeoga. See, there is a smoke in the south
and now another answers it in the north. They are talking about us."

Robert saw the familiar signals which always meant peril to them, and he
was willing to go forward at the uttermost speed. He had become hardened in
a measure to danger, though it seemed to him that he was passing through
enough of it to last a lifetime. But his soul rose to meet it.

They used all the customary devices to hide their traces, wading when there
was water, walking on stones or logs when they were available, but they
knew these stratagems would only delay Tandakora, they could not throw him
off the trail entirely. They hoped more from the coming dark, and, when
night came, it found them going at great speed. Just at twilight they heard
a faint shout again and the faint shout in reply, telling them the pursuit
was maintained, but the night fortunately proved to be very dark, and, an
hour or two later, they came to a heavy windrow, the result of some old
hurricane into which they drew for shelter and rest. They knew that not
even the Indian trailers could find them there in such darkness, and for
the present they were without apprehension.

"Do you think they will pass us in the night?" asked Robert.

"No," replied Tayoga. "They will wait until the dawn and pick up the trail
anew."

"Then we'd better start again about midnight."

"I think so, too."

Meanwhile, lying comfortably among the fallen trees and leaves, they waited
in silence.




CHAPTER XI


THE MYSTIC VOYAGE

The long stay in the windrow served Robert well, more than atoning for the
drain made upon his strength by their rapid flight. In three or four hours
he was back in his normal state, and he felt proudly that he was now as
good as he had ever been. The night, as they had expected, was cold, and he
was thankful that he had hung on to the buffalo robe, in which he wrapped
himself once more, while Tayoga was snug between two big blankets.

Robert dozed, but he was awakened by something stirring near them, and he
sat up with his finger on the trigger of his rifle. The Onondaga was
already listening and watching, ready with his weapon. Presently the white
youth heard his companion laughing softly, and his own tension relaxed, as
he knew Tayoga would not laugh without good cause.

"It is a bear," said Tayoga, "and he has a lair in the windrow, not more
than twenty feet away. He has been out very late at night, too late for a
good, honest home-keeping bear, but he is back at last, and he smells us."

"And alarmed by the odor he does not know whether to enter his home or not.
Well, I hope he'll conclude to take his rest. We eat bear at times,
Tayoga, but just now I wouldn't dream of harming one."

"Nor would I, Dagaeoga, and maybe the bear will divine that we are
harmless, that is, Tododaho or Areskoui will tell him in some way of which
we know nothing that his home is his own to be entered without fear."

"I think I hear him moving now, and also puffing a little."

"You hear aright, Dagaeoga. Tododaho has whispered to him, even as I said,
and he is going into his den which I know is snug and warm, in the very
thickest part of the windrow. Now he is lying down in it with the logs and
branches about him, and soon he will be asleep, dreaming happy dreams of
tender roots and wild honey with no stings of bees to torment him."

"You grow quite poetical, Tayoga."

"Although foes are hunting us, I feel the spirit of the forest and of peace
strong upon me, Dagaeoga. Moreover, Tododaho, as I told you, has whispered
to the animals that we are not to be feared tonight. Hark to the tiny
rustling just beyond the log against which we lie!"

"Yes, I hear it, and what do you make of it, Tayoga?"

"Rabbits seeking their nests. They, too, have snuffed about, noticing the
man odor, which man himself cannot detect, and once they started away in
alarm, but now they are reassured, and they have settled themselves down to
sleep in comfort and security."

"Tayoga, you talk well and fluently, but as I have told you before, you
talk out of a dictionary."

"But as I learned my English out of a dictionary I cannot talk otherwise.
That is why my language is always so much superior to yours, Dagaeoga."

"I'll let it be as you claim it, you boaster, but what noise is that now? I
seem to hear the light sound of hoofs."

The Onondaga raised himself to his full height and peered over the dense
masses of trunks and boughs, his keen eyes cutting the thick dusk. Then he
sank back, and, when he replied, his voice showed distinct pleasure.

"Two deer have come into a little open space, around which the arms of the
windrow stretch nearly all the way, and they have crouched there, where
they will rest, indifferent to the nearness of the bear. Truly, O Dagaeoga,
we have come into the midst of a happy family, and we have been accepted,
for the night, as members of it."

"It must be so, Tayoga, because I see a figure much larger than that of the
deer approaching. Look to the north and behold that shadow there under the
trees."

"I see it, Dagaeoga. It is the great northern moose, a bull. Perhaps he has
wandered down from Canada, as they are rare here. They are often
quarrelsome, but the bull is going to take his rest, within the shelter of
the windrow, and leave its other people at peace. Now he has found a good
place, and he will be quiet for the night."

"Suppose you sleep a while, Tayoga. You have done all the watching for a
long time, and, as I'm fit and fine now, it's right for me to take up my
share of the burden."

"Very well, but do not fail to awaken me in about three hours. We must not
be caught here in the morning by the warriors."

He was asleep almost instantly, and Robert sat in a comfortable position
with his rifle across his knees. Responsibility brought back to him
self-respect and pride. He was now a full partner in the partnership, and
will and strength together made his faculties so keen that it would have
been difficult for anything about the windrow to have escaped his
attention. He heard the light rustlings of other animals coming to comfort
and safety, and flutterings as birds settled on upthrust boughs, many of
which were still covered with leaves. Once he heard a faint shout deep in
the forest, brought by the wind a great distance, and he was sure that it
