another, the following method of forming bulbs on glass tubes may
be of interest. A common method is to heat the part to be formed
and by blowing in one end of the tube gradually expand the glass.
This way has its drawbacks, as many are not sufficiently familiar
with the work to blow a uniform blast, and the result is, a hole
is blown through the side of the tube by uneven heating or
blowing.

A good way to handle this work, is to take the tube and 1 or 2 in.
more in length than the finished article is to be and place one
end over an alcohol flame, and by holding a spare piece of tubing
against the end allow them both to come to a melting heat, then
pull apart and instead of breaking off the long thread thus
formed, simply hold it in the flame at an angle of 45 deg. and
melt it down and close the end at the same time. Close the other
end with the same operation; this makes the tube airtight.

Gradually heat the tube at the point where the bulb is to be
formed, slowly turning the tube to get a uniform heat. The air
inside of the tube becoming heated will expand, and the glass,
being softer where the flame has been applied, will be pushed out
in the shape of a bulb. A great deal of care should be taken not
to go to extremes, as the bulb will burst with a loud report if
the heat is applied too long. The best results are obtained by
heating the glass slowly and then the bulb can be formed with
regularity. This is an easy way to make a thermometer tube. After
the bulb is formed, the other end of the tube can be opened by
heating, drawing out and breaking the thread like glass.
--Contributed by A. Oswald.



** How to Make a Sconce [325]

A sconce is a candlestick holder, so made that it has a reflector
of brass or copper and is to hang upon the wall. The tools
necessary are a riveting hammer, file, metal shears, rivet punch,
flat and round-nosed pliers, screwdriver and sheet brass or copper
No. 23 gauge.

To make the sconce proceed as follows: First, cut off a piece of
brass so that it shall have 1/2 in. extra metal all around;
second, with a piece of carbon paper, trace upon the brass lines
that shall represent the margin of the sconce proper, also trace
the decorative design; third, with a nail set make a series of
holes in the extra margin about 3/4 in. apart and large enough to
take in a 3/4-in. thin screw; fourth, fasten the metal to a thick
board by inserting screws in these holes; fifth, with a
twenty-penny wire nail that has had the sharpness of its point
filed off, stamp the background of the design promiscuously. By
holding the nail about 1/4 in. above the work and striking it with
the hammer, at the same time striving to keep its point at 1/4 in.
above the metal, very rapid progress can be made. This stamping
lowers the background and at the same time raises the design.
Sixth, chase or stamp along the border of the design and
background using a nail filed to a chisel edge. This is to make a
clean sharp division between background and design. Seventh, when
the stamping is complete remove the screws and metal from the
board and cut off the extra margin with the metal shears. File the
edges until they are smooth to the touch.

The drip cup is a piece of brass cut circular and shaped by
placing the brass over a hollow in one end of a block. Give the
metal a circular motion, at the same time beat it with a
round-nosed mallet. Work from the center along concentric rings
outward, then reverse.

The candle holders may have two, three, four, or six arms, and are
bent to shape by means of the round-nosed

[Illustration: Completed Sconce; Shaping the Holders; Riveting]

pliers. The form of the brackets which support the drip cups may
be seen in the illustration.

Having pierced the bracket, drip cup, and holder, these three
parts are riveted together as indicated in the drawing. It will be
found easier usually if the holder is not shaped until after the
riveting is done. The bracket is then riveted to the back of the
sconce. Small copper rivets are used.

It is better to polish all the pieces before fastening any of them
together. Metal polish of any kind will do. After the parts have
been assembled a lacquer may be applied to keep the metal from
tarnishing.



** How To Make a Hectograph [326]

[Illustration: Making Copies with the Hectograph]

A hectograph is very simply and easily made and by means of it
many copies of writing can be obtained from a single original.
Make a tray of either tin or pasteboard, a little larger than the
sheet of paper you ordinarily use and about 1/2 in. deep. Soak 1
oz. of gelatine in cold water over night and in the morning pour
off the water. Heat 6-1/2 oz. of glycerine to about 200 deg. F. on
a water bath, and add the gelatine. This should give a clear
glycerine solution of gelatine.

Place the tray so that it is perfectly level and pour in the
gelatinous composition until it is nearly level with the edge of
the tray. Cover it so the cover does not touch the surface of the
composition and let it stand six hours, when it will be ready for
use.

Make the copy to be reproduced on ordinary paper with aniline ink;
using a steel pen, and making the lines rather heavy so they have
a greenish color in the light. A good ink may be made of methyl
violet 2 parts, alcohol 2 parts, sugar 1 part, glycerine 4 parts,
and water 24 parts. Dissolve the violet in the alcohol mixed with
the glycerine; dissolve the sugar in the water and mix both
solutions.

When the original copy of the writing is ready moisten the surface
of the hectograph slightly with a sponge, lay the copy face down
upon it and smooth down, being careful to exclude all air bubbles
and not shifting the paper. Leave it nearly a minute and raise one
corner and strip it from the pad, where will remain a reversed
copy of the inscription.

Immediately lay a piece of writing paper of the right size on the
pad, smooth it down and then remove as before. It will bear a
perfect copy of the original. Repeat the operation until the
number of copies desired is obtained or until the ink on the pad
is exhausted. Fifty. or more copies can be obtained from a single
original.

When through using the hectograph wash it off with a moist sponge,
and it will be ready for future use. If the surface is impaired at
any time it can be remelted in a water bath and poured into a tray
as before, if it has not absorbed too much ink.



** How to Make a Sailomobile [326]
By Frank Mulford, Shiloh, N. J.

I had read of the beach automobiles used on the Florida coast;
they were like an ice boat with a sail, except they had wheels
instead of runners. So I set to work to make something to take me
over the country roads.

I found and used seven fence pickets for the frame work, and other
things as they were needed. I spliced two rake handles together
for the mast, winding the ends where they came together with wire.
A single piece would be better if you can get one long enough. The
gaff, which is the stick to which the upper end of the sail is
fastened, is a broomstick. The boom, the stick at the bottom of
the sail, was made of a rake handle with a broomstick spliced to
make it long enough. Mother let me have a sheet, which I put down
on the floor and cut into the shape of a mainsail. The wind was
the cheapest power to be found, thus it was utilized; the three
wheels were cast-off bicycle wheels.

I steer with the front wheel, which was the front wheel of an old
bicycle with the fork left on. The axle between the rear wheels is
an iron bar which cost me 15 cents, and the pulley which raises
and lowers the sail cost 5 cents. Twenty cents was all I spent,
all the rest I found.

A saw, hammer, and brace and bit were the tools used. Slats made
the seat and a cushion from the house made it comfortable, and in
a week

[Illustration: Sailomobile for Use on Country Roads]

everything was ready for sailing.

Once it was started with only my little cousin in it and I had to
run fast to catch up.



** A Home-Made Magic Lantern [328]

The essential parts of a magic lantern are a condensing lens to
make the beam of light converge upon the slide to illuminate it
evenly, a projecting lens

[Illustration: Lantern House]

with which to throw an enlarged picture of the illuminated slide
upon a screen and some appliances for preserving the proper
relation of these parts to each other. The best of materials
should be used and the parts put together with care to produce a
clear picture on the screen.

The first to make is the lamp house or box to hold the light. Our
illustration shows the construction for an electric light, yet the
same box may be used for gas or an oil lamp, provided the material
is of metal. A tin box having dimensions somewhere near those
given in the diagrammatic sketch may be secured from your local
grocer, but if such a box is not found, one can be made from a
piece of tin cut as shown in Fig. 1. When this metal is bent at
right angles on the dotted lines it will form a box as shown in
Fig. 2

[Illustration: Magic Lantern Details]

which is placed on a baseboard, 1/2 to 3/4 in. thick, 8 in. wide,
and 14 in. long. This box should be provided with a reflector
located just back of the lamp.

Procure a plano-convex or a bi-convex 6-in. lens with a focal
length of from 15 to 20 in. and a projecting lens 2 in. in
diameter with such a focal length that will give a picture of the
required size, or a lens of 12-in. focus enlarging a 3-in. slide
to about 6 ft. at a distance of 24 ft.

The woodwork of the lantern should be of 1/2-in., well seasoned
pine, white wood or walnut and the parts fastened together with
wood screws, wire brads, or glue, as desired. The board in which
to mount the condensing lens is 16 in. wide and 15 in. high,
battened on both ends to keep the wood from warping. The board is
centered both ways, and, at a point 1 in. above the center,
describe a 9-in. circle with a compass and saw the wood out with a
scroll or keyhole saw. If a small saw is used, and the work
carefully done, the circular piece removed will serve to make the
smaller portion of the ring for holding the condensing lens. This
ring is made up from two rings, A and B, Fig. 3. The inside and
outside diameters of the ring B are 3/8 in. greater than the
corresponding diameters of ring A, so when fastened together
concentrically an inner rabbet is formed for the reception of the
lens and an outer rabbet to fit against the board C in and against
which it rotates being held in place by buttons, DD.

A table, E, about 2 ft. long is fastened to the board C with
brackets F and supported at the outer end with a standard. The
slide support, G, and the lens slide, H, are constructed to slip
easily on the table, E, the strips II serving as guides. Small
strips of tin, JJ, are bent as shown and fastened at the top and
bottom of the rectangular opening cut in the support G for holding
the lantern slides.

All the parts should be joined together snugly and the movable
parts made to slide freely and when all is complete and well
sandpapered, apply two coats of shellac varnish. Place the lamp
house on the bottom board behind the condensing lens and the
lantern is ready for use.

The proper light and focus may be obtained by slipping the movable
parts on the board E, and when the right position is found for
each, all lantern slides will produce a clear picture on the
screen, if the position of the lantern and screen is not changed.
--Contributed by Stuart Mason Kerr, St. Paul, Minn.



** A Quickly Made Lamp [329]

A very simple lamp can be made from materials which are available
in practically every household in the following manner: A cheap
glass tumbler is partly filled with water and then about 1/2 in.
of safe, light burning oil, placed on the water. Cut a thin strip
from an ordinary cork and make a hole in the center to carry a
short piece of wick. The wick should

[Illustration: Lamp]

be of such a length as to dip into the oil, but not long enough.
To reach the water. The upper surface of the cork may be protected
from the flame with a small piece of tin bent over the edges and a
hole punched in the center for the wick. The weight of the tin
will force the cork down into the oil. The level of the oil should
be such as to make the flame below the top of the tumbler and the
light then will not be blown out with draughts. The arrangement is
quite safe as, should the glass happen to upset, the water at once
extinguishes the flame.
--Contributed by G. P. B.



** How to Make a Paper Aeroplane [329]

A very interesting and instructive toy aeroplane can be made as
shown in the accompanying illustrations. A sheet

[Illustration: Folding the Paper]

of paper is first folded, Fig. 1, then the corners on one end are
doubled over, Fig. 2, and the whole piece finished up and held
together with a paper clip as in Fig. 3. The paper clip to be used
should be like the one shown in Fig. 4. If one of these clips is
not at hand, form a piece of wire in the same shape, as it will be
needed for balancing purposes as well as for holding the paper
together. Grasp the aeroplane between the thumb and forefinger at
the place marked A in Fig. 3, keeping the paper as level as
possible and throwing it as you would a dart. The aeroplane will
make an easy and graceful flight in a room where no air will
strike it.
--Contributed by J.H. Crawford, Schenectady, N. Y.



** Bronze Liquid [329]

Banana oil or amyl acetate is a good bronze liquid.



** A Wrestling Mat [330]

The cost of a wrestling mat is so great that few small clubs can
afford to own one. As we did not see our way

[Illustration: Made of Bed Mattresses]

clear to purchase such a mat, I made one of six used bed
mattresses (Fig. 1) purchased from a second-hand dealer. I ordered
a canvas bag, 12 ft. 3 in. by 12 ft. 9 in., from a tent company,
to cover the mattresses. The bag consisted of two pieces with the
seam along each edge. The mattresses were laid side by side and
end to end and the bag placed on and laced up as shown in Fig. 2.
--Contributed by Walter W. White, Denver, Colo.



** A Pocket Voltammeter [330]

Remove the works and stem from a discarded dollar watch, drill two
3/16 in. holes in the edge, 3/4 in. apart, and insert two
binding-posts, Fig. 1, insulating them from the case with
cardboard. Fold two strips of light cardboard, 1/2 in. wide, so as
to form two oblong boxes, 1/2 in. long and 3/16 in. thick, open on
the edges. On one of these forms wind evenly the wire taken from a
bell magnet to the depth of 1/8 in. and on the other wind some 20
gauge wire to the same depth. Fasten the wire with gummed label,
to keep it from unwinding.

Glue the coils to the back of the case and connect one wire from
each binding-post as shown in Fig. 2, while the other two wires
are connected to an induction coil lead which is inserted in the
hole from which the stem was removed. Fasten a brass-headed tack
to the case at the point F with sealing wax or solder and bend a
wire in the shape shown in Fig. 3 to swing freely on the tack.
Attach a piece of steel rod, 3/4 in. long, in the center coil, C,
Fig. 2.

A rubber band, D, connects the steel rod C with the top of the
watch case. The ends of the rubber are fastened with sealing wax.
The rubber keeps the pointer at zero or in the middle of the
scale. Do not use too strong a rubber. A dial may be made by
cutting a piece of stiff white paper so it will fit under the
crystal of the watch. An arc is cut in the paper, as shown in Fig.
1, through which the indicator works.

To calibrate the instrument, first mark the binding-post A, which
is connected to the coil of heavy wire, for amperes and the other
post, V, to the coil of small wire for volts. Connect the lead and
the post marked A to one, two and three cells and each time mark
the place of the pointer on the dial. Take corresponding readings
on a standard ammeter and mark the figures on the dial. The volt
side of the dial may be calibrated in the same manner, using a
voltmeter instead of the ammeter. The place where the

[Illustration: Voltammeter in a Watch Case]

indicator comes to rest after disconnecting the current is marked
zero.
--Contributed by Edward M. Teasdale, Warren, Pa.



** A Film Washing Trough [331]

[Illustration: Washing a Negative Film]

The washing of films without scratching them after they are
developed and fixed is very difficult in hot weather. A convenient
washing trough for washing full length films is shown in the
accompanying sketch. The trough must be made for the size of the
film to be washed. Cut a 1/4-in. board as long as the film and a
trifle wider than the film's width. Attach strips to the edges of
the board to keep the water from spilling over the sides.

Cut a hole in one side of a baking powder can about half way
between the top and bottom, large enough to admit a fair-sized
stream of water from a faucet. Then solder the cover to the can
and punch a number of holes about 1/4 in. apart along the opposite
side from where the large hole was cut. Place this can on one end
of the trough, as shown, with the large hole up.

Some heavy wire bent in the shape of a U and fastened to the under
side of the trough at the can end will furnish supports to keep
that end of the trough the highest and place the opening in the
can close beneath the water faucet. A common pin stuck through one
end of the film and then in the trough close to the can will hold
it in position for washing. Five minutes' washing with this device
is sufficient to remove all traces of the hypo from the film.
--Contributed by M. M. Hunting, Dayton, O.



** Wood Burning [331]

[Illustration: Burnt Wood]

Burnt wood work done with an ordinary reading glass and the sun's
rays.



** The Diving Bottle [331]

This is a very interesting and easily performed experiment
illustrating the transmission of pressure by liquids. Take a
wide-mouthed bottle and fill almost full of water; then into this
bottle place, mouth downward, a small vial or bottle having just
enough air in the bottle to keep it barely afloat. Put a sheet of
rubber over the mouth of the large bottle, draw the edge down over
the neck and wrap securely with a piece of string thus forming a
tightly stretched diaphragm over the top. When a finger is pressed
on the rubber the small bottle will slowly descend until the
pressure is released when the

[Illustration: Pressure Experiments]

small bottle wilt ascend. The moving of the small bottle is caused
by the pressure transmitted through the water, thus causing the
volume of air in the small tube to decrease and the bottle to
descend and ascend when released as the air increases to the
original volume.

This experiment can be performed with a narrow-necked bottle,
provided the bottle is wide, but not very thick. Place the small
bottle in as before, taking care not to have too much air in the
bottom. If the cork is adjusted properly, the bottle may be held
in the hand and the sides pressed with the fingers, thus causing
the small bottle to descend and ascend at will. If the small
bottle used is opaque, or an opaque tube such as the cap of a
fountain pen, many puzzling effects may be obtained. --Contributed
by John Shahan, Auburn, Ala.



** How to Make an Inexpensive Wooden Fan [332]

Select a nice straight-grained piece of white pine about 1/4 in.
thick, 3/4 in. wide and 4 in. long. Lay out the design desired and
cut as shown in Fig. 1, and then soak the wood in hot water to
make it soft and easy to split. Cut the divisions very thin with a
sharp knife down to the point A, as shown in the sketch, taking
care not to split the wood through the part left for the handle.
The fan is then finished by placing each piece over the other as
in Fig. 2. This will make a very pretty ornament.
--Contributed by Fred W. Whitehouse, Upper Troy, N.Y.

[Illustration: Cutting the Wood and Complete Fan]



** Combination Telegraph and Telephone Line [332]

The accompanying diagrams show connections for a short line system

[Illustration: Wiring Diagram]

(metallic circuit) of telegraph where a telephone may be used in
combination on the line. The telephone receivers can be used both
as receivers and transmitters, or ordinary telephone transmitters,
induction coils and battery may be used in the circuit with a
receiver. If a transmitter is used, its batteries may be connected
in circuit with a common push button which is held down when using
the telephone. On a 1000-ft. line, four dry cells will be
sufficient for the telegraph instruments and two cells for the
telephone.
--Contributed by D. W. Milter.



** How to Make a Miniature Windmill [333]

The following description is how a miniature windmill was made,
which gave considerable power for its size, even in a light
breeze. Its smaller parts, such as blades and pulleys, were
constructed of 1-in. sugar pine on account of its softness.

The eight blades were made from pieces 1 by 1-1/2 by 12 in. Two
opposite edges were cut away until the blade was about 1/8 in.
thick. Two inches

[Illustration: Details of Miniature Windmill Construction]

were left uncut at the hub end. They were then nailed to the
circular face plate A, Fig. 1, which was 6 in. in diameter and 1
in. thick. The center of the hub was lengthened by the wooden
disk, B, Fig. 1, which was nailed to the face plate. The shaft C,
Fig. 1, was 1/4-in. iron rod, 2 ft. long, and turned in the
bearings detailed in Fig. 2. J was a nut from a wagon bolt and was
placed in the bearing to insure easy running. The bearing blocks
were 3 in. wide, 1 in. thick and 3 in. high without the upper
half. Both bearings were made in this manner.

The shaft C was keyed to the hub of the wheel, by the method shown
in Fig. 3. A staple, K, held the shaft from revolving in the hub.
This method was also applied in keying the 5-in. pulley F, to the
shaft, G, Fig. 1, which extended to the ground. The 2-1/2-in.
pulley, I, Fig. 1, was keyed to shaft C, as shown in Fig. 4. The
wire L was put through the hole in the axle and the two ends
curved so as to pass through the two holes in the pulley, after
which they were given a final bend to keep the pulley in place.
The method by which the shaft C was kept from working forward is
shown in Fig. 5. The washer M intervened between the bearing block
and the wire N, which was passed through the axle and then bent to
prevent its falling out. Two washers were placed on shaft C,
between the forward bearing and the hub of the wheel to lessen the
friction.

The bed plate D, Fig. 1, was 2 ft. long, 3 in. wide and 1 in.
thick and was tapered from the rear bearing to the slot in which
the fan E was nailed. This fan was made of 1/4-in. pine 18 by 12
in. and was cut the shape shown. The two small iron pulleys with
screw bases, H, Fig. 1, were obtained for a small sum from a
hardware dealer. Their diameter was 1-1/4 in. The belt which
transferred the power from shaft C to shaft G was top string, with
a section of rubber in it to take up slack. To prevent it from
slipping on the two wooden pulleys a rubber band was placed in the
grooves of each.

The point for the swivel bearing was determined by balancing the
bed plate, with all parts in place, across the thin edge of a
board. There a 1/4-in. hole was bored in which shaft G turned. To
lessen the friction here, washers were placed under pulley F. The
swivel bearing was made from two lids of baking powder cans. A
section was cut out of one to permit its being enlarged enough to
admit the other. The smaller one, 0, Fig. 6, was nailed top down
with the sharp edge to the underside of the bed plate, so that the
1/4-in. hole for the shaft G was in the center. The other lid, G,
was tacked, top down also, in the center of the board P, with
brass headed furniture tacks, R, Fig. 6, which acted as a smooth
surface for the other tin to revolve upon. Holes for shaft G were
cut through both lids. Shaft G was but 1/4 in. in diameter, but to
keep it from rubbing against the board P, a 1/2-in. hole was bored
for it, through the latter.

The tower was made of four 1 by 1 in. strips, 25 ft. long. They
converged from points on the ground forming an 8-ft. square to the
board P at the top of the tower. This board was 12 in. square and
the corners were notched to admit the strips as shown, Fig. 1.
Laths were nailed diagonally between the strips to strengthen the
tower laterally. Each strip was screwed to a stake in the ground
so that by disconnecting two of them the other two could be used
as hinges and the tower could be tipped over and lowered to the
ground, as, for instance, when the windmill needed oiling.
Bearings for the shaft G were placed 5 ft. apart in the tower. The
power was put to various uses.



** How to Make a Telegraph Instrument and Buzzer [334]

The only expenditure necessary in constructing this telegraph
instrument is the price of a dry cell, providing one has a few old
materials on hand. Procure a block of wood about 6 in. long and 3
in. wide and take the coils out of an old electric bell. If you
have no bell, one may be had at the dealers for a small sum.
Fasten these coils on the blocks at one end as in Fig. 1. Cut a
piece of tin 2 in. long and 1/2 in. wide and bend it so the end of
the tin

[Illustration: Home-Made Telegraph Instrurment]

when fastened to the block will come just above the core of the
coil. Cut another piece of tin 3 in. long and bend it as shown at
A, Fig. 2. Tack these two pieces of tin in front of the coils as
shown in the illustration. This completes the receiver or sounder.

To make the key, cut out another piece of tin (X, Fig. 1) 4 in.
long and bend it as shown. Before tacking it to the board, cut off
the head of a nail and drive it in the board at a point where the
loose end of the tin will cover it. Then tack the key to the board
and connect the wires of the battery as in Fig. 1. Now, move the
coils back and forth until the click sounds just the way you wish
and you are ready to begin on the Morse code.

When tired of this instrument, connect the wire from the coils to
the key to point A and the one connected at the point under the
key to B, leaving the other wire as it is. By adjusting the coils,
the receiver will begin to vibrate rapidly, causing a buzzing
sound.
--Contributed by John R. McConnell.



** How to Make a Water Bicycle [335]

Water bicycles afford fine sport, and, like many another device
boys make, can be made of material often cast off by their people
as rubbish. The principle material necessary for the construction
of a water bicycle is oil barrels. Flour barrels will not do-they
are not strong enough, nor can they be made perfectly airtight.
The grocer can furnish you with oil barrels at a very small cost,
probably let you have them for making a few deliveries for him.
Three barrels are required for the water bicycle, although it can
be made with but two. Figure 1 shows the method of arranging the
barrels; after the manner of bicycle wheels.

Procure an old bicycle frame and make for it a board platform
about 3 ft. wide at the rear end and tapering to about 2 ft. at
the front, using cleats to hold the board frame, as shown at

[Illustration: Water, Bicycle Complete]

the shaded portion K. The construction of the barrel part is shown
in Fig. 2. Bore holes in the center of the heads of the two rear
barrels and also in the heads of the first barrel and put a shaft
of wood, through the rear barrels and one through the front
barrel, adjusting the side pieces to the shafts, as indicated.

Next place the platform of the bicycle frame and connections
thereon. Going back to Fig. 1 we see that the driving chain passes
from the sprocket driver L of the bicycle frame to the place
downward between the slits in the platform to the driven sprocket
on the shaft between the two barrels. Thus a center drive is made.
The rear barrels are, fitted with paddles as at M, consisting of
four pieces of board nailed

[Illustration: Barrel Float for Bicycle]

and deated about the circumference of the barrels, as shown in
Fig. 1.

The new craft is now ready for a first voyage. To propel it, seat
yourself on the bicycle seat, feet on the pedals, just as you
would were you on a bicycle out in the street. The steering is
effected by simply bending the body to the right or left, which
causes the craft to dip to the inclined side and the affair turns
in the dipped direction. The speed is slow at first, but increases
as the force is generated and as one becomes familiar with the
working of the affair. There is no danger, as the airtight barrels
cannot possibly sink.

Another mode of putting together the set of barrels, using one
large one in the rear and a small one in the front is presented in
Fig, 3. These two barrels are empty oil barrels like the others.
The head holes are bored and the proper wooden shafts are inserted
and the entrance to the bores closed tight by calking with hemp
and putty or clay. The ends of the shafts turn in the wooden frame
where the required bores are made to receive the same. If the
journals thus made are well oiled, there will not be much
friction. Such a frame can be fitted with a platform and a raft to
suit one's individual fancy built upon it, which can

[Illustration: Another Type of Float]

be paddled about with ease and safety on any pond. A sail can be
rigged up by using a mast and some sheeting; or even a little
houseboat, which will give any amount of pleasure, can be built.



** How To Make a Small Searchlight [336]

The materials required for a small searchlight are a 4-volt lamp
of the loop variety, thin sheet brass for the cylinder, copper
piping and brass tubing for base. When completed the searchlight
may be fitted to a small boat and will afford a great amount

[Illustration: Searchlight]

of pleasure for a little work, or it may be put to other uses if
desired.

Make a cylinder of wood of the required size and bend a sheet of
thin brass around it. Shape small blocks of boxwood, D, Fig. 1, to
fit the sides and pass stout pieces of brass wire through the
middle of the blocks for trunnions. Exactly through the middle of
the sides of the cylinder drill holes just so large that when the
blocks containing the trunnions are cemented to the cylinder there
is no chance of contact between cylinder and trunnion, and so
creating a false circuit.

The trunnion should project slightly into the cylinder, and after
the lamp has been placed in position by means of the small wood
blocks shown in Fig. 1, the wires from the lamp should be soldered
to the trunnions. It is best to solder the wire to the trunnions
before cementing the side blocks inside the cylinder.

Turn a small circle of wood, A, Fig. 2, inside the cylinder to fit
exactly and fasten to it a piece of mirror, C, Fig. 2, exactly the
same size to serve as a reflector. Painting the wood with white
enamel or a piece of brightly polished metal will serve the
purpose. On the back of the piece of wood fasten a small brass
handle, B, Fig. 2, so that it may readily be removed for cleaning.

In front of cylinder place a piece of magnifying glass for a lens.
If a piece

[Illustration: Front View;  Side View]

to fit cannot be obtained, fit a glass like a linen tester to a
small disc of wood or brass to fit the cylinder. If magnifying
glass cannot be had, use plain glass and fit them as follows:

Make two rings of brass wire to fit tightly into the cylinder,
trace a circle (inside diameter of cylinder) on a piece of
cardboard; place cardboard on glass and cut out glass with a glass
cutter; break off odd corners with notches on cutters and grind
the edge of the glass on an ordinary red brick using plenty of
water. Place one brass ring in cylinder, then the glass disc and
then the other ring.

For the stand fill a piece of copper piping with melted rosin or
lead. When hard bend the pipe around a piece of wood which has
been sawed to the shape of bend desired. Then melt out the rosin
or lead. Make an incision with a half-round file in the under side
of the tube for the wires to come through. Make the base of wood
as shown in Fig. 1. One half inch from the top bore a hole large
enough to admit the copper pipe and a larger hole up the center to
meet it for the wires to come down.

If it is desired to make the light very complete, make the base of
two pieces of brass tube--one being a sliding fit in the other and
with projecting pieces to prevent the cylinder from going too far.
The light may then be elevated or lowered as wished. On two
ordinary brass terminals twist or solder some flexible wire, but
before doing so fix a little bone washer on the screws of the
terminal so as to insulate it from the tube. When the wires have
been secured to the terminals cover the joint with a piece of very
thin india rubber tubing, such as is used for cycle valves. The
two wires may now be threaded down the copper tube into the base,
and pulled tight, the terminals firmly fixed into the tubes; if
too small, some glue will secure them. To get the cylinder into
its carriage, put one trunnion into the terminal as far as it will
go and this will allow room for the other trunnion to go in its
terminal.



** Electric Alarm that Rings a Bell and Turns on a Light [337]

The illustration shows an alarm clock connected up to ring an
electric bell, and at the same time turn on an electric light to
show the time. The parts indicated are as follows: A, key of alarm
clock; B, contact post, 4 in. long; C, shelf, 5-1/4 by 10 in.; D,
bracket; E, electric bulb (3-1/2 volts) ; S, brass strip, 4-1/2
in. long, 3/8 in. wide and 1/16 in. thick; T, switch; F, wire from
batteries to switch; G, wire from bell to switch; H, wire from
light to switch; I, dry batteries; J, bell; X, point where a
splice is made from the light to wire leading to batteries from
brass strip under clock. Push the switch lever to the right before
retiring.

To operate this, set alarm key as shown in diagram, after two
turns have been made on the key. When alarm goes off, it turns
till it forms a connection by striking the contact post and starts
the electric bell ringing. Throw lever off from the right to
center, which stops bell ringing. To throw on light throw levers
to the left. The bell is then cut out but the light remains on
till lever is again thrown in the center,

[Illustration: Details of Alarm Construction]

In placing clock on shelf, after setting alarm, be sure that the
legs of clock are on the brass strip and that the alarm key is in
position so it will come in contact with the contact post in back
of clock. The contact post may be of 1/4-in. copper tubing, or
1/4-in. brass rod.

The advantage of this is that one can control the bell and light,
while lying in bed, by having the switch on the baseboard, near
the bed, so it can be reached without getting out of bed.
--Contributed by Geo. C. Brinkerhoff, Swissvale, Pa.



** How to Hold a Screw on a Screwdriver [337]

A screw that is taken from a place almost inaccessible with the
fingers requires considerable patience to return it with an
ordinary screwdriver unless some holding-on device is used. I have
found that by putting a piece of cardboard or thick paper with the
blade of the screwdriver in the screw head slot, the screw may be
held and turned into places that it would be impossible with the
screwdriver alone.
--Contributed by C. Chatland, Ogden, Utah.



** How to Make a Lead Cannon [338]

Any boy who has a little mechanical ability can make a very
reliable cannon for his Fourth-of-July celebration by following
the instructions given here:

[Illustration: Lead Cannon Construction]

Take a stick--a piece of curtain roller will do--7 in. long. Make
a shoulder, as at A, Fig. 1, 4 in. from one end, making it as true
and smooth as possible, as this is to be the muzzle of the cannon.
Make the spindle as in Fig. 1, 1/4 in. in diameter. Procure a good
quality of stiff paper, about 6 in. wide, and wrap it around the
shoulder of the stick, letting it extend 3/4 in. beyond the end of
the spindle, as at B, Fig. 2. Push an ordinary shingle nail
through the paper and into the extreme end of the spindle, as at
A, Fig. 2. This is to form the fuse hole.

Having finished this, place stick and all in a pail of sand, being
careful not to get the sand in it, and letting the opening at the
top extend a little above the surface of the sand. Then fill the
paper cylinder with melted lead and let cool. Pull out the nail
and stick, scrape off the paper and the cannon is ready for
mounting, as in Fig. 3.
--Contributed by Chas. S. Chapman, Lanesboro, Minn.



** Homemade Electric Bed Warmer [338]

The heat developed by a carbon-filament lamp is sufficiently high
to allow its use as a heating element of, for instance, a bed
warmer. There are a number of other small heaters which can be
easily made and for which lamps form very suitable heating
elements, but the bed warmer is probably the best example. All
that is required is a tin covering, which can be made of an old
can, about 3-1/2 in. in diameter. The top is cut out and the edge
filed smooth. The lamp-socket end of the flexible cord is inserted
in the can and the shade holder gripped over the opening. A small
lamp of about 5 cp. will do the heating.

A flannel bag, large enough to slip over the tin can and provided
with a neck that can be drawn together by means of a cord, gives
the heater a more finished appearance, as well as making it more
pleasant to the touch.



** Making a Fire with the Aid of Ice [338]

Take a piece of very clear ice and melt it down into the hollow of
your hands so as to form a large lens. The illustration shows how
this is done. With the lens-shaped ice used in the same manner as
a reading glass to

[Illustration: Forming the Ice Lens]

direct the sun's rays on paper or shavings you can start a fire.
--Contributed by Arthur E. Joerin.



** How to Make a Crossbow and Arrow Sling [339]

In making of this crossbow it is best to use maple for the stock,
but if this wood cannot be procured, good straight-grained pine
will do. The

[Illustration: Details of the Bow-Gun and Arrow Sling]

material must be 1-1/2 in. thick, 6 in. wide and a trifle over 3
ft. long. The bow is made from straight-grained oak, ash, or
hickory, 5/8 in. thick, 1 in. wide and 3 ft. long. A piece of oak,
3/8 in. thick, 1-1/2 in. wide and 6 ft. long, will be sufficient
to make the trigger, spring and arrows. A piece of tin, some nails
and a good cord will complete the materials necessary to make the
crossbow.

The piece of maple or pine selected for the stock must be planed
and sandpapered on both sides, and then marked and cut as shown in
Fig. 1. A groove is cut for the arrows in the top straight edge
3/8 in. wide and 3/8 in. deep. The tin is bent and fastened on the
wood at the back end of the groove where the cord slips out of the
notch; this is to keep the edges from splitting.

A mortise is cut for the bow at a point 9-1/2 in. from the end of
the stock, and one for the trigger 12 in. from the opposite end,
which should be slanting a little as shown by the dotted lines. A
spring, Fig. 2, is made from a good piece of oak and fastened to
the stock with two screws. The trigger, Fig. 3, which is 1/4 in.
thick, is inserted in the mortise in the position when pulled
back, and adjusted so as to raise the spring to the proper height,
and then a pin is put through both stock and trigger, having the
latter swing quite freely. When the trigger is pulled, it lifts
the spring up, which in turn lifts the cord off the tin notch.

The stick for the bow, Fig. 4, is dressed down from a point 3/4
in. on each side of the center line to 1/2 in. wide at each end.
Notches are cut in the ends for the cord. The bow is not fastened
in the stock, it is wrapped with a piece of canvas 1-1/2 in. wide
on the center line to make a tight fit in the mortise. A stout
cord is now tied in the notches cut in the ends of the bow making
the cord taut when the wood is straight.

The design of the arrows is shown in Fig. 5 and they are made with
the blades much thinner than the round part.

To shoot the crossbow, pull the cord back and down in the notch as
shown in Fig. 6, place the arrow in the groove, sight and pull the
trigger as in shooting an ordinary gun.

The arrow sling is made from a branch of ash about 1/2 in. in
diameter, the bark removed and a notch cut in one end, as shown in
Fig. 7. A stout cord about 2-1/2 ft. long is tied in the notch and
a large knot made in the other or loose end. The arrows are
practically the same as those used on the crossbow, with the
exception of a small notch which is cut in them as shown in Fig.
8.

To throw the arrow, insert the cord near the knot in the notch of
the arrow, then grasping the stick with the right hand and holding
the wing of the arrow with the left, as shown in Fig. 9, throw the
arrow with a quick slinging motion. The arrow may be thrown
several hundred feet after a little practice.
--Contributed by O. E. Trownes, Wilmette, Ill.



** A Home-Made Vise [340]

Cut two pieces of wood in the shape shown in the sketch and bore a
3/8-in. hole through both of them for a common carriage bolt.
Fasten one of the pieces to the edge of the bench with a large
wood screw and attach the other piece to the first one with a
piece of leather nailed across the bottom of both pieces. The nut
on the carriage bolt may be tightened with a wrench,

[Illustration: Details of a Home-Made Bench Vise]

or, better still, a key filed out of a piece of soft steel to fit
the nut. The edges of the jaws are faced with sheet metal which
can be copper or steel suitable for the work it is intended to
hold.



** Temporary Dark Room Lantern [340]

Occasionally through some accident to the regular ruby lamp, or
through the necessity of, developing while out of reach of a
properly equipped dark room, some makeshift of illumination must
be improvised. Such a temporary safe light may be made from an
empty cigar box in a short time.

[Illustration: Lantern]

Remove the bottom of the box, and nail it in position as shown at
A. Remove one end, and replace as shown at B. Drive a short wire
nail through the center of the opposite end to serve as a seat for
the candle, C. The lamp is finished by tacking two or more layers
of yellow post-office paper over the aperture D, bringing the
paper well around to the sides and bottom of the box to prevent
light leakage from the cracks around the edges, says Photo Era.
The hinged cover E, is used as a door, making lighting and
trimming convenient. The door may be fastened with a nail or piece
of wire. It is well to reinforce the hinge by gluing on a strip of
cloth if the lamp is to be in use more than once or twice. This
lamp is safe, for the projecting edges of A and B form
light-shields for the ventilation orifice and the crack at the top
of the hinged cover, respectively. Moreover, since the flame of
the candle is above A, only reflected and transmitted light
reaches the plate, while the danger of igniting the paper is
reduced to a minimum.



** Runny Paint [340]

The paint will sag and run if too much oil is put in white lead.



** Camps and How to Build Them [341]

There are several ways of building a temporary camp from material
that is always to be found in the woods, and whether these
improvised shelters are intended to last until a permanent camp is
built, or only as a camp on a short excursion, a great deal of fun
can be had in their construction. The Indian camp is the easiest
to make. An evergreen tree with branches growing well down toward
the ground furnishes all the material. By chopping the trunk
almost through, so that when the tree falls the upper part will
still remain attached to the stump, a serviceable shelter can be
quickly provided. The cut should be about 5 ft. from the ground.
Then the boughs and branches on the under side of the fallen top
are chopped away and piled on top. There is room for several
persons under this sort of shelter, which offers fairly good
protection against any but the most drenching rains.

The Indian wigwam sheds rain better, and where there are no
suitable trees that can be cut, it is the easiest camp to make.
Three long poles with the tops tied together and the lower ends
spaced 8 or 10 ft. apart, make the frame of the wigwam. Branches
and brush can easily be piled up, and woven in and out on these
poles so as to shed a very heavy rain.

The brush camp is shaped like an ordinary "A" tent. The ridge pole
should be about 8 ft. long and supported by crotched uprights
about 6 ft. from the ground. Often the ridge pole can be laid from
one small tree to another. Avoid tall trees on account of
lightning. Eight or ten long poles are then laid slanting against
the ridge pole on each side. Cedar or hemlock boughs make the best
thatch for the brush camp. They should be piled up to a thickness
of a foot or more over the slanting poles and woven in and out to
keep them from slipping. Then a number of poles should be laid
over them to prevent them from blowing away. In woods where there
is plenty of bark available in large slabs, the bark lean-to is a
quickly constructed and serviceable camp. The ridge pole is set up
like that of the brush camp. Three or four other poles are laid
slanting to the ground on one side only. The ends of these poles
should be pushed into the earth and fastened with crotched sticks.
Long poles are then laid crossways of these slanting poles, and
the whole can be covered with brush as in the case of the brush
camp or with strips of bark laid overlapping each other like
shingles. Where bark is used, nails are necessary to hold it in
place. Bark may also be used for a wigwam and it can be held in
place by a cord wrapped tightly around the whole structure,
