"He is reputed rich."

"And we are poor. I see you wonder at that. When my husband's father
died, Philemon was executor. It was understood that he was worth
twenty-five thousand dollars. Yet of this amount my poor husband
received but one thousand. I may be uncharitable, but I have always felt
that Philemon cheated us out of our rightful share."

"I should not be surprised. I never liked Squire Carter. He always
seemed to me to be a selfish man."

"He has certainly acted selfishly toward us."

"Does he know of your poverty?"

"Yes. Only two weeks since, in a fit of despair, I wrote to him for
help. Here is his answer."

She handed a letter to Andy. He instantly recognized the handwriting of
the magnate of Arden.

"Shall I read it?" he asked.

"Yes, do so, and let me know what you think of it."

This was the letter:

    "SOPHIA: I have received your letter, and am surprised that you
    should expect me to help support you. You are my brother's widow, it
    is true, but your destitution is no fault of mine. My brother was
    always shiftless and unpractical, and to such men good luck never
    comes. He might at any rate have insured his life, and so made
    comfortable provision for you. You cannot expect me to repair his
    negligence. You say you have two boys, one eleven years of age. He
    is certainly able to earn money by selling papers or tending an
    office.

    "As for myself, I am not a rich man, but have always been careful to
    meet my expenses and provide for the future. I, too, have a son,
    Conrad, whom I think it my duty to educate and start in life. Any
    money I might send you would be so much taken from him. I advise you
    to apply to some charitable society if you need temporary
    assistance. It will be much better than to write me begging letters.
    Yours truly,

    "PHILEMON CARTER."

"This is a very cold-blooded letter," said Andy, indignantly. "He might
at least have inclosed a five-dollar bill."

"He inclosed nothing. I shall never apply to him again."

"Philemon Carter is considered to be one of the richest men in Arden. He
is taxed for twenty-five thousand dollars, and is probably worth double
that sum. People wonder where he got all his money."

"A part of it is my husband's rightful share of the estate, I have no
doubt."

"Can you do nothing about it?"

"How can I? I am poor and have no influential friends. He denies
everything."

"I will think of that, Mrs. Carter. I know a lawyer down town who may
some time look into the matter for you. In the meanwhile, is there any
special work you can do?"

"Before I was married I was for a time a typewriter."

"I will see if I can hear of a situation of that kind. The lawyer I
spoke of may require an operator."

"I would thankfully accept such a position."

"Does Ben earn anything?"

"He makes a little selling papers."

"He ought to be going to school at his age."

"If I could get any work to do I would send him."

"Mrs. Carter, will you accept a little help from me?"

Andy drew a five-dollar bill from his pocketbook and tendered it to the
widow.

"But," she said, "can you spare this? It is a large sum, and you are
only a boy, probably not earning much."

"I am a boy, but I am handsomely paid for my services. Besides, I have
good friends to whom I can apply if I run short of money."

"Heaven bless you!" said Mrs. Carter, earnestly. "You cannot tell how
much good this money will do me. This morning I was utterly discouraged.
I felt that the Lord had forsaken me. But I was mistaken. He has raised
up for me a good friend, who--"

"Hopes to be of a good deal more service to you. I must leave you now,
but I shall bear you in mind, and hope soon to be the bearer of good
tidings. I will take down your address, and call upon you again soon.
Will you allow me to offer you a suggestion?"

"Certainly."

"Then send out and buy some meat. This dry bread is not sufficient for
you. Don't be afraid to spend the money I leave with you. I will see
that you have more."

As Andy left Mrs. Carter's humble home he felt more than ever the cold
and selfish character of the man who, himself living luxuriously,
suffered his brother's family to want.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MR. WARREN AND HIS SUCCESS.


Andy told Mr. Crawford about the poor family he had visited, and what he
had done to help them.

"You must let me refund the money, Andy," said his employer. "Five
dollars is a good deal for a boy to give."

"Don't forget that I have a double income, Mr. Crawford. I would prefer
that this money should come from me. If you are willing to give another
five dollars, it will be appreciated."

"Then I will make it ten. Will you take charge of this bill and give it
to Mrs. Carter?"

"With the greatest pleasure, Mr. Crawford. You have no idea what
happiness it will give the family."

"I am glad you called my attention to their needs. If I could do
anything more to help them--"

"You can if you know any one who wants a typewriter."

"Is the boy able to work a typewriter?"

"No, but the mother is. Before her marriage she was in a lawyer's
office."

"That is a fortunate suggestion. I have a college friend--a classmate at
Columbia--Mr. Gardner, who has just parted with his typewriter, who is
about to be married."

"May I call at his office, and ask for the situation for Mrs. Carter?"

"Yes; it is on Nassau Street."

Andy seized his hat and went over to the lawyer's office.

It was 132 Nassau Street, in the Vanderbilt Building. He went up in the
elevator and found Mr. Gardner in.

"I come from Mr. Crawford," said Andy. "He says you need a typewriter."

"Are you a typewriter?"

"No; I ask for the position for a lady;" and he told the story.

"You say she has had experience in a lawyer's office?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will make her more desirable. When can she call?"

"I will have her here to-morrow morning at any hour."

"Say ten o'clock--a little before, perhaps."

The lawyer was a pleasant-looking man of medium age, and Andy felt sure
that he would be a kind and considerate employer.

After office hours, and before going up to his pupil, Andy called at the
humble home of Mrs. Carter. The widow's face brightened as she saw him.

"You are my good friend," she said. "You are welcome."

"My employer, Mr. Crawford, sends you this," and Andy displayed the
bill.

"It is a godsend. It will enable me to pay my rent, due on Saturday, and
give me three dollars over."

"But that is not all. I have procured you a situation as typewriter in a
lawyer's office. You will have to be on hand to-morrow morning a little
before ten. The office is Mr. Gardner's, at 132 Nassau Street."

"I can hardly believe in my good fortune. I will be there."

"Can you leave the children?"

"I will ask my neighbor, Mrs. Parker, to look after them. What a good
young man you are!" she exclaimed, gratefully.

"Not young man--boy," corrected Andy, with a smile.

"Won't you stay and take a cup of tea?"

"Thank you, Mrs. Carter, but I have an evening engagement. Oh, by the
way, I forgot to say that Mr. Gardner will pay you ten dollars a week."

"I shall feel rich. I shall no longer be worried by thoughts of
starvation."

"Some time you might consult Mr. Gardner about your brother-in-law's
withholding your share of the estate. He will be able to advise you."

Andy felt a warm glow in his heart at the thought of the happiness he
had been instrumental in bringing to the poor family. He had learned the
great lesson that some never learn, that there is nothing so
satisfactory as helping others. We should have a much better world if
that was generally understood.

The next day Andy received a letter from his stanch friend, Valentine
Burns. He read it eagerly, for it brought him some home news, and in
spite of his success he had not forgotten Arden and his many friends
there.

This was the letter:

    "DEAR ANDY: How long it seems since I saw you! You know that you
    were my most intimate friend, and of course I miss you very much. To
    be sure, there is Conrad, who seems willing to bestow his company
    upon me, as my father happens to be pretty well off, but I look upon
    Conrad as a snob, and don't care much about him. When we met
    yesterday, he inquired after you.

    "'What's your friend, Andy Grant, doing in the city?'

    "'He is in a real estate office,' I replied.

    "'Humph! how much does he get paid?'

    "'Five dollars.'

    "'That is probably more than he earns, but it isn't much to live
    upon.'

    "I didn't care to tell him that you had another income, but said:
    'Don't you think you could live on it?'

    "'I couldn't live on ten dollars a week,' said Conrad, loftily.
    'But, then, I haven't been accustomed to live like Andy Grant.'

    "It must be pleasant to you to know that Conrad feels so much
    interest in your welfare.

    "Sometimes I see your father. He looks careworn. I suppose he is
    thinking of the difficult position in which he is placed. I am sorry
    to say that last week he lost his best cow by some disease. I heard
    that he valued it at fifty dollars. I hope that you won't let this
    worry you. The tide will turn some time. I saw your mother day
    before yesterday. She is glad of your success, but of course she
    misses you. She always receives me very cordially, knowing that we
    are intimate friends.

    "I wish I could see you, Andy. You have no idea how I miss you. I
    like quite a number of the boys, but none is so near to me as you
    were.

    "Well, Andy, I must close. Come to Arden soon, if you can. It will
    do us good to see you, and I think even Conrad will be glad, as it
    will give him a chance to pump you as to your position.

    "Your affectionate friend,

    "VALENTINE BURNS."

"So father has lost his best cow--old Whitey," said Andy, thoughtfully.
"If I were not owing money to Mr. Crawford for the land in Tacoma I
would buy him a new one, but some time I hope the land will be valuable,
and then I can make the loss good to father."

The reader has not, I hope, forgotten Andy's fellow lodger, S. Byron
Warren. Mr. Warren was always writing something for the _Century_, the
_Atlantic_, or some other leading magazine, but never had been cheered
by an acceptance. The magazine editors seemed leagued against him.

But one evening, when Andy returned from the office, he found Mr. Warren
beaming with complacence.

"You look happy to-night, Mr. Warren," he said.

"Yes," answered the author; "look at that."

He held out to Andy an eight-page paper called _The Weekly Magnet_, and
pointed out a story of two columns on the second page. Under the title
Andy read, "By S. Byron Warren." It was called "The Magician's Spell; A
Tale of Sunny Spain."

"I congratulate you," said Andy. "When did you write the story?"

"Last winter."

"How does it happen to be published so late?"

"You see, I sent it first to _Scribner's_, then to _Harper's_, and then
to the _Atlantic_. They didn't seem to fancy it, so I sent it to the
_Magnet_."

