Quit it. It's not wholesome."

"But I'm enjoying it, Herr Walther. Imagination is a glorious thing. You
see the same sun that I do in so far as our eyes are able to look upon
it, but you do not see it in the same way. It appears far more splendid
and glorious to me than it does to you. Our eyes are mirrors and mine
reflect today with much more power and much more depth of color than
yours do."

Walther stared at him, comprehending but little of what he had said, and
shook his head slowly.

"Your French blood is surely on top now, Castel," he said. "I should
call you a little mad if you didn't work so hard and with such a good
heart."

"Ah, well, if we enjoy our madness, pray let us remain so."

Walther shook his head again, and walked away some distance where he
stopped, and looked long at his new helper who toiled with uncommon
diligence but who whistled and sang in a low but happy manner as he
toiled. A new thought was slowly making its way into his stolid brain.
A man might have a madness, and be none the worse for it. Well, every
one to his own madness.

John had heard from Ilse that Julie walked on the terrace twice every
day, once in the morning and once in the afternoon, and he strove so to
arrange his work that he might see her again that afternoon. Knowing
that he was already a favorite with Walther he made many suggestions.
This horse or that needed exercise, and one that had been a favorite
with the prince before he had taken to the automobile, and that even now
was often ridden by him, would be all the better for sun and air.
Walther agreed with him and John deftly postponed the time until about
four o'clock, the warmest and brightest part of the afternoon, when he
thought it most likely that Julie would come again.

He led the horse back and forth along a road that led from the stables
to a forest hanging on the slope, being in sight of the terrace about
half the way. But the terrace was bare and it was not until he had made
three or four turns that Julie with her following shadow, Suzanne,
appeared. Again John's heart beat heavily, and the hand that held the
bridle trembled. He could not help it. His mind, highly sensitive and
imaginative, was nevertheless powerful and tenacious to the last degree.
And he was there in the heart of old romance. The vast castle, gray and
sinister, loomed above him, but beyond was the golden light on the
mountains.

He did not try to attract her attention, but, walking calmly on with
the horse, poured all his soul into the wish that she would look his
way. He had not the remotest belief in the supernatural as he told
himself again, but he continued to wish it with all his power and
strength, and presently her gaze turned toward the young peasant and the
horse who were walking slowly up and down the road. He was too far away
to read her face, but his fond fancy told him that she rejoiced again to
see him there.

She looked at him a little while, but she made no sign or signal. He
expected none. She would know too well that it might create suspicion
and from some one of the many windows of the castle jealous eyes might
be watching.

She advanced to the edge of the terrace with her faithful shadow still
close behind her, and then the prince came. He was in a white and silver
uniform of Austria, a magnificent figure of a man, despite his middle
years, and his great brown beard gave him a majestic aspect. But John
knew that his eyes were set close together and that the soul behind them
was unscrupulous and cruel.

He saw Auersperg take off his gorgeous hat and bow low before the young
Julie. Then they walked together on the terrace, the dark shadow of
Suzanne following, but further behind now.

John's heart was filled with a fierce and consuming rage. The presence
of Auersperg, magnificent, triumphant, powerful, a medieval baron here
in the most medieval of all settings, a very monarch indeed, brought him
back to earth. What could he do alone in the face of so much might?
What could Julie herself do, helpless, before so much pressure? And,
after all, from his point of view and from the point of view from his
class, Auersperg was making her a great offer, one that nobles in the
two empires would hold to be most honorable. For the first time he felt
a tremor of doubt, and then he stilled it as base and unworthy. The very
word "morganatic" was repulsive to him. It implied that the man stooped,
and that the woman surrendered something no real wife could yield.
Julie, whose blood was the blood of the great republican marshal, would
never submit to such a wrong.

John presently saw someone standing on the steps of the terrace, and as
he turned with the horse, he beheld a wild and jealous face. It was
young Kratzek, and he was watching Auersperg and Julie. He was only a
lad, this Austrian noble, but John's heart felt a touch of sympathy. A
common love made them akin and he knew that Kratzek's love like his own
was the love of youth, high and pure. He felt neither hate nor jealousy
of the Austrian.

His eyes went back to Julie and Auersperg. Their faces were turned
toward him now and he could see that it was the prince who talked and
that Julie listened, saying but little. The thud of hoofs on the road
into the valley came to him and Pappenheim, on his great black horse,
galloped into view. But he pulled to a walk when he saw the two on the
terrace, and John smiled to himself in grim irony. Pappenheim also loved
the ground upon which the young Julie walked. Von Arnheim and von
Boehlen should be there, too, and then the jealous circle would be
complete.

Kratzek presently walked away, and Pappenheim rode slowly past the
castle and out of sight. Julie turned from the prince and looked fixedly
for a little while in John's direction. He felt that she meant it as a
sign, and he was eager to reply in some way, but prudence held him. Then
she went into the castle and Auersperg was left alone on the terrace.

John saw that Prince Karl of Auersperg was very thoughtful. He walked
slowly back and forth, his figure magnified in the sun's glow, and now
and then he thoughtfully stroked his great brown beard. He seemed to
John more than ever out of place. His time was centuries ago among the
robber barons. In such a group he would not have been the worst, but in
his soul John wished that the hour for all such as he had come. If the
great war struck that dead trunk from the living body of the human race
it would not be fought wholly in vain.

He went into the castle after a while, his walk slow and thoughtful, and
John returned with the horse to the stables. All the rest of the day, he
worked with such diligence and effect that Walther bade him rest.

"You may go about the castle as much as you please," he said, "and you
may enter the part set aside for the servants, but you must stop there.
Nor can you go beyond the immediate castle grounds. If you try it you
risk a shot from the sentries."

"I've no wish to be shot and so I'll not risk it," said John, with the
utmost sincerity, and after bathing his face and hands, he strolled
through the grounds of Zillenstein, his course soon and inevitably
leading him toward the addition to the right wing from the windows of
which lights were shining. Yet the grounds outside were heavy with
shrubbery, and, keeping hidden in it, he advanced farther and farther,
eager to see.

He was not yet twenty yards from the walls and he saw human figures
passing before the windows. Then a dark form presently slipped from a
small door and stood a moment or two on the graveled walk, as if
undecided. John felt the pulses beating hard in his temples. He knew
that stalwart figure. It was none other than the grim and faithful
Suzanne and, daring all, he went to the very edge of the shrubbery,
calling in a loud whisper:

"Suzanne! Suzanne!"

She stood attentive, glanced about, and, seeing that no one observed
her, came to the edge of the deep shadow.

"Suzanne! Suzanne!" called John again. "It is I, John Scott! Have you
any message for me from Mademoiselle Julie?"

She looked again to see that none was near, and then stepped boldly into
the shrubbery, where John seized her arm half in entreaty and half to
hurry her.

"O, Suzanne! Suzanne!" he repeated, with fierce insistence. "Have you
any word for me?"

They were completely in the heavy shadow now, between the short clipped
pines, where no one, even but a few feet away, could see, and before
replying she looked at him, her grim face relaxing into a smile. She had
always watched him before with a sort of angry jealousy, but John
believed that he now read welcome and gladness in her eyes.

"Suzanne! Suzanne!" he repeated, his insistence ever growing stronger.
"Is there no word for me?"

"Aye," she said, "my mistress bids me tell you that she is grateful,
that she understands all you have risked for her sake, that she can
never repay you sufficiently for your great service, and that she feels
safer because you are near."

"Ah," breathed John, "it is worth every risk to hear that."

"But she fears for you. She knows that you are in great danger here. If
they discover who you are, you perish at once as a spy. So she bids me
tell you to go away. It is easy to escape from here to the Italian
frontier. She would not have you lose your life for her."

"Is it because my life is of more value to her than that of any other
man? Oh, tell me, I pray you?"

Another of her rare smiles passed over the grim face of the woman.

"It is a question that Mademoiselle Julie alone can answer," she said.
"But when she went to her room she wept a little and her tears were not
those of sorrow."

"Oh, then, Suzanne, she is indeed glad that I am here. Tell her that I
came for her, and that I will not go away until she goes too."

"She is in no great danger here; she is a prisoner, but they treat her
as a guest, one of high degree."

"Auersperg would force her to marry him."

Suzanne smiled once more, but gravely.

"The prince would marry her," she said, "and he is not the only one who
wishes to do so. But fear not. Auersperg cannot force her to marry him.
She is of the same tempered steel as her brother, the great Monsieur
Philip. Were she a man as he is, she would dare as much as he does, and
being a woman she will dare in a woman's way none the less."

"And the others, Kratzek and Pappenheim, and von Arnheim if he should
come, they are young and brave and true! Might she not, as the only way
of escape from the high-handed baron, marry one of them?"

For the fourth time Suzanne smiled. Never before had she permitted
herself that luxury so many times in a month, but there was an odd glint
in this latest smile of hers, which gave to her face a rare look of
softness.

"Nor will she marry any of them," she said, "although they are brave and
honest and true and love her. Mademoiselle Julie has her own reasons
which she does not tell to me, but I know. She will not marry Prince
Karl of Auersperg. She will not marry Prince Wilhelm von Arnheim, she
will not marry Count Leopold Kratzek, she will not marry Count
Maximilien Pappenheim. Do I not know her well, I who have been with her
all her life?"

And once more that smile with the odd glint in it passed over her stern
face. But John in the thickening dusk could not see it, although her low
earnest voice carried conviction.

"Tell her for me, will you, Suzanne," he said, "that I think I can take
her from the castle of Zillenstein. Tell her, too, that I am in little
danger in my peasant's clothes. I have been face to face with the prince
himself and he has shown no sign of recognition, nor has Count Kratzek
who was my prisoner once. Tell her that I will not go. Tell her that my
heart is light because she fears for my safety and, O Suzanne, tell her
that I will watch over her the best I can, until all of us escape from
this hateful castle."

"It is much to tell. How can I remember it alt?"

"Then tell her all you remember."

"That I promise. And now it's time for me to go back. We cannot risk too
much."

She turned away, but John had another question to ask her. His heart
smote him that he had not thought of Picard.

"Your father, Suzanne?" he said. "I have not heard of him. Is he here?"

"They left him a prisoner at Munich. Doubtless he will escape and he,
too, will reach Zillenstein."

"Tell Mademoiselle Julie that her brother did not come to the appointed
meeting at Chastel, because he was wounded. Not badly. Don't be alarmed,
Suzanne. He'll be as well as ever soon."

"Then he, too, will come to Zillenstein. You are not the only one who
seeks, Monsieur Scott."

"But I am the first to arrive. Nothing can take that from me."

"It is true. Now I must hasten back to the castle. If I stay longer they
will suspect me."

She slipped from the shrubbery and was gone, and, John, afire with new
emotions, strolled in a wide circuit back to the stables.

A week went by. Twice every day he saw Julie on the terrace, but no word
passed between them, the chance never came. But the hosts of the air
were at work. The invisible currents were passing between the girl on
the terrace who was treated like a princess and the young peasant who
walked the horses in the road.

"Be not afraid. I have a strength more than my own to save you," came on
a wave of air.

"I fear not for myself, only for you lest they discover you," came the
answering wave.

"I love you. You are the most beautiful woman in the world and the
bravest. It's cause for pride to risk death for you."

"I know that you are here for me. I knew that you would come, when I saw
you in Metz. I know that under your peasant's garb you are a prince,
more of a real prince than any Auersperg that ever lived."

John was outside of himself. He felt sometimes as if he had left his
body behind. The spirit of the crusader was still upon him, and in sight
of his beloved, the prize that he had reached but not yet won, he cast
aside all thought of danger or failure and awaited the event, whatever
it might be, with the supreme confidence of youth. It is but truth to
say that he was happy in those days, filled with a stolen delight, all
the sweeter because it was stolen under the very eyes of the medieval
baron, lord almost of life and death, who was master there.

He steadily advanced in the good graces of Walther. No other such
industrious and skillful groom had appeared at Zillenstein in many a
day, and he rapidly acquired dexterity also with the automobiles. None
could send them spinning with more certainty along the curving mountain
roads. He practiced with diligence because he had a vague premonition
that all this knowledge would be of use to him some day.

Pappenheim went away, but returned after four days. John fancied that he
had been in Vienna, but he knew the magnet that had brought him back. He
saw the young Austrian's eyes flame more than once when Julie appeared
in her favorite place on the terrace. And yet John neither hated nor
feared him.

Kratzek was well enough to go back to the battle front, but he lingered.
John did not know what excuses he gave, but he was there, and his eyes,
too, burned when Julie passed.

Often in the evening he watched for the grim Suzanne and the word that
she would bring, but she did not come. Day by day he saw her, the long
black shadow behind her mistress, but she never looked toward him,
however intensely he wished it.

The prince went forth occasionally, but he always used an automobile and
he was never gone longer than a day. John wondered why he remained so
long at Zillenstein, knowing that he was a general in the German army
and a man of weight at the battle front. He concluded at last that he
must be waiting there for a conference of some kind between important
men of Germany and Austria. He had heard through the gossip in the
castle that Italy was threatening war on Austria, and the Teutonic
powers must now face also toward the southwest. Much might be decided at
Zillenstein.

Ilse and Olga were still his best sources of information. Very little
that passed in the castle missed their shrewd inquiring minds, and they
had found in the handsome young peasant from Lorraine one with whom they
liked to talk. He jested and laughed with them but there was a certain
reserve on his part that they could not break down but which drew them
on. He would not flirt with them. None was readier than he for light
words and airy compliments, but nothing that he said permitted either of
the trim young Austrian girls to think that he might become a lover.

