   And a boundless sweep and a surge sublime,
     As it blends with the ocean of Years.

2. How the winters are drifting, like flakes of snow,
     And the summers, like buds between;
   And the year in the sheaf--so they come and they go,
   On the river's breast, with its ebb and flow,
     As it glides in the shadow and sheen.

3. There's a magical isle up the river of Time,
     Where the softest of airs are playing;
   There's a cloudless sky and a tropical clime,
   And a song as sweet as a vesper chime,
     And the Junes with the roses are staying.

4. And the name of that isle is the Long Ago,
     And we bury our treasures there;
   There are brows of beauty and bosoms of snow--
   There are heaps of dust--but we love them so!--
     There are trinkets and tresses of hair;

5. There are fragments of song that nobody sings,
     And a part of an infant's prayer,
   There's a lute unswept, and a harp without strings;
   There are broken vows and pieces of rings,
     And the garments that she used to wear.

6. There are hands that are waved, when the fairy shore
     By the mirage is lifted in air;
   And we sometimes hear, through the turbulent roar,
   Sweet voices we heard in the days gone before,
     When the wind down the river is fair.

7. Oh, remembered for aye be the blessed Isle,
     All the day of our life till night--
   When the evening comes with its beautiful smile,
   And our eyes are closing to slumber awhile,
     May that "Greenwood." of Soul be in sight


DEFINITIONS.--1. Realm, region, country. Rhythm, the harmonious flow of
vocal sounds. Rhyme, a word answering in sound to another word. Surge, a
great, rolling swell of water. 3. Ves'per, pertaining to the evening
service in the Roman Catholic Church. 6. Mi-rage' (pro. me-razh'), an
optical illusion causing objects at a distance to seem as though suspended
in the air. 7. Aye (pro. a), always, ever.


NOTES.--5. A lute unswept, that is, unplayed.

7. Greenwood is a notes and very beautiful cemetery at the southern
extremity of Brooklyn, N.Y. The expression means, then, the resting place
of the soul.



LXXV. THE BOSTON MASSACRE.

George Bancroft (b. 1800, d. 1891) was born at Worcester, Mass. He was an
ambitious student, and graduated at Harvard College before he was eighteen
years of age. He then traveled in Europe, spending some time at the German
universities. On his return, in 1822, he was appointed tutor in Greek at
Harvard. His writings at this time were a small volume of original poems,
some translations from Schiller and Goethe, and a few striking essays. Mr.
Bancroft has held numerous high political offices. In 1838 he was
appointed collector of the port at Boston; in 1845 he was made secretary
of the Navy; in 1849 he was sent as United States Minister to Great
Britain; and in 1867 he was sent in the same capacity to Prussia. The work
which has given Mr. Bancroft his great literary reputation is his "History
of the United States, from the Discovery of the American Continent." The
first volume appeared in 1834. Philosophical in reasoning, interesting,
terse in style, and founded on careful research, under the most favorable
advantages, the work stands alone in its sphere.

1. The evening of the fifth came on. The young moon was shining brightly
in a cloudless winter sky, and its light was increased by a new-fallen
snow. Parties of soldiers were driving about the streets, making a parade
of valor, challenging resistance, and striking the inhabitants
indiscriminately with sticks or sheathed cutlasses.

2. A band, which poured out from Murray's barracks, in Brattle Street,
armed with clubs, cutlasses, and bayonets, provoked resistance, and a fray
ensued. Ensign Maul, at the gate of the barrack yard, cried to the
soldiers: "Turn out, and I will stand by you; kill them; stick them; knock
them down; run your bayonets through them." One soldier after another
leveled a firelock, and threatened to "make a lane" through the crowd.

3. Just before nine, as an officer crossed King Street, now State Street,
a barber's lad cried after him: "There goes a mean fellow who hath not
paid my father for dressing his hair;" on which, the sentinel stationed at
the westerly end of the customhouse, on the corner of King Street and
Exchange Lane, left his post, and with his musket gave the boy a stroke on
the head, that made him stagger and cry for pain.

4. The street soon became clear, and nobody troubled the sentry, when a
party of soldiers issued violently from the main guard, their arms
glittering in the moonlight, and passed on, hallooing: "Where are they?
where are they? Let them come."

5. Presently twelve or fifteen more, uttering the same cries, rushed from
the south into King Street, and so by the way of Cornhill towards Murray's
barracks. "Pray, soldiers, spare my life," cried a boy of twelve, whom
they met. "No, no, I'll kill you all," answered one of them, and knocked
him down with his cutlass. They abused and insulted several persons at
their doors and others in the street; "running about like madmen in a
fury," crying, "Fire!" which seemed their watchword, and, "Where are
they? Knock them down." Their outrageous behavior occasioned the ringing
of the bell at the head of King Street.

6. The citizens, whom the alarm set in motion, came out with canes and
clubs; and, partly by the interference of well-disposed officers, partly
by the courage of Crispus Attucks, a mulatto, and some others, the fray at
the barracks was soon over. Of the citizens, the prudent shouted, "Home!
home!" others, it is said, cried out, "Huzza for the main guard! there is
the nest;" but the main guard was not molested the whole evening.

7. A body of soldiers came up Royal Exchange Lane, crying, "Where are the
cowards?" and, brandishing their arms, passed through King Street. From
ten to twenty boys came after them, asking, "Where are they? where are
they?" "There is the soldier who knocked me down," said the barber's boy;
and they began pushing one another towards the sentinel. He loaded and
primed his musket. "The lobster is going to fire," cried a boy. Waving his
piece about, the sentinel pulled the trigger.

8. "If you fire you must die for it," said Henry Knox, who was passing by.
"I don't care," replied the sentry, "if they touch me, I'll fire." "Fire!"
shouted the boys, for they were persuaded he could not do it without leave
from a civil officer; and a young fellow spoke out, "We will knock him
down for snapping," while they whistled through their fingers and huzzaed.
"Stand off !" said the sentry, and shouted aloud, "Turn out, main guard!"
"They are killing the sentinel," reported a servant from the customhouse,
running to the main guard. "Turn out! why don't you turn cut?" cried
Preston, who was captain of the day, to the guard.

9. A party of six, two of whom, Kilroi and Montgomery, had been worsted at
the ropewalk, formed, with a corporal in front and Preston following. With
bayonets fixed, they "rushed through the people" upon the trot, cursing
them, and pushing them as they went along. They found about ten persons
round the sentry, while about fifty or sixty came down with them. "For
God's sake," said Knox! holding Preston by the coat, "take your men back
again; if they fire, your life must answer for the consequences." "I know
what I am about," said he hastily, and much agitated.

10. None pressed on them or provoked them till they began loading, when a
party of about twelve in number, with sticks in their hands, moved from
the middle of the street where they had been standing, gave three cheers,
and passed along the front of the soldiers, whose muskets some of them
struck as they went by. "You are cowardly rascals," they said, "for
bringing arms against naked men." "Lay aside your guns, and we are ready
for you." "Are the soldiers loaded?" inquired Palmes of Preston. "Yes," he
answered, "with powder and ball." "Are they going to fire upon the
inhabitants?" asked Theodore Bliss. "They can not, without my orders,"
replied Preston; while "the town-born" called out, "Come on, you rascals,
you bloody backs, you lobster scoundrels, fire, if you dare. We know you
dare not."

11. Just then, Montgomery received a blow from a stick which had hit his
Musket; and the word "fire!" being given by Preston, he stepped a little
to one side, and shot Attucks, who at the time was quietly leaning on a
long stick. "Don't fire!" said Langford, the watchman, to Kilroi, looking
him full in the face; but yet he did so, and Samuel Gray, who was standing
next Langford, fell lifeless. The rest fired slowly and in succession on
the people, who were dispersing. Three persons were killed, among them
Attucks, the mulatto; eight were wounded, two of them mortally. Of all the
eleven, not more than one had any share in the disturbance.

12. So infuriated were the soldiers that, when the men returned to take up
the dead, they prepared to fire again, but were checked by Preston, while
the Twenty-ninth Regiment appeared under arms in King Street. "This is our
time," cried the soldiers of the Fourteenth; and dogs were never seen more
greedy for their prey.

13. The bells rung in all the churches; the town drums beat. "To arms! to
arms!" was the cry. "Our hearts," said Warren, "beat to arms, almost
resolved by one stroke to avenge the death of our slaughtered brethren;"
but they stood self-possessed, demanding justice according to the law.
"Did you not know that you should not have fired without the order of a
civil magistrate?" asked Hutchinson, on meeting Preston. "I did it,"
answered Preston, "to save my men."

14. The people would not be pacified or retire till the regiment was
confined to the guardroom and the barracks; and Hutchinson himself gave
assurances that instant inquiries should be made by the county
magistrates. One hundred persons remained to keep watch on the
examination, which lasted till three hours after midnight. A warrant was
issued against Preston, who surrendered himself to the sheriff; and the
soldiers of his party were delivered up and committed to prison.


DEFINITIONS.--1. In-dis-crim'i-nate-ly, without distinction. 2. En-sued',
followed, resulted from. En'sign (pro. en'sin). an officer of low rank.
Fire'lock, an old-style musket, with flintlock. 7. Bran'-dish-ing,
waving, flourishing. 13. Self'-pos-sessed, undisturbed, calm in mind,
manner, etc. 14. Pac'i-fied, calmed, quieted. War'rant, a writ authorizing
an officer to seize an offender.


NOTES.--This massacre took place Monday, March 5, 1770.

5. Cornhill is the name of a street in Boston.

7. Lobster was the epithet applied to a British soldier by the Americans
on account of his red coat.

8. Henry Knox (b. 1750, d. 1806) was then a bookseller in Boston. He
afterwards became one of the American generals.

8. Ropewalk. The active trouble resulting in the massacre arose from a
soldier's being thrashed the Friday before at Gray's ropewalk, where he
had challenged one of the workmen to fight; other soldiers joined in the
affray from time to time, but were always worsted.

13. Warren. This was Joseph Warren (b. 1741, d. 1775), the American
patriot, killed shortly after at Bunker Hill.

Thomas Hutchinson was at this time lieutenant governor of Massachusetts.
Although born in Boston, he sided with the British government in the
troubles before the Revolution, and sailed for England in 1774.



LXXVI. DEATH OF THE BEAUTIFUL.


Eliza Lee Fallen (b. 1787, d. 1859) was born in Boston, Mass. Her maiden
name was Cabott. In 1828, she married Charles Follen, Professor of the
German language and its literature in Harvard University. Her principal
works are "Sketches of Married Life," "The Skeptic," "Twilight Stories,"
and "Little Songs." For several years Mrs. Follen was editor of the
"Children's Friend."

1. The young, the lovely, pass away,
     Ne'er to be seen again;
   Earth's fairest flowers too soon decay,
     Its blasted trees remain.

2. Full oft, we see the brightest thing
     That lifts its head on high,
   Smile in the light, then droop its wing,
     And fade away and die.

3. And kindly is the lesson given;
     Then dry the falling tear:
   They came to raise our hearts to Heaven;
     They go to call us there.



LXXVII. SNOW FALLING.

John James Piatt (b. 1835,--) was born in Dearborn County, Ind., and is
of French descent. He began to write verses at the age of fourteen, and
has been connected editorially with several papers. Several editions of
his poems have been issued from time to time, each edition usually
containing some additional poems. Of these volumes we may mention: "Poems
in Sunshine and Firelight," "Western Windows," "The Lost Farm," and "Poems
of House and Home."

1. The wonderful snow is falling
     Over river and woodland and wold;
   The trees bear spectral blossom
     In the moonshine blurr'd and cold.

2. There's a beautiful garden in Heaven;
     And these are the banished flowers,
   Falling and driven and drifted
     Into this dark world of ours.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Wold, a plain or open country, a country without wood
whether hilly or not. Spec'tral, ghostly. 2. Ban'ished, condemned to
exile, driven away.



LXXVIII. SQUEERS'S METHOD.

Charles Dickens (b. 1812, d. 1870). This celebrated novelist was born in
Portsmouth, England. He began his active life as a lawyer's apprentice, in
London; but soon became a reporter, and followed this occupation from 1831
to 1836. His first book was entitled "Sketches of London Society, by Boz."
In 1837 he published the "Pickwick Papers," a work which established his
reputation as a writer. His other works followed with great rapidity, and
his last, "Edwin Drood," was unfinished when he died. He visited America
in 1842 and in 1867. He is buried in Westminster Abbey. Mr. Dickens
excelled in humor and pathos, and was particularly successful in
delineating the joys and griefs of childhood. His writings have a tendency
to prompt to deeds of kindness and benevolence. The following extract is
taken from "Nicholas Nickleby," one of the best of his novels.

1. "Come," said Squeers, "let's go to the schoolroom; and lend me a hand
with my school coat, will you?"

Nicholas assisted his master to put on an old fustian shooting jacket,
which he took down from a peg in the passage; and Squeers, arming himself
with his cane, led the way across a yard to a door in the rear of the
house.

"There," said the schoolmaster, as they stepped in together; "this is our
shop, Nickleby."

2. It was such a crowded scene, and there were so many objects to attract
attention, that at first Nicholas stared about him, really without seeing
anything at all. By degrees, however, the place resolved itself into a
bare and dirty room with a couple of windows, whereof a tenth part might
be of glass, the remainder being stopped up with old copy books and paper.


3. There were a couple of long, old, rickety desks, cut and notched, and
inked and damaged in every possible way; two or three forms, a detached
desk for Squeers, and another for his assistant. The ceiling was supported
like that of a barn, by crossbeams and rafters, and the walls were so
stained and discolored that it was impossible to tell whether they had
ever been touched by paint or whitewash.

4. Pale and haggard faces, lank and bony figures, children with the
countenances of old men, deformities with irons upon their limbs, boys of
stunted growth, and others whose long, meager legs would hardly bear their
stooping bodies, all crowded on the view together. There were little faces
which should have been handsome, darkened with the scowl of sullen, dogged
suffering; there was childhood with the light of its eye quenched, its
beauty gone, and its helplessness alone remaining.

5. And yet this scene, painful as it was, had its grotesque features,
which, in a less interested observer than Nicholas, might have provoked a
smile. Mrs. Squeers stood at one of the desks, presiding over an immense
basin of brimstone and treacle, of which delicious compound she
administered a large installment to each boy in succession, using for the
purpose a common wooden spoon, which might have been originally
manufactured for some gigantic top, and which widened every young
gentleman's mouth considerably, they being all obliged, under heavy
corporeal penalties, to take in the whole bowl at a gasp.

6. "Now," said Squeers, giving the desk a great rap with his cane, which
made half the little boys nearly jump out of their boots, "is that
physicking over?"

"Just over," said Mrs. Squeers, choking the last boy in her hurry, and
tapping the crown of his head with the wooden spoon to restore him. "Here,
you Smike: take away now. Look sharp!"

7. Smike shuffled out with the basin, and Mrs. Squeers hurried out after
him into a species of washhouse, where there was a small fire, and a large
kettle, together with a number of little wooden bowls which were arranged
upon a board. Into these bowls Mrs. Squeers, assisted by the hungry
servant, poured a brown composition which looked like diluted pincushions
without the covers, and was called porridge. A minute wedge of brown bread
was inserted in each bowl, and when they had eaten their porridge by means
of the bread, the boys ate the bread itself, and had finished their
breakfast, whereupon Mr. Squeers went away to his own.

8. After some half-hour's delay Mr. Squeers reappeared, and the boys took
their places and their books, of which latter commodity the average might
be about one to eight learners. A few minutes having elapsed, during which
Mr. Squeers looked very profound, as if he had a perfect apprehension of
what was inside all the books, and could say every word of their contents
by heart, if he only chose to take the trouble, that gentleman called up
the first class.

9. Obedient to this summons there ranged themselves in front of the
schoolmaster's desk, half a dozen scarecrows, out at knees and elbows, one
of whom placed a torn and filthy book beneath his learned eye.

"This is the first class in English spelling and philosophy, Nickleby,"
said Squeers, beckoning Nicholas to stand beside him. "We'll get up a
Latin one, and hand that over to you. Now, then, where's the first boy?"

10. "Please, sir, he's cleaning the back parlor window," said the
temporary head of the philosophical class.

"So he is, to be sure," rejoined Squeers. "We go upon the practical mode
of teaching, Nickleby; the regular education system. C-l-e-a-n, clean,
verb active, to make bright, to scour. W-i-n, win, d-e-r, der, winder, a
casement. When the boy knows this out of book, he goes and does it. It's
just the same principle as the use of the globes. Where's the second boy?"


11. "Please, sir, he is weeding the garden," replied a small voice.

"To be sure," said Squeers, by no means disconcerted, "so he is. B-o-t,
bot, t-i-n, tin, n-e-y, ney, bottinney, noun substantive, a knowledge of
plants. When he has learned that bottinney means a knowledge of plants,
he goes and knows 'em. That's our system, Nickleby: what do you think of
it?"

"It's a very useful one, at any rate," answered Nicholas, significantly.

12. "I believe you," rejoined Squeers, not remarking the emphasis of his
usher. "Third boy, what's a horse?"

"A beast, sir," replied the boy.

"So it is," said Squeers. "Ain't it, Nickleby?"

"I believe there is no doubt of that, sir," answered Nicholas.

"Of course there is n't," said Squeers. "A horse is a quadruped, and
quadruped's Latin for beast, as everybody that's gone through the grammar
knows, or else where's the use of having grammars at all?"

"Where, indeed!" said Nicholas, abstractedly.

13. "As you're perfect in that," resumed Squeers, turning to the boy, "go
and look after my horse, and rub him down well, or I'll rub you down. The
rest of the class go and draw water up till somebody tells you to leave
off, for it's washing day to-morrow, and they want the coppers filled."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Fus'tian, a kind of cotton stuff, including corduroy,
velveteen, etc. 2. Re-solved', made clear, disentangled. 4.
De-form'i-ties, misshapen persons. Stunt'ed, checked in growth. Mea'ger,
thin, lean. 5. Gro-tesque' (pro. gro-tesk'), fanciful, absurd.
Ad-min'is-tered, gave, dispensed. In-stall'ment (literally, part of a
debt), part, portion. Cor-po're-al, bodily. 6. Phys'ick-ing, doctoring,
treating with medicine. 7. Di-lut'ed, weakened by the addition of water.
8. Com-mod'i-ty, article, wares. Pro-found', intellectually deep, wise.
Ap-pre-hen'sion, comprehension, knowledge. 10. Tem'po-ra-ry, for the time
being. 11. Dis-con-cert'ed, confused, abashed. Sig-nif 'i-cant-ly, with
meaning. 12. Ab-stract'-ed-ly, in an absent-minded way.


NOTES.--1. Mr. Squeers is represented as an ignorant, brutal teacher, many
of whom were to be found in Yorkshire, England, at the time of this story.


Nicholas Nickleby is a well-educated, refined young man, who has just
obtained the position of assistant teacher, not knowing Squeers's true
character.

6. Smike is a poor scholar, disowned by his parents, and made almost
idiotic by harsh treatment.

The novel from which this story is abridged, aided greatly in a
much-needed reform in the Yorkshire schools; and the character of Squeers
was so true to life, that numerous suits were threatened against Mr.
Dickens by those who thought themselves caricatured.



LXXIX. THE GIFT OF EMPTY HANDS.

Mrs. S. M. B. Piatt (b, 1835,--) was born near Lexington, Ky. While still
a young girl she began to write poetry, which was well received. In 1861
she was married to the poet John James Piatt. Mrs. Piatt's poetry is
