harsh, crafty manner changed to open bullying. "None of your whining
vapourings here, Mr. Puppy: but be off to your kennel, for it's past
your bed-time! Come, get out!"

Nicholas bit his lip and knit his hands involuntarily, for his finger
ends tingled to avenge the insult; but remembering that the man was
drunk, and that it could come to little but a noisy brawl, he contented
himself with darting a contemptuous look at the tyrant and walked, as
majestically as he could, upstairs, and sternly resolved that the
outstanding account between himself and Mr. Squeers should be settled
rather more speedily than the latter anticipated.

Another day came, and Nicholas was scarcely awake when he heard the
wheels of a chaise approaching the house. It stopped. The voice of Mrs.
Squeers was heard, and in exultation, ordering a glass of spirits for
somebody, which was in itself a sufficient sign that something
extraordinary had happened. Nicholas hardly dared to look out of the
window; but he did so, and the very first object that met his eyes was
the wretched Smike; so bedabbled with mud and rain, so haggard and worn,
and wild, that, but for his garments being such as no scarecrow was ever
seen to wear, he might have been doubtful, even then, of his identity.

"Lift him out," said Squeers, after he had literally feasted his eyes in
silence upon the culprit. "Bring him in; bring him in!"

"Take care," cried Mrs. Squeers, as her husband proffered his
assistance. "We tied his legs under the apron and made 'em fast to the
chaise, to prevent him giving us the slip again."

With hands trembling with delight, Squeers unloosed the cord; and Smike,
to all appearances more dead than alive, was brought into the house and
securely locked up in a cellar, until such time as Mr. Squeers should
deem it expedient to operate upon him, in the presence of the assembled
school.

The news that Smike had been caught and brought back in triumph ran like
wild fire through the hungry community, and expectation was on tiptoe
all morning. On tiptoe it was destined to remain, however, until
afternoon; when Squeers, having refreshed himself with his dinner and
further strengthened himself by an extra libation or so, made his
appearance (accompanied by his amiable partner) with a countenance of
portentous import, and a fearful instrument of flagellation, strong,
supple, wax-ended, and new--in short, purchased that morning expressly
for the occasion.

"Is every boy here?" asked Squeers, in a tremendous voice.

Every boy was there, but every boy was afraid to speak; so Squeers
glared along the lines to assure himself; and every eye dropped, and
every head cowered down, as he did so.

"Each boy keep his place," said Squeers, administering his favourite
blow to the desk and regarding with gloomy satisfaction the universal
start it never failed to occasion.

"Nickleby! to your desk, sir."

It was remarked by more than one small observer that there was a very
curious and unusual expression in the usher's face; but he took his seat
without opening his lips in reply. Squeers, casting a triumphant glance
at his assistant and a look of most comprehensive despotism on the boys,
left the room, and shortly afterward returned, dragging Smike by the
collar--or rather by that fragment of his jacket which was nearest to
the place where his collar would have been, had he boasted such a
decoration.

In any other place, the appearance of the wretched, jaded, spiritless
object would have occasioned a murmur of compassion and remonstrance. It
had some effect even there; for the lookers-on moved uneasily in their
seats; and a few of the boldest ventured to steal looks at each other,
expressive of indignation and pity.

They were lost on Squeers, however, whose gaze was fastened on the
luckless Smike, as he inquired, according to custom in such cases,
whether he had anything to say for himself.

"Nothing, I suppose?" said Squeers, with a diabolical grin.

Smike glanced round, and his eyes rested for an instant on Nicholas, as
if he had expected him to intercede; but his look was riveted on his
desk.

"Have you anything to say?" demanded Squeers again, giving his right arm
two or three flourishes to try its power and suppleness.

"Stand a little out of the way, Mrs. Squeers, my dear; I've hardly got
enough room."

"Spare me, sir!" cried Smike.

"Oh! that's all, is it?" said Squeers. "Yes, I'll flog you within an
inch of your life, and spare you that."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Mrs. Squeers, "that's a good un!"

"I was driven to it," said Smike, faintly; and casting another imploring
look about him.

"Driven to it, were you?" said Squeers. "Oh! it wasn't your fault; it
was mine, I suppose--eh?"

"A nasty, ungrateful, pig-headed, brutish, obstinate, sneaking dog,"
exclaimed Mrs. Squeers, taking Smike's head under her arm and
administering a cuff at every epithet; "what does he mean by that?"

"Stand aside, my dear," replied Squeers. "We'll try and find out."

Mrs. Squeers being out of breath with her exertions, complied. Squeers
caught the boy firmly in his grip; one desperate cut had fallen on his
body--he was wincing from the lash and uttering a scream of pain--it was
raised again, and again about to fall--when Nicholas Nickleby, suddenly
starting up, cried "Stop!" in a voice that made the rafters ring.

"Who cried stop?" asked Squeers, turning savagely round.

"I," said Nicholas, stepping forward. "This must not go on."

"Must not go on!" cried Squeers, almost in a shriek.

"No!" thundered Nicholas.

Aghast and stupefied at the boldness of the interference, Squeers
released his hold of Smike, and, falling back a pace, gazed upon
Nicholas with looks that were positively frightful.

"I say must not," repeated Nicholas, nothing daunted; "shall not, I will
prevent it."

Squeers continued to gaze upon him with his eyes starting out of his
head; but astonishment had actually for the moment bereft him of
speech.

"You have disregarded all my quiet interference in this miserable lad's
behalf," said Nicholas; "you have returned no answer to the letter in
which I begged forgiveness for him and offered to be responsible that he
would remain quietly here. Don't blame me for this public interference.
You have brought it upon yourself; not I."

"Sit down, beggar!" screamed Squeers, almost beside himself with rage,
and seizing Smike as he spoke.

"Wretch," rejoined Nicholas, fiercely, "touch him at your peril! I will
not stand by and see it done. My blood is up, and I have the strength of
ten such men as you. Look to yourself, for by Heaven I will not spare
you, if you drive me on!"

"Stand back!" cried Squeers, brandishing his weapon.

"I have a long series of insults to avenge," said Nicholas, flushed with
passion; "and my indignation is aggravated by the dastardly cruelties
practised on helpless infancy in this foul den. Have a care; for if you
do raise the devil within me, the consequences shall fall heavily upon
your own head!"

He had scarcely spoken, when Squeers in a violent outbreak of wrath,
and with a cry like the howl of a wild beast, spat upon him and struck
him a blow across the face with his instrument of torture, which raised
a bar of livid flesh as it was inflicted. Smarting with the agony of the
blow, and concentrating into that one moment all his feelings of rage,
scorn, and indignation, Nicholas sprang upon him, wrested the weapon
from his hand, and pinning him by the throat beat the ruffian till he
roared for mercy.

The boys--with the exception of Master Squeers, who, coming to his
father's assistance, harassed the enemy in the rear--moved not hand or
foot; but Mrs. Squeers, with many shrieks for aid, hung on to the tail
of her partner's coat and endeavoured to drag him from his infuriated
adversary; while Miss Squeers, who had been peeping through the keyhole
in the expectation of a very different scene, darted in at the very
beginning of the attack, and after launching a shower of inkstands at
the usher's head, beat Nicholas to her heart's content; animating
herself, at every blow, with the recollection of his having refused her
proffered love, and thus imparting additional strength to an arm which
(as she took after her mother in this respect) was, at no time, of the
weakest.

Nicholas, in the full strength of his violence, felt the blows no more
than if they had been dealt with feathers; but, becoming tired of the
noise and uproar, and feeling that his arm grew weaker besides, he threw
all his remaining strength into half a dozen finishing cuts, and flung
Squeers from him, with all the force he could muster. The violence of
his fall precipitated Mrs. Squeers completely over an adjacent form;
Squeers, striking his head against it in his descent, lay at his full
length on the ground, stunned and motionless.

Having brought affairs to this happy termination, and ascertained, to
his thorough satisfaction, that Squeers was only stunned, and not dead
(upon which point he had some unpleasant doubts at first), Nicholas left
his family to restore him, and retired to consider what course he had
better adopt. He looked anxiously round for Smike, as he left the room,
but he was nowhere to be seen.

After a brief consideration, he packed up a few clothes in a small
valise, and, finding that nobody offered to oppose his progress, marched
boldly out by the front door, and, shortly afterward, struck into the
road which led to the Greta Bridge.

Dickens: "Nicholas Nickleby."




DICKENS IN THE CAMP


    Above the pines the moon was slowly drifting,
        The river sang below;
    The dim Sierras, far beyond, uplifting
        Their minarets of snow.

    The roaring camp-fire, with rude humour, painted
        The ruddy tints of health
    On haggard face and form that drooped and fainted
        In the fierce race for wealth;

    Till one arose, and from his pack's scant treasure
        A hoarded volume drew,
    And cards were dropped from hands of listless leisure
        To hear the tale anew.

    And then, while round them shadows gathered faster,
        And as the firelight fell,
    He read aloud the book wherein the Master
        Had writ of "Little Nell."

    Perhaps 'twas boyish fancy,--for the reader
        Was youngest of them all,--
    But, as he read, from clustering pine and cedar
        A silence seemed to fall;

    The fir trees, gathering closer in the shadows,
        Listened in every spray,
    While the whole camp, with "Nell" on English meadows,
        Wandered and lost their way.

    And so in mountain solitudes--o'ertaken
        As by some spell divine--
    Their cares dropped from them like the needles shaken
        From out the gusty pine.

    Lost is that camp and wasted all its fire:
        And he who wrought that spell?--
    Ah! towering pine and stately Kentish spire,
        Ye have one tale to tell!

    Lost is that camp, but let its fragrant story
        Blend with the breath that thrills
    With hopvines' incense all the pensive glory
        That fills the Kentish hills.

    And on that grave where English oak, and holly,
        And laurel wreaths entwine,
    Deem it not all a too presumptuous folly,--
        This spray of Western pine!

Bret Harte




DOST THOU LOOK BACK ON WHAT HATH BEEN


    Dost thou look back on what hath been,
      As some divinely gifted man,
      Whose life in low estate began
    And on a simple village green;

    Who breaks his birth's invidious bar,
      And grasps the skirts of happy chance,
      And breasts the blows of circumstance,
    And grapples with his evil star;

    Who makes by force his merit known,
      And lives to clutch the golden keys,
      To mould a mighty state's decrees,
    And shape the whisper of the throne;

    And moving up from high to higher,
      Becomes on Fortune's crowning slope
      The pillar of a people's hope,
    The centre of a world's desire;

    Yet feels, as in a pensive dream,
      When all his active powers are still,
      A distant dearness in the hill,
    A secret sweetness in the stream,

    The limit of his narrower fate,
      While yet beside its vocal springs
      He played at counsellors and kings,
    With one that was his earliest mate;

    Who ploughs with pain his native lea,
      And reaps the labour of his hands,
      Or in the furrow musing stands;
    "Does my old friend remember me?"

Tennyson: "In Memoriam, LXIV."




THE PASSING OF ARTHUR


And so both hosts dressed them together. And king Arthur took his horse,
and said, Alas this unhappy day, and so rode to his party: and Sir
Mordred in like wise. And never was there seen a more dolefuller battle
in any Christian land. For there was but rushing and riding, foining and
striking, and many a grim word was there spoken either to other, and
many a deadly stroke. But ever king Arthur rode throughout the battle
of Sir Mordred many times, and did full nobly as a noble king should;
and at all times he fainted never. And Sir Mordred that day put him in
great peril. And thus they fought all the long day, and never stinted,
till the noble knights were laid to the cold ground, and ever they
fought still, till it was near night, and by that time was there an
hundred thousand laid dead upon the down.

Then was Arthur wroth out of measure, when he saw his people so slain
from him. Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware of all
his host, and of all his good knights, were left no more alive but two
knights, that was Sir Lucan de Butlere, and his brother Sir Bedivere:
and they full were sore wounded. Jesu mercy, said the king, where are
all my noble knights becomen. Alas that ever I should see this doleful
day. For now, said Arthur, I am come to mine end. But would to God that
I wist where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this
mischief. Then was king Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned upon his
sword among a great heap of dead men. Now give me my spear, said Arthur
unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have espied the traitor that all this woe
hath wrought.

Then the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran toward Sir
Mordred, crying, Traitor, now is thy death day come. And when Sir
Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him with his sword drawn in his
hand. And then king Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a
foin of his spear throughout the body more than a fathom. And when Sir
Mordred felt that he had his death's wound, he thrust himself, with the
might that he had, up to the bur of king Arthur's spear. And right so he
smote Arthur with his sword holden in both his hands, on the side of the
head, that the sword pierced the helmet and the brain-pan, and
therewithal Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth. And the noble
Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned oft-times. And
Sir Lucan de Butlere and Sir Bedivere oft-times heaved him up, and so
weakly they led him betwixt them both to a little chapel not far from
the sea side.

Then Sir Lucan took up the king the one part, and Sir Bedivere the other
part, and in the lifting, the king swooned, and Sir Lucan fell in a
swoon with the lift and therewith the noble knight's heart burst. And
when king Arthur came to himself again, he beheld Sir Lucan how he lay
foaming at the mouth. Alas, said the king, this is unto me a full heavy
sight to see this noble duke so die for my sake, for he would have
holpen me that had more need of help than I. Alas, he would not complain
him, his heart was so set to help me. Now Jesu have mercy upon his soul.
Then Sir Bedivere wept for the death of his brother. Leave this mourning
and weeping, said the king, for all this will not avail me: for, wit
thou well, and I might live myself the death of Sir Lucan would grieve
me evermore; but my time hieth fast, said the king.

