that all defeats and humiliations would be wiped away by an overwhelming
triumph. Their confidence in Pitt was wonderful. That sanguine and
mighty mind had sent waves of energy and enthusiasm to the farthest
limits of the British body politic, whether on one side of the Atlantic
or the other, and it was a singular, but true, fact, that the wisest
were those who believed in him most.

Mr. McLean went away, after a while, and Robert took a walk in the town,
renewing old acquaintances and showing to them how one could really rise
from the dead, a very pleasant task. Yet he longed with all his soul for
the forest, and his comrades of the trail. His condition of life on the
island had been mostly mental. It had been easy there to subsist. His
physical activities had not been great, save when he chose to make them
so, and now he swung to the other extreme. He wished to think less and
to act more, and he shared with Mr. Huysman and Mr. McLean the belief
that the coming campaign would win for England and her colonies a
complete triumph.

He too thrilled at the name of Pitt. The very sound of the four letters
seemed to carry magic everywhere, with the young English officers on the
ship, in Boston, in Albany, and he had noticed too that it inspired the
same confidence at the little towns at which they stopped on their way
across Massachusetts. Like a blast on the horn of the mighty Roland, the
call of Pitt was summoning the English-speaking world to arms. Robert
little dreamed then, despite the words of Colonel Strong, that the great
cleavage would come, and that the call would not be repeated until more
than a century and a half had passed, though then it would sound around
the world summoning new English-speaking nations not then born.

Rogers, the famous ranger, upon whom Tayoga had bestowed the name
Mountain Wolf, arrived the next day, bringing with him fifty men whom he
supplied with ammunition for one of his great raids. The rest of his
band was waiting for him near the southern end of Lake George, and he
could stay only a few hours in Albany. He gave Robert a warm welcome.

"I remember you well, Mr. Lennox," he said. "We've had some hard
fighting together around Lake George against St. Luc, Tandakora and the
others, but I think the battle line will shift far northward now.
Amherst is going to swoop down on Ticonderoga and Crown Point, and Sir
William Johnson, well of his wound, is to march against Niagara. I'll
punish the St. Regis Indians for all their barbarities. Oh, it's to be a
great campaign, and I'll tell you a secret too."

"What is it?" asked Robert.

"We're to have St. Luc against us near the lakes once more. Could you
ask for a better antagonist?"

Robert smiled at the man's eagerness, but his heart throbbed, as always,
at the mention of the great French chevalier's name.

"He'll give us all we can do," he said.

"That's why I want to meet him," said Rogers. "The whole northern
frontier is going to be ablaze."

Robert left that very day with Rogers and his men. Mr. Huysman purchased
for him a splendid equipment which he forced him to accept, and he and
Mr. McLean bade him good-by, while Caterina wept in her apron.

"Don't fear for me," said Robert, who was much moved. "Mr. Pitt will
bring us all victory. His first efforts failed at Ticonderoga, as we
know, but now he has all his forces moving on all fronts, and he's bound
to succeed. You've said that yourselves."

"So we have, Robert," said Mr. Huysman, "and we shall watch for your
return, confident that you'll come."

The next day the rangers, Robert with them, were far to the north of
Albany, and then they plunged into the deep woods. Robert rejoiced at
the breath of the forest now in its freshest green, not yet faded by
summer heats. He had grown to love his island, but it was not like the
mighty wilderness of North America, in which he had spent so much of his
life. He kept at the head of the column, side by side with the Mountain
Wolf, and his step was so strong and elastic that Rogers took approving
notice.

"You like the woods, Robert," he said. "Well, so do I. It's the only
place where a man can live a free life."

"I like the woods and the towns too," said Robert. "Each in its place.
Where do we camp to-night?"

"By a little lake, a few miles farther on, and as we're not yet in the
Indian country we'll make it a fire camp."

The lake covered only two or three acres, but it was set in high hills,
and it was as clear as crystal. A great fire was built near the shore,
two or three of the rangers caught plenty of fish for all, and they were
broiled over the coals. Game had become so plentiful, owing to the
ravages of the war, that a fat deer was shot near the water, and, when
they added coffee and samp from their own stores, they had a feast.

Robert ate with a tremendous appetite, and then, wrapping himself in his
blanket, lay down under a tree. But he did not go to sleep for a long
time. He was full of excitement. All the omens and signs told him that
he was coming into the thick of events once more, and he felt also that
he would soon see Willet and Tayoga again. He would encounter many
perils, but for the present at least he did not fear them. Much of his
vivid youth was returning to him.

He saw the surface of the lake from where he lay, a beautiful silver in
the clear moonlight, and he could even perceive wild fowl swimming at
the far edge, unfrightened by the presence of man, or by the fires that
he built. The skies were a great silver curve, in which floated a
magnificent moon and noble stars in myriads. There was the one on which
Tayoga's Tododaho lived, and so powerful was Robert's fancy that he
believed he could see the great Onondaga sage with the wise snakes in
his hair. And there too was the star upon which Hayowentha lived and the
Onondaga and the Mohawk undoubtedly talked across space as they looked
down on their people.

Out of the forest came the calls of night birds, and Robert saw one
shoot down upon the lake and then rise with a fish in its talons. He
almost expected to see the dusky figure of Tandakora creep from the
bush, and he knew at least that the Ojibway chief would be somewhere
near the lakes. Beyond a doubt they would encounter him and his warriors
as they pressed into the north. Rogers, noticing that he was not asleep,
sat down beside him and said:

"I suppose, Mr. Lennox, when you find Tayoga and Willet that you'll go
with Amherst's army against Ticonderoga and Crown Point. A great force
has gathered to take those places."

"I'm not sure," said Robert, "I think it depends largely upon what
Tayoga and Dave have planned, but I want to go against Quebec, and I
think they will too. Still, I'd like to see our defeat at Ticonderoga
atoned for. It's a place that we ought to have, and Crown Point too."

"A scout that I sent out has come in," said Rogers, "and he says he's
seen an Indian trail, not big enough to be of any danger to us, but it
shows we'll have 'em to deal with before long, though this is south of
their usual range. I hear an owl hooting now, and if I didn't know it
was a real owl I could think it was Tandakora himself."

"I hear it too," said Robert, "and I'm not so sure that it's a real owl.
Do you think that any band will try to cut us off before we reach
Amherst and the lake?"

"I can't say, but my faith in the owl, Robert, is beginning to shake
too. It may be an Indian belonging to the band that the scout told
about, but I still don't think we're in any danger of attack. We're in
too small force to try it down here, but they might cut off a
straggler."

"I'd like to help keep the watch."

"We won't need you to-night, but I may call on you to-morrow night, so
it's my advice to you to sleep now."

The Mountain Wolf walked away to look at his outposts--he was not one
ever to neglect any precaution--and Robert, knowing that his advice was
good, closed his eyes, trying to sleep. But his hearing then became more
acute, and the long, lonesome note of the owl came with startling
dreams. Its cry was in the west, and after a while another owl in the
north answered it. Robert wished that Tayoga was with him. He would
know, but as for himself he could not tell whether or no the owls were
real. They might be Indians, and if so they would probably, when they
gathered sufficient force, throw themselves across the path of the
rangers and offer battle. This presence too indicated that Tayoga and
Willet might be near, because it was against just such bands that they
guarded, and once more his heart beat fast.

He opened his eyes to find that the beauty of the night had deepened, if
that were possible. The little lake was molten silver, and the forest
seemed silver too under silver skies. The moon, large and benignant,
smiled down on the earth, not meant, so Robert thought, for battle. But
the two owls were still calling to each other, and now he was convinced
that they were Indians and not owls. He was really back in the
wilderness, where there was no such thing as peace, the wilderness that
had seldom ever known peace. But believing with Rogers that the force
was too strong to be attacked he fell asleep, at last, and awoke to
another bright summer day.

They resumed the advance with great caution. Rogers did not go directly
toward the force of Amherst, but bore more toward the west, thinking it
likely that he would have to meet the force of Sir William Johnson who
was to cooeperate with Prideaux in the attack on Niagara.

"Sir William has entirely recovered from the wound he received at the
Battle of Lake George," Rogers said to Robert, "and he's again taking a
big part in the war. We have Louisbourg and Duquesne, and now, if we
take Niagara and Ticonderoga and Crown Point, we can advance in great
force on Quebec and Montreal."

"So we can," said Robert, "but there are those owls again, hooting in
the daytime, and I'm quite sure now they're Indians."

"I think so too, and it begins to look as if they meant an attack. Every
mile here brings us rapidly nearer to dangerous country. I'll send out
two more scouts."

Two of his best men were dispatched, one on either flank, but both came
in very soon with reports of imminent danger. Trails were seen, and they
had grown in size. One found the trace of a gigantic moccasin, and it
was believed to be that of Tandakora. Many scouts knew his footstep.
There was no other so large in the north. Rogers' face was grave.

"I think they're going to try to cut us off before we reach the bigger
part of my force," he said. "If so, we'll give 'em a fight. You'll be in
the thick of it much earlier than you expected, Robert."

Robert also was inclined to that opinion, but he was still confident
they could not be menaced by any very large party, and he remained in
that belief the next night, when they made their camp on a little hill,
covered with bushes, but with open country on every side, an excellent
site for defense. They ate another plentiful supper, then put out their
fire, posted sentinels and waited.

Robert was among the sentinels, and Rogers, who had made him second in
command until he was reunited with his main force, stood by him in the
first hour while they waited. There was again a splendid moon and plenty
of fine stars, shedding a brilliant glow over the forest, and they
believed they could see any enemy who tried to approach, especially as
the hill was surrounded on all sides by a stretch of open.

"It's a good place for a camp," said the Mountain Wolf, looking around
with approval. "I believe they'll scarce venture to attack us here."

"But there are the owls," said Robert. "They're at least thinking about
it."

The long mournful cry came from the depths of the forest, and then it
was repeated a second and a third time at other points.

"The owls that send forth those calls," said Robert, "don't sit on the
boughs of trees."

"No," said Rogers; "it's the warriors, not a doubt of it, and they'll be
stealing in on us before long."

But several hours passed before there was any stir in the forest beyond
the open. Then a rifle cracked there, but no one heard the impact of the
bullet. Rogers laughed scornfully.

"Their lead fell short," he said. "How could they expect to hit any of
us at such a range, and they not the best of marksmen even in the
daylight. They can't hope to do any more than to keep us awake."

The rangers made no reply to the shot, they would not deign it with such
notice, but the guard was doubled, while the others remained in their
blankets. A half hour more passed, and a second shot came, but from a
point much nearer.

"They're trying to steal forward through the grass that grows tall down
there," said Rogers. "They're more bent on battle than I thought they'd
be. It seems that they mean to stalk us, so we'll just stalk 'em back."

Four of the rangers, fine sharpshooters, edged their way along the
slope, and, when the warriors among the trees fired, pulled trigger by
the flash of their rifles. It was difficult to hit any one in such a
manner, and more than twenty shots were fired by the two sides, before a
death shout was uttered. Then it came from the forest, and Robert knew
that one warrior was gone. He was taking no present part in the battle
himself, held like the bulk of the force in reserve, but he was an
intent observer. Rogers, the daring leader of the rangers, still
standing by his side, took it all as a part of his daily work, which in
truth it was.

"I think it was Thayer who brought down that warrior," he said. "Thayer
is one of the bravest men I ever saw, and a great scout and trailer.
He'd be worthy to go with Willet and Tayoga and you. Ah, there goes a
second death shout! Any one who seeks a brush with these boys of mine
does it at his own risk."

He spoke proudly, but one of his own men came creeping back presently
with a wound in his shoulder. Rogers himself bound it up and the man lay
down in his blanket, confident that in a week he could resume his place
in the campaign. Those who lived the life he did had, of necessity,
bodies as hard as iron.

The deadly skirmishing died down repeatedly, but, after a little while,
it was always renewed. Though the warriors were getting the worst of it,
they persisted in the attack, and Robert knew they must have some
motive, not yet evident.

"Either they hope to frighten us back, or they mean to hold us until a
much bigger force comes up," he said.

"One or the other," said Rogers, "but I don't believe any big band would
venture down here. The hope to frighten us seems the more likely."

The combat, drawn out long and with so little result, annoyed Robert
intensely. As he saw it, it could have no decisive effect upon anything
and was more than futile, it was insensate folly. The original time set
for his watch was over long since and he wanted to roll himself in his
blanket and find slumber, but those ferocious warriors would not let
him. Despite their losses, they still hung around the hill, and, giving
up the attempt to stalk the defenders through the grass, fired long
shots from the cover of the forest. Another ranger was wounded by a
chance bullet, but Rogers, skillful and cautious, refused to be drawn
from the shelter of the bushes on the hill.

Thus the fitful and distant combat was waged until dawn. But with the
rise of a brilliant sun, throwing a clear light over the whole
wilderness, the warriors drew off and the rangers resumed their march.




CHAPTER XIII

THE REUNION


Willet, the hunter, and Tayoga, the great young Onondaga trailer, were
walking through the northern woods, examining forest and bush very
cautiously as they advanced, knowing that the danger from ambushed
warriors was always present. Willet was sadder and sterner than of old,
while the countenance of the Onondaga was as grave and inscrutable as
ever, though he looked older, more mature, more the mighty forest
runner.

"Think you, Tayoga," said the hunter, "that Tandakora and his men have
dared to come into this region again?"

"Tandakora will dare much," replied the Onondaga. "Though he is full of
evil, we know that well. The French still hold Ticonderoga, and he can
use it as a base for bands much farther south."

"True, but I don't think they'll have Ticonderoga, or Crown Point,
either, long. Amherst is gathering too big an army and there is no
Montcalm to defend them. The Marquis will have his hands full and
overflowing, defending Quebec against Wolfe. We've held both Duquesne
and Louisbourg a long while now. We've smashed the French line at both
ends, and Mr. Pitt is going to see that it's cut in the center too. How
I wish that Robert were alive to see the taking of Ticonderoga! He saw
all the great defeat there and he was entitled to this recompense."

He sighed deeply.

"It may be, Great Bear," said Tayoga, "that Dagaeoga will see the taking
of Ticonderoga. No one has ever looked upon his dead body. How then do
we know that he is dead?"

Willet shook his head.

"'Tis no use, Tayoga," he said. "The lad was murdered by Garay and the
river took his body away. Why, it will be a year this coming autumn
since he disappeared, and think you if he were alive he couldn't have
come back in that time! 'Tis the part of youth to hope, and it does you
credit, but the matter is past hope now. We've all given up except you."

"When only one hopes, Great Bear, though all others have failed, there
is still hope left. Last night I saw Tododaho on his star very clearly.
He looked down at me, smiled and seemed to speak. I could not hear his
words, but at the time I was thinking of Dagaeoga. Since Tododaho sits
with the great gods, and is one of them, he knew my thoughts, and, if he
smiled when I was thinking of Dagaeoga, he meant to give me hope."

The hunter again shook his head sadly.

"You thought you saw it, because you wished it so much," he said, "or
maybe the promise of Tododaho was for the future, the hereafter."

"For the hereafter we need no special promise, Great Bear. That has
always been made to all of us by Manitou himself, but I was thinking of
Dagaeoga alive, present with us in this life, when Tododaho smiled down
on me. I hold it in my heart, Great Bear, as a sign, a promise."

Willet shook his head for the third time, and with increasing sadness,
but said nothing more. If Tayoga cherished such a hope it was a
consolation, a beautiful thing, and he was not one to destroy anybody's
faith.

"Do you know this region?" he asked.

"I was through here once with the Mohawk chief, Daganoweda," replied
Tayoga. "It is mostly in heavy forest, and, since the war has gone on so
long and the settlers have gone away, there has been a great increase in
the game."

"Aye, I know there'll be no trouble on that point. If our own supplies
give out it won't take long to find a deer or a bear. It's a grand
country in here, Tayoga, and sometimes it seems a pity to one that it
should ever be settled by white people, or, for that matter, by red
either. Let it remain a wilderness, and let men come in, just a little
while every year, to hunt."
