sleep here, tonight, and to bargain with the sheik for donkeys or
camels to take us back. This will save two days."

Two or three native craft were fastened up to the shore, waiting for a
breeze to set in, strong enough to take them up. Gregory at once
arranged, with one of them, to put his party on board the steamer, in
their boat. In a quarter of an hour the gunboat approached, and they
rowed out to meet her.

As she came up, Gregory stood up, and shouted to them to throw him a
rope. This was done, and an officer came to the side.

"I want a passage for myself and five men, to Abu Hamed. I am an
officer on General Hunter's staff."

"With pleasure.

"Have you come down from the front?" he asked, as Gregory stepped on
board, with the five blacks.

"Yes."

"Then you can tell me about the great fight. We heard of it, at
Dongola, but beyond the fact that we had thrashed the Khalifa, and
taken Omdurman, we received no particulars.

"But before you begin, have a drink.

"It is horribly annoying to me," he went on, as they sat down under the
awning, and the steward brought tumblers, soda water, some whisky, and
two lemons.

Gregory refused the whisky, but took a lemon with his cold water.

"A horrible nuisance," the officer went on. "This is one of Gordon's
old steamers; she has broken down twice. Still, I console myself by
thinking that, even if I had been in time, very likely she would not
have been taken up.

"I hope, however, there will be work to do, yet. As you see, I have got
three of these native craft in tow, and it is as much as I can do to
get them up this cataract.

"Now, please tell me about the battle."

Gregory gave him an outline of the struggle, of the occupation of
Omdurman, and of what might be called the funeral service of Gordon, at
Khartoum. It was dark before the story was finished.

"By the way," the officer said, as they were about to sit down to
dinner, "while we were on deck, I did not ask about your men. I must
order food to be given them."

"They have plenty," Gregory said. "I brought enough for a week with me.
I thought that I might be detained two or three days, here, and be
obliged to make the journey by land to Abu Hamed."

"I have not asked you what you were doing at this out of the way place,
and how long you have been here."

"I only landed this morning. I came down to search for some relics. My
father was on board Stewart's steamer, and as there would be nothing
doing at Omdurman, for a few days, I got leave to run down. I was
fortunate in securing a boat at Abu Hamed, on my arrival there; and I
have been equally so, now, in having been picked up by you; so that I
shall not be away from Omdurman more than seven days, if I have equal
luck in getting a steamer at Atbara. I do not think I shall be
disappointed, for the white troops are coming down, and stores are
going up for the Egyptian brigade, so that I am certain not to be kept
there many hours. The Sirdar has gone up to Fashoda, or I don't suppose
I should have got leave."

"Yes. I heard at Merawi, from the officer in command, that some foreign
troops had arrived there. I suppose nothing more is known about it?"

"No; no news will probably come down for another fortnight, perhaps
longer than that."

"Who can they be?"

"The general idea is that they are French. They can only be French, or
a party from the Congo States."

"They had tremendous cheek, whoever they are," the officer said. "It is
precious lucky, for them, that we have given the Khalifa something else
to think about, or you may be sure he would have wiped them out pretty
quickly; unless they are a very strong force, which doesn't seem
probable. I hear the Sirdar has taken a regiment up with him."

"Yes, but I don't suppose any actual move will be made, at present."

"No, I suppose it will be a diplomatic business. Still, I should think
they would have to go."

"No one has any doubt about that, at Omdurman," Gregory said. "After
all the expense and trouble we have had to retake the Soudan, it is not
likely that we should let anyone else plant themselves on the road to
the great lakes.

"When will you be at Abu Hamed, sir?"

"We shall be there about five o'clock--at any rate, I think you may
safely reckon on catching the morning train. It goes, I think, at
eight."

"I am sure to catch a train, soon, for orders have been sent down that
railway materials shall be sent up, as quickly as possible; as it has
been decided that the railway shall be carried on, at once, to
Khartoum. I expect that, as soon as the Nile falls, they will make a
temporary bridge across the Atbara."

It was six in the morning, when the steamer arrived at Abu Hamed.
Gregory at once landed, paid his four men, went up to the little
station; and, an hour later, was on his way to Atbara Fort. He had but
two hours to wait there, and reached Omdurman at three o'clock, on the
following afternoon. As he landed, he met an officer he knew.

"Is there any news?" he asked.

"Nothing but Fashoda is talked about. It has been ascertained that the
force there is undoubtedly French. The betting is about even as to
whether France will back down, or not. They have made it difficult for
themselves, by an outburst of enthusiasm at what they considered the
defeat of England. Well, of course, that does not go for much, except
that it makes it harder for their government to give in."

"And has any news been received of the whereabouts of the Khalifa?"

"No. Broadwood, with two regiments of Egyptian cavalry and the camel
corps, started in pursuit of the Khalifa and Osman, an hour after it
was found that they had got away. Slatin Pasha went with them. But as
the horses had been at work all day, they had to stop at half past
eight. They could not then get down to the water, and bivouacked where
they had halted. At four in the morning they started again, and at half
past eight found a spot where they could get down to the river; then
they rode fifteen miles farther.

"They were now thirty-five miles from Omdurman. One of the gunboats had
gone up with supplies, but owing to the Nile having overflowed, could
not get near enough to land them. Next morning they got news that the
Khalifa was twenty-five miles ahead, and had just obtained fresh
camels, so they were ordered to return to the town. They had picked up
a good many of the fugitives, among them the Khalifa's favourite wife;
who, doubtless with other women, had slipped away at one of his halting
places, feeling unable to bear the constant fatigues and hardships of
the flight in the desert.

"The cavalry have since been out again, but beyond the fact that the
Khalifa had been joined by many of the fugitives from the battle, and
was making for Kordofan, no certain news has been obtained. At present,
nothing can be done in that direction.

"That horse you bought is all right."

"I really did not like taking him, for I already had one; and it looked
almost like robbery, giving him two pounds for it, and the saddle."

"Others have done as well," the officer laughed. "One of the brigade
staff bought a horse for a pound from Burleigh, who had given forty for
it at Cairo. There was no help for it. They could not take horses down.
Besides, it is not their loss, after all. The newspapers can afford to
pay for them. They must have been coining money, of late."

"That reconciles me," Gregory laughed. "I did not think of the
correspondents' expenses being paid by the papers."

"I don't know anything about their arrangements, but it stands to
reason that it must be so, in a campaign like this. In an ordinary war,
a man can calculate what his outlay might be; but on an expedition of
this kind, no one could foretell what expenses he might have to incur.

"Besides, the Sirdar has saved the newspapers an enormous expenditure.
The correspondents have been rigidly kept down to messages of a few
hundred words; whereas, if they had had their own way, they would have
sent down columns. Of course, the correspondents grumbled, but I have
no doubt their employers were very well pleased, and the newspapers
must have saved thousands of pounds, by this restriction."

"You are back sooner than I expected," General Hunter said, when
Gregory went in and reported his arrival. "It is scarce a week since
you left."

"Just a week, sir. Everything went smoothly, and I was but three or
four hours at Hebbeh."

"And did you succeed in your search?"

"Yes, sir. I most fortunately found a man who had hidden a pocketbook
he had taken from the body of one of the white men who were murdered
there. There was nothing in it but old papers and, when Brackenbury's
expedition approached, he had hidden it away; and did not give it a
thought, until I enquired if he knew of any papers, and other things,
connected with those on board the steamer. He at once took me to the
place where he had hidden it, under a great stone, and it turned out to
be the notebook and journals of my father; who was, as I thought
possible, the white man who had arrived at Khartoum, a short time
before the place was captured by the Dervishes, and who had gone down
in the steamer that carried Colonel Stewart."

"Well, Hilliard," the General said, kindly, "even the certain knowledge
of his death is better than the fear that he might be in slavery. You
told me you had no remembrance of him?"

"None, sir; but of course, my mother had talked of him so often, and
had several photographs of him--the last taken at Cairo, before he
left--so that I almost seem to have known him. However, I do feel it as
a relief to know that he is not, as I feared was remotely possible, a
slave among the Baggara. But I think it is hard that, after having gone
through two years of trials and sufferings, he should have been
murdered on his way home."

"No doubt that is so. Have you read your father's diary, yet?"

"No, sir; I have not had the heart to do so, and shall put it off,
until the shock that this has given me has passed away. I feel that a
little hard work will be the best thing for me. Is there any chance of
it?"

"You have just returned in time. I am going up the Blue Nile, tomorrow
morning, to clear out the villages; which, no doubt, are all full of
fugitives. I am glad that you have come back. I was speaking of you
today to General Rundle, who is in command.

"One of the objects of the expedition is to prevent Fadil from crossing
the river. He was advancing from Gedareh, at the head of ten thousand
troops, to join the Khalifa; and was but forty miles away, on the day
after we took this place; but when he received the news of our victory,
he fell back. If he can cross, he will bring a very formidable
reinforcement to the Khalifa.

"We know that Colonel Parsons started from Kassala, on the 7th, his
object being to capture Gedareh, during the absence of Fadil. He is to
cross the Atbara at El Fasher, and will then march up this bank of the
river, till he is at the nearest point to Gedareh. It is probable that
he will not strike across before the 18th, or the 20th. His force is
comparatively small, and we do not know how large a garrison Fadil will
have left there.

"Altogether, we are uneasy about the expedition. It is very desirable
that Parsons should know that Fadil is retiring, and that, so far as we
can learn from the natives, he has not yet crossed the Blue Nile.
Gedareh is said to be a strong place, and once there, Parsons might
hold it against Fadil until we can send him reinforcements.

"In order to convey this information to him, we require someone on whom
we can absolutely rely. I said that, if you were here, I felt sure that
you would volunteer for the service. Of course it is, to a certain
extent, a dangerous one; but I think that, speaking the language as you
do, and as you have already been among the Dervishes, you might, even
if taken prisoner, make out a good story for yourself."

"I would undertake the commission, with pleasure," Gregory said. "I
shall, of course, go in native dress."

"I propose that we carry you a hundred miles up the river, with us, and
there land you. From that point, it would not be more than sixty or
seventy miles across the desert to the Atbara, which you would strike
forty or fifty miles above El Fasher. Of course you would be able to
learn, there, whether Parsons had crossed. If he had, you would ride up
the bank till you overtake him. If he had not, you would probably meet
him at Mugatta. He must cross below that, as it is there he leaves the
river."

"That seems simple enough, sir. My story would be that I was one of the
Dervishes, who had escaped from the battle here; and had stopped at a
village, thinking that I was safe from pursuit, until your boats came
along; and that I then crossed the desert to go to Gedareh, where I
thought I should be safe. That would surely carry me through. I shall
want two fast camels--one for myself, and one for my boy."

"These we can get for you, from Abdul Azil, the Abadah sheik. Of
course, you will put on Dervish robes and badges?"

"Yes, sir."

"I will go across and tell General Rundle, and obtain written
instructions for you to carry despatches to Parsons. I will give them
to you when you go up on the boat, in the morning. I will see at once
about the camels, and ask the Intelligence people to get you two of the
Dervish suits. You will also want rifles."

"Thank you, sir! I have a couple of Remingtons, and plenty of
ammunition for them. I have two spears, also, which I picked up when we
came in here."

"We are off again, Zaki," he said, when he returned to his hut; where
the black was engaged in sweeping up the dust, and arranging everything
as usual.

"Yes, master." Zaki suspended his work. "When do we go?"

"Tomorrow morning."

"Do we take everything with us?"

"No. I start in uniform. We shall both want Dervish dresses, but you
need not trouble about them--they will be got for us."

"Then we are going among the Dervishes, again?"

"Well, I hope we are not; but we may meet some of them. We are going
with the expedition up the Blue Nile, and will then land and strike
across the desert, to the Atbara. That is enough for you to know, at
present. We shall take our guns and spears with us."

Zaki had no curiosity. If his master was going, it was of course all
right--his confidence in him was absolute.

In about an hour, a native from the Intelligence Department brought
down two Dervish dresses, complete. They had still three hours before
mess, and Gregory sat down on his bed, and opened his father's
pocketbook, which he had had no opportunity to do, since it came into
his possession.



Chapter 17: A Fugitive.


"I do not suppose," the diary began, "that what I write here will ever
be read. It seems to me that the chances are immeasurably against it.
Still, there is a possibility that it may fall into the hands of some
of my countrymen when, as will surely be the case, the Mahdi's
rebellion is crushed and order restored; and I intend, so long as I
live, to jot down from time to time what happens to me, in order that
the only person living interested in me, my wife, may possibly,
someday, get to know what my fate has been. Therefore, should this
scrap of paper, and other scraps that may follow it, be ever handed to
one of my countrymen, I pray him to send it to Mrs. Hilliard, care of
the manager of the Bank at Cairo.

"It may be that this, the first time I write, may be the last; and I
therefore, before all things, wish to send her my heart's love, to tell
her that my last thoughts and my prayers will be for her, and that I
leave it entirely to her whether to return to England, in accordance
with the instructions I left her before leaving, or to remain in Cairo.

"It is now five days since the battle. It cannot be called a battle. It
was not fighting; it was a massacre. The men, after three days'
incessant fighting, were exhausted and worn out, half mad with thirst,
half mutinous at being brought into the desert, as they said, to die.
Thus, when the Dervishes rushed down in a mass, the defence was feeble.
Almost before we knew what had happened, the enemy had burst in on one
side of the square. Then all was wild confusion--camels and Dervishes,
flying Egyptians, screaming camp followers, were all mixed in
confusion.

"The other sides of the square were also attacked. Some of our men were
firing at those in their front, others turning round and shooting into
the crowded mass in the square. I was with a black regiment, on the
side opposite to where they burst in. The white officer who had been in
command had fallen ill, and had been sent back, a few days after we
left Khartoum; and as I had been, for weeks before that, aiding him to
the best of my powers, and there were no other officers to spare, Hicks
asked me to take his place. As I had done everything I could for the
poor fellows' comfort, on the march; they had come to like me, and to
obey my orders as promptly as those of their former commander.

"As long as the other two sides of the square stood firm, I did so; but
they soon gave way. I saw Hicks, with his staff, charge into the midst
of the Dervishes, and then lost sight of them. Seeing that all was
lost, I called to my men to keep together, to march off in regular
order, and repel all assaults, as this was the only hope there was of
getting free.

"They obeyed my orders splendidly. Two or three times the Dervishes
charged upon them, but the blacks were as steady as rocks, and their
volleys were so fatal that the enemy finally left us alone, preferring
to aid in the slaughter of the panic-stricken Egyptians, and to share
the spoil.

"We made for the wells. Each man drank his fill. Those who had water
bottles filled them. We then marched on towards El Obeid, but before
nightfall the Dervish horse had closed up round us. At daylight their
infantry had also arrived, and fighting began.

"All day we held our position, killing great numbers, but losing many
men ourselves. By night, our water was exhausted. Then the soldiers
offered to attack the enemy, but they were twenty to one against us,
and I said to them, 'No, fight one day longer, if we can hold on. The
Dervishes may retire, or they may offer us terms.'

"So we stood. By the next evening, we had lost half our number. After
they had drawn off, one of the Dervish emirs came in with a white flag,
and offered life to all who would surrender, and would wear the badge
of the Mahdi, and be his soldiers. I replied that an answer should be
given in the morning. When he had left, I gathered the men together.

"'You have fought nobly,' I said, 'but you have scarce a round of
ammunition left. If we fight again tomorrow, we shall all be
slaughtered. I thank you, in the name of the Khedive, for all that you
have done; but I do not urge you to reject the terms offered. Your
deaths would not benefit the Khedive. As far as I am concerned, you are
free to accept the terms offered.'

"They talked for some time together, and then the three native officers
who were still alive came forward.

"'Bimbashi,' they said, 'what will be done about you? We are Mahometans
and their countrymen, but you are a white man and a Christian. You
would not fight for the Mahdi?'

"'No,' I said, 'I would not fight for him, nor would I gain my life, at
the price of being his slave. I wish you to settle the matter, without
any reference to me. I will take my chance. I may not be here, in the
morning. One man might escape, where many could not. All I ask is that
I may not be watched. If in the morning I am not here, you can all say
that I disappeared, and you do not know how. I do not, myself, know
what I am going to do yet.'

"They went away, and in a quarter of an hour returned, and said that
the men would surrender. If they had water and ammunition, they would
go on fighting till the end; but as they had neither, they would
surrender.

"I felt that this was best. The Soudanese love battle, and would as
readily fight on one side as on the other. They have done their duty
well to the Khedive, and will doubtless fight as bravely for the Mahdi.

"The men lay in a square, as they had fought, with sentries placed to
warn them, should the Dervishes make a night attack. British troops
would have been well-nigh maddened with thirst, after being twenty-four
hours without water, and fighting all day in the blazing sun, but they
felt it little. They were thirsty, but in their desert marches they are
accustomed to thirst, and to hold on for a long time without water.

"I was better off, for I had drunk sparingly, the day before, from my
water bottle; and had still a draught left in it. I waited until I
thought that the men were all asleep; then I stripped, and stained
myself from head to foot. I had carried stain with me, in case I might
have to go out as a native, to obtain information. In my valise I had a
native dress, and a native cloth, in which I could have passed as a
peasant, but not as one of the Baggara. However, I put it on, passed
through the sleeping men, and went up to a sentry.

"'You know me,' I said. 'I am your Bimbashi. I am going to try and get
through their lines; but if it is known how I have escaped, I shall be
pursued and slain. Will you swear to me that, if you are questioned,
you will say you know nothing of my flight?'

"'I swear by the beard of the Prophet,' the man said. 'May Allah
protect you, my lord!'

"Then I went on. The night was fairly dark and, as the Dervishes were
nearly half a mile away, I had no fear of being seen by them. There
were many of their dead scattered about, seventy or eighty yards from
our square. I had, all along, felt convinced that it would be
impossible to pass through their lines; therefore I went to a spot
where I had noticed that a number had fallen, close together, and went
about examining them carefully. It would not have done to have chosen
the dress of an emir, as his body might have been examined, but the
ordinary dead would pass unnoticed.

"I first exchanged the robe for one marked with the Mahdi's patches. It
was already smeared with blood. I then carried the body of the man
whose robe I had taken off, for some distance. I laid him down on his
face, thinking that the absence of the patches would not be seen. Then
I crawled some thirty or forty yards nearer to the Dervishes, so that
it would seem that I had strength to get that far, before dying. Then I
lay down, partly on my side, so that the patches would show, but with
my face downwards on my arm.

"I had, before dyeing my skin, cut my hair close to my head, on which I
placed the Dervish's turban. The only property that I brought out with
me was a revolver, and this pocketbook. Both of these I buried in the
sand; the pocketbook a short distance away, the pistol lightly covered,
and within reach of my hand, so that I could grasp it and sell my life
dearly, if discovered.

"Soon after daylight I heard the triumphant yells of the Dervishes, and
knew that my men had surrendered. Then there was a rush of horse and
foot, and much shouting and talking. I lifted my head slightly, and
looked across. Not a Dervish was to be seen in front of me.

"I felt that I had better move, so, taking up my pistol and hiding it,
I crawled on my hands and knees to the spot where I had hidden this
book; and then got up on to my feet, and staggered across the plain, as
if sorely wounded, and scarcely able to drag my feet along. As I had
hoped, no one seemed to notice me, and I saw three or four other
figures, also making their way painfully towards where the Dervishes
had encamped.

"Here were a few camels, standing untended. Everyone had joined in the
rush for booty--a rush to be met with bitter disappointment, for, with
the exception of the arms of the fallen, and what few valuables they
might have about their person, there was nothing to be gained. I
diverged from the line I had been following, kept on until there was a
dip in the ground, that would hide me from the sight of those behind;
then I started to run, and at last threw myself down in the scrub, four
or five miles away from the point from which I had started.

"I was perfectly safe, for the present. The Dervishes were not likely
to search over miles of the desert, dotted as it was with thick bushes.
The question was as to the future. My position was almost as bad as
could be. I was without food or water, and there were hundreds of miles
of desert between me and Khartoum. At every water hole I should, almost
certainly, find parties of Dervishes.

"From time to time I lifted my head, and saw several large parties of
the enemy, moving in the distance. They were evidently bound on a
journey, and were not thinking of looking for me. I chewed the sour
