one along the road shall have seen three mounted men."

For another two days they journeyed, as proposed, by night; resting
by day in quiet places and, so far as they knew, without having
been seen by any of the scattered population. It was in the middle
of the third night, as they were cantering slowly along, that they
heard the tread of a horse, at full gallop, approaching from the
south.

"You had better withdraw from the road," Don Estevan said, "so that
but one horseman will be met. I will stop the rider, and hear why
he gallops so fast. It may be that news has preceded us, and it is
as well to gather what intelligence we can."

The boys withdrew from the road, Don Estevan proceeding ahead. They
heard the sound of the galloping hoofs pause, as their rider met
the Spaniard. There was a talk for a few minutes, and then the
horseman again rode forward at full speed. Don Estevan paused for a
little while, to allow him to get beyond earshot, and then rejoined
his companions.

"I have great news," he said, "and it is for you to decide whether
it will alter your plan of proceeding. The man whom I have just met
is a messenger, dispatched by the governor of Arica to Lima, to
warn the governor there that an English ship, under the noted
freebooter Francis Drake, has put into that harbor; and has started
again, sailing for the north, after exacting certain contributions,
but otherwise refraining from injuring the town."

The boys gave a shout of joy, for they had begun to fear that the
expedition must have met with some disaster, in doubling Cape Horn,
and been compelled to return.

"What will you do?" the Spaniard asked.

"Return to Lima!" the boys exclaimed, simultaneously. "We shall be
there before the admiral can arrive, and can then rejoin our
comrades."

"That will indeed be your best plan," Don Estevan said; "but you
must be disguised thoroughly. However, you are not likely to be so
closely investigated as you otherwise would be, at Lima; for you
may be sure that, when the messenger arrives there, the town will
be in such a ferment of excitement, at the approach of your
countrymen, that our little affair will, for the time, be entirely
forgotten."

"I trust," Ned said, "that we shall be able to do something to
render your security more perfect; for, if I mistake not, when the
admiral hears of the doings of the officials of the Inquisition,
how many people they have burned to death lately at Lima, and what
frightful cruelties they have perpetrated in that ghastly prison,
he will burn the place to the ground and hang up the judges; in
which case we may be sure that no further inquiry will ever be
thought of, concerning the attack on the prison. What do you advise
us to do, senor? For it is clear that your best course is to return
to Arica, direct."

"I cannot think of doing that," the generous young Spaniard
replied. "A few days' longer absence will pass unnoticed,
especially as people will have plenty of other matters to think,
and talk, about. I do not see how you can possibly obtain disguises
without my assistance; and as our pursuers will long since have
been thrown off our track, and will probably have given up the
search and have returned to Lima, convinced that we already have
crossed the mountains and are beyond their reach. I think that
there is little danger in my nearing the city.

"Come, let us turn our horses' heads, at once."

In a few minutes, they were returning by the route they had
hitherto traveled They were already dressed as young Spaniards. The
disguises had been brought by their rescuer, and assumed at the
first halt. He himself had also washed the paint from his face and
hands, and had assumed European garb, in order that any inquiry
about three mounted Indians might be baffled.

"There is now," he said, "no longer any occasion for us to ride by
night. We are journeying north, and any inquiries which may ever be
set on foot will certainly point only to men going south; and
whereas our Indian disguises might have been suspected, I am now in
my proper character, and my passing through can excite no rumor or
comment."

Don Estevan had, indeed, assumed the garb of a Spanish proprietor
of rank, while the boys were dressed as vaqueros; and as they
passed through villages, in the daytime, kept their horses half a
length behind that of their leader. They avoided, on their ride
back, putting up at any of the posadas, or village inns, on their
road; sleeping, as before, in the woods. Their marches were long,
but were performed at a much slower rate of speed, as they were
certain that they would reach Lima long before the admiral's ship,
even should he not pause at any place on the way.

It was upon the sixth day after their rescue from prison that they
again approached Lima. After much consultation, they had agreed to
continue in their Spanish dresses, taking only the precaution of
somewhat staining their faces and hands, to give them the color
natural to men who spend their lives on the plains. Don Estevan,
himself, determined to enter the city with them after nightfall;
and to take them to the house of a trusty friend, where they should
lie, concealed, until the news arrived that the English ship was
off the port. He himself would at once mount his horse, and retrace
his steps to Arica.

The programme was carried out successfully. No one glanced at the
hidalgo as, with his vaqueros, he rode through the streets of Lima.
There were no lights, in those days, save those which hung before
shrines by the roadside; or occasionally a dim oil lamp, suspended
before the portico of some mansion of importance.

The friend to whom Don Estevan assigned them was a young man, of
his own age; a cousin, and one, like himself, liberal in his
opinions, free from bigotry, and hating the cruelties perpetrated
in the name of religion by the Inquisition. He heard with surprise
the narrative which Don Estevan related; for the latter had not
visited him during his short stay in the city, and was supposed
still to be at Arica. Great was his astonishment, indeed, when he
found that the attack upon the prison of the Inquisition, which had
caused such intense excitement in the city, had been planned and
executed by his cousin; and his expressions of approval of the deed
were warm and frequent. He assured the boys that he would do
everything in his power to make them comfortable until the arrival
of the English ship.

A discussion took place as to whether it was better that they
should appear as friends of his, who had come in from their country
estate; or whether they should continue their disguise as vaqueros.
There were objections to either plan. In the first place, the
attendants in waiting would detect the shortcomings in Ned's
Spanish, and would be astonished at the silence of his companion.
Upon the other hand, it would seem strange that they should be kept
apart from the servitors of the house. Finally, it was agreed that
they should appear as men of rank, but that Tom should feign
sickness, and therefore keep his room; Ned for the most part
remaining shut up with him, and taking his meals there.

This course was followed out, and when the arrangement was complete
they took a hearty leave of the noble young Spaniard, who at once
remounted his horse and started on his weary ride back again to
Arica.




Chapter 17: The Golden Hind.



The lads were all anxiety to know what course had been determined
upon, with reference to the arrival of the English vessel. They
were told that a large fleet was assembled in the harbor, but that
great dissension existed, among the authorities, as to whether
resistance should be offered or not.

"Surely," Ned said, "they will never allow one vessel to enter a
harbor, thronged with shipping, and with a strong garrison on shore
ready to take part in the defense!"

Their host flushed a little, and said:

"You English must form but a poor opinion of Spanish courage. On
shore, however, we have proved, on the battlefields of the
Continent, that we can hold our own against all comers. But I own
to you that your sea dogs have caused such a panic, among our
sailors of the western isles, that they are looked upon as
invincible, and our men appear to be paralyzed at the very name of
the English buccaneers."

"Why we are particularly anxious to know," Ned said, "is that, if
resistance is to be offered, it is clear that we must be ready to
embark in a canoe, and to join the ship before she arrives off the
harbor; as otherwise, if she is beaten off we may have no
opportunity, whatever, of regaining her."

"I think," the Spaniard said, "that when the time comes, it is
probable that no resistance may be offered; and that the valor of
those who, so long as the ship is at a distance, are anxious to
fight, will evaporate very rapidly. The citizens, too, are for the
most part opposed to resistance; for they argue that, if the
English conquer, they are likely to lay the town in ruins; whereas,
if unopposed, they may content themselves with certain exactions
upon the richer citizens, as has been their custom in the west."

During the days that elapsed, many arguments took place, between
the Spaniard and Ned, as to the lawfulness of the war which the
English buccaneers carried on with the colonies of a nation at
peace with their own, the Spaniard saying that they approached very
nearly to the verge of piracy. Ned had never given the subject much
consideration before. He had done as others did, and had regarded
the Spaniards as lawful prey, their cruelty towards the natives
forming, in the eyes of the English sailors, a justification for
any treatment which they might inflict upon them. He was, however,
forced to confess that, now the other side was presented to him,
the conduct of his countrymen was really indefensible; and he
blushed as he thought of the various acts of sacrilege in churches,
and other deeds of plunder, in which he had taken part. He assured
his friend that, in the future, neither he nor his companion would
ever share in such deeds again.

It was upon the evening of the 15th of February, two days after
their return to Lima, that their host entered with the news that a
ship was seen in the distance approaching the port, and that it was
the general opinion of the mariners that she was the dreaded
English pirate. He had already made arrangements that a small boat
should be lying at one end of the mole. He told them that he could
not venture to engage rowers, as the fact of the escape of two
white men from the town might be noticed, and inquiries made. The
boys assured him, however, that they were perfectly able to row
themselves; and that the smaller the number in the boat, the less
chances there would be of their being received by a random shot
from their friends.

It was just nightfall when the English ship entered the harbor,
where thirty Spanish vessels were lying, all prepared for defense
The Golden Hind entered the port and dropped her anchor in the
midst; and the quiet resolution and confidence, which this act
betrayed, struck such a panic into the minds of the Spanish
captains, that not one dared be the first to fire a gun at the
intruder. Half an hour after the Golden Hind came to anchor, a boat
was seen approaching, and was met by the hail, "Who goes there?"

The joyful shout of "Friends, your comrades, Ned Hearne and Tom
Tressilis," was received by a cry of incredulity, and astonishment,
by those on board the English vessel.

Two minutes later, the lads were on deck receiving the hearty
embraces and congratulations of all the messmates; Reuben Gale and
Gerald Summers being almost beside themselves with joy, at the
return to them of the comrades they believed to be so long ago
dead. The admiral himself was greatly moved at seeing them; for
their gallantry during the preceding voyage, and their eager zeal
to do all in their power for the expedition, had greatly raised
them in his affections.

They were soon seated in the cabin, which was thronged by as many
of the officers and gentlemen adventurers as could find room there.
A brief narrative was given of their adventures, since leaving the
fleet upon the other side of the continent; and loud were the
expressions of surprise, and approval, at the manner in which they
had gone through the various dangers and difficulties which they
had encountered; Tom insisting, generously, that the credit was
entirely due to the sagacity and coolness of his friend.

When the story of the scene in the dungeons of the Inquisition was
told, and Captain Drake was informed that large numbers of persons
had been burned alive in Lima, by the Inquisition, he was filled
with fury; and at once dispatched two boat loads of men, armed to
the teeth, to the shore, with orders to burn down the prison, to
release any prisoners found there, and to offer them a safe passage
to Europe; and also to hang all officials who might be found within
the walls. Ned acted as guide.

The streets of Lima were deserted, as the news of the landing of a
party from the English ship spread through the town; shops were
closed and windows barred, and it was as through a city of the dead
that the band passed rapidly along, until they reached the prison
of the Inquisition. Here the doors were broken down, and the
English sailors entered the ghastly prison. The cells were found to
be tenanted only by natives, most of them men who had been captured
in the hills, and who had refused to accept the Catholic religion.
These were all loosed, and allowed to depart in freedom for the
mountains, taking with them a store of such provisions for the way
as could be found within the walls.

The sight of the torture room roused the fury of the sailors to the
utmost pitch and, breaking into the part wherein dwelt the
principal inquisitors, these were seized and hung from their
windows. The contents of the various rooms were then heaped
together, a light applied, and in a few minutes a glow of flame
told the people of Lima that the dreaded prison of the Inquisition
was no more.

The party then returned through the streets to the ship, and took
part in the further operations commanded by the admiral. Proceeding
from vessel to vessel, they took out all goods which they fancied,
and which were either valuable, or might be useful to them in their
further voyaging. They hewed down the masts of all the largest
ships and, cutting their cables, allowed them to drift on shore.

No more astonishing scene was ever witnessed than that of thirty
ships, backed by a garrison and considerable population on shore,
allowing themselves to be thus despoiled and wrecked by the crew of
one; and this a vessel inferior in size, and in the numerical
strength of her crew, to many of those within the harbor.

The next day a party landed and stripped many of the churches of
their valuables, and also levied a contribution upon the principal
inhabitants. Ned and Tom, not thinking it worth while at this time
to enter into a controversy, with the comrades to whom they had
been so recently restored, as to the legality of their acts, simply
declined to make part of the party who landed; alleging that they
had had enough of the shore of the South American continent for the
rest of their lives.

The 15th of February, the date upon which the Golden Hind arrived
at the port of Lima, was indeed one to be remembered throughout the
lives of the rescued seamen. Their future had appeared well-nigh
hopeless. On the one side, the dungeon of the Inquisition and
probably a death by fire. On the other, a life passed in the midst
of savages, away from all possibility of ever rejoining their
friends, or returning to their country. Now they were once again
among those delighted to see them, and proudly trod the decks of
the Golden Hind as gentlemen adventurers, having a good share in
the booty, as well as in the honor, which would accrue to all on
board.

So far, indeed, the plunder had been but small. Upon their way down
to the Cape they had gleaned nothing, and since rounding it they
had only touched at Valparaiso, where they had taken all that they
required in the way of wines, stores, and provisions of all kinds,
besides much gold and, it is sad to say, the rich plunder of the
churches, including golden crosses, silver chalices, and altar
cloths. Nowadays it gives one a positive shock to hear of English
sailors rifling churches; but in those rough times, acts of
sacrilege of this kind awakened but little reprobation.

The following day they hove the anchor and sailed northwards. In
the port they had obtained news that, on the evening before they
arrived, a ship laden with much treasure from Panama had appeared,
but receiving news of the approach of the English, had again set
sail. All determined that, if possible, the treasures on board the
Cacafuego should pass into the hold of the Golden Hind.

Spreading all sail, they pressed northward. On the 20th of February
they touched at the port of Paita, but did not find her there. On
the 24th they passed the port of Guayaquil, and on the 28th crossed
the line. On the 1st of March a sail was descried ahead and,
sailing towards her, they found that she was indeed the vessel of
which they were in search; and of which they had heard not only at
Lima, but from a ship which they took at Paita, laden with wine;
and from another, on board of which they found eighty pounds weight
in gold, in Guayaquil.

The Cacafuego had no thought that the solitary ship which was seen
approaching was that of Captain Drake; but taking her for a
Spaniard, made no effort to fly. When, upon her coming close and
hailing her to surrender, they discovered their mistake, the
captain made a bold fight. Hastily loading his carronades, he
poured a volley into the Golden Hind, and did not surrender his
ship until one of his masts had fallen by the board, and he himself
was wounded. Then, finding further resistance useless, he hauled
down his flag.

The booty taken was even greater than had been expected. Of gold
and silver, alone, there was on board her to the value of 750,000
pounds, equal to a vastly larger sum in these days; besides immense
quantities of precious stones, silver vessels, and other valuables.
For six days they lay alongside the Cacafuego, transferring her
cargo to the Golden Hind; and at parting, Captain Drake was
considerate enough to give the captain a letter to Captain Winter,
or any of the other captains of the fleet, should they come north
and meet her, begging that she should be allowed to pass without
interruption; or that, should they have need of any of the few
articles left on board her, they would pay double the value. He
also, in exchange for the valuables transferred, was good enough to
bestow upon the master a little linen, and some other commodities.

As it was now certain that the whole coast would be thoroughly
alarmed, and the Governor General at Panama would be prepared, with
a powerful fleet, to resist the Golden Hind should she stir in that
direction, Captain Francis determined to sail boldly out to sea,
and then to shape his course so as to strike the coast again, far
north of the Spanish possessions. His object, in thus undertaking a
voyage which would seem likely to yield but little profit, was that
he hoped he might find a passage round the north of America, and so
not only shorten his own return journey home, but open a most
valuable country for trade, for his own countrymen.

On the 7th of March, before putting out to sea, he touched at the
Island of Cano, off the coast of Nicaragua. Here they had an alarm
which startled even the boldest. As they lay at anchor they felt
the shock of a terrible earthquake, which almost brought down the
masts of the ship; and for a moment all thought that she had been
struck by some hostile machine, or had fallen down on a rock. The
pumps were manned, and it was happily found that she made no water.

Here they made their last prize on the American coast--a ship which
had come across from China. She was laden with linen, China silk,
and China dishes. Among the spoil is enumerated a falcon made of
gold, with a great emerald set in his breast.

It was not until the 15th of April that they again touched the
land, and landed at Guatulco; whence, after a stay of a few hours,
they departed; "not forgetting," the chronicler says, "to take with
them a certain pot, of about a bushel in bigness, full of royals of
plate, together with a chain of gold, and some other jewels; which
we entreated a gentleman Spaniard to leave behind him, as he was
flying out of town."

They then steered out to sea, and did not see the land again until,
after sailing 1400 leagues, they came, on June 3rd, in sight of
land in 42 degrees north latitude.

Before going further, the adventures of the fleet must be briefly
related from the day, being the 21st of June, when the attack was
made upon them by the Patagonians, and the boys were driven into
the wood. Captain Francis, and those of the crew on shore with him,
soon beat off the natives; inflicting some loss upon them. These
took to the woods, in which they could not be followed; and Captain
Francis, mourning for the loss of his three adventurers, and of the
gunner killed by his side; and despairing of ever recovering the
