way inward in despite of De Bracy and his followers. Two of the foremost
instantly fell, and the rest gave way, notwithstanding all their
leader's efforts to stop them.

"Dogs!" cried De Bracy; "will ye let two men win our only pass for
safety?"

"He is the devil!" replied a veteran man-at-arms, bearing back from the
blows of their sable antagonist.

"And if he be the devil," said De Bracy, "would you fly from him into
the mouth of hell? The castle burns behind us, villains! Let despair
give you courage, or let me forward. I will cope with this champion
myself."

And well and chivalrously did De Bracy that day maintain the fame he had
acquired in the civil wars of that dreadful period. The vaulted passages
in which the two redoubted champions were now fighting hand to hand rang
with the furious blows they dealt each other, De Bracy with his sword,
the Black Knight with his ponderous ax. At length the Norman received a
blow, which, though its force was partly parried by his shield,
descended yet with such violence on his crest that he measured his
length on the paved floor.

"Yield thee, De Bracy," said the Black Knight, stooping over him and
holding against the bars of his helmet the fatal poniard with which
knights despatched their enemies; "yield thee, Maurice de Bracy, rescue
or no rescue, or thou art but a dead man. Speak!"

The gallant Norman, seeing the hopelessness of further resistance,
yielded, and was allowed to rise.

"Let me tell thee what it imports thee to know," he said. "Wilfred of
Ivanhoe is wounded and a prisoner, and will perish in the burning castle
without present help."

"Wilfred of Ivanhoe!" exclaimed the Black Knight. "The life of every man
in the castle shall answer if a hair of his head be singed. Show me his
chamber!"

"Ascend yonder stair," directed De Bracy. "It leads to his apartment."

The turret was now in bright flames, which flashed out furiously from
window and shot-hole. But, in other parts, the great thickness of the
walls and the vaulted roofs of the apartments resisted the progress of
the fire, and there the rage of man still triumphed; for the besiegers
pursued the defenders of the castle from chamber to chamber. Most of the
garrison resisted to the uttermost; few of them asked quarter--none
received it. The air was filled with groans and the clashing of arms.

Through this scene of confusion the Black Knight rushed in quest of
Ivanhoe, whom he found in Rebecca's charge. The knight, picking up the
wounded man as if he were a child, bore him quickly to safety. In the
meantime, Cedric had gone in search of Rowena, followed by the faithful
Gurth. The noble Saxon was so fortunate as to reach his ward's
apartment just as she had abandoned all hope of safety and sat in
expectation of instant death. He committed her to the charge of Gurth,
to be carried without the castle. The loyal Cedric then hastened in
quest of his friend Athelstane, determined at every risk to himself to
save the prince. But ere Cedric penetrated as far as the old hall in
which he himself had been a prisoner, the inventive genius of Wamba had
procured liberation for himself and his companion.

When the noise of the conflict announced that it was at the hottest, the
jester began to shout with the utmost power of his lungs, "Saint George
and the Dragon! Bonny Saint George for merry England! The castle is
won!" These sounds he rendered yet more fearful by banging against each
other two or three pieces of rusty armor which lay scattered around the
hall.

The guards at once ran to tell the Templar that foemen had entered the
old hall. Meantime the prisoners found no difficulty in making their
escape into the court of the castle, which was now the last scene of the
contest. Here sat the fierce Templar, mounted on horseback and
surrounded by several of the garrison, who had united their strength in
order to secure the last chance of safety and retreat which remained to
them. The principal, and now the single remaining drawbridge, had been
lowered by his orders, but the passage was beset; for the archers, who
had hitherto only annoyed the castle on that side by their missiles, no
sooner saw the flames breaking out and the bridge lowered than they
thronged to the entrance. On the other hand, a party of the besiegers
who had entered by the postern on the opposite side were now issuing
into the court-yard and attacking with fury the remnant of the defenders
in the rear.

Animated, however, by despair and the example of their gallant leader,
the remaining soldiers of the castle fought with the utmost valor; and,
being well armed, they succeeded in driving back the assailants.

Crying aloud, "Those who would save themselves, follow me!"
Bois-Guilbert pushed across the drawbridge, dispersing the archers who
would have stopped them. He was followed by the Saracen slaves and some
five or six men-at-arms, who had mounted their horses. The Templar's
retreat was rendered perilous by the number of arrows shot at him and
his party; but this did not prevent him from galloping round to the
barbican, where he expected to find De Bracy.

"De Bracy!" he shouted, "art thou there?"

"I am here," answered De Bracy, "but a prisoner."

"Can I rescue thee?" cried Bois-Guilbert.

"No," said the other. "I have rendered myself."

Upon hearing this, the Templar galloped off with his followers, leaving
the besiegers in complete possession of the castle.

Fortunately, by this time all the prisoners had been rescued and stood
together without the castle, while the yeomen ran through the apartments
seeking to save from the devouring flames such valuables as might be
found. They were soon driven out by the fiery element. The towering
flames surmounted every obstruction and rose to the evening skies one
huge and burning beacon, seen far and wide through the adjacent country.
Tower after tower crashed down, with blazing roof and rafter.

The victors, assembling in large bands, gazed with wonder not unmixed
with fear upon the flames, in which their own ranks and arms glanced
dusky red. The voice of Locksley was at length heard, "Shout, yeomen!
the den of tyrants is no more! Let each bring his spoil to the tree in
Hart-hill Walk, for there we will make just partition among ourselves,
together with our worthy allies in this great deed of vengeance."

SIR WALTER SCOTT.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

     I. Tell what you find out about Cedric and his son, Ivanhoe, or the
     "Disinherited Knight." What impression do you get of Cedric's
     character? of Athelstane's? What was the first adventure the
     travelers had? Who was "the sick friend" the Jews were assisting?
     What further adventure befell the travelers? How did Gurth show his
     true character? Who came to the aid of Gurth and Wamba? What did
     Wamba mean by "whether they be thy children's coats or no"? What
     impression do you get of the stranger? Describe the scene in the
     hermit's abode. What impression do you get of him? Of the Black
     Knight?

     II. Who had made Cedric's party prisoners? Why? Tell what Cedric
     said when he discovered who his captors were. What disposition was
     made of the prisoners? Describe the scene in Isaac's cell. How was
     Front-de-Boeuf interrupted?

     III. What challenge did the knights receive? How did they answer
     it?

     IV. Who came in the character of a priest? What plan did he carry
     out? How? How did Cedric act his part? Describe the scene when the
     escape was discovered. How was Front-de-Boeuf prevented from doing
     Wamba harm?

     V. How did Ivanhoe fall to the care of Rebecca? Where did Rebecca
     take her station? Describe the scenes she saw. What knight led the
     assault? How did Rebecca describe him? Can you guess who the Black
     Knight was? Whom did Ivanhoe think of when he said, "Methought
     there was but one man in England that might do such a deed"?

     VI. What plan did the Black Knight make? How was it executed? Which
     of the assailants proved themselves especial heroes? What was De
     Bracy's plan? How was its accomplishment prevented? What plan for
     escape did the Templar have? How did it end? Tell how Ivanhoe,
     Rowena, Athelstane and Wamba were liberated. Tell what became of
     the knights. Who do you think Locksley was?

     All of the party were rescued except Rebecca, who was carried off
     by Bois-Guilbert and accused of witchcraft. You will have to read
     the novel, _Ivanhoe_, to learn of the further adventures of her,
     Rowena, the Black Knight, and Ivanhoe.


SUPPLEMENTARY READING

     The Talisman--Sir Walter Scott.
     The White Company--A. Conan Doyle.
     When Knighthood Was in Flower--Charles Major.
     The Last of the Barons--Edward Bulwer-Lytton.
     Don Quixote--Miguel de Cervantes.
     The Idylls of the King--Alfred Tennyson.
     Scottish Chiefs--Jane Porter.




SEA FEVER


    I must go down to the seas again, to the lonely sea and the sky,
    And all I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by;
    And the wheel's kick and the wind's song and the white sail's shaking,
    And a gray mist on the sea's face, and a gray dawn breaking.

    I must go down to the seas again, for the call of the running tide
    Is a wild call and a clear call that may not be denied;
    And all I ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying,
    And the flung spray and the blown [v]spume, and the sea-gulls crying.

    I must go down to the seas again, to the vagrant gypsy life,
    To the gull's way and the whale's way where the wind's like a whetted
        knife;
    And all I ask is a merry yarn from a laughing fellow-rover,
    And quiet sleep and a sweet dream when the long trick's over.

    JOHN MASEFIELD.




A GREYPORT LEGEND


    They ran through the streets of the seaport town;
      They peered from the decks of the ships that lay:
    The cold sea-fog that comes whitening down
      Was never as cold or white as they.
        "Ho, Starbuck, and Pinckney, and Tenterden,
        Run for your shallops, gather your men,
      Scatter your boats on the lower bay!"

    Good cause for fear! In the thick midday
      The hulk that lay by the rotting pier,
    Filled with the children in happy play,
      Parted its moorings and drifted clear;
        Drifted clear beyond reach or call,--
        Thirteen children they were in all,--
    All adrift in the lower bay!

    Said a hard-faced skipper, "God help us all!
      She will not float till the turning tide!"
    Said his wife, "My darling will hear _my_ call,
      Whether in sea or heaven she abide!"
        And she lifted a quavering voice and high,
        Wild and strange as a sea-bird's cry,
      Till they shuddered and wondered at her side.

    The fog drove down on each laboring crew,
      Veiled each from each and the sky and shore;
    There was not a sound but the breath they drew,
      And the lap of water and creak of oar.
        And they felt the breath of the downs fresh blown
        O'er leagues of clover and cold gray stone,
      But not from the lips that had gone before.

    They came no more. But they tell the tale
      That, when fogs are thick on the harbor reef,
    The mackerel-fishers shorten sail;
      For the signal they know will bring relief,
        For the voices of children, still at play
        In a phantom-hulk that drifts alway
      Through channels whose waters never fail.

    It is but a foolish shipman's tale,
      A theme for a poet's idle page;
    But still, when the mists of doubt prevail,
      And we lie becalmed by the shores of age,
        We hear from the misty troubled shore
        The voice of the children gone before,
      Drawing the soul to its anchorage!

    BRET HARTE.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

     Read the poem and tell the story found in it. Why was every one so
     "cold and white"? What was the great danger? What happened to
     prevent the sailors' getting to the hulk? What is the tale that is
     told? What is the thought the poet leaves with us in the last
     stanza?




A HUNT BENEATH THE OCEAN


     This story is taken from _Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea_,
     the book that foreshadowed the modern submarine. Monsieur Aronnax,
     a scientist, with two companions, Ned Land and Conseil, was rescued
     at sea by a strange craft, the _Nautilus_, owned and commanded by
     one Captain Nemo, who hated mankind and never went ashore on
     inhabited land. Monsieur Aronnax remained on the submarine for
     months in a kind of captivity and met with many wonderful
     adventures. It should be noted that modern inventions have already
     outstripped many of the author's imaginings.

On returning to my room with Ned and Conseil, I found upon my table a
note addressed to me. I opened it impatiently. It was written in a bold
clear hand, and ran as follows:

"November 16, 1867.

To Professor Aronnax, on board the _Nautilus_:

Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax to a hunting party, which will
take place to-morrow morning in the forest of the island of Crespo. He
hopes that nothing will prevent the professor from being present, and he
will with pleasure see him joined by his companions."

"A hunt!" exclaimed Ned.

"And in the forests of the island of Crespo!" added Conseil.

"Oh, then the gentleman is going on [v]_terra firma_?" asked Ned Land.

"That seems to be clearly indicated," said I, reading the letter once
more.

"Well, we must accept," said Ned. "Once more on dry land, we shall know
what to do. Indeed, I shall not be sorry to eat a piece of fresh
venison."

I contented myself with replying, "Let us see where the island of Crespo
is."

I consulted the [v]planisphere and in 32 deg. 40' north latitude, and 157 deg.
50' west [v]longitude, I found a small island recognized in 1801 by
Captain Crespo, and marked in the ancient Spanish maps as Rocca de la
Platta, or Silver Rock.

I showed this little rock lost in the midst of the North Pacific to my
companions.

"If Captain Nemo does sometimes go on dry ground," said I, "he at least
chooses desert islands."

Ned Land shrugged his shoulders without speaking, and Conseil and he
left me. After supper, which was served by the steward, mute and
impassive, I went to bed, not without some anxiety.

The next morning, the 7th of November, I felt on awakening that the
_Nautilus_ was perfectly still. I dressed quickly and entered the
saloon. Captain Nemo was there, waiting for me. He rose, bowed, and
asked me if it was convenient for me to accompany him. I simply replied
that my companions and myself were ready to follow him.

We entered the room where breakfast was served.

"M. Aronnax," said the captain, "pray share my breakfast without
ceremony; we will chat as we eat. Though I promised you a walk in the
forest, I did not undertake to find hotels there; so breakfast as a man
should who will most likely not have his dinner till very late."

I did honor to the repast. It was composed of several kinds of fish, and
different sorts of seaweed. Our drink consisted of pure water, to which
the captain added some drops of a fermented liquor extracted from a
seaweed. Captain Nemo ate at first without saying a word. Then he began:

"Professor, when I proposed to you to hunt in my submarine forest of
Crespo, you evidently thought me mad. Sir, you should never judge
lightly of any man."

"But, captain, believe me--"

"Be kind enough to listen, and you will then see whether you have any
cause to accuse me of folly and contradiction."

"I listen."

"You know as well as I do, professor, that man can live under water,
providing he carries with him a sufficient supply of breathable air. In
submarine works, the workman, clad in an [v]impervious dress, with his
head in a metal helmet, receives air from above by means of
forcing-pumps and [v]regulators."

"That is a diving apparatus," said I.

"Just so. But under these conditions the man is not at liberty; he is
attached to the pump which sends him air through a rubber tube, and if
we were obliged to be thus held to the _Nautilus_, we could not go far."

"And the means of getting free?" I asked.

"It is to use the Rouquayrol apparatus, invented by two of your own
countrymen, which I have brought to perfection for my own use and which
will allow you to risk yourself without any organ of the body suffering.
It consists of a reservoir of thick iron plates, in which I store the
air under a pressure of fifty [v]atmospheres. This reservoir is fixed on
the back by means of braces, like a soldier's knapsack. Its upper part
forms a box in which the air is kept by means of a bellows, and
therefore cannot escape unless at its [v]normal tension. In the
Rouquayrol apparatus such as we use, two rubber pipes leave this box and
join a sort of tent which holds the nose and mouth; one is to introduce
fresh air, the other to let out foul, and the tongues close one or the
other pipe according to the wants of the [v]respirator. But I, in
encountering great pressures at the bottom of the sea, was obliged to
shut my head like that of a diver in a ball of copper; and it is into
this ball of copper that the two pipes, the inspirator and the
expirator, open. Do you see?"

"Perfectly, Captain Nemo. But the air that you carry with you must soon
be used; when it contains only fifteen per cent of oxygen it is no
longer fit to breathe."

"Right! But I told you, M. Aronnax, that the pumps of the _Nautilus_
allow me to store the air under considerable pressure; and the reservoir
of the apparatus can furnish breathable air for nine or ten hours."

"I have no further objections to make," I answered. "I will only ask one
thing, captain--how can you light your road at the bottom of the sea?"

"With the Ruhmkorff apparatus, M. Aronnax. One is carried on the back,
the other is fastened to the waist. It is composed of a [v]bunsen pile,
which I do not work with bichromate of potash but with sodium. A wire is
introduced which collects the electricity produced, and directs it
toward a lantern. In this lantern is a spiral glass which contains a
small quantity of carbonic acid gas. When the apparatus is at work, this
gas becomes luminous, giving out a white and continuous light. Thus
provided, I can breathe and I can see."

"Captain Nemo, to all my objections you make such crushing answers that
I dare no longer doubt. But if I am forced to admit the Rouquayrol and
Ruhmkorff apparatus, I must be allowed some reservations with regard to
the gun I am to carry."

"But it is not a gun for powder," he said.

"Then it is an air-gun?" I asked.

"Doubtless. How would you have me manufacture gunpowder on board,
without saltpeter, sulphur, or charcoal?"

