Several small boats were drawn up on the shore. One of these they
launched, put out the oars, and rowed quietly to a large barge,
fifty yards from the bank, on which a light was burning. Taking
pains to prevent the boat striking her side, they stepped on board,
fastened the head rope, and proceeded aft. A light was burning in
the cabin and, looking through a little round window in the door,
they saw three boatmen sitting there, smoking and playing cards.
They opened their knives, slid back the door, and stepped in.



Chapter 15: Escaped.


So astonishing was the spectacle of three lightly-clad men,
appearing suddenly on board a craft moored out on the river, that
the three boatmen sat immovable, in the attitudes in which they had
been sitting at the entry of these strange visitors, without
uttering a word. Superstitious by nature, they doubted whether
there was not something supernatural in the appearance of the three
strangers.

"If you cry out or make the slightest sound," Fergus said, showing
his knife, "you are all dead men. If you sit quiet and do as we
order you, no harm will come to you. We want clothes. If you have
spare ones you can hand them to us. If not, we must take those you
have on. We are not robbers, and don't want to steal them. If you
will fix a fair price on the things, we will pay for them. But you
must in any case submit to be bound and gagged till morning; when,
on going on deck, you will find no difficulty in attracting the
attention of some of your comrades, who will at once release you.

"Keep your hands on the table while my friends take away your
knives. If one of you moves a hand, he is as good as a dead man."

His companions removed the knives from the belts of the two men
sitting outside, and then Fergus said to the third man:

"Now, hand over your knife. That will do.

"Now, which of you is the captain?"

"I am," the man sitting farthest from the door said.

"Very well. Now, have you spare clothes on board?"

"Yes, my lord," he replied, in a tone that showed that he had not
yet recovered from his first stupefaction, "we have our Sunday
suits."

"We don't want them," Fergus said. "We want the three suits that
you have on. What do you value them at?"

"Anything you like, my lord."

"No, I want to know how much they cost when new."

The man asked his two comrades, and then mentioned the total.

"Very well, we will give you that. Then you will have no reason for
grumbling, for you will get three new suits for three old ones.

"Now do you--" and he touched the man nearest to him "--take off
your coat, waistcoat, breeches, neck handkerchief, and boots, and
then get into that bunk."

The man did as he was ordered, as did the other two, in succession.
As they did so, Captain Ritzer had gone up on deck and returned
with a coil of thin rope that he had cut off. With this they tied
the men securely.

"There is no occasion to gag them, I think," Fergus said. "They
might shout as loud as they liked and, with this wind blowing, no
one would hear them; or if anyone did hear them, he would take it
for the shouting of a drunken man.

"Now, look here, my men. Here is the money to buy the new clothes.
We have not ill treated you in any way, have we?"

"No, sir, we are quite satisfied."

"Now, I should advise you, in the morning, to manage to untie each
other. We shall fasten the door up as we go out, but you will have
no difficulty in bursting that open, when you are once untied.

"Now I ask you, as you are satisfied, to say nothing about this
affair to anyone. It would only make you a joke among your
comrades, and could do you no good. The best thing that you can do,
when you get free, will be to dress yourselves in your Sunday
clothes, take your boat ashore, and buy new things in the place of
those we have taken."

"That is what we shall do, sir. No one would believe us, if we told
them that three men had come on board and taken our old clothes,
and given us money to buy new ones in their place."

The three boatmen were all tall and brawny Bavarians, and their
clothes fitted Fergus and his companions well. Fishermen's hats
completed their costume. The little cabin had been almost
oppressively warm, and they had completely got over their chill
when they left it, closing the door behind them.

They took their places in the boat, crossed to the opposite shore,
which was to some extent sheltered from the wind, and rowed some
three miles up. Then they landed, pushed the boat off into the
stream, kept along the bank until they came to a road branching off
to the left, and followed it until it struck the main road, a few
hundred yards away; and then walked west.

There had been but few words spoken since they left the barge. It
had been hard work rowing against wind and stream. The oars were
clumsy, and it had needed all their efforts to keep the boat's head
straight. Now that they were in the main road, they were somewhat
more sheltered.

"Well, Drummond, we have accomplished what seemed to me, in spite
of your confidence, well-nigh impossible. We have got out, we have
obtained disguises, and we have eight or nine hours before our
escape can be discovered. I shall believe anything you tell me, in
future," Ritzer said.

"Yes," his companion agreed, "I never believed that we should
succeed; though, as you had set your heart on it, I did not like to
hang back. But it really did seem to me a wild scheme, altogether.
I thought possibly we might get out of the fort, but I believed
that your plan of getting disguises would break down altogether.
The rest seemed comparatively easy.

"The rain has ceased, and the stars are coming out, which is a
comfort indeed. One was often wet through, for days together, when
campaigning; but after five months' coddling, an eight hours' tramp
in a blinding rain would have been very unpleasant, especially as
we have no change of clothes.

"Now, commanding officer, what is to be our next tale?"

"That is simple enough," Fergus said with a laugh. "We have been
down with a raft of timber from the mountains, and are on our way
back. That must be our story till we have passed Ratisbon. There is
but one objection, and that is a serious one. As raftsmen we should
certainly speak the Bavarian dialect, which none of us can do. For
that reason I think it would be safer to leave the Danube at
Passau, and make down through Munich. We should be at Passau
tomorrow morning, and can put up at any little place by the
riverside. Two days' walking will take us to Munich.

"Certainly no one would suspect us of being escaped prisoners. We
can get some other clothes tomorrow morning, and finish the rest of
our journey as countrymen.

"The principal thing will be to get rid of these high boots. I
think in other respects there is nothing very distinctive about our
dress. It will be more difficult to concoct a story, but we must
hope that we sha'n't be asked many questions, and I see no reason
why we should be. We shall look like peasants going from a country
village to a town, but if we could hit upon some story to account
for our not speaking the dialect, it would of course be a great
advantage."

They walked along in silence for some time. Then he went on:

"I should say we might give out that we are three Saxons who,
having been forced at Pirna to enter the Prussian army, had been
taken prisoners at Hochkirch and had been marched down with the
others to Vienna; and that there, on stating who we were and how we
had been forced against our will into Frederick's army, we were at
once released, and are now on our way back to Saxony; and are
tramping through Bavaria, so as to avoid the risk of being seized
and compelled to serve either in the Austrian army or the Prussian;
and that we are working our way, doing a job wherever we can get a
day or two's employment, but that at present, having worked for a
time at Vienna, we are able to go on for a bit without doing so.

"I think with that story we could keep to the plan of going up
through Ratisbon. It would be immensely shorter, and the story
would be more probable than that we should make such a big detour
to get home."

"Yes, I should think that would do well," Ritzer said, "and will
shorten the way by two hundred miles. But after leaving Passau, I
should think that we had better not follow the direct road until we
get to Ratisbon.

"I grant that as far as that town we ought to be quite safe, for
there is no chance of their finding out that we have escaped until
eight o'clock in the morning; then our colonel will have to report
the matter to the commandant in the town. No doubt he will send off
a small party of cavalry, by the Freyberg road to Budweis, to order
the authorities there to keep a sharp lookout for three men passing
north. But I doubt very much whether they will think of sending in
this direction. The escape of three Prussian officers is, after
all, no very important matter. Still, one cannot be too careful,
for possibly the commandant may send to Munich, Ratisbon, and
Vienna.

"It is more likely, however, that the search will be made
principally in and round Linz. They will feel quite sure that we
cannot possibly have obtained any disguises, and must have gone off
in our undergarments; and they will reckon that we should naturally
have hidden up in some outhouse, or country loft, until we could
find some opportunity for obtaining clothes. Most likely the barge
went on this morning, before the alarm had been given; but even if
it didn't, boatmen would not be likely to hear of the escape of
three prisoners.

"No, I think beyond Passau we shall be quite safe, as far as
pursuit goes; but it will be best to halt there only long enough to
take a good meal, and then to go on for a bit, and stop at some
quiet riverside village."

"I don't think I shall be able to go very far," Ritzer said. "These
boots are a great deal too large for me, and are chafing my feet
horribly. The road is good and level; and I was thinking, just now,
of taking them off and carrying them."

"That would be the best way, by far," Fergus said. "I should think
at Passau we are sure to find a boat going up to Ratisbon, and that
will settle the difficulty."

The distance was some thirty miles and, making one or two halts for
a rest, they reached Passau just as morning was breaking. In a
short time the little inns by the river opened their doors, and the
riverside was astir. They went into one of the inns and ate a
hearty meal, then they went down to the waterside, and found that
there were several country boats going up the river. They soon
bargained for a passage, and had just time to buy a basket of
bread, sausage, and cheese, with half a dozen bottles of wine,
before the boat started. There were no other passengers on board
and, telling the story they had agreed upon, they were soon on good
terms with the boatmen.

Including the windings of the river, it was some eighty miles to
Ratisbon. The boat was towed by two horses, and glided pleasantly
along, taking three days on the passage. They bought food at the
villages where the craft lay up for the night, and arrived at
Ratisbon at nine o'clock in the evening. There they found no
difficulty in obtaining a lodging at a small inn, where no
questions, whatever, were asked.

A short day's journey took them to Neumarkt, a tramp of upwards of
twenty miles. It was a longer journey on to Bamberg, and two days
later, to their satisfaction, they entered Coburg.

They were now out of Bavaria, and had escaped all difficulties as
to the dialect far better than they had anticipated, never having
been asked any questions since they left the boat at Ratisbon. They
had now only to say that they were on their way to join the
Confederate army that was again being gathered; but they preferred
avoiding all questions, by walking by night and resting at little
wayside inns during the day. Avoiding all towns, for the troops
were beginning to move, they crossed the Saxon frontier three days
after leaving Coburg, and then travelled by easy stages to Dresden.

Here they went straight to the headquarters of the commandant of
the town, and reported themselves to him. Fergus had personal
acquaintances on his staff, and had no difficulty in obtaining, for
himself and his companions, an advance of a portion of the pay due
to them, in order that they might obtain new outfits.

This took a couple of days, and the two captains then said goodbye
to Fergus, with many warm acknowledgments for the manner in which
he had enabled them to regain their freedom--expressions all the
more earnest since they heard that the Austrians had decided that,
in future, they would make no exchanges whatever of prisoners--and
started to rejoin their regiments.

Fergus felt strangely lonely when they had left him. The king was
at Breslau. Keith was lying dead in Hochkirch. What had become of
Lindsay he knew not, nor did he know to whom he ought to report
himself, or where Karl might be with his remaining charger and
belongings. Hitherto at Dresden he had felt at home. Now, save for
Count Eulenfurst and his family, he was a stranger in the place.

Naturally, therefore, he went out to their chateau. Here he was
received with the same warmth as usual.

"Of course we heard of your capture at Hochkirch," the count said,
"though not for many weeks afterwards. We were alarmed when the
news came of the marshal's death, for as it was upon his division
that the brunt of the battle had fallen, we feared greatly for you.
At last came the list the Austrians had sent in of the prisoners
they had taken, and we were delighted to see your name in it;
though, as the Austrians have been so chary of late of exchanging
prisoners, we feared that we might not see you for some time.
However, remembering how you got out of Spielberg, we did not
despair of seeing you back in the spring.

"Thirza was especially confident. I believe she conceives you
capable of achieving impossibilities. However, you have justified
her faith in you.

"Supper will be served in a few minutes, and as no doubt your story
is, as usual, a long one, we will not begin it until we have
finished the meal. But tell us first, how were you captured?"

"I was riding through the mist to find the marshal; whom I had not
seen for two hours, as I was with the regiment that defended the
church at Hochkirch, and then cut its way out through the
Austrians. The mist was so thick that I could not see ten yards
ahead, and rode plump into an Austrian battalion. They fired a
volley that killed poor Turk, and before I could get on my feet I
was surrounded and taken prisoner--not a very heroic way, I must
admit."

"A much pleasanter way, though, than that of being badly wounded,
and so found on the field by the enemy," the countess said; "and
you were fortunate, indeed, in getting through that terrible battle
unhurt."

"I was, indeed, countess; but I would far rather have lost a limb
than my dear friend and relation, the marshal. I was allowed to
attend his funeral the next day. The Austrians paid him every
honour and, though I have mourned for him most deeply, I cannot but
feel that it was the death he would himself have chosen. He had
been ailing for some months, and had twice been obliged to leave
his command and rest. It would, in any case, probably have been his
last campaign; and after such a wonderfully adventurous life as he
had led, he would have felt being laid upon the shelf sorely."

"His elder brother--Earl Marischal in Scotland, is he not?--who has
been governor for some years at Neufchatel, is with the king at
Breslau, at present. They say the king was greatly affected at the
loss of the marshal who, since Schwerin's death, has been his most
trusted general."

"I have never seen the marshal's brother," Fergus said, "though I
know that they were greatly attached to each other. I hope that he
will be at Breslau when I get there. I shall go and report myself
to the king, after I have had a few days' rest here. At present I
seem altogether unattached. The marshal's staff is, of course,
broken up; but as I served on the king's own staff twice, during
the last campaign, I trust that he will put me on it again."

"That he will do, of course," the count said. "After saving his
life at Zorndorf, he is sure to do so."

Supper was now announced, and after it had been removed and the
party drew round the fire, Fergus told them the story of his
escape.

"It was excellently managed," the count said, when he had finished.
"I do not know that it was quite as dramatic as your escape from
Spielberg, but I should think that, of the two, the escape from
Linz must have seemed the most hopeless. The plan of getting the
shutters open and of swimming the moat might have occurred to
anyone; but the fact that you were in uniform, and that it would
have been impossible to smuggle in a disguise, would have appeared
to most men an insuperable obstacle to carrying out the plan.

"You certainly are wonderfully full of resource. As a rule, I
should think that it is much more difficult for two men to make
their escape from a place than it is for one alone; but it did not
seem to be so, in this case."

"It certainly did not add to the difficulty of getting out of the
fort, count. Indeed, in one respect it rendered it more easy. There
were three of us to work at the heads of the rivets, and it
certainly facilitated our getting clothes from the boatmen, besides
rendering the journey much more pleasant than it would have been
for one of us alone.

"On the other hand, it would have been impossible to carry out the
escape from Spielberg in the manner I did, if I had had two
officers with me in the cell. We could not have hoped to obtain
three uniforms, could hardly have expected all to slip by the
sentry unnoticed. Lastly, the three of us could not have got post
horses. Still, it is quite possible that we might have escaped in
some other manner."

"Then you have not the most remote idea where you will find your
servant and horse?"

"Not the slightest. If Captain Lindsay got safely through the
battle of Hochkirch, I should say that my man would stick by him.
His servant, a tough Scotchman, and Karl are great chums; and I
have no doubt that, unless he received positive orders to the
contrary, Karl has kept company with him."

"Of course you can find out, from the authorities here, who has
taken command of Marshal Keith's division; and might possibly hear
whether he took over the marshal's personal staff, or whether he
brought his own officers with him."

"Yes, I should think I might do that, count. I think I shall in any
case report myself to the king; but if Lindsay were stationed at
any place I could pass through, on my way to Breslau, I would pick
up Karl and my horse."

"I shall of course send you another horse tomorrow," the count
said. "No, no, it is of no use your saying anything against it. It
was settled that I should supply you with mounts, while the war
lasted, and I intend to carry that out fully. I don't know that I
have another in my stables here that is quite equal to the other
pair, but there are two or three that approach them very nearly. If
you can get a mounted orderly, well and good; if not, I will lend
you one of my men. Any of my grooms would be delighted to go with
you, for all regard you as the saviour of our lives.

"I am afraid, my friend, you will not be able to pay us many more
visits. Your king is a miracle of steadfastness, of energy, and
rapidity; but even he cannot perform impossibilities. Leave out the
Russians, and I believe that he would be more than a match for the
Austrians, who are hampered by the slowness of their generals; but
Russia cannot be ignored. In the first campaign she was
non-existent, in the second she annexed East Prussia. This year you
have had a deadly tussle with her, next year she may be still more
formidable; and I do not believe that Frederick with all his skill,
and with the splendid valour his troops show, can keep the Russians
from advancing still further into the country, and at the same time
prevent the Austrians and the Federal army from snatching Dresden
from his grasp.

"I myself should regret this deeply. Prussia, although she taxes
the population heavily, at least permits no disorders nor ill
treatment of the people, no plundering of the villages; while the
Austrians, Croats, and Pandoors will spread like a swarm of hornets
over the land, and the state of the Saxons under their so-called
rescuers will be infinitely worse than it has been under their
conquerors."

"It would be a heavy blow to the king to lose Dresden," Fergus
agreed, "but I am by no means sure that he would not be better
without it; except, of course, that it would bring the enemy so
much nearer to Berlin, otherwise the loss of Saxony would be a
benefit to him. During all his movements, and in all his
combinations, he is forced to keep an eye on Dresden. At one moment
it is Soubise, with his mixed army of French, Austrians, and
Confederate troops, who have to be met and, leaving all else,
Frederick is forced to march away two or three hundred miles, and
waste two or three precious months before he can get a blow at
them. Then he has to leave a considerable force to prevent them
gathering again, while he hurries back to prevent Daun from
besieging Dresden, or to wrest Silesia again out of his hands.
Saxony lost, he could devote his whole mind and his whole power to
the Russian and Austrian armies; who will no doubt, at the next
campaign, endeavour to act together; and the nearer they are to
each other, the more easily and rapidly can he strike blows at them
alternately."

"Perhaps you are right," the count said, "and certainly the
Austrians would have to keep a considerable force to garrison
Dresden and hold Saxony; for they would be sure that, at the very
first opportunity, Frederick would be among them raining his blows
rapidly and heavily. As to any advance north, they would not dare
attempt it; for Frederick, who can move more than twice as fast as
any Austrian army, would fall on their flank or rear and annihilate
them.

"Still, the blow would be undoubtedly a heavy one for the king,
inasmuch as it would greatly raise the spirits of his enemies, and
would seem to show them that the end was approaching."

"I think the end is a good way off still, count. Even if the
Russians and Austrians marched across Prussia, they would hold
little more than the ground they stood on. Frederick would be ever
hovering round them, attacking them on every opportunity, and
preventing them from sending off detached columns; while the
cavalry of Ziethen and Seidlitz would effectually prevent Cossacks
and Croats from going out to gather stores for the armies, and to
plunder and massacre on their own account. I doubt whether anything
short of the annihilation of his army would break the king's spirit
and, so far as I can see, that is by no means likely to take
place."

"However, the point at present, my friend, is that if the Austrians
get Dresden, it may be long before we see you again."

"I fancy that when the army goes into winter quarters again, if I
am able to get leave of absence, I shall do myself the pleasure of
paying you a visit, whether the city has changed hands or not. If
one can travel twice through Austria without being detected, it is
hard indeed if I cannot make my way into Saxony."

"But you must not run too great risks," the countess said. "You
know how glad we should be to see you, and that we regard you as
one of ourselves; but even a mother could hardly wish a son to run
into such danger, in order that they might see each other for a
short time."

"What do you say, Thirza?" her father asked.

