
There was a cry of alarm, and the singing suddenly stopped.

"I am a friend," he exclaimed. "I have come to warn you of danger.
There are men coming in this direction from the town."

"My brethren, we will separate," the minister said calmly. "But
first, I will pronounce the benediction."

This he did solemnly, and then said:

"Now, let all make through the wood and, issuing from the other
side, return by a circuit to the town.

"Mademoiselle Claire, I will accompany you to the chateau."

At this moment Philip heard horses approaching.

"This way, Pierre," he shouted, and ran to meet them.

Fifty yards away he came upon them, and leapt into his saddle.

"See to your weapons, lads," he said. "I believe there are others
in the wood already."

He was within twenty yards of the clearing when he heard a sudden
shout of:

"Down with the Huguenot dogs! Kill! Kill!"

He dashed forward, followed by his men. A mob of armed men, headed
by two or three horsemen, had burst from the opposite side of the
glade and were rushing upon the Huguenots, who had just broken up
into small groups.

They stood, as if paralysed, at this sudden attack. No cry or
scream broke from the women. Most of these threw themselves upon
their knees. A few of the men followed their example, and prepared
to die unresistingly. Some sprang away among the trees, and above
the din the preacher's voice was heard commencing a Huguenot hymn
beginning, "The gates of heaven are opened;" in which, without a
moment's hesitation, those who remained around him joined.

In a moment, with savage shouts and yells, their assailants were
upon them, smiting and thrusting. With a shout, Philip spurred
forward from the other side. He saw at once that, against such
numbers, he and his three followers could do nothing; but his rage
at this massacre of innocent people--a scene common enough in
France, but which he now for the first time witnessed--half
maddened him.

One of the horsemen, whom he recognized at once as the man Pierre
had knocked down with the plate, rode at the girl Philip had been
watching; and who was standing, with upturned face, joining in the
hymn. The man attending her drew his sword, and placed himself in
the way of the horseman; but the latter cut him down, and raised
the sword to strike full at the girl, when Philip shot him through
the head.

Instantly another horseman, with a shout of recognition, rode at
him. Philip thrust his still smoking pistol in his holster, and
drew his sword.

"This is more than I hoped for," his assailant said, as he dealt a
sweeping blow at him.

"Do not congratulate yourself too soon," Philip replied, as he
guarded the blow and, lunging in return, the point glided off his
adversary's armour.

He parried again; and then, with a back-handed sweep, he struck his
opponent on the neck with his whole force. Coming out to take part
in a Huguenot hunt, in which he expected no opposition, the knight
had left his helmet behind him; and fell from his horse, with his
head half severed from his body.

In the meantime the two men-at-arms and Pierre had driven back the
mob of townsmen; who, however, having massacred most of the
unresisting Huguenots, were surging up round them.

"Give me your hand, mademoiselle, and put your foot on mine,"
Philip exclaimed to the girl, who was still standing close to him.

"Pierre," he shouted as, bewildered by the uproar, the girl
instinctively obeyed the order, "take this woman up behind you."

Pierre made his horse plunge, and so freed himself from those
attacking him. Then, reining round, he rode to Philip's side, and
helped the companion of the young lady to the croup of his saddle;
Philip dashing forward, to free his two followers from their
numerous assailants.

"To the left, Eustace;" and, cutting their way through the crowd,
the three horsemen freed themselves and, as they dashed off, were
joined by Pierre.

"We must work back by the way we came, Monsieur Philip," Pierre
said. "There is another body coming up in front, to cut off
fugitives; and that was why I shouted to you."

In a minute or two they were out of the wood. Men were seen running
across the fields, but these they easily avoided.

"Now turn again, and make straight for La Chatre," Philip said. "We
can cross the bridge, and ride through the place without danger.
Those who would have interfered with us are all behind us."

As he had expected, the place was perfectly quiet. The better class
of the bourgeois were all asleep, either ignorant or disapproving
of the action of the mob. As soon as they were through the town,
Philip checked the speed of his horse.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "I am as yet in ignorance of your name. I
am the Chevalier Philip Fletcher, an English gentleman fighting for
the cause of the reformed religion, under Admiral Coligny. I am on
my way east, with important despatches; and I was bivouacking with
my three followers in the wood, when I was attracted by the
singing.

"Judging, from the words of the minister, that there was danger of
an attack, I put one of my men on the watch; while I myself
remained in the wood by your meeting place. Unfortunately, the
sound of the last hymn you sang drowned the noise made by the party
that assailed you. However, happily we were in time to save you and
your servant; and our sudden appearance doubtless enabled many to
escape, who would otherwise have been massacred."

The girl had burst into a fit of sobbing, as soon as the danger was
over; but she had now recovered.

"My name is Claire de Valecourt, monsieur," she said. "My father is
with the Admiral. He will be deeply grateful to you for saving my
life."

"I have the honour of knowing the Count de Valecourt, mademoiselle;
and am glad, indeed, that I have been able to be of service to his
daughter. The count is one of the gentlemen who act as guardians to
the Prince of Navarre, whom I have also the honour of knowing.

"And now, what are your wishes? It is not too late even now, should
you desire it, for me to take you back to the chateau."

"I should be defenceless there, sir," she said. "There are but a
score of men-at-arms and, though formerly a place of some strength,
it could not be defended now. See, sir, it is too late already."

Philip looked round, and saw a bright light suddenly rising from
the clump of trees on which the chateau stood. He gave an
exclamation of anger.

"It cannot be helped," she said quietly. "It is but a small place.
It was part of my mother's dower. Our estates, you know, are in
Provence. My father thought I should be safer, here, than remaining
there alone while he was away. We have always been on good terms
with the townspeople here, and they did not interfere with those of
our religion during the last war; so we thought that it would be
the same now. But of late some people have been here, stirring up
the townsmen; and some travelling friars preached in the
marketplace, not long since, upbraiding the people with their
slackness in not rooting us out altogether.

"A month ago, one of the persecuted ministers came to the chateau
at night, and has been concealed there since. Seeing that there
will be no minister here for some time, word was sent round
secretly, to those of our religion in the town, and twice a week we
have had meetings in the wood. Many of the servants of the chateau
are Catholics, and of the men-at-arms, the majority are not of our
faith. Therefore I used to steal out quietly with my attendant. We
heard, two days ago, that a rumour of the meetings had got about;
and tonight's was to have been the last of them."

"And now, mademoiselle, what are your wishes? Have you any friends
with whom I could place you, until you could rejoin your father?"

"None near here, monsieur. I have always lived in the south."

"I should not have taken you for a lady of Provence," Philip said.
"Your hair is fair, and you have rather the appearance of one of my
own countrywomen, than of one born in the south of France."

"I am partly of northern blood," she said. "My mother was the
daughter of Sir Allan Ramsay, a Scottish gentleman who took service
in France, being driven from home by the feuds that prevailed
there. I knew but little about her, for she died when I was a
child; and my father, who loved her greatly, seldom speaks to me of
her."

Philip rode for some time in silence.

"I feel that I am a terrible burden on your hands, monsieur," she
said quietly, at last; "but I will do anything that you think best.
If you set us down, we will try and find refuge in some peasant's
hut; or we can dress ourselves as countrywomen, and try to make our
way westward to La Rochelle."

"That is not to be thought of," he replied gravely. "Were it not
that my despatches may not be delayed, without great danger to our
cause, the matter would be of no inconvenience; but we must ride
fast and far. As to leaving you to shift for yourselves, it is
impossible; but if we could find a Huguenot family with whom I
could place you, it would be different. But unfortunately, we are
all strangers to the country."

"I can ride well," the girl said, "and if horses could be procured
would, with my maid, try to reach La Rochelle; travelling by night,
and hiding in the woods by day. We could carry food with us, so as
not to have to enter any place to purchase it."

Philip shook his head.

"We will halt at yonder clump of trees," he said. "It is not yet
midnight, and then we can talk the matter over further."

As soon as they halted, he unrolled his cloak.

"Do you, mademoiselle, and your attendant lie down here. We shall
be but a short distance away, and two of us will keep watch;
therefore you can sleep without fear of surprise."

"This is an unfortunate business, Pierre," he said, after the
latter had fastened the horses to the trees.

"I can understand that, monsieur. I have been talking to the maid,
and it seems that they have no friends in these parts."

"That is just it, Pierre. One thing is certain--they cannot ride on
with us. We must journey as fast as possible, and delicate women
could not support the fatigue; even were it seemly that a young
lady, of good family, should be galloping all over France with a
young man like myself."

"I should not trouble about that, monsieur. At ordinary times,
doubtless, it would cause a scandal; but in days like these, when
in all parts of France there are women and children hiding from the
persecution, or fleeing for their lives, one cannot stand upon
niceties. But doubtless, as you say, they would hinder our speed
and add to our dangers."

"I see but two plans, Pierre. The one is that they should journey
to La Rochelle, in charge of yourself and Eustace. We have now
twice crossed the country without difficulty and, as there would be
no need of especial speed, you could journey quietly; choosing
quiet and lonely places for your halts, such as farmhouses, or
groups of two or three cottages where there is a tiny inn."

"What is your other plan, sir?"

"The other plan is that you should start forward at once, so as to
enter Saint Amboise early. Stable your horse at an inn; and order
rooms, saying that you are expecting your master and a party, who
are on their way to join the army. You might also order a meal to
be cooked. Then you could enter into conversation with stablemen
and others, and find out whether there are any castles in the
neighbourhood held for us by Huguenot lords, or by their wives in
their absence. If not, if there are any Huguenot villages. In fact,
try and discover some place where we may leave the young lady in
safety. You can have three hours to make your inquiry.

"At the end of that time, whether successful or not, say that you
are going out to meet your master and lead him to the inn. Give the
host a crown, as an earnest of your return and on account of the
meal you have ordered, and then ride to meet us.

"We shall start from here at daybreak. If you succeed in hearing of
some place where, as it seems, she can be bestowed in safety, we
will take her there at once. If not, you and Eustace must start
back with them, travelling slowly. The horses will carry double,
easily enough.

"Do not forget to get a cold capon or two, some good wine, and a
supply of white bread, while you are waiting in the town."

"Which horse shall I take, sir?"

"You had best take Robin. He is the faster of the two, though not
quite so strong as Victor."

"I understand, monsieur, and will carry out your orders. If there
be a place within twenty miles--or within forty, if lying on the
right road--where the young lady can be left in safety, rely upon
it I will hear of it; for there is nought I would not do, rather
than turn back at the outset of our journey, while you have to
journey on with only Roger, who is a stout man-at-arms enough, but
would be of little use if you should find yourself in difficulties;
for his head is somewhat thick, and his wits slow."

Robin had already finished his scanty ration of food and, when
Pierre tightened the girths before mounting, looked round in mild
surprise at finding himself called upon to start, for the second
time, after he had thought that his work was done.

"You shall have a good feed at Saint Amboise," Pierre said, patting
its neck; "and beyond that, there will be no occasion, I hope, for
such another day's work."

After seeing Pierre start, Philip threw himself down for two hours'
sleep; and then went to relieve Eustace, who was keeping watch at
the edge of a clump of trees. As soon as it was broad daylight, he
went across to where Claire de Valecourt was lying down by the side
of her maid, with a cloak thrown over them. She sat up at once, as
his step approached.

"I am afraid you have not had much sleep, mademoiselle."

"No, indeed," she said. "I have scarce closed my eyes. It will be
long before I shall sleep quietly. That terrible scene of last
night will be before my eyes for a long time. Do you think that the
minister escaped, Monsieur Fletcher?"

"I fear that he did not. I saw him cut down, by the fellow I shot,
just before he turned to ride at you."

"How many do you think escaped?"

"A score perhaps, or it may be more. Some fled at once. Others I
noticed make off, as we rode forward."

"Did not one of your men ride off, last night, soon after we lay
down?"

"Yes, I sent off my servant."

And he told her the mission upon which Pierre had been despatched.

"That is a good plan," she said. "I would much rather hide
anywhere, than that you should go forward on your long journey with
but half your little force. Does it not seem strange, monsieur,
that while, but a few hours ago, I had never so much as heard your
name, now I owe my life to you, and feel that I have to trust to
you in everything? I am quite surprised, now I look at you--I
scarce saw your face, last night; and only noticed, as I sat in
front of you, that you seemed very big and strong. And as you
talked of what I must do, just as if you had been my father, I have
been thinking of you as a grave man, like him. Now I see you are
quite young, and that you don't look grave at all."

Philip laughed.

"I am young, and not very grave, mademoiselle. I am not at all fit
to be the protector of a young lady like yourself."

"There I am sure you are wronging yourself, Monsieur Fletcher. The
Admiral would never have sent you so far, with important
despatches, had he not full confidence that you were wise as well
as brave. And you said you were a chevalier, too. My cousin Antoine
looks ever so much older than you do, and he has not been knighted
yet. I know young gentlemen are not made knights, unless they have
done something particularly brave."

Philip smiled.

"I did not do anything particularly brave, mademoiselle; but what I
did do happened to attract the Admiral's attention.

"Now, here are the remains of a cold capon, some bread, and wine.
You and your attendant had better eat something, while we are
saddling the horses and preparing for a start."

Four hours later they halted, three miles from Saint Amboise;
taking refuge in a wood near the road, where they could see Pierre
as he returned. Half an hour later he rode up. Philip went down the
road to meet him.

"Well, Pierre, what success?"

"I have heard of a place where I think Mademoiselle de Valecourt
would be safe, for the present. It is the chateau of Monsieur de
Landres. It lies some five-and-twenty miles away, and is in the
forest, at a distance from any town or large village. It is a small
place, but is strong. Monsieur de Landres is with the army in the
west, but he has only taken a few of his men with him; and forty,
they say, have been left to guard the tower. As most of the
Catholics round here have obeyed the king's summons, and are either
with the royal army in the west, or with the two dukes at Metz,
there seems no chance of any attack being made upon Landres."

"That will do excellently, Pierre. No doubt the lady will be happy
to receive Mademoiselle de Valecourt, whose father is a well-known
nobleman and, at present, in the same army as the lady's husband.
At any rate, we will try that to begin with."

They started without delay and, riding briskly, reached Landres in
four hours; having had a good deal of difficulty in finding the
way. As soon as they issued from the forests into a cleared space,
half a mile across, in the centre of which stood the fortalice, a
horn was heard to sound, and the drawbridge was at once raised.
Philip saw, with satisfaction, that Pierre had not been
misinformed. The castle was an old one and had not been modernized
and, with its solid-looking walls and flanking towers, was capable
of standing a siege.

Halting the others, when halfway across to the tower, he rode on
alone. As he approached, a lady appeared on the battlements over
the gate; while the parapet was occupied with armed men, with
spears and crossbows. Philip removed his cap.

"Madame," he said, "I am a soldier belonging to the army of the
Prince of Navarre, and am riding on the business of Admiral
Coligny. On my way hither, I had the good fortune to save a
Huguenot congregation, and the daughter of the Count de Valecourt,
from massacre by the people of La Chatre. My business is urgent,
and I am unable to turn back to conduct her to her father, who is
with the army of the prince. Hearing that you are of the reformed
religion, I have ventured to crave your protection for the young
lady; until I can return to fetch her, or can notify to her father
where he may send for her."

"The lady is welcome," Madame de Landres said. "In such times as
these, it is the duty of all of our religion to assist each other;
and the daughter of the Count de Valecourt, whom I know by
reputation, will be specially welcomed."

Bowing to the lady, Philip rode back to his party.

"The matter is settled, mademoiselle. The chatelaine will be glad
to receive you."

By the time they reached the castle the drawbridge had been
lowered; and Madame de Landres stood at the gate, ready to receive
her guest. As Philip, leaping off, lifted the girl to the ground,
the lady embraced her kindly.

"I am truly glad to be able to offer you a shelter, for a time. You
are young, indeed, to be abroad without a natural protector; for as
I gather this gentleman, whose name I have not yet learned, rescued
you by chance from an attack by the Catholics."

"God sent him to my succour, as by a miracle," Claire said simply.
"The Chevalier Fletcher is known to my father. Had he arrived but
one minute later, I should be one among seventy or eighty who are
now lying dead in a wood, near La Chatre. My father had a chateau
close by, but it was fired after the massacre."

"And now, mademoiselle, with your permission, and that of Madame de
Landres, we will ride on at once. We must do another thirty miles
before sunset."

Madame de Landres, however, insisted on Philip and his men stopping
to partake of a meal before they rode on; and although they had
breakfasted heartily, four hours before, upon the provisions Pierre
had brought back with him from Amboise, their ride had given them
an appetite; and Philip did not refuse the invitation. Madame de
Landres expressed much satisfaction on hearing that the Huguenot
army was likely to pass somewhere near the neighbourhood of the
chateau, on its way to effect a junction with the Duc de
Deux-Ponts; and promised to send one of her retainers with a
message, to the count, that his daughter was in her keeping. The
meal was a short one; and Philip, after a halt of half an hour,
mounted and rode on again.

"My father will thank you, when you meet him, Monsieur Fletcher. As
for me, I cannot tell you what I feel, but I shall pray for you
always; and that God, who sent you to my aid, will watch over you
in all dangers," Claire de Valecourt had said, as she bade him
goodbye.

They halted that night at a small village and, as Philip was eating
his supper, Pierre came in.

"I think, monsieur, that it would be well for us to move on for a
few miles farther."

"Why, Pierre? We have done a long day's journey, and the horses had
but a short rest last night."

"I should like to rest just as well as the horses," Pierre said;
"but I doubt if we should rest well, here. I thought, when we drew
bridle, that the landlord eyed us curiously; and that the men who
sauntered up regarded us with more attention than they would
ordinary travellers. So I told Eustace and Roger, as they led the
horses to the stable, to keep the saddles on for the present; and I
slipped away round to the back of the house, and got my ear close
to the open window of the kitchen. I got there just as the landlord
came in, saying:

[Illustration: Pierre listens at the open window of the inn.]

"'These are the people, wife, that we were told of three hours ago.
There are the same number of men, though they have no women with
them, as I was told might be the case. Their leader is a
fine-looking young fellow, and I am sorry for him, but that I can't
help. I was told that, if they came here, I was to send off a
messenger at once to Nevers; and that, if I failed to do so, my
house should be burnt over my head, and I should be hung from the
tree opposite, as a traitor to the king. Who he is I don't know,
but there can be no doubt he is a Huguenot, and that he has killed
two nobles. I daresay they deserved it if they were, as the men
said, engaged in what they call the good work of slaying Huguenots;
which is a kind of work with which I do not hold. But that is no
business of mine--I am not going to risk my life in the matter.

"'Besides, if I don't send off it will make no difference; for they
told half-a-dozen men, before they started, that they would give a
gold crown to the first who brought them news of the party; and it
is like enough someone has slipped off, already, to earn the money.
So I must make myself safe by sending off Jacques, at once. The men
said that their lords had powerful friends at Nevers, and I am not
going to embroil myself with them, for the sake of a stranger.'

"'We have nothing to do with the Huguenots, one way or other,' the
woman said. 'There are no Huguenots in this village, and it is
nothing to us what they do in other parts. Send off Jacques if you
like, and perhaps it will be best; but I don't want any fighting or
bloodshed here.'

"I slipped away then," continued Pierre, "as I thought the landlord
would be coming out to look for this Jacques. If it had not been
for what he said about the reward offered, and the likelihood that
others would already have started with the news, I should have
watched for the man and followed him when he started. I don't think
he would have carried his message far. As it was, I thought it best
to let you know at once; so that we could slip out of this trap, in
time."



Chapter 17: The Battle Of Moncontor.


When Pierre left him in order to look after the horses, Philip
continued his meal. There could be no hurry, for Nevers was twelve
miles away; and it would be four hours, at least, before a party
could arrive.

The landlady herself brought in the next course. After placing the
dish upon the table, she stood looking earnestly at him for a
minute, and then said:

"You spoke of stopping here tonight, sir. The accommodation is very
poor and, if you will take my advice, you will ride farther. There
have been some men along here this afternoon, inquiring for a party
like yours; and offering a reward to any who would carry the news
to them, should you pass through. Methinks their intentions were
not friendly."

"I thank you very much for your counsel," Philip said, "and will
take it. I know that there are some who would gladly hinder me, in
my journey; and if there is, as you say, a risk of their coming
here for me, it were as well that I rode farther, although I would
gladly have given my horses a night's rest. I thank you warmly for
having warned me."

"Do not let my husband know that I have spoken to you," she said.
"He is an honest man, but timid; and in these days 'tis safest not
to meddle with what does not concern one."

Philip waited for two hours, and then told Pierre to saddle the
horses, and tell the landlord that he wished to speak to him.

"I have changed my mind, landlord," he said, "and shall ride
forward. The horses will have rested now, and can very well do
another fifteen miles; so let me have your reckoning. You can
charge for my bedroom as, doubtless, it has been put in order for
me."

