appeared to the seamen--rammed her with maleficent passion.

This time he struck the ship just under the weather cathead.  He was
going not less than six knots an hour to the ship's three, and the
force of the blow completely stove in the bows of the _Essex_.  Those
on board could feel the huge bulk scraping along beneath the keel a
second time, and then, having done all the damage he could, he went
hurtling off to windward.  He had exacted a complete revenge for their
attack upon him.

Working with the energy of despair, for the ship seemed literally
sinking under their feet, the men succeeded in clearing away the spare
boat and launching it.  The steward saved two quadrants, two Bowditch's
"Practical Navigators," the captain's chest and that {236} of the first
mate, with two compasses which the mate had snatched from the binnacle.
They shoved off, but had scarcely made two lengths from the ship when
she fell over to windward and settled low in the water on her
beam-ends, a total wreck.

The captain and second mate, seeing the signal for the recall of the
boats flying, had cut loose from their whales and were rowing toward
the ship.  They knew something had happened, but what it was, they
could not tell.  The captain's boat was the first to reach the mate's.
He stopped close by, so completely overpowered that for a space he
could not utter a syllable.

"My God!  Mr. Chase," he gasped out at last; "what is the matter?"

"We have been stove in by a whale, sir," said the mate, telling the
whole appalling story.

By the captain's direction, the boats rowed to the sinking ship, and
with their hatchets the men managed to cut away the masts, whereupon
she rose two-thirds of the way to an even keel.  They scuttled the
deck--chopped holes through her, that is--and succeeded in coming at
some six hundred pounds of unspoiled hard bread, which they divided
among the three boats, and sufficient fresh water to give each boat
sixty-five gallons in small breakers--being all they dared to take in
each one.  They also procured a musket, two pistols, some powder and
bullets, some tools and six live turtles.  From the light spars of the
ship they rigged two masts for each boat and with the light canvas
provided each one with two spritsails and a jib.  They also got some
light cedar planking used to repair the boats, and with it built the
gunwales up six inches all around.

{237}

On the 22nd of November, being then in 120 W. Long., and just north of
the equator, the officers took counsel together as to what to do.  The
nearest lands were the Marquesas Islands, fifteen hundred miles away;
the Society Islands, twenty-four hundred miles away, and the Sandwich
Islands, three thousand miles away.  They knew little about the first
two groups, save that they were inhabited by fierce and treacherous
savages from whom they had as much to fear as from the perils of the
sea.  The Sandwich Islands were too far away, and they would be apt to
meet hurricanes, prevalent at that season, should they attempt to reach
them.  After a long deliberation they decided to take advantage of the
southeast trades by sailing by the wind until they reached the
twenty-fifth parallel of south latitude.  Then falling in with westerly
and variable winds, they could turn east and run for the coast of Chili
or Peru.  This course involved the longest voyage, but it also promised
the greatest chance for success.

Sometimes they made good progress with favorable winds.  At other times
they lay immobile in the blazing tropic sunlight which was almost
unbearable.  Often they were buffeted by fierce squalls or wild storms,
especially as they left the equator.  Only the important incidents of
their unparalleled voyage can be dwelt upon.  Most of the events
mentioned happened in the mate's boat, but the experience of the boat
epitomes that of the others.

The mate's boat was the smallest.  He was allotted five men.  The other
two boats each contained one more man.  The men were put on an
allowance of one sea-biscuit, weighing about one pound and a quarter,
and a pint of water a day.  In the mate's boat the provisions were kept
in his chest, which he {238} locked.  The men behaved in the most
exemplary manner.  In only one instance did any one ever attempt to
steal provisions.  They ran into a storm on the 24th, which wet some of
their biscuit, and as it was necessary to get rid of the damaged bread
as soon as possible, the daily allowance was taken from the spoiled
portion exclusively.  The soaked biscuit were very salt and greatly
increased their thirst.

During the long and exhausting voyage, a plank started in the mate's
boat, and it was with difficulty that they heeled it over in the water,
at the risk of their lives, to get to the place and nail it up.  One
night the captain's boat was attacked by a species of fish known as a
"killer" (Orca), and its bows were stove in.  This also they managed to
patch up.  On December 3rd, they ate the last of the spoiled salt
bread, and their relief when they began on the other was amazing.
Their thirst was terrible, especially as it became necessary to cut the
allowance of food and water in half.  They tried from time to time to
catch rain water by means of the sails, but the canvas had been so
often drenched by the spray that the water they caught was as salt as
the sea.

One day they caught half a dozen flying fish, which they ate raw.  Mr.
Chase remarks on the delicacy and daintiness of the mouthfuls which
these little fish afforded the starving mariners.  They fished for
dolphins and porpoises, but they never caught any, perhaps because they
had nothing with which to bait the hooks.  One day, seeking to
alleviate the pangs of thirst by wetting their bodies, three of the men
dropped into the water alongside and clung to the gunwale.  One of them
discovered that the boat's bottom was covered with barnacles.  They
were {239} ravenously devoured, but proved of little value as food.
The men in the water were so weak that had it not been for the efforts
of three who had remained in the boat, sceptical as to the utility of
the bath, they would never have been able to regain their positions.
During all these experiences, discipline was maintained--indeed, it was
maintained to the very last.

On the 15th of December, they reached Ducie Island, in Long. 124
degrees 40 minutes W., Lat. 24 degrees 40 minutes S., having come some
seventeen hundred miles in twenty-three days in these open boats.  They
landed on the island and found a few shell-fish, birds, and a species
of pepper-grass, but no water.  The famished men soon consumed
everything eatable they could come at on the island.  They hunted high
and low, but it was not until the 22nd that they found a spring of
water.  The island was almost desolate.  Nothing was to be gained by
remaining there, so the majority concluded to sail for Easter Island,
some nine hundred miles southward.  Three men decided to stay on the
island.  They all spent a melancholy Christmas there, repairing their
boats and filling their water-breakers, and on the 27th the others took
their departure.

On the 14th of January, 1821, they found that they had been driven to
the south of Easter Island, and that it was not practicable to beat up
to it.  They therefore determined to head for Juan Fernandez--Robinson
Crusoe's Island--some two thousand miles southeastward.  On the 10th,
the second mate, Matthew Joy, died from exposure, and was buried the
next morning.  On the 12th in the midst of a terrible storm, the boats
separated.

First we will follow the course of the mate's boat.  {240} On the 20th,
Peterson, a black man, died and was buried.  On the 8th of February,
Isaac Cole, a white seaman, died.  The men on the boat were by this
time in a frightful condition, weak and emaciated to the last degree.
Their provisions were almost gone.  But two biscuit to a man remained.
They were still over a thousand miles from land.  They came to a
fearful determination.  The body of Cole was not buried.  They lived on
him from the 9th to the 14th.  On the 15th and 16th, they consumed the
last vestige of their biscuit.

On the 17th, driving along at the mercy of wind and wave, for there was
not a man strong enough to do anything, they caught sight of the Island
of Massafuera.  They were helpless to bring the boat near to the
Island.  Whale-boats were steered by an oar.  There was not a single
man able to lift an oar.  In addition to starvation, thirst, weakness,
mental anguish, their legs began to swell with a sort of scurvy, giving
them excessive pain.  Their condition can scarcely be imagined.  The
breath of life was there, nothing more.

However, they had at last reached the end of their sufferings, for on
the morning of the 19th of February, 1821, in Lat. 35 degrees 45
minutes S., Long. 81 degrees 03 minutes W., the three surviving men
were picked up by the brig _Indian_, of London, Captain William
Crozier.  On the 25th of February, they arrived at Valparaiso,
ninety-six days and nearly four thousand miles from the sinking of the
ship!

The other two boats managed to keep together for a little while after
they lost sight of the mate's boat.  On the 14th of February,
provisions in the second mate's boat gave out entirely.  On the 15th,
Lawson Thomas, a black man, died in that boat and was eaten.  {241} The
captain's boat ran out of provisions on the 21st.  On the 23rd Charles
Shorter, another Negro, died in the second mate's boat and was shared
between the two boats.  On the 27th another black man died from the
same boat, furnishing a further meal for the survivors.  On the 28th,
Samuel Reed, the last black man, died in the captain's boat and was
eaten like the rest.  Singular that all the Negroes died first!

On the 29th, in a storm, these two boats separated.  When they parted
the second mate's boat had three living white men in her.  Nothing was
ever heard of her.

It might be inferred from the fact that the surviving men had had
something to eat, that they were in fair physical condition.  That is
far from the truth.  The men who had died were nothing but skin and
bone, and all that the survivors got from their ghastly meals was the
bare prolongation of a life which sank steadily to a lower and lower
ebb.  We may not judge these people too harshly.  Hunger and thirst
make men mad.  They scarcely realized what they did.

There was worse to come.  On the 1st of February, 1821, being without
food or drink of any sort, the four men in the captain's boat cast lots
as to which should die for the others.  There is something significant
of a spirit of fair play and discipline, not without its admirable
quality, that under such circumstances, the weaker were not overpowered
by the stronger, but that each man had an equal chance for life.  The
lot fell upon Owen Coffin,[1] the captain's nephew.  He did not repine.
He expressed his willingness to abide {242} by the decision.  No man
desired to be his executioner.  They cast lots, as before, to determine
who should kill him, and the lot fell upon Charles Ramsdale.  By him
Coffin was shot.

Thus they eked out a miserable existence until the 11th of February,
when Barzilla Ray died.  On the 23rd of February, the two remaining
men, the captain and Ramsdale, just on the point of casting lots as to
which should have the last poor chance for life, were picked up by the
Nantucket whaler, _Dauphin_, Captain Zimri Coffin.  They had almost
reached St. Mary's Island, ten miles from the coast of Chili.  On the
17th of March, these two survivors joined the three from the mate's
boat in Valparaiso.

In the harbor was the United States frigate, _Constellation_, Captain
Charles G. Ridgeley, U. S. N.  As soon as her commander heard of the
three left on Ducie Island, he arranged with Captain Thomas Raines, of
the British merchant ship, _Surrey_, to touch at the island on his
voyage to Australia and take off the men.  Captain Raines found them
still alive, but reduced to the last gasp.

Thus of the twenty men, five reached Valparaiso; three were saved on
the island, three were lost in the second mate's boat, two died and
were buried; six died and were eaten, and one was shot and eaten.

So ends this strange tragedy of the sea.



[1] A tradition still current in Nantucket has it that the lot fell to
the captain, whereupon his nephew, already near death, feeling that he
could not survive the afternoon, offered and insisted upon taking his
uncle's place.  I doubt this.




{245}

II

Some Famous American Duels

We are accustomed to regard our country as peculiarly law-abiding and
peaceful.  This, in spite of the fact that three presidents have been
murdered within the last forty-five years, a record of assassination of
chief magistrates surpassed in no other land, not even in Russia.  We
need not be surprised to learn that in no country was the serious duel,
the _combat a l'outrance_, so prevalent as in the United States at one
period of our national development.  The code of honor, so-called, was
most profoundly respected by our ancestors; and the number of eminent
men who engaged in duelling--and of whom many lost their lives on the
field--is astonishing.  Scarce any meeting was without its fatal
termination, perhaps owing to the fact that pistols and rifles were
generally used, and Americans are noted for their marksmanship.

There has been a revulsion of public sentiment which has brought about
the practical abolition of duelling in America.  Although the practice
still obtains in continental European countries, it is here regarded as
immoral, and it is illegal as well.  For one reason, in spite of the
apparent contradiction above, we are a law-abiding people.  The genius
of the Anglo-Saxon--I, who am a Celt, admit it--is for the orderly
administration of the law, and much of the evil noted comes from the
introduction within our borders {246} of an imperfectly assimilated
foreign element which cherishes different views on the subject.
Another deterrent cause is a cool common sense which has recognized the
futility of trying to settle with blade or bullet differences which
belong to the courts; to this may be added a keen sense of humor which
has seen the absurdity and laughed the practice out of existence.  The
freedom of the press has also been a contributing factor.  Perhaps the
greatest deterrent, however, has been the development of a sense of
responsibility for life and its uses to a Higher Power.

As General Grant has put it, with the matchless simplicity of
greatness: "I do not believe I ever would have the courage to fight a
duel.  If any man should wrong me to the extent of my being willing to
kill him, I should not be willing to give him the choice of weapons
with which it should be done, and of the time, place, and distance
separating us when I executed him.  If I should do any other such a
wrong as to justify him in killing me, I would make any reasonable
atonement within my power, if convinced of the wrong done."

With this little preliminary, I shall briefly review a few of the most
noted duels in our history.


I. A Tragedy of Old New York

On Wednesday, the 11th of July, 1804, at seven o'clock on a bright,
sunny, summer morning, two men, pistol in hand, confronted each other
on a narrow shelf of rocky ground jutting out from the cliffs that
overlook the Hudson at Weehawken, on the Jersey shore.  One was a
small, slender man, the other taller and more imposing in appearance.
Both had been soldiers; each faced the other in grave quietude, {247}
without giving outward evidence of any special emotion.

One was at that time the Vice-president of the United States; the other
had been Secretary of the Treasury, a general in command of the army,
and was the leading lawyer of his time.  The Vice-president was
brilliantly clever; the ex-Secretary was a genius of the first order.

A political quarrel had brought them to this sorry position.  Words
uttered in the heat of campaign, conveying not so much a personal
attack as a well-merited public censure, had been dwelt upon until the
Vice-president had challenged his political antagonist.  The great
attorney did not believe in duels.  He was a Christian, a man of
family; he had everything to lose and little to gain from this meeting.
Upon his great past he might hope to build an even greater future.  He
was possessed of sufficient moral courage to refuse the meeting, but
had, nevertheless, deliberately accepted the other's challenge.  It is
believed that he did so from a high and lofty motive; that he felt
persuaded of the instability of the Government which he had helped to
found, and that he realized that he possessed qualities which in such a
crisis would be of rare service to his adopted country.  His future
usefulness, he thought--erroneously, doubtless, but he believed
it--would be impaired if any one could cast a doubt upon his courage by
pointing to the fact that he had refused a challenge.

Thirty months before, his son, a bright lad of eighteen, fresh from
Columbia College, had been shot dead in a duel which he had brought
upon himself by resenting a public criticism of his father.  He had
fallen on that very spot where his father stood.  I think that {248}
the tragedy must have been in the great statesman's mind that summer
morning.

The word was given.  The two pistols were discharged.  The
Vice-president, taking deliberate aim, fired first.  The ex-Secretary
of the Treasury, who had previously stated to his second that he did
not intend to fire at his adversary, discharged his pistol in the air.
He had been hit by the bullet of his enemy, and did not know that as he
fell, by a convulsive movement, he had pulled the trigger of the weapon
in his hand.

That was the end--for he died the next day after lingering agonies--of
Alexander Hamilton, the greatest intellect and one of the greatest
personalities associated with the beginning of this Government.  It was
also the end of his successful antagonist, Aaron Burr, for thereafter
he was a marked man, an avoided, a hated man.  When abroad in 1808, he
gave Jeremy Bentham an account of the duel, and said that he "was sure
of being able to kill him."  "And so," replied Bentham, "I thought it
little better than a murder."  "Posterity," the historian adds, "will
not be likely to disturb the judgment of the British philosopher."


II. Andrew Jackson as a Duellist

Comparatively speaking, the next great duel on my list attracted little
more than local attention at the time.  Years after, when one of them
who took part in it had risen to national fame, and was a candidate for
