Coote, with his heart in his shoes, watched the retreating figure till
it was lost to view, and then turned, bewildered and scared, to the
school.

Heathcote was waiting for him at the door.

"Well, what did the cad want?--what's the row, I say?" he demanded,
catching sight of the dazed face of his chum.

"Oh, Georgie, a most frightful row!" gasped Coote.  "He says I've stolen
a pencil!"

"What, the one you were talking about?"

"Yes, the very one."

"I suppose you haven't, really?" asked Heathcote, with no false
delicacy.

"No, really I haven't--that is, if I have I-- Look here; do hunt my
pockets, will you, old man?"

Georgie obeyed, and every pocket of the unhappy Coote was successively
explored, without bringing to light the missing pencil.

"There," said the suspect, with a sigh of relief when the operation was
over, "I was positive I hadn't got it.  He says I was the only one in
the shop, and that he missed it as soon as I had gone; but really and
truly I didn't take it; I never did such a thing in my life."

"Of course you didn't.  He's a cad and has got a spite against us,
that's what it is.  What's he going to do?"

"He says unless I take it to him by this time to-morrow, he'll send a
policeman to take me up," and the unhappy youth's voice choked with the
words.

Heathcote gave a long, dismal whistle.

"Whatever will you do?" he asked, in tones of deep concern.

"How can I take it back?" asked Coote, "if I hadn't got it.  I wish to
goodness I had got it!"

"You'll have to square him, somehow," said Georgie.  "You're positive it
hasn't dropped into your shoes, or anywhere, by accident."

The bare suggestion sent Coote up to the dormitory, where he undressed,
and shook out each article of his toilet, in the hope of discovering the
lost treasure.

Alas! high or low, there was no _sign_ of it.

He spent a terrible afternoon, wondering where he should be that time
to-morrow, or whether possibly Mr Webster would alter his mind, and
send a policeman up forthwith.

He was in no humour for tennis, or a row in the Den, or a "Sociable"
concert after school, and avoided them all.  And to add to his troubles,
Heathcote was detained two hours for some offence; so that he was
deprived for an equal length of time of the consolation of that hero's
sympathy and advice.

He spent the interval dismally in a retired corner of the field, where
he hoped to be able to collect his shattered wits in peace.  But it was
no good.  He could see no way through it.

"Oh!" thought he, for the hundredth time, "how I wish I had really taken
it!"

He had just arrived at this conclusion, when a light step approaching,
caused him to look up, and see Dick.

"Hullo, old man," said the latter, "how jolly blue you look.  What's the
row?"

Coote repeated his dismal story, and marked the dismay which crept over
his leader's face as he told it.

"By Jove, old man," said Dick, "it's a mess.  How ever are you to get
out?"

"That's just what I don't know," groaned Coote.  "If I only had the
pencil it would be all right.  But, really and truly, Dick, I never took
it; did I?"

"All serene," said Dick.  "But, I say, if you can't give him the pencil
back, perhaps you can pay him for it."

"It cost thirty shillings; and I've only got seven-and-six."

"I've got ten shillings," said Dick.  "That's seventeen-and-six.
Perhaps if we gave him that, he'd wait for the rest."

"You're an awful brick," said poor Coote, gratefully.  "If it hadn't
been for you and Georgie, I don't know what I should have done."

Dick started and coloured.

"Is he in it?  Does he know about it?" he asked.

"Yes, Dick," said Coote, feeling rather in a hobble.  "I--thought, you
know, I'd better tell him."

"What did he say?"

"Oh, not much; that is, he said he'd help me if he could.  But--I don't
see how he can."

"He might be able to lend you enough to make up the price," said Dick,
after a pause.

"I know he would, he's such a brick--that is," added the wretched Coote,
correcting himself, "you're both such bricks."

Dick made no answer, but walked off, musing to himself.

"Both bricks!"  And yet poor Coote had to blush when he mentioned the
name of one brick to the other!  Dick was getting tired of this.

He retired to the school, to think over what could be done, and was
about to ascend the stairs, when the familiar form of Georgie appeared
coming to meet him.

"Georgie, Coote's in an awful mess; I vote we back him up."

"So do I, rather, old man."

And they went off arm-in-arm to find him.

Check to you, Pledge!



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

HOW OUR HEROES FALL OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE.

Templeton opened its eyes as it saw David and Jonathan walking together
across the fields that afternoon.  The Den, with native quickness of
perception, instantly snuffed a battle in the air, and dogged the heels
of the champions with partisan shouts and cheers.

"Dick will finish him in a round and a half," shouted Raggles.

"Don't you be too cock-sure," cried Gosse, "Georgie's got a neat
'square-fender' on him, and I rather fancy him best myself."

Gosse had not the ghost of a notion what a "square-fender" was; nor had
anyone else.  But the word carried weight, and there was a run on
Georgie accordingly.

Raggles, however, was not to be snuffed out too easily.

"Bah!" shouted he, "what's the use of a 'square-fender,' when Dick can
get down his 'postman's knock' over the top, and blink his man into
fits."

After that Georgie was nowhere.  A fellow who can "blink" his man with a
"postman's knock," no matter what it means, is worth half-a-dozen
"square-fenders."  And so Dick became a favourite, and the event was
considered as good as settled.

Which was just as well; for our heroes, as they walked in search of
Coote, could not be so engrossed either in their newly-healed alliance,
or in the affliction of their friend, as to be unaware of the commotion
at their heels.  And it was not till Dick had ordered the foremost of
the procession to "hook it," enforcing his precept by one or two
impartially-distributed samples of his "postman's knock," that it dawned
on the Den there was to be no fight after all.

Whereupon they yapped off in disgust, with their noses in the air, in
search of some better sport.

Left to themselves, our heroes, with a strange mixture of joy and
anxiety in their hearts, broke into a trot, and presently sighted Coote.

That unhappy youth, little dreaming of the revolution which his scrape
was destined to effect in Templeton, was still sitting where Dick had
left him, ruefully meditating on his near prospect of incarceration.
The vision of Dick and Heathcote advancing upon him by no means tended
to allay the tumult of his feelings.

"I'm in for it now," groaned he to himself.  "They're both going to
pitch into me for telling the other.  What a mule I was ever to come to
Templeton."

But Dick's first words dispelled these gloomy forebodings effectually.

"Keep your pecker up, old man, Georgie and I are both going to back you
up.  We'll pull you through somehow."

"I've got ten bob," said Georgie.  "That's twenty-seven-and-six.
Perhaps he'll let you off the other half-crown."

Considering he had not abstracted the pencil at all, Coote inwardly
thought Mr Webster might forego this small balance, and be no loser.
And he half-hinted as much.

"It's an awful shame," said he, "not to believe my word.  I really don't
see why we ought to stump up at all."

But this proposal by no means suited his ardent backers-up, who looked
upon the whole affair as providential, and by no means to be burked.

"Bound to do it," said Dick decisively.  "Things look ugly against you,
you know, and it would be a terrible business if you got locked up.  It
would cost less to square Webster then to bail you out; wouldn't it,
Georgie?"

"Rather!" said Georgie.  "Besides, it looks awkward if it gets out that
you've been to prison.--Our 'Firm' oughtn't to get mixed up in that sort
of mess."

After this, Coote resigned all pretensions to the further direction of
his own defence, and left his case unreservedly in the hands of his two
honest partners.

They decided that very evening, with or without leave, to go down with
the twenty-seven-and-six to Mr Webster.

Dick was the only one of the three who got leave; but his two friends
considered the crisis one of such urgency that even without leave they
should brave all consequences and accompany him.

Mr Webster was in the act of putting up his shutters when the small
careworn procession halted before his door, and requested the favour of
an interview.

The bookseller was in a good temper.  He had rather enjoyed the day's
adventure, and reckoned that the moral effect of his action would be
good.  Besides, the looks of the culprit and his two friends fully
justified his suspicions.  They had doubtless come to restore the
pencil, and plead for mercy.  They should see that mercy was not kept in
stock in his shop, and would want some little trouble before it was to
be procured.

So he bade his visitors step inside, and state their business.

"We've come about the pencil, you know," said Dick, adopting a
conciliatory tone to begin with.  "It's really a mistake, Webster.
Coote never took it."

"No.  We've known Coote for years, and never knew him do such a thing,"
said Heathcote.

"And they've turned out every one of my pockets," said Coote, "and there
was no sign of it."

Mr Webster smiled serenely.

"Very pretty, young gentlemen; very pretty.  When you have done joking,
perhaps, you'll give me what belongs to me."

"Hang it!" cried Dick, forgetting his suavity.  "It's no joke, Webster.
I tell you, Coote never took the thing."

"You were here in the shop, of course, and saw him?" said the tradesman.

"No, I wasn't," said Dick; "you know that as well as I do."

"Coote," said Heathcote, feeling it his turn to back up--"Coote's a
gentleman; not a thief."

"I'm glad to hear that," said Mr Webster.  "He's sure he's not both?"

"I'm positive," said Coote.

"And is that all you've come to say?" said the bookseller.

"No," said Dick.  "It's an awful shame if you can't believe us.  But if
you won't--well, we'd sooner pay you for the pencil and have done with
it."

Mr Webster was charmed.  He had always imagined himself a sharp man and
he was sure of it now.  For a minute or two the boys' joint
protestations of innocence had staggered his belief in Coote's guilt;
but this ingenuous offer convinced him he had been right after all.

"Oh, you didn't steal it, but you're going to pay for it, are you?  Very
pretty!  What do you think it was worth?"

"Thirty shillings," said Dick, "that was the price marked on it."

"And yet you never saw it."

"Of course I didn't," retorted Dick, beginning to feel hot.  "I've told
you so twice--Coote saw it."

"Yes," said Coote, "there was a tiny label on it."

"We can't make up quite thirty shillings," said Heathcote; "but we've
got twenty-seven shillings and sixpence.  I suppose you'll make that
do?"

"_Do_ you suppose I'll make it do?" said Mr Webster, beginning to feel
hot, too.  "You think you can come to my shop, and pilfer my things like
so many young pickpockets; and then you have the impudence to come and
offer me part of the price to say nothing about it.  No, thank you.
That's not my way of doing business."

"There's nothing else we can do," said Dick.

"Oh, yes, there is.  You can march off to the lockup--all three of you
if you like; but one of you, anyhow.  And so you will, as sure as I
stand here."

"Oh, Mr Webster, I say, please don't say that.  He never took it,
really he didn't."

"Come, that'll do.  Twelve o'clock to-morrow, unless I get the pencil,
you'll get a call from the police.  Off you go.  I've had enough of
you."

And the bookseller, whose temper had gradually been evaporating during
the visit, bustled our heroes out of the shop, and slammed the door
behind them.

"It's all up, old man," said Heathcote, lugubriously.  "I did think the
cad would shut up for twenty-seven shillings and sixpence."

"I'm afraid he wants me more than the money," said Coote.  "Whatever
_can_ I do?"

"You can't prove you didn't take it; that's the worst," said Dick.

"He can't prove I did.  He only thinks I did.  How I wish I _had_ that
stupid pencil."

With which original conclusion they returned to Templeton.  Dick, under
cover of his _exeats_ marched ostentatiously in.  The other two, in a
far more modest and shy manner, entered by their hands and knees, on
receipt of a signal from their leader that the coast was clear.

Heathcote deemed it prudent not to exhibit himself in the Den, and
therefore retired to Pledge's study as the place least likely to be
dangerous.

Pledge was there working.

"Hullo, youngster," said he, "what's been your little game this evening?
Been to a prayer meeting?"

"No," said Heathcote laconically.

It was no part of Pledge's manner to appear inquisitive.  He saw there
was a mystery, and knew better than to appear in the slightest degree
anxious to solve it.

He had as yet heard nothing of the newly-formed alliance in low life,
and attributed Heathcote's uncommunicativeness either to shame for some
discreditable proceeding, or else to passing ill-humour.  In either case
he reckoned on knowing all about it before long.

Heathcote was very uncomfortable.  It had not occurred to him till just
now that Pledge would resent the return of his allegiance to Dick as an
act of insubordination.  Not that that would keep him from Dick; but
Heathcote, who had hitherto admired his old patron as a friend, by no
means relished the idea of having him an enemy.  He therefore felt that
the best thing he could do was to hold his tongue, and if, after all, a
row was to come, well--it would have to come.

He sat down to do his own preparation, and for half an hour neither
student broke the silence.

Then Pledge, who had never known his _protege_ silent for so long
together before, felt there must be something the matter which he ought
to be aware of.

So he leaned back in his chair and stretched himself.

"You're a nice boy, George!" said he, laughing; "you've been sitting
half an hour with your pen in your hand and haven't written a word."

Georgie coloured up.

"It's a stiff bit of prose," said he.

"So it seems.  Suppose I do it for you?"

"No, thanks, Pledge," said the boy, who, without having any particular
horror of having his lessons done for him, did not like just now, when
he was conscious of having revolted against his senior, to accept
favours from him.

"No?  It's true, then, Georgie is joining the elect and going to take
holy orders?"

"No, I'm not," said Georgie.

"Then Georgie is trying to be funny and not succeeding," said the
monitor, drily, returning to his own books.

Another silent quarter of an hour passed, and then the first bed bell
rang.

"Good-night," said Heathcote, gathering together his books.

"Good-night, dear boy!" said Pledge, with the red spots coming out on
his cheeks; "come down with me to the 'Tub' in the morning."

"I'm going down with another fellow," said Georgie, feeling his heart
bumping in his chest.

"Oh!" said the monitor, indifferently; "with a _very_ dear friend?--the
saintly Dick, for instance?"

"Yes," said Heathcote, and left the room.

Pledge sat motionless, watching the closed door for a full minute, and,
as he did so, an ugly look crept over his face, which it was well for
Heathcote he did not see.  Then he turned mechanically to his books, and
buried himself in them for the rest of the evening.

The "Tub" next morning was crowded as usual, and it needed very little
penetration on Pledge's part to see that the triple alliance between our
three heroes was fast and serious.

They undressed on the same rock, they dived side by side from the
spring-board, they came above water at the same moment, they challenged
collectively any other three of the Den to meet them in mortal combat in
mid-Tub, and they ended up their performance by swimming solemnly in
from the open arm-in-arm, Coote, of course, being in the middle.

All this Pledge observed, and marked also their anxious looks and
hurried consultations as they dressed.  He guessed that there must be
some matter of common interest which was just then acting as the pivot
on which the alliance turned, and his taste for scientific research
determined him, if possible, to discover it.

So when, after "Tub," the three friends marched arm-in-arm down town,
Pledge casually strolled the same way at a respectful distance.

It was clear the "Firm" was bound on a momentous and unpleasant errand.

Coote every other minute was convulsed by the brotherly claps which the
backers-up on either side bestowed upon him; and the long faces of all
three, as now and then they stopped and scrutinised the shop-window of
some silversmith or pawnbroker, betokened anything but content or high
spirits.

At length Pledge saw them enter very dejectedly at Mr Webster's door,
where, not being anxious to disturb them, he left them and took a short
