TELLS SOMETHING OF THE DOINGS OF SOLVE KLOFE AND OTHERS, AND TREATS OF A
FEW OF THE MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES OF GUTTORM STOUTHEART.

The scene is changed.  It is night; yet how different from night in most
other inhabited parts of the earth!  The midnight sun is just sinking
beneath the horizon, close to the spot whence, in about twenty minutes,
he will rise, to repeat his prolonged course of nearly four-and-twenty
hours through the northern sky.  But if the darkness of night is absent,
its deep quietude is there.  The mighty cliffs that rise like giant
walls to heaven, casting broad, heavy shadows over the sea, send forth
no echoes, for the innumerable birds that dwell among them are silently
perched like snowflakes on every crag, or nestled in every crevice,
buried in repose.  The sea resembles glass, and glides with but a faint
sigh upon the shore.  All is impressively still on mountain and fiord.
Everything in nature is asleep, excepting the wakeful eye of day, the
hum of distant rills, the boom of inland cataracts, and the ripple on
the shore.  These sounds, however, do but render the universal silence
more profound by suggesting the presence of those stupendous forces
which lie latent everywhere.

A white mist floats over the sea like a curtain of gauze, investing
insignificant objects with grandeur, and clothing caverns, cliffs, and
mountain gorges with unusual sublimity.

Only one object suggestive of man is visible through the haze.  It is a
ship--of the old, old-fashioned build--with high stem and stern, and
monstrous figurehead.  Its forefoot rests upon the strip of gravel in
yonder bay at the foot of the cliff, whose summit is lost in the clouds.
The hull reposes on its own reflected image, and the taper mast is
repeated in a wavy but distinct line below.  It is the "longship"; the
"war vessel"; the "sea horse" of Solve Klofe, the son of King Hunthiof
of More, whom Harald Fairhair slew.

Solve had, as we have before said, spent the winter in taking his
revenge by herrying the coast in his longship, and doing all in his
power to damage the King's men, as well as those who were friendly to
his cause.  Among other things he had, early in spring, persuaded Haldor
the Fierce to let him have the use of one of his warships, with a few of
his best men, to accompany him on a viking cruise.  Erling had resisted
his pressing invitation to bear him company, because of important
business, the nature of which he did not think it necessary to disclose.
His friend Glumm the Gruff also declined from similar reasons.  At all
events, he was similarly pre-engaged and taciturn.  Thorer the Thick,
however, and Kettle Flatnose, and young Alric--the latter by special and
importunate request--were allowed to accompany him on this expedition.

We do not intend to give the details of this foray, although it was
unusually stirring and prolific of adventure.  Suffice it to say, that
they had several hard fights both with Swedish and Danish vikings, in
all of which Alric distinguished himself for reckless daring, and would
certainly have been carried home dead upon his own shield had not Kettle
Flatnose watched over him with the solicitude of a father, and warded
off many a blow that was aimed at his pugnacious head.  We fear it must
be added that Alric was not sufficiently impressed with his friend's
services in this way.  The truth is that he entertained the firm belief
that nobody could kill him, and that he could kill anybody--which was
all very well as far as it went, but would not have carried him
scathless through the cruise, had not the stout Irishman been at his
back.

Immense and valuable booty was gained at this time, for one of the
vessels which they captured had been cruising in southern lands, and was
returning with a large quantity of gold and silver ornaments when Solve
Klofe attacked it.  A misfortune befell them, however.  On their way
home a storm drove Thorer's vessel on the rocks in a fog, and it became
a total wreck.  The crew were all saved, however, and much of the
lading, by Solve, who stowed the goods in his own ship, and brought home
the men.  They were within a day's sail of Horlingdal, when they put
ashore to take a few hours' repose.

Three hours after midnight Solve Klofe, whose breathing up to that time
had resembled that of an infant, gave vent to a prolonged bass snore,
and opened his eyes.  This was followed by the shutting of his mouth,
and with one of those satisfactory stretchings of the body with which a
sound sleeper is wont in the morning to dismiss repose and recall his
energies.  Having lain still a few moments to enjoy the result, Solve
sat up, and stretching forth his hand, drew aside the curtain of the
tent under which he slept, and looked out.  The sight that gladdened his
eyes was beautiful beyond description, for the sun was up in all his
northern glory, and shone on the silver sea with dazzling light, while
he scattered away the mists of morning.  But the best sight of all to
the bold viking was the splendid warship which, with painted sides and
shields, and gilded masts and prow, glowed and glittered like a
beautiful gem in a setting of the brightest azure blue.

Turning his eyes inside his tent again, Solve gazed with the
expressionless aspect of a still drowsy man upon the countenance of
Kettle, whose flat nose and open mouth gave vent to tones resembling
those of a bassoon.  Beside him, and nestling close to him, lay the
youthful Alric, with his curly head resting on Kettle's broad bosom; for
the lad, albeit manly enough when awake, had sufficient of the child
still about him to induce a tendency on his part, when asleep, to make
use of any willing friend as a pillow.  Thorer the Thick was also there,
with his head on his arm, his body sprawling indescribably, his shield
above him like a literal coverlet, and his right hand on his sword-hilt.

"Ho!" exclaimed Solve, in a tone that marvellously resembled the tones
of modern men in similar circumstances.

Kettle and Thorer, however, sprang up to a sitting posture with very
primitive alacrity, for in those days a man's life often depended on his
being and keeping very wide-awake.

Poor Alric was tumbled somewhat unceremoniously to one side, but that
failed to awaken him, for he was not yet sufficiently trained to sleep
in the midst of alarms, and felt very naturally inclined to growl and
bite when shaken or told to "get up!"

In a few minutes, however, his lethargy was overcome; the men were
aroused; the tents were struck; the longship was pushed off, and, under
the influence of thirty pair of oars, it crept like a monstrous insect
away over the sea.

Those who had not to work at the oars sat at first quietly on the
thwarts, or leaned over the gunwale gazing into the deep, or up at the
sky, enjoying the warm air and their own fancies.  But after a time
talkative spirits began to loose their tongues, and ere long a murmur of
quiet conversation pervaded the ship.

"I wonder what news we shall hear at the stede when we arrive?" said
Thorer to Kettle, who with several others sat on the poop beside Solve.

"I hope it won't be bad news," answered Kettle.  "Harald is not the man
to sleep through the summer when there is work to be done.  If it wasn't
that I expect to give him the tooth-ache before I go, surely I should
have been in Ireland long ago."

"Whom didst thou serve under, Kettle, before we brought thee to Norway?"
asked Alric.

"Under the King of Dublin," replied Kettle.

"Was he a great king?"

"A great king?  Aye, never was there a greater; and a great king he is
yet, if he's alive, though I have my own fears on that point, for he was
taking badly to ale when I left."

There was something pathetic yet humorous in the tone and expression
with which Kettle said this which caused Alric to laugh.  The Irishman
started, and for an instant his huge countenance blazed with a look of
wrath which was quite majestic, and overawed the boy, bold though he
was.  But it passed away in a moment, and was replaced by a sorrowful
look as Kettle shook his head and said--

"Ah! boy, your laugh reminded me of the laugh of the villain Haabrok who
took the old king's throne at the time I was carried off, bound hand and
foot.  Lucky was it for him that my hands were not free then.--Well,
well, this sounds like bragging," he added with a smile, "which is only
fit for boys and cowards."

Alric winced a little at this, for he was quite aware of his own
tendency to boast, and for a moment he felt a strong inclination to
stand up for "boys", and assert, that although boasting was common
enough with cowardly boys, it was not so with all boys; but on
consideration he thought it best to hold his tongue, on that point, at
least until he should have freed himself of the evil of boasting.  To
change the subject he said--

"Was the old king fond of thee, Kettle?"

"Aye, as fond of me as of his own son."

"Was he like my father?" pursued the boy.

"No; there are not many men like thy father, lad; but he was a stout and
brave old man, and a great warrior in his day.  Now I think of it, he
was very like Guttorm Stoutheart."

"Then he was a handsome man," said Solve Klofe with emphasis.

"He was," continued Kettle, "but not quite so desperate.  Old Guttorm is
the most reckless man I ever did see.  Did I ever tell ye of the
adventure I had with him when we went on viking cruise south to
Valland?"

"No," said Solve; "let us hear about it; but stay till I change the
oarsmen."

He went forward and gave the order to relieve the men who had rowed from
the land, and when the fresh men were on the benches he returned and
bade Kettle go on.

"'Tis a fine country," said the Irishman, glancing round him with a
glowing eye, and speaking in a low tone, as if to himself--"one to be
proud of."

And in truth there was ground for his remark, for the mists had by that
time entirely cleared away, leaving unveiled a sea so calm and bright
that the innumerable islets off the coast appeared as if floating in
air.

"That is true," said Thorer.  "I sometimes wonder, Kettle, at thy
longing to return to Ireland.  I am in the same case with thyself--was
taken from my home in Jemteland, laboured as a thrall, wrought out my
freedom, and remained in Haldor's service, but have never wished to
return home."

"Didst thou leave a wife and children behind thee?" asked Kettle.

"Nay; I was carried away while very young."

"Is thy father alive, or thy mother?"

"No, they are both dead."

"Then I wonder not that ye have no desire to return home.  My father and
mother are both alive--at least I have good reason to believe so--my
wife and children are waiting for me.  Canst wonder, man, that I long to
behold once more the green hills of Ireland?"

"Nay, if that be so, I wonder not," replied Thorer.

"Come, Kettle, thou forgettest that we wait for the story about old
Guttorm Stoutheart," said Solve Klofe, arranging the corner of a sail so
as to protect his back from the sun.

"'Tis an old story now in Horlingdal," said Kettle; "but as thou hast
not been in this quarter for a long time, no doubt it is new to thee.
Thorer there knows it well; but I find that it bears telling more than
once.  Well, it was, as I have said, two years past that Guttorm went
south to Valland on viking cruise.  He called at Horlingdal in passing,
and got some of the dalesmen.  Among others, I was allowed to go.  He
and I got on very well together, and we were fortunate in getting much
booty.  One day we came to a part of the coast where we saw a strong
castle of stone on the top of a hill a short way inland.  We also saw
plenty of cattle on a plain near the sea, so Guttorm ordered his
longship to be steered for the shore, and we began to drive some of the
cattle down to the beach, intending to slaughter them there, as our
provisions were getting low.  On seeing this, a party of men came out
from the castle and bade us begone.  We told them to be easy in their
minds, for we only wanted a little food.  We even went so far as to ask
it of them civilly, but the men were such surly fellows that they
refused to listen to reason, and attacked us at once.  Of course we
drove them back into their castle, but in doing so we lost one or two of
our best men.  This angered old Guttorm, who is not a quarrelsome man,
as ye know.  He would have gone away peaceably enough if he had been let
alone to help himself to a few beasts; but his blood was set up by that
time, so he ordered all the men on shore, and we pitched our tents and
besieged the castle.  Being made of stone, there was no chance of
setting it on fire, and as the walls were uncommonly high, it was not
possible to take it by assault.  Well, we sat down before it, and for
two days tried everything we could think of to take it, but failed, for
there were plenty of men in it, and they defended the walls stoutly.
Besides this, to say the truth, we had already lost a number of good men
on the cruise and could ill afford to lose more.

"On the third day some of our chief men advised Guttorm to give it up,
but that made him so furious that no one dared speak to him about it for
another two days.  At the end of that time his nephew plucked up heart,
and going to him, said--

"`Uncle, do you see the little birds that fly back and forward over the
castle walls so freely, and build their nests in the thatch of the
housetops?'

"`I do, nephew,' says Guttorm.  `What then?'

"`My advice is,' says the nephew, `that you should order the men to make
each a pair of wings like those the birds have, and then we shall all
fly over the walls, for it seems to me that there is no other way of
getting into the castle.'

"`Thou art a droll knave,' replies Guttorm, for he was ever fond of a
joke; `but thou art wise also, therefore I advise thee to make a pattern
pair of wings for the men; and when they are ready--'

"Here Guttorm stopped short, and fell to thinking; and he thought so
long that his nephew asked him at last if he had any further commands
for him.

"`Yes, boy, I have.  There is more in this matter of the wings than thou
dreamest of.  Go quickly and order the men to make snares, and catch as
many of these little birds as they can before sunset.  Let them be
careful not to hurt the birds, and send Kettle Flatnose and my
house-carle hither without delay.'

"When I came to the old man I found him walking to and fro briskly, with
an expression of eagerness in his eye.

"`Kettle,' he said smartly, `go and prepare two hundred pieces of cord,
each about one foot long, and to the end of each piece tie a small chip
of wood as long as the first joint of thy thumb, and about the size of a
goose quill.  Smear these pieces of wood over with pitch, and have the
whole in my tent within three hours.'

"As I walked away to obey this order, wondering what it could all be
about, I heard him tell his chief house-carle to have all the men armed
and ready for action a little after sunset, as quietly as possible.

"Before the three hours were out, I returned to the tent with the two
hundred pieces of cord prepared according to orders, and found old
Guttorm sitting with a great sack before him, and a look of perplexity
on his face that almost made me laugh.  He was half-inclined to laugh
too, for the sack moved about in a strange way, as if it were alive!

"`Kettle,' said he, when I came forward, `I need thy help here.  I have
got some three hundred little birds in that sack, and I don't know how
to keep them in order, for they are fluttering about and killing
themselves right and left, so that I shall soon have none left alive for
my purpose.  My thought is to tie one of these cords to a leg of each
bird, set the bit of stick on fire and let it go, so that when it flies
to its nest in the thatch it will set the houses in the castle on fire.
Now, what is thy advice?'

"`Call as many of the men into the tent as it will hold, and let each
catch a bird, and keep it till the cords are made fast; says I.'

"This was done at once, but we had more trouble than we expected, for
when the mouth of the sack was opened, out flew a dozen of the birds
before we could close it!  The curtain of the tent was down, however,
so, after a good deal of hunting, we caught them again.  When the cords
were tied to these the men were sent out of the tent, each with a little
bird in his hand, and with orders to go to his particular post and
remain there till further orders.  Then another batch of men came in,
and they were supplied with birds and cords like the others; but ye have
no notion what trouble we had.  I have seen a hundred viking prisoners
caught and held fast with half the difficulty and less noise!  Moreover,
while some of the men squeezed the birds to death in their fear lest
they should escape, others let theirs go in their anxiety not to hurt
them, and the little things flew back to their nests with the cords and
bits of chip trailing after them.  At last, however, all was ready.  The
men were kept in hiding till after dark; then the little chips were set
on fire all at the same time, and the birds were let go.  It was like a
shower of stars descending on the castle, for each bird made straight
for its own nest; but just as we were expecting to behold the success of
our plan, up jumped a line of men on the castle walls, and by shouting
and swinging their arms scared the birds away.  We guessed at once that
the little birds which had escaped too soon with the strings tied to
their legs had been noticed, and the trick suspected, for the men in the
castle were well prepared.  A few of the birds flew over their heads,
and managed to reach the roofs, which caught fire at once; but wherever
this happened, a dozen men ran at the place and beat the fire out.  The
thing was wisely contrived, but it was cleverly met and repelled, so we
had only our trouble and the disappointment for our pains.

"After this," continued Kettle, "old Guttorm became like a wolf.  He
snarled at everyone who came near him for some time, but his passion
never lasted long.  He soon fell upon another plan.

"There was a small river which ran at the foot of the mound on which the
castle stood, and there were mudbanks on the side next to it, One night
we were all ordered to go to the mudbanks as quiet as mice, with shovels
and picks in our hands, and dig a tunnel under the castle.  We did so,
and the first night advanced a long way, but we had to stop a good while
before day to let the dirt wash away and the water get clear again, so
that they might not suspect what we were about.  The next night we got
under the castle wall, and on the fifth night had got well under the
great hall, for we could hear the men singing and shouting as they sat
at meat above us.  We had then to work very carefully for fear of making
a noise, and when we thought it ready for the assault we took our swords
and shields with us, and Guttorm led the way.  His chief house-carle was
appointed to drive through the floor, while Guttorm and I stood ready to
egg him on and back him up.

"We heard the men above singing and feasting as usual, when suddenly
there was a great silence, for one of the big stones over our heads was
loosened, and they had evidently felt or seen it.  Now was the time
come; so, while the house-carle shovelled off the earth, some of us got
our fingers in about the edge of the stone, and pulled with all our
force.  Suddenly down it came and a man along with it.  We knocked him
on the head at once, and gave a loud huzza as the house-carle sprang up
through the hole, caught a shower of blows on his shield, and began to
lay about him fiercely.  Guttorm was very mad at the carle for going up
