Goodwins and the shore.  It went out in a few seconds, but not before
the master of the tug had taken its bearings and altered his course.  At
the same time signal-guns and rockets were observed, both from the North
sandhead light-vessel and the Gull, and several flaring lights were also
seen burning on or near the Goodwin sands.

On nearing the _Middle Break_, which was easily distinguishable from the
surrounding turmoil by the intensity of its roar as the seas rolled over
it, the coxswain of the lifeboat ordered the sail to be hoisted and the
tow-rope slipped.  Pike, who was a thoroughly intelligent and
sympathetic bowman, had all in readiness; he obeyed the order instantly,
and the boat, as if endued with sudden life, sprang away on its own
account into the broken water.

Broken water! who but a lifeboat-man can conceive what that means?--
except, indeed, those few who have been saved from wreck.  A chaos of
white water, rendered ghostly and grey by darkness.  No green or liquid
water visible anywhere; all froth and fury, with force tremendous
everywhere.  Rushing rivers met by opposing cataracts; bursting against
each other; leaping high in air from the shock; falling back and
whirling away in wild eddies,--seeking rest, but finding none!  Vain
indeed must be our attempt to describe the awful aspect, the mad music,
the fearful violence of "broken water" on the Break!

In such a sea the boat was tossed as if she were a chip; but the gale
gave her speed, and speed gave her quick steering power.  She leaped
over the foam, or dashed through it, or staggered under it, but always
rose again, the men, meanwhile, holding on for life.  Pike was ready in
the bow, with an arm tightly embracing the bollard, or strong post,
round which the cable runs.  The coxswain's figure, towering high in the
stern, with the steering tackles in his hands, leaned forward against a
strong strap or band fixed across the boat to keep him in position.

They made straight for the spot where the flare light had been seen.  At
first darkness and thick spray combined prevented them from seeing
anything, but in a few minutes a dark object was seen looming faintly
against the sky, and the coxswain observed with anxious concern that it
lay not to leeward, but to windward of him.

"Out oars! down with the sail!" he shouted.

His voice was very powerful, but it was swept away, and was only heard
by those nearest to him.  The order was instantly obeyed, however; but
the gale was so heavy and the boat so large that headway could not be
made.  They could see that the wreck was a small vessel on her
beam-ends.  Being to leeward, they could hear despairing cries
distinctly, and four or five human beings were seen clinging to the
side.  The lifeboat-men strained till their sinews well-nigh cracked; it
seemed doubtful whether they had advanced or not, when suddenly an
unusually large wave fell in thunder on the Break; it rushed over the
shallows with a foaming head, caught the boat on its crest and carried
it far away to leeward.

Sail was again made.  A box near the coxswain a feet was opened, and a
blue-light taken out.  There was no difficulty in firing this.  A sharp
stroke on its butt lighted the percussion powder within, and in a moment
the scene was illumined by a ghastly glare, which brought out the blue
and white boat distinctly, and gave corpse-like colour to the faces of
the men.  At the same time it summoned the attendant steamer.

In a few minutes the tug ran down to her; the tow-rope was taken on
board, and away went the brother and sister once more to windward of the
wreck; but now no wreck was to be seen!  They searched round the shoal
in all directions without success, and finally were compelled to come to
the conclusion that the same sea which had carried the boat to leeward
had swept the wreck away.

With sad hearts they now turned towards the Goodwins, but the melancholy
incident they had just witnessed was soon banished from their minds by
the urgent signals for aid still seen flaring in all directions.  For
the nearest of these they made at full speed.  On their way, a dark
object was seen to sweep past them across their stern as if on the wings
of the wind.  It was the Broadstairs lifeboat, which had already done
good service that night, and was bent on doing more.  Similarly occupied
were the lifeboats of Deal, Walmer, and other places along the coast.  A
Deal lugger was also seen.  The hardy beachmen of Kent fear no storm.
They run out in all weathers to succour ships in distress, and much good
service do they accomplish, but their powers are limited.  Like the
steam-tugs, they can hover around the sands in heavy gales, and venture
gingerly near to them; but thus far, and no farther, may they go.  They
cannot, like the noble lifeboats, dash right into the caldron of surf,
and dare the sands and seas to do their worst!

The lifeboat men felt cheered, no doubt, to know that so many able hands
were fighting around them in the same battle, but they had little time
to think on such things; the work in hand claimed their exclusive
attention--as it must now claim ours.

One vessel was seen burning three very large flare lights.  Towards this
the steamer hastened, and when as near as prudence would permit her to
approach the Goodwin sands--something less than quarter of a mile--the
hawser was again slipped, sail was made on the lifeboat, and she once
more entered the broken water alone.

Here, of course, being more exposed, it was still more tremendous than
on the Break.  It was a little after midnight when they reached the
sands, and made the discovery that they were on the wrong hide of them.
The tide was making, however, and in a short time there was sufficient
water to enable the boat to run right over; she struck many times, but,
being tough, received no serious damage.  Soon they drew near the wreck,
and could see that she had sunk completely, and that the crew were
clinging to the jibboom.

When about fifty yards to windward, the anchor was let go, the lifeboat
veered down towards the wreck, and with much difficulty they succeeded
in taking off the whole crew of seven men.  Signalising the tug with
another blue-light, they ran to leeward into deep water, and were again
taken in tow; the saved men being with some difficulty put on board the
tug.  They were Dutchmen; and the poor master of the lost vessel could
find no words sufficiently forcible to express his gratitude to the
coxswain of the lifeboat.  When he afterwards met him on shore, he wrung
his hand warmly, and, with tears in his eyes, promised never to forget
him.  "Me never tinks of you," said he (meaning the reverse), "so long's
I live; me tell the King of Holland!"

It is but just to add that the poor fellow faithfully redeemed his
ill-expressed promise, and that the coxswain of the lifeboat now
possesses a medal presented to him by the King of Holland in
acknowledgment of his services on that occasion.

But the great work of that night still remained to be done.  Not far
from the light-vessel a flare-light was seen burning brightly.  It
seemed to be well tended, and was often renewed.  Towards this the tug
now steered with the little sister in tow.  They soon came near enough
to observe that she was a large ship, going to pieces on the sands.

Slipping the cable once more, the lifeboat gallantly dashed into the
thickest of the fight, and soon got within hail of the wreck.

Then it was that, for the first time, a ray of hope entered the hearts
of the passengers of the luckless Wellington, and then it was that Jim
Welton and Stanley Hall, with several young officers, who had kept the
tar-barrels burning so briskly for so many hours, despite the drenching
seas, sent up a loud thrilling cheer, and announced to the
terror-stricken women and children that _the lifeboat was in sight_!

What a cry for those who had been for three hours dashing on the sands,
expecting every moment that the ship would break up!  The horrors of
their situation were enhanced by the novelty of their sensations!  All
of us can realise to some extent, from hearsay and from paintings, what
is meant by billows bursting high over ships' mast-heads and washing
everything off the decks, but who that has not experienced it can
imagine what it is to see gigantic yards being whipped to and fro as a
light cane might be switched by a strong man, to see top-masts snapping
like pipe-stems, to hear stout ropes cracking like pliant whipcord, and
great sails flapping with thunder-claps or bursting into shreds?  Above
all, who can realise the sensation caused by one's abode being lifted
violently with every surge and dropped again with the crashing weight of
two thousand tons, or being rolled from side to side so that the floor
on which one stands alternates between the horizontal and perpendicular,
while one's frame each time receives a shock that is only too much in
dread harmony with the desperate condition of the mind?

"The lifeboat in sight!"  Who at such a time would not pray God's best
blessing on the lifeboat, on the stalwart men who man it, and on the
noble Society which supports it?

Certain it is that many a prayer of this kind was ejaculated on board
the Wellington that night, while the passengers re-echoed the good news,
and hurriedly went on deck.  But what an awful scene of dreary
desolation presented itself when they got there!  The flares gave forth
just enough light to make darkness visible--ropes, masts, yards, sails,
everything in indescribable confusion, and the sea breaking over all
with a violence that rendered it extremely difficult to maintain a
footing even in the most sheltered position.

Fortunately by this time the vessel had been beaten sufficiently high on
the shoal to prevent the terrible rolling to which she had been at first
subjected; and as the officers and seamen vied with each other in
attentions to the women and children, these latter were soon placed in
comparative security, and awaited with breathless anxiety the arrival of
the boat.

In order to keep the flare-lights burning all kinds of materials had
been sacrificed.  Deluged as they were continually by heavy seas,
nothing but the most inflammable substances would burn.  Hence, when
their tar-barrels were exhausted, Stanley Hall and his assistants got
hold of sheets, table-cloths, bedding, and garments, and saturated these
with paraffine oil, of which, fortunately, there happened to be a large
quantity on board.  They now applied themselves with redoubled diligence
to the construction and keeping alight of these flares, knowing well
that the work which remained to be done before all should be rescued,
was of a nature requiring time as well as care and courage.

On rushed the lifeboat through the broken water.  When almost within
hail, the coxswain heard the roar of an unusually heavy sea rushing
behind him.

"Let go the fore-sheet," he shouted, "and hold on for your lives."

The wave--a billow broken to atoms, yet still retaining all its weight
and motive force--overwhelmed the boat and passed on.  Before she had
quite recovered, another sea of equal size engulfed her, and as she had
been turned broadside on by the first, the second caught her in its
embrace and carried her like the wind bodily to leeward.  Her immense
breadth of beam prevented an upset, and she was finally launched into
shallower water, where the sand had only a few feet of sea above it.
She had been swept away full quarter of a mile in little more than a
minute!  Here the surf was like a boiling caldron, but there was not
depth enough to admit of heavy seas.

The same sea that swept away the boat carried the fore and main masts of
the Wellington by the board, and extinguished all her lights.

The boat drove quite two miles to leeward before the tug got hold of her
again.  To have returned to the wreck against wind and tide alone, we
need scarcely repeat, would have been impossible, but with the aid of
the tug she was soon towed to her old position and again cast loose.

Once more she rushed into the fight and succeeded in dropping anchor a
considerable distance to windward of the wreck, from which point she
veered down under her lee, but so great was the mass of broken masts,
spars, and wreckage--nothing being now left but parts of the mizzen and
bowsprit--that the coxswain was obliged to pay out 117 fathoms of cable
to keep clear of it all.

The difficulty and danger of getting the boat alongside now became
apparent to the people on the wreck, many of whom had never dreamed of
such impediments before, and their hopes sank unreasonably low, just as,
before, they had been raised unduly high.

With great difficulty the boat got near to the port quarter of the ship,
and Pike stood up ready in the bow with a line, to which was attached a
loaded cane, something like a large life-preserver.

"Heave!" shouted the coxswain.

The bowman made a deliberate and splendid cast; the weighted cane fell
on the deck of the ship, and was caught by Jim Welton, who attached a
hawser to it.  This was drawn into the boat, and in a few seconds she
was alongside.  But she was now in great danger!  The wild waters that
heaved, surged, and leaped under the vessel's lee threatened to dash the
boat in pieces against her every moment, and it was only by the
unremitting and strenuous exertions of the men with boat-hooks, oars,
and fenders that this was prevented.  Now the boat surged up into the
chains as if about to leap on board the ship; anon it sank into a gulf
of spray, or sheered wildly to leeward, but by means of the hawser and
cable, and a "spring" attached to the latter, she was so handled that
one and another of the crew of the wreck were taken into her.

The first saved was a little child.  It was too small and delicate to be
swung over the side by a rope, so the captain asked Jim Welton, as being
the most agile man in the ship and possessed of superabundant animal
courage, to take it in his arms and leap on board.  Jim agreed at once,
handed over the care of his flare-lights to one of the men, and prepared
for action.  The poor child, which was about a year old, clung to its
mother's neck with terror, and the distracted woman--a soldier's widow--
could scarce be prevailed on to let the little one out of her arms.

"Oh, let me go with him," she pleaded most earnestly, "he is all that is
left to me."

"You shall follow immediately; delay may be death," said the captain,
kindly, as he drew the child gently but firmly from her grasp.

It was securely bound to Jim's broad bosom by means of a shawl.
Watching his opportunity when the boat came surging up on the crest of a
billow almost to his feet, and was about to drop far down into the
trough of the sea, the young sailor sprang from the side and was caught
in the outstretched arms of the lifeboat men.

It had occurred to Stanley Hall, just before this happened, that there
was every probability of some of the passengers falling overboard during
the process of being transferred to the boat.  Stanley was of a somewhat
eccentric turn of mind, and seldom allowed his thoughts to dissipate
without taking action of some kind.  He therefore got into the mizzen
chains and quietly fastened a rope round his waist, the other end of
which he tied to a stanchion.

"You'll get crushed by the boat there," cried the captain, who observed
him.

"Perhaps not," was the reply.

He stood there and watched Jim Welton as he leaped.  The mother of the
child, unable to restrain herself, climbed on the bulwarks of the
vessel.  Just as she did so the boat surged up again,--so close that it
required but a short step to get into her.  Some of the passengers
availed themselves of the chance--the poor widow among them.  She sprang
with a cry of joy, for she saw her child's face at the moment as they
unbound him from Jim's breast, but she sprang short.  Little wonder that
a woman should neglect to make due allowance for the quick swooping of
the boat!  Next moment she was in the boiling foam.  A moment later and
she was in Stanley Hall's grasp, and both were swept violently to
leeward, but the rope brought them up.  Despite darkness and turmoil the
quick-eyed coxswain and his mate had noted the incident.  Pike payed out
the hawser, the coxswain eased off the spring; away went the boat, and
next moment Pike had Stanley by the hair.  Short was the time required
for their strong arms to pull him and his burden in-board; and, oh! it
was a touching sight to witness the expressions of the anxious faces
that were turned eagerly towards the boat, and glared pale and ghastly
in the flaring light, as her sturdy crew hauled slowly up, hand over
hand, and got once more under the vessel's lee.

No sooner were they within reach than another impatient passenger leaped
overboard.  This was Jim's faithful dog Neptune!  Watching his time with
the intelligence of a human being, he sprang, with much greater
precision and vigour than any human being could have done, and,
alighting on Pike's shoulders, almost drove that stout boatman into the
bottom of the boat.

Soon the boat was as full as it could hold.  All the women and children
had been got into her, and many of the male passengers, so that there
was no room to move; still there remained from twenty to thirty people
to be rescued.  Seeing this, Jim seized Neptune by the neck and flung
him back into the wreck.  Catching a rope that hung over the side, he
also swung himself on board, saying,--"You and I must sink or swim
together, Nep!  Shove off, lads, and come back as soon as you can."

The hawser was slipped as he spoke; the lifeboat was hauled slowly but
steadily to windward up to her anchor.  Tons of water poured over her
every moment, but ran through her discharging tubes, and, deeply loaded
though she was, she rose buoyant from each immersion like an invincible
sea-monster.

When the anchor was reached, a small portion of the foresail was set,
and then, cutting the cable with one blow of a hatchet, away they went
like the scudding foam right over the boiling shallows on the spit of
sand.

"Hand out a blue-light there," cried the coxswain.  A sharp blow caused
the blue-fire to flare up and shed a light that fell strong as that of
the full moon on the mingled grave, pale, stern, and terrified faces in
the lifeboat.

"Safe!" muttered one of the crew.

"Safe?" was echoed in surprise, no doubt, from several fluttering
hearts.

As well might that have been said to the hapless canoe-man rushing over
the Falls of Niagara as to the inexperienced ones there, while they
gazed, horror-struck, on the tumult of mad waters in that sudden blaze
of unearthly light.  Their faith in a trustworthy and intelligent
boatman was not equal to their faith in their own eyes, backed by
ignorance!  But who will blame them for lack of faith in the
circumstances?  Nevertheless, they _were_ safe.  The watchful master of
the tug,--laying-to off the deadly banks, now noting the compass, now
casting the lead, anon peering into the wild storm,--saw the light, ran
down to it, took the rescued ones on board, and, having received from
the coxswain the information that there were "more coming," sent them
down into his little cabin, there to be refreshed and comforted, while
