different from the dust-stained cavalier who the day before passed over
the desert plain.  Now he appears in a gorgeous laced uniform, with
lancer cap and plume, gold cords and aiguillettes dangling adown his
breast; for he has this morning made his toilet with care, in
consideration of the company in which he intends travelling.

Neither Hamersley nor the hunter hold their eyes long upon him; they are
both looking for another individual--each his own.  These soon make
their appearance, their white dresses distinguishable amid the darker
uniforms.  During the march their position has been changed.  They are
now near the centre of the troop, the young lady upon her own mare
Lolita, while the Indian damsel is mounted on a mule.  They are free,
both hand and limb, but a file in front, with another behind, have
charge of them.  Farther rearward is another group, more resembling
captives.  This is composed of three men upon mules, fast bound to
saddle and stirrup, two of them having their arms pinioned behind their
backs.  Their animals are led each by a trooper who rides before.  The
two about whose security such precaution has been taken are Don Valerian
and the doctor, the third, with his arms free, is Chico.  His
fellow-servant Manuel, also on mule-back, is following not far behind,
but in his attitude or demeanour there is nothing to tell of the
captive.  If at times he looks gloomy, it is when he reflects upon his
black treason and infamous ingratitude.  Perhaps he has repented, or
deems the prospect not so cheerful as expected.  After all, what will be
his reward?  He has ruined his master and many others beside, but this
will not win him the love of Conchita.

The spectators feel somewhat relieved as Colonel Miranda comes in sight.
Still more as the march brings him nearer, and it can be seen that he
sits his horse with no sign of having received any injury; and neither
has Don Prospero.  The elaborate fastenings are of themselves evidences
that no hurt has happened to them.  It has been a capture without
resistance, as their friends hoped it would, their fears having been of
a conflict to end in the death of the exiles.

One by one, and two by two, the troops come filing on, till the leader
is opposite the spot where the two spectators stand crouching among the
trees.  These are dwarf cedars, and give the best cover for concealment.
Thoroughly screened by their thickly-set boughs and dense dark foliage,
Hamersley and the hunter command a clear view of everything below.  The
distance to the summit of the pass is about two hundred yards in a
slanting direction.

As the lancer colonel approaches the spot where the picket is posted, he
halts and gives an order.  It is for the guard to fall in along with the
rest of the troop.

At this moment a similar thought is in the minds of the two men whose
eyes are upon him from above.  Wilder is the first to give expression to
it.  He does so in an undertone,--

"Ef we ked trust the carry o' our rifles, Frank."

"I was thinking of it," is the rejoinder, equally earnest.  "We can't
I'm afraid it's too far."

"I weesh I only had my old gun; she'd a sent a bullet furrer than that.
A blue pill inter his stomach 'ud simplerfy matters consid'rable.  'Tall
events it 'ud git your gurl out o' danger, and mayhap all on 'em.  I
b'lieve the hul clanjamfery o' them spangled jay birds 'ud run at
hearin' a shot.  Then we ked gie 'em a second, and load an' fire half a
dozen times afore they could mount up hyar--if they'd dar to try it.
Ah! it's too fur.  The distance in these hyar high purairas is desprit
deceivin'.  Durned pity we kedn't do it.  I fear we can't."

"If we should miss, then--"

"Things 'ud only be wuss.  I reck'n we'd better let'm slide now, and
foller arter.  Thar boun' straight for the Del Norte; but whether or no,
we kin eesy pick up thar trail."

Hamersley still hesitates, his fingers alternately tightening on his
gun, and then relaxing.  His thoughts are flowing in a quick current--
too quick for cool deliberation.  He knows he can trust his own aim, as
well as that of his comrade.  But the distance is doubtful, and the
shots might fall short.  Then it would be certain death to them; for the
situation is such that there could be no chance to escape, with fifty
horsemen to pursue, themselves mounted upon mules, and therewith be
reached without difficulty.  They might defend themselves on the mound,
but not for long.  Two against fifty, they would soon be overpowered.
After all, it will be better to let the troop pass on.  So counsels the
ex-Ranger, pointing out that the prisoners will be carried on to New
Mexico--to Albuquerque, of course.  He and his comrade are Americans,
and not proscribed there.  They can follow without fear.  Some better
opportunity may arise for rescuing the captives.  Their prison may offer
this; and from what they have heard of such places it is probable
enough.  A golden key is good for opening the door of any gaol in
Mexico.

Only one thought hinders Hamersley from at once giving way to this
reasoning--the thought of his betrothed being in such company--under
such an escort, worse than unprotected!

Once more he scans the distance that separates him from the soldiers,
his gun tightly grasped.

Could their colonel but suspect his proximity at that moment, and what
is passing through his mind, he would sit with little confidence in his
saddle, bearing himself less pompously.

Caution, backed by the ex-Ranger's counsel, asserts its sway, and the
Kentuckian relaxes his grasp on the gun, dropping its butt to the
ground.

The last files, having cleared the gap, are formed into a more compact
order; when, the bugle again sounding "Forward," the march is resumed,
the troop striking off over the plain in the direction whence it came.



CHAPTER FIFTY FOUR.

A MAN AND A MULE.

Carefully as ever, Hamersley and the Texan keep to their place of
concealment.  They dare not do otherwise.  The slope by which they
ascended is treeless, the cedars only growing upon the summit.  The
gorge, too, by which they went up, and at the bottom of which their
mules were left, debouches westwardly on the plain--the direction in
which the lancers have ridden off.  Any of these chancing to look back
would be sure to catch sight of them if they show themselves outside the
sheltering scrub.  They have their apprehensions about their animals.
It is a wonder these have not been seen by the soldiers.  Although
standing amid large boulders, a portion of the bodies of both are
visible from the place mentioned.  Fortunately for their owners, their
colour closely resembled the rocks, and for which the troopers may have
mistaken them.  More probably, in their impatience to proceed upon the
return route, none of them turn their eyes in that direction.

An equally fortunate circumstance is the fact of the mules being
muffled.  Otherwise they might make themselves heard.  Not a sound,
either snort or hinney, escape them; not so much as the stamping of a
hoof.  They stand patient and silent, as if they themselves had fear of
the men who are foes to their masters.

For a full hour after the lancers have left these stay crouching behind
the cedars.  Even an hour does not take the troop out of sight.
Cumbered with their captives, they march at slow, measured pace--a walk.
Moreover, the pellucid atmosphere of the Staked Plain makes objects
visible at double the ordinary distance.  They are yet but five miles
from the buttes, and, looking back, could see a man at their base, more
surely one mounted.

The two who are on the summit allow quite twenty minutes more to elapse
before they think of leaving it.  Then, deeming it safe, they prepare to
descend.

Still they are in no haste.  Their intention is to follow the cavalcade,
but by no means to overtake it.  Nor do they care to keep it in sight,
but the contrary, since that might beget danger to themselves.  They
anticipate no difficulty in taking up the trail of a troop like that
Walt confidently declares he could do so were he blindfolded as their
mules, adding, in characteristic phraseology, "I ked track the skunks by
thar smell."

Saying this he proposes a "bit o' brakwist," a proposition his comrade
assents to with eagerness.  They have not eaten since dinner of the day
before, their provisions having been left below, and the sharp morning
air has given additional edge to their appetites.  This at length draws
them down to their mules.

Taking off the _tapados_ to relieve the poor animals, who have somewhat
suffered from being so scurvily treated, they snatch a hasty repast from
their haversacks, then light their pipes for a smoke preparatory to
setting forth.  It is not yet time, for the soldiers are still in sight.
They will wait till the last lance pennon sinks below the horizon.

Whilst smoking, with eyes bent upon the receding troop, a sound salutes
their ears, causing both to start.  Fortunately they draw back behind
one of the boulders, and there remain listening.  What they heard was
certainly a hoofstroke, whether of horse or mule--not of either of their
own; these are by their sides, while the sound that has startled them
appears to proceed from the other side of the mound, as if from the
summit of the pass leading up out of the valley.

They hear it again.  Surely it is in the gorge that goes down, or at the
head of it.

Their conjecture is that one of the lancers has lagged behind, and is
now _en route_ to overtake the troop.

If it be thus what course are they to pursue?  He may look back and see
themselves or their animals, then gallop on and report to his comrades.

'Twould be a sinister episode, and they must take steps to prevent it.

They do so by hastily restoring the _tapados_ and leading the mules into
a _cul-de-sac_, where they will be safe from observation.

Again they hear the sound, still resembling a hoofstroke, but not of an
animal making way over the ground in walk, trot, or gallop, but as one
that refused to advance, and was jibbing.

Between them and it there seems great space, a projecting spur of the
butte from which they have just descended.  By climbing the ridge for a
score of yards or so they can see into the gorge that goes down to the
valley.

As the trampling still appears steadfast to the same point, their alarm
gives place to curiosity, then impatience.  Yielding to this, they
scramble up the ridge that screens the kicking animal from their view.

Craning their heads over its crest, they see that which, instead of
causing further fear, rather gives them joy.

Just under their eyes, in the gap of the gorge, a man is struggling with
a mule.  It is a contest of very common occurrence.  The animal is
saddled, and the man is making attempts to get his leg over the saddle.
The hybrid is restive, and will not permit him to put foot in the
stirrup.  Ever as he approaches it shies back, rearing and pitching to
the full length and stretch of the bridle-rein.

Soon as seeing him, they upon the ridge recognise the man thus
vexatiously engaged.  He is the peon Manuel.

"The durned scoundrel," hissed Walt, through clenched teeth.  "What's
kep him ahint, I wonder?"

Hamersley responds not--he, too, conjecturing.

"By Jehorum!" continues the hunter, "it looks like he'd stayed back
apurpose.  Thar ked been nothin' to hinder him to go on 'long wi' the
rest.  The questyun air what he's stayed for.  Some trick o' trezun,
same as he's did afore."

"Something of the kind, I think," rejoins Hamersley, still considering.

"Wal, he's wantin' to get on bad enuf now, if the mule 'ud only let him.
Say, Frank, shell I put a payriud to their conflict by sendin' a bit o'
lead that way, I kin rub the varmint out by jest pressin' my finger on
this trigger."

"Do you mean the man or the mule?"

"The man, in coorse.  For what shed I shoot the harmless critter that's
been carryin' him?  Say the word, an' I'll send him to kingdom come in
the twinklin' o' a goat's tail.  I've got sight on him.  Shall I draw
the trigger?"

"For your life, don't look yonder!  They're not yet out of sight.  They
might see the smoke, perhaps hear the crack.  Comrade, you're taking
leave of your senses!"

"Contemplatin' that ugly anymal below air enough to make me.  It a'most
druv me out o' my mind to think o' his black ungratefulness.  Now,
seein' hisself through the sight of a rifle 'ithin good shootin'
distance, shurely ye don't intend we shud let him go!"

"Certainly not.  That would be ruin to ourselves.  We must either kill
or capture him.  But it must be done without noise, or at least without
firing a shot.  They're not far enough off yet."

"How d'ye devise, then?"

"Let's back to our mules, mount, and get round the ledge.  We must head
him before he gets out of the gap.  Come on!"

Both scramble back down the slope quicker than they ascended it, knowing
there is good reason for haste--the best for their lives--every thing
may depend on capturing the peon.  Should he see them, and get away, it
will be worse both for them and their dear ones.

In two minutes the mules are again unmuffled and mounted.  In two more
they are entering the gap from outside, their masters on their backs.

These, spurring the animals to speed, enter the gorge, their eyes
everywhere.  They reach the spot where the peon was so late seen,
striving to get into his saddle.  They see the turf torn up by the
hybrid's hoofs, but no man, no mule.



CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE.

A LAGGER LAGGED.

The surprise of the two men is but momentary; for there can be no
mystery about the peon's disappearance.  He has simply gone down the
ravine, and back into the valley.  Is he on return to the house, which
they know is now untenanted, and, if so, with what intent?  Has he
become so attached to the place as to intend prolonging his sojourn
there? or has something arisen to make him discontented with the company
he has been keeping, and so determined to get quit of it by hanging
behind?

Something of this sort was on their minds as they last saw him over the
crest of the ridge.  While in conflict with his mule, he was ever and
anon turning his eyes towards the point where the soldiers must have
been last seen by him; for from the gap in which he was these were no
longer visible.  Both Hamersley and Wilder had noticed an uneasy air
about him at the time, attributing it to his vexation at being delayed
by the obstinacy of the animal and the fear of being left behind.  Now
that he had mounted and taken the back-track, the cause must be
different.

"Thar's somethin' queery in what the coyoats doin'," is Walt's
half-soliloquised observation; adding, "Though what he's arter tain't so
eezy to tell.  He must be tired o' their kumpany, and want to get shet
o' it.  He'll be supposin' they ain't likely to kum back arter him; an'
I reck'n they won't, seein' they've got all out o' him they need care
for.  Still, what ked he do stayin' hyar by himself?"

Walt is still ignorant of the peon's partiality for his own sweetheart.
He has had a suspicion of something, but not the deep, dire passion that
burns in the Indian's heart.  Aware of this, he would not dwell on the
probability of the man having any intention, any more than himself,
remain behind now that Conchita is gone.

"Arter all," he continues, still speaking in half soliloquy, "I don't
think stayin's his game.  There's somethin' else at the bottom on't."

"Can Uraga have sent him back on any errand?"

"No, that ain't it eyther.  More like he's good on a errand o' his own.
I reckon I ken guess it now.  The traitur intends turnin' thief as
well--doin' a leetle bit o' stealin' along wi' his treason.  Ye
remember, Frank, thar war a goodish grit o' valleyables in the shanty--
the saynorita's jeweltry an' the like.  Jest possyble, in the skrimmage,
whiles they war making capter o' thar prisoners, this ugly varmint tuk
devantage o' the confusion to secret a whun o' thar gimcracks, an's now
goed back arter 'em."

"It seems probable enough.  Still, he might have some other errand, and
may not go on as far as the house.  In which case, we may look for his
return this way at any moment.  It will never do for us to start upon
their trail, leaving him coming in our rear.  He would see us, and in
the night might slip past and give them warning they were followed."

"All that air true.  We must grup him now."

"Should we go down after him, or stay here till he comes up?"

"Neythur o' the two ways'll do.  He moutn't kum along no time.  If he's
got plunder he won't try to overtake the sogers, but wait till they're
well out o' his way.  He knows the road to the Del Norte, and kin travel
it by hisself."

"Then we should go down after him."

"Only one o' us.  If we both purceed to the shanty there's be a chance
o' passin' him on the way.  He mout be in the timmer, an', seein' us,
put back out hyar, an' so head us.  There'd no need o' both for the
capterin' sech a critter as that.  I'll fetch him on his marrowbones by
jest raisin' this rifle.  Tharfor, s'pose you stay hyar an' guard this
gap, while I go arter an' grup him.  I'm a'most sartin he'll be at the
shanty.  Anyhow, he's in the trap, and can't get out till he's hed my
claws roun' the scruff o' his neck an' my thumb on his thropple."

"Don't kill him if you can help it.  True he deserves to die; but we may
want a word with him first.  He may give information that will
afterwards prove useful to us."

"Don't be afeared, Frank.  I shan't hurt a har o' his head, unless he
reesists, then I must kripple him a bit.  But he ain't like to show
fight, such a coyoat as he!"

"All right, Walt.  I'll wait for you."

"You won't hev long.  Ye'd better take kiver back o' them big stones to
make sure o' not bein' seen by him, shed he by any chance slip past me.
An' keep yur ears open.  Soon as I've treed him I'll gie a whistle or
two.  When ye hear that ye can kim down."

After delivering this chapter of suggestions and injunctions, the
ex-Ranger heads his mule down the pass, and is soon lost to his
comrade's sight as he turns off along the ledge of the cliff.

Hamersley, himself inclined to caution, follows the direction last
given, and rides back behind one of the boulders.  Keeping in the
saddle, he sits in silent meditation.  Sad thoughts alone occupy his
mind.  His prospects are gloomy indeed; his forecast of the future dark
and doubtful.  He has but little hope of being able to benefit Don
Valerian Miranda, and cannot be sure of rescueing his sister--his own
betrothed--in time to avert that terrible catastrophe which he knows to
be impending over her.  He does not give it a name--he scarce dares let
it take shape in his thoughts.

Nearly half-an-hour is spent in this painful reverie.  He is aroused
from it by a sound which ascends out of the valley.  With a start of joy
he recognises the signal his comrade promised to send him.  The whistle
is heard in three distinct "wheeps," rising clear above the hoarser
sibillations of the cascades.  From the direction he can tell it comes
from the neighbourhood of the house; but, without waiting to reflect
whither, he spurs his mule out, and rides down the pass as rapidly as
possible.

On reaching the level below he urges the animal to a gallop, and soon
arrives at the ranche.

There, as expected, he finds his companion, with the peon a captive.

The two, with their mules, form a tableau in front of the untenanted
dwelling.

The ex-Ranger is standing in harangue attitude, slightly bent forward,
his body propped by his rifle, the butt of which rests upon the ground.
At his feet is the Indian, lying prostrate, his ankles lashed together
with a piece of cowhide rope, his wrists similarly secured.

"I ked catched him a leetle sooner," says Walt to his comrade, coming
up, "but I war kewrious to find out what he war arter, an' waited to
watch him.  That's the explication o' it."

He points to a large bag lying near, with its contents half poured out--
a varied collection of articles of bijouterie and virtu, resembling a
cornucopia; spilling its fruits.  Hamersley recognises them as part of
the _penates_ of his late host.

"Stolen goods," continues Walt, "that's what they air.  An' stole from a
master he's basely betrayed, may be to death.  A mistress, besides,
that's been too kind to him.  Darnation! that's a tortiss-shell comb as
belonged to my Concheeter, an' a pair o' slippers I ken swar wur here.
What shed we do to him?"

"What I intended," responds Hamersley, assuming a curious air; "first
make him confess--tell all he knows.  When we've got his story out of
him we can settle that next."

The confession is not very difficult to extract.  With Wilder's
bowie-knife gleaming before his eyes, its blade within six inches of his
breast, the wretch reveals all that has passed since the moment of his
first meditating treason.  He even makes declaration of the motive,
knowing the nobility of the men who threatened him, and thinking by this
means to obtain pardon.

To strengthen his chances he goes still farther, turning traitor against
him to whom he had sold himself--Uraga.  He has overheard a conversation
between the Mexican colonel and his adjutant, Lieutenant Roblez.  It was
to the effect that they do not intend taking their prisoners all the way
back to Albuquerque.  How they mean to dispose of them the peon does not
know.

He had but half heard the dialogue relating to Don Valerian and the
doctor.

The female prisoners!  Can he tell anything of what is intended with
them?  Though not in these terms, the question is asked with this
earnestness.

The peon is unable to answer it.  He does not think they are prisoners--
certainly not Conchita.  She is only being taken back along with her
mistress.  About the senorita, his mistress, he heard some words pass
between Uraga and Roblez, but without comprehending their signification.

In his own heart Hamersley can supply it--does so with dark, dire
misgivings.



CHAPTER FIFTY SIX.

"THE NORTE."

Westward, across the Liana Estacado, Uraga and his lancers continue on
their return march.  The troop, going by twos, is again drawn out in an
elongated line, the arms and accoutrements of the soldiers glancing in
the sun, while the breeze floats back the pennons of their lances.  The
men prisoners are a few files from the rear, a file on each flank
guarding them.  The women are at the head, alongside the guide and
sub-lieutenant, who has charge of the troop.

For reasons of his own the lancer colonel does not intrude his company
on the captives.  He intends doing so in his own time.  It has not yet
come.  Nor does he take any part in directing the march of the men.
That duty has been entrusted to the _alferez_; he and Roblez riding
several hundred paces in advance of the troop.

He has thus isolated himself for the purpose of holding conversation
with his adjutant, unembarrassed by any apprehension of being overheard.

