  an idea.  Anything but an easy life, to my mind.  Ah! there's nothing
  like roughing it, Harry, my boy.  Why, I am thriving on it--growing
  like a young walrus, eating like a Canadian voyageur, and sleeping
  like a top!  This is a splendid country for sport, and as our
  _bourgeois_ [the gentleman in charge of an establishment is always
  designated the bourgeois] has taken it into his head that I am a good
  hand at making friends with the Indians, he has sent me out on several
  expeditions, and afforded me some famous opportunities of seeing life
  among the redskins.  There is a talk just now of establishing a new
  outpost in this district, so if I succeed in persuading the governor
  to let me accompany the party, I shall have something interesting to
  write about in my next letter.  By the way, I wrote to you a month
  ago, by two Indians who said they were going to the missionary station
  at Norway House.  Did you ever get it?  There is a hunter here just
  now who goes by the name of Jacques Caradoc.  He is a first-rater--can
  do anything, in a wild way, that lies within the power of mortal man,
  and is an inexhaustible anecdote-teller, in a quiet way.  He and I
  have been out buffalo-hunting two or three times, and it would have
  done your heart good, Harry, my dear boy, to have seen us scouring
  over the prairie together on two big-boned Indian horses--regular
  trained buffalo-runners, that didn't need the spur to urge, nor the
  rein to guide them, when once they caught sight of the black cattle,
  and kept a sharp look-out for badger-holes, just as if they had been
  reasonable creatures.  The first time I went out I had several rather
  ugly falls, owing to my inexperience.  The fact is, that if a man has
  never run buffaloes before, he's sure to get one or two upsets, no
  matter how good a horseman he may be.  And that monster Jacques,
  although he's the best fellow I ever met with for a hunting companion,
  always took occasion to grin at my mishaps, and gravely to read me a
  lecture to the effect that they were all owing to my own clumsiness or
  stupidity; which, you will acknowledge, was not calculated to restore
  my equanimity.

  The very first run we had cost me the entire skin of my nose, and
  converted that feature into a superb Roman for the next three weeks.
  It happened thus.  Jacques and I were riding over the prairie in
  search of buffaloes.  The place was interspersed with sundry knolls
  covered with trees, slips and belts of woodland, with ponds scattered
  among them, and open sweeps of the plain here and there; altogether a
  delightful country to ride through.  It was a clear early morning, so
  that our horses were fresh and full of spirit.  They knew, as well as
  we ourselves did, what we were out for, and it was no easy matter to
  restrain them.  The one I rode was a great long-legged beast, as like
  as possible to that abominable kangaroo that nearly killed me at Red
  River; as for Jacques, he was mounted on a first-rate charger.  I
  don't know how it is, but somehow or other everything about Jacques,
  or belonging to him, or in the remotest degree connected with him, is
  always first-rate!  He generally owns a first-rate horse, and if he
  happens by any unlucky chance to be compelled to mount a bad one, it
  immediately becomes another animal.  He seems to infuse some of his
  own wonderful spirit into it!  Well, as Jacques and I curvetted along,
  skirting the low bushes at the edge of a wood, out burst a whole herd
  of buffaloes.  Bang went Jacques's gun, almost before I had winked to
  make sure that I saw rightly, and down fell the fattest of them all,
  while the rest tossed up their tails, heels, and heads in one grand
  whirl of indignant amazement, and scoured away like the wind.  In a
  moment our horses were at full stretch after them, on their _own_
  account entirely, and without any reference to _us_.  When I recovered
  my self-possession a little, I threw forward my gun and fired; but
  owing to my endeavouring to hold the reins at the same time, I nearly
  blew off one of my horse's ears, and only knocked up the dust about
  six yards ahead of us!  Of course Jacques could not let this pass
  unnoticed.  He was sitting quietly loading his gun, as cool as a
  cucumber, while his horse was dashing forward at full stretch, with
  the reins hanging loosely on his neck.

  "Ah, Mister Charles," said he, with the least possible grin on his
  leathern visage, "that was not well done.  You should never hold the
  reins when you fire, nor try to put the gun to your shoulder.  It an't
  needful.  The beast'll look arter itself, if it's a riglar
  buffalo-runner; any ways, holdin' the reins is of no manner of use.  I
  once know'd a gentleman that came out here to see the buffalo-huntin'.
  He was a good enough shot in his way, an' a first-rate rider.  But he
  was full o' queer notions: he _would_ load his gun with the ramrod in
  the riglar way, instead o' doin' as we do, tumblin' in a drop powder,
  spittin' a ball out your mouth down the muzzle, and hittin' the stock
  on the pommel of the saddle to send it home.  And he had them
  miserable things--the _somethin'_ 'cussion-caps, and used to fiddle
  away with them while we were knockin' over the cattle in all
  directions.  Moreover, he had a notion that it was altogether wrong to
  let go his reins even for a moment, and so, what between the ramrod
  and the 'cussion-caps and the reins, he was worse than the greenest
  clerk that ever came to the country.  He gave it up in despair at
  last, after lamin' two horses, and finished off by runnin' after a big
  bull, that turned on him all of a suddent, crammed its head and horns
  into the side of his horse, and sent the poor fellow head over heels
  on the green grass.  He wasn't much the worse for it, but his fine
  double-barrelled gun was twisted into a shape that would almost have
  puzzled an Injin to tell what it was."  Well, Harry, all the time that
  Jacques was telling me this we were gaining on the buffaloes, and at
  last we got quite close to them, and as luck would have it, the very
  thing that happened to the amateur sportsman happened to me.  I went
  madly after a big bull in spite of Jacques's remonstrances, and just
  as I got alongside of him up went his tail (a sure sign that his anger
  was roused), and round he came, head to the front, stiff as a rock; my
  poor charger's chest went right between his horns, and, as a matter of
  course, I continued the race upon _nothing_, head first, for a
  distance of about thirty yards, and brought up on the bridge of my
  nose.  My poor dear father used to say I was a bull-headed rascal,
  and, upon my word, I believe he was more literally correct than he
  imagined; for although I fell with a fearful crash, head first, on the
  hard plain, I rose up immediately, and in a few minutes was able to
  resume the chase again.  My horse was equally fortunate, for although
  thus brought to a sudden stand while at full gallop, he wheeled about,
  gave a contemptuous flourish with his heels, and cantered after
  Jacques, who soon caught him again.  My head bothered me a good deal
  for some time after this accident, and swelled up till my eyes became
  almost undistinguishable; but a few weeks put me all right again.  And
  who do you think this man Jacques is?  You'd never guess.  He's the
  trapper whom Redfeather told us of long ago, and whose wife was killed
  by the Indians.  He and Redfeather have met, and are very fond of each
  other.  How often in the midst of these wild excursions have my
  thoughts wandered to you, Harry!  The fellows I meet with here are all
  kind-hearted, merry companions, but none like yourself.  I sometimes
  say to Jacques, when we become communicative to each other beside the
  camp-fire, that my earthly felicity would be perfect if I had Harry
  Somerville here; and then I think of Kate, my sweet, loving sister
  Kate, and feel that, even although I had you with me, there would
  still be something wanting to make things perfect.  Talking of Kate,
  by the way, I have received a letter from her, the first sheet of
  which, as it speaks of mutual Red River friends, I herewith enclose.
  Pray keep it safe, and return per first opportunity.  We've loads of
  furs here and plenty of deer-stalking, not to mention galloping on
  horseback on the plains in summer and dog-sledging in winter.  Alas!
  my poor friend, I fear that it is rather selfish in me to write so
  feelingly about my agreeable circumstances, when I know you are slowly
  dragging out your existence at that melancholy place York Fort; but
  believe me, I sympathise with you, and I hope earnestly that you will
  soon be appointed to more genial scenes.  I have much, very much, to
  tell you yet, but am compelled to reserve it for a future epistle, as
  the packet which is to convey this is on the point of being closed.

  Adieu, my dear Harry, and wherever you may happen to pitch your tent,
  always bear in kindly remembrance your old friend, CHARLES KENNEDY.

The letter was finished, but Harry did not cease to hold intercourse
with his friend.  With his head resting on his two hands and his elbows
on the table, he sat long, silently gazing on the signature, while his
mind revelled in the past, the present, and the future.  He bounded over
the wilderness that lay between him and the beautiful plains of the
Saskatchewan.  He seized Charley round the neck, and hugged and wrestled
with him as in days of yore.  He mounted an imaginary charger, and swept
across the plains along with him; listened to anecdotes innumerable from
Jacques, attacked thousands of buffaloes, singled out scores of wild
bulls, pitched over horses' heads and alighted precisely on the bridge
of his nose, always in close proximity to his old friend.  Gradually his
mind returned to its prison-house, and his eye fell on Kate's letter,
which he picked up and began to read.--It ran thus:--

  MY DEAR, DEAR, DARLING CHARLEY,--I cannot tell you how much my heart
  has yearned to see you, or hear from you, for many long, long months
  past.  Your last delightful letter, which I treasure up as the most
  precious object I possess, has indeed explained to me how utterly
  impossible it was to have written a day sooner than you did; but that
  does not comfort me a bit, or make those weary packets more rapid and
  frequent in their movements, or the time that passes between the
  periods of hearing from you less dreary and anxious.  God bless and
  protect you, my darling, in the midst of all the dangers that surround
  you.  But I did not intend to begin this letter by murmuring, so pray
  forgive me, and I shall try to atone for it by giving you a minute
  account of everybody here about whom you are interested.  Our beloved
  father and mother, I am thankful to say, are quite well.  Papa has
  taken more than ever to smoking since you went away.  He is seldom out
  of the summer-house in the garden now, where I very frequently go, and
  spend hours together in reading to and talking with him.  He very
  often speaks of you, and I am certain that he misses you far more than
  we expected, although I think he cannot miss you nearly so much as I
  do.  For some weeks past, indeed ever since we got your last letter,
  papa was engaged all the forenoon in some mysterious work, for he used
  to lock himself up in the summer-house--a thing he never did before.
  One day I went there at my usual time, and instead of having to wait
  till he should unlock the door, I found it already open, and entered
  the room, which was so full of smoke that I could hardly see.  I found
  papa writing at a small table, and the moment he heard my footstep he
  jumped up with a fierce frown and shouted, "Who's there?" in that
  terrible voice that he used to speak in long ago when angry with his
  men, but which he has almost quite given up for some time past.  He
  never speaks to me, as you know very well, but in the kindest tones,
  so you may imagine what a dreadful fright I got for a moment; but it
  was only for a moment, because the instant he saw that it was me his
  dear face changed, and he folded me in his arms, saying, "Ah, Kate,
  forgive me, my darling!  I did not know it was you, and I thought I
  had locked the door, and was angry at being so unceremoniously
  interrupted."  He then told me he was just finishing a letter of
  advice to you, and going up to the table, pushed the papers hurriedly
  into a drawer.  As he did so I guessed what had been his mysterious
  occupation, for he seemed to have covered _quires_ of paper with the
  closest writing.  Ah, Charley, you're a lucky fellow to be able to
  extort such long letters from our dear father.  You know how difficult
  he finds it to write even the shortest note, and you remember his old
  favourite expression, "I would rather skin a wild buffalo bull alive
  than write a long letter."  He deserves long ones in return, Charley;
  but I need not urge you on that score--you are an excellent
  correspondent.  Mamma is able to go out every day now for a drive in
  the prairie.  She was confined to the house for nearly three weeks
  last month, with some sort of illness that the doctor did not seem to
  understand, and at one time I was much frightened, and very, very
  anxious about her, she became so weak.  It would have made your heart
  glad to have seen the tender way in which papa nursed her through the
  illness.  I had fancied that he was the very last man in the world to
  make a sick-nurse, so bold and quick in his movements, and with such a
  loud, gruff voice--for it _is_ gruff, although very sweet at the same
  time.  But the moment he began to tend mamma he spoke more softly even
  than dear Mr Addison does, and he began to walk about the house on
  tiptoe, and persevered so long in this latter that all his moccasins
  began to be worn out at the toes, while the heels remained quite
  strong.  I begged of him often not to take so much trouble, as _I_ was
  naturally the proper nurse for mamma; but he wouldn't hear of it, and
  insisted on carrying breakfast, dinner, and tea to her, besides giving
  her all her medicine.  He was for ever making mistakes, however, much
  to his own sorrow, the darling man; and I had to watch him pretty
  closely, for more than once he has been on the point of giving mamma a
  glass of laudanum in mistake for a glass of port wine.  I was a good
  deal frightened for him at first, as, before he became accustomed to
  the work, he tumbled over the chairs and tripped on the carpets while
  carrying trays with dinners and breakfasts, till I thought he would
  really injure himself at last; and then he was so terribly angry with
  himself at making such a noise and breaking the dishes--I think he has
  broken nearly an entire dinner and tea set of crockery.  Poor George,
  the cook, has suffered most from these mishaps--for you know that dear
  papa cannot get angry without letting a _little_ of it out upon
  somebody; and whenever he broke a dish or let a tray fall, he used to
  rush into the kitchen, shake his fist in George's face, and ask him,
  in a fierce voice, what he meant by it.  But he always got better in a
  few seconds, and finished off by telling him never to mind, that he
  was a good servant on the whole, and he wouldn't say any more about it
  just now, but he had better look sharp out and not do it again.  I
  must say, in praise of George, that on such occasions he looked very
  sorry indeed, and said he hoped that he would always do his best to
  give him satisfaction.  This was only proper in him, for he ought to
  be very thankful that our father restrains his anger so much; for you
  know he was rather violent _once_, and you've no idea, Charley, how
  great a restraint he now lays on himself.  He seems to me quite like a
  lamb, and I am beginning to feel somehow as if we had been mistaken,
  and that he never was a passionate man at all.  I think it is partly
  owing to dear Mr Addison, who visits us very frequently now, and papa
  and he are often shut up together for many hours in the smoking-house.
  I was sure that papa would soon come to like him, for his religion is
  so free from everything like severity or affected solemnity.  The
  cook, and Rosa, and my dog that you named Twist, are all quite well.
  The last has grown into a very large and beautiful animal, something
  like the stag-hound in the picture-book we used to study together long
  ago.  He is exceedingly fond of me, and I feel him to be quite a
  protector.  The cocks and hens, the cow and the old mare, are also in
  perfect health; so now, having told you a good deal about ourselves, I
  will give you a short account of the doings in the colony.

  First of all, your old friend Mr Kipples is still alive and well, and
  so are all our old companions in the school.  One or two of the latter
  have left, and young Naysmith has joined the Company's service.  Betty
  Peters comes very often to see us, and she always asks for you with
  great earnestness.  I think you have stolen the old woman's heart,
  Charley, for she speaks of you with great affection.  Old Mr Seaforth
  is still as vigorous as ever, dashing about the settlement on a
  high-mettled steed, just as if he were one of the youngest men in the
  colony.  He nearly poisoned himself, poor man, a month ago, by taking
  a dose of some kind of medicine by mistake.  I did not hear what it
  was, but I am told that the treatment was rather severe.  Fortunately
  the doctor happened to be at home when he was sent for, else our old
  friend would, I fear, have died.  As it was, the doctor cured him with
  great difficulty.  He first gave him an emetic, then put mustard
  blisters to the soles of his feet, and afterwards lifted him into one
  of his own carts, without springs, in which he drove him for a long
  time over all the ploughed fields in the neighbourhood.  If this is
  not an exaggerated account, Mr Seaforth is certainly made of sterner
  stuff than most men.  I was told a funny anecdote of him a few days
  ago, which I am sure you have never heard, otherwise you would have
  told it to me, for there used to be no secrets between us, Charley--
  alas!  I have no one to confide in or advise with now that you are
  gone.  You have often heard of the great flood; not Noah's one, but
  the flood that nearly swept away our settlement and did so much damage
  before you and I were born.  Well, you recollect that people used to
  tell of the way in which the river rose after the breaking up of the
  ice, and how it soon overflowed all the low points, sweeping off
  everything in its course.  Old Mr Seaforth's house stood at that time
  on the little point, just beyond the curve of the river, at the foot
  of which our own house stands, and as the river continued to rise, Mr
  Seaforth went about actively securing his property.  At first he only
  thought of his boat and canoes, which, with the help of his son Peter
  and a Canadian, who happened at the time to be employed about the
  place, he dragged up and secured to an iron staple in the side of his
  house.  Soon however, he found that the danger was greater than at
  first he imagined.  The point became completely covered with water,
  which brought down great numbers of half-drowned and quite-drowned
  cattle, pigs, and poultry, and stranded them at the garden fence, so
  that in a short time poor Mr Seaforth could scarcely move about his
  overcrowded domains.  On seeing this, he drove his own cattle to the
  highest land in his neighbourhood, and hastened back to the house,
  intending to carry as much of the furniture as possible to the same
  place.  But during his short absence the river had risen so rapidly
  that he was obliged to give up all thoughts of this, and think only of
  securing a few of his valuables.  The bit of land round his dwelling
  was so thickly covered with the poor cows, sheep, and other animals,
  that he could scarcely make his way to the house, and you may fancy
  his consternation on reaching it to find that the water was more than
  knee-deep round the walls, while a few of the cows and a whole herd of
  pigs had burst open the door (no doubt accidentally) and coolly
  entered the dining-room, where they stood with drooping heads, very
  wet, and apparently very miserable.  The Canadian was busy at the back
  of the house, loading the boat and canoe with everything he could lay
  hands on, and was not aware of the foreign invasion in front.  Mr
  Seaforth cared little for this, however, and began to collect all the
  things he held most valuable, and threw them to the man, who stowed
  them away in the boat.  Peter had been left in charge of the cattle,
  so they had to work hard.  While thus employed the water continued to
  rise with fearful rapidity, and rushed against the house like a
  mill-race, so that it soon became evident that the whole would ere
  long be swept away.  Just as they finished loading the boat and
  canoes, the staple which held them gave way; in a moment they were
  swept into the middle of the river, and carried out of sight.  The
  Canadian was in the boat at the time the staple broke, so that Mr
  Seaforth was now left in a dwelling that bid fair to emulate Noah's
  ark in an hour or two, without a chance of escape, and with no better
  company than five black oxen in the dining-room, besides three sheep
  that were now scarcely able to keep their heads above water, and three
  little pigs that were already drowned.  The poor old man did his best
  to push out the intruders, but only succeeded in ejecting two sheep
  and an ox.  All the others positively refused to go, so he was fain to
  let them stay.  By shutting the outer door he succeeded in keeping out
  a great deal of water.  Then he waded into the parlour, where he found
  some more little pigs, floating about and quite dead.  Two, however,
  more adventurous than their comrades, had saved their lives by
  mounting first on a chair and then upon the table, where they were
  comfortably seated, gazing languidly at their mother, a very heavy fat
  sow, which sat, with what seemed an expression of settled despair, on
  the sofa.  In a fit of wrath, Mr Seaforth seized the young pigs and
  tossed them out of the window; whereupon the old one jumped down, and
  half walking, half swimming, made her way to her companions in the
  dining-room.  The old gentleman now ascended to the garret, where from
  a small window he looked out upon the scene of devastation.  His chief
  anxiety was about the foundation of the house, which, being made of a
  wooden framework, like almost all the others in the colony, would
  certainly float if the water rose much higher.  His fears were better
  founded than the house.  As he looked up the river, which had by this
  time overflowed all its banks and was spreading over the plains, he
  saw a fresh burst of water coming down, which, when it dashed against
  his dwelling, forced it about two yards from its foundation.  Suddenly
  he remembered that there were a large anchor and chain in the kitchen,
  both of which he had brought there one day, to serve as a sort of
  anvil when he wanted to do some blacksmith work.  Hastening down, he
  fastened one end of the chain to the sofa, and cast the anchor out of
  the window.  A few minutes afterwards another rush of water struck the
  building, which yielded to pressure, and swung slowly down until the
  anchor arrested its further progress.  This was only for a few
  seconds, however.  The chain was a slight one.  It snapped, and the
  house swept majestically down the stream, while its terrified
  occupants cowered within it.

  For two days nothing was heard of old Mr Seaforth.  Indeed, the
  settlers had too much to do in saving themselves and their families to
  think of others; and it was not until the third day that people began
  to inquire about him.  His son Peter had taken a canoe and made
  diligent search in all directions, but although he found the house
  sticking on a shallow point, neither his father nor the cat was on or
  in it.  At last he was brought to the island, on which nearly half the
  colony had collected, by an Indian who had passed the house and
  brought him away in his canoe, along with the old cat.  Is he not a
  wonderful man, to have come through so much in his old age? and he is
  still so active and hearty!  Mr Swan of the mill is dead.  He died of
  fever last week.  Poor old Mr Cordon is also gone.  His end was very
  sad.  About a month ago he ordered his horse and rode off, intending
  to visit Fort Garry.  At the turn of the road, just above Grant's
  House, the horse suddenly swerved, and its rider was thrown to the
  ground.  He did not live more than half an hour after it.  Alas! how
  very sad to see a man, after escaping all the countless dangers of a
  long life in the woods (and his, you know, was a very adventurous
  one), thus cut violently down in his old age!  O Charley, how little
  we know what is before us!  How needful to have our peace made with
  God through Jesus Christ, so that we may be ready at any moment when
  our Father calls us away!  There are many events of great interest
  that have occurred here since you left.  You will be glad to hear that
  Jane Patterson is married to our excellent friend Mr Cameron, who has
  taken up a store near to us, and intends to run a boat to York Fort
  next summer.  There has been another marriage here which will cause
  you astonishment at least, if not pleasure.  Old Mr Peters has
  married Marie Peltier!  What _could_ have possessed her to take such a
  husband!  I cannot understand it.  Just think of her, Charley, a girl
  of eighteen, with a husband of seventy-five!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this point the writing, which was very close and very small,
terminated.  Harry laid it down with a deep sigh, wishing much that
Charley had thought it advisable to send him the second sheet also.  As
wishes and regrets on this point were equally unavailing, he endeavoured
to continue it in imagination, and was soon as deeply absorbed in
following Kate through the well-remembered scenes of Red River as he had
been, a short time before, in roaming with her brother over the wide
prairies of the Saskatchewan.  The increasing cold, however, soon warned
him that the night was far spent.  He rose and went to the stove; but
the fire had gone out, and the almost irresistible frost of these
regions was already cooling everything in Bachelors' Hall down to the
freezing-point.  All his companions had put out their candles, and were
busy, doubtless, dreaming of the friends whose letters had struck and
reawakened the long-dormant chords that used to echo to the tones and
scenes of other days.  With a slight shiver, Harry returned to his
apartment, and kneeled to thank God for protecting and preserving his
absent friends, and especially for sending him "good news from a far
land."  The letter with the British post-marks on it was placed under
his pillow.  It occupied his waking and sleeping thoughts that night,
and it was the first thing he thought of and re-read on the following
morning, and for many mornings afterwards.  Only those can fully
estimate the value of such letters who live in distant lands, where
letters are few--very, very few--and far between.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

CHANGES--HARRY AND HAMILTON FIND THAT VARIETY IS INDEED CHARMING--THE
LATTER ASTONISHES THE FORMER CONSIDERABLY.

Three months passed away, but the snow still lay deep and white and
undiminished around York Fort.  Winter--cold, silent, unyielding
winter--still drew its white mantle closely round the lonely dwelling of
the fur-traders of the Far North.

Icicles hung, as they had done for months before, from the eaves of
every house, from the tall black scaffold on which the great bell hung,
and from the still taller erection that had been put up as an outlook
for "_the ship_" in summer.  At the present time it commanded a bleak
view of the frozen sea.  Snow covered every housetop, and hung in
ponderous masses from their edges, as if it were about to fall; but it
never fell--it hung there in the same position day after day, unmelted,
unchanged.  Snow covered the whole land, and the frozen river, the
swamps, the sea-beach, and the sea itself, as far as the eye could
reach, seemed like a pure white carpet.  Snow lined the upper edge of
every paling, filled up the key-hole of every door, embanked about half
of every window, stuck in little knobs on the top of every picket, and
