found myself in the satisfactory position of one thoroughly useful in
his sphere of life, and on the whole, though my first young master
returned constantly to my thoughts, I contrived to be very happy in my
new capacity.

Two events, however, both of a pleasant nature, served to vary the
monotony of George's second term at college.  The first of these was a
visit from his friend and patron, Dr Wilkins, the rector of
Muggerbridge.

George was sitting at his modest breakfast one morning, when his door
suddenly opened, and the well-known and beloved face of his old tutor
lit up the apartment.

My master sprang to his feet, and with unaffected joy rushed forward to
welcome his guest, before it had do much as occurred to him into what
uninviting quarters he was receiving him.

"How good of you to come, sir!" he cried.  "I never expected such
happiness."

"You don't suppose I should go through Cambridge and never beat up your
quarters, my boy!  But, dear me, how ill you are looking!"

"Am I?  I don't feel ill."

"Humph! you're overdoing it.  But aren't you going to offer me some
breakfast?"

George coloured, and his spirits sank as his eyes fell on the scanty
fare of which he himself had been partaking.

"It's only bread-and-butter," he said.

"And what better?" said Dr Wilkins, sitting down; "and I warrant the
butter's good if it's your mother's making."

"So it is," said George, beginning to recover his spirits.  "And how did
you leave them at home, sir?"

"First-rate, my boy;--looking much better than you are.  And so this is
your den?  Well, it's--"

"Nothing very grand," put in George.

"Exactly, nothing very grand; but I dare say you find it as good a place
to read in as a drawing-room, eh?  Now tell me all about yourself, my
boy, while I drink this good tea of yours."

And George, with light heart and beaming face, told his good friend of
all his doings, his hardships, his difficulties, his triumphs, and his
ambitions.

And Dr Wilkins sat and listened with pride and thankfulness at heart,
to find his young _protege_ the same earnest, unaffected boy he had
parted with from Muggerbridge six months before.  They talked for a long
time that morning.  The tutor and boy passed in review all the work
hitherto accomplished and discussed the programme of future study.  Many
were the wholesome counsels the elder gave to the younger, and many were
the new hopes and resolutions which filled the lad's heart as he opened
all his soul to his good friend.

"And now," said Dr Wilkins, "I want you to take me to see your college
and chapel."

George looked perplexed.  Who was _he_ to conduct a Doctor of Divinity
over his college.  Such a hermit's life had he led that he hardly knew
the ins and outs of the place himself, and there was not a single man in
the college to whom he was not a stranger.

"I'm afraid you've chosen a bad guide," faltered he.  "I don't know any
of the men, and very little of the place."

"Oh, never mind that," said the doctor; "it will be all the more
interesting to make a tour of discovery, so come along!"

George put on his cap and gown and obeyed.  For a moment he wished the
gown had been long enough to conceal the patch on the knee of his
trousers, but the next he laughed at himself for his vanity.

"There's nothing to be ashamed of," thought he, "and if it _is_
patched--well, it is."

And thus consoling himself, he accompanied the doctor across the
quadrangle.

Men certainly did stare at him as he passed, and some of them deemed him
a queer "specimen," and others wondered what Saint George's was coming
to.  But my master, if he noticed their looks, disregarded them, and as
for Dr Wilkins, he smiled to himself to think how prone mankind is to
judge by appearances.

"Unless I mistake," mused he to himself, "these young sparks of Saint
George's will some day think fit to be proud of their poor fellow-
collegian."

The two made the tour of the college, and finished up with the grand old
Gothic chapel.  It was easy to guess why George's face lit up as he
approached the place.  The deep notes of an organ were sounding across
the quadrangle, and as they entered the door a flood of harmony swept
towards them down the long aisles.  Dr Wilkins could feel the boy's arm
tremble, and heard the sigh of delight which escaped his lips.  Without
a word they sat in the nearest stalls, and listened while the music went
on.  How it rose and fell, how it trembled in the oak arches of the
roof, and swept through the choir down to where they sat!  It was only
an ordinary organist's practice; but to George, after his hard work, and
with the memories of home revived by the presence of his dear tutor, it
came as a breath from heaven.  Daily, nearly, had he heard that organ
since his coming to Cambridge, but never had it delighted him as it did
now.

"Can we see the organ?" he said, when the last chord had died away.

"Let us try," said the doctor.

The gallery door was open, and ascending the stairs to the organ loft,
they found the organist preparing to depart.

"We have been a clandestine audience," said the doctor, "and couldn't
help coming to thank you for the treat you have given us.  My young
friend here is music mad."

The organist smiled.

"You took me at a disadvantage," he said, "I was only amusing myself."

"Whatever you were doing for yourself, you delighted us," said the
doctor.

"Would you like to try the organ?" presently said the organist to
George.

Oh, what a bound of delight I could feel in my master's breast at the
invitation.

"May I?" he exclaimed.

"Certainly, if you like--and if you can," added the other, hesitatingly,
as if not sure whether the lad's skill would be equal to his enthusiasm.

George sat down on the bench, and laid his fingers lovingly on the keys.
But he withdrew them before he had sounded a note.  "I would rather you
did not watch me too closely," he said, nervously, "for I am only a
beginner."

"Let us go and sit down stairs," suggested the doctor.

The organist looked still more doubtful than before, and began to repent
his offer.  However, he retired with the doctor, and made up his mind to
be excruciated.  They sat down in two of the stalls and waited.

And then George began to play.  What he played I cannot tell.  It began
first in a faint whisper of music which swelled onward into a pure
choral melody.  Then suddenly the grand old roof trembled with the clash
of a martial movement, strong and steady, which carried the listener
onward till he was, with the sound, lost in the far distance.  Then, in
wailing minor numbers the music returned, slowly working itself up into
the tumult and fury of a pent-up agony, and finally sweeping all before
it in a wild hurricane of bitterness.  Then a pause, and then sweetly
and in the far distance once more rose the quiet hymn, and after that
all was silence.

After the first few notes the organist had uttered a startled
ejaculation, and drawn the doctor to another seat farther down the nave,
where, till all was over, he sat motionless as a statue.  But the moment
the music had ceased he ran up the stairs with a face full of pleasure
and admiration, and actually seized George by the hand.

"You're a genius, sir.  That was not at all bad, I can tell you."

A happy smile was all the answer George could give.

"Not at all bad," repeated the organist.  "I was telling your friend,"
added he to Dr Wilkins, who had returned more slowly to the organ,
"that was not at all bad.  He must come here often."

"Nothing, I am sure, would delight him more," said the doctor.  "Eh, my
boy?"

"Nothing, indeed," said George, "but--"

"But your reading, I suppose."

"Never mind your reading, sir!" exclaimed the organist.  "What's that to
music?  Take my advice, and go in for music."

Poor George! for a moment he felt tempted to abandon all his ambitions
and resolutions at the prospect of a career so delightful and congenial.

But he was made of firmer stuff than Tom Drift, and replied,--

"I cannot do that, sir; but if I may come now and then--"

"Come whenever you like," said the organist; and so saying he shook
George and his friend by the hand, and hurried from the chapel.

This was the event which of all others brightened George Reader's first
year at college.

Instead of aimless walks, he now stole at every spare moment (without
cutting into his ordinary work) to the organ, and there revelled in
music.

His acquaintance with the college organist increased and developed into
a friendship, of which mutual admiration formed a large element, and one
happy Sunday, a year after his arrival at Cambridge, he received, for
the first time, the much coveted permission to preside at the organ
during a college service, a task of which he acquitted himself so well--
nay, so remarkably well--that not only did he frequently find himself
again in the same position, but his playing came to be a matter of
remark among the musical set of Saint George's.

"Who is the fellow who played to-day?" a man inquired one day of the
organist; "is he a pupil of yours?"

"No.  I might be a pupil of his in some things.  He's a boy, and, mark
my words, if he goes on as he's begun he'll be heard of some day."

"What's his name, do you know?" inquired the youth.

"I don't even know that, I never-- Here he comes!"

"Introduce me, will you?"

"With pleasure.  Allow me to introduce Mr Halliday," said the organist
to George.

Halliday!  Wasn't that a familiar name to me?  Was it possible?  This
fine fellow, then, was no other than Jim Halliday, whom I had last seen
as a boy on the steps of Randlebury, with his chum Charlie Newcome,
waving farewell to Tom Drift.

Ah, how my heart beat at being thus once more brought back into the
light of those happy days by this unexpected meeting!

My master by no means shared my delight at the incident.  He had always
shrunk from acquaintanceships among his fellow-collegians.  With none,
hitherto, but the organist had he become familiar, and that only by
virtue of an irresistible common interest.  His poverty and humble
station forbade him to intrude his fellowship on the clannish gentry of
Saint George's, and certainly his cravings for hard study led him, so
far from considering the exclusion as a hardship, to look upon it as a
mercy, and few things he desired more devoutly than that this
satisfactory state of affairs might continue.

I do not say George was right in this.  Sociability is, to a certain
extent, a duty, and one that ought not without the soundest reason to be
shirked.  George may have carried his reserve rather too far, but at any
rate you will allow he erred on the right side, if he erred at all, and
carried his purpose through with more honesty and success than poor Tom
Drift had displayed in a very similar situation.

Now, however, his hermitage was in peril of a siege, and he quailed as
he acknowledged the introduction offered him.

"How are you?" said Halliday, with all his own downrightness.  "I and a
lot of fellows have liked your playing, and I don't see why I shouldn't
tell you so.  How are you?"

"I'm quite well, thank you," faltered George.

"You're a freshman, I suppose?" asked Jim.

"No, I'm in my second year."

"Are you?  I thought I knew all the men in the college; but perhaps you
live in the town?"

"No, I live in college."

"Where are your rooms?" asked the astonished Jim.

"In, or rather under, H staircase," replied George.  "Perhaps you would
know the place best as the `Mouse-trap.'"

Jim could not resist a whistle of surprise and a rapid scrutiny of his
new acquaintance.

"The `Mouse-trap'!  That's an awful hole, isn't it?"

"Yes," said George, his candour coming to his rescue to deliver him from
this cross-examination, "but it's cheap--"

Jim looked as afflicted as if he had been seized with a sudden
toothache.

"What a blundering jackass I am!  Please excuse my rudeness; I never
meant to annoy you."

"You have not done so.  You are not the sort of man I should mind
knowing I was poor--"

"Of course not; so am I poor; but don't let's talk of that.  Will you
come to my rooms?"

George hesitated, and then answered,--

"I'd rather not, please.  I'm reading hard, and, besides--"

"Besides what?"

"I've no right to expect you to associate with me."

"Why _ever_ not?"

"I may as well tell you straight out.  My father is a gamekeeper, and I
am a gamekeeper's son."

Jim laughed pleasantly.

"Well, really your logic is perfect, but I can't say as much for your
sense.  Bless you, man, aren't we all of us lineal descendants of a
gardener?  Come along!"

"Please excuse me," again faltered George; "you are very kind, but your
friends may not thank you for--"

"My friends!--oh, yes!" blurted out Jim.  "What on earth business have
they to put their noses into my affairs.  Like their impudence, all of
them!"

Jim, you will see, was still a boy, though he had whiskers.
