with a degree of vigour that left his hearers to imagine anything they
pleased, and then settle it in their minds that the thing so imagined
was out of all sight short of the mark.

The excitement of the man at last fully roused the sleepy crew, and
Croft sprang up with the agility of a cat.

"Ho! boys," he cried, proceeding to buckle his garments round him, "up
with you.  Ketch the hosses, an' put to.  Look alive, will you? grease
your jints, _do_.  Now, strangers, I'll shew you how we ketch a bar in
this lo-cation; bring yer rules, for sometimes he breaks his trap, an'
isn't there a spree jist!"

We need scarcely remark, that the latter part of this speech was made to
Sinton and his comrade, who were drawing the charges of their revolvers
and reloading.

"Is the trap far off?" inquired Ned.

"Quarter of an hour, or so.  Look sharp, lads."

This exhortation was unnecessary, for the men had already caught three
stout horses, all of which were attached to an enormous waggon or van,
whose broad wheels accounted for the tracks discovered in the valley on
the previous evening.

"That's his cage," said the bear-catcher, replying to Ned's look of
inquiry.  "It's all lined with sheet-iron, and would hold an ontamed
streak o' lightnin', it would.  Now, then, drive ahead."

The lumbering machine jolted slowly down the hill as he spoke, and while
several of the party remained with the horses, Croft and our travellers,
with the remainder, pushed on ahead.  In less than twenty minutes, they
came to a ravine filled with thick underwood, from the recesses of which
came forth sounds of fierce ursine wrath that would have deterred most
men from entering; but Croft knew his game was secure, and led the way
confidently through the bushes, until he reached a spot on which stood
what appeared to be a small log-cabin without door or window.  Inside of
this cabin an enormous grizzly-bear raged about furiously, thrusting his
snout and claws through the interstices of the logs, and causing
splinters to fly all round him, while he growled in tones of the deepest
indignation.

"Oh! ain't he a bit o' thunder?" cried Croft, as he walked round the
trap, gazing in with glittering eyes at every opening between the logs.

"How in the world did you get him in there?" asked Ned Sinton, as soon
as his astonishment had abated sufficiently to loosen his tongue.

"Easy enough," replied Croft.  "If ye obsarve the top o' the trap, ye'll
see the rope that suspended it from the limb o' that oak.  Inside there
was a bit o' beef, so fixed up, that when Mister Caleb laid hold of it,
he pulled a sort o' trigger, an' down came the trap, shuttin' him in
slick, as ye see."

At this moment the powerful animal struggled so violently that he tilted
his prison on one side, and well-nigh overturned it.

"Look out, lads," shouted Croft, darting towards a tree, and cocking his
rifle,--actions in which he was imitated by all the rest of the party,
with surprising agility.

"Don't fire till it turns over," he cried, sternly, on observing that
two of the more timid members of his band were about to fire at the
animal's legs, which appeared below the edge of the trap.  Fortunately,
the bear ceased its efforts just at that critical moment, and the trap
fell heavily back to its original position.

"By good luck!" shouted Croft; "an' here comes the cage.  Range up on
the left, boys, and out with the hosses, they won't stand this."

The terrified animals were removed from the scene, trembling violently
from head to foot, and the whole band, applying their shoulders to the
wheels, slowly pushed the vehicle alongside of the trap until the sides
of the two met.

There was a strong door in the side of the trap, which was now removed
by being pulled inwards, revealing to bruin an aperture which
corresponded to another door opening into the iron-lined cage.  There
were stout iron bars ready to be shot home the instant he condescended
to pass through this entrance; but Caleb, as Croft called him, shewed
himself sadly destitute of an inquiring disposition.  He knew that there
was now a hole in his prison-wall, for he looked at it; he knew that a
hole either conducted into a place or out of it, for life-long
experience had taught him that; yet he refused to avail himself of the
opportunity, and continued to rage round the trap, glaring between the
logs at his foes outside.  It is unreasonable to suppose that he was
afraid to go into the hole because it was a _dark_ one, for he was well
accustomed to such dark dens; besides, no one who looked at him could
for a moment suppose that he was, or could be, afraid of anything at
all.  We must, therefore, put his conduct down to sheer obstinacy.

The men poked him with sticks; shouted at him; roared in his face; threw
water over him; and even tried the effect of a shot of powder at his
flank; but all to no purpose, although their efforts were continued
vigorously for full two hours.  The bear would _not_ enter that hole on
any account whatever.

"Try another shot of powder at him," cried Croft, whose patience was now
almost exhausted.

The shot was fired at his flank, and was received with a ferocious
growl, while the strong wood-work of the trap trembled under his efforts
to escape.

"Ain't it vexin'?" said Croft, sitting down on the stump of a tree and
wiping the perspiration from his forehead.  Ned Sinton and Tom, who had
done their utmost to assist their new acquaintance, sat down beside him
and admitted that it _was_ vexing.  As if by one impulse, the whole
party then sat down to rest, and at that moment, having, as it were,
valiantly asserted his right of independent action, the bear turned
slowly round and quietly scrambled through the hole.  The men sprang up;
the massive iron bars were shot into their sockets with a clang; and
bruin was a prisoner for life.

As neither Edward Sinton nor Tom Collins had any particular desire to
become bear-catchers, they bade their new friends adieu that afternoon,
and continued their journey.  The road, as they advanced, became more
and more steep and rugged, so that they could only proceed at a walk,
and in many places experienced considerable difficulty, and ran no
little risk, in passing along the faces of cliffs, where the precipices
ascended hundreds of feet upwards like walls, on the one hand, and
descended sheer down into an unfathomable abyss, on the other.  But the
exceeding grandeur of the scenery amply repaid their toils, and the deep
roar of that mighty cataract ever sounded in their ears.  At length they
reached the head of the valley, and stood under the spray of the fall,
which, expanding far above and around the seething caldron whence it
sprang, drenched the surrounding country with perpetual showers.

Here a gap or pass in the mountains was discovered, ascending on the
left, and affording, apparently, an exit from the valley.  Up this the
travellers toiled until they cleared the spray of the falls, and then
sat down beside a clump of trees to dry their garments in the sunshine
and to cook their mid-day meal.

"What a glorious thing it is, Tom, to wander thus unrestrained amid such
scenes!" said Ned Sinton, as he busied himself roasting a piece of
venison, which his rifle had procured but half-an-hour before.  "How
infinitely more delightful than travelling in the civilised world, where
one is cheated at every turn, and watched and guarded as if robbery, or
murder, or high treason were the only probable objects a traveller could
have in view."

"`Comparisons,' my dear fellow--you know the proverb," replied Tom
Collins; "don't uphold California at the expense of the continent.
Besides, there are many in this world who would rather a thousand times
wander by the classic lake of Como, with its theatrical villas and its
enchanting sunshine and perfume, or paddle up the castellated Rhine,
than scramble here among wild rocks, and woods, and cataracts, with the
chance of meeting an occasional savage or a grizzly-bear."

"Go on, my boy," said Ned, with a touch of sarcasm in his tone, "you
haven't read me half a lesson yet.  Besides, the `many' you refer to,
are there not hundreds, ay, thousands, whose chief enjoyment in
travelling is derived from the historical associations called up by the
sight of the ruined castles and temples of classic ground--whose delight
it is to think that here Napoleon crossed the Alps, as Hannibal did
before him, (and many a nobody has done after him), that there, within
these mouldering ruins, the oracles of old gave forth their voice--
forgetting, perhaps, too easily, while they indulge in these
reminiscences of the past, that the warrior's end was wholesale murder,
and that the oracle spoke only to deceive poor ignorant human nature.
Ha!  I would not give one hearty dash into pure, uncontaminated nature
for all the famous `tours' put together."

Ned looked round him as he spoke, with a glow of enthusiasm that neither
badinage nor philosophy could check.

"Just look around thee," he continued; "open thine ears, Tom, to the
music of yon cataract, and expand thy nostrils to the wild perfume of
these pines."

"I wouldn't, at this moment," quietly remarked Tom, "exchange for it the
perfume of that venison steak, of which I pray thee to be more
regardful, else thou'lt upset it into the fire."

"Oh!  Tom--incorrigible!"

"Not at all, Ned.  While you flatter yourself that you have all the
enthusiastic study of nature to yourself, here have I succeeded, within
the last few minutes, in solving a problem in natural history which has
puzzled my brains for weeks past."

"And, pray thee, what may that be, most sapient philosopher?"

"Do you see yonder bird clinging to the stem of that tree, and pitching
into it as if it were its most deadly foe?"

"I do--a woodpecker it is."

"Well," continued Tom, sitting down before his portion of the venison
steak, "that bird has cleared up two points in natural history, which
have, up till this time, been a mystery to me.  The one was, why
woodpeckers should spend their time in pecking the trees so incessantly;
the other was, how it happened that several trees I have cut down could
have had so many little holes bored in their trunks, and an acorn neatly
inserted into each.  Now that little bird has settled the question for
me.  I caught him in the act not ten minutes ago.  He flew to that tree
with an acorn in his beak, tried to insert it into a hole, which didn't
fit, being too small; so he tried another, which did fit, poked the nut
in, small end first, and tapped it scientifically home.  Now, why did he
do it?  That's the question."

"Because he wanted to, probably," remarked Ned; "and very likely he lays
up a store of food for winter in this manner."

"Very possibly.  I shall make a note of this, for I'm determined to have
it sifted to the bottom.  Meanwhile, I'll trouble you for another junk
of venison."

It was many weeks afterwards ere Tom Collins succeeded in sifting this
interesting point to the bottom; but perhaps the reader may not object
to have the result of his inquiries noted at this point in our story.

Many of the trees in California, on being stripped of their bark, are
found to be perforated all over with holes about the size of a
musket-ball.  These are pierced by the woodpecker with such precision
and regularity that one might believe they had been cut out by a
ship-carpenter.  The summer is spent by this busy little bird in making
these holes and in filling them with acorns.  One acorn goes to one
hole, and the bird will not try to force the nut into a hole that is too
small for it, but flutters round the tree until it finds one which fits
it exactly.  Thus one by one the holes are filled, and a store of food
is laid up for winter use in a larder which secures it from the
elements, and places it within reach of the depositor when the winter
snows have buried all the acorns that lie upon the ground, and put them
beyond the reach of woodpeckers.  The birds never encroach on their
store until the snow has covered the ground, then they begin to draw
upon their bank; and it is a curious fact that the bills of these birds
are always honoured, for their instinct enables them to detect the bad
nuts with unerring certainty, so that their bank is always filled with
good ones.  This matter of selecting the good nuts is a mere chance with
men, for often those shells which seem the soundest, are found to
contain a grub instead of a nut.  Even the sagacious Indian is an
uncertain judge in this respect, but the woodpecker, provided by an
all-wise Creator with an unerring instinct, never makes a mistake in
selecting its store of food for winter.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

CURIOUS TREES, AND STILL MORE CURIOUS PLAINS--AN INTERESTING DISCOVERY,
FOLLOWED BY A SAD ONE--FATE OF TRAVELLERS IN THE MOUNTAINS--A SUDDEN
ILLNESS--NED PROVES HIMSELF TO BE A FRIEND IN NEED AND IN DEED, AS WELL
AS AN EXCELLENT DOCTOR, HUNTER, COOK, AND NURSE--DEER-SHOOTING BY
FIRELIGHT.

During the course of their wanderings among the mountains our hero and
his companion met with many strange adventures and saw many strange
sights, which, however, we cannot afford space to dwell upon here.
Their knowledge in natural history, too, was wonderfully increased, for
they were both observant men, and the school of nature is the best in
which any one can study.  Audubon, the hunter-naturalist of America,
knew this well! and few men have added so much as he to the sum of human
knowledge in his peculiar department, while fewer still have so
wonderfully enriched the pages of romantic adventure in wild, unknown
regions.

In these wanderings, too, Ned and Tom learned to know experimentally
that truth is indeed stranger than fiction, and that if the writers of
fairy-tales had travelled more they would have saved their imaginations
a deal of trouble, and produced more extraordinary works.

The size of the trees they encountered was almost beyond belief, though
none of them surpassed the giant of which an account has been already
given.  Among other curious trees they found _sugar-pines_ growing in
abundance in one part of the country.  This is, perhaps, the most
graceful of all the pines.  With a perfectly straight and cylindrical
stem and smooth bark, it rears its proud crest high above other trees,
and flings its giant limbs abroad, like a sentinel guarding the forest.
The stem rises to about four-fifths of its height perfectly free of
branches; above this point the branches spread out almost horizontally,
drooping a little at the ends from the weight of the huge cones which
they bear.  These cones are about a foot-and-a-half long, and under each
leaf lies a seed the size of a pea, which has an agreeably sweet taste,
and is much esteemed by the Indians, who use it as an article of food.

Another remarkable sight they saw was a plain, of some miles in extent,
completely covered with shattered pieces of quartz, which shone with
specks and veins of pure gold.  Of course they had neither time nor
inclination to attempt the laborious task of pulverising this quartz in
order to obtain the precious metal; but Ned moralised a little as they
galloped over the plain, spurning the gold beneath their horses' hoofs,
as if it had been of no value whatever!  They both puzzled themselves
also to account for so strange an appearance; but the only solution that
seemed to them at all admissible was, that a quartz vein had, at some
early period of the world's history, been shattered by a volcanic
eruption, and the plain thus strewn with gold.

But from the contemplation of these and many other interesting sights
and phenomena we must pass to an event which seriously affected the
future plans of the travellers.

One beautiful evening--such an evening as, from its deep quiet and
unusual softness, leaves a lasting impression on the memory--the two
horsemen found themselves slowly toiling up the steep acclivity of a
mountain-ridge.  Their advance was toilsome, for the way was rugged, and
no track of any kind assisted them in their ascent.

"I fear the poor horses will give in," said Ned, dismounting and looking
back at his companion, who slowly followed him.

"We are near the summit," answered Tom, "and they shall have a long rest
there."

As he spoke, they both dismounted and advanced on foot, leading their
fatigued horses by the bridles.

"Do you know," said Tom, with a sigh, "I feel more used up to-day than I
have been since we started on this journey.  I think we had better
encamp and have a cup of tea; there is a little left yet, if I mistake
not."

"With all my heart, Tom; I, too, feel inclined to rest, and--"

Ned paused, for at that moment they overtopped the highest edge of the
ridge, and the view that burst upon them was well fitted to put to
flight every previous train of thought.

The ridge on which they stood rose several hundred feet above the level
of the plain beyond, and commanded a view of unknown extent towards the
far west.

The richest possible sweep of country was spread out at their feet like
a huge map, bathed in a glow of yellow sunshine.  Lakes and streams,
crags and rocks, sward, and swamp, and plain--undulating and abrupt,
barren and verdant--all were there, and could be embraced in a single
wide-sweeping glance.  It seemed, to the entranced travellers, like the
very garden of Eden.  Water-fowl flew about in all directions, the
whistling of their wings and their wild cries being mellowed by distance
into pleasant music; and, far away on the right, where a clear lake
mirrored each tree on its banks, as if the image were reality, a herd of
deer were seen cooling their sides and limbs in the water, while, on the
extreme horizon, a line of light indicated the shores of the vast
Pacific Ocean.

Ere the travellers could find words to express their feelings, a rock,
with a piece of stick and a small rag attached to it, attracted their
attention.

"We are not the first who have set their feet here, it seems," said Ned,
pointing to the signal.

"Strange!" muttered Tom Collins, as they turned towards the rock; "that
does not look like an Indian mark; yet I would have thought that white
men had never stood here before, for the spot is far removed from any
known diggings, and, as we know fail well, is not easily reached."

On gaining the rock, they found that the rag was a shred of linen,
without mark of any kind to tell who had placed it there.

"It must have been the freak of some Indian hunter," said Ned, examining
the rock on which the little flag-staff was raised.  "Stay--no--here are
some marks cut in the stone!  Look here, Tom, can you decipher this?  It
looks like the letter D--DB."

"DB?" cried Tom Collins, with a degree of energy that surprised his
friend.  "Let me see!"

Tom carefully removed the moss, and cleared out the letters, which were
unmistakeable.

"Who can DB have been?" said Ned.

Tom looked up with a flushed countenance and a glittering eye, as he
exclaimed--

"Who?  Who but Daniel Boone, Cooper's great hero--Hawk-eye, of the `Last
of the Mohicans'--Deer-slayer--Leather-stocking!  _He_ has been here
before us--ay, brave spirit!  Long before other hunters had dared to
venture far into the territory of the scalping, torturing, yelling
red-skin, this bold heart had pushed westward, fearless and alone, until
his eagle eye rested on the great Pacific.  It _must_ have been he.  I
have followed him, Ned, in spirit, throughout all his wild career, for I
knew him to be a _real_ man, and no fiction; but little did I think that
I should see a spot where his manly foot had rested, or live to discover
