

CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

HOW I SUFFERED A RELAPSE, WHICH DID ME GOOD.

The gentleman who entered the room was a middle-aged man, of striking
appearance.  In face and person he seemed worn and feeble.  He walked
with a slight stoop; his cheeks were hollow and slightly flushed, and
his brow was furrowed by lines which would have appeared deep even in a
much older man.  But as soon as he began to talk his face lit up, his
eyes sparkled, and there was a ring in his voice which was more like
Jack Smith himself than his older and more sedate namesake.

For this stranger, I guessed at once, must be the other Mr Smith with
whom Jack lodged.

At sight of him Billy stopped abruptly in the middle of his sentence,
and, putting his hand up to his forelock, saluted him with his usual
familiar grin.

"Ah, William, my worthy friend, you here?" the gentleman said, almost
gaily, as he entered.  "I heard I should find you on duty.  You must
introduce me to this sick gentleman, and ask him if I shall disturb
him."

Billy grinned in a confused sort of way, not knowing exactly how to do
the honours.  Then, looking at me and jerking his thumb in the direction
of the stranger, he said, "This here's the cove from downstairs!"

The gentleman approached my bedside and said, gently, "Am I disturbing
you?  I found a note from my fellow-lodger when I got in just now,
asking me to call up and see how you were getting on."

"It's very kind of you," said I.  "I hope you can stay a bit."

"Certainly; I've nothing to do."

Billy, however, did not apparently favour this suggestion.

"This 'ere cove," said he, pointing to me, "ain't to jaw, mister!"

"Quite right, William," said the gentleman; "I'll see he doesn't.  I'll
do all the talking and he shall do the listening.  You can go down to my
room and make my bed ready for me and tidy up."

The boy looked dubiously first at the speaker, then at me, as if he was
not quite sure about the propriety of allowing me out of his sight, but
finally obeyed.

"There's a trusty youngster for you!" said the gentleman, laughing, as
he disappeared.  "Young Smith couldn't have found a safer nurse for you
anywhere."

"I believe you are right," said I.

"And how are you feeling?  You're looking better than when I saw you
last, anyhow."

"I never saw you before, did I?"  I asked.

"No, you didn't; but I saw you when you were brought in here the other
evening.  However, as Billy says, you mustn't talk now.  I suppose you
heard me order him to make my bed.  I always go to bed every morning at
eleven.  Young Smith and I are like Box and Cox, you know; he's away all
day, I'm away all night.  Just when he's finishing up work I'm
beginning."

"I wonder you can keep awake all the night," I said.

"Not more wonderful than you keeping awake all day, my boy.  In fact,
there's not much chance of a poor literary hack sleeping over his work.
Now I wonder, when you read your newspaper in the morning, if you ever
think of what has to be done to produce it.  If you only did, I dare say
you would find it more interesting than it often seems."

And then my companion launched out into a lively description of the work
of a newspaper office, and of the various stages in the production of a
paper, from the pen and ink in the sub-editor's room to the printed,
folded, and delivered newspaper which lies on one's breakfast-table
every morning.  I wish I could repeat it all for the benefit of the
reader, for few subjects are more interesting; but it would take more
time than we have to spare to do so.

Of course Mr Smith the elder--for so I had to call him to distinguish
him from my friend his namesake--rattled on in this strain, more for the
sake of keeping me interested and amused than any other reason.  Still,
his talk was something better than idle chatter, and I began to feel
that here at last, among all my miscellaneous acquaintance, was a man
worth knowing.

He gave me no chance of talking myself, but rattled on from one topic to
another in a way which left me quite free to listen or not as I liked,
and finally rose, much to my regret, to go.

"Now I must be off, or I shall have Billy up to hunt me off.  Good-bye,
my boy; glad to see you doing so well.  You've a lot to be thankful for,
and of course you are."

"Will you come again?"  I asked.

"Gladly; that is, if Billy allows me," said he, laughing, and nodding
kindly as he left the room.

"No wonder," thought I, as I listened to his footsteps going down
stairs--"no wonder Jack Smith found these lodgings pleasanter than
Beadle Square."

I saw Mr Smith frequently during the next few days.  He usually came up
to sit with me for half an hour or so in the morning, and was always the
same cheery and interesting companion.

And yet I could not quite make him out.  For when not talking or smiling
his face used to wear a look of habitual trouble and restlessness, which
made me suspect he was either making an effort to be cheery before me,
or else that he was the victim of a constant battle between good spirits
and bad.

However, just as I was getting to feel intimate with him, and looking
forward to hear more about him than I had yet learned, my recovery came
to a sudden and rather serious halt.

I was lying one evening propped up in my bed, with my damaged arm
feeling comparatively comfortable, and myself in a particularly jovial
frame of mind as I listened to Jack Smith attempting to instil into the
mind of the volatile Billy the art of spelling d-o-g--dog.

"Now, Billy," said the instructor, "you'll never get on at this rate.
That letter you're pointing at is a B for Billy, and not a D."

"That there B's a caution," growled the boy; "he's always a-turnin' up."

"Time you knew him, then," said Smith.  "Now show us the D."

Billy cocked his head a little to one side and took a critical survey of
the alphabet before him.  His eye passed once down and once up the
procession, then looking up at Jack with a grin, he said, "He's 'iding,
I reckon, governor.  That there dorg'll have to start with a B after
all."

Our laughter at this philosophic observation was interrupted by an
unwonted footstep on the stairs outside.  It certainly was not Mr
Smith, for he was out at his work; nor was it the doctor, our only other
visitor, for he always came up two steps at a time, and his boots always
squeaked.  Who could our visitor be?

"Come in," called Smith, as a knock sounded on the door.

To my utter astonishment and concern, Hawkesbury, with his sweetest
smile, entered the room.

How had he found out my retreat?  What did he want here?  What would
Jack Smith say?  These were the questions which rushed through my mind
as he closed the door behind him and walked into the room.

I glanced round at Jack.  There was written anything but peace in his
countenance, while Billy glared like a young bulldog ready to spring on
the intruder.

"Well, Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, in his blandest voice, addressing me
and ignoring everybody else; "you'll be surprised to see me here.  The
fact is, I couldn't feel happy till I came to see you and tell you how
sorry I was for your accident."

My few days' confinement and the opportunity for meditation they had
afforded had served to give me an insight into Hawkesbury's character
which made me treat this speech suspiciously.  I replied nothing, and
felt very uncomfortable.

"It was most unfortunate," proceeded Hawkesbury, helping himself to the
chair.  "You know--"

"Excuse me," interrupted Smith at this point, in a tone which made me
start; "this is my room, Hawkesbury, and I must ask you to go."

The visitor's face clouded with a quick shade of vexation, but
immediately regained its chronic smile, as he said, "Ah, Smith!  I
should have said it was my friend Batchelor I came to see, not you."

"You're no friend of his," retorted Smith, with rising wrath.

"Do you hear, nob," broke in Billy, unable to restrain himself any
longer; "you ain't a-wanted here."

Hawkesbury looked round with an amused smile.

"Really," said he, "a most gratifying reception, and from a most
unexpected quarter.  Er--excuse me, Smith, I'm afraid it's rather a
strange request--would you mind allowing me to have a little private
conversation with my friend?"

"No," replied Smith, firmly.

"Really," said Hawkesbury.  "I must appeal to Batchelor himself."

"I shall answer for Batchelor," said Smith, not giving me time to reply.
"Leave my room, please."

"Do you hear?  You leave the bloke's room," cried Billy.  "Ef you don't
you'll get a topper."

Hawkesbury, whose colour had been rising during the last few moments,
and whose assurance had gradually been deserting him, now turned round
with a ceremonious smile to the last speaker as he rose to his feet and
said, "If _you_ desire it, I'll go.  I can submit to be ordered off by a
shoeblack, but the son of a convict is--"

With clenched fist and crimson face Jack gave a sudden bound towards the
speaker.  But as suddenly he checked himself and walked gently to my
bed, where I had started up ready to spring to my feet and back up my
friend in what seemed a certain quarrel.

"What a cad I am!" he murmured, as he bent over me, and motioned me
gently back to my pillow, "but the fellow nearly drives me mad."

I was too exhausted by my effort to say anything.

Jack remained by my side while the unwelcome visitor slowly walked to
the door.  But if one of Hawkesbury's enemies was disposed of, another
remained.  Billy, who had been a fuming and speechless witness of this
last scene, now boiled over completely, and was to be kept in check no
longer.

Wasting no words, he made a wild dash at the retreating intruder and
closed with him.  He would have closed with a lion, I firmly believe, if
a lion had made himself obnoxious to Jack Smith.

Hawkesbury turned suddenly to receive the assault; an angry flush
overspread his face, his hands clenched, and next moment Billy reeled
back bleeding and almost senseless into the middle of the room, and the
visitor had gone.

This was the event which put a check on my recovery.

To lie helpless and see Jack Smith insulted before my face would have
been bad enough, but to hear him taunted with the very secret I had so
miserably and treacherously let out was more than I could endure.

I don't know what I did that evening, I was so weak and so excited.  I
have vague recollections of breaking out into passionate self-reproaches
and wild entreaties for forgiveness; and of Jack Smith with pale and
troubled face bending over me trying to soothe me, imploring me to be
still, telling me twenty times there was nothing left to forgive.  And
then in the middle of the scene the doctor arrived, with serious face
and hushed voice.  He felt my pulse more carefully than ever, and took
my temperature not once only, but several times.  There was a hurried
consultation in the corner of the room, of which all I heard were the
words "most unfortunate" and "fever."  My usual supper of bread-and-
butter and an _egg_ gave place to a cup of beef-tea, which I could
scarcely taste, and after that some medicine.  Jack, with a face more
solemn than ever, made his bed at the foot of mine, and smoothed my
pillow for me and whispered--

"Be sure and call if you want anything."

Then everything was silent and dark, and I began to realise that I was
ill.  I shall never forget that night.  I tossed restlessly and
ceaselessly all through it.  In whatever position I lay I found no
relief.  My arm seemed to pain me more than ever before, my head ached,
I was nearly suffocated with heat.  And my mind was as restless as my
body.  One after another the follies and meannesses, the failures and
sins of my life in London, rose up before me and stared me in the face.
Try all I would, I could not get rid of them.  I tried to think of other
things--of books I had read, of stories I had heard, of places I had
seen, of Stonebridge House, of Brownstroke--but no, the thought of my
pitiful career in London, my debts, my evil acquaintances, my treachery
to my friend, would come and come and come, and drive out all else.  And
all the while I seemed to see Jack's solemn face looking reproachfully
at me from the bottom of the bed, just as it had looked at me that
morning weeks ago at Hawk Street.  Once, instead of being at the bottom
of the bed, I found it close beside me, saying--

"What is it, old boy?"

"Eh? nothing.  I didn't call."

"Yes you did.  Do try and lie still and get some rest."

Lie still!  As soon tell the waves to lie still in the storm as expect
me, with my fever-tossed body and mind, to rest!

So the night wore on, and when the morning light struggled through the
window it found me in a raging fever and delirious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I must pass over the weeks that followed.  I was very ill--as ill, so
they told me afterwards, as I well could be, and live.

Jack watched me incessantly.  I don't know what arrangement he came to
at Hawk Street, but while I was at my worst he never left my bedside day
or night.

No one else was allowed up, except occasionally Billy, to relieve guard.
With these two nurses to tend me--and never a patient had two such
guardian angels!--I battled with my fever, and came through it.

I came through it an altered being.

Surely--this was the thought with which I returned to health--we boys,
sent up to rough it in London, are not, after all, mere slung stones.
There _is_ One who cares for us, some One who comes after us when we go
astray, some One who saves us when we are at the point of falling, if we
will but cry, in true penitence, to Him!

I had had many and grievous lessons before I had found it out; but now I
had, life seemed a new thing to me!

As my convalescence advanced and my bodily strength returned, my spirits
rose within me, and I felt eager to be back at my post at Hawk Street.
However, I had to exercise some patience yet.  Meanwhile, with Billy
(and occasionally Mr Smith), as my companion by day, and Jack by night,
the time could hardly hang heavily.

"Well, Billy," I said one morning when the doctor had been and told me
that next week I might be allowed to sit up for an hour or so a day, "I
shall soon be rid of this bed.  I don't know what would have become of
me if it hadn't been for you and Jack Smith."

"Ga on," said Billy, who, with his tongue in one cheek and his face
twisting into all sorts of contortions, was sitting writing an exercise
in a copy-book, "you don't know what you're torkin' about."

"Oh yes, I do, though," I replied, understanding that this was Billy's
modest way of disclaiming any merit.

"More'n you didn't when you was 'avin' the fever!" observed the boy.

"What?"  I inquired.  "Was I talking much when I was ill?"

"You was so," said Billy, "a-joring and a-joring and a-joring same as
you never heard a bloke."

"What was I saying?"  I asked, feeling a little uneasy as to what I
might have said in my delirium.

"You was a swearin' tremenjus," said the boy.

"Was I?"  Alas!  Jack would have heard it all.

"Yes, and you was a-torkin' about your Crowses, and Wollopses, and
Doubledaisies, and sich like.  And you was a-tellin' that there
'Orksbury (which I'd like to do for, the animal, so I would), as you was
a convex son, and he wasn't to tell no one for fear Mashing should 'ear
of it.  And you was a-crying out for your friend Smith to shine your
boots, and tellin' him you wouldn't do it never no more.  And you was a-
singin' out that there was a little gal a-bein' run away with on a pony,
and you must go and stop 'im.  You was a-jawin', rather."

I could hardly help laughing at his description, though its details
reminded me sadly of my old follies and their consequences.

The most extraordinary raving of all, however, was that which referred
to my stopping the little girl's runaway pony at Packworth years ago--an
incident I don't believe I had ever once thought of since.

It was curious, too, that, now it was called to memory, I thought of the
adventure a good deal, and wished I knew what had become of the owner of
that restive little pony.  I determined to tell Jack about it when he
came home.

"What do you think, Jack?"  I said, as he was tucking me up for the
night.  "Billy has been telling me what I was talking about in my fever,
and says one thing I discoursed about was a little girl who was being
run away with by a pony."

"Yes," said Jack, laughing; "I heard that.  It was quite a new light for
you, old man, to be dreaming of that sort of romantic thing."

"But it really happened once," I said.

"No! where?  I thought the Henniker and Mrs Nash were the only lady
friends you ever had?  Where was it?"

"At Packworth, of all places," I said.  "It was that day I went over to
try and find you out--just before we came up to London, you know.  I was
walking back to Brownstroke, and met the pony bolting down the road."

Jack seemed suddenly very much interested.  "What sort of little girl
was it?" he asked.

"I can't exactly tell you.  She was so frightened I had hardly time to
look at her.  But--"

"What sort of pony?" asked Jack.

"A grey one--and a jolly little animal, too!"  I said.  "But why do you
ask?"

"Only," said Jack, with a peculiar smile, "because it strikes me very
forcibly the young person in question was my sister, that's all!"

"What!"  I exclaimed, in amazement, "your sister!--the little girl of
the photograph!  Oh, Jack, how extraordinary!"

"It is queer," said Jack; "but it's a fact all the same.  I heard about
it when I was last home.  The pony took fright, so they told me, and--
wasn't there a nurse with her?"

"Yes, there was."

"Yes; that was Mrs Shield.  The pony took fright as she was walking
beside it, and Mary would have come to grief to a dead certainty, so
they both say, if a young gentleman hadn't rushed up and stopped it.
Why, Fred, old man," said he, taking my hand, "I little thought I owed
you all that!"

I took his hand warmly, but humbly.

"Jack," I said, "I think it's almost time you and I gave up talking
about what we owe to one another.  But," I added, after a moment, "if
you do want to do me a favour, just let us have a look at that
photograph again, will you, old man?"



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

HOW I FOUND MYSELF ONCE MORE AT HAWK STREET.

In due time the doctor paid his final visit and gave me leave to return
to Hawk Street.

I can't describe how strange it seemed to be walking out once more in
the open air, leaning on Jack's arm, and feeling myself an active member
of society.

The part of the town where Jack's lodgings were situated was new to me.
It could not have been worse than Beadle Square, but it wasn't much
better.  This street was narrow and squalid and crowded, and presented
no attractions either in the way of fresh air or convenience.  Still, to
me, any place that harboured Jack Smith would have been more homelike
than the stateliest mansion.

"By the way," said Jack, as we walked down to the office the first
morning, "I suppose you don't want to go back to Beadle Square."

"Not if I can help it," I said; "the only thing is, I suppose, I ought
to tell my uncle.  You know he paid my lodging there."

"Oh, that's all right," said Jack.  "I went down one day and saw Mrs
Nash and told her what had become of you, and said she might let your
bed to any one else.  And I wrote to your uncle (I thought it best not
to bother you by telling you at the time), and told him where you were
and how you were getting on.  He wrote back a civil note to say he was
glad to hear you were getting better; and with regard to the lodgings,
he had been just about to write and say that as you had now a
respectable income at the office he would not be continuing to pay for
your lodging; so that when you got well you might consider yourself free
to do as you liked in that respect."

"Awfully obliging of him," said I.

"Well, it struck me as rather a cordial way of putting it," remarked
Jack, laughing.

"I had better look for quarters at once," said I.

"Do nothing of the kind.  Stay where you are!"

"What?"  I exclaimed, in pleased astonishment.  The idea had never
occurred to me before.  "How ever could I?  As it is I've been turning
Mr Smith out long enough."

"He was talking to me about it the other day," said Jack.  "He finds
that all his time is now required at the office of the newspaper he
writes for, and therefore he has really no use for his room except as a
bedroom.  So that our room up stairs is at our complete disposal."

"How jolly!"  I exclaimed.  "Nothing could have happened more
delightfully."

"Nothing," said Jack, as pleased as I was; "and he says any time of an
evening when he's away we can use the lower room as if it was our own.
Isn't it brickish of him?"

I agreed heartily in the sentiment, and proceeded to Hawk Street with
less weight on my mind than ever.

There, as was natural, I found myself an object of a good deal of
interest and remark.  Doubleday, who once during my illness had sent me
a short note of sympathy by Smith, was the first to welcome me back to
my old quarters.

"Here we are again, young 'un, alive and kicking," cried he, clapping me
on the back as I entered.  "How his whiskers have grown, haven't they,
Wallop?  Well, how's your game leg?"

"It was my arm, not my leg," I said.

"No! was it?  I heard it was your off-leg and your spine and your skull
that were smashed.  That's what made me so surprised to see you.  Never
mind, I'm glad to see you, young 'un, for there's a ticklish bit of
figure work to do.  None of the others would look at it, so I've saved
it up for you, my boy."

"And I'm ready for it," said I.

Crow and Wallop greeted me rather more shyly.  I fancy they had had
rather a fright when they heard how very ill I had been.

They shook hands rather sheepishly, and Wallop said something about the
weather which had no actual bearing, on my recovery.  I had come to the
conclusion during my illness that Crow and Wallop had not been
altogether profitable companions, and I was therefore glad they were not
more demonstrative now.

But I had yet to meet Hawkesbury, and wished the operation well over;
for however much I may once have believed in him, I now disliked him,
and determined to have as little to do with him as possible.

"Ah, Batchelor," cried he, coming up with outstretched hand, and beaming
as if the incident in my sick-room weeks ago had never happened.  "So
glad to see you back.  We have missed you greatly.  How do you feel?
You're looking better than when I saw you last."

I just took his hand and said, "Thank you," as shortly as I could.

He appeared neither to notice my manner nor my tone.

"You've had a long spell of it," said he.  "I'd no idea a broken arm was
such a serious thing.  But I dare say you'll be all the better for your
long rest."

I set to work to open my desk and get together my papers and pens, ready
for work.

"It was a bad fall you had," continued he, standing beside me as I was
thus employed.  "You have no idea how distressed I was when it happened.
But Whipcord was really in such a shocking state that night that--"

"Can you give me a piece of blotting-paper?"  I said to Doubleday across
the desk.

He waited till I had got what I wanted, and proceeded, smiling as ever,
"It really wasn't safe for any of us.  Masham, by the way, was very
sorry to hear of your accident, and asked me to tell you so.  I meant to
do so the evening I called, but your friend was really so polite that I
forgot all about it."

I had stood it thus far, and kept to my resolve of saying as little as I
could.  But when he brought in Jack's name it was all I could do to hold
my peace.

I made an excuse to leave my place and consult a Directory, in the hopes
of shaking him off, but there he was when I returned, ready to go on as
benignly as ever.

"I'm sure, Batchelor," said he, "it must have been greatly against you
to be cooped up in that miserable lodging all the time, and in--what I
should call--such uncongenial society.  But when one is ill, of course
one has just to put up with what one can get."

My patience had reached its limit at last.

"My friend's society is more congenial to me than yours is at present!"
I said, colouring up and bending over my writing.

"I see," said he, "he has got you under this thumb again, and means to
keep you there."

"Will you let me get on with my work?"  I said.

"Oh, certainly!" said he, smiling blandly.  "I merely wished to tell you
how glad I was to see you back at last; but I dare say that doesn't
interest you."

I made no answer, and, seeing that I was determined to hold no more
conversation, he gently withdrew.

I felt quite relieved when he had done so, and still more to find that,
for the first time in my life, I had been proof against his
blandishments.

"What have you been doing to Petty-Cash?" whispered Doubleday to me,
presently; "he looks so smiling and benevolent that I'm certain you must
have given him mortal offence about something or other."

