
THE COASTGUARDSMAN'S YARN.

A LEGEND OF THE CIVIL WAR.

Several summers ago I happened to be spending a few weeks at W--, a
small fishing village on the Welsh coast.  A beautiful little place it
was, nestling in a break of the cliffs which rose majestically above it
on either side and stretched in gaunt rugged walls seaward.

The beautiful bay, with its sunset lights behind the grand headland,
with its deep caves and tumbled rocks, and above all its blue waters,
lying sometimes calm and motionless, and at others dashing furiously at
the foot of the cliffs, was enough to attract any lover of nature.

And dull little place as it was, with its one tiny inn and its handful
of natives, the time I spent there, with my easel and paint-brush, was
one of the most enjoyable of my life.

But beautiful as the view was from the land, I found the view from the
sea still more attractive, and in order to gratify my tastes in this
respect, I took pains to get myself into the good graces of one or two
of the fishermen, a few of whom could speak English, and many times
accompanied them on their fishing cruises in the bay, where, while they
toiled at the nets, I sat and drank in the thousand beauties of the
coast, or worked eagerly with my brush to commit them to canvas.

The expedition I liked best was towards the southern headland of the
bay, where the cliffs were tallest and steepest and where, to add to the
other attractions of the view, stood, perched like an eagle's nest on
the edge of the crag, the ruins of an old castle.

By old, I do not mean Roman or even Norman.  Indeed in that sense it was
comparatively modern; for the building, what was left of it, looked more
like one of those Tudor manor-houses which dot the country still, than a
fortress.  And yet, that it had been fortified was plain enough even
still.  On the side towards the sea it needed no protection; indeed
looking up at it from below, it seemed almost to overhang its
precipitous foundation.  But on the land side there remained traces of a
moat, and loop-holes in the walls, and a massive gate.

It was scarcely to be called a picturesque ruin, except inasmuch as
every ruin is picturesque.  Its bare walls rose gaunt and black out of
the ground, not out of a heap of tumbled moss-grown masonry, or covered
over with ivy.  There were very few signs of decay about the place,
ruinous as it was, and very little examination was enough to show that
it had suffered not from old age, or from the cannon of an enemy, but
from fire.

No one about could tell me its story, and the mystery of the place only
added to its charm.  Indeed I was quite glad to discover that it had not
even a name, and that the country folk would as soon have thought of
crossing the old moat after nightfall as they would have done of
stepping over the edge of the cliff.  The only thing I could learn about
it, in fact, was that it was haunted, and that the one little turret
which still retained a roof, and over which the only ivy visible tried
to creep, was railed the Lady Tower, and was the "most haunted" spot of
all.

I could not believe that the one corner of the old ruin where there
still remained a sign of life and verdure, could be infested by any very
terrible ghost.  Still I am not quite sure whether I should have enjoyed
a solitary night's rest there, and to have suggested the thing to the
natives of W-- would have been enough to secure my incarceration as a
raving lunatic.  So I did not.  But by daytime I added myself one more
to the spirits that haunted the place, and yielded myself up completely
to its fascination.

One day towards the end of my visit I walked over to a coastguard
station some miles along the shore for the sake of taking a last survey
of the beautiful coast.  When I reached it I found, to my pleasure, one
of the W-- fishing-boats just preparing to put out and sail round the
headland back to the village.  One of the coastguardsmen was on board,
and I was glad to accept the invitation of my honest friend to form
another of the party.

I found the coastguardsman a most intelligent fellow--well informed on
many subjects, and even professing to be something of an art critic.  I
showed him one or two of my pictures, and he was graciously pleased to
approve of them, especially a sketch of the ruined castle from the
south, with the Lady Tower in the foreground.

The examination of this picture naturally turned the conversation on to
the ruin, and I was delighted to find my companion seemed almost as
interested in the subject as I was.

"It's a strange thing," said I, "that the one thing wanting seems to be
a story."

"Ah! that was burnt out by the fire, sir."

I was rude enough to laugh.  He fancied I was lamenting the absence of
the top storey!

"I don't mean that," I said.  "What I mean is, no one seems to know
anything about the place or its history."

"Not they!  What should they bother their heads about it for?"

"But it must have a history of some sort," said I.

"Of course it has."

"Do you know it?"

"Of course I do."

It was quite a shock to me to find any one knew anything about my ruin,
and it was some time before I ventured to ask--

"Would you tell it to me?"

Instead of saying "Yes," the coastguardsman laid down his telescope,
pulled a plug of tobacco out of his pocket, and, cutting off a small
quid, put it into his mouth, looked up at the sail, shifted himself once
or twice in his seat, and then, looking to see if I was ready, began--

"It's not such a wonderful yarn after all, sir.  You see, something like
two hundred and fifty years ago, when our Civil Wars were going on--
you've heard of them, I suppose?--yonder castle belonged to a stout
Charles the First's man called Fulke.  He owned a good bit about this
coast, I'm told, and the folk at the New Manor are sort of descendants.
But direct descendants they can't be, for Fulke only had one daughter,
sir, and she never married.  If it hadn't been for those cruel wars she
would have been married, though, for she was betrothed to a neighbour,
young Morgan, who lived beyond that hill there, and mightily they loved
one another too!  Fulke, whose lands joined on Morgan's, was pleased
enough to have the two families united, and united they would have been
to this day but for the Civil Wars.  I'm no great hand at dates, sir,
but it was somewheres about 1642 that things began to get unpleasant.

"One day, not long before the wedding was to be, Fulke and his daughter
went over to Morgan Hall; and while the young folk spent the day love-
making in the garden the two old folk sat and discussed the affairs of
the nation in the house.  And it's safe to say the two out of doors
agreed far better than the two indoors.  For Morgan went with the
Parliament, and told Fulke the King had no right to try and arrest the
five members, and that the Parliament had done a fine thing in
protecting them, and that if he'd been there he'd have called out
against the King as loud as any of them.  At that Fulke--who was a hot-
headed man at best of times, and who went mad to hear any one say a word
against the King--got up in a rage, and, taking his hat, stalked out
into the garden, and taking his daughter by the arm marched away from
Morgan Hall with never a word.

"It was a sad business.  The young folks begged and the old Morgan sent
a letter; but no, Fulke wouldn't listen to one of them, and forbade his
daughter to leave the castle.

"Whether the lovers saw one another after that I don't know, but almost
directly after the war blazed out and the whole country went mad.
Morgan and his son had to leave these parts, and took arms under the
Parliament, while Fulke brought guns and powder into his castle, and
hoisted the flag of King Charles.

"The young lady had a busy time of it sheltering and entertaining the
Royalists who came this way.  But she had no heart in it--not that she
didn't love the King, sir.  Yet she loved young Morgan more.

"So things went on for four or live years.  The King, as you know, sir,
got the worst of it, and was driven to his wits' end.  Most of his
friends had fallen, and some had deserted.  But so far no one had given
Fulke much trouble.  Either they had never heard of him, or saw there
was not much to fear from him.  So the Royal flag waved over the castle
day and night, and the young lady did what her father bid her, and never
went abroad or heard a word of young Morgan.

"But at last the King, not knowing what to do, tried to bring over the
Irish to help him.  And then it was the troubles in these parts began.
For every one that was suspected of aiding in this venture was doomed by
the Parliament.

"And Fulke was suspected.  Rightly or wrongly I can't say, but I've a
notion there was something in it.  Anyway, his castle commanded the bay,
and the Parliament made up their minds to have it.  Fulke had only time
to get a score or so of men with arms and provender inside his gate,
when a troop of roundheads came with their guns over the lulls and sat
down before it.

"The leader of the troop was a Colonel Frank, a cruel, ruffianly fellow,
as you shall hear.  And the second in command was no other than young
Captain Morgan himself.

"He had had plenty of rough work during the war, and had done it well.
And it's a pity, sir, all the Parliament's officers weren't of his sort,
for he was as unlike Colonel Frank as a house-dog is to a wolf.  When
first ordered on this expedition he didn't know where he was going, and
you can fancy his horror at finding out that he was to lay siege to the
very castle that held his lady-love.  At first he would have held back,
and even refused.  But he was under iron rules, and besides, thought he,
I might help my lady more by going than staying away.

"So he came with the troop to the castle, and looked wistfully up at the
little turret yonder, and prayed that she might never know that he was
where he was.

"Colonel Frank came expecting an easy task with this small out-of-the-
way castle.  But it was not so easy as he thought.  On two sides, as you
see, sir, no mortal man could get at it.  And on the other two, Fulke
had guarded himself so well that by the end of a fortnight the
Roundheads were not an inch nearer getting the place than they had been
when they began.

"The rage of the colonel knew no bounds, and he vowed all sorts of
vengeance.  You may fancy one of his men did not join in his threats.
Many a time that fortnight Captain Morgan wished a shot from the castle
might find him out and end his misery.  And yet whenever he was tempted
to desert or quarrel with his colonel the thought of the lady left with
no protector at the mercy of such a man held him to his post.  All he
could do was once or twice to urge the colonel to raise the siege, or
come to terms with its master.  But Frank was bent on vengeance, and at
last poor Morgan had to desist for fear of getting suspected himself.

"About three weeks after the siege had begun, when the Roundheads were
beginning to lose spirit, and Morgan's hopes were beginning to rise once
more, a trooper rushed into the colonel's tent to say he had found a
small cave below the top of the cliff which seemed to run up under the
castle.  The colonel's eyes blazed at the news, and he ordered the man
to lead him instantly to the spot.  Do you see a square grey patch on
the face of the cliff up there, sir, nearly at the top, under the south
corner?"

"Yes; what is it?"

"That's the mouth of the cave.  At least, it's not a cave now, for it's
filled up.  But it was there the trooper, under cover of night, led the
colonel and the captain.  They didn't do more than mark the place then,
for fear an alarm might be given by a sentinel within.

"`Now,' says Colonel Frank, `the castle's ours; and not a soul inside it
shall be there by this time to-morrow.'

"`What shall you do?' says Captain Morgan, pale, and with a shaky voice.

"`Do?  Art thou a dunce, Morgan?  Without doubt, at the end of that cave
is a way up into the castle; and though the passage be too narrow for
all my troop, three men and a captain will suffice to lay faggots and
light them at the door.  What say you, comrade?'

"`What!' cries Morgan, `would you burn the place?  No, no, colonel; we
will capture it if we can, but it is no soldier's work to burn men in
their beds!'

"`Fool!' exclaims the colonel, in a passion, `it is no captain's work to
read sermons to his colonel, sirrah!  These rebels shall be smoked out
like all other vermin!'

"`But,' says the captain once more, and very pale--`but I hear there is
a lady in the castle, and--'

"`Peace, sir, on your peril!' exclaims the colonel, `and hold yourself
ready to obey orders when I shall give them.'

It was no use saying more, young Morgan saw that.  As it was, he knew
his colonel half suspected him of some treachery, and for the rest of
that day put a watch upon him.  Twenty times that day he was on the
point of risking all consequences and declaring to his officer's face he
would have no hand in this bad business.  But the thought of how much
worse that might be for the folk in the castle kept him to his post.

"Well, sir, the day passed, and they kept up a show of besieging the
place on the land side, and took care to keep all Fulke's guns turned
that way.  But at nightfall Colonel Frank called Morgan to him and
ordered him to take six men, whom he named, and try the passage.

"`If you find a sentinel at this end,' says the colonel, `see he is
overpowered and taken before an alarm can be given.  Over the cliff will
be the shortest way with him.  The men you take know their business; and
see you perform yours!' he says, with a scowl.  `I and the rest of the
troop will be ready to storm the place as soon as we see the flames.  Go
now, lose no time; and, hark you, there is no quarter to-night for
traitors!'

"This last remark may have been meant for the captain, who knew that, at
heart, he was a traitor to the Parliament that night; or it may have
been meant for the inmates of the castle.  Anyway, it sounded ugly
enough, and it was all Morgan could do to hold his peace and make no
reply.

"He found the six men waiting for him without, and in the darkness they
crept stealthily round to the edge of the cliff, where a narrow ledge
led down to the end of the cave.

"It was a perilous step down, especially to those unaccustomed to the
way.  But the spot had been carefully marked in the daytime, and
presently the little band all stood there at the entrance.  Morgan in
his secret heart wished some sentinel of the besieged might have
perceived them, and so given an alarm.  But no; such was the security
Fulke felt in the secrecy of his cave that it never entered his head to
guard it.

"The men entered one by one, with a man carrying a light in front.  The
passage was too narrow to allow of two abreast, and too low for any one
to stand upright in it.  So, single file, on hands and knees, they
crawled forward.

"At last, when they had gone some way, and the sound of the sea grew
faint in the distance, Morgan halted his men.

"`Give me the light,' says he, `and stay here while I go forward and see
how the passage ends.'

"He crawled forward to the front of the file and took the torch from the
hands of the foremost man.  But when he began to move forward he noticed
that two of the band followed him at a short distance.

"`Did I not order you to remain with the rest?' demands he, angrily.

"`Pardon, captain.  The colonel bade us keep close to you,' says one of
the men, sourly.

"Morgan's blood ran cold in his veins, and his last hope of giving a
friendly warning to those in the castle vanished.  However, it was no
time to quarrel, and he answered, with a forced laugh, `The colonel
flatters me by his attention.  But, as he is anxious for my welfare,
come on, my men, and keep your eyes on me.'

"The three went forward, till the cave became so narrow that they could
scarcely drag themselves farther.  In one place a little chink in the
roof let in a faint ray of moonlight from above.

"At length they could get no farther, and Morgan, turning his head,
said, `It's a false scent, after all; the cave leads nowhere!'

"But at that moment over their heads they heard a sound of feet, and
