Little cared Forsyth for that.  He lay almost stunned on his couch,
quite regardless of the storm.  To his surprise, however, the toothache
did not return.  Nay, to make a long story short, it never again
returned to that tooth till the end of his days!

The storm now blew its fiercest, and the men sat in silence in the
kitchen listening to the turmoil, and to the thundering blows given by
the sea to their wooden house.  Suddenly the beacon received a shock so
awful, and so thoroughly different from any that it had previously
received, that the men sprang to their feet in consternation.

Ruby and the smith were looking out at the doorway at the time, and both
instinctively grasped the woodwork near them, expecting every instant
that the whole structure would be carried away; but it stood fast.  They
speculated a good deal on the force of the blow they had received, but
no one hit on the true cause; and it was not until some days later that
they discovered that a huge rock of fully a ton weight had been washed
against the beams that night.

While they were gazing at the wild storm, a wave broke up the
mortar-gallery altogether, and sent its remaining contents into the sea.
All disappeared in a moment; nothing was left save the powerful beams
to which the platform had been nailed.

There was a small boat attached to the beacon.  It hung from two davits,
on a level with the kitchen, about thirty feet above the rock.  This had
got filled by the sprays, and the weight of water proving too much for
the tackling, it gave way at the bow shortly after the destruction of
the mortar-gallery, and the boat hung suspended by the stern-tackle.
Here it swung for a few minutes, and then was carried away by a sea.
The same sea sent an eddy of foam round towards the door and drenched
the kitchen, so that the door had to be shut, and as the fire had gone
out, the men had to sit and await their fate by the light of a little
oil-lamp.

They sat in silence, for the noise was now so great that it was
difficult to hear voices, unless when they were raised to a high pitch.

Thus passed that terrible night; and the looks of the men, the solemn
glances, the closed eyes, the silently moving lips, showed that their
thoughts were busy reviewing bygone days and deeds; perchance in making
good resolutions for the future--"if spared!"

Morning brought a change.  The rush of the sea was indeed still
tremendous, but the force of the gale was broken and the danger was
past.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS.

Time rolled on, and the lighthouse at length began to grow.

It did not rise slowly, as does an ordinary building.  The courses of
masonry having been formed and fitted on shore during the winter, had
only to be removed from the workyard at Arbroath to the rock, where they
were laid, mortared, wedged, and trenailed, as fast as they could be
landed.

Thus, foot by foot it grew, and soon began to tower above its
foundation.

From the foundation upwards for thirty feet it was built solid.  From
this point rose the spiral staircase leading to the rooms above.  We
cannot afford space to trace its erection step by step, neither is it
desirable that we should do so.  But it is proper to mention, that there
were, as might be supposed, leading points in the process--eras, as it
were, in the building operations.

The first of these, of course, was the laying of the foundation stone,
which was done ceremoniously, with all the honours.  The next point was
the occasion when the tower showed itself for the first time above water
at full tide.  This was a great event.  It was proof positive that the
sea had been conquered; for many a time before that event happened had
the sea done its best to level the whole erection with the rock.

Three cheers announced and celebrated the fact, and a "glass" all round
stamped it on the memories of the men.

Another noteworthy point was the connexion--the marriage, if the simile
may be allowed--of the tower and the beacon.  This occurred when the
former rose to a few feet above high-water mark, and was effected by
means of a rope-bridge, which was dignified by the sailors with the name
of "Jacob's ladder."

Heretofore the beacon and lighthouse had stood in close relation to each
other.  They were thenceforward united by a stronger tie; and it is
worthy of record that their attachment lasted until the destruction of
the beacon after the work was done.  Jacob's ladder was fastened a
little below the doorway of the beacon.  Its other end rested on, and
rose with, the wall of the tower.  At first it sloped downward from
beacon to tower; gradually it became horizontal; then it sloped upward.
When this happened it was removed, and replaced by a regular wooden
bridge, which extended from the doorway of the one structure to that of
the other.

Along this way the men could pass to and fro at all tides, and during
any time of the day or night.

This was a matter of great importance, as the men were no longer so
dependent on tides as they had been, and could often work as long as
their strength held out.

Although the work was regular, and, as some might imagine, rather
monotonous, there were not wanting accidents and incidents to enliven
the routine of daily duty.  The landing of the boats in rough weather
with stones, etcetera, was a never-failing source of anxiety, alarm, and
occasionally amusement.  Strangers sometimes visited the rock, too, but
these visits were few and far between.

Accidents were much less frequent, however, than might have been
expected in a work of the kind.  It was quite an event, something to
talk about for days afterwards, when poor John Bonnyman, one of the
masons, lost a finger.  The balance crane was the cause of this
accident.  We may remark, in passing, that this balance crane was a very
peculiar and clever contrivance, which deserves a little notice.

It may not have occurred to readers who are unacquainted with mechanics
that the raising of ponderous stones to a great height is not an easy
matter.  As long as the lighthouse was low, cranes were easily raised on
the rock, but when it became too high for the cranes to reach their
heads up to the top of the tower, what was to be done?  Block-tackles
could not be fastened to the skies!  Scaffolding in such a situation
would not have survived a moderate gale.

In these circumstances Mr Stevenson constructed a _balance_ crane,
which was fixed in the centre of the tower, and so arranged that it
could be raised along with the rising works.  This crane resembled a
cross in form.  At one arm was hung a movable weight, which could be run
out to its extremity, or fixed at any part of it.  The other arm was the
one by means of which the stones were hoisted.  When a stone had to be
raised, its weight was ascertained, and the movable weight was so fixed
as _exactly_ to counterbalance it.  By this simple contrivance all the
cumbrous and troublesome machinery of long guys and bracing-chains
extending from the crane to the rock below were avoided.

Well, Bonnyman was attending to the working of the crane, and directing
the lowering of a stone into its place, when he inadvertently laid his
left hand on a part of the machinery where it was brought into contact
with the chain, which passed over his forefinger, and cut it so nearly
off that it was left hanging by a mere shred of skin.  The poor man was
at once sent off in a fast rowing boat to Arbroath, where the finger was
removed and properly dressed.  [See note 1.]

A much more serious accident occurred at another time, however, which
resulted in the death of one of the seamen belonging to the _Smeaton_.

It happened thus.  The _Smeaton_ had been sent from Arbroath with a
cargo of stones one morning, and reached the rock about half-past six
o'clock a.m.  The mate and one of the men, James Scott, a youth of
eighteen years of age, got into the sloop's boat to make fast the hawser
to the floating buoy of her moorings.

The tides at the time were very strong, and the mooring-chain when
sweeping the ground had caught hold of a rock or piece of wreck, by
which the chain was so shortened, that when the tide flowed the buoy got
almost under water, and little more than the ring appeared at the
surface.  When the mate and Scott were in the act of making the hawser
fast to the ring, the chain got suddenly disentangled at the bottom, and
the large buoy, measuring about seven feet in length by three in
diameter in the middle, vaulted upwards with such force that it upset
the boat, which instantly filled with water.  The mate with great
difficulty succeeded in getting hold of the gunwale, but Scott seemed to
have been stunned by the buoy, for he lay motionless for a few minutes
on the water, apparently unable to make any exertion to save himself,
for he did not attempt to lay hold of the oars or thwarts which floated
near him.

A boat was at once sent to the rescue, and the mate was picked up, but
Scott sank before it reached the spot.

This poor lad was a great favourite in the service, and for a time his
melancholy end cast a gloom over the little community at the Bell Rock.
The circumstances of the case were also peculiarly distressing in
reference to the boy's mother, for her husband had been for three years
past confined in a French prison, and her son had been the chief support
of the family.  In order in some measure to make up to the poor woman
for the loss of the monthly aliment regularly allowed her by her lost
son, it was suggested that a younger brother of the deceased might be
taken into the service.  This appeared to be a rather delicate
proposition, but it was left to the landing-master to arrange according
to circumstances.  Such was the resignation, and at the same time the
spirit of the poor woman, that she readily accepted the proposal, and in
a few days the younger Scott was actually afloat in the place of his
brother.  On this distressing case being represented to the Board, the
Commissioners granted an annuity of 5 pounds to the lad's mother.

The painter who represents only the sunny side of nature portrays a
one-sided, and therefore a false view of things, for, as everyone knows,
nature is not all sunshine.  So, if an author makes his pen-and-ink
pictures represent only the amusing and picturesque view of things, he
does injustice to his subject.

We have no pleasure, good reader, in saddening you by accounts of "fatal
accidents", but we have sought to convey to you a correct impression of
things, and scenes, and incidents at the building of the Bell Rock
Lighthouse, as they actually were, and looked, and occurred.  Although
there was much, _very_ much, of risk, exposure, danger, and trial
connected with the erection of that building, there was, in the good
providence of God, _very_ little of severe accident or death.  Yet that
little must be told,--at least touched upon,--else will our picture
remain incomplete as well as untrue.

Now, do not imagine, with a shudder, that these remarks are the prelude
to something that will harrow up your feelings.  Not so.  They are
merely the apology, if apology be needed, for the introduction of
another "accident."

Well, then.  One morning the artificers landed on the rock at a
quarter-past six, and as all hands were required for a piece of special
work that day, they breakfasted on the beacon, instead of returning to
the tender, and spent the day on the rock.

The special work referred to was the raising of the crane from the
eighth to the ninth course--an operation which required all the strength
that could be mustered for working the guy-tackles.  This, be it
remarked, was before the balance crane, already described, had been set
up; and as the top of the crane stood at the time about thirty-five feet
above the rock, it became much more unmanageable than heretofore.

At the proper hour all hands were called, and detailed to their several
posts on the tower, and about the rock.  In order to give additional
purchase or power in tightening the tackle, one of the blocks of stone
was suspended at the end of the movable beam of the crane, which, by
adding greatly to the weight, tended to slacken the guys or
supporting-ropes in the direction to which the beam with the stone was
pointed, and thereby enabled the men more easily to brace them one after
another.

While the beam was thus loaded, and in the act of swinging round from
one guy to another, a great strain was suddenly brought upon the
opposite tackle, with the end of which the men had very improperly
neglected to take a turn round some stationary object, which would have
given them the complete command of the tackle.

Owing to this simple omission, the crane, with the large stone at the
end of the beam, got a preponderancy to one side, and, the tackle
alluded to having rent, it fell upon the building with a terrible crash.

The men fled right and left to get out of its way; but one of them,
Michael Wishart, a mason, stumbled over an uncut trenail and rolled on
his back, and the ponderous crane fell upon him.  Fortunately it fell so
that his body lay between the great shaft and the movable beam, and thus
he escaped with his life, but his feet were entangled with the
wheel-work, and severely injured.

Wishart was a robust and spirited young fellow, and bore his sufferings
with wonderful firmness while he was being removed.  He was laid upon
one of the narrow frame-beds of the beacon, and despatched in a boat to
the tender.  On seeing the boat approach with the poor man stretched on
a bed covered with blankets, and his face overspread with that deadly
pallor which is the usual consequence of excessive bleeding, the
seamen's looks betrayed the presence of those well-known but
indescribable sensations which one experiences when brought suddenly
into contact with something horrible.  Relief was at once experienced,
however, when Wishart's voice was heard feebly accosting those who first
stepped into the boat.

He was immediately sent on shore, where the best surgical advice was
obtained, and he began to recover steadily, though slowly.  Meanwhile,
having been one of the principal masons, Robert Selkirk was appointed to
his vacant post.

And now let us wind up this chapter of accidents with an account of the
manner in which a party of strangers, to use a slang but expressive
phrase, came to grief during a visit to the Bell Rock.

One morning, a trim little vessel was seen by the workmen making for the
rock at low tide.  From its build and size, Ruby at once judged it to be
a pleasure yacht.  Perchance some delicate shades in the seamanship,
displayed in managing the little vessel, had influenced the sailor in
forming his opinion.  Be this as it may, the vessel brought up under the
lee of the rock and cast anchor.

It turned out to be a party of gentlemen from Leith, who had run down
the firth to see the works.  The weather was fine, and the sea calm, but
these yachters had yet to learn that fine weather and a calm sea do not
necessarily imply easy or safe landing at the Bell Rock!  They did not
know that the _swell_ which had succeeded a recent gale was heavier than
it appeared to be at a distance; and, worst of all, they did not know,
or they did not care to remember, that "there is a time for all things,"
and that the time for landing at the Bell Rock is limited.

Seeing that the place was covered with workmen, the strangers lowered
their little boat and rowed towards them.

"They're mad," said Logan, who, with a group of the men, watched the
motions of their would-be visitors.

"No," observed Joe Dumsby; "they are brave, but hignorant."

"_Faix_, they won't be ignorant long!" cried Ned O'Connor, as the little
boat approached the rock, propelled by two active young rowers in
Guernsey shirts, white trousers, and straw hats.  "You're stout, lads,
both of ye, an' purty good hands at the oar, _for gintlemen_; but av ye
wos as strong as Samson it would puzzle ye to stem these breakers, so ye
better go back."

The yachters did not hear the advice, and they would not have taken it
if they had heard it.  They rowed straight up towards the landing-place,
and, so far, showed themselves expert selectors of the right channel;
but they soon came within the influence of the seas, which burst on the
rock and sent up jets of spray to leeward.

These jets had seemed very pretty and harmless when viewed from the deck
of the yacht, but they were found on a nearer approach to be quite able,
and, we might almost add, not unwilling, to toss up the boat like a
ball, and throw it and its occupants head over heels into the air.

But the rowers, like most men of their class, were not easily cowed.
They watched their opportunity--allowed the waves to meet and rush on,
and then pulled into the midst of the foam, in the hope of crossing to
the shelter of the rock before the approach of the next wave.

Heedless of a warning cry from Ned O'Connor, whose anxiety began to make
him very uneasy, the amateur sailors strained every nerve to pull
through, while their companion who sat at the helm in the stern of the
boat seemed to urge them on to redoubled exertions.  Of course their
efforts were in vain.  The next billow caught the boat on its foaming
crest, and raised it high in the air.  For one moment the wave rose
between the boat and the men on the rock, and hid her from view, causing
Ned to exclaim, with a genuine groan, "Arrah! they's gone!"

But they were not; the boat's head had been carefully kept to the sea,
and, although she had been swept back a considerable way, and nearly
half-filled with water, she was still afloat.

The chief engineer now hailed the gentlemen, and advised them to return
and remain on board their vessel until the state of the tide would
permit him to send a proper boat for them.

In the meantime, however, a large boat from the floating light, pretty
deeply laden with lime, cement, and sand, approached, when the
strangers, with a view to avoid giving trouble, took their passage in
her to the rock.  The accession of three passengers to a boat, already
in a lumbered state, put her completely out of trim, and, as it
unluckily happened, the man who steered her on this occasion was not in
the habit of attending the rock, and was not sufficiently aware of the
run of the sea at the entrance of the eastern creek.

Instead, therefore, of keeping close to the small rock called _Johnny
Gray_, he gave it, as Ruby expressed it, "a wide berth."  A heavy sea
struck the boat, drove her to leeward, and, the oars getting entangled
among the rocks and seaweed, she became unmanageable.  The next sea
threw her on a ledge, and, instantly leaving her, she canted seaward
upon her gunwale, throwing her crew and part of her cargo into the
water.

All this was the work of a few seconds.  The men had scarce time to
realise their danger ere they found themselves down under the water; and
when they rose gasping to the surface, it was to behold the next wave
towering over them, ready to fall on their heads.  When it fell it
