
"All in favour please signify!" murmured Chairman Bessie.

Such a chorus of "Aye!" came in response that the motion was carried
unanimously, and nothing remained but to discuss details.

"We shall have to let the Juniors know about it, and start them
collecting," said Natalie Preston.

"We'd better each collect as much as possible in our own district or
parish," suggested Gwen. "Lesbia and I, for instance, can undertake
Skelwick. I'm sure some of the people there would give towards a cot."

"Then we'll have cards or books to enter the amounts?"

"Of course."

"What about the gymkhana?"

"We must appoint a special committee to arrange a programme and
competitions, and ask people if they'll offer prizes."

"I vote we appoint the prefects, then, as a committee."

"Right-o!"

Gwen came away from the meeting with flying colours. She had certainly
made a proposition which nobody else had thought of, but which all
acknowledged was exactly the most fitting to meet the circumstances.
For the first time in her experience she found her remarks receiving
the attention not only of her own Form, but even of the Sixth. The
prefects, mindful of their dignity, generally held themselves aloof,
so it was indeed a triumph for Gwen to be seized upon, after the
meeting was over, by Bessie Manners, and consulted upon the general
working of the scheme. To walk down the corridor linked arm in arm
with the head girl was a distinction that fell to few, and Gwen,
though she accepted the honour with apparent unconsciousness, knew
perfectly well that it would make an enormous difference to her
position in the school. For the moment she was talked about. Her plan
for the cot was called "Gwen Gascoyne's scheme", and to her was given
the entire credit for originating it. The more the idea was discussed,
the more everybody liked it. The mistresses sympathized heartily, and
the Juniors promised earnest co-operation. Gwen, for once, was
appreciated to her heart's content. It was wonderful how gracious the
prefects were towards her, and how the members of her own Form
suddenly treated her with respect. After so long a period of
unpopularity it was very sweet to find general opinion had thus veered
round, and Gwen enjoyed her new character of organizer to the full.
She threw herself heart and soul into the working of her scheme, and
thanks partly to her parish experience at Skelwick, and partly to a
practical element in her composition, she was able to give really good
and helpful advice, both as to the collecting of the fund, and the
arranging of the gymkhana. There was very little time before the day
of the anniversary, so those in authority were obliged to push matters
as fast as they could. Each girl in the school begged in her own
circle most assiduously, and from the reports that began to be
circulated the result seemed most encouraging.

"I believe we're going to get the L100 just by collecting, and that
the gymkhana will be extra," said Bessie Manners exultingly. "By the
by, Miss Roscoe wishes it to be known that she would much prefer not
to be offered a private testimonial, but that everything should go
towards the cot."

"Oh, we wanted to give her some remembrance, though," cried several of
the girls, rather disappointed.

"I'd set my heart on her having a silver teapot at least," said Iris
Watson.

"It's just like Miss Roscoe not to want anything personal," said
Gwen. "I must say I admire her for it. She always reminds me of an
ancient Roman--the State first and foremost in her estimation, and
herself nowhere."

"Yes, she'd sacrifice a good deal for the sake of the school," agreed
Bessie Manners.

It was decided to turn the anniversary into a kind of floral fete, to
be held in the large cricket field. There were to be morris dances, a
maypole dance, a procession of decorated bicycles, and numerous
athletic competitions. Tea, coffee, and lemonade would be served at
tables on the ground, and flowers and sweets could be carried round in
baskets and sold during the afternoon. It was wonderful when once the
ball had been set rolling how quickly offers of help flowed in. The
girls' parents and friends approved of the idea of a "Rodenhurst" cot
for the Convalescent Home, and were most kind in their contributions.
Enough cakes were promised to provide amply for afternoon tea. Bessie
Manners's mother undertook to send a supply of ices, and a generous
store of sweets and flowers seemed forthcoming. To have such an
excellent mutual object to work for seemed to unite all the members of
the school, and especially to break down the barrier between Seniors
and Juniors which had hitherto existed. While before it had hardly
been considered etiquette for the Sixth and Fifth to talk to those in
the Lower Forms, they might now be seen conferring on quite pleasant
terms about the gymkhana, comparing notes on subscriptions, and making
arrangements for flower selling and sweet vending.

Considering the large amount of home preparation that was expected
from her in view of the forthcoming examinations, Gwen found she had
set herself a task in undertaking any more work, but by arranging her
time very carefully, she managed to perform one set of duties without
neglecting another. She and Lesbia collected fifteen and ninepence for
the cot among their friends in Skelwick, and wrote down the various
items with much satisfaction in a notebook supplied for the purpose.
The Gascoynes did not possess bicycles, so could not join the cycle
parade, but Lesbia was to sing in one of the glees, and Gwen meant to
enter for certain of the athletic sports. Her long arms and legs
would, she hoped, stand her in good stead in a contest of running or
jumping, and even if she did not win a prize, it was worth competing
for the mere fun of the thing. Giles and Basil were scarcely less
excited, for the Boys' Preparatory Department was to have its share in
the celebrations, and they looked forward to showing their prowess in
public. They spent much of their spare time in training for various
Olympic games, an occupation of which Beatrice heartily approved.

"It keeps them out of mischief for the whole evening," she declared.
"I bless the gymkhana."

"It's wonderful how it's drawn everyone together at school," observed
Gwen. "Even Miss Roscoe isn't nearly as starchy as usual, and Miss
Trent was quite jolly when we were talking over the programme. As for
Upper and Lower School, we just ignore any distinction between the two
when it's a question of the fete."

"I'm glad to hear it," said Beatrice, "I always thought the Seniors at
Rodenhurst were much too stand-off. It will do them a world of good to
forget their dignity for once, and mix freely with the rest of the
school."

"Yes, it's quite a comfort to be able to talk to Lesbia in the gym.
now," agreed Gwen.

"Do you mean to say you couldn't before?" exclaimed Beatrice. "Things
weren't so bad as that when I was there."

"Etiquette's been getting stricter and stricter since you left. The
prefects of about two years ago started the notion that Seniors must
keep to themselves, and not have anything to do with Juniors, and you
know when an idea like that gets broached how everybody takes it up
and sticks to it. It's impossible to defy a rule of that kind just 'on
one's own'."

"I know; rules the girls make for themselves are generally better kept
than those made at headquarters. I agree that you couldn't break
through the etiquette of your Form. Still, I'm glad the barrier is
down at last, and hope it will never be raised again."

"I shan't be the one to plant a stake in the fence of division!"
laughed Gwen.

Practising for the various items of the fete proceeded briskly at
Rodenhurst. The younger girls, during the winter course of dancing
lessons, had learned to plait the maypole, and to execute some lively
morris dances. Though Miss Robins, their teacher, was not in Stedburgh
during the summer, they remembered their steps quite well enough to
enable them to give a performance, with the aid of a little
supervision from some of their elders. Various members of the
Seniors, who understood morris dancing, undertook to superintend
rehearsals, and drill the small girls in any details they had
forgotten. It was thought that this portion of the entertainment would
form a great attraction of the fete, and give it somewhat the
character of a May Day celebration. The Juniors who were fortunate
enough to be taking part were immensely important, and keenly anxious
to make their contribution to the programme a complete success. They
turned up loyally for rehearsals, and were unwearied in practising any
difficult bits where there was a likelihood of a hitch occurring.

One afternoon, about two o'clock, Gwen, with her Virgil in her hand,
sauntered down the Rodenhurst garden into the playing field which lay
at the back of the school. She was anxious to seize the half-hour for
preparation, as she knew she would have scant time in the evening for
all she was obliged to finish, and she hoped to find a quiet corner in
the open air, where she might study in peace. As she walked along,
seeking a shady spot, she was attracted by the sound of angry voices,
and peeping over the hedge that divided the small playing field from
the larger hockey and cricket field, she saw a selection of Second
Form girls collected for a rehearsal. Netta Goodwin was the Senior in
command, and with Netta these Juniors were evidently having an excited
altercation.

"But Moira Thompson didn't do that!" shrieked an indignant voice.

"Do as I tell you!" ordered Netta tartly. "You lot go over there, and
begin your dance, and Ida Bridge and Peggie Weston stop here and hold
this rope."

"But I'm the leader!" wailed Ida. "They can't get on without me!"

"They'll have to, for once."

"But it's not fair! You've come to help us to practise--not for us to
help you!"

"That's as I like to arrange it!"

"Oh, you are a beast!"

"Apologize for that word, or I'll spiflicate you! Where are your
manners?"

"If you're not fair, we shan't mind manners, so there!"

"Ida Bridge, do you intend to hold this rope?"

"Shan't! I'd rather tell Miss Trent first."

"You miserable little sneak!"

"I'm not a sneak! It's your fault! Why can't you take our rehearsal
properly, like the others did? We're wasting time."

"So we are! Get to business, you kids over there. Why don't you begin
your precious dance?"

"We can't without Ida and Peggie--specially Ida!" fumed the
performers.

"Well, I've told you I want them myself, and you'll just have to
manage as best you can. Now then, off you go--one--two--three! Bother
the lot of you! What are you waiting for?"

"For Ida Bridge."

"You won't get her!"

"Then the rehearsal's off!"

"No, it's not off, you lazy little wretches! You can manage all right
if you like; I know perfectly well you can! It's just a piece of
obstinacy. Pig policy doesn't pay with me, I assure you! I've been put
in authority for this afternoon, and I mean to have my own way, so I
give you warning. Start that dance instantly, and Ida and Peggie hold
this rope."

Instead of obeying, the Juniors crowded round Netta uttering protests
and reproaches in a perfect chorus of mutiny. Gwen, who could not
quite grasp the cause of the quarrel, made her way through a gap in
the hedge and entered the large field.

"What's all the shindy about?" she enquired. "You're like a set of
wild Irishmen at a fair. I thought you were supposed to be
rehearsing?"

"How can we rehearse by ourselves?"

"And without our leader?"

"Netta won't conduct!"

"She told us to go and dance by ourselves, while she practised her own
jumping."

"And she wanted to make Ida and Peggie hold the rope for her."

"How can we do our morris dance without Ida and Peggie? It spoils the
figures."

"Netta!" gasped Gwen. "Did you actually mean to practise jumping
instead of taking this rehearsal?"

Netta shrugged her shoulders easily.

"The kids know their steps so well, they can do the thing perfectly,"
she replied. "What was the good of wasting my time drilling them? I
thought I'd make them of some use, and let them hold a rope for me.
They're an ungrateful little set of sneaks--won't do a thing for their
seniors!"

"Why, I should think not, in this case, when you'd been specially
told off by the Committee to superintend their dance. I sympathize
with the kids. They've right on their side. It's you who are the
sneak."

"Oh! Am I indeed, Miss Gwen Gascoyne? Thank you for nothing. It's a
pretty name to have called me, and I shan't forget it."

"But it's true!" returned Gwen with warmth. "It's simply abominable
behaviour to pretend to act dancing mistress and use the time for your
own purposes. Why should these kids hold a rope for you?"

"And why should you take me to task, I'd like to know? You're not a
prefect."

"I only wish I were."

"No doubt you do!" sneered Netta. "You've been so stuck up since your
Cot scheme was adopted, that you seem to imagine yourself as good as
the head of the school."

"Gwen, you take our rehearsal instead--we've wasted ten minutes or
more over wrangling!" pleaded one of the Juniors.

"I will, if Netta will let me."

"Oh, I yield my place with pleasure to the all-important,
all-necessary Gwen Gascoyne!" retorted Netta. "We humbler members of
the Fifth don't get a look-in nowadays. But just let me give you one
word of good advice, my lofty Pharaoh--pride occasionally comes before
a fall!"




CHAPTER XIX

A School Gymkhana


