
"Oh, I don't want to go where Slegge is."

"But you should want to go where Slegge is.  I know he's a nasty,
disagreeable fellow; but you needn't notice that.  If he's civil--well,
that will be right enough.  If he isn't, treat him with good-humoured
contempt.  You aren't afraid of him, are you?"

"I!  Afraid of him!" cried Singh indignantly, and he emitted quite a
puff of angry breath.--"What did you do that for?" he continued angrily,
for, as if by accident, Glyn, with a quick gesture, had knocked off his
cap, and then stooping quickly snatched it from off the grass and put it
carefully on again.  "You did that on purpose," cried Singh angrily.

"Oh, it's all right.  It was the stopper came off, and I put it on
again."

"Bah!" cried Singh with a snort; but he walked quietly on, gradually
calming down as his companion half-guided him towards the group of boys
who were idling about under the elm-trees, pretty close to where the new
piece of fence marked the place where the elephant went through.

Yielding to Glyn, Singh would have walked quietly up with him and been
ready enough under his friend's guidance to embark on any sport or game
that was going on; but as Glyn afterwards said when he was laughing it
over, "old Slegge" made the pepper-stopper shoot out at once, for, after
evidently seeing who were approaching, he slowly edged himself round
till his back was to the companions, and began talking aloud, measuring
the time by means of his ears till he came to the conclusion that Singh
was near enough to catch everything he said, and even Glyn winced as he
heard the lad say:

"Oh, by the way, you fellows, I suppose you have done it for a lark, and
you mean to put it back in my box; but I have missed my turban, the one
with the big pearl in it that fastens the plume of feathers."

The boys were silent, staring at the speaker, for they did not catch the
point of the remark; and Slegge continued:

"You see, I set great store by that turban.  It was an old one of my
father's, and of course it was very valuable.  You see, in Bungly Horror
a turban like that--some fellows call them puggamarees, but that's only
because they are ignorant beggars--but as I was saying, turbans like
that come down from father to son.  I don't know how old this one was,
and nobody notices that they are old, because they always go so
regularly to the wash; and you know the more muslin's washed the whiter
it gets, while as for the holes, of course, they are the beauty of it,
because it gets to look more and more like splendid old lace."

Slegge's remarks remained problematical for a few moments, and then the
meaning came with a flash to Burton, who had suddenly caught sight of
Singh and Glyn.

He burst into a merry guffaw at once, and thus set off the rest, while
Slegge waited till they had done before going on with the by no means
poor imitation of Singh's manner of speaking and a rather peculiar
utterance of the consonant _r_.

"I don't know what you fellows are laughing at," he said, with a look of
supreme innocency; "but I suppose you don't know any better.  It's your
ignorance of the value of family relics like that; and because you never
see me bouncing about the schoolyard with my turban on, you think I
haven't got one in my box--I mean, had one; so now no more nonsense.
Whoever took it for a lark had better put it back before I get my monkey
up--Indian monkey, I mean--for if I do there's going to be
head-punching, and no mistake."

"Come on, Singh," said Glyn quietly, as he slipped his arm through his
companion's and tried to lead him away.  "Don't take any notice of the
malicious brute."

But Singh's feet seemed to be shod with something magnetic which made
them cling to the ground, and he stood fast.

"Come on, I say," cried Glyn.  "No nonsense!  Do you hear?"

Singh turned upon him quickly with an angry flash in his eyes, and he
was about to burst out with some fierce retort; but in those brief
moments it seemed to him that it was not Glyn's but the Colonel's
masterful eyes that were gazing down into his, as, truth to tell, they
had more than once looked down upon his father in some special crisis
when in the cause of right the brave English officer had with a few
words mastered the untutored Indian chief, and maintained his position
as adviser as well as friend.

The next minute Singh was walking quietly away by his companion's side;
but his arm kept giving a sharp jerk as Slegge went on speaking more and
more loudly, uttering words so that the friends might hear.

"I don't care," said Slegge; "you fellows can do what you like, but I am
not going to believe it.  It's all a got-up thing.  I don't believe
there ever was any precious belt, or, if there was, it was only a green
glass sham.  Emeralds set in gold, indeed!  Whoever heard of a fellow
coming to school with a thing like that in his box?  Bah!  Yah!  It
isn't likely that even a nigger would do it."  And as the companions
passed out of earshot, Slegge continued, "It doesn't matter to me; my
time's nearly up at school, thank goodness! and I shall finish with the
next half.  But I do pity you poor beggars who have got to stay.  I
don't know what the place is coming to.  It seems to me that old
Bewley's head's getting soft, unless he's getting so hard-up that he's
glad to take anybody's money to keep the old mathematical musical-box
going, or else he wouldn't have taken a nigger to be put in the same
rank with English gentlemen."

"Here, you had better mind," said Burney.

"Why?" snapped out Slegge.

"Because you will have old Glyn hear you."

"Pooh!  What do I care for Glyn?"

"Ever so much," said Burney.  "I don't suppose you want another
licking."

"Look here, Burney, none of your cheek, please, or else somebody else
will get a licking.  None of that.  You were always a sneak, and trying
to curry favour with the Indian nigger."

"Curry, eh?" said Burney with a half-laugh.  "Well, suppose I did.  I
like Indian curry."

"Do you.  But you won't like my curry," snorted out Slegge, "for I'll
give you such a curry-combing down as will make you sore for a week, my
fine fellow.--Look here, boys, all of you; I am not ashamed to own I was
licked that day, for I was weak and ill, and in one of the first rounds
I nearly put my elbow out of joint.  Something was put out of joint, but
it snapped back."

"He means his nose," whispered little Burton.  "It has been ever since
Severn came.  I never heard it snap back; did you?"

"I saw him blow it several times," said the companion to whom he spoke,
"and I saw his pocket-hanky after, and, oh my!"

"What are you two boys plotting there?" snarled Slegge.  "My ears are
sharper than you think, and if you don't want yours pulled you had
better drop it."

Little Burton dropped upon his knees, crouching down all of a heap and
seeming to subside into the worn brown earth as he laid his forehead
upon the ground, while Slegge seized the opportunity and rushed at him
as if he were a football, delivering a heavy kick that sent the poor
little fellow over.

"Serve you right!" cried Slegge, as the boy uttered a sharp cry of pain.
"Now, go and yelp somewhere else.  Let's have none of your howlings
here."

But only a faint sob followed, while the little fellow rose with his
teeth closely set and lips compressed, as he tried to stifle the cries
that were struggling to escape, and then stood leaning against his
nearest companion without uttering a sound.

"Look here, Burton," sneered Slegge, "go and tell Severn, and ask him to
come and lick me again.  I am ready, and I'll let him see.--Yes, you may
look, Mr Burney, Esquire.  I saw that letter yesterday you had from
home.  Esquire indeed!  It's sickening!--I am ready to have it out with
him whenever he likes, and take the nigger after him when he's had his
gruel.  Go and tell him if you like.  It's been dull enough in the place
ever since that miserable imposture about the lost belt.  You want
something to rouse you up, and I'll give it you if you can bring those
two fellows up to the scratch; but that you can't do.  Look at them
sneaking off like a street cur and an Indian jackal.  Contemptible
beasts!  I only wish they would come back.  I feel just in the humour
now to give them what for.  Yah!--Well, any of you going to fetch them
back?"

"I'm not," said Burney, shrugging his shoulders.  And he turned
half-away as if to go and lean against the fence, but really to hide his
face as he muttered to himself, "Oh, shouldn't I like to see you licked
again!"

"Well, who's going?" cried Slegge haughtily.--"No one?--Here, you, you
snivelling little wretch," he continued, turning to little Burton, "go,
and tell that big bully Severn that I am waiting here to give him his
dose, and that he's to bring the nigger with him to have his lot when I
have done with number one.--Yes, boys, I feel just in the humour for it,
and I am going to cut both their combs.--Do you hear, Burton?"

The little fellow drew a long, deep breath, but he did not move.

"Do you hear what I say?" roared Slegge.

"Yes," said the little fellow sturdily.

"Well, be off, then, at once, before you get another kick."

"Shan't!" cried the little fellow, through his set teeth; and a sharp
jerk seemed to run through his body as he clenched his fists.

"Oh, that's it, is it?" cried Slegge, making a stride towards him.

"Run, Burton, run!" cried two or three voices.

"Shan't!" came again.

"No," cried Slegge.  "He'd better!  I'd run him!  Here, I don't want to
hurt you, young un.  You go and tell them both what I say."

"Shan't!" cried the little fellow fiercely, and he looked his persecutor
full in the face.

"Hark at him!  Hark at the little bantam!" cried Slegge, with a forced
laugh.  "And look at them, boys.  Look at the two slinking off like the
curs they are, with their tails between their legs.  There, you will be
disappointed; there's no fight in them."

The big school-hero was quite right certainly as far as one of the pair
was concerned, for just then Singh was saying, "Oh, it's cowardly of
you.  I can't bear it.  I will go back and have a go at him myself."

"No, you won't," said Glyn sturdily, and he locked Singh's arm well
within his own.

"How dare he insult me like that!  I don't care if he half-kills me; but
I won't bear it."

"Yes, you will," said Glyn, "like a man."

"Like a coward, you mean."

"No, I don't.  I am not going to have you knocked about just because a
low bully abuses you."

"Well, will you go and thrash him yourself?"

"No.  I have whipped the cur once, and I am not going to lower myself by
fighting again because in his spite he turned and barked at us.  I could
do it again, and I feel just in the humour; but what does it mean?
Black eyes and bruises, and the skin off one's knuckles, and a nasty
feeling that one has degraded one's self into fighting a blackguard, for
that's what he is, or he wouldn't have insulted you as he did just
now.--Come away."

"Oh, I didn't think you were such a coward, Glyn."

"And you don't think so now," replied Glyn coolly.  "You are in a
regular rage, and that's just the difference between you Indian fellows
and an Englishman.  You begin going off like a firework."

"Yes, and you go off as if you had had cold water poured on you."

"Very likely," replied Glyn.  "There, we are both hot now.  Let's try
and cool down.  I don't care whether it seems cowardly or whether it
doesn't; but I am not going to get up a fight and make an exhibition of
myself for the other fellows to see.  Once was quite enough; and perhaps
after all it's harder work to bear a thing like this than to go over
yonder and punch old Slegge's head and have it out."

"I don't care whether it is or not," said Singh fiercely.  "Let's go,
and if you won't fight, I will."

"Look here, Singhy; you and I have had lots of wrestles, haven't we?"

"Yes; but what's that got to do with it?"

"Why, this.  I am not bragging; but I have more muscle in my arms than
you have, and if I like I can put you on your back at any time."

"Ur-r-r-r-r-ur!" growled Singh.

"That means you own it.  Well now, look here; if you try to get away
from me I'll put you down on your back and sit upon you till you grow
cool."

"Do if you dare!" cried Singh.

Glyn closed with him on the instant.  There was a short struggle.  The
young Indian prince was laid neatly upon his back almost without an
effort on the part of Glyn, who the next moment was seated calmly
astride his companion's chest, fortunately well out of sight of the
group beneath the elms.  Then for a few minutes Singh heaved and
struggled, glaring the while into his companion's eyes, until, as if he
had caught the contagion of the good-humoured smile in Glyn's frank
young face, a change came over Singh's, and the fierce heaving gave way
to a movement that was certainly the beginning of a laugh, followed by a
good-humoured appeal.

"Let me get up, Glyn.  I am quite quiet now," said the boy.

"No games?"

"No; honour bright.  It's all over now, and I don't want to fight."

The next minute the two lads were walking away as if nothing had
happened.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

A LITTLE VICTIM.

That same evening Singh went down the town to relieve his feelings and
the heaviness of one of his pockets, for the day before both he and Glyn
had received letters from the Colonel with their monthly allowance.
Glyn had refused to join his companion, to Singh's great annoyance, for
the occurrences of the day had left him touchy and ready to take offence
at anything.

"I wouldn't have refused to go with you," he said.  "It's precious
disagreeable, and you might come."

"Can't," said Glyn firmly.  "I can't come, and you know why."

"Oh yes, I know why; all out of disagreeableness.  You haven't got any
other reason."

"Yes, I have.  You haven't written to father, have you, to thank him for
what you got?"

"No; I am going to write to-morrow."

"And then when to-morrow comes you'll say the same, and the same next
day.  There never was such a fellow for putting off things."

"Well, you needn't talk," cried Singh.  "You haven't written to the
Colonel to say you have got yours."

"No," said Glyn firmly; "but I am going to write this evening."

"No, you are not.  Come on down town with me.  I want to go to the old
shop.  Do come, there's a good chap!  I hate going alone."

"Why?"

"Because if I go alone I always see so many things I want to buy, and
then I go on buying, and my allowance doesn't last out till next time."

"Nonsense!  What difference would it make if I came with you?  You'd be
just as bad," cried Glyn.

"Oh no, I shouldn't.  When you are with me you always keep on
interfering and stopping me; and then the money lasts out twice as
well."

"Well, look here," said Glyn; "wait till I have written my letter, and I
will make it a short one this time, and go with you afterwards."

"Oh, you are a disagreeable one!  There won't be time then, and it will
be too late for going out.  There, you see if I ask you to go again."

Uttering these words in his snappiest way, Singh whisked himself round
and stalked off.

"Can't help it," said Glyn to himself.  "I will get it done, and then go
and meet him.  He'll soon cool down, and there will be time enough to go
to the shop and get back before supper."

But, all the same, Glyn uttered a low sigh as he thrust his hands into
his pockets, to jingle in one the four keys that made his bunch, and in
the other several coins which formed the half of the Colonel's previous
day's cheque.

The keys felt light in his right hand and the coins very heavy, and
there was a something about him that seemed to suggest that they ought
to be spent; but the boy turned his face rigorously towards the door of
the theatre, when his attention was taken by Wrench's tom-cat.  He was
crouching upon the sill of one of the lower windows, which was raised a
little way, and evidently intently watching something within.

"What's he after?" said Glyn to himself.  "Some bird got inside, I
suppose, and flying about among the rafters."

Walking quietly up to see if his surmise were true, the cat did not hear
him till he was quite close, when it bounded off the sill and made for
the Doctor's garden, to disappear among the shrubs.

