neighbourhood, to return and occupy the same quarters.

"Thank you much, good mother," answered the prince; "but there is little
chance of that. The sooner I get out of this wood the better."

"I don't know that," said the fairy.

"What do you mean?" asked the prince.

"Why, how should I know?" returned she.

"I can't tell," said the prince.

"Very well," said the fairy.

"How strangely you talk!" said the prince.

"Do I?" said the fairy.

"Yes, you do," said the prince.

"Very well," said the fairy.

The prince was not used to be spoken to in this fashion, so he felt a
little angry, and turned and walked away. But this did not offend the
fairy. She stood at the door of her little house looking after him till
the trees hid him quite. Then she said "At last!" and went in.

The prince wandered and wandered, and got nowhere. The sun sank and sank
and went out of sight, and he seemed no nearer the end of the wood than
ever. He sat down on a fallen tree, ate a bit of bread the old woman had
given him, and waited for the moon; for, although he was not much of an
astronomer, he knew the moon would rise some time, because she had risen
the night before. Up she came, slow and slow, but of a good size, pretty
nearly round indeed; whereupon, greatly refreshed with his piece of
bread, he got up and went--he knew not whither.

After walking a considerable distance, he thought he was coming to the
outside of the forest; but when he reached what he thought the last of
it, he found himself only upon the edge of a great open space in it,
covered with grass. The moon shone very bright, and he thought he had
never seen a more lovely spot. Still it looked dreary because of its
loneliness, for he could not see the house at the other side. He sat
down, weary again, and gazed into the glade. He had not seen so much
room for several days.

All at once he spied something in the middle of the grass. What could it
be? It moved; it came nearer. Was it a human creature, gliding across--a
girl dressed in white, gleaming in the moonshine? She came nearer and
nearer. He crept behind a tree and watched, wondering. It must be some
strange being of the wood--a nymph whom the moonlight and the warm
dusky air had enticed from her tree. But when she came close to where
he stood, he no longer doubted she was human--for he had caught sight of
her sunny hair, and her clear blue eyes, and the loveliest face and form
that he had ever seen. All at once she began singing like a nightingale,
and dancing to her own music, with her eyes ever turned towards the
moon. She passed close to where he stood, dancing on by the edge of the
trees and away in a great circle towards the other side, until he could
see but a spot of white in the yellowish green of the moonlit grass. But
when he feared it would vanish quite, the spot grew, and became a figure
once more. She approached him again, singing and dancing, and waving her
arms over her head, until she had completed the circle. Just opposite
his tree she stood, ceased her song, dropped her arms, and broke out
into a long clear laugh, musical as a brook. Then, as if tired, she
threw herself on the grass, and lay gazing at the moon. The prince was
almost afraid to breathe lest he should startle her, and she should
vanish from his sight. As to venturing near her, that never came into
his head.

She had lain for a long hour or longer, when the prince began again to
doubt concerning her. Perhaps she was but a vision of his own fancy. Or
was she a spirit of the wood, after all? If so, he too would haunt the
wood, glad to have lost kingdom and everything for the hope of being
near her. He would build him a hut in the forest, and there he would
live for the pure chance of seeing her again. Upon nights like this at
least she would come out and bask in the moonlight, and make his soul
blessed. But while he thus dreamed she sprang to her feet, turned her
face full to the moon, and began singing as she would draw her down from
the sky by the power of her entrancing voice. She looked more beautiful
than ever. Again she began dancing to her own music, and danced away
into the distance. Once more she returned in a similar manner; but
although he was watching as eagerly as before, what with fatigue and
what with gazing, he fell fast asleep before she came near him. When he
awoke it was broad daylight, and the princess was nowhere.

He could not leave the place. What if she should come the next night! He
would gladly endure a day's hunger to see her yet again: he would buckle
his belt quite tight. He walked round the glade to see if he could
discover any prints of her feet. But the grass was so short, and her
steps had been so light, that she had not left a single trace behind
her. He walked half-way round the wood without seeing anything to
account for her presence. Then he spied a lovely little house, with
thatched roof and low eaves, surrounded by an exquisite garden, with
doves and peacocks walking in it. Of course this must be where the
gracious lady who loved the moonlight lived. Forgetting his appearance,
he walked towards the door, determined to make inquiries, but as he
passed a little pond full of gold and silver fishes, he caught sight of
himself and turned to find the door to the kitchen. There he knocked,
and asked for a piece of bread. The good-natured cook brought him in,
and gave him an excellent breakfast, which the prince found nothing the
worse for being served in the kitchen. While he ate, he talked with
his entertainer, and learned that this was the favourite retreat of
the Princess Daylight. But he learned nothing more, both because he was
afraid of seeming inquisitive, and because the cook did not choose to be
heard talking about her mistress to a peasant lad who had begged for his
breakfast.

As he rose to take his leave, it occurred to him that he might not be
so far from the old woman's cottage as he had thought, and he asked the
cook whether she knew anything of such a place, describing it as well as
he could. She said she knew it well enough, adding with a smile--

"It's there you're going, is it?"

"Yes, if it's not far off."

"It's not more than three miles. But mind what you are about, you know."

"Why do you say that?"

"If you're after any mischief, she'll make you repent it."

"The best thing that could happen under the circumstances," remarked the
prince.

"What do you mean by that?" asked the cook.

"Why, it stands to reason," answered the prince "that if you wish to do
anything wrong, the best thing for you is to be made to repent of it."

"I see," said the cook. "Well, I think you may venture. She's a good old
soul."

"Which way does it lie from here?" asked the prince.

She gave him full instructions; and he left her with many thanks.

Being now refreshed, however, the prince did not go back to the cottage
that day: he remained in the forest, amusing himself as best he could,
but waiting anxiously for the night, in the hope that the princess would
again appear. Nor was he disappointed, for, directly the moon rose, he
spied a glimmering shape far across the glade. As it drew nearer, he saw
it was she indeed--not dressed in white as before: in a pale blue like
the sky, she looked lovelier still. He thought it was that the blue
suited her yet better than the white; he did not know that she was
really more beautiful because the moon was nearer the full. In fact the
next night was full moon, and the princess would then be at the zenith
of her loveliness.

The prince feared for some time that she was not coming near his
hiding-place that night; but the circles in her dance ever widened as
the moon rose, until at last they embraced the whole glade, and she
came still closer to the trees where he was hiding than she had come the
night before. He was entranced with her loveliness, for it was indeed a
marvellous thing. All night long he watched her, but dared not go near
her. He would have been ashamed of watching her too, had he not become
almost incapable of thinking of anything but how beautiful she was. He
watched the whole night long, and saw that as the moon went down she
retreated in smaller and smaller circles, until at last he could see her
no more.

Weary as he was, he set out for the old woman's cottage, where he
arrived just in time for her breakfast, which she shared with him. He
then went to bed, and slept for many hours. When he awoke the sun was
down, and he departed in great anxiety lest he should lose a glimpse
of the lovely vision. But, whether it was by the machinations of the
swamp-fairy, or merely that it is one thing to go and another to return
by the same road, he lost his way. I shall not attempt to describe his
misery when the moon rose, and he saw nothing but trees, trees, trees.

She was high in the heavens before he reached the glade. Then indeed
his troubles vanished, for there was the princess coming dancing towards
him, in a dress that shone like gold, and with shoes that glimmered
through the grass like fireflies. She was of course still more beautiful
than before. Like an embodied sunbeam she passed him, and danced away
into the distance.

Before she returned in her circle, the clouds had begun to gather about
the moon. The wind rose, the trees moaned, and their lighter branches
leaned all one way before it. The prince feared that the princess would
go in, and he should see her no more that night. But she came dancing on
more jubilant than ever, her golden dress and her sunny hair streaming
out upon the blast, waving her arms towards the moon, and in the
exuberance of her delight ordering the clouds away from off her face.
The prince could hardly believe she was not a creature of the elements,
after all.

By the time she had completed another circle, the clouds had gathered
deep, and there were growlings of distant thunder. Just as she passed
the tree where he stood, a flash of lightning blinded him for a moment,
and when he saw again, to his horror, the princess lay on the ground.
He darted to her, thinking she had been struck; but when she heard him
coming, she was on her feet in a moment.

"What do you want?" she asked.

"I beg your pardon. I thought--the lightning" said the prince,
hesitating.

"There's nothing the matter," said the princess, waving him off rather
haughtily.

The poor prince turned and walked towards the wood.

"Come back," said Daylight: "I like you. You do what you are told. Are
you good?"

"Not so good as I should like to be," said the prince.

"Then go and grow better," said the princess.

Again the disappointed prince turned and went.

"Come back," said the princess.

He obeyed, and stood before her waiting.

"Can you tell me what the sun is like?" she asked.

"No," he answered. "But where's the good of asking what you know?"

"But I don't know," she rejoined.

"Why, everybody knows."

"That's the very thing: I'm not everybody. I've never seen the sun."

"Then you can't know what it's like till you do see it."

"I think you must be a prince," said the princess.

"Do I look like one?" said the prince.

"I can't quite say that."

"Then why do you think so?"

"Because you both do what you are told and speak the truth.--Is the sun
so very bright?"

"As bright as the lightning."

"But it doesn't go out like that, does it?"

"Oh, no. It shines like the moon, rises and sets like the moon, is much
the same shape as the moon, only so bright that you can't look at it for
a moment."

"But I would look at it," said the princess.

"But you couldn't," said the prince.

"But I could," said the princess.

"Why don't you, then?"

"Because I can't."

"Why can't you?"

"Because I can't wake. And I never shall wake until----"

Here she hid her face in her hands, turned away, and walked in the
slowest, stateliest manner towards the house. The prince ventured to
follow her at a little distance, but she turned and made a repellent
gesture, which, like a true gentleman-prince, he obeyed at once. He
waited a long time, but as she did not come near him again, and as the
night had now cleared, he set off at last for the old woman's cottage.

It was long past midnight when he reached it, but, to his surprise, the
old woman was paring potatoes at the door. Fairies are fond of doing odd
things. Indeed, however they may dissemble, the night is always their
day. And so it is with all who have fairy blood in them.

"Why, what are you doing there, this time of the night, mother?" said
the prince; for that was the kind way in which any young man in his
country would address a woman who was much older than himself.

"Getting your supper ready, my son," she answered.

"Oh, I don't want any supper," said the prince.

"Ah! you've seen Daylight," said she.

"I've seen a princess who never saw it," said the prince.

"Do you like her?" asked the fairy.

"Oh! don't I?" said the prince. "More than you would believe, mother."

"A fairy can believe anything that ever was or ever could be," said the
old woman.

"Then are you a fairy?" asked the prince.

"Yes," said she.

"Then what do you do for things not to believe?" asked the prince.

"There's plenty of them--everything that never was nor ever could be."

"Plenty, I grant you," said the prince. "But do you believe there could
be a princess who never saw the daylight? Do you believe that now?"

This the prince said, not that he doubted the princess, but that he
wanted the fairy to tell him more. She was too old a fairy, however, to
be caught so easily.

"Of all people, fairies must not tell secrets. Besides, she's a
princess."

"Well, I'll tell you a secret. I'm a prince."

"I know that."

"How do you know it?"

"By the curl of the third eyelash on your left eyelid."

"Which corner do you count from?"

"That's a secret."

"Another secret? Well, at least, if I am a prince, there can be no harm
in telling me about a princess."

"It's just the princes I can't tell."

"There ain't any more of them--are there?" said the prince.

"What! you don't think you're the only prince in the world, do you?"

"Oh, dear, no! not at all. But I know there's one too many just at
present, except the princess----"

"Yes, yes, that's it," said the fairy.

"What's it?" asked the prince.

But he could get nothing more out of the fairy, and had to go to bed
unanswered, which was something of a trial.

Now wicked fairies will not be bound by the law which the good fairies
obey, and this always seems to give the bad the advantage over the good,
for they use means to gain their ends which the others will not. But it
is all of no consequence, for what they do never succeeds; nay, in the
end it brings about the very thing they are trying to prevent. So
you see that somehow, for all their cleverness, wicked fairies are
dreadfully stupid, for, although from the beginning of the world they
have really helped instead of thwarting the good fairies, not one of
them is a bit wiser for it. She will try the bad thing just as they all
did before her; and succeeds no better of course.

The prince had so far stolen a march upon the swamp-fairy that she
did not know he was in the neighbourhood until after he had seen the
princess those three times. When she knew it, she consoled herself by
thinking that the princess must be far too proud and too modest for any
young man to venture even to speak to her before he had seen her six
times at least. But there was even less danger than the wicked fairy
