
"If you like," he said, "to come round with me now; my servant
shall take the horses round there, put them in, and bring the wagon
here; and he can then take your horses back with him to my stables.

"Please to write me a paper--signed by the name on your German
pass--saying that you have bought my horses of me, and have sold me
yours. Put down any figures you like as having passed between us.
You are upon a very perilous expedition and, in case of anything
happening to you, it would be well for me that nothing, beyond a
mere business transaction, could be traced between us."

At seven o'clock the next morning they started. The distance was
only thirty miles, but the roads were terribly slippery from the
deep snow, now trampled flat by the immense traffic of the army. It
was five in the afternoon when they reached the first sentries, at
the entrance to Versailles. The pass was sufficient, and they went
on uninterrupted. Percy drove, and Ralph sat beside him.

The town swarmed with officers and soldiers, of all ranks. No one
paid them any attention, and they drove through the Place d'Armes
and on to the marketplace; where they knew there were many inns,
frequented by the market people. Here--as they expected--they found
it impossible to get a bed; but they had no difficulty in obtaining
permission for the wagon to stand in a yard, and were lucky enough
to get stable room for the horses. They went into the town and
bought four blankets; and as, at starting, they had filled the
wagon two feet deep with straw, they had--in spite of the cold
weather--every hope of passing a comfortable night.

Dinner was the next thing and, that over, they strolled about until
nine o'clock. It was a singular sight, this army of invaders
comfortably quartered in the ancient capital of France. The palace,
the statues in front of it, everything told of the glories of
France; every park around, every little palace was infinitely
associated with its sovereigns; and here, in the midst of these
memorials, the German invaders stalked carelessly, drank in the
cafes, or feasted in the hotels, as if the place had belonged to
them from time immemorial. Afar off, in the quiet of the evening,
could be heard the distant boom of the guns round the beleaguered
city.

There were several things which the Barclays wanted to get; but
they had no difficulty with them, as the shops were all open, as
usual. The population had a depressed look. All classes were
suffering much, with the exception of the shopkeepers, whose
business was as brisk as ever--save only those tradesmen who dealt
in articles of female attire, for which there was no demand,
whatever. The ladies of Versailles went as little as possible into
the streets; and when they did so, all dressed themselves in black,
or other somber colors.

By nine o'clock the shops were all closed; and the Barclays
returned to their wagon, with their purchases in their hands.

"It's awfully cold, Ralph!" Percy said, as they rolled themselves
in their blankets, and covered themselves over with straw.

"It is, Percy; but it will be a deal colder, in the river."

Percy gave a shudder at the thought.

"Don't you think, Ralph, that there is any possibility of entering
on either of the other sides?"

"Not the slightest, Percy. It must be across the river, or not at
all. The sentries will not be anything like so thick, upon that
side."

Had anyone looked into the wagon, at eight o'clock next morning, he
would have been surprised at the occupation upon which the boys
were engaged. Each was sewing a piece of thin waterproof cloth upon
a pair of white woolen gloves; so that the fingers, when outspread,
had the appearance of the webbed foot of a frog.

"That ought to help us," Ralph said, when they finished. "For a
really long swim, I daresay they would be very fatiguing; but it is
cold, not fatigue, we have to fear, and speed is therefore
everything."

At nine o'clock, Ralph went to the office of the general in
command. There were a number of other persons waiting for permits,
and Ralph waited his turn to go in to the officer engaged in
signing them.

"I am from Frankfort, as my papers show," he said, handing the
officer his pass. "I wish for a pass to go, with my horse and cart,
to Bellevue. There are, I hear, many officers desirous of selling,
or sending home, articles they have saved."

Saved, it may be mentioned, was the word employed in the German
army for stolen--which has an ugly sound.

The officer signed the paper.

"You must not go by the Sevres route," he said. "You must turn off
at Viroflay, and go by Chaville."

Half an hour later they started in the wagon At the gates of
Versailles--a mile from the town--they were stopped by sentries;
but allowed to pass on production of the order, with the necessary
stamp.

"Everything is going on well, thus far," Ralph said, as they turned
off from the main road, at Viroflay. "It looks like snow, too,
which would exactly suit us."

Viroflay was crowded with Prussian troops. An officer stopped them,
as they passed.

"Where are you going to?"

"We are going to Bellevue," Ralph said. "We are purchasers of any
curiosities or souvenirs of the war--such as pictures, or
clocks--and we also undertake to deliver, in Germany, any article
which may be entrusted to our charge. We have our passes and
papers, in regular order."

"Wait a minute," the officer said. "Draw up at that villa there."

The wagon drew up to the villa, the officer walking in front. He
motioned to Ralph to dismount, and to follow him into the house;
leaving Percy in charge of the wagon Five or six officers were
sitting in what had been the drawing room of the villa.

"Who have you got here?" one of them asked, as Ralph's conductor
entered.

"A worthy Hebrew," the other laughed, "who will either purchase, or
carry home, articles saved."

There was a general movement of interest. The furniture of the room
was a wreck, the papers were hanging in strips, a broken chair was
blazing upon the fire; several family portraits on the wall were
pierced with holes, having evidently served the purpose of targets,
for pistol shooting.

Ralph's conductor left the room for a moment, and returned with a
very handsome drawing room clock; worth, Ralph knew, at least
fifteen hundred francs.

"How much will you give for that?"

Ralph examined it critically.

"Four hundred francs," he said.

"Nonsense! It cost five times that."

"About four times," Ralph said, "when it was new. It is not new,
now, and it has to be taken to Germany. If you prefer it, I will
carry it to Frankfort; and send it on thence by rail, at ten
percent upon its value."

"Yes, I will agree to that," the officer said. "How much will that
be?"

"I am content to take it at your own valuation," Ralph said. "The
value you set upon the clock was two thousand francs."

There was a laugh among the other officers.

"He has you there, major."

"Not at all," the officer said. "He shall take it at the valuation
he placed upon it--four hundred francs."

"Pardon me," Ralph said, "I did not value it at that sum, I only
offered to give that sum for it; besides which, that was an
estimate of the value I set upon it at Viroflay, not the value I
should set upon it at Frankfort.

"I will say one thousand francs; that is, I will undertake it at a
hundred, if you will get it put into a case of some sort."

The other officers now offered various objects, either for sale or
transport--pictures, vases, clocks, and even pianos. Ralph haggled
over the price of each article, in a way which would have done
honor to his appearance. At last--having arranged all their
matters--he said that he was going on to Bellevue; but would call
and complete the purchases, and receive the goods entrusted to him,
either that night or the next morning.

"If any of you gentleman would kindly give me your card, to give to
the officer of the regiment at Bellevue, saying that you have found
me fair in my dealing, I should feel very grateful," Ralph said,
humbly.

The officer laughed, but one of them took out his card, and wrote
upon it:

"Dear Von Koch, this man is--for a Hebrew--tolerably fair in his
ideas."

"That is for the major of the regiment, at Bellevue," he said; and
Ralph bowed, as if he had received a recommendation of the warmest
kind.

"I was beginning to be alarmed, Ralph," Percy said, when his
brother again took his place in the wagon.

"I have been haggling over prices," Ralph said. "Fortunately, we
are not pressed for time."

They had another stop, of some duration, at Chaville; and it was
nearly three o'clock in the afternoon before they came down to the
back of Bellevue. Here they were stopped and, upon Ralph producing
his pass, an officer came up.

"You cannot go any farther," he said. "You are close to Bellevue,
now; but if you were to take this wagon into the main road, you
would draw Valerien's fire upon us, at once.

"You will find most of the officers there," pointing to a large
house, near.

"I have this card, for Major Von Koch," Ralph said. "I am here to
buy, or carry home on commission, goods of all kinds."

The officer went with Ralph; and the scene at Viroflay was
repeated, but upon a much larger scale. Viroflay is a small
village, containing only a few large villas; Bellevue is composed
almost entirely of handsome residences, owned by Parisians. The
quantity of articles "saved" was proportionately large.

After examining and bargaining for a large number of valuable
articles of furniture, pictures and clocks; Ralph left, with some
of the officers, to view other articles in the villas upon the side
of Bellevue, looking down upon the river. Percy had taken the
horses out of the wagon, and accompanied his brother, ostensibly to
carry back any articles purchased.

At one of the villas Ralph expressed a great desire to go out into
the garden, to look over Paris; and the officer with him--being in
an excellent humor, at the disposal of some articles at much higher
prices than he had expected to receive; and at having the proceeds,
in German bank notes, in his pockets--went out himself, and pointed
out all the various objects of interest.

The fog of a winter's evening was already shutting in the view, but
the boys could see the principal buildings of Paris. The towers of
Notre Dame, the domes of the Pantheon and Invalides, the heights of
Montmartre and Vilette, and the forts of Issy and Vanves were
distinctly visible. The boys' eyes turned, however, more to the
river at their feet, and the intervening ground, than upon the
objects--however interesting--of distant Paris.

"Do not show yourself," the officer said. "If we were caught sight
of, from Issy or Point du Jour--or from that gunboat, below--we
should have a rain of shells about us, in no time. You can look out
from among the trees; but do not get beyond their shelter, or you
will be seen, instantly."

The house in whose garden they were standing stood upon the brow of
the hill. Behind was a little wood, and gardens sloping
pretty-steeply down. Then along by the water was a street, with
houses upon either side. The river was, here, divided by an island;
the lower end of which, however, scarcely extended low enough to be
opposite to the spot upon which the boys were standing.

"Bless me," Ralph said, "it must be very dangerous, living down
there. Why, that gunboat could blow the place into the air."

"That she could," the officer said, "and consequently, none of our
men live there. We have sentries along the river bank, and a few
others scattered about; but none of the troops are quartered there,
nor even in this line of villas where we now are. If we were to
show a light at night, in any window here, we should have a shell
in in a couple of minutes. We have no fear, whatever, of a sortie
in this direction; and have plenty of force behind."

Ralph and Percy lingered, upon one excuse or another; asking
questions as long as they could, and making the best use of their
time, to gain a fair idea of the ground that they would have to
cross. They had with them, in the wagon, a map of Bellevue and
Meudon upon a large scale, with every house marked upon it.

"It is going to be a dark night," the officer said, as they hurried
away, "and we shall have snow before midnight."

Another hour or two was spent in purchasing various articles, taken
from the French villas. Darkness had come on, and Ralph told the
officers that he should not return until the next morning to
Versailles; and that if the articles to be entrusted to his care
for delivery were put in rough cases--of which there were plenty,
which had come full of stores--and brought by ten o'clock in the
morning, carefully directed, it would be in sufficient time.

"Will you give us leave to sleep in one of the villas, upon the
farther side of the road?" Ralph asked the officer in command. "My
boy has never seen a shot fired, in earnest; and I should like him
to be able to say he had watched the fire of the forts, round
Paris."

"If you sleep there," the colonel said, "you must not light a fire,
or show a light, or you would bring the fire of a hundred guns upon
us."

"I will be very careful, sir," Ralph answered. "Will you kindly let
an orderly go with us, to pass us through the sentries? For, as
it's dark now, they would not let us pass."

The colonel gave the order, and an orderly went with them. They
stopped at the wagon, and each took out a large bundle.

"We shall want our blankets, tonight," Ralph said. "It is bitterly
cold.

"Would you like a glass of brandy, to help keep it out, my man?"

The soldier smiled an assent, drank off a glass of brandy, and then
accompanied them to the villa. Short as was the distance, they were
challenged twice, and the sign and counter-sign had to be
exchanged. They reached the deserted villa, threw down the bundles
in a corner; and then the orderly said good night, and left them to
themselves.



Chapter 16: A Desperate Attempt.


"So far, so good, Percy!" Ralph said, when they heard the street
door slam, as the orderly left. "Hitherto we have had the most
extraordinary good fortune and, as it's going to snow--for I felt a
few flakes, as we came along--I look upon it as good as done."

"It will take away from us risk of being hit, but I don't see that
it will make much difference in our risk of being drowned," Percy
said. "I own, Ralph, I am a great deal more afraid of that, than of
the other."

"But it does, Percy. It makes all the difference in the world. We
had agreed that we would put on life belts; but that we would blow
the smallest quantity of air possible into them, so that they might
give us some slight assistance, and yet not be too buoyant to
prevent us from diving. Now we can blow them up with wind, so as to
prevent the possibility of our being drowned. Once in the water,
and we are safe from everything except a stray bullet. In a
snowstorm, on such a dark night as this, they could not see our
heads five yards off."

"But what is worse, Ralph, we shall not be able to see five yards,
either; and should have no idea where we were swimming."

"I had not thought of that, Percy. Yes, that would be very
serious," and Ralph thought, for some time. "It seems a risk, this,
Percy; but I can see no plan, except to draw their fire."

"How do you mean?" Percy asked, puzzled.

"You see, Percy, our idea before was to get down to the shore, to
put our dummy into the water, and to let it float down a hundred
yards--the length of its string--and then to start ourselves,
holding the other end of the string, in hopes that--if the sentries
are really sharply on the lookout--they would see the dummy,
instead of us, as it will be a much more conspicuous object;
especially as we intended to do as much diving as we could, and our
movements forward would jerk the dummy's string, and make him bob,
like a man swimming. If they once caught sight of it, they would be
too busy firing at it to look about for anyone else.

"Well now, I think that instead of giving up the dummy
altogether--as we might have done, now that the snow has come
on--we must let it float gently down, for seventy or eighty yards;
and then throw a stone into the water by it, so as to draw the
attention of the sentry. Or--if the sentries are pretty far
apart--one of us might make a great splash in the water, when the
dummy is floating; and then run back before the sentry gets up, and
get into the water quietly, higher up. Their fire will act as a
guide to us."

"We had better start soon, Ralph. It may take us an hour, or even
two, to get down to the water; for we must go along like ghosts, so
as not to alarm the sentries; and we shall have walls to get over,
and all sorts of difficulties."

"All right, Percy. I do not see the use of waiting. We shall not
get any warmer, by stopping here. It's like having a tooth out.
One's got to do it, and the sooner it's done, the better.

"Now for our bundles."

They went downstairs into a cellar--where the light could not be
seen from outside--struck a light, and lit a candle. The first
thing taken out of the bundle was the dummy--a net, rather larger
than a man's head, tightly filled with corks; with a cord, a
hundred yards in length, attached. Next were two complete suits,
made of white calico; with caps, with long flaps of the same
material. Next were two large rolls of India rubber webbing, about
six inches wide, which they had brought from Tours with them.

"I can't think that that will be any good, Ralph."

"It will, indeed, Percy. The water will, of course, soak through;
but what gets in will remain in, and the heat of the body will warm
it, a good deal. I can assure you, it will be a great deal warmer
than having the icy water flowing past you."

Both boys now took off their coats and waistcoats, put on a warm
flannel jersey over their flannel shirts, and then wound the
bandages of India rubber round each other's bodies. They began
under the arms; drawing the webbing tight, as they wound it round,
so that its natural elasticity caused each turn to press tightly
upon the turn above, which it overlapped. This bandage was
continued down to the lower part of the body. Then they put on the
life belts. Over them they put their suits of white calico, white
shoes with India rubber soles, the white caps, and swimming gloves.

They then put the "dummy" in a pillow case, which they had bought
for it at Versailles. Before putting on their caps, they fastened
the quills with the dispatches in their hair. In a belt, underneath
their jackets, each carried a heavy revolver.

"This India rubber stuff regularly squeezes me, Ralph."

"All the better, Percy. You will feel the benefit of it, when you
are in the water, believe me."

The boys now knelt down together, and asked for protection through
the peril which they were about to encounter. A few minutes later
they rose, grasped each other's hand; and then--blowing out the
light--groped their way upstairs, opened a window which led into
the garden, and stepped out.
