"Out of zee way!" shouted the professor, making a wild effort to swing
the python against a tree, but the tail slipped from his grasp, the
professor fell, and the snake went crashing against a log, under which
it took refuge.

Nigel, who was nearest to it, sprang forward, fortunately caught its
tail, and, swinging it and himself round with such force that it could
not coil up at all, dashed it against a tree.  Before it could recover
from the shock, Moses had caught up a hatchet and cut its head off with
one blow.  The tail wriggled for a few seconds, and the head gaped once
or twice, as if in mild surprise at so sudden a finale.

"Zat is strainch--very strainch," slowly remarked the professor, as,
still seated on the ground, he solemnly noted these facts.

"Not so _very_ strange, after all," said Van der Kemp; "I've seen the
head of many a bigger snake cut off at one blow."

"Mine frond, you mistake me.  It is zee vorking of physical law in zee
spiritual vorld zat perplexes me.  Moses has cut zee brute in two--
physical fact, substance can be divided.  Zee two parts are still alife,
zerfore, zee life--zee spirit--has also been divided!"

"It is indeed very strange," said Nigel, with a laugh.  "Stranger still
that you may cut a worm into several parts, and the life remains in
each, but, strangest of all, that you should sit on the ground,
professor, instead of rising up, while you philosophise.  You are not
hurt, I hope--are you?"

"I razer zink I am," returned the philosopher with a faint smile; "mine
onkle, I zink, is spraint."

This was indeed true, and it seemed as if the poor man's wanderings were
to be, for a time at least, brought to an abrupt close.  Fortunately it
was found that a pony could be procured at that village, and, as they
had entered the borders of the mountainous regions, and the roads were
more open and passable than heretofore, it was resolved that the
professor should ride until his ankle recovered.

We must now pass over a considerable portion of time and space, and
convey the reader, by a forced march, to the crater of an active
volcano.  By that time Verkimier's ankle had recovered and the pony had
been dismissed.  The heavy luggage, with the porters, had been left in
the low grounds, for the mountain they had scaled was over 10,000 feet
above the sea-level.  Only one native from the plain below accompanied
them as guide, and three of their porters whose inquiring minds tempted
them to make the ascent.

At about 10,000 feet the party reached what the natives called the dempo
or edge of the volcano, whence they looked down into the sawah or
ancient crater, which was a level space composed of brown soil
surrounded by cliffs, and lying like the bottom of a cup 200 feet below
them.  It had a sulphurous odour, and was dotted here and there with
clumps of heath and rhododendrons.  In the centre of this was a cone
which formed the true--or modern--crater.  On scrambling up to the lip
of the cone and looking down some 300 feet of precipitous rock they
beheld what seemed to be a pure white lake set in a central basin of 200
feet in diameter.  The surface of this lakelet smoked, and although it
reflected every passing cloud as if it were a mirror, it was in reality
a basin of hot mud, the surface of which was about thirty feet below its
rim.

"You will soon see a change come over it," said the hermit, as the party
gazed in silent admiration at the weird scene.

He had scarcely spoken, when the middle of the lake became intensely
black and scored with dark streaks.  This, though not quite obvious at
first from the point where they stood, was caused by the slow formation
of a great chasm in the centre of the seething lake of mud.  The lake
was sinking into its own throat.  The blackness increased.  Then a dull
sullen roar was heard, and next moment the entire lake upheaved, not
violently, but in a slow, majestic manner some hundreds of feet into the
air, whence it fell back into its basin with an awful roar which
reverberated and echoed from the rocky walls of the caldron like the
singing of an angry sea.  An immense volume of steam--the motive power
which had blown up the lake--was at the same time liberated and
dissipated in the air.

The wave-circles died away on the margin of the lake, and the placid,
cloud-reflecting surface was restored until the geyser had gathered
fresh force for another upheaval.

"Amazing!" exclaimed Nigel, who had gazed with feelings of awe at this
curious exhibition of the tremendous internal forces with which the
Creator has endowed the earth.

"Vonderful!" exclaimed the professor, whose astonishment was such, that
his eyebrows rose high above the rim of his huge blue binoculars.

Moses, to whom such an exhibition of the powers of nature was familiar,
was, we are sorry to say, not much impressed, if impressed at all!
Indeed he scarcely noticed it, but watched, with intense teeth-and-gum
disclosing satisfaction, the faces of two of the native porters who had
never seen anything of the kind before, and whose terrified expressions
suggested the probability of a precipitate flight when their trembling
limbs became fit to resume duty.

"Will it come again soon?" asked Nigel, turning to Van der Kemp.

"Every fifteen or twenty minutes it goes through that process all day
and every day," replied the hermit.

"But, if I may joodge from zee stones ant scoriae around," said the
professor, "zee volcano is not always so peaceful as it is joost now."

"You are right.  About once in every three years, and sometimes oftener,
the crops of coffee, bananas, rice, etcetera, in this region are quite
destroyed by sulphur-rain, which covers everything for miles around the
crater."

"Hah! it vould be too hote a place zis for us, if zat vas to happin
joost now," remarked Verkimier with a smile.

"It cannot be far off the time now, I should think," said Van der Kemp.

All this talk Moses translated, and embellished, to the native porters
with the solemn sincerity of a true and thorough-paced hypocrite.  He
had scarcely finished, and was watching with immense delight the
changeful aspect of their whitey-green faces, when another volcanic fit
came on, and the deep-toned roar of the coming explosion was heard.  It
was so awesome that the countenance even of Van der Kemp became graver
than usual.  As for the two native porters, they gazed and trembled.
Nigel and the professor also gazed with lively expectation.  Moses--we
grieve to record it--hugged himself internally, and gloated over the two
porters.

Another moment and there came a mighty roar.  Up went the mud-lake
hundreds of feet into the air; out came the steam with the sound of a
thousand trombones, and away went the two porters, head over heels, down
the outer slope of the cone and across the sawah as if the spirit of
evil were after them.

There was no cause, however, for alarm.  The mud-lake, falling back into
its native cup, resumed its placid aspect and awaited its next upheaval
with as much tranquillity as if it had never known disturbance in the
past, and were indifferent about the future.

That evening our travellers encamped in close proximity to the crater,
supped on fowls roasted in an open crevice whence issued steam and
sulphurous smells, and slept with the geyser's intermittent roar
sounding in their ears and re-echoing in their dreams.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

TELLS OF VOLCANIC FIRES AND A STRANGE RETURN "HOME."

This tremendous introduction to volcanic fires was but the prelude to a
period of eruptive action which has not been paralleled in the world's
history.

For a short time after this, indeed, the genial nature of the weather
tended to banish from the minds of our travellers all thoughts of
violence either in terrestrial or human affairs, and as the professor
devoted himself chiefly to the comparatively mild occupation of catching
and transfixing butterflies and beetles during the march southward,
there seemed to be nothing in the wide universe above or below save
peace and tranquillity--except, perhaps, in the minds of beetles and
butterflies!

Throughout all this period, nevertheless, there were ominous growlings,
grumblings, and tremors--faint but frequent--which indicated a condition
of mother earth that could not have been called easy.

"Some of the volcanoes of Java must be at work, I think," said Nigel one
night, as the party sat in a small isolated wood-cutter's hut discussing
a supper of rice and fowls with his friends, which they were washing
down with home-grown coffee.

"It may be so," said Van der Kemp in a dubious tone; "but the sounds,
though faint, seem to me a good deal nearer.  I can't help thinking that
the craters which have so recently opened up in Krakatoa are still
active, and that it may be necessary for me to shift my quarters, for my
cave is little more, I suspect, than the throat of an ancient volcano."

"Hah! say you so, mine frond?  Zen I vould advise you to make no delay,"
said the professor, critically examining a well-picked drumstick.  "You
see, it is not pleasant to be blown up eizer by the terrestrial
eruptions of zee vorld or zee celestial explosions of your vife.--A
leetle more rice, Moses if you please.  Zanks."

"Now, mine fronds," he continued, after having disposed of a supper
which it might have taxed a volcano's throat to swallow, "it is viz
great sorrow zat I must part from you here."

"Part!  Why?" asked the hermit in surprise.

"Vy, because I find zis contrie is heaven upon eart'.  Zat is, of
course, only in a scientific point of view.  Zee voods are svarming, zee
air is teeming, ant zee vaters are vallo'ing vit life.  I cannot tear
myself avay.  But ve shall meet again--at Telok Betong, or Krakatoa, or
Anjer, or Batavia."

It was found that the man of science was also a man of decision.
Nothing would persuade him to go a step further.  The wood-cutter's hut
suited him, so did the wood-cutter himself, and so, as he said, did the
region around him.  With much regret, therefore, and an earnest
invitation from the hermit to visit his cave, and range the almost
unexplored woods of his island, the travellers parted from him; and our
three adventurers, dismissing all attendants and hiring three ponies,
continued their journey to the southern shores of Sumatra.

As they advanced it soon became evident that the scene of volcanic
activity was not so far distant as the island of Java, for the air was
frequently darkened by the falling of volcanic dust which covered the
land with a greyish powder.  As, however, at least sixteen volcanoes
have been registered in the island of Sumatra, and there are probably
many others, it was impossible to decide where the scene of eruption
was, that caused those signs.

One afternoon the travellers witnessed a catastrophe which induced them
to forego all idea of spending more time in examining the country.  They
had arrived at a village where they found a traveller who appeared to be
going about without any special object in view.  He spoke English, but
with a foreign accent.  Nigel naturally felt a desire to become sociable
with him, but he was very taciturn and evidently wished to avoid
intercourse with chance acquaintances.  Hearing that there were curious
hot-water and mud springs not far off, the stranger expressed a desire
to visit them.  Nigel also felt anxious to see them, and as one guide
was sufficient for the party the stranger joined the party and they went
together.

The spot they were led to was evidently a mere crust of earth covering
fierce subterranean fires.  In the centre of it a small pond of mud was
boiling and bubbling furiously, and round this, on the indurated clay,
were smaller wells and craters full of boiling mud.  The ground near
them was obviously unsafe, for it bent under pressure like thin ice, and
at some of the cracks and fissures the sulphurous vapour was so hot that
the hand could not be held to it without being scalded.

Nigel and the stranger walked close behind the native guide, both,
apparently, being anxious to get as near as possible to the central
pond.  But the guide stopped suddenly, and, looking back, said to Van
der Kemp that it was not safe to approach nearer.

Nigel at once stopped, and, looking at the stranger, was struck by the
wild, incomprehensible expression of his face as he continued to
advance.

"Stop! stop, sir!" cried the hermit on observing this, but the man paid
no attention to the warning.

Another instant and the crust on which he stood gave way and he sank
into a horrible gulf from which issued a gust of sulphurous vapour and
steam.  The horror which almost overwhelmed Nigel did not prevent him
bounding forward to the rescue.  Well was it for him at that time that a
cooler head than his own was near.  The strong hand of the hermit seized
his collar on the instant, and he was dragged backward out of danger,
while an appalling shriek from the stranger as he disappeared told that
the attempt to succour him would have been too late.

A terrible event of this kind has usually the effect of totally
changing, at least for a time, the feelings of those who witness it, so
as to almost incapacitate them from appreciating ordinary events or
things.  For some days after witnessing the sudden and awful fate of
this unknown man, Nigel travelled as if in a dream, taking little notice
of, or interest in, anything, and replying to questions in mere
monosyllables.  His companions seemed to be similarly affected, for they
spoke very little.  Even the volatile spirit of Moses appeared to be
subdued, and it was not till they had reached nearly the end of their
journey that their usual flow of spirits returned.

Arriving one night at a village not very far from the southern shores of
Sumatra they learned that the hermit's presentiments were justified, and
that the volcano which was causing so much disturbance in the islands of
the archipelago was, indeed, the long extinct one of Krakatoa.

"I've heard a good deal about it from one of the chief men here," said
the hermit as he returned to his friends that night about supper-time.
"He tells me that it has been more or less in moderate eruption ever
since we left the island, but adds that nobody takes much notice of it,
as they don't expect it to increase much in violence.  I don't agree
with them in that," he added gravely.

"Why not?" asked Nigel.

"Partly because of the length of time that has elapsed since its last
eruption in 1680; partly from the fact that that eruption--judging from
appearances--must have been a very tremendous one, and partly because my
knowledge of volcanic action leads me to expect it; but I could not
easily explain the reason for my conclusions on the latter point.  I
have just been to the brow of a ridge not far off whence I have seen the
glow in the sky of the Krakatoa fires.  They do not, however, appear to
be very fierce at the present moment."

As he spoke there was felt by the travellers a blow, as if of an
explosion under the house in which they sat.  It was a strong vertical
bump which nearly tossed them all off their chairs.  Van der Kemp and
his man, after an exclamation or two, continued supper like men who were
used to such interruptions, merely remarking that it was an earthquake.
But Nigel, to whom it was not quite so familiar, stood up for a few
seconds with a look of anxious uncertainty, as if undecided as to the
path of duty and prudence in the circumstances.  Moses relieved him.

"Sot down, Massa Nadgel," said that sable worthy, as he stuffed his
mouth full of rice; "it's easier to sot dan to stand w'en its
eart'quakin'."

Nigel sat down with a tendency to laugh, for at that moment he chanced
to glance at the rafters above, where he saw a small anxious-faced
monkey gazing down at him.

He was commenting on this creature when another prolonged shock of
earthquake came.  It was not a bump like the previous one, but a severe
vibration which only served to shake the men in their chairs, but it
shook the small monkey off the rafter, and the miserable little thing
fell with a shriek and a flop into the rice-dish!

"Git out o' dat--you scoundril!" exclaimed Moses, but the order was
needless, for the monkey bounced out of it like india-rubber and sought
to hide its confusion in the thatch, while Moses helped himself to some
more of the rice, which, he said, was none the worse for being
monkeyfied!

At last our travellers found themselves in the town of Telok Betong,
where, being within forty-five miles of Krakatoa, the hermit could both
see and hear that his island-home was in violent agitation; tremendous
explosions occurring frequently, while dense masses of smoke were
ascending from its craters.

"I'm happy to find," said the hermit, soon after their arrival in the
town, "that the peak of Rakata, on the southern part of the island where
my cave lies, is still quiet and has shown no sign of breaking out.  And
now I shall go and see after my canoe."

"Do you think it safe to venture to visit your cave?" asked Nigel.

"Well, not absolutely safe," returned the hermit with a peculiar smile,
"but, of course, if you think it unwise to run the risk of--"

"I asked a simple question, Van der Kemp, without any thought of
myself," interrupted the youth, as he flushed deeply.

"Forgive me, Nigel," returned the hermit quickly and gravely, "it is but
my duty to point out that we cannot go there without running _some_
risk."

"And it is _my_ duty to point out," retorted his hurt friend, "that when
any man, worthy of the name, agrees to follow another, he agrees to
accept all risks."

To this the hermit vouchsafed no further reply than a slight smile and
nod of intelligence.  Thereafter he went off alone to inquire about his
canoe, which, it will be remembered, his friend, the captain of the
steamer, had promised to leave for him at this place.

Telok Betong, which was one of the severest sufferers by the eruption of
1883, is a small town at the head of Lampong Bay, opposite to the island
of Krakatoa, from which it is between forty and fifty miles distant.  It
is built on a narrow strip of land at the base of a steep mountain, but
little above the sea, and is the chief town of the Lampong Residency,
which forms the most southerly province of Sumatra.  At the time we
write of, the only European residents of the place were connected with
Government.  The rest of the population was composed of a heterogeneous
mass of natives mingled with a number of Chinese, a few Arabs, and a
large fluctuating population of traders from Borneo, Celebes, New
Guinea, Siam, and the other innumerable isles of the archipelago.  These
were more or less connected with prahus laden with the rich and varied
merchandise of the eastern seas.  As each man in the town had been
permitted to build his house according to his own fancy, picturesque
irregularity was the agreeable result.  It may be added that, as each
man spoke his own language in his own tones, Babel and noise were the
consequence.

In a small hut by the waterside the hermit found the friend--a Malay--to
whom his canoe had been consigned, and, in a long low shed close by, he
found the canoe itself, with the faithful Spinkie in charge.

"Don't go near the canoe till you've made friends with the monkey," said
the Malay in his own tongue, as he was about to put the key in the door.

"Why not?" asked the hermit.

"Because it is the savagest brute I ever came across," said the man.
"It won't let a soul come near the canoe.  I would have killed it long
