Laud looked like the very impersonation of dignity itself, as he walked
towards the door.

"Stop!" yelled the captain.

"I do not know that any one but Hasbrook suspects you of a crime," Laud
explained.

"I'm glad he does suspect me," added the strange man, more gently.
"Whoever did that job served him just right, and I envy the man that did
it."

"Still, it is unpleasant to be suspected of a crime."

"It wasn't a crime."

"People call it so; but I sympathize with you, for like you I am
suspected of a crime, of which, like yourself, I am innocent."

"Are you, indeed? And what may your crime be, Mr. Cavendish?"

"It is in this connection that I wish to state my particular business
with you."

"Go on and state it, and don't be all night about it."

"I may add that I also came to warn you against the movements of
Hasbrook. I will begin at the beginning."

"Begin, then; and don't go round Cape Horn in doing it," snarled the
captain.

"I will, sir. Captain Patterdale--"

"Another miserable psalm-singer. Is he in the scrape?"

"He is, sir. He has lost a tin box, which contained nearly fourteen
hundred dollars in cash, besides many valuable papers."

"I'm glad of it; and I hope he never will find it," was the kindly
expression of the eccentric nabob for the Christian nabob. "Was the box
lost or stolen?"

"Stolen, sir."

"So much the better. I hope the thief will never be discovered."

Laud did not say how he happened to know that the tin box had been
stolen, for Captain Patterdale, the deputy sheriff, and Nellie were
supposed to be the only persons who had any knowledge of the fact.

"It appears that in this tin box there was a certain fifty-dollar bill,
which had been torn into four parts, and mended by pasting two strips of
paper upon it, one extending from right to left, and the other from top
to bottom, on the back."

"Eh?" interposed the wicked nabob. "Wait a minute."

The captain opened an iron safe in the room, and from a drawer took out
a handful of bank bills. From these he selected three, and tossed them
on the table.

"Like those?" he inquired, with interest.

"Exactly like them," replied Laud, astonished to find that each was the
counterpart of the one he had paid Donald for the Juno, and had the
"white cross of Denmark" upon it.

"Do you know how those bills happened to be in that condition, Mr.
Cavendish?" chuckled the captain.

"Of course I do not, sir."

"I'll tell you, my gay buffer. I have got a weak, soft place somewhere
in my gizzard; I don't know where; if I did, I'd cut it out. About three
months ago, just after I brought from Portland one hundred of these new
fifty-dollar bills, there was a great cry here for money for some
missionary concern. I read something in the newspaper, at this time,
about what some of the missionaries had done for a lot of sailors who
had been cast away on the South Sea Islands. I thought more of the
psalm-singers than ever before, and I was tempted to do something for
them. Well, I actually wrote to some parson here who was howling for
money, and stuck four of those bills between the leaves. I think it is
very likely I should have sent them to the parson, if I hadn't been
called out of the room. I threw the note, with the bills in it, on the
table, and went out to see a pair of horses a jockey had driven into the
yard for me to look at. When I came back and glanced at the note, I
thought what a fool I had been, to think of giving money to those
canting psalm-singers. I was mad with myself for my folly, and I tore
the note into four pieces before I thought that the bills were in it.
But Mrs. Sykes mended them as you see. Go on with your yarn, my buffer."

"That bill I paid to Don John for the Juno," continued Laud. "He paid it
to Mr. Leach, the sail-maker, who paid it to Captain Patterdale, and he
says it was one of the bills in the tin chest when it was stolen. Don
John says he had it from me."

"Precisely so; and that is what makes it unpleasant to be suspected of a
crime," laughed Captain Shivernock. "But you don't state where you got
the bill, Mr. Cavendish. Perhaps you don't wish to tell."

"I shall tell the whole story with the greatest pleasure," added Laud.
"I was sailing one day down by Haddock Ledge, when I saw a man tumble
overboard from a boat moored where he had been fishing. He was staving
drunk, and went forward, as I thought, to get up his anchor. The boat
rolled in the sea, and over he went. I got him out. The cold water
sobered him in a measure, and he was very grateful to me. He went to his
coat, which he did not wear when he fell, and took from his pocket a
roll of bills. He counted off ten fifties, and gave them to me. Feeling
sure that I had saved his life, I did not think five hundred dollars was
any too much to pay for it, and I took the money. I don't think he would
have given me so much if he hadn't been drunk. I asked him who he was,
but he would not tell me, saying he didn't want his friends in Boston
to know he had been over the bay, and in the bay; but he said he had
been staying in Belfast a couple of days."

"Good story!" laughed the wicked nabob.

"Every word of it is as true as preaching," protested Laud.

"Just about," added the captain, who hadn't much confidence in
preaching.

"You can see, Captain Shivernock, that I am in an awkward position,"
added Laud. "I have no doubt the man I saved was the one who stole the
tin box. He paid me with the stolen bills."

"It is awkward, as you say," chuckled the strange man. "I suppose you
wouldn't know the fellow you saved if you saw him."

"O, yes, I think I should," exclaimed Laud. "But suppose, when Captain
Patterdale comes to me to inquire where I got the marked bill, I should
tell him this story. He wouldn't believe a word of it."

"He would be a fool if he did," exclaimed Captain Shivernock, with a
coarse grin. "Therefore, my gay buffer, don't tell it to him."

"But I must tell him where I got the bill," pleaded Laud.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the eccentric, shaking his sides as though they
were agitated by a young earthquake. "Tell him I gave you the bill!"

The captain seemed to be intensely amused at the novel idea; and Laud
did not object; on the contrary, he seemed to appreciate the joke. It
was midnight when he left the house, and went to the Juno to sleep in
her cabin. If he had gone home earlier in the evening, he might have
seen Captain Patterdale, who did him the honor to make a late call upon
him.




CHAPTER XV.

LAUD CAVENDISH TAKES CARE OF HIMSELF.


Donald did not sleep very well in the cabin of the Maud, not only
because his bed was very hard and uncomfortable, but because he was
troubled; and before morning he fully realized the truth of the saying,
in regard to certain persons, that "they choose darkness, because their
deeds are evil." He wished he had not consented to keep the secret of
either Captain Shivernock or Laud Cavendish, and was afraid he had
compromised himself by his silence. When he turned out in the morning,
he believed he had hardly slept a wink all night, though he had actually
slumbered over six hours; but a person who lies awake in the darkness,
especially if his thoughts are troublesome, lengthens minutes into
hours. But Donald welcomed the morning light when he awoke, and the
bright sun which streamed through the trunk ports. He went to the shop,
and for two hours before his men arrived worked on the tender of the
Maud.

The mast of the yacht was stepped during the forenoon, and after dinner
the rigger came to do his part of the work. Samuel Rodman was now so
much interested in the progress of the labor on the new yacht, that he
spent nearly all his time on board of her. The top mast, gaff, and boom
were all ready to go into their places, and the Maud looked as though
she was nearly completed. All the members of the Yacht Club were
impatient for her to be finished, for the next regatta had been
postponed a week, so that the Maud could take part in the affair; and
the club were to go on a cruise for ten days, after the race.

There was no little excitement in the club in relation to the Maud.
Donald had confidently asserted his belief, weeks before, that she would
outsail the Skylark, not as a mere boast, but as a matter of business.
His father had made an improvement upon the model of the Sea Foam, which
he was reasonably certain would give her the advantage. The young
boat-builder had also remedied a slight defect in the arrangement of
the centre-board in the Maud, had added a little to the size of the jib
and mainsail, and he hoped these alterations would tell in favor of the
new craft, while they would not take anything from her stiffness in
heavy weather.

"I believe the old folks are as much interested in the next race as the
members of the club, Don John," said Rodman, one day, as he came upon
the wharf.

"I am glad they are," replied Donald, laughing. "It will make business
good for Ramsay & Son."

"Half a dozen of them are going to make up a first prize of one hundred
dollars for the regatta; so that the winner of the race will make a good
thing by it," added Rodman.

"That will be a handsome prize."

"If the Maud takes it, Don John, the money shall be yours, as you are to
sail her."

"O, no!" exclaimed Donald. "I don't believe in that. The prize will
belong to the boat."

"If you win the race in the Maud, I shall be satisfied with the glory,
without any of the spoils."

"Well, we won't quarrel about it now, for she may not win the first
prize."

"Well, the same gentlemen will give a second prize of fifty dollars,"
continued Rodman. "But don't you expect to get the first prize, Don
John?"

"I do; but to expect is not always to win, you know."

"You have always talked as though you felt pretty sure of coming in
first," said Rodman, who did not like to see any abatement of confidence
on the part of the boat-builder.

"It is the easiest thing in the world to be mistaken, Sam. If the Maud
loses the first prize, I may as well shut up shop, and take a situation
in a grocery store, for my business would be ruined."

"Not quite so bad as that, I hope," added Rodman.

"Mr. Norwood is waiting to see how she sails, before he orders a yacht
for Frank. Can't you invite Frank and his father to sail with us in the
race?"

"Certainly, if you desire it, Don John," replied Rodman. "Mr. Norwood is
a big man, and he will be a capital live weight for us, if it happens to
blow fresh."

"I hope it will blow; if it don't, the Christabel is sure of the first
prize. I want just such a day as we had when the Sea Foam cleaned out
the Skylark."

"That was a little too much of a good thing. You came pretty near taking
the mast out of the Sea Foam that day."

"Not at all; our masts don't come out so easily as that, though I think
the mast of the Sea Foam would snap before she would capsize."

"I like that in a boat; it is a good thing to have a craft that will
stay right side up. The fellows have got another idea, Don John."

"Well, ideas are good things to have. What is it now?" asked Donald.

"They are going to build a club-house over on Turtle Head."

"On Turtle Head! Why don't they have it down on Manhegan?" which is an
island ten miles from the coast of Maine.

"It will be only a shanty, where the fellows can have a good time, and
get up chowders. They talk of hiring a hall in the city, and having
meetings for mutual improvement during the fall and winter."

"That will be a capital idea."

"We can have a library of books on nautical and other subjects, take the
newspapers and magazines, and hang up pictures of yachts and other
vessels on the walls. I hope, when you get the Maud done, you will not
be so busy, Don John, for you don't attend many of our club meetings."

"I hope to be busier than ever. You see, Sam, I can't afford to run with
you rich fellows. I don't wear kid gloves," laughed Donald.

"No matter if you don't; you are just as good a fellow as any of them."

"Everybody uses me first rate; as well as though my father had been a
nabob."

"Well, they ought to; for it is brains, not money, that makes the man.
We want to see more of you in the club. You must go with us on our long
cruise."

"I am afraid I can't spare the time. Ten days is a good while; but it
will depend upon whether I get the job to build Mr. Norwood's yacht."

Donald would gladly have spent more time with the club, but his
conscience would not permit him to neglect his business. He felt that
his success depended entirely upon his own industry and diligence; and
he never left his work, except when the occasion fully justified him in
doing so. He attended all the regattas as a matter of business, as well
as of pleasure; and he had seen the Sea Foam beaten twice by the
Skylark since he won the memorable race in the former. Edward Patterdale
was fully satisfied, now, that a skilful boatman was as necessary as a
fast boat, in order to win the honors of the club, and he wished Donald
to "coach" him, until he obtained the skill to compete with the
commodore. Donald had promised to do it, as soon as he had time, and the
owner of the Sea Foam hoped the opportunity would be afforded during the
long cruise.

The work on the Maud was hurried forward as rapidly as was consistent
with thoroughness, and in a few days she was ready for the last coats of
paint. The boat-builder was favored with good, dry weather, and on the
