carry the inquiry farther here at present. The clerk, who was watching
him closely, was the first to speak.

"I own, Mr. Hartington, that I do not in the slightest degree understand
the gist of your questions, but I can well imagine that at the present
moment you are wondering whether it would be safe to ask farther. I
will, therefore, tell you at once that one of my reasons for leaving Mr.
Brander's employment was that I did not like his way of doing business,
nor did I like the man himself. The general opinion of him was that he
was a public-spirited and kind-hearted man. I can only say that our
opinion of him in the office was a very different one. He was a hard
man, and frequently when pretending to be most lenient to tenants on the
estates to which he was agent, or to men on whose lands he held
mortgages, he strained the law to its utmost limits. I will not say more
than that, but I could quote cases in which he put on the screw in a way
that was to my mind most absolutely unjustifiable, and I had been for a
very long time trying to get out of his office before the opportunity
came. I may also say, Mr. Hartington, that I had the highest respect for
your father. He always had a kind word when he came into the office, and
regularly at Christmas he handed Levison and myself a check for ten
pounds each, for, as he said, the trouble his business gave us. I tell
you this in order that you may feel you can safely repose any confidence
in me, and that my advice will be wholly at your service if you should
think fit to give me your confidence in this matter, whatever it may
be. But at the same time I must say it would be still better if you put
yourself in the hands of some respectable firm of solicitors. I do not
suggest my own principals more than others, although few men stand
higher in the profession."

"There are reasons against my laying the matter before any firm of
solicitors, and the chief of these is that my hands are tied in a
peculiar manner, and that I am unable to carry it through to its natural
sequence, but I will very thankfully accept your offer and will frankly
tell you the nature of my suspicions, for they are nothing more than
suspicions. I may first say that the news that my father was a
shareholder in the Abchester Bank astounded me. For a time, I put it
down to one of those sudden impulses that are unaccountable, but I may
tell you, and here my confidence begins, that I have come across
Cumming, the bank manager, and from him have obtained some curious
particulars of this transaction--particulars that have excited my
suspicions.

"You wondered why I asked you those questions. I will tell you. You did
not see my father affix his signature to either of those documents. The
one being certainly the transfer of some of Cumming's shares to him. The
other being, as I believe, the mortgage that, as you doubtless heard,
Mr. Brander held over my father's estate. How could you tell those two
signatures were not clever forgeries?"

Mr. Harford gave a start of surprise.

"God bless me, sir," he exclaimed, "such an idea never entered my mind."

"That I can quite understand," Cuthbert said, quietly, "but you must
admit it is possible."

"But in that case," the clerk said, after a pause, "Brander himself must
have been the forger, and surely that is not possible. I fancy I know
Mr. Brander pretty well, but I should never have dreamt him capable of
forgery. Not because I have a high opinion of his honesty, but because I
believe him to be a cautious man, and besides I do not see what possible
interest he could have had in ruining your father by putting his name
on to the register of shareholders. Even if he had an interest in so
doing the risk of detection would be frightful, for not only would the
matter be known to the directors, but, as you are aware, any shareholder
has a right on the payment of a nominal fee to inspect the list of
shareholders."

"Precautions were taken against this," Cuthbert said. "Just glance
through this paper, which has been signed and sworn to by Cumming in
proper form at Brussels."

Mr. Harford ran his eye over the document and then read it through
carefully word by word.

"This is an extraordinary statement," he said, gravely, "do you believe
it, Mr. Hartington?"

"I believe it implicitly. I had the man practically at my mercy. As you
know, there is a warrant out for his arrest and a word from me would
have set the police on his track and led to an application for his
extradition. Therefore he had every motive for telling me the truth, and
I am as certain as I can be, that he did so."

"If so there can be no question that Mr. Brander had some very strong
reason indeed for preventing the knowledge of this transfer having ever
been made from being known; but in any case it must have come out when
the bank failed and of course he must have had a pretty accurate
knowledge of the state of its affairs."

"Yes, but it man be that he had an equally accurate knowledge of the
state of my father's health. That would account for what Cumming says as
to his offer to bolster up the bank for a time, and for a retraction of
that offer within a few days after my father's death."

"But why on earth should he have run all this risk merely to ruin you?
He had no cause of enmity against you, had he, sir?"

"None, so far as I knew but now we come to the other document where you
witnessed the signature without having seen it signed. If the signature
on the transfer was a forgery, why not that on the mortgage, if it was
the mortgage. If so you see the motive of the transfer. The smash of the
bank brought a good many estates into the market and they would
consequently go cheap. Not only would he get it far below its value, but
by reason of this pretended mortgage he would get a further drawback of
L15,000 from the price he would pay as its purchase."

"Good heavens, Mr. Hartington! You take my breath away! Have you any
reason whatever for believing that the mortgage was a bogus one?"

"None, beyond the fact that I was ignorant of its existence. I was so
surprised that I not only wrote to Brander himself but to the official
liquidator. The former said he had advanced the money at the urgent
request of my father, who told him he wished to settle a very long
standing claim upon him, and that he desired that the transaction should
be kept an absolute secret. The official liquidator said he had gone
carefully into the question of the mortgage, that it was of three years,
standing, that the receipts Mr. Brander had given my father for the
half-yearly interest on the money had been found among my father's
papers, and that Brander had moreover produced a document, showing that
he had sold securities to that amount, and had drawn the money from his
bankers in town by a singled check for L15,000. Do you remember whether
such a deed was ever drawn up in the office?"

"Certainly it was not, but you see that proves nothing, for it was to be
kept a secret. Brander might have had it drawn up by some solicitor in
London."

"I see that. Well, then, this deed, whatever it was that you witnessed,
was that drawn up in the office?"

"No. I remember Levison and I talked it over and said it was curious
that a deed between Brander and Mr. Hartington should not have been
given to us as usual to be drawn up."

"You witnessed his signature then as well as that of my father?"

"Yes, I have a particular reason for remembering that, for I had sat
down hurriedly after he had signed it, and dipping my pen too deeply in
the ink, made a blot. It was no doubt a stupid thing to do, but Brander
was so unreasonably angry about it, and blew me up so roughly that I
made up my mind there and then to stand it no longer, and wrote that
very evening to my friend in my present office the letter which led to
my getting the situation there two or three months later."

"That blot may be a most important one," Cuthbert said, "if it occurs on
the mortgage deed on Fairclose, it is clear that document was not, as it
professes on its face, executed three years earlier."

"That would be so indeed," Mr. Harford exclaimed, excitedly; "it would
be a piece of evidence there would be no getting over, and that fact
would account for Brander's anger, which seemed to me was out of all
proportion to the accident. If you could show that the mortgage deed on
which Brander claimed is really that document we witnessed, it would be
all up with him. As to the receipts for the payments of interest they
proved nothing as they were, of course, in Brander's own handwriting and
were found where he put them. If you could find out that Brander had
knowledge of Mr. Hartington's state of health about the time that
transfer was produced you would strengthen your case. It seems to me
that he must have got an inkling of it just before he filled up the
transfer, and that he ante-dated it a week so that it would appear to
have been signed before he learnt about his illness. I can see no other
reason for the ante-dating it."

"That may have been the reason," Cuthbert agreed. "It was one of the
points for which Cumming and I, talking it over, could see no motive.
Certainly he would wish that if anyone said to him you ought to have
prevented Mr. Hartington buying those shares when you knew that he was
in a precarious state of health, to be able to reply that when the
shares were bought he had not the slightest idea of his being in
anything but the best of health."

"At any rate I will see Dr. Edwardes, and ascertain exactly when he did
tell Brander. He is certain to be able by turning back to his visiting
book, to ascertain when he himself became aware of my father's danger,
and is likely to remember whether he told Brander at once."

"But even without that, Mr. Hartington, if you can prove that question
of the date of the deed you have him completely on the hip. Still it
will be a very difficult case to carry through, especially if you cannot
get Cumming to come into court."

"But, as I began by telling you, I cannot carry out the case to a
legitimate conclusion, nor do I want the intervention of lawyers in the
matter. I want the estate back again if I can get it, but rather than
this matter should be made public I would not lift a little finger to
regain the property. It happens," and he smiled dryly, "that Mr.
Brander's reputation is almost as dear to me as it is to him, for I am
going to marry his daughter. We should not feel quite comfortable
together, you see, at the thought that the father was working out a
sentence of penal servitude."

"That is an unfortunate combination indeed, Mr. Hartington," Mr. Harford
said seriously, though he could not repress a smile of amusement at the
unexpected news. "Then it seems to me, sir, that Brander may in fact
snap his fingers at any threat you may hold out, for he would feel
certain that you would never take any steps that would make the matter
public."

"Fortunately," Cuthbert replied. "Mr. Brander is wholly unaware of the
little fact I have mentioned, and is likely to remain so until matters
are finally arranged between us."

"That is indeed fortunate. Then I understand, Mr. Hartington, your
object is to obtain so strong a proof of Brander's share in this affair
as will place you in a position to go down to him, and force him into
some satisfactory arrangement with you."

"That is it, and it is clear the first step will be to see the official
liquidator and to obtain a sight of the mortgage."

"I suppose you know that he is the head of the firm of Cox, Tuke, and
Atkinson, in Coleman Street. I suggest that the best plan will be to see
him to-morrow, and to make an appointment with him for you to inspect
the mortgage. You would wish me, of course, to be with you when you do
so?"

"Think you very much. I will go round there in the morning, and will
call at your office afterwards and let you know if I have arranged the
matter, and the time at which I am to call to inspect the mortgage."




CHAPTER XIX.


Cuthbert, on calling upon the head of the great firm of accountants, was
courteously received by him.

"Of course, I remember your name, Mr. Hartington, with reference to the
Abchester Bank failure. It seemed a particularly hard case, and I know
our Mr. Wanklyn, who had charge of the winding up, took particular
interest in it, and personally consulted me more than once about it,
though I cannot exactly recall the circumstances now. What is it that
you say you want to examine?"

"I want to have a look at the deed of mortgage that Mr. Brander, who
purchased the property, had upon it."

"Yes, I remember now, that was one of the points on which Mr. Wanklyn
consulted me. It struck him at first sight as being rather a remarkable
transaction, and he went into it carefully, but it was all proved to be
correct to his satisfaction. It is unfortunate that the system of
registering mortgages is not enforced everywhere as it is in London--it
would save a great deal of trouble in such cases as the present."

"Are the affairs of the bank quite wound up?"

"Dear me, no, Mr. Hartington. Why, it is but two years since the
failure. There are properties to be realized that cannot be forced on
the market without ruinous loss. There are assets which will not be
available until after death; it is not the assets of the bank, but the
assets of individual shareholders and debtors of the bank that have to
be collected. I should say it will be at least twenty years before the
last dividend will be divided. I am sure Mr. Wanklyn will be happy to
let you see any document you desire. I will take you to him."

Mr. Wanklyn had a room on the same floor with his principal, and Mr. Cox
took Cuthbert and introduced him to him.

"Mr. Hartington wants to have a look at the mortgage that Brander held
on the late Mr. Hartington's estate. You remember we had several talks
about it at the time, and you took a good deal of pains about the
matter. Mr. Hartington wrote to me about it from Paris, if you
recollect, and you replied to him in my name. I will leave him with you
to talk it over."

"Have you any particular reason for wanting to see the deed, Mr.
Hartington?" the accountant asked, when Mr. Cox had left the room. "I
only ask because I suppose the documents connected with the winding up
of the bank must weigh several tons, and it will take a considerable
time for a clerk to hunt out the one in question. If you have really any
motive for examining it I will get it looked out for you by to-morrow,
but it will put us to a great deal of trouble."

"I am really anxious to see it for a special purpose, Mr. Wanklyn. I
have reason to believe there was some irregularity in the matter."

"I am afraid it will make but little difference to you whether it was so
or not, Mr. Hartington. The creditors of the bank have been the
sufferers if there was any irregularity in it."

"Yes, I suppose so, and yet I assure you it is not a mere matter of
sentiment with me. Other questions might turn upon it."

"Then I will certainly have it ready for you by to-morrow--give me until
the afternoon. Will four o'clock suit you?"

"Very well. I will, with your permission, bring with me one of the
attesting witnesses to my father's signature. He was one of Mr.
Brander's clerks at the time."

Mr. Wanklyn looked up keenly.

"You can bring whom you like," he said, after a pause, "and I will put a
room at your disposal, but of course the document cannot be taken away."

"Certainly not, Mr. Wanklyn, and I am very much obliged to you for
granting my request."

Cuthbert called for James Harford at the hour at which he had said he
went out to lunch, and told him of the appointment he had made.

"I have been thinking it over, Mr. Hartington, and I should recommend
you to bring Cooper with you."

"Who is Cooper?"

"He is one of our greatest experts on handwriting. I don't know whether
you have any of your father's letters in your possession."

"Yes, I have several. I brought over the last two I had from him,
thinking they might be useful."

"Well, his opinion on the signatures may be valuable, though as a rule
experts differ so absolutely that their evidence is always taken with
considerable doubt, but it is part of his business to look out for
erasures and alterations. It is quite possible Brander may have removed
that blot, and that he has done it so well that neither you nor I could
detect it; but whether he did it with a knife or chemicals you may be
sure that Cooper will be able to spot it, whichever he used. I have very
little doubt that your suspicions are correct and those parchments were
really the pretended mortgage deeds. If you like I will go round and see
Cooper at once and arrange for him to meet us in Coleman Street
to-morrow at four o'clock."

"Thank you very much. The idea of the blot being erased had never struck
me."

The next day Cuthbert met James Harford and Mr. Cooper at the door of
the accountants, and after being introduced by the clerk to the expert
they went up together. On giving his name in the office a clerk came
across to him.

"If you will come with me, gentlemen, I will lead you to the room that
is ready for you. This is the document that you desire to see."

As soon as they were alone they sat down at the table, and opened the
deed.

"How is it for size?" Cuthbert asked.

"It is about the same size, but that is nothing. All deeds are on two or
three sizes of parchment. The last page is the thing."

Cuthbert turned to it. There were but four lines of writing at the top
of the page, and below these came the signatures.

"Of course I could not swear to it, Mr. Hartington, but it is precisely
in accordance with my recollection. There were either three, four, or
five lines at the top. Certainly not more than five, certainly not less
than three. As you see there is no blot to my signature. Now, Mr.
Cooper, will you be kind enough to compare the signatures of these two
letters with the same name there?"

Mr. Cooper took the letter and deed to a desk by the window, examined
them carefully, then took out a large magnifying glass from his pocket,
and again examined them.

"I should say they are certainly not by the same hand," he said,
decisively. "I do not call them even good imitations. They are nothing
like as good as would be made by any expert in signing other people's
names. The tail of the 'J' in James in these two letters runs up into
the 'a' but as you will notice the pen is taken off and the letter 'a'
starts afresh. Here on the contrary you see the pen has not been taken
off, but the upstroke of the 'J' runs on continuously into the 'a.' More
naturally it would be just the other way. In these two letters the
writer would be signing his name more hurriedly than to a formal deed,
and would be much more likely to run his letters into each other than
when making a formal signature on parchment.

"Looking through this glass you will observe also that although the
letters run on together there is a slight thickening in the upstroke
between each letter as if the writer had paused, though without taking
his pen off, to examine the exact method of making the next letter in a
copy lying before him. In the surname there are half a dozen points of
difference. To begin with, the whole writing slopes less than in the
other signatures. In both your father's letters the cross of the first
't' is much lower than usual and almost touches the top of the 'r' and
i.' The same peculiarity is shown in the second 't' in both letters,
while on the deed the 't's' are crossed a good deal higher. The whole
word is more cramped, the flourish at the end of the 'n' is longer but
less free. In the capital letter, the two downstrokes are a good deal
closer together. There has been the same pause between each letter as
those I pointed out in the Christian name, and indeed the glass shows
you the pen was altogether taken off the paper between the 'o' and the
'n,' as the writer studied that final flourish. My opinion is that it is
not only a forgery but a clumsy one, and would be detected at once by
anyone who had the original signatures before him. I will even go so far
as to say that I doubt if any bank clerk well acquainted with Mr.
Hartington's signature would pass it."

"And now for the blot," Cuthbert said. "There was a blot somewhere near
the signature of Mr. Harford."

"Don't tell me where it was, Mr. Harford. I would rather not know its
exact position."

With the aid of the magnifying glass the expert carefully examined the
parchment and then held it up to the light.

"The blot was in the middle of the signature and involved the letters
'a' and 'r.' Is that right?"

"That is right, Mr. Cooper; he used blotting paper to it at once, and it
did not show up very strongly."

"An eraser has been used and a chemical of some sort, and the two
letters involved in the blot have been re-written, or at any rate
touched up, but they have run a little. You can see it quite plainly
through this lens. The difference between their outline and that of the
other letters is quite distinct, and by holding the parchment so that
the light falls across it, you can see that, although it has been
rubbed, probably by the handle of a penknife to give it a gloss, the
difference between that gloss and the rest of the surface, is distinctly
visible."

"I see that," the clerk said, "and I should be quite prepared to swear
now, Mr. Hartington, that this is the document I signed some three weeks
after I signed as witness to the transfer."

"That is quite good enough, I think," Cuthbert said. "Thank you, Mr.
Cooper, you have quite settled the doubt I had in my mind. I do not
think I shall have occasion to ask you to go into court over this
matter, but should I have to do so I will, of course, give you due
notice."

After paying the expert's fee Cuthbert went into the office and handed
the document over to the clerk from whom he had received it.

"Would you kindly put it where it can be got at easily should it be
wanted again. It is of the highest importance."

After parting with Mr. Cooper at the door, Cuthbert walked westward with
Mr. Harford.

"So far you have proved that your suspicions are correct, sir, and I
have not the least doubt that your father's signature to the transfer
was, like this, a forgery. May I ask what step you propose to take next?
Of course if your object was not to prevent publicity your course would
be clear. You would first apply for a warrant for the arrest of Brander
on a charge of double forgery. When that was proved, you would have to
take steps to apply to have it declared that your father's name was
wrongfully placed among the shareholders of the bank, and then endeavor
to obtain a decree ordering the liquidator to reimburse the proceeds of
the sale of the estate and all other moneys received by him from your
father's executor. Lastly, you would apply to have the sale annulled,
not only on the ground of fraud on the part of Mr. Brander, but because
the liquidators could not give a title. Of course in all these steps you
would have to be guided by a firm of high standing, but as you
particularly wish to avoid publicity, I suppose your first step will be
to confront Brander with the proofs of his guilt. I suppose you would
