sweetly and clearly that Cousin Sophia across the road heard her and
croaked out to Mrs. Albert,

"'Sing before eating, cry before sleeping,' I've always heard."

But Rilla Blythe shed no tears before the nightfall. When her father,
his face grey and drawn and old, came to her that afternoon and told
her that Walter had been killed in action at Courcelette she crumpled
up in a pitiful little heap of merciful unconsciousness in his arms.
Nor did she waken to her pain for many hours.



CHAPTER XXIII

"AND SO, GOODNIGHT"

The fierce flame of agony had burned itself out and the grey dust of
its ashes was over all the world. Rilla's younger life recovered
physically sooner than her mother. For weeks Mrs. Blythe lay ill from
grief and shock. Rilla found it was possible to go on with existence,
since existence had still to be reckoned with. There was work to be
done, for Susan could not do all. For her mother's sake she had to put
on calmness and endurance as a garment in the day; but night after
night she lay in her bed, weeping the bitter rebellious tears of youth
until at last tears were all wept out and the little patient ache that
was to be in her heart until she died took their place.

She clung to Miss Oliver, who knew what to say and what not to say. So
few people did. Kind, well-meaning callers and comforters gave Rilla
some terrible moments.

"You'll get over it in time," Mrs. William Reese said, cheerfully. Mrs.
Reese had three stalwart sons, not one of whom had gone to the front.

"It's such a blessing it was Walter who was taken and not Jem," said
Miss Sarah Clow. "Walter was a member of the church, and Jem wasn't.
I've told Mr. Meredith many a time that he should have spoken seriously
to Jem about it before he went away."

"Pore, pore Walter," sighed Mrs. Reese.

"Do not you come here calling him poor Walter," said Susan indignantly,
appearing in the kitchen door, much to the relief of Rilla, who felt
that she could endure no more just then. "He was not poor. He was
richer than any of you. It is you who stay at home and will not let
your sons go who are poor--poor and naked and mean and small--pisen
poor, and so are your sons, with all their prosperous farms and fat
cattle and their souls no bigger than a flea's--if as big."

"I came here to comfort the afflicted and not to be insulted," said
Mrs. Reese, taking her departure, unregretted by anyone. Then the fire
went out of Susan and she retreated to her kitchen, laid her faithful
old head on the table and wept bitterly for a time. Then she went to
work and ironed Jims's little rompers. Rilla scolded her gently for it
when she herself came in to do it.

"I am not going to have you kill yourself working for any war-baby,"
Susan said obstinately.

"Oh, I wish I could just keep on working all the time, Susan," cried
poor Rilla. "And I wish I didn't have to go to sleep. It is hideous to
go to sleep and forget it for a little while, and wake up and have it
all rush over me anew the next morning. Do people ever get used to
things like this, Susan? And oh, Susan, I can't get away from what Mrs.
Reese said. Did Walter suffer much--he was always so sensitive to pain.
Oh, Susan, if I knew that he didn't I think I could gather up a little
courage and strength."

This merciful knowledge was given to Rilla. A letter came from Walter's
commanding officer, telling them that he had been killed instantly by a
bullet during a charge at Courcelette. The same day there was a letter
for Rilla from Walter himself.

Rilla carried it unopened to Rainbow Valley and read it there, in the
spot where she had had her last talk with him. It is a strange thing to
read a letter after the writer is dead--a bitter-sweet thing, in which
pain and comfort are strangely mingled. For the first time since the
blow had fallen Rilla felt--a different thing from tremulous hope and
faith--that Walter, of the glorious gift and the splendid ideals, still
lived, with just the same gift and just the same ideals. That could not
be destroyed--these could suffer no eclipse. The personality that had
expressed itself in that last letter, written on the eve of
Courcelette, could not be snuffed out by a German bullet. It must carry
on, though the earthly link with things of earth were broken.

"We're going over the top tomorrow, Rilla-my-Rilla," wrote Walter. "I
wrote mother and Di yesterday, but somehow I feel as if I must write
you tonight. I hadn't intended to do any writing tonight--but I've got
to. Do you remember old Mrs. Tom Crawford over-harbour, who was always
saying that it was 'laid on her' to do such and such a thing? Well,
that is just how I feel. It's 'laid on me' to write you tonight--you,
sister and chum of mine. There are some things I want to say
before--well, before tomorrow.

"You and Ingleside seem strangely near me tonight. It's the first time
I've felt this since I came. Always home has seemed so far away--so
hopelessly far away from this hideous welter of filth and blood. But
tonight it is quite close to me--it seems to me I can almost see
you--hear you speak. And I can see the moonlight shining white and
still on the old hills of home. It has seemed to me ever since I came
here that it was impossible that there could be calm gentle nights and
unshattered moonlight anywhere in the world. But tonight somehow, all
the beautiful things I have always loved seem to have become possible
again--and this is good, and makes me feel a deep, certain, exquisite
happiness. It must be autumn at home now--the harbour is a-dream and
the old Glen hills blue with haze, and Rainbow Valley a haunt of
delight with wild asters blowing all over it--our old
"farewell-summers." I always liked that name better than 'aster'--it
was a poem in itself.

"Rilla, you know I've always had premonitions. You remember the Pied
Piper--but no, of course you wouldn't--you were too young. One evening
long ago when Nan and Di and Jem and the Merediths and I were together
in Rainbow Valley I had a queer vision or presentiment--whatever you
like to call it. Rilla, I saw the Piper coming down the Valley with a
shadowy host behind him. The others thought I was only pretending--but
I saw him for just one moment. And Rilla, last night I saw him again. I
was doing sentry-go and I saw him marching across No-man's-land from
our trenches to the German trenches--the same tall shadowy form, piping
weirdly--and behind him followed boys in khaki. Rilla, I tell you I saw
him--it was no fancy--no illusion. I heard his music, and then--he was
gone. But I had seen him--and I knew what it meant--I knew that I was
among those who followed him.

"Rilla, the Piper will pipe me 'west' tomorrow. I feel sure of this.
And Rilla, I'm not afraid. When you hear the news, remember that. I've
won my own freedom here--freedom from all fear. I shall never be afraid
of anything again--not of death--nor of life, if after all, I am to go
on living. And life, I think, would be the harder of the two to
face--for it could never be beautiful for me again. There would always
be such horrible things to remember--things that would make life ugly
and painful always for me. I could never forget them. But whether it's
life or death, I'm not afraid, Rilla-my-Rilla, and I am not sorry that
I came. I'm satisfied. I'll never write the poems I once dreamed of
writing--but I've helped to make Canada safe for the poets of the
future--for the workers of the future--ay, and the dreamers, too--for
if no man dreams, there will be nothing for the workers to fulfil--the
future, not of Canada only but of the world--when the 'red rain' of
Langemarck and Verdun shall have brought forth a golden harvest--not in
a year or two, as some foolishly think, but a generation later, when
the seed sown now shall have had time to germinate and grow. Yes, I'm
glad I came, Rilla. It isn't only the fate of the little sea-born
island I love that is in the balance--nor of Canada nor of England.
It's the fate of mankind. That is what we're fighting for. And we shall
win--never for a moment doubt that, Rilla. For it isn't only the living
who are fighting--the dead are fighting too. Such an army cannot be
defeated.

"Is there laughter in your face yet, Rilla? I hope so. The world will
need laughter and courage more than ever in the years that will come
next. I don't want to preach--this isn't any time for it. But I just
want to say something that may help you over the worst when you hear
that I've gone 'west.' I've a premonition about you, Rilla, as well as
about myself. I think Ken will go back to you--and that there are long
years of happiness for you by-and-by. And you will tell your children
of the Idea we fought and died for--teach them it must be lived for as
well as died for, else the price paid for it will have been given for
nought. This will be part of your work, Rilla. And if you--all you
girls back in the homeland--do it, then we who don't come back will
know that you have not 'broken faith' with us.

"I meant to write to Una tonight, too, but I won't have time now. Read
this letter to her and tell her it's really meant for you both--you two
dear, fine loyal girls. Tomorrow, when we go over the top--I'll think
of you both--of your laughter, Rilla-my-Rilla, and the steadfastness in
Una's blue eyes--somehow I see those eyes very plainly tonight, too.
Yes, you'll both keep faith--I'm sure of that--you and Una. And
so--goodnight. We go over the top at dawn."

Rilla read her letter over many times. There was a new light on her
pale young face when she finally stood up, amid the asters Walter had
loved, with the sunshine of autumn around her. For the moment at least,
she was lifted above pain and loneliness.

"I will keep faith, Walter," she said steadily. "I will work--and
teach--and learn--and laugh, yes, I will even laugh--through all my
years, because of you and because of what you gave when you followed
the call."

Rilla meant to keep Walter's letter as a a sacred treasure. But, seeing
the look on Una Meredith's face when Una had read it and held it back
to her, she thought of something. Could she do it? Oh, no, she could
not give up Walter's letter--his last letter. Surely it was not
selfishness to keep it. A copy would be such a soulless thing. But
Una--Una had so little--and her eyes were the eyes of a woman stricken
to the heart, who yet must not cry out or ask for sympathy.

"Una, would you like to have this letter--to keep?" she asked slowly.

"Yes--if you can give it to me," Una said dully.

"Then--you may have it," said Rilla hurriedly.

"Thank you," said Una. It was all she said, but there was something in
her voice which repaid Rilla for her bit of sacrifice.

Una took the letter and when Rilla had gone she pressed it against her
lonely lips. Una knew that love would never come into her life now--it
was buried for ever under the blood-stained soil "Somewhere in France."
No one but herself--and perhaps Rilla--knew it--would ever know it. She
had no right in the eyes of her world to grieve. She must hide and bear
her long pain as best she could--alone. But she, too, would keep faith.



CHAPTER XXIV

MARY IS JUST IN TIME

The autumn of 1916 was a bitter season for Ingleside. Mrs. Blythe's
return to health was slow, and sorrow and loneliness were in all
hearts. Every one tried to hide it from the others and "carry on"
cheerfully. Rilla laughed a good deal. Nobody at Ingleside was deceived
by her laughter; it came from her lips only, never from her heart. But
outsiders said some people got over trouble very easily, and Irene
Howard remarked that she was surprised to find how shallow Rilla Blythe
really was. "Why, after all her pose of being so devoted to Walter, she
doesn't seem to mind his death at all. Nobody has ever seen her shed a
tear or heard her mention his name. She has evidently quite forgotten
him. Poor fellow--you'd really think his family would feel it more. I
spoke of him to Rilla at the last Junior Red meeting--of how fine and
brave and splendid he was--and I said life could never be just the same
to me again, now that Walter had gone--we were such friends, you
know--why I was the very first person he told about having
enlisted--and Rilla answered, as coolly and indifferently as if she
were speaking of an entire stranger, 'He was just one of many fine and
splendid boys who have given everything for their country.' Well, I
wish I could take things as calmly--but I'm not made like that. I'm so
sensitive--things hurt me terribly--I really never get over them. I
asked Rilla right out why she didn't put on mourning for Walter. She
said her mother didn't wish it. But every one is talking about it."

"Rilla doesn't wear colours--nothing but white," protested Betty Mead.

"White becomes her better than anything else," said Irene
significantly. "And we all know black doesn't suit her complexion at
all. But of course I'm not saying that is the reason she doesn't wear
it. Only, it's funny. If my brother had died I'd have gone into deep
mourning. I wouldn't have had the heart for anything else. I confess
I'm disappointed in Rilla Blythe."

"I am not, then," cried Betty Meade, loyally, "I think Rilla is just a
wonderful girl. A few years ago I admit I did think she was rather too
vain and gigglesome; but now she is nothing of the sort. I don't think
there is a girl in the Glen who is so unselfish and plucky as Rilla, or
who has done her bit as thoroughly and patiently. Our Junior Red Cross
would have gone on the rocks a dozen times if it hadn't been for her
tact and perseverance and enthusiasm--you know that perfectly well,
Irene."

"Why, I am not running Rilla down," said Irene, opening her eyes
widely. "It was only her lack of feeling I was criticizing. I suppose
she can't help it. Of course, she's a born manager--everyone knows
that. She's very fond of managing, too--and people like that are very
necessary I admit. So don't look at me as if I'd said something
perfectly dreadful, Betty, please. I'm quite willing to agree that
Rilla Blythe is the embodiment of all the virtues, if that will please
you. And no doubt it is a virtue to be quite unmoved by things that
would crush most people."

Some of Irene's remarks were reported to Rilla; but they did not hurt
her as they would once have done. They didn't matter, that was all.
Life was too big to leave room for pettiness. She had a pact to keep
and a work to do; and through the long hard days and weeks of that
disastrous autumn she was faithful to her task. The war news was
consistently bad, for Germany marched from victory to victory over poor
Rumania. "Foreigners--foreigners," Susan muttered dubiously. "Russians
or Rumanians or whatever they may be, they are foreigners and you
cannot tie to them. But after Verdun I shall not give up hope. And can
you tell me, Mrs. Dr. dear, if the Dobruja is a river or a mountain
range, or a condition of the atmosphere?"

The Presidential election in the United States came off in November,
and Susan was red-hot over that--and quite apologetic for her
excitement.

"I never thought I would live to see the day when I would be interested
in a Yankee election, Mrs. Dr. dear. It only goes to show we can never
know what we will come to in this world, and therefore we should not be
proud."

Susan stayed up late on the evening of the eleventh, ostensibly to
finish a pair of socks. But she 'phoned down to Carter Flagg's store at
intervals, and when the first report came through that Hughes had been
elected she stalked solemnly upstairs to Mrs. Blythe's room and
announced it in a thrilling whisper from the foot of the bed.

"I thought if you were not asleep you would be interested in knowing
it. I believe it is for the best. Perhaps he will just fall to writing
notes, too, Mrs. Dr. dear, but I hope for better things. I never was
very partial to whiskers, but one cannot have everything."

When news came in the morning that after all Wilson was re-elected,
Susan tacked to catch another breeze of optimism.

"Well, better a fool you know than a fool you do not know, as the old
proverb has it," she remarked cheerfully. "Not that I hold Woodrow to
be a fool by any means, though by times you would not think he has the
sense he was born with. But he is a good letter writer at least, and we
do not know if the Hughes man is even that. All things being considered
I commend the Yankees. They have shown good sense and I do not mind
admitting it. Cousin Sophia wanted them to elect Roosevelt, and is much
disgruntled because they would not give him a chance. I had a hankering
for him myself, but we must believe that Providence over-rules these
matters and be satisfied--though what the Almighty means in this affair
of Rumania I cannot fathom--saying it with all reverence."

Susan fathomed it--or thought she did--when the Asquith ministry went
down and Lloyd George became Premier.

"Mrs. Dr. dear, Lloyd George is at the helm at last. I have been
praying for this for many a day. Now we shall soon see a blessed
change. It took the Rumanian disaster to bring it about, no less, and
that is the meaning of it, though I could not see it before. There will
be no more shilly-shallying. I consider that the war is as good as won,
and that I shall tie to, whether Bucharest falls or not."

Bucharest did fall--and Germany proposed peace negotiations. Whereat
Susan scornfully turned a deaf ear and absolutely refused to listen to
such proposals. When President Wilson sent his famous December peace
note Susan waxed violently sarcastic.

"Woodrow Wilson is going to make peace, I understand. First Henry Ford
had a try at it and now comes Wilson. But peace is not made with ink,
Woodrow, and that you may tie to," said Susan, apostrophizing the
unlucky President out of the kitchen window nearest the United States.
"Lloyd George's speech will tell the Kaiser what is what, and you may
keep your peace screeds at home and save postage."

"What a pity President Wilson can't hear you, Susan," said Rilla slyly.

"Indeed, Rilla dear, it is a pity that he has no one near him to give
him good advice, as it is clear he has not, in all those Democrats and
Republicans," retorted Susan. "I do not know the difference between
them, for the politics of the Yankees is a puzzle I cannot solve, study
it as I may. But as far as seeing through a grindstone goes, I am
afraid--" Susan shook her head dubiously, "that they are all tarred
with the same brush."

"I am thankful Christmas is over," Rilla wrote in her diary during the
last week of a stormy December. "We had dreaded it so--the first
Christmas since Courcelette. But we had all the Merediths down for
dinner and nobody tried to be gay or cheerful. We were all just quiet
and friendly, and that helped. Then, too, I was so thankful that Jims
had got better--so thankful that I almost felt glad--almost but not
quite. I wonder if I shall ever feel really glad over anything again.
It seems as if gladness were killed in me--shot down by the same bullet
that pierced Walter's heart. Perhaps some day a new kind of gladness
will be born in my soul--but the old kind will never live again.

"Winter set in awfully early this year. Ten days before Christmas we
had a big snowstorm--at least we thought it big at the time. As it
happened, it was only a prelude to the real performance. It was fine
the next day, and Ingleside and Rainbow Valley were wonderful, with the
trees all covered with snow, and big drifts everywhere, carved into the
most fantastic shapes by the chisel of the northeast wind. Father and
mother went up to Avonlea. Father thought the change would do mother
good, and they wanted to see poor Aunt Diana, whose son Jock had been
seriously wounded a short time before. They left Susan and me to keep
house, and father expected to be back the next day. But he never got
back for a week. That night it began to storm again, and it stormed
unbrokenly for four days. It was the worst and longest storm that
Prince Edward Island has known for years. Everything was
disorganized--the roads were completely choked up, the trains
blockaded, and the telephone wires put entirely out of commission.

"And then Jims took ill.

"He had a little cold when father and mother went away, and he kept
getting worse for a couple of days, but it didn't occur to me that
there was danger of anything serious. I never even took his
temperature, and I can't forgive myself, because it was sheer
carelessness. The truth is I had slumped just then. Mother was away, so
I let myself go. All at once I was tired of keeping up and pretending
to be brave and cheerful, and I just gave up for a few days and spent
