
Marco did not wait for The Rat to recover his breath and speak.

"I know why he looks at you so," he answered for him.  "He is startled.
Yesterday we went to a hair-dresser's shop down below there, and we saw
a man who was almost exactly like you--only--" he added, looking up,
"his eyes were gray and yours are brown."

"He was my twin brother," said the guide, puffing at his pipe
cheerfully.  "My father thought he could make hair-dressers of us both,
and I tried it for four years.  But I always wanted to be climbing the
mountains and there were not holidays enough.  So I cut my hair, and
washed the pomade out of it, and broke away. I don't look like a
hair-dresser now, do I?"

He did not.  Not at all.  But Marco knew him.  He was the man. There
was no one on the mountain-top but themselves, and the sun was just
showing a rim of gold above the farthest and highest giant's shoulders.
One need not be afraid to do anything, since there was no one to see or
hear.  Marco slipped the sketch out of the slit in his sleeve.  He
looked at it and he looked at the guide, and then he showed it to him.

"That is not your brother.  It is you!" he said.

The man's face changed a little--more than any other face had changed
when its owner had been spoken to.  On a mountain-top as the sun rises
one is not afraid.

"The Lamp is lighted," said Marco.  "The Lamp is lighted."

"God be thanked!" burst forth the man.  And he took off his hat and
bared his head.  Then the rim behind the mountain's shoulder leaped
forth into a golden torrent of splendor.

And The Rat stood up, resting his weight on his crutches in utter
silence, and stared and stared.

"That is three!" said Marco.



XXIII

THE SILVER HORN

During the next week, which they spent in journeying towards Vienna,
they gave the Sign to three different persons at places which were on
the way.  In a village across the frontier in Bavaria they found a
giant of an old man sitting on a bench under a tree before his mountain
"Gasthaus" or inn; and when the four words were uttered, he stood up
and bared his head as the guide had done.  When Marco gave the Sign in
some quiet place to a man who was alone, he noticed that they all did
this and said their "God be thanked" devoutly, as if it were part of
some religious ceremony.  In a small town a few miles away he had to
search some hours before he found a stalwart young shoemaker with
bright red hair and a horseshoe-shaped scar on his forehead.  He was
not in his workshop when the boys first passed it, because, as they
found out later, he had been climbing a mountain the day before, and
had been detained in the descent because his companion had hurt himself.

When Marco went in and asked him to measure him for a pair of shoes, he
was quite friendly and told them all about it.

"There are some good fellows who should not climb," he said. "When they
find themselves standing on a bit of rock jutting out over emptiness,
their heads begin to whirl round--and then, if they don't turn head
over heels a few thousand feet, it is because some comrade is near
enough to drag them back.  There can be no ceremony then and they
sometimes get hurt--as my friend did yesterday."

"Did you never get hurt yourself?" The Rat asked.

"When I was eight years old I did that," said the young shoemaker,
touching the scar on his forehead.  "But it was not much.  My father
was a guide and took me with him.  He wanted me to begin early.  There
is nothing like it--climbing.  I shall be at it again.  This won't do
for me.  I tried shoemaking because I was in love with a girl who
wanted me to stay at home.  She married another man.  I am glad of it.
Once a guide, always a guide."  He knelt down to measure Marco's foot,
and Marco bent a little forward.

"The Lamp is lighted," he said.

There was no one in the shop, but the door was open and people were
passing in the narrow street; so the shoemaker did not lift his red
head.  He went on measuring.

"God be thanked!" he said, in a low voice.  "Do you want these shoes
really, or did you only want me to take your measure?"

"I cannot wait until they are made," Marco answered.  "I must go on."

"Yes, you must go on," answered the shoemaker.  "But I'll tell you what
I'll do--I'll make them and keep them.  Some great day might come when
I shall show them to people and swagger about them."  He glanced round
cautiously, and then ended, still bending over his measuring.  "They
will be called the shoes of the Bearer of the Sign.  And I shall say,
'He was only a lad. This was the size of his foot.'"  Then he stood up
with a great smile.

"There'll be climbing enough to be done now," he said, "and I look to
see you again somewhere."

When the boys went away, they talked it over.

"The hair-dresser didn't want to be a hair-dresser, and the shoemaker
didn't want to make shoes," said The Rat.  "They both wanted to be
mountain-climbers.  There are mountains in Samavia and mountains on the
way to it.  You showed them to me on the map.

"Yes; and secret messengers who can climb anywhere, and cross dangerous
places, and reconnoiter from points no one else can reach, can find out
things and give signals other men cannot," said Marco.

"That's what I thought out," The Rat answered.  "That was what he meant
when he said, 'There will be climbing enough to be done now.'"

Strange were the places they went to and curiously unlike each other
were the people to whom they carried their message.  The most singular
of all was an old woman who lived in so remote a place that the road
which wound round and round the mountain, wound round it for miles and
miles.  It was not a bad road and it was an amazing one to travel,
dragged in a small cart by a mule, when one could be dragged, and
clambering slowly with rests between when one could not: the
tree-covered precipices one looked down, the tossing whiteness of
waterfalls, or the green foaming of rushing streams, and the immensity
of farm- and village-scattered plains spreading themselves to the feet
of other mountains shutting them in were breath-taking beauties to look
down on, as the road mounted and wound round and round and higher and
higher.

"How can any one live higher than this?" said The Rat as they sat on
the thick moss by the wayside after the mule and cart had left them.
"Look at the bare crags looming up above there.  Let us  look at her
again.  Her picture looked as if she were a hundred years old."

Marco took out his hidden sketch.  It seemed surely one of the
strangest things in the world that a creature as old as this one seemed
could reach such a place, or, having reached it, could ever descend to
the world again to give aid to any person or thing.

Her old face was crossed and recrossed with a thousand wrinkles. Her
profile was splendid yet and she had been a beauty in her day.  Her
eyes were like an eagle's--and not an old eagle's.  And she had a long
neck which held her old head high.

"How could she get here?" exclaimed The Rat.

"Those who sent us know, though we don't," said Marco.  "Will you sit
here and rest while I go on further?"

"No!" The Rat answered stubbornly.  "I didn't train myself to stay
behind.  But we shall come to bare-rock climbing soon and then I shall
be obliged to stop," and he said the last bitterly. He knew that, if
Marco had come alone, he would have ridden in no cart but would have
trudged upward and onward sturdily to the end of his journey.

But they did not reach the crags, as they had thought must be
inevitable.  Suddenly half-way to the sky, as it seemed, they came to a
bend in the road and found themselves mounting into a new green
world--an astonishing marvel of a world, with green velvet slopes and
soft meadows and thick woodland, and cows feeding in velvet pastures,
and--as if it had been snowed down from the huge bare mountain crags
which still soared above into heaven--a mysterious, ancient, huddled
village which, being thus snowed down, might have caught among the
rocks and rested there through all time.

There it stood.  There it huddled itself.  And the monsters in the blue
above it themselves looked down upon it as if it were an incredible
thing--this ancient, steep-roofed, hanging-balconied, crumbling cluster
of human nests, which seemed a thousand miles from the world.  Marco
and The Rat stood and stared at it.  Then they sat down and stared at
it.

"How did it get here?" The Rat cried.

Marco shook his head.  He certainly could see no explanation of its
being there.  Perhaps some of the oldest villagers could tell stories of
how its first chalets had gathered themselves together.

An old peasant driving a cow came down a steep path.  He looked with a
dull curiosity at The Rat and his crutches; but when Marco advanced and
spoke to him in German, he did not seem to understand, but shook his
head saying something in a sort of dialect Marco did not know.

"If they all speak like that, we shall have to make signs when we want
to ask anything," The Rat said.  "What will she speak?"

"She will know the German for the Sign or we should not have been sent
here," answered Marco.  "Come on."

They made their way to the village, which huddled itself together
evidently with the object of keeping itself warm when through the
winter months the snows strove to bury it and the winds roared down
from the huge mountain crags and tried to tear it from among its rocks.
The doors and windows were few and small, and glimpses of the inside of
the houses showed earthen floors and dark rooms.  It was plain that it
was counted a more comfortable thing to live without light than to let
in the cold.

It was easy enough to reconnoiter.  The few people they saw were
evidently not surprised that strangers who discovered their unexpected
existence should be curious and want to look at them and their houses.

The boys wandered about as if they were casual explorers, who having
reached the place by chance were interested in all they saw.  They went
into the little Gasthaus and got some black bread and sausage and some
milk.  The mountaineer owner was a brawny fellow who understood some
German.  He told them that few strangers knew of the village but that
bold hunters and climbers came for sport.  In the forests on the
mountain sides were bears and, in the high places, chamois.  Now and
again, some great gentlemen came with parties of the daring kind--very
great gentlemen indeed, he said, shaking his head with pride.  There
was one  who had castles in other mountains, but he liked best to come
here.  Marco began to wonder if several strange things might not be
true if great gentlemen sometimes climbed to the mysterious place.  But
he had not been sent to give the Sign to a great gentleman.  He had
been sent to give it to an old woman with eyes like an eagle which was
young.

He had a sketch in his sleeve, with that of her face, of her
steep-roofed, black-beamed, balconied house.  If they walked about a
little, they would be sure to come upon it in this tiny place.  Then he
could go in and ask her for a drink of water.

They roamed about for an hour after they left the Gasthaus.  They went
into the little church and looked at the graveyard and wondered if it
was not buried out of all sight in the winter. After they had done
this, they sauntered out and walked through the huddled clusters of
houses, examining each one as they drew near it and passed.

"I see it!" The Rat exclaimed at last.  "It is that very old-looking
one standing a little way from the rest.  It is not as tumbled down as
most of them.  And there are some red flowers on the balcony."

"Yes!  That's it!" said Marco.

They walked up to the low black door and, as he stopped on the
threshold, Marco took off his cap.  He did this because, sitting in the
doorway on a low wooden chair, the old, old woman with the eagle eyes
was sitting knitting.

There was no one else in the room and no one anywhere within sight.
When the old, old woman looked up at him with her young eagle's eyes,
holding her head high on her long neck, Marco knew he need not ask for
water or for anything else.

"The Lamp is lighted," he said, in his low but strong and clear young
voice.

She dropped her knitting upon her knees and gazed at him a moment in
silence.  She knew German it was clear, for it was in German she
answered him.

"God be thanked!" she said.  "Come in, young Bearer of the Sign, and
bring your friend in with you.  I live alone and not a soul is within
hearing."

She was a wonderful old woman.  Neither Marco nor The Rat would live
long enough to forget the hours they spent in her strange dark house.
She kept them and made them spend the night with her.

"It is quite safe," she said.  "I live alone since my man fell into the
crevasse and was killed because his rope broke when he was trying to
save his comrade.  So I have two rooms to spare and sometimes climbers
are glad to sleep in them.  Mine is a good warm house and I am well
known in the village.  You are very young," she added shaking her head.
"You are very young.  You must have good blood in your veins to be
trusted with this."

"I have my father's blood," answered Marco.

"You are like some one I once saw," the old woman said, and her eagle
eyes set themselves hard upon him.  "Tell me your name."

There was no reason why he should not tell it to her.

"It is Marco Loristan," he said.

"What!  It is that!" she cried out, not loud but low.

To Marco's amazement she got up from her chair and stood before him,
showing what a tall old woman she really was.  There was a startled,
even an agitated, look in her face.  And suddenly she actually made a
sort of curtsey to him--bending her knee as peasants do when they pass
a shrine.

"It is that!" she said again.  "And yet they dare let you go on a
journey like this!  That speaks for your courage and for theirs."

But Marco did not know what she meant.  Her strange obeisance made him
feel awkward.  He stood up because his training had told him that when
a woman stands a man also rises.

"The name speaks for the courage," he said, "because it is my father's."

She watched him almost anxiously.

"You do not even know!" she breathed--and it was an exclamation and not
a question.

"I know what I have been told to do," he answered.  "I do not ask
anything else."

"Who is that?" she asked, pointing to The Rat.

"He is the friend my father sent with me," said Marco smiling. "He
called him my aide-de-camp.  It was a sort of joke because we had
played soldiers together."

It seemed as if she were obliged to collect her thoughts.  She stood
with her hand at her mouth, looking down at the earth floor.

"God guard you!" she said at last.  "You are very--very young!"

"But all his years," The Rat broke in, "he has been in training for
just this thing.  He did not know it was training, but it was.  A
soldier who had been trained for thirteen years would know his work."

He was so eager that he forgot she could not understand English. Marco
translated what he said into German and added:  "What he says is true."

She nodded her head, still with questioning and anxious eyes.

"Yes.  Yes," she muttered.  "But you are very young."  Then she asked
in a hesitating way:

"Will you not sit down until I do?"

"No," answered Marco.  "I would not sit while my mother or grandmother
stood."

"Then I must sit--and forget," she said.

She passed her hand over her face as though she were sweeping away the
sudden puzzled trouble in her expression.  Then she sat down, as if she
had obliged herself to become again the old peasant she had been when
they entered.

"All the way up the mountain you wondered why an old woman should be
given the Sign," she said.  "You asked each other how she could be of
use."

Neither Marco nor The Rat said anything.

"When I was young and fresh," she went on.  "I went to a castle over
the frontier to be foster-mother to a child who was born a great
noble--one who was near the throne.  He loved me and I loved him.  He
was a strong child and he grew up a great hunter and climber.  When he
was not ten years old, my man taught him to climb.  He always loved
these mountains better than his own.  He comes to see me as if he were
only a young mountaineer.  He sleeps in the room there," with a gesture
over her shoulder into the darkness.  "He has great power and, if he
chooses to do a thing, he will do it--just as he will attack the
biggest bear or climb the most dangerous peak.  He is one who can bring
things about.  It is very safe to talk in this room."

Then all was quite clear.  Marco and The Rat understood.

No more was said about the Sign.  It had been given and that was
enough.  The old woman told them that they must sleep in one of her
bedrooms.  The next morning one of her neighbors was going down to the
valley with a cart and he would help them on their way.  The Rat knew
that she was thinking of his crutches and he became restless.

"Tell her," he said to Marco, "how I have trained myself until I can do
what any one else can.  And tell her I am growing stronger every day.
Tell her I'll show her what I can do.  Your father wouldn't have let me
come as your aide if I hadn't proved to him that I wasn't a cripple.
Tell her.  She thinks I'm no use."

Marco explained and the old woman listened attentively.  When The Rat
got up and swung himself about up and down the steep path near her
house she seemed relieved.  His extraordinary dexterity and firm
swiftness evidently amazed her and gave her a confidence she had not
felt at first.

