blue flannel shirtwaist that Mrs. Lynde made you. If Roy hadn't already
lost head and heart about you he certainly would tonight. But I don't
like orchids on you, Anne. No; it isn't jealousy. Orchids don't seem to
BELONG to you. They're too exotic--too tropical--too insolent. Don't put
them in your hair, anyway."

"Well, I won't. I admit I'm not fond of orchids myself. I don't think
they're related to me. Roy doesn't often send them--he knows I like
flowers I can live with. Orchids are only things you can visit with."

"Jonas sent me some dear pink rosebuds for the evening--but--he isn't
coming himself. He said he had to lead a prayer-meeting in the slums! I
don't believe he wanted to come. Anne, I'm horribly afraid Jonas doesn't
really care anything about me. And I'm trying to decide whether I'll
pine away and die, or go on and get my B.A. and be sensible and useful."

"You couldn't possibly be sensible and useful, Phil, so you'd better
pine away and die," said Anne cruelly.

"Heartless Anne!"

"Silly Phil! You know quite well that Jonas loves you."

"But--he won't TELL me so. And I can't MAKE him. He LOOKS it, I'll
admit. But speak-to-me-only-with-thine-eyes isn't a really reliable
reason for embroidering doilies and hemstitching tablecloths. I don't
want to begin such work until I'm really engaged. It would be tempting
Fate."

"Mr. Blake is afraid to ask you to marry him, Phil. He is poor and can't
offer you a home such as you've always had. You know that is the only
reason he hasn't spoken long ago."

"I suppose so," agreed Phil dolefully. "Well"--brightening up--"if he
WON'T ask me to marry him I'll ask him, that's all. So it's bound to
come right. I won't worry. By the way, Gilbert Blythe is going about
constantly with Christine Stuart. Did you know?"

Anne was trying to fasten a little gold chain about her throat. She
suddenly found the clasp difficult to manage. WHAT was the matter with
it--or with her fingers?

"No," she said carelessly. "Who is Christine Stuart?"

"Ronald Stuart's sister. She's in Kingsport this winter studying music.
I haven't seen her, but they say she's very pretty and that Gilbert is
quite crazy over her. How angry I was when you refused Gilbert, Anne.
But Roy Gardner was foreordained for you. I can see that now. You were
right, after all."

Anne did not blush, as she usually did when the girls assumed that her
eventual marriage to Roy Gardner was a settled thing. All at once she
felt rather dull. Phil's chatter seemed trivial and the reception a
bore. She boxed poor Rusty's ears.

"Get off that cushion instantly, you cat, you! Why don't you stay down
where you belong?"

Anne picked up her orchids and went downstairs, where Aunt Jamesina was
presiding over a row of coats hung before the fire to warm. Roy Gardner
was waiting for Anne and teasing the Sarah-cat while he waited. The
Sarah-cat did not approve of him. She always turned her back on him.
But everybody else at Patty's Place liked him very much. Aunt Jamesina,
carried away by his unfailing and deferential courtesy, and the pleading
tones of his delightful voice, declared he was the nicest young man she
ever knew, and that Anne was a very fortunate girl. Such remarks made
Anne restive. Roy's wooing had certainly been as romantic as girlish
heart could desire, but--she wished Aunt Jamesina and the girls would
not take things so for granted. When Roy murmured a poetical compliment
as he helped her on with her coat, she did not blush and thrill as
usual; and he found her rather silent in their brief walk to Redmond.
He thought she looked a little pale when she came out of the coeds'
dressing room; but as they entered the reception room her color and
sparkle suddenly returned to her. She turned to Roy with her gayest
expression. He smiled back at her with what Phil called "his deep,
black, velvety smile." Yet she really did not see Roy at all. She was
acutely conscious that Gilbert was standing under the palms just across
the room talking to a girl who must be Christine Stuart.

She was very handsome, in the stately style destined to become rather
massive in middle life. A tall girl, with large dark-blue eyes, ivory
outlines, and a gloss of darkness on her smooth hair.

"She looks just as I've always wanted to look," thought Anne miserably.
"Rose-leaf complexion--starry violet eyes--raven hair--yes, she has them
all. It's a wonder her name isn't Cordelia Fitzgerald into the bargain!
But I don't believe her figure is as good as mine, and her nose
certainly isn't."

Anne felt a little comforted by this conclusion.




Chapter XXVII

Mutual Confidences


March came in that winter like the meekest and mildest of lambs,
bringing days that were crisp and golden and tingling, each followed
by a frosty pink twilight which gradually lost itself in an elfland of
moonshine.

Over the girls at Patty's Place was falling the shadow of April
examinations. They were studying hard; even Phil had settled down to
text and notebooks with a doggedness not to be expected of her.

"I'm going to take the Johnson Scholarship in Mathematics," she
announced calmly. "I could take the one in Greek easily, but I'd rather
take the mathematical one because I want to prove to Jonas that I'm
really enormously clever."

"Jonas likes you better for your big brown eyes and your crooked smile
than for all the brains you carry under your curls," said Anne.

"When I was a girl it wasn't considered lady-like to know anything about
Mathematics," said Aunt Jamesina. "But times have changed. I don't know
that it's all for the better. Can you cook, Phil?"

"No, I never cooked anything in my life except a gingerbread and it was
a failure--flat in the middle and hilly round the edges. You know the
kind. But, Aunty, when I begin in good earnest to learn to cook don't
you think the brains that enable me to win a mathematical scholarship
will also enable me to learn cooking just as well?"

"Maybe," said Aunt Jamesina cautiously. "I am not decrying the higher
education of women. My daughter is an M.A. She can cook, too. But
I taught her to cook BEFORE I let a college professor teach her
Mathematics."

In mid-March came a letter from Miss Patty Spofford, saying that she and
Miss Maria had decided to remain abroad for another year.

"So you may have Patty's Place next winter, too," she wrote. "Maria and
I are going to run over Egypt. I want to see the Sphinx once before I
die."

"Fancy those two dames 'running over Egypt'! I wonder if they'll look up
at the Sphinx and knit," laughed Priscilla.

"I'm so glad we can keep Patty's Place for another year," said Stella.
"I was afraid they'd come back. And then our jolly little nest here
would be broken up--and we poor callow nestlings thrown out on the cruel
world of boardinghouses again."

"I'm off for a tramp in the park," announced Phil, tossing her book
aside. "I think when I am eighty I'll be glad I went for a walk in the
park tonight."

"What do you mean?" asked Anne.

"Come with me and I'll tell you, honey."

They captured in their ramble all the mysteries and magics of a March
evening. Very still and mild it was, wrapped in a great, white, brooding
silence--a silence which was yet threaded through with many little
silvery sounds which you could hear if you hearkened as much with your
soul as your ears. The girls wandered down a long pineland aisle that
seemed to lead right out into the heart of a deep-red, overflowing
winter sunset.

"I'd go home and write a poem this blessed minute if I only knew how,"
declared Phil, pausing in an open space where a rosy light was staining
the green tips of the pines. "It's all so wonderful here--this great,
white stillness, and those dark trees that always seem to be thinking."

"'The woods were God's first temples,'" quoted Anne softly. "One can't
help feeling reverent and adoring in such a place. I always feel so near
Him when I walk among the pines."

"Anne, I'm the happiest girl in the world," confessed Phil suddenly.

"So Mr. Blake has asked you to marry him at last?" said Anne calmly.

"Yes. And I sneezed three times while he was asking me. Wasn't that
horrid? But I said 'yes' almost before he finished--I was so afraid he
might change his mind and stop. I'm besottedly happy. I couldn't really
believe before that Jonas would ever care for frivolous me."

"Phil, you're not really frivolous," said Anne gravely. "'Way down
underneath that frivolous exterior of yours you've got a dear, loyal,
womanly little soul. Why do you hide it so?"

"I can't help it, Queen Anne. You are right--I'm not frivolous at heart.
But there's a sort of frivolous skin over my soul and I can't take it
off. As Mrs. Poyser says, I'd have to be hatched over again and hatched
different before I could change it. But Jonas knows the real me and
loves me, frivolity and all. And I love him. I never was so surprised
in my life as I was when I found out I loved him. I'd never thought it
possible to fall in love with an ugly man. Fancy me coming down to one
solitary beau. And one named Jonas! But I mean to call him Jo. That's
such a nice, crisp little name. I couldn't nickname Alonzo."

"What about Alec and Alonzo?"

"Oh, I told them at Christmas that I never could marry either of them.
It seems so funny now to remember that I ever thought it possible that I
might. They felt so badly I just cried over both of them--howled. But I
knew there was only one man in the world I could ever marry. I had made
up my own mind for once and it was real easy, too. It's very delightful
to feel so sure, and know it's your own sureness and not somebody
else's."

"Do you suppose you'll be able to keep it up?"

"Making up my mind, you mean? I don't know, but Jo has given me a
splendid rule. He says, when I'm perplexed, just to do what I would
wish I had done when I shall be eighty. Anyhow, Jo can make up his mind
quickly enough, and it would be uncomfortable to have too much mind in
the same house."

"What will your father and mother say?"

"Father won't say much. He thinks everything I do right. But mother WILL
talk. Oh, her tongue will be as Byrney as her nose. But in the end it
will be all right."

"You'll have to give up a good many things you've always had, when you
marry Mr. Blake, Phil."

"But I'll have HIM. I won't miss the other things. We're to be married
a year from next June. Jo graduates from St. Columbia this spring, you
know. Then he's going to take a little mission church down on Patterson
Street in the slums. Fancy me in the slums! But I'd go there or to
Greenland's icy mountains with him."

"And this is the girl who would NEVER marry a man who wasn't rich,"
commented Anne to a young pine tree.

"Oh, don't cast up the follies of my youth to me. I shall be poor as
gaily as I've been rich. You'll see. I'm going to learn how to cook
and make over dresses. I've learned how to market since I've lived
at Patty's Place; and once I taught a Sunday School class for a whole
summer. Aunt Jamesina says I'll ruin Jo's career if I marry him. But
I won't. I know I haven't much sense or sobriety, but I've got what is
ever so much better--the knack of making people like me. There is a
man in Bolingbroke who lisps and always testifies in prayer-meeting.
He says, 'If you can't thine like an electric thtar thine like a
candlethtick.' I'll be Jo's little candlestick."

"Phil, you're incorrigible. Well, I love you so much that I can't make
nice, light, congratulatory little speeches. But I'm heart-glad of your
happiness."

"I know. Those big gray eyes of yours are brimming over with real
friendship, Anne. Some day I'll look the same way at you. You're going
to marry Roy, aren't you, Anne?"

"My dear Philippa, did you ever hear of the famous Betty Baxter, who
'refused a man before he'd axed her'? I am not going to emulate that
celebrated lady by either refusing or accepting any one before he 'axes'
me."

"All Redmond knows that Roy is crazy about you," said Phil candidly.
"And you DO love him, don't you, Anne?"

"I--I suppose so," said Anne reluctantly. She felt that she ought to be
blushing while making such a confession; but she was not; on the other
hand, she always blushed hotly when any one said anything about Gilbert
Blythe or Christine Stuart in her hearing. Gilbert Blythe and Christine
Stuart were nothing to her--absolutely nothing. But Anne had given up
trying to analyze the reason of her blushes. As for Roy, of course she
was in love with him--madly so. How could she help it? Was he not her
ideal? Who could resist those glorious dark eyes, and that pleading
voice? Were not half the Redmond girls wildly envious? And what a
charming sonnet he had sent her, with a box of violets, on her birthday!
Anne knew every word of it by heart. It was very good stuff of its kind,
too. Not exactly up to the level of Keats or Shakespeare--even Anne
was not so deeply in love as to think that. But it was very tolerable
magazine verse. And it was addressed to HER--not to Laura or Beatrice or
the Maid of Athens, but to her, Anne Shirley. To be told in rhythmical
cadences that her eyes were stars of the morning--that her cheek had
the flush it stole from the sunrise--that her lips were redder than the
roses of Paradise, was thrillingly romantic. Gilbert would never have
dreamed of writing a sonnet to her eyebrows. But then, Gilbert could
see a joke. She had once told Roy a funny story--and he had not seen
the point of it. She recalled the chummy laugh she and Gilbert had had
together over it, and wondered uneasily if life with a man who had no
sense of humor might not be somewhat uninteresting in the long run. But
who could expect a melancholy, inscrutable hero to see the humorous side
of things? It would be flatly unreasonable.




Chapter XXVIII

A June Evening


"I wonder what it would be like to live in a world where it was always
June," said Anne, as she came through the spice and bloom of the twilit
orchard to the front door steps, where Marilla and Mrs. Rachel were
sitting, talking over Mrs. Samson Coates' funeral, which they had
attended that day. Dora sat between them, diligently studying her
lessons; but Davy was sitting tailor-fashion on the grass, looking as
gloomy and depressed as his single dimple would let him.

"You'd get tired of it," said Marilla, with a sigh.

"I daresay; but just now I feel that it would take me a long time to get
tired of it, if it were all as charming as today. Everything loves June.
Davy-boy, why this melancholy November face in blossom-time?"

"I'm just sick and tired of living," said the youthful pessimist.

"At ten years? Dear me, how sad!"

"I'm not making fun," said Davy with dignity. "I'm
dis--dis--discouraged"--bringing out the big word with a valiant effort.
