
The Story Girl was in great fettle that night. Never had her tales
sparkled with such wit and archness.

"Sara Stanley," said Aunt Olivia, shaking her finger at her after a
side-splitting yarn, "if you don't watch out you'll be famous some day."

"These funny stories are all right," said Uncle Roger, "but for real
enjoyment give me something with a creep in it. Sara, tell us that story
of the Serpent Woman I heard you tell one day last summer."

The Story Girl began it glibly. But before she had gone far with it,
I, who was sitting beside her, felt an unaccountable repulsion creeping
over me. For the first time since I had known her I wanted to draw away
from the Story Girl. Looking around on the faces of the group, I saw
that they all shared my feeling. Cecily had put her hands over her eyes.
Peter was staring at the Story Girl with a fascinated, horror-strickened
gaze. Aunt Olivia was pale and troubled. All looked as if they were held
prisoners in the bonds of a fearsome spell which they would gladly break
but could not.

It was not our Story Girl who sat there, telling that weird tale in
a sibilant, curdling voice. She had put on a new personality like a
garment, and that personality was a venomous, evil, loathly thing. I
would rather have died than have touched the slim, brown wrist on which
she supported herself. The light in her narrowed orbs was the cold,
merciless gleam of the serpent's eye. I felt frightened of this unholy
creature who had suddenly come in our dear Story Girl's place.

When the tale ended there was a brief silence. Then Aunt Janet said
severely, but with a sigh of relief,

"Little girls shouldn't tell such horrible stories."

This truly Aunt Janetian remark broke the spell. The grown-ups laughed,
rather shakily, and the Story Girl--our own dear Story Girl once more,
and no Serpent Woman--said protestingly,

"Well, Uncle Roger asked me to tell it. I don't like telling such
stories either. They make me feel dreadful. Do you know, for just a
little while, I felt exactly like a snake."

"You looked like one," said Uncle Roger. "How on earth do you do it?"

"I can't explain how I do it," said the Story Girl perplexedly. "It just
does itself."

Genius can never explain how it does it. It would not be genius if it
could. And the Story Girl had genius.

As we left the orchard I walked along behind Uncle Roger and Aunt
Olivia.

"That was an uncanny exhibition for a girl of fourteen, you know,
Roger," said Aunt Olivia musingly. "What is in store for that child?"

"Fame," said Uncle Roger. "If she ever has a chance, that is, and I
suppose her father will see to that. At least, I hope he will. You and
I, Olivia, never had our chance. I hope Sara will have hers."

This was my first inkling of what I was to understand more fully in
later years. Uncle Roger and Aunt Olivia had both cherished certain
dreams and ambitions in youth, but circumstances had denied them their
"chance" and those dreams had never been fulfilled.

"Some day, Olivia," went on Uncle Roger, "you and I may find ourselves
the aunt and uncle of the foremost actress of her day. If a girl
of fourteen can make a couple of practical farmers and a pair of
matter-of-fact housewives half believe for ten minutes that she really
is a snake, what won't she be able to do when she is thirty? Here, you,"
added Uncle Roger, perceiving me, "cut along and get off to your bed.
And mind you don't eat cucumbers and milk before you go."



CHAPTER XXIV. THE BEWITCHMENT OF PAT

We were all in the doleful dumps--at least, all we "young fry" were, and
even the grown-ups were sorry and condescended to take an interest
in our troubles. Pat, our own, dear, frolicsome Paddy, was sick
again--very, very sick.

On Friday he moped and refused his saucer of new milk at milking time.
The next morning he stretched himself down on the platform by Uncle
Roger's back door, laid his head on his black paws, and refused to take
any notice of anything or anybody. In vain we stroked and entreated and
brought him tidbits. Only when the Story Girl caressed him did he give
one plaintive little mew, as if to ask piteously why she could not do
something for him. At that Cecily and Felicity and Sara Ray all began
crying, and we boys felt choky. Indeed, I caught Peter behind Aunt
Olivia's dairy later in the day, and if ever a boy had been crying I vow
that boy was Peter. Nor did he deny it when I taxed him with it, but he
would not give in that he was crying about Paddy. Nonsense!

"What were you crying for, then?" I said.

"I'm crying because--because my Aunt Jane is dead," said Peter
defiantly.

"But your Aunt Jane died two years ago," I said skeptically.

"Well, ain't that all the more reason for crying?" retorted Peter. "I've
had to do without her for two years, and that's worse than if it had
just been a few days."

"I believe you were crying because Pat is so sick," I said firmly.

"As if I'd cry about a cat!" scoffed Peter. And he marched off
whistling.

Of course we had tried the lard and powder treatment again, smearing
Pat's paws and sides liberally. But to our dismay, Pat made no effort to
lick it off.

"I tell you he's a mighty sick cat," said Peter darkly. "When a cat
don't care what he looks like he's pretty far gone."

"If we only knew what was the matter with him we might do something,"
sobbed the Story Girl, stroking her poor pet's unresponsive head.

"I could tell you what's the matter with him, but you'd only laugh at
me," said Peter.

We all looked at him.

"Peter Craig, what do you mean?" asked Felicity.

"'Zackly what I say."

"Then, if you know what is the matter with Paddy, tell us," commanded
the Story Girl, standing up. She said it quietly; but Peter obeyed. I
think he would have obeyed if she, in that tone and with those eyes, had
ordered him to cast himself into the depths of the sea. I know I should.

"He's BEWITCHED--that's what's the matter with him," said Peter, half
defiantly, half shamefacedly.

"Bewitched? Nonsense!"

"There now, what did I tell you?" complained Peter.

The Story Girl looked at Peter, at the rest of us, and then at poor Pat.

"How could he be bewitched?" she asked irresolutely, "and who could
bewitch him?"

"I don't know HOW he was bewitched," said Peter. "I'd have to be a witch
myself to know that. But Peg Bowen bewitched him."

"Nonsense!" said the Story Girl again.

"All right," said Peter. "You don't have to believe me."

"If Peg Bowen could bewitch anything--and I don't believe she could--why
should she bewitch Pat?" asked the Story Girl. "Everybody here and at
Uncle Alec's is always kind to her."

"I'll tell you why," said Peter. "Thursday afternoon, when you fellows
were all in school, Peg Bowen came here. Your Aunt Olivia gave her a
lunch--a good one. You may laugh at the notion of Peg being a witch,
but I notice your folks are always awful good to her when she comes, and
awful careful never to offend her."

"Aunt Olivia would be good to any poor creature, and so would mother,"
said Felicity. "And of course nobody wants to offend Peg, because she
is spiteful, and she once set fire to a man's barn in Markdale when he
offended her. But she isn't a witch--that's ridiculous."

"All right. But wait till I tell you. When Peg Bowen was leaving Pat
stretched out on the steps. She tramped on his tail. You know Pat
doesn't like to have his tail meddled with. He slewed himself round and
clawed her bare foot. If you'd just seen the look she gave him you'd
know whether she was a witch or not. And she went off down the lane,
muttering and throwing her hands round, just like she did in Lem Hill's
cow pasture. She put a spell on Pat, that's what she did. He was sick
the next morning."

We looked at each other in miserable, perplexed silence. We were only
children--and we believed that there had been such things as witches
once upon a time--and Peg Bowen WAS an eerie creature.

"If that's so--though I can't believe it--we can't do anything," said
the Story Girl drearily. "Pat must die."

Cecily began to weep afresh.

"I'd do anything to save Pat's life," she said. "I'd BELIEVE anything."

"There's nothing we can do," said Felicity impatiently.

"I suppose," sobbed Cecily, "we might go to Peg Bowen and ask her to
forgive Pat and take the spell off him. She might, if we apologized real
humble."

At first we were appalled by the suggestion. We didn't believe that Peg
Bowen was a witch. But to go to her--to seek her out in that mysterious
woodland retreat of hers which was invested with all the terrors of the
unknown! And that this suggestion should come from timid Cecily, of all
people! But then, there was poor Pat!

"Would it do any good?" said the Story Girl desperately. "Even if she
did make Pat sick I suppose it would only make her crosser if we went
and accused her of bewitching him. Besides, she didn't do anything of
the sort."

But there was some uncertainty in the Story Girl's voice.

"It wouldn't do any harm to try," said Cecily. "If she didn't make him
sick it won't matter if she is cross."

"It won't matter to Pat, but it might to the one who goes to her,"
said Felicity. "She isn't a witch, but she's a spiteful old woman, and
goodness knows what she'd do to us if she caught us. I'm scared of Peg
Bowen, and I don't care who knows it. Ever since I can mind ma's been
saying, 'If you're not good Peg Bowen will catch you.'"

"If I thought she really made Pat sick and could make him better,
I'd try to pacify her somehow," said the Story Girl decidedly. "I'm
frightened of her, too--but just look at poor, darling Paddy."

We looked at Paddy who continued to stare fixedly before him with
unwinking eyes. Uncle Roger came out and looked at him also, with what
seemed to us positively brutal unconcern.

"I'm afraid it's all up with Pat," he said.

"Uncle Roger," said Cecily imploringly, "Peter says Peg Bowen has
bewitched Pat for scratching her. Do you think it can be so?"

"Did Pat scratch Peg?" asked Uncle Roger, with a horror-stricken face.
"Dear me! Dear me! That mystery is solved. Poor Pat!"

Uncle Roger nodded his head, as if resigning himself and Pat to the
worst.

"Do you really think Peg Bowen is a witch, Uncle Roger?" demanded the
Story Girl incredulously.

"Do I think Peg Bowen is a witch? My dear Sara, what do YOU think of a
woman who can turn herself into a black cat whenever she likes? Is she a
witch? Or is she not? I leave it to you."

"Can Peg Bowen turn herself into a black cat?" asked Felix, staring.

"It's my belief that that is the least of Peg Bowen's accomplishments,"
answered Uncle Roger. "It's the easiest thing in the world for a witch
to turn herself into any animal you choose to mention. Yes, Pat is
bewitched--no doubt of that--not the least in the world."

"What are you telling those children such stuff for?" asked Aunt Olivia,
passing on her way to the well.

"It's an irresistible temptation," answered Uncle Roger, strolling over
to carry her pail.

"You can see your Uncle Roger believes Peg is a witch," said Peter.

"And you can see Aunt Olivia doesn't," I said, "and I don't either."

"See here," said the Story Girl resolutely, "I don't believe it, but
there MAY be something in it. Suppose there is. The question is, what
can we do?"

"I'll tell you what I'D do," said Peter. "I'd take a present for Peg,
and ask her to make Pat well. I wouldn't let on I thought she'd made
him sick. Then she couldn't be offended--and maybe she'd take the spell
off."

"I think we'd better all give her something," said Felicity. "I'm
willing to do that. But who's going to take the presents to her?"

"We must all go together," said the Story Girl.

"I won't," cried Sara Ray in terror. "I wouldn't go near Peg Bowen's
house for the world, no matter who was with me."

"I've thought of a plan," said the Story Girl. "Let's all give her
something, as Felicity says. And let us all go up to her place this
evening, and if we see her outside we'll just go quietly and set
the things down before her with the letter, and say nothing but come
respectfully away."

"If she'll let us," said Dan significantly.

"Can Peg read a letter?" I asked.

"Oh, yes. Aunt Olivia says she is a good scholar. She went to school and
was a smart girl until she became crazy. We'll write it very plain."

"What if we don't see her?" asked Felicity.

"We'll put the things on her doorstep then and leave them."

"She may be miles away over the country by this time," sighed Cecily,
"and never find them until it's too late for Pat. But it's the only
thing to do. What can we give her?"

"We mustn't offer her any money," said the Story Girl. "She's very
indignant when any one does that. She says she isn't a beggar. But
she'll take anything else. I shall give her my string of blue beads.
She's fond of finery."

"I'll give her that sponge cake I made this morning," said Felicity. "I
guess she doesn't get sponge cake very often."

"I've nothing but the rheumatism ring I got as a premium for selling
needles last winter," said Peter. "I'll give her that. Even if she
hasn't got rheumatism it's a real handsome ring. It looks like solid
gold."

"I'll give her a roll of peppermint candy," said Felix.

"I'll give one of those little jars of cherry preserve I made," said
Cecily.

"I won't go near her," quavered Sara Ray, "but I want to do something
for Pat, and I'll send that piece of apple leaf lace I knit last week."

I decided to give the redoubtable Peg some apples from my birthday tree,
and Dan declared he would give her a plug of tobacco.

"Oh, won't she be insulted?" exclaimed Felix, rather horrified.

"Naw," grinned Dan. "Peg chews tobacco like a man. She'd rather have
it than your rubbishy peppermints, I can tell you. I'll run down to old
Mrs. Sampson's and get a plug."

"Now, we must write the letter and take it and the presents to her right
away, before it gets dark," said the Story Girl.

We adjourned to the granary to indite the important document, which the
Story Girl was to compose.

"How shall I begin it?" she asked in perplexity. "It would never do to
say, 'Dear Peg,' and 'Dear Miss Bowen' sounds too ridiculous."

"Besides, nobody knows whether she is Miss Bowen or not," said Felicity.
"She went to Boston when she grew up, and some say she was married there
and her husband deserted her, and that's why she went crazy. If she's
married, she won't like being called Miss."

"Well, how am I to address her?" asked the Story Girl in despair.

Peter again came to the rescue with a practical suggestion.

"Begin it, 'Respected Madam,'" he said. "Ma has a letter a school
