So they told him that he should have sweet hay and oats, and as much of
them as the dappled horse chose to have, and all the other riders had
to take their horses out of the stable that Dapplegrim might stand alone
and really have plenty of room.

But this did not last long, for the other people in the King's Court
became envious of the lad, and there was no bad thing that they would
not have done to him if they had but dared. At last they bethought
themselves of telling the King that the youth had said that, if he
chose, he was quite able to rescue the Princess who had been carried off
into the mountain a long time ago by the Troll.

The King immediately summoned the lad into his presence, and said that
he had been informed that he had said that it was in his power to rescue
the Princess, so he was now to do it. If he succeeded in this, he no
doubt knew that the King had promised his daughter and half the kingdom
to anyone who set her free, which promise should be faithfully and
honourably kept, but if he failed he should be put to death. The youth
denied that he had said this, but all to no purpose, for the King was
deaf to all his words; so there was nothing to be done but say that he
would make the attempt.

He went down into the stable, and very sad and full of care he was. Then
Dapplegrim inquired why he was so troubled, and the youth told him, and
said that he did not know what to do, 'for as to setting the Princess
free, that was downright impossible.'

'Oh, but it might be done,' said Dapplegrim. 'I will help you; but you
must first have me well shod. You must ask for ten pounds of iron and
twelve pounds of steel for the shoeing, and one smith to hammer and one
to hold.'

So the youth did this, and no one said him nay. He got both the iron
and the steel, and the smiths, and thus was Dapplegrim shod strongly and
well, and when the youth went out of the King's palace a cloud of dust
rose up behind him. But when he came to the mountain into which the
Princess had been carried, the difficulty was to ascend the precipitous
wall of rock by which he was to get on to the mountain beyond, for the
rock stood right up on end, as steep as a house side and as smooth as a
sheet of glass. The first time the youth rode at it he got a little way
up the precipice, but then both Dapplegrim's fore legs slipped, and down
came horse and rider with a sound like thunder among the mountains. The
next time that he rode at it he got a little farther up, but then one of
Dapplegrim's fore legs slipped, and down they went with the sound of a
landslip. But the third time Dapplegrim said: 'Now we must show what we
can do,' and went at it once more till the stones sprang up sky high,
and thus they got up. Then the lad rode into the mountain cleft at full
gallop and caught up the Princess on his saddle-bow, and then out again
before the Troll even had time to stand up, and thus the Princess was
set free.

When the youth returned to the palace the King was both happy and
delighted to get his daughter back again, as may easily be believed, but
somehow or other the people about the Court had so worked on him that
he was angry with the lad too. 'Thou shalt have my thanks for setting my
Princess free,' he said, when the youth came into the palace with her,
and was then about to go away.

She ought to be just as much my Princess as she is yours now, for you
are a man of your word,' said the youth.

'Yes, yes,' said the King. 'Have her thou shalt, as I have said it; but
first of all thou must make the sun shine into my palace here.'

For there was a large and high hill outside the windows which
overshadowed the palace so much that the sun could not shine in.

'That was no part of our bargain,' answered the youth. 'But as nothing
that I can say will move you, I suppose I shall have to try to do my
best, for the Princess I will have.'

So he went down to Dapplegrim again and told him what the King desired,
and Dapplegrim thought that it might easily be done; but first of all he
must have new shoes, and ten pounds of iron and twelve pounds of steel
must go to the making of them, and two smiths were also necessary, one
to hammer and one to hold, and then it would be very easy to make the
sun shine into the King's palace.

The lad asked for these things and obtained them instantly, for the King
thought that for very shame he could not refuse to give them, and so
Dapplegrim got new shoes, and they were good ones. The youth seated
himself on him, and once more they went their way, and for each hop that
Dapplegrim made, down went the hill fifteen ells into the earth, and so
they went on until there was no hill left for the King to see.

When the youth came down again to the King's palace he asked the King
if the Princess should not at last be his, for now no one could say that
the sun was not shining into the palace. But the other people in the
palace had again stirred up the King, and he answered that the youth
should have her, and that he had never intended that he should not;
but first of all he must get her quite as good a horse to ride to the
wedding on as that which he had himself. The youth said that the King
had never told him he was to do that, and it seemed to him that he had
now really earned the Princess; but the King stuck to what he had said,
and if the youth were unable to do it he was to lose his life, the
King said. The youth went down to the stable again, and very sad and
sorrowful he was, as anyone may well imagine. Then he told Dapplegrim
that the King had now required that he should get the Princess as good
a bridal horse as that which the bridegroom had, or he should lose his
life. 'But that will be no easy thing to do,' said he, 'for your equal
is not to be found in all the world.'

'Oh yes, there is one to match me,' said Dapplegrim. 'But it will not
be easy to get him, for he is underground. However, we will try. Now
you must go up to the King and ask for new shoes for me, and for them
we must again have ten pounds of iron, twelve pounds of steel, and two
smiths, one to hammer and one to hold, but be very particular to see
that the hooks are very sharp. And you must also ask for twelve barrels
of rye, and twelve slaughtered oxen must we have with us, and all the
twelve ox-hides with twelve hundred spikes set in each of them; all
these things must we have, likewise a barrel of tar with twelve tons of
tar in it. The youth went to the King and asked for all the things that
Dapplegrim had named, and once more, as the King thought that it would
be disgraceful to refuse them to him, he obtained them all.

So he mounted Dapplegrim and rode away from the Court, and when he had
ridden for a long, long time over hills and moors, Dapplegrim asked: 'Do
you hear anything?'

'Yes; there is such a dreadful whistling up above in the air that I
think I am growing alarmed,' said the youth.

'That is all the wild birds in the forest flying about; they are sent to
stop us,' said Dapplegrim. 'But just cut a hole in the corn sacks, and
then they will be so busy with the corn that they will forget us.'

The youth did it. He cut holes in the corn sacks so that barley and rye
ran out on every side, and all the wild birds that were in the forest
came in such numbers that they darkened the sun. But when they caught
sight of the corn they could not refrain from it, but flew down and
began to scratch and pick at the corn and rye, and at last they began to
fight among themselves, and forgot all about the youth and Dapplegrim,
and did them no harm.

And now the youth rode onwards for a long, long time, over hill and
dale, over rocky places and morasses, and then Dapplegrim began to
listen again, and asked the youth if he heard anything now.

'Yes; now I hear such a dreadful crackling and crashing in the forest on
every side that I think I shall be really afraid,' said the youth.

'That is all the wild beasts in the forest,' said Dapplegrim; 'they
are sent out to stop us. But just throw out the twelve carcasses of the
oxen, and they will be so much occupied with them that they will quite
forget us.' So the youth threw out the carcasses of the oxen, and then
all the wild beasts in the forest, both bears and wolves, and lions,
and grim beasts of all kinds, came. But when they caught sight of
the carcasses of the oxen they began to fight for them till the blood
flowed, and they entirely forgot Dapplegrim and the youth.

So the youth rode onwards again, and many and many were the new scenes
they saw, for travelling on Dapplegrim's back was not travelling slowly,
as may be imagined, and then Dapplegrim neighed.

'Do you hear anything? he said.

'Yes; I heard something like a foal neighing quite plainly a long, long
way off,' answered the youth.

'That's a full-grown colt,' said Dapplegrim, 'if you hear it so plainly
when it is so far away from us.'

So they travelled onwards a long time, and saw one new scene after
another once more. Then Dapplegrim neighed again.

'Do you hear anything now?' said he.

'Yes; now I heard it quite distinctly, and it neighed like a full-grown
horse,' answered the youth.

'Yes, and you will hear it again very soon,' said Dapplegrim; 'and then
you will hear what a voice it has.' So they travelled on through many
more different kinds of country, and then Dapplegrim neighed for the
third time; but before he could ask the youth if he heard anything,
there was such a neighing on the other side of the heath that the youth
thought that hills and rocks would be rent in pieces.

'Now he is here!' said Dapplegrim. 'Be quick, and fling over me the
ox-hides that have the spikes in them, throw the twelve tons of tar over
the field, and climb up into that great spruce fir tree. When he comes,
fire will spurt out of both his nostrils, and then the tar will catch
fire. Now mark what I say--if the flame ascends I conquer, and if it
sinks I fail; but if you see that I am winning, fling the bridle, which
you must take off me, over his head, and then he will become quite
gentle.'

Just as the youth had flung all the hides with the spikes over
Dapplegrim, and the tar over the field, and had got safely up into the
spruce fir, a horse came with flame spouting from his nostrils, and the
tar caught fire in a moment; and Dapplegrim and the horse began to fight
until the stones leapt up to the sky. They bit, and they fought with
their fore legs and their hind legs, and sometimes the youth looked at
them. And sometimes he looked at the tar, but at last the flames began
to rise, for wheresoever the strange horse bit or wheresoever he kicked
he hit upon the spikes in the hides, and at length he had to yield. When
the youth saw that, he was not long in getting down from the tree and
flinging the bridle over the horse's head, and then he became so tame
that he might have been led by a thin string.

This horse was dappled too, and so like Dapplegrim that no one could
distinguish the one from the other. The youth seated himself on the
dappled horse which he had captured, and rode home again to the King's
palace, and Dapplegrim ran loose by his side. When he got there, the
King was standing outside in the courtyard.

'Can you tell me which is the horse I have caught, and which is the one
I had before?' said the youth. 'If you can't, I think your daughter is
mine.'

The King went and looked at both the dappled horses; he looked high and
he looked low, he looked before and he looked behind, but there was not
a hair's difference between the two.

'No,' said the King; 'that I cannot tell thee, and as thou hast procured
such a splendid bridal horse for my daughter thou shalt have her; but
first we must have one more trial, just to see if thou art fated to
have her. She shall hide herself twice, and then thou shalt hide thyself
twice. If thou canst find her each time that she hides herself, and if
she cannot find thee in thy hiding-places, then it is fated, and thou
shalt have the Princess.'

'That, too, was not in our bargain,' said the youth. 'But we will make
this trial since it must be so.'

So the King's daughter was to hide herself first.

Then she changed herself into a duck, and lay swimming in a lake that
was just outside the palace. But the youth went down into the stable and
asked Dapplegrim what she had done with herself.

'Oh, all that you have to do is to take your gun, and go down to the
water and aim at the duck which is swimming about there, and she will
soon discover herself,' said Dapplegrim.

The youth snatched up his gun and ran to the lake. 'I will just have a
shot at that duck,' said he, and began to aim at it.

'Oh, no, dear friend, don't shoot! It is I,' said the Princess. So he
had found her once.

The second time the Princess changed herself into a loaf, and laid
herself on the table among four other loaves; and she was so like the
other loaves that no one could see any difference between them.

But the youth again went down to the stable to Dapplegrim, and told
him that the Princess had hidden herself again, and that he had not the
least idea what had become of her.

'Oh, just take a very large bread-knife, sharpen it, and pretend that
you are going to cut straight through the third of the four loaves which
are lying on the kitchen table in the King's palace--count them from
right to left--and you will soon find her,' said Dapplegrim.

So the youth went up to the kitchen, and began to sharpen the largest
bread-knife that he could find; then he caught hold of the third loaf
on the left-hand side, and put the knife to it as if he meant to cut it
straight in two. 'I will have a bit of this bread for myself,' said he.

'No, dear friend, don't cut, it is I!' said the Princess again; so he
had found her the second time.

And now it was his turn to go and hide himself; but Dapplegrim had given
him such good instructions that it was not easy to find him. First he
turned himself into a horse-fly, and hid himself in Dapplegrim's left
nostril. The Princess went poking about and searching everywhere, high
and low, and wanted to go into Dapplegrim's stall too, but he began to
bite and kick about so that she was afraid to go there, and could not
find the youth. 'Well,' said she, 'as I am unable to find you, you must
show yourself; 'whereupon the youth immediately appeared standing there
on the stable floor.

Dapplegrim told him what he was to do the second time, and he turned
himself into a lump of earth, and stuck himself between the hoof and the
shoe on Dapplegrim's left fore foot. Once more the King's daughter went
and sought everywhere, inside and outside, until at last she came into
the stable, and wanted to go into the stall beside Dapplegrim. So this
time he allowed her to go into it, and she peered about high and low,
but she could not look under his hoofs, for he stood much too firmly on
his legs for that, and she could not find the youth.

'Well, you will just have to show where you are yourself, for I can't
find you,' said the Princess, and in an instant the youth was standing
by her side on the floor of the stable.

'Now you are mine!' said he to the Princess.

'Now you can see that it is fated that she should be mine,' he said to
the King.

'Yes, fated it is,' said the King. 'So what must be, must.'

Then everything was made ready for the wedding with great splendour and
promptitude, and the youth rode to church on Dapplegrim, and the King's
daughter on the other horse. So everyone must see that they could not be
long on their way thither.(20)

(20) From J. Moe.




THE ENCHANTED CANARY

I

ONCE upon a time, in the reign of King Cambrinus, there lived at
Avesnes one of his lords, who was the finest man--by which I mean the
fattest--in the whole country of Flanders. He ate four meals a day,
slept twelve hours out of the twenty-four, and the only thing he ever
did was to shoot at small birds with his bow and arrow.

Still, with all his practice he shot very badly, he was so fat and
heavy, and as he grew daily fatter, he was at last obliged to give up
walking, and be dragged about in a wheel-chair, and the people made fun
of him, and gave him the name of my Lord Tubby.

Now, the only trouble that Lord Tubby had was about his son, whom he
loved very much, although they were not in the least alike, for the
young Prince was as thin as a cuckoo. And what vexed him more than all
was, that though the young ladies throughout all his lands did their
best to make the Prince fall in love with them, he would have nothing to
say to any of them, and told his father he did not wish to marry.

Instead of chatting with them in the dusk, he wandered about the woods,
whispering to the moon. No wonder the young ladies thought him very odd,
but they liked him all the better for that; and as he had received at
his birth the name of Desire, they all called him d'Amour Desire.

'What is the matter with you?' his father often said to him. 'You have
everything you can possibly wish for: a good bed, good food, and tuns
full of beer. The only thing you want, in order to become as fat as a
pig, is a wife that can bring you broad, rich lands. So marry, and you
will be perfectly happy.'

'I ask nothing better than to marry,' replied Desire, 'but I have never
seen a woman that pleases me. All the girls here are pink and white, and
I am tired to death of their eternal lilie and roses.

'My faith!' cried Tubby; 'do you want to marry a negress, and give me
grandchildren as ugly as monkeys and as stupid as owls?'

'No, father, nothing of the sort. But there must be women somewhere in
the world who are neither pink nor white, and I tell you, once for all,
that I will never marry until I have found one exactly to my taste.'


II


Some time afterwards, it happened that the Prior of the Abbey of
Saint Amand sent to the Lord of Avesnes a basket of oranges, with a
beautifully-written letter saying that these golden fruit, then unknown
in Flanders, came straight from a land where the sun always shone.

That evening Tubby and his son ate the golden apples at supper, and
thought them delicious.

Next morning as the day dawned, Desire went down to the stable and
saddled his pretty white horse. Then he went, all dressed for a journey,
to the bedside of Tubby, and found him smoking his first pipe.

'Father,' he said gravely, 'I have come to bid you farewell. Last night
I dreamed that I was walking in a wood, where the trees were covered
with golden apples. I gathered one of them, and when I opened it there
came out a lovely princess with a golden skin. That is the wife I want,
and I am going to look for her.'

The Lord of Avesnes was so much astonished that he let his pipe fall to
the ground; then he became so diverted at the notion of his son marrying
a yellow woman, and a woman shut up inside an orange, that he burst into
fits of laughter.

Desire waited to bid him good-bye until he was quiet again; but as his
father went on laughing and showed no signs of stopping, the young man
took his hand, kissed it tenderly, opened the door, and in the twinkling
of an eye was as at the bottom of the staircase. He jumped lightly on
his horse, and was a mile from home before Tubby had ceased laughing.

'A yellow wife! He must be mad! fit for a strait waistcoat!' cried the
good man, when he was able to speak. 'Here! quick! bring him back to
me.'

The servants mounted their horses and rode after the Prince; but as
they did not know which road he had taken, they went all ways except
the right one, and instead of bringing him back they returned themselves
when it grew dark, with their horses worn out and covered with dust.


III


When Desire thought they could no longer catch him, he pulled his horse
into a walk, like a prudent man who knows he has far to go. He travelled
in this way for many weeks, passing by villages, towns, mountains,
valleys, and plains, but always pushing south, where every day the sun
seemed hotter and more brilliant.

At last one day at sunset Desire felt the sun so warm, that he thought
he must now be near the place of his dream. He was at that moment close
to the corner of a wood where stood a little hut, before the door of
which his horse stopped of his own accord. An old man with a white beard
was sitting on the doorstep enjoying the fresh air. The Prince got down
from his horse and asked leave to rest.

'Come in, my young friend,' said the old man; 'my house is not large,
but it is big enough to hold a stranger.'

The traveller entered, and his host put before him a simple meal. When
his hunger was satisfied the old man said to him:

'If I do not mistake, you come from far. May I ask where you are going?'

'I will tell you,' answered Desire, 'though most likely you will laugh
at me. I dreamed that in the land of the sun there was a wood full of
orange trees, and that in one of the oranges I should find a beautiful
princess who is to be my wife. It is she I am seeking.'

'Why should I laugh?' asked the old man. 'Madness in youth is true
wisdom. Go, young man, follow your dream, and if you do not find the
happiness that you seek, at any rate you will have had the happiness of
seeking it.'


IV


The next day the Prince arose early and took leave of his host.

'The wood that you saw in your dream is not far from here,' said the
old man. 'It is in the depth of the forest, and this road will lead you
there. You will come to a vast park surrounded by high walls. In the
middle of the park is a castle, where dwells a horrible witch who allows
no living being to enter the doors. Behind the castle is the orange
grove. Follow the wall till you come to a heavy iron gate. Don't try to
press it open, but oil the hinges with this,' and the old man gave him a
small bottle.

'The gate will open of itself,' he continued, 'and a huge dog which
guards the castle will come to you with his mouth wide open, but just
throw him this oat cake. Next, you will see a baking woman leaning over
her heated oven. Give her this brush. Lastly, you will find a well on
your left; do not forget to take the cord of the bucket and spread it in
the sun. When you have done this, do not enter the castle, but go round
it and enter the orange grove. Then gather three oranges, and get back
to the gate as fast as you can. Once out of the gate, leave the forest
by the opposite side.

'Now, attend to this: whatever happens, do not open your oranges till
you reach the bank of a river, or a fountain. Out of each orange will
come a princess, and you can choose which you like for your wife. Your
choice once made, be very careful never to leave your bride for an
instant, and remember that the danger which is most to be feared is
never the danger we are most afraid of.'


V


Desire thanked his host warmly, and took the road he pointed out. In
less than an hour he arrived at the wall, which was very high indeed. He
sprang to the ground, fastened his horse to a tree, and soon found the
iron gate. Then he took out his bottle and oiled the hinges, when the
gate opened of itself, and he saw an old castle standing inside. The
Prince entered boldly into the courtyard.

Suddenly he heard fierce howls, and a dog as tall as a donkey, with eyes
like billiard balls, came towards him, showing his teeth, which were
like the prongs of a fork. Desire flung him the oat cake, which the
great dog instantly snapped up, and the young Prince passed quietly on.

A few yards further he saw a huge oven, with a wide, red-hot gaping
mouth. A woman as tall as a giant was leaning over the oven. Desire gave
her the brush, which she took in silence.

Then he went on to the well, drew up the cord, which was half rotten,
and stretched it out in the sun.

Lastly he went round the castle, and plunged into the orange grove.
There he gathered the three most beautiful oranges he could find, and
turned to go back to the gate.

But just at this moment the sun was darkened, the earth trembled, and
Desire heard a voice crying:

'Baker, baker, take him by his feet, and throw him into the oven!'

'No,' replied the baker; 'a long time has passed since I first began to
scour this oven with my own flesh. YOU never cared to give me a brush;
