near the outskirts. The signal calls were answered as before, and a
number of the faithful gathered round with their simple offerings of
food.

As they began stating their grievances, Ned as usual warned them off
with a brief "to-morrow" when he saw outside the group of Hindoos two
or three Mussulman troopers.

These moved closely up, and contemplated the wild-looking fakir, with
his tangled hair and his eyes peering out through the tangle. One of
them looked at the bear for some time attentively, and then said:

"That is no bear; it is a man in a bear's skin."

Ned had feared that the discovery might be made, and had from the first
had his answer ready.

"Fool," he said in a loud, harsh voice, "who with his eyes in his head
supposed that it was a bear? It is one who has sinned and is under a
vow. Dogs like you know naught of these things, but the followers of
Siva know."

"Do you call me a dog?" said the Mussulman angrily, and strode forward
as if to strike; but Ned leaped to his feet, and twirling his staff
round his head, brought it down with such force on the soldier's wrist
that it nearly broke the arm. The Hindoos began to shout "Sacrilege!"
as the Mussulman drew his pistol. Before he could fire, however, his
comrades threw themselves upon him. At this time it was the policy of
Hindoos and Mussulmans alike to drop all religious differences, and the
troopers knew that any assault upon a holy fakir would excite to
madness the Hindoo population.

The furious Mohammedan was therefore dragged away by his fellows, and
Ned calmly resumed his seat. The Hindoos brought a fresh supply of food
for the holy man expiating his sin in so strange a way, and then left
the fakir to his meditation and his rest.

Half an hour later the Warreners were on their way, and before morning
congratulated themselves upon having done more than half of the two
hundred and eighty miles which separate Lucknow from Delhi. The
remaining distance took them, however, much longer than the first part
had done, for Dick cut his foot badly against a stone the next night,
and was so lamed that the night journeys had to be greatly shortened.
Instead, therefore, of arriving in eight days, as they had hoped, it
was the 3d of September--that is, thirteen days from their
start--before they saw in the distance the British flag flying on the
watch tower on the Ridge. They had made a long detour, and came in at
the rear of the British position. On this side the country was
perfectly open, and the villagers brought in eggs and other produce to
the camp.

Upon the 25th of August the enemy had sent a force of six thousand men
to intercept the heavy siege train which was on its way to the British
camp from the Punjaub. Brigadier-General Nicholson, one of the most
gallant and promising officers of the British army, was sent out
against them with a force of two thousand men, of which only one-fourth
were British. He met them at Nujufghur and routed them, capturing all
their guns, thirteen in number. A curious instance here occurred of the
manner in which the least courageous men will fight when driven to bay.
The army of six thousand men had made so poor a fight that the British
loss in killed and wounded amounted to only thirty-three men. After it
was over it was found that a party of some twenty rebels had taken
shelter in a house in a village in the British rear. The Punjaub
infantry was sent to drive them out, but its commanding officer and
many of its men were killed by the desperate handful of mutineers. The
Sixty-first Queen's was then ordered up, but the enemy was not
overpowered until another officer was dangerously wounded and many had
fallen. Altogether the victory over this little band of men cost us
sixteen killed and forty-six wounded--that is to say, double the loss
which had been incurred in defeating six thousand of them in the open.
The result of this engagement was that the road in the rear of the
British camp was perfectly open, and the Warreners experienced no
hindrance whatever in approaching the camp.

Dick had, after crossing the Oude frontier, left his bear's skin behind
him, and adopted the simple costume of a native peasant, the blue cloth
and a white turban, Ned having begged a piece of white cotton for the
purpose. Traveling only at night, when the natives wrap themselves up
very much, there was little fear of Dick's color being detected; and as
he kept himself well in the background during the short time of an
evening when Ned appeared in public, he had passed without attracting
any attention whatever.

The Warreners' hearts leaped within them on beholding, on the afternoon
of the 3d of September, a party of British cavalry trotting along the
road, two miles from camp.

"It is the Guides," Ned said. "We know the officer, Dick. Keep on your
disguise a minute longer; we shall have some fun."

Ned accordingly stood in the middle of the road and shouted his
"Hoo-Hac!" at the top of his voice.

"Get out of the way, you old fool," the officer riding at its head
said, as he drew up his horse on seeing the wild figure, covered with
shaggy hair to the waist, twirling his formidable staff.

Ned stopped a moment. "Not a bit more of an old fool than you are
yourself, Tomkins," he said.

The officer reined his horse back in his astonishment. He had spoken in
English unconsciously, and being answered in the same language, and
from such a figure as this, naturally petrified him.

"Who on earth are you?" he asked.

"Ned Warrener; and this is my brother Dick;" and Ned pulled off his wig.

"By Jove!" the officer said, leaping from his horse; "I am glad to see
you. Where on earth have you come from? Some one who came up here from
Allahabad had seen some fellow there who had come down from Cawnpore,
and he reported that you had gone on into Lucknow in disguise, and that
news had come you had got safely in."

"So we did," Ned said; "and as you see, we have got safely out again.
We left there on the night of the 20th."

"And what was the state of things then?" Lieutenant Tomkins asked. "How
long could they hold out? We know that it will be another three weeks
before Havelock can hope to get there."

"Another three weeks!" Ned said. "That is terrible. They were hard
pushed indeed when we left; the enemy were driving mines in all
directions; the garrison were getting weaker and weaker every day, and
the men fit for duty were worked to death. It seems next to impossible
that they could hold out for another four or five weeks from the time
we left them; but if it can be done, they will do it. Do you happen to
have heard of our father?"

"The man that brought the news about you said he was all right and
hearty, and the troop was doing good work in scouring the country round
Cawnpore. Now will you ride back and report yourself to General
Wilson?" So saying, he ordered two of the troopers to dismount and walk
back to camp.

Ned had thrown down the wig when he took it off; but before mounting
Dick picked it up, rolled it up into a little parcel, and said:

"It is my first effort in wig-making, and as it has saved our lives
I'll keep it as long as I live, as a memento; besides, who knows? it
may be useful again yet."

Quite an excitement was created in the camp behind the Ridge by the
arrival of the Guide cavalry with two Englishmen in native dress, and
the news that they were officers from Lucknow quickly spread.

The cavalry drew up at their own lines, and then dismounting,
Lieutenant Tomkins at once sent an orderly to the general with the
news, while the boys were taken inside a tent, and enjoyed the luxury
of a bath, and a message was sent round to the officers of the
regiment, which rapidly resulted in sufficient clothes being
contributed to allow the boys to make their appearance in the garb of
British officers.

A curry and a cup of coffee were ready for them by the time they were
dressed, and these were enjoyed indeed after a fortnight's feeding upon
uncooked grain, varied only by an occasional piece of native bread or
cake. The hasty meal concluded, they accompanied Lieutenant Tomkins to
the general's tent.

They were most cordially received by General Wilson; and omitting all
details, they gave him an account of their having been cut off during a
successful sortie from Lucknow, and having made their way to Delhi in
disguise. Then they proceeded to describe fully the state of affairs at
Lucknow, a recital which was at once interesting and important,
inasmuch as though several native messengers had got through from
Lucknow to General Havelock, as none of them carried letters--for these
would have insured their death if searched--they had brought simply
messages from General Inglis asking for speedy help, and their stories
as to the existent state of things in the garrison were necessarily
vague and untrustworthy.

The most satisfactory portion of the boys' statement was, that although
the garrison were now on short rations, and that all the comforts, and
many of what are regarded as almost the necessaries of life, were
exhausted, yet that there was plenty of grain in the place to enable
the besieged to exist for some weeks longer.

"The great fear is that some essential part of the defense may be
destroyed by mines," Ned concluded. "Against open attacks I think that
the garrison is safe; but the enemy are now devoting themselves so much
to driving mines that however great the care and vigilance of the
garrison, they may not be always able to detect them, or, even if they
do so, to run counter-mines, owing to the numerical weakness of our
force."

"Thanks for your description, gentlemen; it throws a great light upon
the state of affairs, and is very valuable. I will at once telegraph a
_resume_ of it to the central government and to General Havelock. The
pressing need of aid will no doubt impress the Calcutta authorities
with the urgent necessity to place General Havelock in a position to
make an advance at the earliest possible moment. He will, of course,
communicate to Colonel Warrener the news of your safe arrival here. You
have gone through a great deal indeed since you left here, while we
have been doing little more than hold our own. However, the tide has
turned now. We have received large reinforcements and our siege train;
and I hope that in the course of a fortnight the British flag will once
again wave over Delhi. In the meantime you will, at any rate for a few
days, need rest. I will leave you for a day with your friends of the
Guides, and will then attach you to one of the divisional staffs. I
hope that you will both dine with me to-day."

That evening at dinner the Warreners met at the general's table General
Nicholson, whose chivalrous bravery placed him on a par with Outram,
who was called the Bayard of the British army. He was short of staff
officers, and did not wish to weaken the fighting powers of the
regiments of his division by drawing officers from them. He therefore
asked General Wilson to attach the Warreners to his personal staff.
This request was at once complied with. Their new chief assured them
that for the present he had no occasion for their services, and that
they were at liberty to do as they pleased until the siege operations
began in earnest. The next few days were accordingly spent, as Dick
said, in eating and talking.

Every regiment in camp was anxious to hear the tale of the siege of
Lucknow, and of the Warreners' personal experience in entering and
leaving the besieged Residency; and accordingly they dined, lunched, or
breakfasted by turns with every mess in camp. They were indeed the
heroes of the day; and the officers were much pleased at the simplicity
with which these gallant lads told their adventures, and at the entire
absence of any consciousness that they had done anything out of the
way. In fact, they rather regarded the whole business as two schoolboys
might regard some adventure in which they had been engaged, Dick, in
particular, regarding all their adventures, with the exception only of
the sufferings of the garrison of Lucknow, in the light of an "immense
lark."

In the meantime, the troops were working day and night in the trenches
and batteries, under the directions of the engineer officers; and every
heart beat high with satisfaction that, after standing for months on
the defensive, repelling continual attacks of enormously superior
numbers, at last their turn had arrived, and that the day was at hand
when the long-deferred vengeance was to fall upon the bloodstained city.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE STORMING OF DELHI.


On the morning of the 8th of September the battery, eight hundred yards
from the Moree gate of Delhi, opened fire, and sent the first battering
shot against the town which had for three months been besieged.
Hitherto, indeed, light shot, shell, and shrapnel had been fired at the
gunners on the walls to keep down their fire, and the city and palace
had been shelled by the mortar batteries; but not a shot had been fired
with the object of injuring the walls or bringing the siege to an end.

For three months the besiegers had stood on the offensive, and the
enemy not only held the city, but had erected very strong works in the
open ground in front of the Lahore gate, and had free ingress and
egress from the town at all points save from the gates on the north
side, facing the British position on the Ridge. During these three long
months, however, the respective position of the parties had changed a
good deal. For the first month the mutineers were elated with their
success all over that part of India. They were intoxicated with treason
and murder; and their enormous numbers in comparison with those of the
British troops in the country made them not only confident of success,
but arrogant in the belief that success was already assured. Gradually,
however, the failure of all their attempts, even with enormously
superior forces, to drive the little British force from the grip which
it so tenaciously held of the hill in front of Delhi, damped the ardor
of their enthusiasm. Doubts as to whether, after all, their mutiny and
their treachery would meet with eventual success, and fear that
punishment for their atrocities would finally overtake them, began for
the first time to enter their minds.

Quarrels and strife broke out between the various leaders of the
movement, and pitched battles were fought between the men of different
corps. Then came pestilence and swept the crowded quarters. A reign of
terror prevailed throughout the city; the respectable inhabitants were
robbed and murdered, shops were burst open and sacked, and riot and
violence reigned supreme.

The puppet monarch, terrified at the disorder that prevailed, and
finding his authority was purely nominal--the real power resting in the
hands of his own sons, who had taken a leading share in getting up the
revolt, and in those of the Sepoy generals--began to long for rest and
quiet. The heavy shell which from time to time crashed into his palace
disturbed his peace, and, through his wives, he secretly endeavored to
open negotiations with the British. These overtures were, however,
rejected. The king had no power whatever, and he and his household were
all concerned in the massacres which had taken place in the palace
itself.

It was then, by an army which, however small, was confident of victory,
against one which, however large, was beginning to doubt that final
success would be theirs, that the siege operations began on the morning
of the 8th of September. Thenceforth the besiegers worked night and
day. Every night saw fresh batteries rising at a distance of only three
hundred yards from the walls; fifteen hundred camels brought earth;
three thousand men filled sandbags, placed fascines, and erected
traverses for the guns. The batteries rose as if by magic. The besieged
viewed these preparations with a strange apathy. They might at the
commencement of the work have swept the ground with such a shower of
grape and musketry fire that the erection of batteries so close to
their walls would have been impossible; but for the first three nights
of the work they seemed to pay but little heed to what we were doing,
and when at last they awoke to the nature of our proceedings, and began
a furious cannonade against the British, the works had reached a height
that afforded shelter to those employed upon them. Each battery, as
fast as the heavy siege guns were placed in position, opened upon the
walls, until forty heavy guns thundered incessantly.

The enemy now fought desperately. Our fire overpowered that of the guns
at the bastions opposed to them; but from guns placed out in the open,
on our flank, they played upon our batteries, while from the walls a
storm of musketry fire and rockets was poured upon us. But our gunners
worked away unceasingly. Piece by piece the massive walls crumbled
under our fire, until, on the 13th, yawning gaps were torn through the
walls of the Cashmere and Water bastions. That night four engineer
officers--Medley, Long, Greathead, and Home--crept forward and examined
the breaches, and returned, reporting that it would be possible to
climb the heaps of rubbish and enter at the gaps in the wall. Orders
were at once issued for the assault to take place at daybreak next
morning.

The assaulting force was divided into four columns; the first, composed
of three hundred men of the Seventy-fifth Regiment, two hundred and
fifty men of the First Bengal Fusiliers, and four hundred and fifty men
of the Second Punjaub Infantry--in all one thousand men, under
Brigadier-General Nicholson, were to storm the breach near the Cashmere
bastion. The second column, consisting of two hundred and fifty men of
the Eighth Regiment, two hundred and fifty men of the Second Bengal
Fusiliers, and three hundred and fifty men of the Fourth Sikh Infantry,
under Colonel Jones, Q.B., were to storm the breach in the Water
bastion. The third column, consisting of two hundred men of the
Fifty-second Regiment, two hundred and fifty men of the Ghoorka Kumaan
battalion, and five hundred men of the First Punjaub Infantry, under
Colonel Campbell, were to assault by the Cashmere gate, which was to be
blown open by the engineers. The fourth column, eight hundred and sixty
strong, was made up of detachments of European regiments, the Sirmoor
battalion of Ghoorkas, and the Guides. It was commanded by Major Reed,
and was to carry the suburb outside the walls, held by the rebels,
called Kissengunge, and to enter the city by the Lahore gate. In
addition to the four storming columns was the reserve, fifteen hundred
strong, under Brigadier Longfield. It consisted of two hundred and
fifty men of the Sixty-first Regiment, three hundred of the Beloochee
battalion, four hundred and fifty of the Fourth Punjab Infantry, three
hundred of the Jhind Auxiliary Force, and two hundred of the Sixtieth
Rifles, who were to cover with their fire the advance of the storming
column, and then to take their places with the reserves. This body was
to await the success of the storming column, and then follow them into
the city, and assist them as required. The cavalry and the rest of the
force were to cover the flank and defend the Ridge, should the enemy
attempt a counter attack.

Precisely at four o'clock on the morning of the 14th, the Sixtieth
Rifles dashed forward in skirmishing order toward the walls, and the
heads of the assaulting columns moved out of the batteries, which had
until this moment kept up their fire without intermission.

The Warreners were on duty by the side of General Nicholson; and
accustomed as they were to danger, their hearts beat fast as they
awaited the signal. It was to be a tremendous enterprise--an enterprise
absolutely unrivaled in history--for five thousand men to assault a
city garrisoned by some thirty thousand trained troops, and a fanatical
and turbulent population of five hundred thousand, all, it may be said,
fighting with ropes round their necks.

As the Rifles dashed forward in front, and the head of the column
advanced, a terrific fire of musketry broke out from wall and bastion,
which the British, all necessity for concealment being over, answered
with a tremendous cheer as they swept forward. Arrived at the ditch
there was a halt. It took some time to place the ladders, and officers
and men fell fast under the hail of bullets. Then as they gathered in
strength in the ditch there was one wild cheer, and they dashed up the
slope of rubbish and stones, and passed through the breach.

The entrance to Delhi was won.

Scrambling breathlessly up, keeping just behind their gallant general,
the Warreners were among the first to win their way into the city.

An equally rapid success had attended the assault upon the breach in
the Water bastion by the second column. Nor were the third far behind
in the assault through the Cashmere gate, But here a deed had first to
be done which should live in the memories of Englishmen so long as we
exist as a nation.

As the head of the assaulting column moved forward a little party
started at the double toward the Cashmere gate. The party consisted of
