week. There could have been no difficulty in doing so. The stories of
demons, and probably the murder of inquisitive people who tried to pry
into what was going on, created such a dread of the place that those in
the secret would come and go without the slightest difficulty.
Conceivably, young men may from time to time have gone out for a year
into the world and brought back wives with them, or girls may have been
sent by the people in league with them outside, and obtained husbands,
which is less likely. I should think it was more probable that young
boys and girls would be kidnapped, and brought in here from time to
time. All this is pure guesswork, of course, but nevertheless there may
be people here, and it is just as well to take a look round from above
before we trust ourselves inside the place."

On gaining the plateau they followed the crest of the valley until they
came to a spot where the ravine appeared to end. They found that in
fact it made a sharp turn. It was here only some ten feet wide, but
soon broadened out to thirty. Fifty yards farther there was another
sharp bend, the ravine narrowed to twenty feet, and the sides became
absolutely perpendicular. Twenty yards farther still they saw something
like a wall about thirty or forty feet high stretching across the
gorge, which was here some seventy feet deep. About twenty feet from
the foot there was a steep ascent of rocks, such as might have fallen
there by a slip from one side or the other. Above these a perpendicular
wall rose for another twenty-five feet. Harry and his brother looked at
it in surprise from the height at which they stood. Its appearance was
precisely that of the wall-precipices on each side. It was rough and
uneven, and they could see no signs of any joints.

"It looks as if it were natural," Bertie said, "but it can't be."

"No, it must certainly be artificial, but it is a wonderful imitation,
and certainly anyone coming up the ravine would suppose that bank of
rocks at the foot had fallen from its face; but we know that it can't
be that, for the water makes its way through. Besides, you see it is
only three feet wide at the top, and then there is a narrow ledge a
couple of feet wide, which was evidently made for the garrison to stand
upon and shoot their arrows at anyone attempting to come up the ravine.
Behind the slope is all rough rocks, except just below our feet, where
there is a narrow stone staircase of regularly-cut steps. It is so
narrow that it could not be noticed by anyone standing here, unless
they bent over to look straight down as I am doing. Well, it is just as
well that we made the circuit, for we certainly could not have climbed
over there."

Another sharp turn, and the ravine ran straight towards the castle.
They hurried on, and when they had gone fifty yards stood at the edge
of a roughly circular pit. It was seventy or eighty feet across,
narrowing at each end. At one end was the ravine at whose mouth they
were standing, and directly opposite, in what might be called the neck
of the bottle, stood the Castle of the Demons. It was some fifty feet
in width, and as it stood back about forty feet up the neck it could
hardly be seen at any point except that at which they were standing.
There was no door or other opening at less than some twenty-five feet
from the ground. At that height was a broad aperture about four feet
high and twelve wide. Above this were several smaller openings about
four feet square. The singular point in the structure was a rough arch
of rock, which extended above it and formed its roof. This arch
projected thirty or forty feet in front of the building, so that the
latter had the appearance of standing in a great cave.

"What an extraordinary-looking place!" Bertie said in a low voice.

"Extraordinary, but how splendidly chosen for concealment! You see the
top of the rock above it is level with the ground on either side. This
would perfectly well account for people riding along the line of the
cliffs, and passing over without dreaming that there was a house below
them. Even if they went to the edge on this side, they would simply see
this deep pit and the ravine beyond, but could not by any possibility
obtain a sight of the house unless they came round to nearly where we
are standing, which they could have no possible motive for doing.
Besides, you see, all the way we have been passing through a thick
bush; and I have no doubt that in the old time a wood stood here,
possibly planted by the builders of the house. Of course the arch
existed before the house was built. The stratum below was probably
softer, and the stream gradually trickled through, and perhaps in some
great flood, when this basin was full, burst its way out, after which
the rock gradually fell until it formed that great natural arch."

"Well, let us go round and have a look at the other side."

They found that the width of the arch to the sea cliff was a hundred
and fifty feet.

"If the castle extends to this face, Bertie, it is a hundred feet
across, but from here we can't see whether it does so. It is probably
built flush, however, as Dias said that it was not noticeable from the
sea, and had the arch projected beyond it it could certainly have been
seen."

"Well, Harry, if you will tie a rope round my waist you can let me
down, and I will have a look at it. You can hold me easily enough if
you stand twenty feet back from the edge, and you won't have to pull me
up, because I can easily climb up the rope by myself. I need not go
down more than thirty or forty feet, and I can do that easily enough."

"Oh, I could pull you up, Bertie."

"Well, you could do that if by any chance I should get tired; then I
could give a shout, and you could haul on the rope."

"There are lots of stumps of trees here, Bertie, and I can take half a
turn round one of them and so let you down easily; then when you shout
I will fasten the rope there and come to the edge, and I can hear
whether you want me to haul or not. Of course it must depend whether
there are any jagged rocks sticking out. If so, it would be better for
you to climb, as the rope might chafe against them if I pulled."

"I understand." Bertie laid down his weapons and water-flask, made a
loop at the end of one of the ropes they had brought large enough for
him to sit in, then he looked for a spot where the short grass extended
to the very edge. "This is a good place, and the rope won't chafe as it
runs over that. Now I am ready. If you will go back to that stump
fifteen feet away and let it out gradually, I will be off."

He knelt down, and putting the rope over his head took a firm hold of
it just above the loop, and then crawled backwards, his brother keeping
the rope taut. "Slack it out gradually now," Bertie said; "I am just
over."

Directly afterwards his shoulders disappeared. Harry let the rope
slowly out until he calculated that fifty feet were over the cliff,
then he fastened it very securely round the stump and went forward to
the edge.

"Are you all right, Bertie?" he shouted.

"Quite right."

The face of the rock was very even, and there was nothing for the rope
to chafe against. Harry lay down at the edge, keeping a firm hold of
the rope to prevent himself from slipping over, and was able to look
down on Bertie.

"Well, Bertie, what is it?"

"It is the wall of the house, I have no doubt, but it is so cleverly
built that I can scarcely see where the arch ends and the house begins.
Looking quite close I can see where the stones join, but their face has
been left rough; and as it is just the same colour as the rocks, and
lines have been cut down its face, and cracks made across it answering
to the lines in the rock on both sides, I am sure I should not have
known it was built up unless I had examined it. It is much narrower on
this side than on the other--not more than twenty-five feet, I should
say. There seem to be some irregularly-shaped holes in what looks like
a fissure in the middle. I suppose they are to light the rooms on this
side of the house, but they are certainly too small to be noticed from
the sea."

"Does the sea come right up to the foot of the cliff?"

It was a minute before the answer came. "The water comes to the foot,
but there is a line of rocks running along forty or fifty feet farther
out. Some of them seem to be thirty feet out of the water; at one end
they touch the cliff, and at the other there is a free passage. The
water is very clear, but as far as I can judge I should say there is a
depth of a fathom or a fathom and a half between the rocks and the
cliff. Certainly a boat could row in to a position underneath where I
am."

"Is there anything more?"

"No."

"You don't see an entrance down here?"

"No."

"All right! Then you may as well come up again. Can you climb up?"

"Easily."

"Well, hail me if you want me to haul."

Harry went back to the stump, unwound the rope until it was only half a
turn round it, and then, holding it firmly, stood ready to haul up.




CHAPTER XV

INVESTIGATIONS


Harry was relieved when, a few minutes later, Bertie's head appeared
above the edge, and directly afterwards he crawled over. "My arms have
strengthened ever so much with our work. I could have done it before,
but it would have been hard work."

"Well, so far so good, Bertie. There is no doubt that it is one of the
best hiding-places in the world, and I am not a bit surprised that the
Spaniards never found it. Now we will go back to the edge of the ravine
and have a good look from that side."

As they went along he said, "Let us have a look at these bushes,
Bertie. The soil is very thin about here, and I wonder that the trees
grew."

"These are pines," Bertie said, "and in the mountains we often saw
pines growing among rocks where there did not seem a handful of soil
for them."

On examining they found several old stumps, and thrusting a ramrod down
Harry found, to his surprise, that the soil was from three to four feet
deep. He tried again a little farther off, and found that it was two
feet; further still, it was only one.

"The tree must have stood in a hole in the rock," he said. "Try another
one, Bertie." The same results were obtained. "That explains it, Bert.
Evidently when they planted the trees to prevent this place from being
seen from the hills, they cut away the rock in circles about twelve
feet across and made cup-shaped holes, which they filled up with earth.
When they planted the young trees I dare say at first they watered
them. They could easily enough fetch water up from the stream. When the
trees got fairly rooted they would be able to leave them alone, perhaps
giving them a good watering once every two or three months. Whenever
the rains came they would be able to give up watering altogether, for
in these basins the earth would keep moist for a very long time. It
would be a big job, but no doubt the king who built the place had all
his tribe at work on it. It is probable that the Incas had established
themselves at Cuzco for many years before they came down to this place,
and the trees may not have been planted till their coming was first
heard of. In that case there would be plenty of time to hide the place
before they came down and searched the shore. We know that the Chimoos
resisted them for a considerable time before they were finally
conquered. Well, for whatever purpose this place was built it is one in
which either the Chimoos or the Incas, if they ever found the place,
would be likely to hide treasure, which is satisfactory. Now we will
sit down here for a short time and watch both windows. You look at the
two top lines, Bertie, and I will look at the two lower lines. I
certainly do not see any signs of life. That is how the water gets
out," and he pointed to a roughly-shaped arch about twelve feet wide
and as many high. Through this the little stream disappeared. "I expect
there is a similar passage at the other end."

"There may have been," Bertie said. "I was hanging so close to the wall
that there may very well have been one without my being able to see it.
But it looks pitch-dark in there. If there were much of an opening we
ought to see the light, for, as we agreed, it can't be more than a
hundred feet long."

[Illustration: HARRY DROPPED THE BARREL OF HIS RIFLE INTO THE PALM OF
HIS LEFT HAND.]

"That is the first place we will investigate, Bertie. The question of
how we are to get into the house wants some thinking over. That lowest
window is a good twenty-five feet above the ground."

"Of course if we had a grapnel we could fasten it to the end of a rope
and chuck it in."

"We shall have to make something of that sort. If the window had been
on the other side instead of this it would have been easy enough,
because I could have lowered you and slipped down the rope afterwards,
but that arch sticking out so far on this side makes it impossible. All
that we can do now is, as far as I can see, to lower ourselves down on
to the top of that wall in the ravine, then go and examine the tunnel.
We have got plenty of rope to lower ourselves from here on to the wall."

They watched the building for another twenty minutes. "I am convinced
that no one is there," Harry said. "I have not seen as much as a shadow
pass any of the windows since. If people did live in it they would
naturally be on this side of the house, because the rooms here are
better lighted and more cheerful, and no doubt they are the principal
rooms, as the house narrows so much at the other end."

"Well, let us try it," Bertie said. "If there is a strong force here we
should only have to make a bolt back to that narrow staircase. We could
hold that against a whole tribe."

They rose and walked along the edge of the ravine till they were above
the wall, then, fastening the rope to a stump, they slid down on to it.

"So far so good," Harry said, as, holding their rifles in their hands,
they went down the steps. Then he suddenly stopped. "Hullo," he
exclaimed, "here are two skeletons!"

They were not quite skeletons, for the bones were covered by a
parchment-like skin, and there were still remains of the short skirt
each had worn in life. A spear lay beside each. With difficulty the
brothers passed down without treading upon them.

"They must have been here a long time, Harry," Bertie said when they
got to the bottom.

"Any time," the other said. "In the dry air of these low lands there is
scarce any decay. You remember those mummies we saw. I believe iron or
steel will lie here for years without rusting. They may have been here
for a couple of hundred years or more."

"I wonder what killed them, Harry?"

"I have no idea. You see, one was lying almost on the other with his
arms round his body, as if he had died trying to lift him up. If they
had been shot by arrows they would still be sticking into them; if they
had been killed by people pursuing them they would probably be lying
upon their backs, for they would naturally have faced round at the last
moment to resist their pursuers, whereas there are no signs of injury.
This settles the point that there is no one in the house. Had it been
inhabited, the bodies would have been removed from the path, for it is
by this that people would go out and return. There may have been a
ladder down from the wall; the only other way they could have got out
would have been through that passage to the sea. A boat may have been
kept there; but even if that had been so, we should scarcely have found
those bodies on the steps. Well, we shall have plenty of time to talk
over that."

They walked across the open space until they approached the building.
For a height of twenty feet it was constructed of stone, above that it
appeared to be made of the great adobe bricks which had been so largely
used at Pachacamac, and in others of the old ruins they had seen.

"There is no question that it must have been built by the Chimoos or
some race before them," Harry said; "the Incas could have had no
possible reason for erecting such a place. Well, now for the tunnel."

The little stream only occupied two feet of the passage. They were
therefore enabled to walk down dry-foot.

"We ought to have brought a torch with us," Bertie said.

"I don't think we shall want that; there is a sort of thin blue light,
the reflection of the light upon the water outside, though I don't know
why it should be so blue."

The reason was soon manifest. The passage sloped downwards, and when
they had gone some fifty feet their progress was arrested by water
which appeared of a deep-blue colour.

"That is it," Harry said. "You see the roof comes down into the water
twenty feet off, and the light has come up under it. They sloped this
passage to make the water flow out below the surface of the sea, so
that the opening could not be seen from without. By the light I should
not say that the opening is more than six inches under the water. I
don't know how the tides are, but if it is high tide now, the top of
the opening would be eighteen inches out of water at low tide, for, as
you know, the tide only rises about two feet on this coast. In that
case a boat would be able to come in and out at low tide, but of course
a man wanting to come in or go out could easily dive under at any time.
Well, that settles that point for the present. It was a clever plan;
any amount of water could flow out in flood time, and yet no one who
took the trouble to come behind that ledge of rocks we saw would have
any idea that there was an opening. I think now that we had better go
back, Bertie; in the first place because we can do nothing until we
have manufactured a grapnel of some sort, and in the next place because
every moment we delay will add to the anxiety of our friends in camp.
We must have been away three hours, I should say."

They ascended the steps, fastened the short rope round a block at the
top of the wall across the ravine, and lowered themselves down. They
had to proceed with great care while making their way down the slope
composed of rough and jagged rocks, Once at the bottom of the ravine,
however, they walked briskly on. They had scarcely issued from the
entrance when they saw a stir in the camp in the distance and heard a
shout of delight, and then Dias dashed off to meet them at the top of
his speed.

"Thanks to all the saints, senor, that you are safe! You do not know
how we have suffered. We have prayed ever since you started, all of us.
Once or twice I threw myself down in despair, but Maria chided me for
having so little faith in God to keep you from evil, and cheered me by
saying that had harm come to you we should assuredly have heard the
sound of your guns. Have you been in the castle?"

"No, Dias, we have not been in--for the good reason that we could not
get in, because the only entrance is fully twenty-five feet from the
ground. We cannot enter until we have made some contrivance by which a
rope can be fixed there, or manufactured a ladder, which would be the
best way and save a lot of trouble, if we could get a couple of poles
long enough. We thought that we would come back when we had seen all
there was to be seen outside the place."

The Indian's face fell. "Then you do not know what is in the house,
senor?"

"No; but we are certain that there is no one there, and that probably
no one has been there for the past two hundred years, and perhaps a
good deal longer."

"And the demons have not interfered with you?"

"The demons knew better," Bertie laughed.

"They may not be powerful in the daytime," Dias said in an awed tone.
"It is at night that they would be terrible."

"Well, Dias," Bertie said, "everyone knows that the demons cannot
withstand the sign of the cross. All you have to do is to make a small
cross, hold it up in front of you and say, '_Vade retro, Satanas!_' and
they will fly howling away."

"Seriously," Harry said, "you know it is all bosh about demons, Dias."

"But the church exorcises evil spirits. I have seen a priest go with
candles and incense to a haunted house, and drive out the evil spirits
there."

"That is to say, Dias, no spirits were ever seen there afterwards, and
we may be very certain that no spirits were ever seen there before,
though cowardly people might have fancied they saw them. However,
to-morrow we shall get inside, and Bertie and I will stop there all
night, and if we neither see nor hear anything of them you may be quite
sure that there are none there."

"But the traditions say they have strangled many and torn them, senor;
their bodies have been found in the daytime and carried off."

"It is quite possible that they were strangled and torn there, but you
may be sure that it was the work not of demons, but of the men who were
set to guard the place from intruders. Well, those men have gone. We
found two skeletons, which must have been there at least a hundred
years, perhaps a great deal more. They were lying on the stairs, the
only way of getting into the place, and they would have been removed
long ago if anyone had been passing in or out."

By this time they had arrived at the camp. "I knew you would come back
all safe, senors," Donna Maria said triumphantly; "I told Dias so over
and over again. But what have you seen?"

"I see something now--or rather I don't see something now that I should
like to see," Bertie laughed. "I thought you would have got a good
dinner ready for me, but I do not see any signs of its being even
begun."

The woman laughed. "I have been too busy praying, senor, and have been
keeping up Dias's spirits. I never knew him faint-hearted before, and
it really almost frightened me; but I will set about getting dinner at
once."

"No, no," Harry said; "we are really not hungry. We had a good meal
before we started. So do you three sit down and I will tell you all we
have seen."

The three natives listened with intense interest. When he had done,
Maria clapped her hands. "It must be a wonderful place," she said. "I
wish I had gone with you, I will go to-morrow if you will take me."

"Certainly we will take you, Maria; and I have no doubt that Dias will
go too."

