
But a voice sounded above the other voices, and presently it was
speaking in a silence.

'Comrades and fellow workers,' it said, and it was the voice of a
tall, coppery-coloured man who had climbed into a chariot that had been
stopped by the crowd. Its owner had bolted, muttering something about
calling the Guards, and now the man spoke from it. 'Comrades and fellow
workers, how long are we to endure the tyranny of our masters, who live
in idleness and luxury on the fruit of our toil? They only give us a
bare subsistence wage, and they live on the fat of the land. We labour
all our lives to keep them in wanton luxury. Let us make an end of it!'

A roar of applause answered him.

'How are you going to do it?' cried a voice.

'You look out,' cried another, 'or you'll get yourself into trouble.'

'I've heard almost every single word of that,' whispered Robert, 'in
Hyde Park last Sunday!'

'Let us strike for more bread and onions and beer, and a longer mid-day
rest,' the speaker went on. 'You are tired, you are hungry, you are
thirsty. You are poor, your wives and children are pining for food. The
barns of the rich are full to bursting with the corn we want, the corn
our labour has grown. To the granaries!'

'To the granaries!' cried half the crowd; but another voice shouted
clear above the tumult, 'To Pharaoh! To the King! Let's present a
petition to the King! He will listen to the voice of the oppressed!'

For a moment the crowd swayed one way and another--first towards the
granaries and then towards the palace. Then, with a rush like that of an
imprisoned torrent suddenly set free, it surged along the street towards
the palace, and the children were carried with it. Anthea found it
difficult to keep the Psammead from being squeezed very uncomfortably.

The crowd swept through the streets of dull-looking houses with few
windows, very high up, across the market where people were not buying
but exchanging goods. In a momentary pause Robert saw a basket of onions
exchanged for a hair comb and five fish for a string of beads. The
people in the market seemed better off than those in the crowd; they
had finer clothes, and more of them. They were the kind of people who,
nowadays, would have lived at Brixton or Brockley.

'What's the trouble now?' a languid, large-eyed lady in a crimped,
half-transparent linen dress, with her black hair very much braided and
puffed out, asked of a date-seller.

'Oh, the working-men--discontented as usual,' the man answered. 'Listen
to them. Anyone would think it mattered whether they had a little more
or less to eat. Dregs of society!' said the date-seller.

'Scum!' said the lady.

'And I've heard THAT before, too,' said Robert.

At that moment the voice of the crowd changed, from anger to doubt, from
doubt to fear. There were other voices shouting; they shouted defiance
and menace, and they came nearer very quickly. There was the rattle of
wheels and the pounding of hoofs. A voice shouted, 'Guards!'

'The Guards! The Guards!' shouted another voice, and the crowd of
workmen took up the cry. 'The Guards! Pharaoh's Guards!' And swaying a
little once more, the crowd hung for a moment as it were balanced. Then
as the trampling hoofs came nearer the workmen fled dispersed, up alleys
and into the courts of houses, and the Guards in their embossed leather
chariots swept down the street at the gallop, their wheels clattering
over the stones, and their dark-coloured, blue tunics blown open and
back with the wind of their going.

'So THAT riot's over,' said the crimped-linen-dressed lady; 'that's
a blessing! And did you notice the Captain of the Guard? What a very
handsome man he was, to be sure!'

The four children had taken advantage of the moment's pause before the
crowd turned to fly, to edge themselves and drag each other into an
arched doorway.

Now they each drew a long breath and looked at the others.

'We're well out of THAT,' said Cyril.

'Yes,' said Anthea, 'but I do wish the poor men hadn't been driven back
before they could get to the King. He might have done something for
them.'

'Not if he was the one in the Bible he wouldn't,' said Jane. 'He had a
hard heart.' 'Ah, that was the Moses one,' Anthea explained. 'The Joseph
one was quite different. I should like to see Pharaoh's house. I wonder
whether it's like the Egyptian Court in the Crystal Palace.'

'I thought we decided to try to get taken on in a Temple,' said Cyril in
injured tones.

'Yes, but we've got to know someone first. Couldn't we make friends
with a Temple doorkeeper--we might give him the padlock or something. I
wonder which are temples and which are palaces,' Robert added, glancing
across the market-place to where an enormous gateway with huge side
buildings towered towards the sky. To right and left of it were other
buildings only a little less magnificent.

'Did you wish to seek out the Temple of Amen Ra?' asked a soft voice
behind them, 'or the Temple of Mut, or the Temple of Khonsu?'

They turned to find beside them a young man. He was shaved clean from
head to foot, and on his feet were light papyrus sandals. He was clothed
in a linen tunic of white, embroidered heavily in colours. He was gay
with anklets, bracelets, and armlets of gold, richly inlaid. He wore
a ring on his finger, and he had a short jacket of gold embroidery
something like the Zouave soldiers wear, and on his neck was a gold
collar with many amulets hanging from it. But among the amulets the
children could see none like theirs.

'It doesn't matter which Temple,' said Cyril frankly.

'Tell me your mission,' said the young man. 'I am a divine father of the
Temple of Amen Ra and perhaps I can help you.'

'Well,' said Cyril, 'we've come from the great Empire on which the sun
never sets.'

'I thought somehow that you'd come from some odd, out-of-the-way spot,'
said the priest with courtesy.

'And we've seen a good many palaces. We thought we should like to see a
Temple, for a change,' said Robert.

The Psammead stirred uneasily in its embroidered bag.

'Have you brought gifts to the Temple?' asked the priest cautiously.

'We HAVE got some gifts,' said Cyril with equal caution. 'You see
there's magic mixed up in it. So we can't tell you everything. But we
don't want to give our gifts for nothing.'

'Beware how you insult the god,' said the priest sternly. 'I also can
do magic. I can make a waxen image of you, and I can say words which, as
the wax image melts before the fire, will make you dwindle away and at
last perish miserably.'

'Pooh!' said Cyril stoutly, 'that's nothing. _I_ can make FIRE itself!'

'I should jolly well like to see you do it,' said the priest
unbelievingly.

'Well, you shall,' said Cyril, 'nothing easier. Just stand close round
me.'

'Do you need no preparation--no fasting, no incantations?' The priest's
tone was incredulous.

'The incantation's quite short,' said Cyril, taking the hint; 'and as
for fasting, it's not needed in MY sort of magic. Union Jack, Printing
Press, Gunpowder, Rule Britannia! Come, Fire, at the end of this little
stick!'

He had pulled a match from his pocket, and as he ended the incantation
which contained no words that it seemed likely the Egyptian had ever
heard he stooped in the little crowd of his relations and the priest and
struck the match on his boot. He stood up, shielding the flame with one
hand.

'See?' he said, with modest pride. 'Here, take it into your hand.'

'No, thank you,' said the priest, swiftly backing. 'Can you do that
again?'

'Yes.'

'Then come with me to the great double house of Pharaoh. He loves good
magic, and he will raise you to honour and glory. There's no need of
secrets between initiates,' he went on confidentially. 'The fact is,
I am out of favour at present owing to a little matter of failure of
prophecy. I told him a beautiful princess would be sent to him from
Syria, and, lo! a woman thirty years old arrived. But she WAS a
beautiful woman not so long ago. Time is only a mode of thought, you
know.'

The children thrilled to the familiar words.

'So you know that too, do you?' said Cyril.

'It is part of the mystery of all magic, is it not?' said the priest.
'Now if I bring you to Pharaoh the little unpleasantness I spoke of will
be forgotten. And I will ask Pharaoh, the Great House, Son of the Sun,
and Lord of the South and North, to decree that you shall lodge in the
Temple. Then you can have a good look round, and teach me your magic.
And I will teach you mine.'

This idea seemed good--at least it was better than any other which at
that moment occurred to anybody, so they followed the priest through the
city.

The streets were very narrow and dirty. The best houses, the priest
explained, were built within walls twenty to twenty-five feet high,
and such windows as showed in the walls were very high up. The tops of
palm-trees showed above the walls. The poor people's houses were little
square huts with a door and two windows, and smoke coming out of a hole
in the back.

'The poor Egyptians haven't improved so very much in their building
since the first time we came to Egypt,' whispered Cyril to Anthea.

The huts were roofed with palm branches, and everywhere there were
chickens, and goats, and little naked children kicking about in the
yellow dust. On one roof was a goat, who had climbed up and was eating
the dry palm-leaves with snorts and head-tossings of delight. Over every
house door was some sort of figure or shape.

'Amulets,' the priest explained, 'to keep off the evil eye.'

'I don't think much of your "nice Egypt",' Robert whispered to Jane;
'it's simply not a patch on Babylon.'

'Ah, you wait till you see the palace,' Jane whispered back.

The palace was indeed much more magnificent than anything they had yet
seen that day, though it would have made but a poor show beside that
of the Babylonian King. They came to it through a great square pillared
doorway of sandstone that stood in a high brick wall. The shut doors
were of massive cedar, with bronze hinges, and were studded with bronze
nails. At the side was a little door and a wicket gate, and through
this the priest led the children. He seemed to know a word that made the
sentries make way for him.

Inside was a garden, planted with hundreds of different kinds of trees
and flowering shrubs, a lake full of fish, with blue lotus flowers at
the margin, and ducks swimming about cheerfully, and looking, as Jane
said, quite modern.

'The guard-chamber, the store-houses, the queen's house,' said the
priest, pointing them out.

They passed through open courtyards, paved with flat stones, and the
priest whispered to a guard at a great inner gate.

'We are fortunate,' he said to the children, 'Pharaoh is even now in
the Court of Honour. Now, don't forget to be overcome with respect and
admiration. It won't do any harm if you fall flat on your faces. And
whatever you do, don't speak until you're spoken to.'

'There used to be that rule in our country,' said Robert, 'when my
father was a little boy.'

At the outer end of the great hall a crowd of people were arguing with
and even shoving the Guards, who seemed to make it a rule not to let
anyone through unless they were bribed to do it. The children heard
several promises of the utmost richness, and wondered whether they would
ever be kept.

All round the hall were pillars of painted wood. The roof was of cedar,
gorgeously inlaid. About half-way up the hall was a wide, shallow step
that went right across the hall; then a little farther on another; and
then a steep flight of narrower steps, leading right up to the throne on
which Pharaoh sat. He sat there very splendid, his red and white double
crown on his head, and his sceptre in his hand. The throne had a canopy
of wood and wooden pillars painted in bright colours. On a low, broad
bench that ran all round the hall sat the friends, relatives, and
courtiers of the King, leaning on richly-covered cushions.

The priest led the children up the steps till they all stood before the
throne; and then, suddenly, he fell on his face with hands outstretched.
The others did the same, Anthea falling very carefully because of the
Psammead.

'Raise them,' said the voice of Pharaoh, 'that they may speak to me.'

The officers of the King's household raised them.

'Who are these strangers?' Pharaoh asked, and added very crossly, 'And
what do you mean, Rekh-mara, by daring to come into my presence while
your innocence is not established?'

'Oh, great King,' said the young priest, 'you are the very image of
Ra, and the likeness of his son Horus in every respect. You know the
thoughts of the hearts of the gods and of men, and you have divined
that these strangers are the children of the children of the vile and
conquered Kings of the Empire where the sun never sets. They know a
magic not known to the Egyptians. And they come with gifts in their
hands as tribute to Pharaoh, in whose heart is the wisdom of the gods,
and on his lips their truth.'

'That is all very well,' said Pharaoh, 'but where are the gifts?'

The children, bowing as well as they could in their embarrassment at
finding themselves the centre of interest in a circle more grand, more
golden and more highly coloured than they could have imagined possible,
pulled out the padlock, the Necessaire, and the tie-clip. 'But it's not
tribute all the same,' Cyril muttered. 'England doesn't pay tribute!'

Pharaoh examined all the things with great interest when the chief of
the household had taken them up to him. 'Deliver them to the Keeper of
the Treasury,' he said to one near him. And to the children he said--

'A small tribute, truly, but strange, and not without worth. And the
magic, O Rekh-mara?'

'These unworthy sons of a conquered nation...' began Rekh-mara.

'Nothing of the kind!' Cyril whispered angrily.

'... of a vile and conquered nation, can make fire to spring from dry
wood--in the sight of all.'

'I should jolly well like to see them do it,' said Pharaoh, just as the
priest had done.

