
"If Utes come, sure to find traces," the chief said. "Many horses in
valley make tracks as plain as noonday. Gold valley bad place for
fight."

"That is so," Jerry agreed. "We should not have a show there. Even if we
made a log-house, and it would be a dog-goned trouble to carry up the
logs,--we might be shut up in it, and the red-skins would only have to
lie round and shoot us down if we came out. I reckon we had best stay
here after all, Harry. We could keep them outside the range of our
rifles anyhow by day."

"I don't see that that would be much good to us, Jerry; for if they came
by day they would not find us here. Still I don't know that it ain't
best for us to stay here; it would give us a lot of trouble to build a
place. I reckon two of us had better stay here all the day with the
horses. If the red-skins come, they can fire a couple of shots, and we
shall hear them up at the washing-place. The red-skins would be safe to
draw off for a bit to talk it over before they attacked, as they would
not know how many there were among the trees. That would give the rest
time to come down."

It took three days' hard work to saw the planks and make the cradle, and
troughs sufficiently long to lead the water down into it from the stream
higher up. These were roughly but strongly made, the joints being
smeared with clay to prevent the water from running through. A dam was
then made to keep back the water above the spot where they intended to
begin, which was about fifty yards below the quartz vein, and from this
dam the trough was taken along on strong trestles to the cradle.

The horses were brought into the camp at daybreak every morning and tied
up to the trees, and were let out again at nightfall. Tom remained in
camp, the chief being with him. The latter, however, was, during the
time Harry was away, twice absent for a day on hunting excursions lower
down the valley, which was there thickly wooded. The first time, he
returned with the hams and a considerable portion of the rest of the
flesh of a bear. The second time, he brought up the carcass of a deer.

"How far does the valley run?" Tom asked.

"Valley last ten miles. Sides get steep and high, then canyon begin."

"That will run right down to the Colorado?"

The chief nodded. "Leaping Horse go no farther. Canyon must go down to
the river."

"How far is it before the sides of the valley get too steep to climb?"

"Two miles from here. Men could climb another mile or two, horses not."

"Is there much game down there, chief?"

The Seneca nodded.

"That is a comfort, we sha'n't be likely to run out of fresh meat."

The chief was very careful in choosing the wood for the fire, so that in
the daytime no smoke should be seen rising from the trees. When the dead
wood in the clump of trees was exhausted he rode down the valley each
day, and returned in an hour with a large faggot fastened behind him on
the horse. He always started before daybreak, so as to reduce the risk
of being seen from the hills. On the sixth day the men began their work
at the gravel. The bottle of mercury was emptied into the cradle, the
bottom of which had been made with the greatest care, so as to prevent
any loss from leakage. Two of the men brought up the gravel in buckets
and pans, until the cradle was half full. Then water was let in, and the
third man rocked the machine and kept on removing the coarse stuff that
worked up to the top, while the others continued bringing up fresh
gravel.

"Well, what luck?" Tom asked, when they returned in the evening.

"We have not cleaned up yet; we shall let it run for three or four days
before we do. We are only on the surface yet, and the stuff wouldn't pay
for the trouble of washing out."

On the eighth day after their departure Harry and Hunting Dog returned.

"Well, boys, it is all stowed away safely," he said. "I know the Major
well, and he let me have a big chest, which he locked up, after I had
put the bags in, and had it stowed away in the magazine; so there is no
fear of its being touched. Any signs of the red-skins?"

"Nary a sign. We have none of us been up the valley beyond this, so that
unless they come right down here, they would find no trail. The horses
are always driven down the valley at night."

"How is the work going on, Jerry?"

"We began washing two days ago; to-morrow night we shall clean up. We
all think it is going to turn out pretty good, for we have seen gold in
the sand several times as we have carried it up in the pails."

The next day Tom went up with the others, the Indians remaining in camp.
Two men now worked at the cradle, while the other three brought up the
sand and gravel. Towards evening they began the work of cleaning up. No
more stuff was brought up to the machine, but the water was still run
into it. As fast as the shaking brought the rough gravel to the top it
was removed, until only a foot of sand remained at the bottom. The water
was now stopped and the sand dug out, and carefully washed in the pans
by hand. At the bottom of each pan there remained after all the sand had
been removed a certain amount of gold-dust, the quantity increasing as
the bottom was approached. The last two panfuls contained a considerable
amount.

"It does not look much," Tom said when the whole was collected together.

"It is heavy stuff, lad," Harry replied. "What do you think there is,
Jerry? About twelve ounces, I should fancy."

"All that, Harry; nigher fourteen, I should think."

The pan was now put at the bottom of the cradle, a plug pulled out, and
the quicksilver run into it. A portion of this was poured on
wash-leather, the ends of which were held up by the men so as to form a
bag. Harry took the leather, and holding it over another pan twisted it
round and round. As the pressure on the quicksilver increased it ran
through the pores of the leather in tiny streams, until at last a lump
of pasty metal remained. This was squeezed again and again, until not a
single globule of quicksilver passed through the leather. The ball,
which was of the consistency of half-dried mortar was then taken out,
and the process repeated again and again until the whole of the
quicksilver had been passed through the leather. Six lumps of amalgam
about the size of small hens' eggs remained.

"Is that good, uncle?" Tom asked.

"Very fair, lad; wonderfully good indeed, considering we have not got
down far yet. I should say we shall get a pound and a half of gold out
of it."

"But how does the gold get into it, uncle?"

"There is what is called an affinity between quicksilver and gold. The
moment gold touches quicksilver it is absorbed by it, just as a drop of
water is taken up by a lump of salt. It thickens the quicksilver, and as
it is squeezed through the leather the quicksilver is as it were
strained out, and what remains behind becomes thicker and thicker,
until, as you see, it is almost solid. It is no good to use more
pressure, for if you do a certain amount of the gold would be squeezed
through the leather. You see, as the stuff in the cradle is shaken, the
gold being heavier than the sand finds its way down to the bottom, and
every particle that comes in contact with the quicksilver is swallowed
up by it."

"And how do you get the quicksilver out of those lumps?"

"We put them in one of those clay crucibles you saw, with a pinch of
borax, cover them up, and put them in a heap of glowing embers. That
evaporates the quicksilver, and leaves the gold behind in the shape of a
button." This was done that evening, and when the buttons were placed in
the scales they just turned the two-pound weight.

"Well, boys, that is good enough for anything," Harry said. "That, with
the dust, makes a pound a day, which is as good as the very best stuff
in the early days of California."

They worked steadily for the next seven weeks. Contrary to their
expectations the gravel was but little richer lower down than they had
found it at the end of the first wash-up, but continued about equally
good, and the result averaged about a pound weight of gold a day. This
was put into little bags of deer-skin, each containing five pounds'
weight, and these bags were distributed among the saddle-bags, so that
in case of sudden disturbance there would be no risk of their being left
behind. The Indians took it by turns to hunt; at other times they
remained on guard in camp, Tom only staying when one of them was away.
One day when the mining party stopped work, and sat down to eat some
bread and cold meat,--which they had from the first brought up, so as to
save them the loss of time entailed by going to the camp and back,--the
report of a gun came upon their ears. All started to their feet and
seized their rifles, and then stood listening intently. A minute later
two more shots were heard at close intervals.

"Red-skins for sure!" Jerry exclaimed. "I thought as how our luck were
too good to last." They started at a run down the little valley, and
only paused when they reached its mouth. Harry then advanced cautiously
until he could obtain a view of the main valley. He paused for a minute
and then rejoined his companions.

"There are fifty of them," he said, "if there is one. They are Utes in
their war-paint. They are a bit up the valley. I think if we make a rush
we can get to the trees before they can cut us off."

"We must try anyhow," Sam Hicks said, "else they will get the two
Indians and our horses and saddles and all. Just let us get breath for a
moment, and then we will start."

"Keep close together as you run," Harry said, "and then if they do come
up we can get back to back and make a fight of it." After a short pause
they started. They had not gone twenty yards when a loud yell proclaimed
that the Indians had seen them. They had, however, but three hundred
yards to run, while the Utes were double that distance from the clump.

When the miners were within fifty yards of the trees two rifle-shots
rang out, and two of the Utes, who were somewhat ahead of the rest; fell
from their horses, while the rest swerved off, seeing that there was no
hope of cutting the party off. A few more yards and the miners were
among the trees.

"So the Utes have found us out, chief," Harry said as he joined Leaping
Horse, who had just reloaded his ride.

"Must have tracked us. They are a war-party," the Seneca replied.
"Hunter must have found tracks and taken news back to the villages."

"Well, we have got to fight for it, that is clear enough," Harry said.
"Anyhow, now they see there are seven of us they are not likely to
attack until it gets dark, so we have time to think over what had best
be done. We had just begun our meal when we heard your shot, and the
best thing we can do is to have a good feed at once. We may be too busy
later on."

The chief said a word to the young Indian, and, leaving him on the
watch, accompanied the others to the fire. They had scarcely sat down
when Hunting Dog came up.

"More Utes," he said briefly, pointing across the valley.

They at once went to the outer line of trees. On the brow of the rise
opposite were a party of horsemen between twenty and thirty strong.

"That shows they have learnt all about our position," Harry said. "Those
fellows have been lying in wait somewhere over the hill to cut us off if
we took to our horses on seeing the main body. Let us have a look the
other side."

Crossing the clump of trees, they saw on the brow there another party of
Utes.

"I reckon they must have crossed that valley we were working in just
after we got through," Jerry said. "It is mighty lucky they did not come
down on us while we were washing, for they could have wiped us all out
before we had time to get hold of our guns. Well, Harry, we are in a
pretty tight fix, with fifty of them up the valley and five-and-twenty
or so on each side of us. We shall have to be dog-goned smart if we are
to get out of this scrape."

"Hand me your rifle, Tom," his uncle said, "it carries farther than
mine, and I will give those fellows a hint that they had best move off a
bit."

Steadying his piece against a tree, he took a careful aim and fired. One
of the Indians swerved in his saddle, and then fell forward on the neck
of his horse, which turned and galloped off with the rest.

"Now we will have our meal and take council, chief," Harry said as he
turned away. "If we have got to fight there is no occasion to fight
hungry."

The fire was made up; there was no need to be careful now. Strips of
deer's flesh were hung over it, and the meal was soon ready. But little
was said while it was being eaten, then they all lighted their pipes and
each put a pannikin of hot tea beside him.

"Now, chief," Harry said, "have you arrived at any way out of this? It
is worse than it was the last time we got caught in this valley."

The chief shook his head. "No good fight here," he said; "when night
come they creep up all round."

"Yes, I see that we have got to bolt, but the question is, how? If we
were to ride they would ride us down, that is certain. Jerry and Tom
might possibly get away, though that ain't likely. Their critters are
good, but nothing downright extraordinary, and the chances are that some
of the Utes have got faster horses than theirs. As for the rest of us,
they would have us before we had ridden an hour."

"That ain't to be thought of," Jerry said. "It seems to me our best
chance would be to leave the critters behind, and to crawl out the
moment it gets dark, and try and get beyond them."

"They will close in as soon as it gets dark, Jerry. They will know well
enough that that is the time we shall be moving. I reckon we should not
have a chance worth a cent of getting through. What do you say, chief?"

Leaping Horse nodded in assent.

"Well, then," Sam Hicks said, "I vote we mount our horses and go right
at them. I would rather do that and get rubbed out in a fair fight than
lie here until they crawl up and finish us."

No one answered, and for some minutes they smoked on without a word
being spoken, then Harry said:

"There is only one chance for us that I can see, and that is to mount
now and to ride right down the valley. The chief says that in some
places it is not more than fifty yards wide, with steep cliffs on each
side, and we could make a much better fight there, for they could only
attack us in front. There would be nothing for them then but to dismount
and close in upon us from tree to tree, and we could make a running
fight of it until we come to the mouth of the canyon. There must be
places there, that we ought to be able to hold with our seven rifles
against the lot of them."

"Bully for you, Harry! I reckon that would give us a chance anyhow. That
is, if we ain't cut off before we get to the wood."

"Let us have a look round and see what they are doing," Harry said. "Ah!
here comes Hunting Dog. He will tell us all about it."

"Utes on hills all gone up and joined the others," the young Indian said
as he came up.

"It could not be better news!" Harry exclaimed. "I reckon they have
moved away to tempt us to make a start for the fort, for they know if we
go that way they will have us all, sure. They have not reckoned on our
riding down the valley, for they will be sure we must have found out
long ago that there ain't any way out of it. Well, we had best lose no
time. There is some meat ready, Hunting Dog, and you had best fill up
while we get ready for a start."

The blankets and buffalo rugs were wrapped up and strapped behind the
saddles, as soon as these were placed behind the horses. They had only a
small quantity of meat left, as the chief was going out hunting the next
morning, but they fastened this, and eighty pounds of flour that still
remained, on to one of the pack-horses. They filled their powder-horns
from the keg, and each put three or four dozen bullets into his
holsters, together with all the cartridges for their pistols; the rest
of the ammunition was packed on another horse. When all was completed
they mounted.

"We may get a couple of hundred yards more start before we are seen,"
Harry said. "Anyhow, we have got five hundred yards, and may reckon on
making the two miles to where the valley narrows before they catch us."

The instant, however, they emerged from the wood, two loud yells were
heard from Indians who had been left lying down on watch at the top of
the slopes on either side. Sam, who was the worst shot of the party, had
volunteered to lead the string of pack-horses, while Ben was ready to
urge them on behind.

"You may want to stop some of the leading varmint, and I should not be
much good at that game, so I will keep straight on without paying any
attention to them."

A loud answering yell rose from the Indians up the valley.

"We shall gain fifty yards or so before they are fairly in the saddle,"
Harry said as they went off at the top of their speed, the horses
seeming to know that the loud war-cry boded danger. They had gone half a
mile before they looked round. The Indians were riding in a confused
mass, and were some distance past the grove the miners had left, but
they still appeared as far behind as they had been when they started.
Another mile and the mass had broken up; the best-mounted Indians had
left the rest some distance behind, and considerably decreased the gap
between them and the fugitives. Another five minutes and the latter
reached the wood, that began just where the valley narrowed and the
cliffs rose almost perpendicularly on each side. As soon as they did so
they leapt from their horses, and each posting himself behind a tree
opened fire at their pursuers, the nearest of whom were but two hundred
yards away. Four fell to the first seven shots; the others turned and
galloped back to the main body, who halted at once.

"They won't try a charge," Harry said; "it isn't in Indian nature to
come across the open with the muzzles of seven rifles pointed at them.
They will palaver now; they know they have got us in a trap, and they
will wait till night. Now, chief, I reckon that you and I and Hunting
Dog had best stay here, so that if they try, as they are pretty sure to
do, to find out whether we are here still, we can give them a hint to
keep off. The other four had better ride straight down the canyon, and go
on for a bit, to find out the best place for making a stand, and as soon
as it is dark we will go forward and join them. There will be no
occasion for us to hurry. I reckon the skunks will crawl up here soon
after it is dark; but they won't go much farther, for we might hide up
somewhere and they might miss us. In the morning they will come down on
foot, sheltering behind the trees as much as they can, till at last they
locate us."

The chief nodded his approval of the plan, and Tom and the three miners
at once started, taking the pack-horses with them. On the way down they
came upon a bear. Ben was about to fire, but Jerry said: "Best leave him
alone, Ben; we are only three miles down, and these cliffs would echo
the sound and the red-skins would hear it and know that some of us had
gone down the valley, and might make a rush at once." In an hour and a
half they came down to a spot where the valley, after widening out a
good bit, suddenly terminated, and the stream entered a deep canyon in
the face of the wall of rock that closed it in.

"I reckon all this part of the valley was a lake once," Jerry said.
"When it got pretty well full it began to run over where this canyon is
and gradually cut its way out down to the Colorado. I wonder how far it
is to the river."

They had gone but a hundred yards down the canyon when they came to a
place where a recent fall of rocks blocked it up. Through these the
stream, which was but a small one, made its way.

"There is a grist of water comes down here when the snow melts in the
spring," Ben remarked. "You can see that the rocks are worn fifty feet
up. Waal, I reckon this place is good enough for us, Jerry."

"I reckon so, too," the latter agreed. "It will be a job to get our
horses over; but we have got to do it anyhow, if we have to carry them."
The animals, however, managed to scramble up the rocks that filled the
canyon to the height of some thirty feet. The distance between the rock
walls was not more than this in width.

"We could hold this place for a year," Ben said, "if they didn't take to
chucking rocks down from above."

"Yes, that is the only danger," Jerry agreed; "but the betting is they
could not get nigh enough to the edge to look down. Still, they might do
