
"No, I'm going halfway with 'em. I'll be able to hear the sound of a
gun. Then, ef they're trapped, we must make tracks for the canoes at
once, for after following 'em to the lake they're safe to take up
their back track to see where they've come from; so, ef I hear a gun,
I'll make back here as quick as I can come."

When the three men had started silence fell on the tent. The redskins
at once lay down to sleep, and Jake followed their example. Harold
lay quiet thinking over the events which had happened to him in the
last three years, while Cameron lay with his face turned toward the
lamp with a set, anxious look on his face. Several times he crawled
to the entrance and listened when the crack made by some breaking
bough came to his ear. Hours passed and at last Harold dozed off, but
Cameron's eyes never closed until about midnight the blanket at the
entrance moved and Peter entered.

"Hae ye seen the ithers?" Cameron exclaimed.

"No, and were not likely to," Peter answered. "It was all still to
the time I came away, and afore I moved I was sure they must have
left the village. They won't come straight back, bless ye; they'll go
'way in the opposite direction and make a sweep miles round. They may
not be here for hours yet; not that there's much chance of their
tracks being traced. It has not snowed for over a week, and the snow
round the village must be trampled thick for a mile and more, with
the squaws coming and going for wood and the hunters going out on the
chase. I've crossed a dozen tracks or more on my way back. Ef it
wasn't for that we daren't have gone at all, for ef the snow was new
fallen the sight of fresh tracks would have set the first Injun that
come along a-wondering; and when a redskin begins to wonder he sets
to to ease his mind at once by finding out all about it, ef it takes
him a couple of days' sarch to do so. No, you can lie down now for
some hours. They won't be here till morning."

So saying, the scout set the example by wrapping himself up and going
to sleep, but Cameron's eyes never closed until the blanket was drawn
on one side again and in the gray light of the winter morning the
Seneca and Pearson crawled into the tent.

"What news?" Harold asked, for Cameron was too agitated to speak.

"Both gals are there," Pearson answered.

An exclamation of thankfulness broke from Harold. A sob of joy issued
from the heart of the Scotchman, and for a few minutes his lips moved
as he poured forth his silent thankfulness to God.

"Waal, tell us all about it," Peter said. "I can ask the chief any
questions afterward."

"We went on straight enough to the village," the hunter began. "It
are larger than when I saw it last, and War Eagle's influence in the
tribe must have increased. I didn't expect to find no watch, the
redskins having, so far as they knew, no enemies within five hundred
mile of 'em. There was a lot of fires burning and plenty of redskins
moving about among 'em. We kept on till we got quite close, and then
we lay up for a time below a tree at the edge of the clearing. There
were a sight too many of 'em about for the Seneca to go in yet
awhile. About half an hour arter we got there we saw two white gals
come outen one of the wigwams and stand for a while to warm
theirselves by one of the fires. The tallest of the two, well-nigh a
woman, was Nelly Welch. I knew her, in course. The other was three or
four years younger, with yaller hair over her shoulders. Nelly seemed
quiet and sad-like, but the other 'peared more at home--she laughed
with some of the redskin gals and even jined in their play. You see,"
he said, turning to Cameron, "she'd been captured longer and
children's spirits soon rise again. Arter a while they went back to
the wigwam. When the fires burned down and the crowd thinned, and
there was only a few left sitting in groups round the embers, the
Seneca started. For a long time I saw nothing of him, but once or
twice I thought I saw a figure moving among the wigwams. Presently
the fires burned quite down and the last Injun went off. I had begun
to wonder what the chief was doing, when he stood beside me. We made
tracks at once and have been tramping in a long circle all night. The
chief can tell ye his part of the business hisself."

"Well, chief, what have you found out?" Peter asked.

The Indian answered in his native tongue, which Peter interpreted
from time to time for the benefit of his white companions:

"When Deer Tail left the white hunter he went into the village. It
was no use going among the men, and he went round by the wigwams and
listened to the chattering of the squaws. The tribe were all well
contented, for the band brought back a great deal of plunder which
they had picked up on their way back from the army. They had lost no
braves and everyone was pleased. The destruction of the settlement of
the white man who had repulsed them before was a special matter for
rejoicing. The scalps of the white man and his wife are in the
village. War Eagle's son, Young Elk, is going to marry the white
girl. There are several of the braves whose heads have been turned by
the white skin and her bright eyes, but Young Elk is going to have
her. There have been great feastings and rejoicings since the return
of the warriors, but they are to be joined tomorrow by Beaver's band,
and then they will feast again. When all was quiet I went to the
wigwam where the white girls are confined. An old squaw and two of
War Eagle's daughters are with them. Deer Tail had listened while
they prepared for rest and knew on which side of the wigwam the tall
white maiden slept. He thought that she would be awake. Her heart
would be sad and sleep would not come to her soon, so he crept round
there and cut a slit in the skin close to where she lay. He put his
head in at the hole and whispered, 'Do not let the white girl be
afraid; it is a friend. Does she hear him?' She whispered, 'Yes.'
'Friends are near,' he said. 'The young warrior Harold, whom she
knows, and others, are at hand to take her away. The Iroquois will be
feasting to-morrow night. When she hears the cry of a night-owl let
her steal away with her little white sister and she will find her
friends waiting.' Then Deer Tail closed the slit and stole away to
his friend the white hunter. I have spoken."

"Jest what I expected of you, chief," Peter said warmly. "I thought
as how you'd manage to git speech with 'em somehow. If there's a
feast to-night, it's hard ef we don't manage to get 'em off."

"I suppose we must lie still all day, Peter."

"You must so," the hunter said. "Not a soul must show his nose
outside the tent except that one of the redskins'll keep watch to be
sure that no straggler has come across our tracks and followed 'em
up. Ef he was to do that, he might bring the hull gang down on us.
Ye'd best get as much sleep as ye can, for ye don't know when ye may
get another chance."

At nightfall the whole party issued from the tent and started toward
the Indian village. All arrangements had been made. It was agreed
that Pearson and the Seneca should go up to the village, the former
being chosen because he was known to Nelly. Peter and one of the
redskins were to take post a hundred yards further back, ready to
give assistance in case of alarm, while the rest were to remain about
half a mile distant. Cameron had asked that he might go with the
advance party, but upon Peter pointing out to him that his
comparatively slow rate of progression in snow-shoes would, in case
of discovery, lead to the recapture of the girls, he at once agreed
to the decision. If the flight of the girls was discovered soon after
leaving the camp, it was arranged that the Seneca and Peter should
hurry at once with them to the main body, while the other two Indians
should draw off their pursuers in another direction. In the event of
anything occurring to excite the suspicion of the Indians before
there was a chance of the girls being brought safely to the main
body, they were to be left to walk quietly back to camp, as they had
nothing to fear from the Indians. Peter and the Seneca were then to
work round by a circuitous route to the boat, where they were to be
joined by the main body, and to draw off until another opportunity
offered for repeating the attempt.

It was eight o'clock in the evening when Pearson and the Seneca
approached the village. The fires were burning high, and seated round
them were all the warriors of the tribe. A party were engaged in a
dance representing the pursuit and defeat of an enemy. The women were
standing in an outer circle, clapping their hands and raising their
voices in loud cries of applause and excitement as the dance became
faster and faster. The warriors bounded high, brandishing their
tomahawks. A better time could not have been chosen for the evasion
of the fugitives. Nelly Welch stood close to a number of Indian
girls, but slightly behind them. She held the hand of little Janet
Cameron.

Although she appeared to share in the interest of the Indians in the
dance, a close observer would have had no difficulty in perceiving
that Nelly was preoccupied. She was, indeed, intently listening for
the signal. She was afraid to move from among the others lest her
absence should be at once detected, but so long as the noise was
going on she despaired of being able to hear the signal agreed upon.
Presently an Indian brave passed close to her, and as he did so
whispered in her ear in English, "Behind your wigwam--friends there."
Then he passed on and moved round the circle as if intending to take
his seat at another point.

The excitement of the dance was momentarily increasing, and the
attention of the spectators was riveted to the movements of the
performers. Holding Janet's hand, Nelly moved noiselessly away from
the place where she had been standing. The movement was unnoticed, as
she was no longer closely watched, a flight in the depth of winter
appearing impossible. She kept round the circle till no longer
visible from the spot she had left. Then, leaving the crowd, she made
her way toward the nearest wigwams. Once behind these the girls stole
rapidly along under their shelter until they stood behind that which
they usually inhabited. Two figures were standing there. They
hesitated for a moment, but one of them advanced.

"Jack Pearson!" Nelly exclaimed, with a low cry of gladness.

"Jest that same, Nelly, and right glad to see you. But we've no time
for greeting now; the hull tribe may be after us in another five
minutes. Come along, pretty," he said, turning to Janet. "You'll find
somebody ye know close at hand."

Two minutes later the child was in her father's arms, and after a
moment's rapturous greeting between father and child and a very
delighted one between Nelly Welch and her Cousin Harold, the flight
was continued.

"How long a start do you think we may have?"

"Half an hour, maybe. The women may be some time afore they miss her,
and they'll sarch for her everywhere afore they give the alarm, as
they'll be greatly blamed for their carelessness."

There had been a pause in the flight for a few seconds when the
Seneca and Pearson arrived with the girls at the point where Peter
and the other Indian were posted, two hundred yards from the camp. Up
to this point the snow was everywhere thickly trampled, but as the
camp was left further behind the footprints would naturally become
more scarce. Here Pearson fastened to the girls' feet two pairs of
large moccasins; inside these wooden soles had been placed. They
therefore acted to some extent like snowshoes and prevented the
girls' feet from sinking deeply, while the prints which they left
bore no resemblance to their own. They were strapped on the wrong
way, so that the marks would seem to point toward the village rather
than away from it. Both girls protested that they should not be able
to get along fast in these encumbrances, but one of the men posted
himself on either side of each and assisted them along, and as the
moccasins were very light, even with the wooden soles inside, they
were soon able to move with them at a considerable pace.

Once united the whole party kept along at the top of their speed.
Peter Lambton assisted Cameron with Janet, and the girl, half-lifted
from the ground, skimmed over the surface like a bird, only touching
the snow here and there with the moccasins. Nelly Welch needed no
assistance from Harold or Pearson. During the long winters she had
often practiced on snow-shoes, and was consequently but little
encumbered with the huge moccasins, which to some extent served the
same purpose.

They had been nearly half an hour on their way when they heard a
tremendous yell burst from the village.

"They've missed you," Peter said. "Now it's a fair race. We've got a
good start and 'll git more, for they'll have to hunt up the traces
very carefully, and it may be an hour, perhaps more, before they
strike upon the right one. Ef the snow had been new fallen we should
have had 'em arter us in five minutes; but even a redskin's eye will
be puzzled to find out at night one track among such hundreds."

"I have but one fear," Pearson said to Harold.

"What is that?"

"I'm afeared that without waiting to find the tracks they may send
off half a dozen parties to the lake. They'll be sure that friends
have taken the gals away, and will know that their only chance of
escape is by the water. On land we should be hunted down to a
certainty, and the redskins, knowing that the gals could not travel
fast, will not hurry in following up the trail. So I think they'll at
once send off parties to watch the lake, and 'll like enough make no
effort to take up the trail till to-morrow morning."

This was said in a low whisper, for although they were more than two
miles from the village it was necessary to move as silently as
possible.

"You had best tell the others what you think, Pearson. It may make a
difference in our movements."

A short halt was called, and the Seneca and Peter quite agreed with
Pearson's idea.

"We'd best make for the canoe that's furthest off. When the redskins
find the others, which they're pretty sure to do, for they'll hunt
every bush, they're likely to be satisfied and to make sure they'll
ketch us at one or the other."

This much decided upon, they continued their flight, now less
rapidly, but in perfect silence. Speed was less an object than
concealment. The Indians might spread, and a party might come across
them by accident. If they could avoid this, they were sure to reach
their canoe before morning and unlikely to find the Indians there
before them.

It was about twelve miles to the spot where they had hidden the
canoe, and although they heard distant shouts and whoops ringing
through the forest, no sound was heard near them.




CHAPTER XV.


THE ISLAND REFUGE.

The night was intensely cold and still and the stars shone brightly
through the bare boughs overhead.

"Are you sure you are going all right?" Nelly asked Harold. "It is so
dark here that it seems impossible to know which way we are going."

"You can trust the Indians," Harold said. "Even if there was not a star
to be seen they could find their way by some mysterious instinct. How
you are grown, Nelly! Your voice does not seem much changed, and I am
longing to see your face."

"I expect you are more changed than I am, Harold," the girl answered.
"You have been going through so much since we last met, and you seem
to have grown so tall and big. Your voice has changed very much, too;
it is the voice of a man. How in the world did you find us here?"

Pearson had gone on ahead to speak to the Seneca, but he now joined
them again.

"You mustn't talk," he said. "I hope there's no redskins within five
miles of us now, but there's never any saying where they may be."

There was, Harold thought, a certain sharpness in the hunter's voice,
which told of a greater anxiety than would be caused by the very
slight risk of the quietly spoken words being heard by passing
redskins, and he wondered what it could be.

They were now, he calculated, within a mile of the hiding place where
they had left the boat, and they had every reason for believing that
none of the Indians would be likely to have followed the shore so
far. That they would be pursued and that, in so heavily laden a
canoe, they would have great difficulty in escaping, he was well
aware, but he relied on the craft of the hunters and Senecas for
throwing their pursuers off the trail.

All at once the trees seemed to open in front, and in a few minutes
the party reached the river. A cry of astonishment and of something
akin to terror broke from Harold. As far as the eye could reach the
lake was frozen. Their escape was cut off.

"That's jest what I've been expecting," Pearson said. "The ice had
begun to form at the edge when we landed, and three days and nights
of such frost as we've had since was enough to freeze Ontario. What
on arth's to be done?"

No one answered. Peter and the redskins had shared Pearson's anxiety,
but to Harold and Cameron the disappointment was a terrible one; as
to Jake, he left all the thinking to be done by the others. Harold
stood gazing helplessly on the expanse of ice which covered the
water. It was not a smooth sheet, but was rough and broken, as if,
while it had been forming, the wind had broken the ice up into cakes
again and again, while the frost as often had bound them together.

They had struck the river within a few hundred yards of the place
where the canoe was hidden, and, after a short consultation between
the Seneca chief, Peter Lambton, and Pearson, moved down toward that
spot.

"What are you thinking of doing?" Harold asked when they gathered
round the canoe.

"We're going to load ourselves with the ammunition and deer's flesh,"
Peter said, "and make for a rocky island which lies about a mile off
here. I noticed it as we landed. There's nothing to do but to fight
it out to the last there. It are a good place for defense, for the
redskins won't like to come out across the open, and, even covered by
a dark night, they'd show on this white surface."

"Perhaps they won't trace us."

"Not trace us!" the trapper repeated scornfully. "Why, when daylight
comes, they'll pick up our track and follow it as easy as you could
that of a wagon across the snow."

They were just starting when Harold gave a little exclamation.

"What is it, lad?"

"A flake of snow fell on my face."

All looked up. The stars had disappeared. Another flake and another
fell on the upturned faces of the party.

"Let's thank the great God," Peter said quietly. "There's a chance
for our lives yet. Half an hour's snow and the trail 'll be lost."

Faster and faster the snowflakes came down. Again the leaders
consulted.

"We must change our plans, now," Peter said, turning to the others.
"So long as they could easily follow our tracks it mattered nothing
that they'd find the canoe here; but now it's altogether different.
We must take it along with us."

The weight of the canoe was very small. The greater part of its
contents had already been removed. There was a careful look round to
see that nothing remained on the bank; then four of the men lifted it
on their shoulders, and the whole party stepped out upon the ice. The
snow was now falling heavily, and to Harold's eyes there was nothing
to guide them in the direction they were following. Even the Indians
would have been at a loss had not the Seneca, the instant the snow
began to fall, sent on one of his followers at full speed toward the
island. Harold wondered at the time what his object could be as the
Indian darted off across the ice, but now he understood. Every minute
or two the low hoot of an owl was heard, and toward this sound the
party directed their way through the darkness and snow.

