"But what was? what's the matter?"

With some little difficulty the two prefects at length succeeded in
extracting from their excited comrade an account of his wrongs; even
then such an amount of cross-questioning was necessary that it will be
best to make no attempt at a verbatim report, but rather to give the
reader a more concise version of the story.

From Browse's statement it appeared that just before supper some one had
come to his study, saying: "Smeaton wants you in the 'lab;' look sharp!"
The door had only been opened about a couple of inches, and then closed
again.  From the few words thus spoken Browse did not recognize the
voice; but thinking that his particular friend Smeaton (another
tremendous worker) was engaged in some important experiments, and needed
his assistance, he hurried away, never dreaming but that the message he
had received was genuine.

In order to reach the laboratory, it was necessary to traverse the
box-room and the gymnasium, both of which were in darkness, the lights
being turned out by the prefect on duty when the boys assembled for
preparation.

Across the first of these chambers Browse groped his way in safety.
Hardly, however, had he crossed the threshold of the second, when he was
suddenly seized and held fast by several strong pairs of hands.
His indignant expostulations were met with a titter of suppressed
laughter; he was roughly forced down upon his knees, and while in this
position what seemed like two buckets of cold water were emptied over
his devoted head.  This having been done, he was dragged to his feet,
thrust back into the box-room, and the door leading into the gymnasium
was slammed to and locked on the inside.  From first to last not a word
had been spoken, and at the very commencement of the struggle Browse's
spectacles had been knocked off.  These two circumstances had entirely
prevented him from recognizing the shadowy figures of his assailants.
He made one attempt to force the door open, but finding it securely
fastened, had come straight away to the captain's study.

"It's that Thurston and some of his gang," he repeated in conclusion;
"they did it to pay me out for interfering with their noisy meetings."

Allingford and John Acton sprang to their feet.  The idea that the rowdy
element should be so powerful in Ronleigh that a Sixth Form boy could
with impunity be seized and drenched with cold water, was not very
pleasing to one who was largely responsible for the order of the school,
and the captain's face was as black as thunder.

"All right!" he exclaimed; "leave this to me.  Go and change your
clothes."

The two prefects hurried down the passage.

"Wait a minute," said Allingford.  "Which is Thurston's study?"

Acton knocked at the door; and receiving no answer, pushed it open and
looked in.  The room was empty.

"Come on," cried Allingford; "the 'gym!'  They may be there still."

They rushed down the stairs, scattering a group of small boys who were
roasting chestnuts at the gas-jet in the passage, and on through the
box-room, but only to find the door on the other side standing
wide open, and the gymnasium itself silent and deserted--two empty
water-cans, lying in a big pool of wet on the cement floor, being the
only remaining traces of the recent outrage.

"They're gone," said Acton.  "What shall we do?"

"We'll find one of them, at all events," replied his companion; and
returning once more to the neighbourhood of the studies, he shouted,--

"_Thurston!_"

There was a faint "Hullo!" and a moment later a door opened half-way
down the passage.

"Well, what d'you want?"

Allingford walked quickly forward.  "Look here," he demanded sternly,
"where have you been? What have you been doing?"

"Doing!" echoed Thurston; "why, I've been sitting here for the last two
hours with old Smeaton.  I asked him to let me come and work in his
study to-night.  There's some of this Ovid I can't get on with, and he
promised he'd help me out with it if I'd tell him what it was I didn't
understand."

The captain hesitated a moment, rather nonplussed by this unexpected
reply.  "I believe you know something about this affair with Browse," he
continued.  "Who did it?"

"Who did what?" demanded Thurston snappishly.  "If you mean when he came
banging at my study door last night--"

"No, I don't mean that," interrupted Allingford.  "I mean this
blackguard's trick that was played on him to-night."

"I don't know what you're talking about," retorted Thurston angrily.
"Look here, Allingford, I'll thank you not to call me a blackguard for
nothing, for I suppose that's what you're driving at.  If you don't
think I'm speaking the truth, ask Smeaton.  I suppose you'll take his
word, if you won't take mine."

Smeaton, whose veracity it was impossible to doubt, confirmed the last
speaker's assertions, and Allingford and Acton were forced to beat a
retreat, feeling that they had certainly been worsted in the
encounter.

"What's to be done?" asked Acton, as they re-entered the captain's
study.

"I don't know," answered the other, flinging himself into a chair.
"The only thing I can see is to report it to the doctor."

"Oh, I shouldn't do that; it's more a piece of personal spite than any
disorder and breach of rule, like that reading-room affair.  I think
it's a thing which ought to be put down by the fellows themselves.
Who was in Thurston's study last night?"

"I don't know.  It may have been those fellows Gull and Hawley, but you
can't accuse them without some evidence; you see what I got just now for
tackling Thurston.  Ever since the elections there seem to be a lot of
fellows bent on bringing the place to the dogs.  Thurston's hand and
glove with the whole lot of them, and it's hard to say who did this
thing to Browse."

A report of what had happened was rapidly spreading all over the school.
One by one the other prefects dropped in to the captain's study to talk
the matter over.  Most of them were inclined to agree with Acton in
considering it a thing to be taken up by the boys themselves, and the
discussion was continued till bedtime.

"Well, I'll tell you what I think I'd better do," said Allingford,
preparing to wish his companions good-night.  "I'll report it to the
doctor, and ask him not to take any steps in the matter until we've
had a chance of inquiring into it ourselves."

The story of Browse's mishap, as we have just said, soon passed from
mouth to mouth, until it was common property throughout the college.
The remarks which the news elicited were often of an entirely opposite
nature, according to the character of the boys who made them.  Noaks and
Mouler laughed aloud, declaring it a rare good joke; but to the credit
of the Ronleians of that generation be it said, the majority shook their
heads, and muttered, "Beastly shame!"  "What'll be done?" was the
question asked on all sides.  "Will it be reported to the doctor?"

"If it is," said "Rats," "we shall lose another half-holiday.  Confound
those fellows, whoever they are! I should like to see them all jolly
well kicked."

On the following day the first assembly for morning school passed
without anything happening, though every one looked rather anxiously
towards the head-master's throne as Dr. Denson took his seat.

The brazen voice of the bell had just proclaimed the eleven o'clock
interval, when the Triple Alliance, hurrying with their companions of
the Lower Fourth along the main corridor leading to the schoolroom,
found that the passage was nearly blocked by a large crowd of boys
standing round the notice-board.

"Hullo!" said Diggory, "another rhyme?"

This time, however, the placard was in good plain prose, and ran as
follows:--

                           "NOTICE.

         "A meeting of the whole school will take place
          directly after dinner in the gymnasium.  A full
          attendance is urgently requested, as the matter for
          consideration is of great importance.

                      "A. R. ALLINGFORD."

"Humph," muttered Fletcher senior to himself, as he turned on his heel
after reading the notice, "the fat's in the fire now, and no mistake."



CHAPTER XVII.


DIGGORY READS THE CIPHER.

The gymnasium was filled with a dense crowd of boys; "Rats," Maxton,
and some other members of the Lower Fourth were fighting for seats on
the parallel bars, and throughout tho whole assembly there was a subdued
murmur of interest and expectation.  The last gathering of the kind had
been a court-martial held some two years previously on a boy suspected
of stealing.  Old stagers, in a patronizing manner, related what had
happened to their younger comrades, adding, "What, weren't you here
_then?_  Well, you are a kid!" and forgetting to mention that at the
time they themselves were wearing knickerbockers, and doing simple
arithmetic in the lowest form.

At one end of the room was a big chest containing dumb-bells and
single-sticks, and Allingford, mounting on the top of this as the last
stragglers from the dining-hall joined the assembly, called for silence.

There was no attempt at eloquence or self-assertion in Allingford's
remarks; brief they were almost to bluntness, but well suited to the
audience to whom they were addressed.  It was the old, well-tried
captain of Ronleigh who spoke, and the boys of Ronleigh who listened,
and the manner in which the words were given and received might have
reminded one of a speech of Sir Colin Campbell's in the Indian Mutiny,
and the answer of the Highlanders he addressed:--

"Ninety-third, you are my own lads; I rely on you to do yourselves and
me credit."

"Ay, ay, Sir Colin; ye ken us, and we ken you."

"I think you all know," began the captain, "the reason of this meeting
being called together.  Last night Browse was set on in this room--in
the dark, mind you--knocked down, and drenched with cold water.
Some fellows may think it a good joke.  I don't; I think the fellows who
did it were cads and cowards.  I reported the matter to the doctor, and
he consented to act in accordance with the wishes of the prefects, and
leave the matter in the hands of the boys themselves rather than inquire
into it himself, which would probably only have meant another punishment
for the whole school."  ("Hear, hear!")

"Now, what I want to say is this.  I've been here a good many years--
longer than any one, except Oaks and Rowlands and two or three more.
I love the place, and I'm proud of it.  I'd sooner be captain of
Ronleigh than of any other public school you could mention" (cheers);
"but I tell you plainly, the place is going down.  There's been a good
deal too much of this rowdy element showing lately, and it's high time
it was put a stop to.

"Some of you, I know, have lately taken a dislike to me, and think I
don't act rightly."  ("No, no!")  "If I'm to blame, I'm sorry for it,
for I've always tried to do my best.  I ask you not to look upon this
matter as a personal affair, either of mine or of any of the other
prefects, but to consider only the welfare of the school.  I say again
that if Ronleigh is to retain its reputation, and be kept from going to
the dogs, it's high time these underhanded bits of foul play like the
reading-room row and this attack on Browse were put a stop to; and I beg
you all to join in taking measures to prevent anything of the kind
occurring again in the future."

The speaker concluded his remarks amid a general outburst of applause.

"So we will," cried several voices; "three cheers for old Ally!"

"In my opinion," began Oaks, as soon as order was restored, "the first
thing is to try to find out who did it; surely a fellow can't be set on
by three or four others without somebody knowing something about it.--
Haven't you yourself any idea who it was, Browse?"

"Well, I can't swear," answered Browse readily.  "I couldn't see,
because it was dark, and my spectacles were knocked off; but I'm pretty
certain it was some of Thurston's lot--Gull, or Hawley, or some of those
fellows.  They did it because I complained when they kicked up a row and
interfered with my work."

This reply created a great sensation, and the air was rent with a storm
of groans, cheers, and hisses.

Oaks, who seemed to have taken upon himself the duties of counsel for
the prosecution, held up his hand to procure silence.

"Shut up!" he exclaimed; "every one will be heard in time.  Browse
thinks it might have been Gull, Thurston, or Hawley.--Now, Gull, what
have you got to say?  Where were you last night?"

"In bed, asleep," answered Gull promptly.

There was a laugh.

"I don't mean that.  What we want to know is, what were you doing after
'prep'?"

"Well, I was about some private business of my own."

"What was it?"

"I don't see why I should tell you all my private affairs."

"Well, in this instance we mean to know; so out with it.  What were you
doing directly after 'prep' last night?"

There was a hush of expectation.  Every one thought an important
disclosure was about to be made.

"All right," answered Gull calmly; "if you must know, I'll tell you.
I was in the matron's room, getting her to sew two buttons on my
waistcoat."

A roar of laughter interrupted the proceedings; the defence had scored
heavily.  Oaks was for the moment completely nonplussed, and Thurston
seized the opportunity of making a counter-attack.  He strode forward,
and mounting the chest addressed the assembly as follows:--

"Gentlemen, however low Ronleigh may have sunk, there is still, I
believe, left among us a certain amount of love of fair play, and
therefore I ask you to give me a hearing.  The saying goes, 'Give a dog
a bad name and then hang him.'  I'm a dog on which certain people have
been good enough to bestow a bad name.  I know I've got it, and to tell
you the truth I don't much care.  All the same, I don't see why I should
be hung for a thing which is no fault of mine.  You've just heard what
Gull's had to say.  I can prove that I was in Smeaton's study when this
thing happened; and I daresay, if Hawley is to be cross-examined, he'll
