might be two days. You see, Peter, a lad who gets a crack on the head
like yours lies still and asleep for a long time. Besides, it don't
make any difference to you how long we've been out. So, just you stay
in your bunk a little while longer, and Miguel will bring you
something to eat and drink."

"Thank you, captain. You're almost a father to me."

"That's a good lad, Peter. I am your father, I'm the father of all my
crew, and don't forget that a father sometimes has to punish his
children, so just you stay in your bunk till you're bid to come out of
it."

"Thank you, captain. I wouldn't think of disobeying you. Besides, I'm
too weak to move yet."

The captain and Miguel went out, and Robert heard them fastening the
door on the outside. Then the darkness shut him in again, and he lay
back in his bunk. The spark of hope somewhere in his mind had grown a
little larger. His head had ceased to ache and his limbs were
free. The physical difference made a mental difference yet
greater. Although there seemed to be absolutely no way out, he would
find one.

The door was opened again, and Miguel, bearing the ship's lantern in
one hand and a plate of food in the other, came in. It was rough food
such as was served on rough ships, but Robert sat up and looked at it
hungrily. Miguel grinned, and laughed until the gold hoops in his ears
shook.

"You, Peter Smith," he said. "Me terrible glad to see you again. Miss
my old comrade. Mourn for him, and then when find him jump into the
cold river to save him."

"It's true," said Robert, "it was a long and painful parting, but here
we are, shipmates again. It was good of you, Miguel, to risk your life
to save me, and now that we've had so many polite interchanges,
suppose you save me from starving to death and pass that plate of
food."

"With ver' good will, Peter. Eat, eat with the great heartiness,
because we have ver', ver' hard work before us and for a long
time. The captain will want you to do as much work in t'ree mont' as
t'ree men do, so you can make up the t'ree mont' you have lost."

"Tell him I'm ready. I've already confessed all my sins to him."

"He won't let you work as sailor at first. He make you help me in the
cook's galley."

"I'm willing to do that too. You know I can cook. You'll remember,
Miguel, how I helped you in the Mediterranean, and how I did almost
all your work that time you were sick, when we were cruising down to
the Brazils?"

Miguel grinned.

"You have the great courage, you Peter," he said. "You always
have. Feel better now?"

"A lot, Miguel. The bread was hard, I suppose, and better potatoes
have been grown, but I didn't notice the difference. That was good
water, too. I've always thought that water was a fine drink. And now,
Miguel, hunger and thirst being satisfied, I'll get up and stretch my
limbs a while. Then I'll be ready to go to work."

"I tell you when the captain wants you. Maybe an hour from now, maybe
two hours."

He took his lantern and the empty plate and withdrew, but Robert heard
him fastening the door on the outside again. Evidently they did not
yet wholly trust the good intentions of Peter Smith, the deserter,
whom they had recaptured in the Hudson. But the spark of hope lodged
somewhere in the mind of Peter Smith was still growing and
glowing. The removal of the bonds from his wrist and ankles had
brought back a full and free circulation, and the food and water had
already restored strength to one so young and strong. He stood up,
flexed his muscles and took deep breaths.

He had no familiarity with the sea, but he was used to navigation in
canoes and boats on large and small lakes in the roughest kind of
weather, and the rocking of the schooner, which continued, did not
make him seasick, despite the close foul air of the little room in
which he was locked. He still heard the creaking of cordage and now he
heard the tumbling of waves too, indicating that the weather was
rough. He tried to judge by these sounds how fast the schooner was
moving, but he could make nothing of it. Then he strained his memory
to see if he could discover in any manner how long he had been on the
vessel, but the period of his unconsciousness remained a mystery,
which he could not unveil by a single second.

Long stay in the room enabled him to penetrate its dusk a little, and
he saw that its light and air came in normal times from a single small
porthole, closed now. Nevertheless a few wisps of mist entered the
tiny crevices, and he inferred the vessel was in a heavy fog. He was
glad of it, because he believed the schooner would move slowly at such
a time, and anything that impeded the long African journey was to his
advantage.

A period which seemed to be six hours but which he afterward knew to
be only one, passed, and his door swung back for the third time. The
face of Miguel appeared in the opening and again he grinned, until his
mouth formed a mighty slash across his face.

"You come on deck now, you Peter," he said, "captain wants you."

Robert's heart gave a mighty beat. Only those who have been shut up in
the dark know what it is to come out into the light. That alone was
sufficient to give him a fresh store of courage and hope. So he
followed Miguel up a narrow ladder and emerged upon the deck. As he
had inferred, the schooner was in a heavy fog, with scarcely any wind
and the sails hanging dead.

The captain stood near the mast, gazing into the fog. He looked
taller and more evil than ever, and Robert saw the outline of a pistol
beneath his heavy pea jacket. Several other men of various
nationalities stood about the deck, and they gave Robert malicious
smiles. Forward he saw a twelve pound brass cannon, a deadly and
dangerous looking piece. It was extremely cold on deck, too, the raw
fog seeming to be so much liquid ice, but, though Robert shivered, he
liked it. Any kind of fresh air was heaven after that stuffy little
cabin.

"How are you feeling, Peter?" asked the captain, although there was no
note of sympathy in his voice.

"Very well, sir, thank you," replied Robert, "and again I wish to make
my apologies for deserting, but the temptations of New York are very
strong, sir. The city went to my head."

"So it seems. We missed you on the voyage to Boston and back, but we
have you now. Doubtless Miguel has told you that you are to help him a
couple of days in his galley, and you'll stay there close. If you come
out before I give the word it's a belaying pin for you. But when I do
give the word you'll go back to your work as one of the cleverest
sailormen I ever had. You'll remember how you used to go out on the
spars in the iciest and slipperiest weather. None so clever at it as
you, Peter, and I'll soon see that you have the chance to show again
to all the men that you're the best sailor aboard ship."

Robert shivered mentally. He divined the plan of this villain, who
would send him in the icy rigging to sure death. He, an untrained
sailor, could not keep his footing there in a storm, and it could be
said that it was an accident, as it would be in the fulfilment though
not in the intent. But he divined something else that stopped the
mental shudder and that gave him renewed hope. Why should the captain
threaten him with a belaying pin if he did not stay in the cook's
galley for two days? To Robert's mind but one reason appeared, and it
was the fear that he should be seen on deck. And that fear existed
because they were yet close to land. It was all so clear to him that
he never doubted and again his heart leaped. He was bareheaded, but he
touched the place where his cap brim should have been and replied:

"I'll remember, captain."

"See that you do," said the man in level tones, instinct nevertheless
with hardness and cruelty.

Robert touched his forehead again and turned away with Miguel,
descending to the cook's galley, resolved upon some daring trial, he
did not yet know what. Here the Portuguese set him to work at once,
scouring pots and kettles and pans, and he toiled without complaint
until his arms ached. Miguel at last began to talk. He seemed to
suffer from the lack of companionship, and Robert divined that he was
the only Portuguese on board.

"Good helper, you Peter," he said. "It no light job to cook for twenty
men, and all of them hungry all the time."

"Have we our full crew on board, Miguel?"

"Yes, twenty men and four more, and plenty guns, plenty powder and
ball. Fine cannon, too."

Robert judged that the slaver would be well armed and well manned, but
he decided to ask no more questions at present, fearing to arouse the
suspicions of Miguel, and he worked on with shut lips. The Portuguese
himself talked--it seemed that he had to do so, as the longing for
companionship overcame him--but he did not tell the name of the
schooner or its captain. He merely chattered of former voyages and of
the ports he had been in, invariably addressing his helper as Peter,
and speaking of him as if he had been his comrade.

Robert, while apparently absorbed in his tasks, listened attentively
to all that he might hear from above He knew that the fog was as thick
as ever, and that the ship was merely moving up and down with the
swells. She might be anchored in comparatively shallow water. Now he
was absolutely sure that they were somewhere near the coast, and the
coast meant hope and a chance.

Dinner, rude but plentiful, was served for the sailors and food
somewhat more delicate for the captain in his cabin.

Robert himself attended to the captain, and he could see enough now to
know that the dark had come. He inferred there would be no objection
to his going upon deck in the night, but he made no such suggestion.
Instead he waited upon the tall man with a care and deftness that made
that somber master grin.

"I believe absence has really improved you, Peter," he said. "I
haven't been waited on so well in a long time."

"Thank you, sir," said Robert.

Secretly he was burning with humiliation. It hurt his pride terribly
to serve a rough sea captain in such a manner, but he had no choice
and he resolved that if the chance came he would pay the debt. When
the dinner or supper, whichever it might be called, was over, he went
back to the galley and cheerfully began to clear away, and to wash and
wipe dishes. Miguel gave him a compliment, saying that he had improved
since their latest voyage and Robert thanked him duly.

When all the work was done he crawled into a bunk just over the cook's
and in any other situation would have fallen asleep at once. But his
nerves were on edge, and he was not sleepy in the least. Miguel,
without taking off his clothes, lay down in the bunk beneath him, and
Robert soon heard him snoring. He also heard new sounds from above, a
whistle and a shriek and a roar combined that he did not recognize at
first, but which a little thought told him to be a growing wind and
the crash of the waves. The schooner began to dip and rise
violently. He was dizzy for a little while, but he soon recovered. A
storm! The knowledge gave him pleasure. He did not know why, but he
felt that it, too, contributed hope and a chance.

The roar of the storm increased, but Miguel, who had probably spent
nearly all his life at sea, continued to sleep soundly. Robert was
never in his life more thoroughly awake.

He sat up in his bunk, and now and then he heard the sound of voices
and of footsteps overhead, but soon they were lost entirely in the
incessant shrieking of the wind and the continuous thunder of the
great waves against the side of the schooner. In truth, it was a
storm, one of great fury. He knew that the ship although stripped to
the utmost, must be driving fast, but in what direction he had no
idea. He would have given much to know.

The tumult grew and by and by he heard orders shouted through a
trumpet. He could stand it no longer, and, leaping down, he seized the
Portuguese by the shoulder and shook him.

"Up, Miguel," he cried. "A great storm is upon us!"

The cook opened his eyes sleepily, and then sprang up, a look of alarm
on his face. While the eyes of the Portuguese were filled with fear,
he also seemed to be in a daze. It was apparent to Robert that he was
a heavy sleeper, and his long black hair falling about his forehead he
stared wildly. His aspect made an appeal to Robert's sense of humor,
even in those tense moments.

"My judgment tells me, Miguel," he shouted--he was compelled to raise
his voice to a high pitch owing to the tremendous clatter
overhead--"that there is a great storm, and the schooner is in danger!
And you know, too, that your old comrade, Peter Smith, who has sailed
the seas with you so long, is likely to be right in his opinions!"

The gaze of Miguel became less wild, but he looked at Robert with awe
and then with superstition.

"You have brought us bad luck," he exclaimed. "An evil day for us
when you came aboard."

Robert laughed. A fanciful humor seized him.

"But this is my place," he said. "I, Peter Smith, belong on board this
schooner and you know, Miguel, that you and the captain insisted on my
coming back."

"We go on deck!" cried the cook, now thoroughly alarmed by the uproar,
which always increased. He rushed up the ladder and Robert followed
him, to be blown completely off his feet when he reached the deck. But
he snatched at the woodwork, held fast, and regained an upright
position. The captain stood not far away, holding to a rope, but he
was so deeply engrossed in directing his men that he paid no attention
to Robert.

The youth cleared the mist and spray from his eyes and took a
comprehensive look. The aspect of sea and sky was enough to strike
almost any one with terror, but upon this occasion he was an
exception. He had never looked upon a wilder world, but in its very
wildness lay his hope. The icy spars from which he would slip to
plunge to his death in the chilling sea were gone, and so was far
Africa, and the slaver's hunt. He was not a seaman, his experience had
been with lakes, but one could reason from lakes to the universal
ocean, and he knew that the schooner was in a fight for life. And
involved in it was his fight for freedom.

The wind, cold as death, and sharp as a sword, blew out of the
northeast, and the schooner, heeled far over, was driving fast before
it, in spite of every effort of a capable captain and crew. The ship
rose and fell violently with the huge swells, and water that stung
like an icy sleet swept over her continually. Looking to the westward
Robert saw something that caused his heart to throb violently. It was
a dim low line, but he knew it to be land.

What land it was he had no idea, nor did he at the moment care, but
there lay freedom. Rows of breakers opening their strong teeth for the
ship might stretch between, but better the breakers than the slaver's
deck and the man hunt in the slimy African lagoons. For him the icy
wind was the breath of life, and he soon ceased to shiver. But he
became conscious of chattering teeth near him and he saw Miguel, his
face a reproduction of terror in all its aspects.

"We go!" shouted the Portuguese. "The storm drive the ship on the
breakers and she break to pieces, and all of us lost!"

Robert's fantastic spirit was again strong upon him.

"Then let us go!" he shouted back. "Better this clean, cold coast than
the fever swamps of Africa!  Hold fast, Miguel, and we'll ride in
together!"

The superstitious awe of the Portuguese deepened, and he drew away
from Robert. In the moment of terrible storm and approaching death
this could be no mortal youth who showed not fear, but instead a joy
that was near to exaltation. Then and there he was convinced that when
they had seized him and brought him aboard they had made their own
doom certain.

"In twenty minutes, we strike!" cried Miguel. "Ah, how the wind rise!
Many a year since I see such a storm!"

Spars snapped and were carried away in the foaming sea. Then the mast
went, and the crew began to launch the boats. Robert rushed to the
captain's cabin. When he served the man there he had not failed to
observe what the room contained, and now he snatched from the wall a
huge greatcoat, a belt containing a brace of pistols in a holster with
ammunition, and a small sword. He did not know why he took the sword,
but it was probably some trick of the fancy and he buckled it on with
the rest. Then he returned to the deck, where he could barely hold his
footing, the schooner had heeled so far over, and so powerful was the
wind and the driving of the spray. One of the boats had been launched
under the command of the second mate, but she was overturned almost
instantly, and all on board her were lost. Robert was just in time to
see a head bob once or twice on the surface of the sea, and then
disappear.

A second boat commanded by the first mate was lowered and seven or
eight men managed to get into it, rowing with all their might toward
an opening that appeared in the white line of foam. A third which
could take the remainder of the crew was made ready and the captain
himself would be in charge of it.

It was launched successfully and the men dropped into it, one by one,
but very fast. Miguel swung down and into a place. Robert advanced for
the same purpose, but the captain, who was still poised on the rail of
the ship, took notice of him for the first time.

"No! No, Peter!" he shouted, and even in the roar of the wind Robert
observed the grim humor in his voice. "You've been a good and faithful
sailorman, and we leave you in charge of the ship! It's a great
promotion and honor for you, Peter, but you deserve it! Handle her
well because she's a good schooner and answers kindly to a kind hand!
Now, farewell, Peter, and a long and happy voyage to you!"

A leveled pistol enforced his command to stop, and the next moment he
slid down a rope and into the boat. A sailor cut the rope and they
pulled quickly away, leaving Robert alone on the schooner. His
exultation turned to despair for a moment, and then his courage came
back. Tayoga in his place would not give up. He would pray to his
Manitou, who was Robert's God, and put complete faith in His wisdom
and mercy. Moreover, he was quit of all that hateful crew. The ship
of the slavers was beneath his feet, but the slavers themselves were
gone.

As he looked, he saw the second boat overturn, and he thought he heard
the wild cry of those about to be lost, but he felt neither pity nor
sympathy. A stern God, stern to such as they, had called them to
account. The captain's boat had disappeared in the mist and spray.

Robert, with the huge greatcoat wrapped about him clung to the stump
of the mast, which long since had been blown overboard, and watched
the white line of the breakers rapidly coming nearer, as they reached
out their teeth for the schooner. He knew that he could do nothing
more for himself until the ship struck. Then, with some happy chance
aiding him, he would drop into the sea and make a desperate try for
the land. He would throw off the greatcoat when he leaped, but
