different about it."

"Yes, we're often willing to do things by our own free will, but not
under compulsion.  The great Washington himself wrote of the evils of
slave labor.  The 'old fields' scattered all over Virginia show what it
has done for this noble commonwealth."

Harry remembered quite well similar "old fields" in Kentucky.  Slaves
were far less numerous there than in Virginia, and he was old enough to
have observed that, in addition to the wrong of slavery, they were a
liability rather than an asset.  But he too felt anew the instinctive
rebellion against being compelled to do what he would perhaps do anyhow.

General Lee talked more of the land and Harry and Dalton listened
respectfully.  Harry saw that his commander's heart turned strongly
toward it.  He knew that Jefferson had dreamed of the United States as
an agricultural community, having no part in the quarrels of other
nations, but he knew that it was only a dream.  The South, the section
that had followed Jefferson's dream, was now at a great disadvantage.
It had no ships, and it did not have the mills to equip it for the
great war it was waging.  He realized more keenly than ever the
one-sided nature of the South's development.

The general turned his horse toward the banks of the Rapidan, and a
resplendent figure came forward to meet him.  It was that incarnation
of youth and fantastic knighthood, Jeb Stuart, who had just returned
from a ride toward the north.  He wore a new and brilliant uniform and
the usual broad yellow sash about his waist.  His tunic was
embroidered, too, and his epaulets were heavy with gold.  The thick
gold braid about his hat was tied in a gorgeous loop in front.  His
hands were encased in long gloves of the finest buckskin, and he tapped
the high yellow tops of his riding boots with a little whip.

Harry always felt that Stuart did not really belong to the present. His
place was with the medieval knights who loved gorgeous armor, who
fought by day for the love of it and who sat in the evening on the
castle steps with fair ladies for the love of it, and who in the dark
listened to the troubadours below, also for the love of it.  A great
cavalry leader, he shone at his brightest in the chase, and, when there
was no fighting to be done, his were the spirits of a boy, and he was
as quick for a prank as any lad under his own command.

But Stuart, although he had joked with Jackson, never took any
liberties with Lee.  He instantly swept the ground with his plumed hat
and said in his most respectful manner:

"General, will you honor us by dining with us?  We've just returned
from a long ride northward and we've made some captures."

Lee caught a twinkle in his eye, and he smiled.

"I see no prisoners, General Stuart," he replied, "and I take it that
your captures do not mean human beings."

"No, sir, there are other things just now more valuable to us than
prisoners.  We raided a little Yankee outpost.  Nobody was hurt, but,
sir, we've captured some provisions, the like of which the Army of
Northern Virginia has not tasted in a long time.  Would you mind coming
with me and taking a look?  And bring Kenton and Dalton with you, if
you don't mind, sir."

"This indeed sounds tempting," said the commander-in-chief of the Army
of Northern Virginia.  "I accept your invitation, General Stuart, in
behalf of myself and my two young aides."

He dismounted, giving the reins of Traveller to an orderly, and walked
toward Stuart's tent, which was pitched near the river.  The "captures"
were heaped in a grassy place.

"Here, sir," said General Stuart, "are twenty dozen boxes of the finest
French sardines.  I haven't tasted sardines in a year and I love them."

"I've always liked them," said General Lee.

"And here, sir, are several cases of Yorkshire ham, brought all the way
across the sea--and for us.  It isn't as good as our Virginia ham,
which is growing scarce, but we'll like it.  And cove oysters, cases
and cases of 'em.  I like 'em almost as well as sardines."

"Most excellent."

"And real old New England pies, baked, I suppose, in Washington.  We
can warm 'em over."

"I see that you have the fire ready."

"And jars of preserves, a half-dozen kinds at least, and all of 'em
look as if two likely youngsters like Kenton and Dalton would be
anxious to get at 'em."

"You judge us rightly, General," said Harry.  "We'll show no mercy to
such prisoners as we have here."

"You wouldn't be boys and you wouldn't be human if you did," rejoined
Stuart, "would they, General?"

"They would not," replied Lee.  "One of the principal recollections of
my boyhood is that I was always hungry.  Our regular three meals a day
were not enough for us, however much we ate at one time.  Virginia,
like your own Kentucky, Harry, is full of forage, and we moved in
groups.  Now, didn't you find a lot of food in the woods and fields?"

"Oh, yes, sir," rejoined Harry with animation.  "I was hungry all the
time, too.  An hour after breakfast I was hungry again, and an hour
after dinner, which we had in the middle of the day, I was hungry once
more."

"But you knew where to go for supplies."

"Yes, sir; we had berries, strawberries, blackberries, raspberries,
gooseberries, dewberries, cherries, all of them growing wild although
some of them started tame.  And then we could forage for pears,
peaches, plums, damsons, all kinds of apples, paw paws, and then later
for the nuts, hickory nuts, walnuts, chestnuts, hazel nuts,
chinquapins, and a lot more.  We could have almost lived in the woods
and fields from early spring until late fall."

"We did the same in Virginia," said the commander-in-chief.  "I've
often thought that our forest Indians did not develop a higher
civilization, because it was so easy for them to live, save in the
depths of a hard winter.  They had most of the berries and fruits and
nuts that we white boys had.  The woods were full of game, and the
lakes and rivers full of fish.  They were not driven by the hard
necessity that creates civilization."

"Dinner is ready, sir," announced General Stuart, who had been
directing the orderlies.  "I can offer you and the others nothing but
boxes and kegs to sit on, but I can assure you that this Northern food,
some of which comes in cans, is excellent."

The two lads and General Stuart fell to work with energy.  General Lee
ate more sparingly.  Stuart was a boy himself, talking much and running
over with fun.

"Have you heard what happened to General Early, sir?" he asked the
commander-in-chief.

"Not yet."

"But you will, sir, to-morrow.  Early will be slow in sending you that
dispatch.  He hasn't had time to write it yet.  He's not through
swearing."

"General Early is a valiant and able man, but I disapprove of his
swearing."

"Why, sir, 'Old Jube' can't help it.  It's a part of his breathing, and
man cannot live without breath.  He sent one of his best aides with a
dispatch to General Hill, who is posted some distance away.  Passing
through a thick cedar wood the aide was suddenly set upon by a genuine
stage villain, large, dark and powerful, who clubbed him over the head
with the butt of a pistol, and then departed with his dispatch."

"And what happened then?"

"The aide returned to General Early with his story, but without his
dispatch.  The general believed his account, of course, but he called
him names for allowing himself to be surprised and overcome by a single
Yankee.  He cursed until the air for fifty yards about him smelled
strongly of sulphur and brimstone."

"Did he do anything more?"

"Yes, General.  He sent a duplicate of the dispatch by an aide whom he
said he could trust.  In an hour the second man came back with the same
big lump on his head and with the same story.  He had been ambushed at
the crossing of a ravine full of small cedars, and the highwayman was
undoubtedly the same, too, a big, powerful fellow, as bold as you
please."

Harry's pulse throbbed hard for a few moments, when he first heard
mention of the man.  The description, not only physical, but of manner
and action as well, answered perfectly.  He had not the slightest doubt
that it was Shepard.

"A daring deed," said General Lee.  "We must see that it is not
repeated."

"But that wasn't all of the tale, sir.  While the second man was
sitting on the bank, nursing his broken head, the Yankee Dick Turpin
read the dispatch and saw that it was a duplicate of the first.  He
became red-hot with wrath, and talked furiously about the extra and
unnecessary work that General Early was forcing upon him.  He ended by
cramming the dispatch into the man's hands, directing him to take it
back, and to tell General Early to stop his foolishness.  The aide was
a bit dazed from the blow he received and he delivered that message
word for word.  Why, sir, General Early exploded.  People who have
heard him swear for years and who know what an artist he is in
swearing, heard him then utter swear words that they had never heard
before, words invented on the spur of the moment, and in the heat of
passion, words full of pith and meaning."

"And that was all, I suppose?"

"Not by any means, sir.  General Early picked two sharpshooters and
sent them with another copy of the dispatch.  They passed the place of
the first hold-up, and next the ravine without seeing anybody.  But as
they were riding some distance further on both of their horses were
killed by shots from a small clump of pines.  Before they could regain
their feet Dick Turpin came out and covered them with his rifle--it
seems that he had one of those new repeating weapons.

"The men saw that his eye was so keen and his hand so steady that they
did not dare to move a hand to a pistol.  Then as he looked down the
sights of his rifle he lectured them.  He told them they were foolish
to come that way, when the two who came before them had found out that
it was a closed road.  He said that real soldiers learned by
experience, and would not try again to do what they had learned to be
impossible.

"Then he said that after all they were not to blame, as they had been
sent by General Early, and he made one of them who had the stub of a
pencil write on the back of the dispatch these words: 'General Jubal
Early, C. S. A.: This has ceased to be a joke.  After your first man
was stopped, it was not necessary to do anything more.  I have the
dispatch. Why insist on sending duplicate after duplicate?'  And the
two had to walk all the way back to General Early with that note,
because they didn't dare make away with the dispatch.

"I have a certain respect for that man's skill and daring, but General
Early had a series of spells.  He retired to his tent and if the
reports are not exaggerated, a continuous muttering like low thunder
came from the tent, and all the cloth of it turned blue from the
lightnings imprisoned inside."

General Lee himself smiled.

"It was certainly annoying," he said.  "I hope the dispatch was not of
importance."

"It contained nothing that will help the Yankees, but it shows that the
enemy has some spies--or at least one spy--who are Napoleons at their
trade."




CHAPTER XIII

THE COMING OF GRANT


The little dinner ended.  Despite his disapproval of General Early's
swearing, General Lee laughed heartily at further details of the
strange Yankee spy's exploits.  But it was well known that in this
particular General Early was the champion of the East.  Harry did not
know that in the person of Colonel Charles Woodville, his cousin, Dick
Mason, had encountered one of equal ability in the Southwest.

Presently General Lee and his two young aides mounted their horses for
the return.  The commander-in-chief seemed gayer than usual.  He was
always very fond of Stuart, whose high spirits pleased him, and before
his departure he thanked him for his thoughtfulness.

"Whenever we get any particularly choice shipments from the North I
shall always be pleased to notify you, General, and send you your
share," said Stuart, sweeping the air in front of him again with his
great plumed hat.  With his fine, heroic face and his gorgeous uniform
he had never looked more a knight of the Middle Ages.

General Lee smiled and thanked him again, and then rode soberly back,
followed at a short distance by his two young aides.  Although the view
of hills and mountains and valleys and river and brooks was now
magnificent, the sumach burning in red and the leaves vivid in many
colors, Lee, deeply sensitive, like all his rural forbears, to rural
beauty, nevertheless seemed not to notice it, and soon sank into deep
thought.

It is believed by many that Lee knew then that the Confederacy had
already received a mortal blow.  It was not alone sufficient for the
South to win victories.  She must keep on winning them, and the failure
at Gettysburg and the defeat at Vicksburg had put her on the defensive
everywhere.  Fewer blockade runners were getting through.  Above all,
there was less human material upon which to draw.  But he roused
himself presently and said to Harry:

"There was something humorous in the exploits of the man who held up
General Early's messengers, but the fellow is dangerous, exceedingly
dangerous at such a time."

"I've an idea who he is, sir," said Harry.

"Indeed!  What do you know?"

Then Harry told nearly all that he knew about Shepard, but not
all--that struggle in the river, and his sparing of the spy and the
filching of the map at the Curtis house, for instance--and the
commander-in-chief listened with great attention.

"A bold man, uncommonly bold, and it appears uncommonly skilled, too.
We must send out a general alarm, that is, we must have all our own
scouts and spies watching for him."

Harry said nothing, but he did not believe that anybody would catch
Shepard.  The man's achievements had been so startling that they had
created the spell of invincibility.  His old belief that he was worth
ten thousand men on the Northern battle line returned.  No movement of
the Army of Northern Virginia could escape him, and no lone messenger
could ever be safe from him.

Lee returned to his camp on Clarke's Mountain, and, a great revival
meeting being in progress, he joined it, sitting with a group of
officers.  Fitzhugh Lee, W. H. F. Lee, Jones, Rosser, Wickham, Munford,
Young, Wade Hampton and a dozen others were there.  Taylor and Marshall
and Peyton of his staff were also in the company.

The preacher was a man of singular power and earnestness, and after the
sermon he led the singing himself, in which often thirty or forty
thousand voices joined.  It was a moving sight to Harry, all these men,
lads, mostly, but veterans of many fields, united in a chorus mightier
than any other that he had ever heard.  It would have pleased Stonewall
Jackson to his inmost soul, and once more, as always, a tear rose to
his eye as he thought of his lost hero.

Harry and Dalton left their horses with an orderly and came back to the
edge of the great grove, in which the meeting was being held.  They had
expected to find St. Clair and Happy Tom there, but not seeing them,
wandered on and finally drifted apart.  Harry stood alone for a while
on the outskirts of the throng.  They were all singing again, and the
mighty volume of sound rolled through the wood.  It was not only a
singular, it was a majestic scene also to Harry.  How like unto little
children young soldiers were! and how varied and perplexing were the
problems of human nature!  They were singing with the utmost fervor of
Him who had preached continuously of peace, who was willing to turn one
cheek when the other was smitten, and because of their religious zeal
they would rush the very next day into battle, if need be, with
increased fire and zeal.

He saw a heavily built, powerful man on the outskirts, but some
distance away, singing in a deep rolling voice, but something vaguely
familiar in the figure drew his glance again.  He looked long and well
and then began to edge quietly toward the singer, who was clothed in
the faded butternut uniform that so many of the Confederate soldiers
wore.

The fervor of the singer did not decrease, but Harry noticed that he
too was moving, moving slowly toward the eastern end of the grove, the
same direction that Harry was pursuing.  Now he was sure.  He would
have called out, but his voice would not have been heard above the vast
volume of sound.  He might have pointed out the singer to others, but,
although he felt sure, he did not wish to be laughed at in case of
mistake. But strongest of all was the feeling that it had become a duel
between Shepard and himself.

He walked slowly on, keeping the man in view, but Shepard, although he
never ceased singing, moved away at about the same pace.  Harry
inferred at once that Shepard had seen him and was taking precautions.
The temptation to cry out at the top of his voice that the most
dangerous of all spies was among them was almost irresistible, but it
would only create an uproar in which Shepard could escape easily,
leaving to him a load of ridicule.

He continued his singular pursuit.  Shepard was about a hundred yards
away, and they had made half the circuit of this huge congregation.
Then the spy passed into a narrow belt of pines, and when Harry moved
forward to see him emerge on the other side he failed to reappear. He
hastened to the pines, which led some distance down a little gully, and
he was sure that Shepard had gone that way.  He followed fast, but he
could discover no sign. He had vanished utterly, like thin smoke swept
away by a breeze.

He returned deeply stirred by the appearance and disappearance--easy,
