to have it all stolen. So if you choose to come up to the Doctor with
them, I shall go with you, and tell him what I think of it."

The farmer began to take Holmes for a master; besides, he wanted to get
back to his flock. Corporal punishment was out of the question, the odds
were too great; so he began to hint at paying for the damage. Arthur
jumped at this, offering to pay anything, and the farmer immediately
valued the guinea-hen at half a sovereign.

"Half a sovereign!" cried East, now released from the farmer's grip;
"well, that is a good one! The old hen ain't hurt a bit, and she's seven
years old, I know, and as tough as whipcord; she couldn't lay another
egg to save her life."

It was at last settled that they should pay the farmer two shillings,
and his man one shilling; and so the matter ended, to the unspeakable
relief of Tom, who hadn't been able to say a word, being sick at heart
at the idea of what the Doctor would think of him; and now the whole
party of boys marched off down the footpath towards Rugby. Holmes, who
was one of the best boys in the School, began to improve the occasion.
"Now, you youngsters," said he, as he marched along in the middle of
them, "mind this; you're very well out of this scrape. Don't you go near
Thompson's barn again; do you hear?"

Profuse promises from all, especially East.

"Mind, I don't ask questions," went on Mentor, "but I rather think some
of you have been there before this after his chickens. Now, knocking
over other people's chickens, and running off with them, is stealing.
It's a nasty word, but that's the plain English of it. If the chickens
were dead and lying in a shop, you wouldn't take them, I know that, any
more than you would apples out of Griffith's basket; but there's no real
difference between chickens running about and apples on a tree, and the
same articles in a shop. I wish our morals were sounder in such matters.
There's nothing so mischievous as these school distinctions, which
jumble up right and wrong, and justify things in us for which poor boys
would be sent to prison." And good old Holmes delivered his soul on the
walk home of many wise sayings, and, as the song says,

     "Gee'd 'em a sight of good advice;"

which same sermon sank into them all, more or less, and very penitent
they were for several hours. But truth compels me to admit that East, at
any rate, forgot it all in a week, but remembered the insult which had
been put upon him by Farmer Thompson, and with the Tadpole and other
hair-brained youngsters committed a raid on the barn soon afterwards,
in which they were caught by the shepherds and severely handled, besides
having to pay eight shillings--all the money they had in the world--to
escape being taken up to the Doctor.

Martin became a constant inmate in the joint study from this time, and
Arthur took to him so kindly that Tom couldn't resist slight fits of
jealousy, which, however, he managed to keep to himself. The kestrel's
eggs had not been broken, strange to say, and formed the nucleus
of Arthur's collection, at which Martin worked heart and soul, and
introduced Arthur to Howlett the bird-fancier, and instructed him in
the rudiments of the art of stuffing. In token of his gratitude, Arthur
allowed Martin to tattoo a small anchor on one of his wrists; which
decoration, however, he carefully concealed from Tom. Before the end of
the half-year he had trained into a bold climber and good runner, and,
as Martin had foretold, knew twice as much about trees, birds, flowers,
and many other things, as our good-hearted and facetious young friend
Harry East.



CHAPTER V--THE FIGHT:

     "Surgebat Macnevisius
     Et mox jactabat ultro,
     Pugnabo tua gratia
     Feroci hoc Mactwoltro."--Etonian.

There is a certain sort of fellow--we who are used to studying boys all
know him well enough--of whom you can predicate with almost positive
certainty, after he has been a month at school, that he is sure to have
a fight, and with almost equal certainty that he will have but one. Tom
Brown was one of these; and as it is our well-weighed intention to give
a full, true, and correct account of Tom's only single combat with a
school-fellow in the manner of our old friend Bell's Life, let those
young persons whose stomachs are not strong, or who think a good set-to
with the weapons which God has given us all an uncivilized, unchristian,
or ungentlemanly affair, just skip this chapter at once, for it won't be
to their taste.

It was not at all usual in those days for two School-house boys to
have a fight. Of course there were exceptions, when some cross-grained,
hard-headed fellow came up who would never be happy unless he was
quarrelling with his nearest neighbours, or when there was some
class-dispute, between the fifth form and the fags, for instance, which
required blood-letting; and a champion was picked out on each side
tacitly, who settled the matter by a good hearty mill. But, for the
most part, the constant use of those surest keepers of the peace, the
boxing-gloves, kept the School-house boys from fighting one another. Two
or three nights in every week the gloves were brought out, either in the
hall or fifth-form room; and every boy who was ever likely to fight at
all knew all his neighbours' prowess perfectly well, and could tell to a
nicety what chance he would have in a stand-up fight with any other
boy in the house. But, of course, no such experience could be gotten as
regarded boys in other houses; and as most of the other houses were more
or less jealous of the School-house, collisions were frequent.

After all, what would life be without fighting, I should like to know?
From the cradle to the grave, fighting, rightly understood, is the
business, the real highest, honestest business of every son of man.
Every one who is worth his salt has his enemies, who must be beaten, be
they evil thoughts and habits in himself, or spiritual wickednesses in
high places, or Russians, or Border-ruffians, or Bill, Tom, or Harry,
who will not let him live his life in quiet till he has thrashed them.

It is no good for quakers, or any other body of men, to uplift their
voices against fighting. Human nature is too strong for them, and they
don't follow their own precepts. Every soul of them is doing his own
piece of fighting, somehow and somewhere. The world might be a better
world without fighting, for anything I know, but it wouldn't be our
world; and therefore I am dead against crying peace when there is no
peace, and isn't meant to be. I am as sorry as any man to see folk
fighting the wrong people and the wrong things, but I'd a deal sooner
see them doing that than that they should have no fight in them. So
having recorded, and being about to record, my hero's fights of all
sorts, with all sorts of enemies, I shall now proceed to give an account
of his passage-at-arms with the only one of his school-fellows whom he
ever had to encounter in this manner.

It was drawing towards the close of Arthur's first half-year, and
the May evenings were lengthening out. Locking-up was not till eight
o'clock, and everybody was beginning to talk about what he would do in
the holidays. The shell, in which form all our dramatis personae now
are, were reading, amongst other things, the last book of Homer's
"Iliad," and had worked through it as far as the speeches of the women
over Hector's body. It is a whole school-day, and four or five of the
School-house boys (amongst whom are Arthur, Tom, and East) are preparing
third lesson together. They have finished the regulation forty lines,
and are for the most part getting very tired, notwithstanding
the exquisite pathos of Helen's lamentation. And now several long
four-syllabled words come together, and the boy with the dictionary
strikes work.

"I am not going to look out any more words," says he; "we've done the
quantity. Ten to one we shan't get so far. Let's go out into the close."

"Come along, boys," cries East, always ready to leave "the grind," as he
called it; "our old coach is laid up, you know, and we shall have one of
the new masters, who's sure to go slow and let us down easy."

So an adjournment to the close was carried nem. con., little Arthur not
daring to uplift his voice; but, being deeply interested in what they
were reading, stayed quietly behind, and learnt on for his own pleasure.

As East had said, the regular master of the form was unwell, and they
were to be heard by one of the new masters--quite a young man, who had
only just left the university. Certainly it would be hard lines if,
by dawdling as much as possible in coming in and taking their places,
entering into long-winded explanations of what was the usual course of
the regular master of the form, and others of the stock contrivances of
boys for wasting time in school, they could not spin out the lesson so
that he should not work them through more than the forty lines. As to
which quantity there was a perpetual fight going on between the master
and his form--the latter insisting, and enforcing by passive resistance,
that it was the prescribed quantity of Homer for a shell lesson; the
former, that there was no fixed quantity, but that they must always be
ready to go on to fifty or sixty lines if there were time within the
hour. However, notwithstanding all their efforts, the new master got on
horribly quick. He seemed to have the bad taste to be really interested
in the lesson, and to be trying to work them up into something like
appreciation of it, giving them good, spirited English words, instead
of the wretched bald stuff into which they rendered poor old Homer, and
construing over each piece himself to them, after each boy, to show them
how it should be done.

Now the clock strikes the three-quarters; there is only a quarter of an
hour more, but the forty lines are all but done. So the boys, one after
another, who are called up, stick more and more, and make balder and
ever more bald work of it. The poor young master is pretty near beat by
this time, and feels ready to knock his head against the wall, or his
fingers against somebody else's head. So he gives up altogether the
lower and middle parts of the form, and looks round in despair at the
boys on the top bench, to see if there is one out of whom he can strike
a spark or two, and who will be too chivalrous to murder the most
beautiful utterances of the most beautiful woman of the old world. His
eye rests on Arthur, and he calls him up to finish construing Helen's
speech. Whereupon all the other boys draw long breaths, and begin to
stare about and take it easy. They are all safe: Arthur is the head of
the form, and sure to be able to construe, and that will tide on safely
till the hour strikes.

Arthur proceeds to read out the passage in Greek before construing it,
as the custom is. Tom, who isn't paying much attention, is suddenly
caught by the falter in his voice as he reads the two lines--

[greek text deleted]

He looks up at Arthur. "Why, bless us," thinks he, "what can be the
matter with the young un? He's never going to get floored. He's sure
to have learnt to the end." Next moment he is reassured by the spirited
tone in which Arthur begins construing, and betakes himself to drawing
dogs' heads in his notebook, while the master, evidently enjoying the
change, turns his back on the middle bench and stands before Arthur,
beating a sort of time with his hand and foot, and saying; "Yes, yes,"
"Very well," as Arthur goes on.

But as he nears the fatal two lines, Tom catches that falter, and again
looks up. He sees that there is something the matter; Arthur can hardly
get on at all. What can it be?

Suddenly at this point Arthur breaks down altogether, and fairly bursts
out crying, and dashes the cuff of his jacket across his eyes, blushing
up to the roots of his hair, and feeling as if he should like to go down
suddenly through the floor. The whole form are taken aback; most of them
stare stupidly at him, while those who are gifted with presence of mind
find their places and look steadily at their books, in hopes of not
catching the master's eye and getting called up in Arthur's place.

The master looks puzzled for a moment, and then seeing, as the fact is,
that the boy is really affected to tears by the most touching thing in
Homer, perhaps in all profane poetry put together, steps up to him and
lays his hand kindly on his shoulder, saying, "Never mind, my little
man, you've construed very well. Stop a minute; there's no hurry."

Now, as luck would have it, there sat next above Tom on that day, in
the middle bench of the form, a big boy, by name Williams, generally
supposed to be the cock of the shell, therefore of all the school below
the fifths. The small boys, who are great speculators on the prowess of
their elders, used to hold forth to one another about Williams's great
strength, and to discuss whether East or Brown would take a licking from
him. He was called Slogger Williams, from the force with which it was
supposed he could hit. In the main, he was a rough, goodnatured fellow
enough, but very much alive to his own dignity. He reckoned himself
the king of the form, and kept up his position with the strong hand,
especially in the matter of forcing boys not to construe more than the
legitimate forty lines. He had already grunted and grumbled to himself
when Arthur went on reading beyond the forty lines; but now that he
had broken down just in the middle of all the long words, the Slogger's
wrath was fairly roused.

"Sneaking little brute," muttered he, regardless of prudence--"clapping
on the water-works just in the hardest place; see if I don't punch his
head after fourth lesson."

"Whose?" said Tom, to whom the remark seemed to be addressed.

"Why, that little sneak, Arthur's," replied Williams.

"No, you shan't," said Tom.

"Hullo!" exclaimed Williams, looking at Tom with great surprise for a
moment, and then giving him a sudden dig in the ribs with his elbow,
which sent Tom's books flying on to the floor, and called the attention
of the master, who turned suddenly round, and seeing the state of
things, said,--

"Williams, go down three places, and then go on."

The Slogger found his legs very slowly, and proceeded to go below Tom
and two other boys with great disgust; and then, turning round and
facing the master, said, "I haven't learnt any more, sir; our lesson is
only forty lines."

"Is that so?" said the master, appealing generally to the top bench. No
answer.

"Who is the head boy of the form?" said he, waxing wroth.

"Arthur, sir," answered three or four boys, indicating our friend.

"Oh, your name's Arthur. Well, now, what is the length of your regular
lesson?"

Arthur hesitated a moment, and then said, "We call it only forty lines,
sir."

"How do you mean--you call it?"

"Well, sir, Mr. Graham says we ain't to stop there when there's time to
construe more."

"I understand," said the master.--"Williams, go down three more places,
and write me out the lesson in Greek and English. And now, Arthur,
finish construing."

"Oh! would I be in Arthur's shoes after fourth lesson?" said the little
boys to one another; but Arthur finished Helen's speech without any
further catastrophe, and the clock struck four, which ended third
lesson.

Another hour was occupied in preparing and saying fourth lesson, during
which Williams was bottling up his wrath; and when five struck, and the
lessons for the day were over, he prepared to take summary vengeance on
the innocent cause of his misfortune.

Tom was detained in school a few minutes after the rest, and on coming
out into the quadrangle, the first thing he saw was a small ring of
boys, applauding Williams, who was holding Arthur by the collar.

"There, you young sneak," said he, giving Arthur a cuff on the head with
his other hand; "what made you say that--"

"Hullo!" said Tom, shouldering into the crowd; "you drop that, Williams;
you shan't touch him."

"Who'll stop me?" said the Slogger, raising his hand again.

"I," said Tom; and suiting the action to the word he struck the arm
which held Arthur's arm so sharply that the Slogger dropped it with a
start, and turned the full current of his wrath on Tom.

"Will you fight?"

"Yes, of course."

"Huzza! There's going to be a fight between Slogger Williams and Tom
Brown!"

The news ran like wildfire about, and many boys who were on their way
to tea at their several houses turned back, and sought the back of the
chapel, where the fights come off.

"Just run and tell East to come and back me," said Tom to a small
School-house boy, who was off like a rocket to Harrowell's, just
stopping for a moment to poke his head into the School-house hall, where
the lower boys were already at tea, and sing out, "Fight! Tom Brown and
Slogger Williams."

Up start half the boys at once, leaving bread, eggs, butter, sprats,
and all the rest to take care of themselves. The greater part of the
remainder follow in a minute, after swallowing their tea, carrying their
food in their hands to consume as they go. Three or four only remain,
who steal the butter of the more impetuous, and make to themselves an
unctuous feast.

In another minute East and Martin tear through the quadrangle, carrying
a sponge, and arrive at the scene of action just as the combatants are
beginning to strip.

Tom felt he had got his work cut out for him, as he stripped off his
jacket, waistcoat, and braces. East tied his handkerchief round his
waist, and rolled up his shirtsleeves for him. "Now, old boy, don't you
open your mouth to say a word, or try to help yourself a bit--we'll do
all that; you keep all your breath and strength for the Slogger." Martin
meanwhile folded the clothes, and put them under the chapel rails; and
now Tom, with East to handle him, and Martin to give him a knee, steps
out on the turf, and is ready for all that may come; and here is the
Slogger too, all stripped, and thirsting for the fray.

It doesn't look a fair match at first glance: Williams is nearly two
inches taller, and probably a long year older than his opponent, and he
is very strongly made about the arms and shoulders--"peels well," as the
little knot of big fifth-form boys, the amateurs, say, who stand outside
the ring of little boys, looking complacently on, but taking no active
part in the proceedings. But down below he is not so good by any
means--no spring from the loins, and feeblish, not to say shipwrecky,
about the knees. Tom, on the contrary, though not half so strong in the
arms, is good all over, straight, hard, and springy, from neck to ankle,
better perhaps in his legs than anywhere. Besides, you can see by the
clear white of his eye, and fresh, bright look of his skin, that he is
in tip-top training, able to do all he knows; while the Slogger looks
rather sodden, as if he didn't take much exercise and ate too much
