doubt; so we'd better be providing the things Jim promises to cook so
well."

They had learned the border habit of acting promptly, and Henry Ross and
Sol were to depart the very next morning for the mainland on a hunt for
deer, while Long Jim was to keep house. Paul otherwise would have been
anxious to go with the hunters, but he had an idea of his own, and when
Henry suggested that he accompany them, he replied that he expected to
make a contribution of a different kind.

All these plans were made in the evening, and then every member of the
five, wrapping himself in his buffalo robe, fell asleep. The fire in Jim
Hart's furnace had been permitted to die down to a bed of coals, and the
glow from them barely disclosed the five figures lying, dark and silent,
on the floor. They slept, clean in conscience and without fear.

Henry, Shif'less Sol, and Ross were off at dawn, and Paul, using a rude
wooden needle that he had shaped with his own pocketknife, and the tendon
of a deer as thread, made a large bag of buckskin. Then he threw it
triumphantly over his shoulder.

"Now what under the sun, Paul, are you goin' to do with that?" asked Jim
Hart.

"I'm going to add variety to our winter store. Just you wait, Jim Hart,
and see."

Bearing the bag, he left the house and took his way to the north end of
the island. He had not been above learning more than one thing from the
squirrels, and he had recalled a grove of great hickory trees growing
almost to the water's edge. Now the ground was thickly covered with the
nuts which had fallen when the severe frosts and the snow and ice came.
There were several varieties, including large ones two inches long, and
the fine little ones known to boys throughout the Mississippi Valley as
the scaly bark. Paul procured two stones, and, cracking several of them,
found them delicious to the taste. Already in his Kentucky home he had
become familiar with them all. The hogs of the settlers, running through
the forest and fattening upon these nuts and acorns, known collectively as
"mast," acquired a delicious flavor. Boys and grown people loved the nuts,
too.

The nuts lay about in great quantities, and the thick, barky coverings,
known to the boys as "hulls," almost fell off at a touch. Soon the ground
was littered with these hulls, while the big buckskin bag was filled with
the clean nuts. Then, lifting it to his shoulder, Paul marched off proudly
to the house.

"Now, why didn't I think uv that?" said Jim Hart, as Paul threw down the
bag before him and disclosed its contents. "An' all them hick'ry nuts jest
layin' thar on the ground an' waitin' fur me."

"It's because you had so much else to do, Jim," said Paul; "and as I'm
idle a good deal of the time, the thought occurred to me."

"You shorely do have the gift uv sayin' nice things, an' makin' a feller
feel good, Paul," said Jim admiringly.

Paul laughed. Jim's words pleased him.

"I told nothing but the truth," he said. "Now, Jim, I'm going back for
more, and I'd like to do this job all by myself. I think I can gather at
least six bagfuls, and we'll heap them here by the wall."

"An' mighty good seas'nin' they'll be to deer an' buffalo an' b'ar meat,"
said Jim Hart. "It wuz a good thought uv yours, Paul."

Paul worked the whole morning, and when he had gathered all the nuts in
the house he estimated the quantity at several bushels. Although he sought
to conceal his pride, he cast more than one triumphant look at the great
heap by the wall.

He and Jim went forth together in the afternoon with rude spades, made of
wood and hardened at the edges in the fire, to dig for Indian turnip.

"It ain't much of a veg'table," said Jim, "but we might find it useful to
give a new taste to our meat, or it might be uv some help doctorin', in
case any uv us fell sick."

They found two or three of the roots, and the remainder of the afternoon
they devoted to strengthening their house. They did this with huge slabs
of bark lying everywhere on the ground, fallen in former seasons. Some
they put on the roof, thatching in between with dry grass and leaves, and
others they fastened on the sides.

"It ain't purty," said Jim, "but it turns rain an' snow, an' that's what
we're after."

"I take another view," said Paul. "It does look well. It blends with the
wilderness, and so it has a beauty of its own."

The three hunters were not to return that night, and Paul and Jim kept
house. Jim slept lightly, and just before the dawn he rolled over in his
buffalo robe and pushed Paul's shoulder.

Paul awoke instantly, and sat up.

"What is it, Jim?" he asked anxiously. It was his natural thought that
some danger threatened, and it was so dark in the cabin that he could not
see Jim's face.

"Do you hear that hoo-hooing sound?" asked Jim Hart.

Paul listened and heard faintly a low, mellow note.

"What is it, Jim?" he asked.

"The call of the wild turkey."

"What, Indians again?"

"No, it's the real bird, talkin'. An old gobbler is tellin' his hens that
day is comin'. It's a plumb waste on his part, because they know it
theirselves, but he must jest let 'em know what a smart bird he is. An'
it's that pride uv his that will be his ruin. Git up, Paul; we must have
him an' one uv his hens to eat."

"Where do you think they are?" asked Paul.

"In the hick'ry grove. I guess they lighted thar fur the night, when
flyin' 'cross the lake."

The two hurried on their clothes, took their rifles, and stole out. A
faint tinge of light was just showing under the horizon in the east, but
the air was not yet gray. It was very cold at that early hour, and Paul
shivered, but he soon forgot it in the ardor of the chase.

"Slip along softer nor a cat, Paul," said Jim. "We don't want to give old
Mr. Gobbler any warnin' that his time hez come. Thar, hear him? The tarnal
fool! He's jest bound to show us where he is."

The mellow call arose again, very clear and distinct in the silent air,
and as they approached the edge of the hickory grove, Jim pointed upward.

"See him thar on the limb," he said, "the big feller with the feathers all
shinin' an' glistenin'? That's the gobbler, an' the littler ones with the
gray feathers are the hens. I'm goin' to take the gobbler. He may be old,
but he's so fat he's bound to be tender; an' s'pose, Paul, you take that
hen next to him. When I say 'Now,' fire."

The two raised their guns, took careful aim, and Jim said "Now." They
fired together, aiming at the necks or heads. The big gobbler fell like a
stone from the bough and lay still. The hen fell, too, but she fluttered
about on the ground. The rest flew away on whirring wings. Paul ran
forward and finished his bird with a stick, but Jim lifted the great
gobbler and looked at him with admiring eyes.

"Did you ever see a finer turkey?" he said. "He must weigh all uv forty
pounds, an' he's as fat as he can be with the good food uv the wilderness.
An' he's a beauty, too! Jest look at them glossy blue-black feathers. No
wonder so many hens wuz in love with him. I could be pop'lar with the
women folks, too, ef I wuz ez handsome ez Mr. Gobbler here."

They picked and cleaned the turkeys, and then hung the dressed bodies from
the boughs of a tree near the hut, where they would be frozen, and thus
keep.

The hunters returned that afternoon with two deer, and were delighted with
Jim and Paul's zeal and success.

"Ef things go on this swimmin' way," said Shif'less Sol, "we'd be able to
feed an army this winter, ef it wuz needed."

It was very cold that evening, and they built the fire higher than usual.
Great mellow rays of heat fell over all the five, and lighted up the whole
interior of the cabin with its rich store of skins and nuts and dressed
meats, and other spoil of the wilderness. The five, though no one of them
ever for a moment forgot their great mission of saving Kentucky, had a
feeling of content. Affairs were going well.

"Paul," said Shif'less Sol, "you've read books. Tell us about some o' them
old fellers that lived a long time ago. I like to hear about the big
ones."

"Well," said Paul, "there was Alexander. Did you ever hear of him, Sol?"

Shif'less Sol shook his head and sighed.

"I can't truly call myself an eddicated man," he replied, "though I have
the instincks o' one. But I ain't had the proper chance. No, Paul, me an'
Alexander is strangers."

"Then I'll make you acquainted," said Paul. He settled himself more
comfortably before the fire, and the others did likewise.

"Alexander lived a long, long time ago," said Paul. "He was a Greek--that
is, he was a Macedonian with Greek blood in him--I suppose it comes to the
same thing--and he led the Greeks and Macedonians over into Asia, and
whipped the Persians every time, though the Persians were always twenty to
one."

"Who writ the accounts o' them thar battles?" asked Shif'less Sol.

"Why, the Greeks, of course."

"I thought so. Why, Jim Hart here must be a Greek, then. To hear him tell
it, he's always whippin' twenty men at a time. But it ain't in natur' for
one man to whip twenty."

"I never said once in my life that I whipped twenty men at a time,"
protested Jim Hart.

"We'll let it pass," said Paul, "and Sol may be right about the Greeks
piling it up for themselves; but so they wrote it, and so we have to take
it. Well, Alexander, although he wasn't much more than a boy, kept on
whipping the Persians until at last their king, Darius, ran away with his
wives."

Shif'less Sol whistled.

"Do you mean to tell me, Paul," he said, "that any white man ever had more
than one wife! I thought only Injun chiefs had 'em?"

"Why, it was common a long time ago," replied Paul.

"What a waste!" said Shif'less Sol. "One man havin' a lot uv wives, an'
Jim Hart here ain't ever been able to get a single one."

"An' you ain't, either, Sol Hyde," said Jim Hart.

"Oh, me!" replied Shif'less Sol carelessly. "I'm too young to marry."

"Let him go on about Alexander, the fightin' feller," interrupted Tom
Ross.

"Alexander conquered all Asia," resumed Paul, "but it didn't agree with
him. The more he conquered the more he wanted to conquer."

"Jest like a little boy eatin' turkey," said Shif'less Sol. "Can't hold
enough to suit him. Stummick ain't ez big ez his appetite, an' he hez to
cry about it. I don't think your Alexander wuz such a big man, after all."

"He was not, from one point of view, Sol, but he was certainly a general.
After conquering all the world, he fell to drinking too much, and
quarreling with his best friends. One day he got raging drunk, which made
him hot all over, and he jumped into an icy river to cool off. That gave
him a fever, and he died right away. He was only thirty-two."

Shif'less Sol sniffed in disgust.

"Dead at thirty-two!" he said. "Now, I call him a plumb failure. With
fightin' goin' on all the time, an' fevers layin' aroun' fur you, I call
it somethin' jest to live, an' I mean to stay in these parts till I'm a
hundred. Why, that Alexander never had time, Paul, to think over what he'd
done. I wouldn't change places with him, I think I'm a heap sight better
off."

"I agrees with Sol ag'in," said Tom Ross, who had been in deep thought.
"In dang'rous times it's doin' a heap jest to live, an' a man who dies
off at thirty-two, all through his own foolishness, ain't much to brag
about."

Henry laughed.

"Paul," he said, "you'll have to bring out better examples of greatness to
satisfy Sol and Tom."

Paul laughed, too.

"I just tell things as they are," he said. "Maybe they are right."

Henry went to the door and looked out. The air was full of raw chill, and
he heard the leafless boughs rustling in the winter wind. All around him
was the dark wilderness, and, natural hunter and warrior though he was, he
was glad to have the shelter, the fire, and his comrades. He turned back
and closed the door tightly, in order to shut out any stray gust that
might be of an unusually penetrating quality.

"I'm thinking that we'd better start away hunting again very early in the
morning," he said. "The big snows are bound to come soon. That first
little one was only a taste of what we're going to get."

They were off again at daybreak, and this time Paul went with them. The
party turned to the southward, in order to avoid the chance of meeting
Shawnees or Miamis, and soon had the luck to run into a small buffalo
herd. They killed only what they could carry, and then returned with it
toward the island. Henry continually watched the skies as they traveled,
and he uttered an exclamation of relief when they landed. The heavens all
the while had been leaden and somber, and there was no wind stirring.

"See," he said, "the great snow comes!"

The sullen skies opened, and big white flakes dropped down as they hurried
with their fresh supplies to the cabin.




CHAPTER XVI

NOEL


The snow fell three days and nights without ceasing, and they rejoiced
greatly over their foresight in preparing so well for it, because it was a
big snow, a very big snow. "It ain't jest snowin'," said Shif'less Sol;
"the bottom o' the sky hez dropped out, an' all the snow's tumblin' down."

The great flakes never ceased for a moment to fall. The sun did not get a
single chance to shine, and as fast as one cloud was emptied, another,
huge and black, was drawn in its place across the sky. The island ceased
to be an island, because the snow heaped up on the frozen surface of the
lake, and it was impossible to tell where land ended and water began. The
boughs of the trees bent and cracked beneath their load, and some fell to
the ground. At times the sound of snapping boughs was like stray rifle
shots.

