competent men to manage them. Poorly built ships, short manned, with
officers unfit for their positions, constitute the harvest of
destruction on the ocean.

Mr. Lowington believed that the students of the Academy Ship would be as
safe on board the Young America as they would on shore. He had taken a
great deal of pains to demonstrate his theory to parents, and though he
often failed, he often succeeded. The Young America had just passed
through one of the severest gales of the year, and in cruising for the
next three years, she would hardly encounter a more terrific storm. She
had safely weathered it; the boys had behaved splendidly, and not one of
them had been lost, or even injured, by the trying exposure. The
principal's theory was thus far vindicated.

The starboard watch piped to breakfast, when the sail was discovered,
too far off to make her out. The boys all manifested a deep interest in
the distant wanderer on the tempestuous sea, mingled with a desire to
know how the stranger had weathered the gale. Many of them went up the
shrouds into the tops, and the spy-glasses were in great demand.

"Do you make her out, Captain Gordon?" asked Mr. Fluxion, as he came up
from his breakfast, and discovered the commander watching the stranger
through the glass.

"Yes, sir; I can just make her out now. Her foremast and mainmast have
gone by the board, and she has the ensign, union down, hoisted at her
mizzen," replied the captain, with no little excitement in his manner.

"Indeed!" exclaimed the teacher of mathematics, as he took the glass.
"You are right, Captain Gordon, and you had better keep her away."

"Shall I speak to Mr. Lowington first, sir?" asked the captain.

"I think there is no need of it in the present instance. There can be
no doubt what he will do when a ship is in distress."

"Mr. Kendall, keep her away two points," said the captain to the officer
of the deck. "What is the ship's course now?"

"East-south-east, sir," replied the second lieutenant, who had the deck.

"Make it south-east."

"South-east, sir," repeated Kendall. "Quartermaster keep her away two
points," he added to the petty officer conning the wheel.

"Two points, sir," said Bennington, the quartermaster

"Make the course south-east."

"South-east, sir."

After all these repetitions it was not likely that any mistake would
occur; and the discipline of the ship required every officer and seaman
who received a material order, especially in regard to the helm or the
course, to repeat it, and thus make sure that it was not misunderstood.

It was Sunday; and no study was required, or work performed, except the
necessary ship's duty. Morning prayers had been said, as usual, and
there was to be divine service in the steerage, forenoon and afternoon,
for all who could possibly attend; and this rule excepted none but the
watch on deck. By this system, the quarter watch on duty in the
forenoon, attended in the afternoon; those who were absent at morning
prayers were always present at the evening devotions; and blow high or
blow low, the brief matin and vesper service were never omitted, for
young men in the midst of the sublimity and the terrors of the ocean
could least afford to be without the daily thought of God, "who plants
his footsteps in the sea, and rides upon the storm."

Every man and boy in the ship was watching the speck on the watery
waste, which the glass had revealed to be a dismasted, and perhaps
sinking ship. The incident created an intense interest, and was
calculated to bring out the finer feelings of the students. They were
full of sympathy for her people, and the cultivation of noble and
unselfish sentiments, which the occasion had already called forth, and
was likely to call forth in a still greater degree, was worth the voyage
over the ocean; for there are impressions to be awakened by such a scene
which can be garnered in no other field.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE WRECK OF THE SYLVIA.


The people in the dismasted ship had discovered the Young America, as it
appeared from the efforts they were using to attract her attention. The
booming of a gun was occasionally heard from her, but she was yet too
far off to be distinctly seen.

On the forecastle of the Academy Ship were two brass guns,
four-pounders, intended solely for use in making signals. They had never
been fired, even on the Fourth of July, for Mr. Lowington would not
encourage their use among the boys. On the present occasion he ordered
Peaks, the boatswain, to fire twice, to assure the ship in distress that
her signals were heard.

The top-gallant sails were set, and the speed of the ship increased as
much as possible; but the heavy sea was not favorable to rapid progress
through the water. At four bells, when all hands but the second part of
the port watch were piped to attend divine service in the steerage, the
Young America was about four miles distant from the dismasted vessel.
She was rolling and pitching heavily, and not making more than two or
three knots an hour.

Notwithstanding the impatience of the crew, and their desire to be on
deck, where they could see the wreck, the service on that Sunday
forenoon was especially impressive. Mr. Agneau prayed earnestly for
those who were suffering by the perils of the sea, and that those who
should draw near unto them in the hour of their danger, might be filled
with the love of God and of man, which would inspire them to be faithful
to the duties of the occasion.

When the service was ended the students went on deck again. The wreck
could now be distinctly seen. It was a ship of five or six hundred tons,
rolling helplessly in the trough of the sea. She was apparently
water-logged, if not just ready to go down. As the Young America
approached her, her people were seen to be laboring at the pumps, and to
be baling her out with buckets. It was evident from the appearance of
the wreck, that it had been kept afloat only by the severest exertion on
the part of the crew.

"Mr. Peaks, you will see that the boats are in order for use," said Mr.
Lowington. "We shall lower the barge and the gig."

"The barge and the gig, sir," replied the boatswain.

"Captain Gordon," continued the principal, "two of your best officers
must be detailed for the boats."

"I will send Mr. Kendall in the barge, sir."

"Very well; he is entirely reliable. Whom will you send in the gig?"

"I am sorry Shuffles is not an officer now, for he was one of the best
we had for such service," added the captain.

"Shuffles is out of the question," replied Mr. Lowington.

"Mr. Haven, then, in the gig."

"The sea is very heavy, and the boats must be handled with skill and
prudence."

"The crews have been practised in heavy seas, though in nothing like
this."

The barge and the gig--called so by courtesy--were the two largest boats
belonging to the ship, and pulled eight oars each. They were light and
strong, and had been built with especial reference to the use for which
they were intended. They were life-boats, and before the ship sailed,
they had been rigged with life-lines and floats. If they were upset in a
heavy sea, the crews could save themselves by clinging to the rope,
buoyed up by the floats.

The Young America stood up towards the wreck, intending to pass under
her stern as near as it was prudent to lay, the head of the dismasted
ship being to the north-west.

"Boatswain, pipe all hands to muster," said the captain, prompted by Mr.
Lowington, as the ship approached the wreck.

"All hands on deck, ahoy!" shouted the boatswain, piping the call.

The first lieutenant took the trumpet from the officer of the deck, and
the crew, all of whom were on deck when the call was sounded, sprang to
their muster stations.

"All hands, take in courses," said the executive officer; and those who
were stationed at the tacks and sheets, clew-garnets and buntlines,
prepared to do their duty when the boatswain piped the call.

"Man the fore and main clew-garnets and buntlines!" shouted the first
lieutenant. "Stand by tacks and sheets!"

The fore and main sail, being the lowest square sails, are called the
courses. There is no corresponding sail on the mizzenmast. The ropes by
which the lower corners of these sails are hauled up for furling are the
clew-garnets--the same that are designated clewlines on the topsails.

The tacks and sheets are the ropes by which the courses are hauled down,
and kept in place, the tack being on the windward side, and the sheet on
the leeward.

"All ready, sir," reported the lieutenants forward.

"Haul taut! Let go tacks and sheets! Haul up!"

These orders being promptly obeyed, the courses were hauled up, and the
ship was under topsails and top-gallant sails, jib, flying-jib, and
spanker.

"Ship, ahoy!" shouted the first lieutenant through his trumpet, as the
Young America rolled slowly along under the stern of the wreck.

"Ship, ahoy!" replied a voice from the deck of the wreck. "We are in a
sinking condition! Will you take us off?"

"Ay, ay!" cried Haven, with right good will.

"You will heave to the ship, Mr. Haven," said the captain, when she had
passed a short distance beyond the wreck.

"Man the jib and flying-jib halyards and down-hauls," said the first
lieutenant.

"All ready forward, sir," replied the second lieutenant, on the
forecastle.

"Stand by the maintop bowline! Cast off! Man the main braces!"

"Let go the jib and flying-jib halyards! Haul down!" And the jibs were
taken in.

"Slack off the lee braces! Haul on the weather braces!"

The main-topsail and top-gallant were thus thrown aback, and the Young
America was hove to, in order to enable her people to perform their
humane mission.

"Stand by to lower the barge and gig!" continued Haven.

"Mr. Haven, you will board the wreck in the gig," said Captain Gordon.

"Yes, sir," replied he, touching his cap, and handing the trumpet to the
second lieutenant.

"Mr. Kendall, you will take charge of the barge," added the captain.

"The barge, sir," answered Kendall, passing the trumpet to Goodwin, the
third lieutenant, who, during the absence of his superiors, was to
discharge the duty of the executive officer.

The boats were cleared away, and every preparation made for lowering
them into the water. This was a difficult and dangerous manoeuvre in the
heavy sea which was running at the time. The professors' barge, which
was secured at the davits on the weather side of the ship, was to be
lowered with her crew on board, and they took their places on the
thwarts, with their hands to the oars in readiness for action. The
principal had requested Mr. Fluxion to go in the barge and Mr. Peaks in
the gig, not to command the boats, but to give the officers such
suggestions as the emergency of the occasion might require.

"All ready, sir," reported Ward, the coxswain of the barge, when the
oarsmen were in their places.

"Stand by the after tackle, Ward," said Haven. "Bowman, attend to the
fore tackle."

At a favorable moment, when a great wave was sinking down by the ship's
side, the order was given to lower away, and in an instant the barge
struck the water. Ward cast off the after tackle, and the bowman did the
same with the forward tackle. At the moment the order to lower was
given, as the wave sank down, the ship rolled to windward, and the boat
struck the water some eight feet from the vessel's side.

"Up oars!" said the coxswain, with energy.

"Lively, Ward," added the first lieutenant.

"Let fall!" continued the coxswain, as a billow lifted the boat, so that
those on board could see the ship's deck. "Give way together!"

The barge, tossed like a feather on the high seas, gathered headway, and
moved off towards the wreck.

The lowering of the barge had been so successful that the same method
was adopted with the gig; but as she was under the lee of the ship,
there was less difficulty in getting her off. She pulled round the
ship's bow, and having made less stern way in starting both boats came
up under the counter of the wreck at about the same time. When the barge
and gig reached the ship, a line was thrown to each of them over the
quarter, which the bowman caught, and made fast to the ring.

"Where is the captain of the ship?" demanded Mr. Haven.

"Here," shouted that officer.

"How many have you aboard?"

"Eighteen!"

"You must slide down on a rope over the stern; we can't go alongside,"
continued the first lieutenant.

"Ay, ay, sir!" responded the captain of the ship. "I have two women and
two children on board."

"You must lower them in slings," added Haven, prompted by Mr. Fluxion.

[Illustration: THE WRECK OF THE SYLVIA. page 254.]

The people on board the wreck went to work, and one of the women was
lowered into each boat at the same time. A long loop was made in the end
of the rope, and the woman sat down in the bight of it, holding on to
the line with her hands. At a moment when the sea favored the movement,
the boats were hauled up close to the ship's stern, the passenger caught
by two of the crew, and hauled on board. A boy and a girl were let down
in the same manner. The captain, mates, and seamen came down the rope
hand over hand.

Each boat now had nine passengers, who were stowed in the stern sheets
and on the bottom. The ropes from the ship were cast off, and the
oarsmen were ordered to give way. The barge and the gig rose and fell,
now leaping up on the huge billows, and then plunging down deep into the
trough of the sea; but they had been well trimmed, and though the comb
of the sea occasionally broke into them, drenching the boys with spray,
the return to the Young America was safely effected.

"How happens it that you are all boys?" asked the captain of the wrecked
ship, who was in Paul Kendall's boat.

"That's the Academy Ship," replied the second lieutenant.

"The what?" exclaimed the captain.

"It is the Young America. She is a school ship."

"O, ay!"

There was no disposition to talk much in the boats. The officers and
crews were fully employed in keeping the barge and gig right side up in
the tremendous sea, and though all hands were filled with curiosity to
know the particulars of the wreck, all questions were wisely deferred
until they were on the deck of the ship.

When the gig came up under the counter of the Young America, a line was
thrown down to the bowman who made it fast to the ring. The passengers
were then taken aboard in slings rigged on the spanker-boom, which was
swung over the lee quarter for the purpose. Part of the boat's crew were
taken on board in the same way, and then the gig was hoisted up to the
davits with the rest in her.

Before the barge was allowed to come up under the counter, the officer
of the deck wore ship, so as to bring the port quarter, on which the
boat was to be suspended, on the lee side. Her passengers were taken on
deck as those from the gig had been, and she was hoisted up.

"Mr. Kendall, I congratulate you upon the success of your labors," said
Mr. Lowington, when the second lieutenant reached the deck. "You have
handled your boat exceedingly well, and you deserve a great deal of
credit."

"That's a fact, sir," added Boatswain Peaks, touching his cap. "I hardly
spoke a word to him, and I've seen many a boat worse handled in a sea."

Paul blushed at the praise bestowed upon him, but he was proud and happy
to have done his duty faithfully on this important occasion. The same
commendation was given to the first lieutenant, after the barge had been
hauled up to the davits, and the order given for the ship to fill away
again.

The women and children were conducted to the professors' cabin as soon
as they came on board, and the seamen were taken into the steerage. All
of them were exhausted by the anxiety and the hardships they had
endured, and as soon as their safety was insured, they sank almost
helpless under the pressure of their physical weakness.

"This is a school ship, I'm told," said Captain Greely, the master of
the shipwrecked vessel, who had also been invited to the main cabin.

"Yes, sir; we call it the Academy Ship, and we have eighty-seven young
gentlemen on board," replied Mr. Lowington.

"They are smart boys, sir. I never saw boats better handled than those
which brought us off from the ship," added Captain Greely, warmly.

"Your voyage has come to an unfortunate conclusion," said Mr. Lowington.

