
"My only fear is that we shan't get near her before it is dark."

"I think that we have plenty of time for that, sir. You see we got
up anchor at half-past six, and it is just twelve o'clock now.
Another five hours should take us up to her if the wind holds at
this."

By two o'clock the topsails of the brigantine could be again made
out from the deck. She was still working along shore, and was on
their port bow.

"Another three hours and we shall be alongside of her," the skipper
said; "and if I am not mistaken we shall come out ahead of her."

"There is one advantage in the course we are taking, Hawkins.
Viewing us, as she will, pretty nearly end on till we get nearly
abreast of her, she won't be able to make out our rig clearly."

By four o'clock they were within five miles of the brigantine. The
wind then freshened, and laying her course as she did, while the
brigantine was obliged to make frequent tacks, the Osprey ran down
fast towards her.

"They must have their eyes on us by this time," the captain said.
"Though they cannot be sure that it is the Osprey, they can see
that she is a yawl of over a hundred tons, and as they cannot doubt
that we are chasing them, they won't be long in guessing who we
are. Shall we get the arms up, sir?"

"Yes, you may as well do so. The muskets can be loaded and laid by
the bulwarks, but they are not to be touched until I give the
order. No doubt they also are armed. I am anxious not to fire a
shot if it can be helped, and once alongside we are strong enough
to overpower them with our cutlasses only. With the five blacks we
are now double their strength, and even Carthew may see the
uselessness of offering any resistance."

They ran down until they were within a mile of the shore, not being
now more than a beam off the brigantine. Two female figures had
some time before been made out on her deck, but they had now
disappeared. It was evident that the Osprey was being closely
watched by those on board the brigantine. Presently two or three
men were seen to run aft.

"They are going to tack again, sir. If they do they will come right
out to us."

Frank made no reply, but stood with his glass fixed on the
brigantine. Suddenly he exclaimed:

"Round with her, Hawkins!"

"Up with your helm, Andrews. Hard up, man!" the skipper shouted, as
he himself ran to slack out the main sheet. Four men ran aft to
assist him.

"That will do," he said, as she fell off fast from the wind. "Now,
then, gather in the main sheet, ready for a jibe. Slack off the
starboard runner; a couple of hands aft and get the square sail out
of the locker.

"Mr. Purvis, get the yard across her, lower her down ready for the
sail, and see that the braces and guys are all right.

"Now in with the sheet, lads, handsomely. That will do, that is it.
Over she goes. Slack out the sheet steadily."

"She is round, too," Frank said, as the boom went off nearly
square. "We have gained, and she is not more than half a mile
away."

The manoeuvre had, in fact, brought the yachts nearer to each
other. Both had their booms over to starboard.

"Quick with that square sail," Frank shouted. "She is drawing away
from us fast."

Two minutes later the square sail was hoisted, and the foot boomed
out on the port side. Every eye was now fixed on the brigantine,
but to their disappointment they saw that she was still, though
very much more slowly, drawing ahead.

"That is just what I feared," Frank said, in a tone of deep
vexation. "With those big yards I was certain that she would leave
us when running ahead before the wind. However, there is no fear of
our leaving her. What are we doing now? Seven knots?"

"About that, sir, and she is doing a knot better."

"What do you think that she will do now, Hawkins?"

"I don't see what she has got to do, sir. If she were to get five
miles ahead of us, and then haul her wind, she would know that she
could not go away from us, for we should be to windward; and we are
evidently a good bit faster than she is when we are both close
hauled. The only other thing that I can see for her to do is to run
straight on to Port au Prince. At the rate we are going now she
would be in soon after daylight tomorrow. We should be seven or
eight miles astern of her, and he might think that we should not
venture to board her there."

"I don't think that he would rely on that, Hawkins. Now that he
knows who we are, he will guess that we shall stick at nothing.
What I am afraid of is that he will lower a boat and row Miss
Greendale and her maid ashore. He might do it either there, or,
what would be much more likely, row ashore to some quiet place
during the night, take his friend and two or three of his men with
him, and leave the rest to sail her to Port au Prince."

"I don't think that the wind is going to hold," the skipper said,
looking astern. "I reckon that it will drop, as it generally does,
at sunset. It is not blowing so hard now as it did just before we
wore round."

In half an hour, indeed, it fell so light that the Osprey was
standing through the water only at three and a half knots an hour.
The light wind suited the Phantom, with her great sail spread. She
had now increased her lead to a mile and a half, and was evidently
leaving them fast.

"There is only one thing to be done, George. We must board them in
boats."

"I am ready, Major; but it will be a rather risky business."

Frank looked at him in surprise.

"I don't mean for us, sir," George said, with a smile, "but for
Miss Greendale. You may be sure that those fellows will fight hard,
and as we come up behind we shall get it hot. Now, sir, if anything
happens to you, you must remember that the Osprey will be as good
as useless towards helping her. You as her owner might be able to
justify what we are doing, but if you were gone there would be no
one to take the lead. Carthew would only have to sail into Port au
Prince and denounce us as pirates. I hear from the pilot that these
niggers have got some armed ships, and they might sink us as soon
as we came into the harbour, and then there would be an end to any
chance of Miss Greendale getting her liberty."

"That is true enough, George, but I think that it must be risked.
Now that he knows we are here, he has nothing to do but to send her
ashore under the charge of his friend and two or three of the
sailors, and take her up into the hills. Or he might go with her
himself, which is perhaps more likely. Then when we came up with
her at Port au Prince the skipper would simply deny that there had
ever been any ladies on board, and would swear that he had only
carried out two gentlemen passengers, as his papers would show, and
might declare that he had landed them at Porto Rico. Of course,
they are certain to fight now, for they can do so without risk, as
they can swear that they took us for a pirate.

"How many do you think that the gig will carry, Hawkins?"

"Well, sir, you might put nine in her. You brought ten off at
Southampton; but if you remember, it put her very low in the water,
and we should run a good deal heavier than your party then."

"Yes, I think that we had better take only nine. If we overload her
she will row so heavily that we shall be a long time overhauling
them."

"I am not quite sure that we shall overhaul them anyhow, sir. Look
at those clouds coming over the hills. They are travelling fast,
and I should say that we are likely to have a squall. No doubt they
get them here pretty often with such high land all round."

"Well, we must chance that, Hawkins. If one does come you must pick
us up as we come along. I agree with you; it does look as if we
should have a squall. It may not be anything very serious, but
anyhow, if it comes it will take her along a great deal faster than
we can row.

"Purvis, I suppose that the dinghy will carry seven?"

"Yes, she will do that easily."

"Very well, we can but try; that will give sixteen of us, which is
about their strength. You must remain on board. Purvis shall
command the dinghy; Lechmere will go with me. Pick out thirteen
hands. You and Perry can manage with seven and the five negroes,
but keep a sharp lookout for that squall. Remember that you will
have very short warning. We are only a mile from the shore, and as
it is coming down from the hills you may not see it on the water
until it is quite close to you."

The boats were lowered, and the men, armed with musket and cutlass,
took their places. Frank and George Lechmere each had a cutlass and
a revolver buckled to the waist.

"Now give way, lads," Frank said. "She is about two miles ahead of
us, and we ought to overtake her in half an hour."

It was now getting dusk, the light fading out suddenly as the
clouds spread over the sky. Frank's last orders to the skipper
before leaving were:

"Edge her in, Hawkins, until you are dead astern of the brigantine.
Then if the squall comes down before we reach her, we shall be
right in your track."

"I have put a lighted lantern into the stern sheets of each boat,
sir, and have thrown a bit of sail cloth over them, so that if she
leaves you behind, and you hold it up, there won't be any fear of
our missing you."

The men rowed hard, but the gig had to stop frequently to let the
dinghy come up. They gained, however, fast upon the brig, and in
half an hour were but a few hundred yards astern. Then came a hail
from the brigantine in French:

"Keep off or we will sink you!"

No reply was made. They were but two hundred yards away when there
were two bright flashes from the stern of the brigantine, and a
shower of bullets splashed round the boats. There were two or three
cries of pain, and George Lechmere felt Frank give a sudden start.

"Are you hit, sir?"

"I have got a bullet in my left shoulder, George, but it is of no
consequence.

"Row on, lads," he shouted. "We shall be alongside before they have
time to load again.

"I never thought of their having guns, though," he went on, as the
men recovered from their surprise, and dashed on again with a
cheer. "By the sharp crack they must be brass. I suppose he picked
up a couple of small guns at Ostend, thinking that they might be
useful to him in these waters."

A splattering fire of musketry now broke out from the brigantine.
They had lessened their distance by half when they saw the
brigantine, without apparent cause, heel over. Farther and farther
she went until her lee rail was under water.

The firing instantly ceased, and there were loud shouts on board; then,
as she came up into the wind, the square yards were let fall, and the
crew ran up the ratlines to secure the sails. Simultaneously the
foresail came down, then her head payed off again, and she darted
away like an arrow from the boats.

These, however, had ceased rowing. Frank, as he saw the brigantine
bowing over, had shouted to Purvis to put the boat's head to the
wind, doing the same himself. A few seconds afterwards the squall
struck them with such force that some of the oars were wrenched
from the hands of the men, who were unprepared for the attack.

"Steady, men, steady!" Frank shouted. "It won't last long. Keep on
rowing, so as to hold the boat where you are, till the yacht comes
along. It won't be many minutes before she is here."

In little over a quarter of an hour she was seen approaching, and
Frank saw that, in spite of the efforts of the men at the oars, the
boats had been blown some distance to leeward. However, as soon as
the lanterns were held up the Osprey altered her course, and the
captain, taking her still further to leeward, threw her head up to
the wind until they rowed alongside her.

Frank had by this time learned that one of the men in the bow had
been killed, and that three besides himself had been wounded. Two
were wounded on board the dinghy.

"So they have got some guns," the skipper said, as they climbed on
deck. "No one hurt, I hope?"

"There is one killed, I am sorry to say, and five wounded," Frank
replied; "but none of them seriously. I have got a bullet in my
shoulder, but that is of no great consequence. So you got through
it all right?"

"Yes, sir, it looked so nasty that I got the square-sail off her
and the topsail on deck before it struck us, and as we ran the
foresail down just as it came we were all right, and only just got
the water on deck. It was as well, though, that we were lying
becalmed. As it was, she jumped away directly she felt it. I was
just able to see the brigantine, and it seemed to me that she had a
narrow escape of turning turtle."

"Yes, they were too much occupied with us to be keeping a sharp
lookout at the sky, and if it had been a little stronger it would
have been a close case with her. Thank God that it was no worse.
Can you make her out still?"

"Yes, sir, I can see her plainly enough with my glasses."

In a quarter of an hour the strength of the squall was spent. The
wind then veered round to its former quarter, taking the Osprey
along at the rate of some five knots an hour.

The wounded were now attended to. George Lechmere found that the
ball had broken Frank's collarbone and gone out behind. Both he and
Frank had had sufficient experience to know what should be done,
and after bathing the wound, and with the assistance of two
sailors, who pulled the arm into its place, George applied some
splints to the broken bone to keep it firm, and then bandaged it
and the arm.

One of the sailors had a wound in the cheek, the ball in its
passage carrying off part of the ear. One of the men sitting in the
bow had a broken arm, but only one of the others was seriously
hurt. Frank went on deck again as soon as his shoulder was bandaged
and his left arm strapped tightly to his side.

"I suppose that she is still gaining on us, Hawkins?"

"Yes, she is dropping us. I reckon she has gone fast, sir, fully
half a knot, though we have got all sail set."

"There is one comfort," Frank said. "The coast from here as far as
the Bec is so precipitous, that they won't have a chance of putting
the boat ashore until they get past that point, and by the time
they are there daylight will have broken."



Chapter 16.

The stars were bright, and with the aid of a night glass the
brigantine was kept in sight; the sailors relieving each other at
the masthead every half hour. Frank would have stayed on deck all
night, had not George Lechmere persuaded him to go below.

"Look here, Major," he said. "It is like enough that we may have a
stiff bit of fighting tomorrow. Now we know that those fellows have
guns, though they may be but two or three pounders, and it is clear
that it is not going to be altogether such a one-sided job as we
looked for. You have had a long day already, sir. You have got an
ugly wound, and if you don't lie down and keep yourself quiet, you
won't be fit to do your share in any fighting tomorrow; and I
reckon that you would like to be in the front of this skirmish. You
know in India wounds inflamed very soon if one did not keep quiet
with them, and I expect that it is just the same here.

"It is not as if you could do any good on deck. The men are just as
anxious to catch that brigantine as you are. They were hot enough
before, but now that one of their mates has been killed, and five
or six wounded, I believe that they would go round the world rather
than let her slip through their hands. I shall be up and down all
night, Major, and the captain and both mates will be up, too, and I
promise that we will let you know if there is anything to tell
you."

"Well, I will lie down, George, but I know that I shall get no
sleep. Still, perhaps, it will be better for me to keep my arm
quite quiet."

He was already without his coat, for that had been cut from the
neck down to the wrist, to enable George to get at the wound. He
kicked off his light canvas shoes, and George helped him to lie
down in his berth.

"You will be sure to let me know if she changes her course or
anything?"

"I promise you that I will come straight down, Major."

Three quarters of an hour later, George stole noiselessly down and
peeped into the stateroom. He had turned down the swinging lamp
before he went up, but there was enough light to enable him to see
that his master had fallen off to sleep. He took the news up to
Hawkins, who at once gave orders that no noise whatever was to be
made. The men still moved about the deck, but all went barefooted.

"The wind keeps just the same," Hawkins said. "I can't make it more
than three and a half knots through the water. I would give a
year's pay if it would go round dead ahead of us; we should soon
pick her up then. As it is, she keeps crawling away. However, we
can make her out, on such a night as this, a good deal further than
she is likely to get before morning. Besides, we shall be having
the moon up soon, and as we are steering pretty nearly east, it
will show her up famously.

"Now I will give you the same advice that you gave the governor.
You had much better lie down for a bit. Purvis has gone down for a
sleep, Perry will go down when he comes up at twelve, and I shall
get an hour or two myself later on."

"I won't go down," George said, "but I will bring a couple of
blankets up and lie down aft. I promised the Major that I would let
him know if there was any change in the wind, or in the
brigantine's course, so wake me directly there is anything to tell
him. I have put his bell within reach. I have no doubt I shall hear
it through that open skylight if he rings; but if not, wake me at
once."

"All right. Trust us for that."

Twice during the night George got up and went below. The first time
Frank had not moved. The second he found that the tumbler of lime
juice and water, on the table at the side of the bunk, was nearly
half emptied; and that his master had again gone off to sleep and
was breathing quietly and regularly.

"He is going on all right," he said to Hawkins, when he went up.
"There is no fever yet, anyhow, for he has drunk only half that
glass of lime juice. If he had been feverish he would not have
stopped until he had got to the bottom of it."

When George next woke, the morning was breaking.

"Anything new?" he asked Purvis, who was now at the tiller.

"Nothing whatever. The governor has not rung his bell. The wind is
just as it was, neither better nor worse, and the brigantine is
eight miles ahead of us."

George went forward to have a look at her.

"I think I had better wake him," he said to himself. "He will have
had nine hours of it, and he won't like it if I don't let him know
that it is daylight. I will get two or three fresh limes squeezed,
and then go in to him."
