
It did not seem at all to Polly that she was repeating these words
herself; rather they seemed to be said to her gently, slowly,
distinctly, by a well-loved and familiar voice.

It was true, then, there was a Guide, and those who were afraid to go
alone could hold a Hand which would never lead them astray.

Her bitter sobs came more quietly as she thought of this. Gradually her
eyes closed, and she fell asleep.

When Flower started across the moor it was quite true that she was not
in the least afraid. A great terror had come to her that night; during
those awful minutes when she feared the baby was dead, the terror of the
deed she had done had almost stunned her; but when Maggie came and
relieved her of her worst agony, a good deal of her old manner and a
considerable amount of her old haughty, defiant spirit had returned.

Flower was more or less uncivilized; there was a good deal of the wild
and of the untamed about her; and now that the baby was alive, and
likely to do well, overwhelming contrition for the deed she had done no
longer oppressed her.

She stepped along as quickly as her uncomfortable boots would admit. The
moonlight fell full on her slender figure, and cast a cold radiance over
her uncovered head. Her long, yellow hair floated down over her
shoulders; she looked wonderfully ethereal, almost unearthly, and had
any of the villagers been abroad, they might well have taken her for one
of the ghosts of the moor.

Flower had a natural instinct for finding her way, and, aided by
Maggie's directions, she steered in a straight course for the village.
Not a soul was abroad; she was alone, in a great solitude.

The feeling gave her a certain sense of exhilaration. From the depths of
her despair her easily influenced spirits sprang again to hope and
confidence. After all, nothing very dreadful had happened. She must
struggle not to give way to intemperate feelings. She must bear with
Polly! she must put up with Maggie. It was all very trying, of course,
but it was the English way. She walked along faster and faster, and now
her lips rose in a light song, and now again she ran, eager to get over
the ground. When she ran her light hair floated behind her, and she
looked less and less like a living creature.

Polly had slept for nearly two hours. She awoke to hear a voice singing,
not the sweet, touching, high notes which had seemed to fall from the
stars to comfort her, but a wild song:

  "Oh, who will up and follow me?
    Oh, who will with me ride?
  Oh, who will up and follow me
    To win a bonny bride?"

For a moment Polly's heart stood still; then she started forward with a
glad and joyful cry.

"It is Flower! Flower coming back again with little Pearl!" she said, in
a voice of rapture. "That is Flower's song and Flower's voice, and she
wouldn't sing so gayly if baby was not quite, quite well, and if she was
not bringing her home."

Polly rose, as well as she could, to a sitting posture, and shouted out
in return:

"Here I am, Flower. Come to me. Bring me baby at once."

Even Flower, who in many respects had nerves of iron, was startled by
this sudden apparition among the bracken. For a brief instant she
pressed her hand to her heart. Were Maggie's tales true? Were there
really queer and unnatural creatures to be found on the moor?

"Come here, Flower, here! I have sprained my ankle. What are you afraid
of?" shouted Polly again. Then Flower sprang to her side, knelt down by
her, and took her cold hand in hers. Flower's slight fingers were warm;
she was glowing all over with life and exercise.

"Where's baby?" said Polly, a sickly fear stealing over her again when
she saw that the queer girl was alone.

"Baby? She's in the hermit's hut with Maggie. Don't scold me, Polly. I'm
very sorry I got into a passion."

Polly pushed Flower's fingers a little away.

"I don't want to be angry," she said. "I've been asking God to keep me
from being angry. I did wrong myself, I did very wrong, only you did
worse; you did worse than I did, Flower."

"I don't see that at all. At any rate, I have said I am sorry. No one is
expected to beg pardon twice. How is it you are out here, lying on the
moor, Polly? Are you mad?"

"No. I came out to look for baby, and for you."

"But why are you here? You could not find us in that lazy fashion."

"Look at my foot; the moonlight shines on it. See, it is twisted all
round. I fell from a height and hurt myself. I have been lying here for
hours."

"Poor Polly! I am really sorry. I once strained my foot like that. The
pain was very bad--very, very bad. Mother kept my foot on her knee all
night; she bathed it all night long; in the morning it was better."

"Please, Flower, don't mind about my foot now. Tell me about baby. Is
she ill? Have you injured her?"

"I don't know. I suppose I did wrong to take her out like that. I said
before, I was sorry. I was frightened about her, awfully frightened,
until Maggie came in. I was really afraid baby was dead. I don't want to
speak of it. It wasn't true. Don't look at me like that. Maggie came,
and said that little Pearl lived. I was so relieved that I kissed
Maggie, yes, actually, although she is only a kitchen-maid. Maggie got a
warm bath ready, and put baby in, and when I left the hut she was sound
asleep. Maggie knew exactly what to do for her. Fancy my kissing her,
although she is only a kitchen-maid!"

"She is the dearest girl in the world!" said Polly. "I think she is
noble. Think of her going to the hermit's hut, and finding baby, and
saving baby's life. Oh, she is the noblest girl in the world, miles and
miles above you and me!"

"You can speak for yourself. I said she behaved very well. It is
unnecessary to compare her to people in a different rank of life. Now,
do you think you can lean on me, and so get back to Sleepy Hollow?"

"No, Flower. I cannot possibly stir. Look at my foot; it is twisted the
wrong way."

"Then I must leave you, for Maggie has sent me in a great hurry to get
milk, and comforts of all sorts, for baby."

"Please don't stay an instant. Run, Flower. Why did you stay talking so
long? If father is in the house, you can tell him, and he will come, I
know, and carry me home. But, oh! get everything that is wanted for baby
first of all. I am not of the smallest consequence compared to baby. Do
run, Flower; do be quick. It frets me so awfully to see you lingering
here when baby wants her comforts."

"I shan't be long," said Flower. She gathered up her skirts, and sped
down the path, and Polly gave a sigh of real relief.




CHAPTER X.

LOOKING AT HERSELF.


That night, which was long remembered in the annals of the Maybright
family as one of the dreariest and most terrible they had ever passed
through, came to an end at last. With the early dawn Polly was brought
home, and about the same time Nurse and Maggie reappeared with baby on
the scene.

Flower, after she had briefly told her tidings, went straight up to her
own room, where she locked the door, and remained deaf to all entreaties
on David's part that he might come in and console her.

"She's always dreadful after she has had a real bad passion," he
explained to Fly, who was following him about like a little ghost. "I
wish she would let me in. She spends herself so when she is in a passion
that she is quite weak afterwards. She ought to have a cup of tea; I
know she ought."

But it was in vain that David knocked, and that little Fly herself, even
though she felt that she hated Flower, brought the tea. There was no
sound at the other side of the locked door, and after a time the anxious
watchers went away.

At that moment, however, had anybody been outside, they might have seen
pressed against the window-pane in that same room a pale but eager face.
Had they looked, too, they might have wondered at the hard lines round
the young, finely-cut lips, and yet the eager, pleading watching in the
eyes.

There was a stir in the distance--the far-off sound of wheels. Flower
started to her feet, slipped the bolt of her door, ran downstairs, and
was off and away to meet the covered carriage which was bringing baby
home.

She called to George, who was driving it, to stop. She got in, and
seated herself beside Nurse and baby.

"How is she? Will she live?" she asked, her voice trembling.

"God grant it!" replied the Nurse. "What are you doing, Miss Flower? No,
you shan't touch her."

"I must! Give her to me this moment. There is Dr. Maybright. Give me
baby this moment. I must, I _will_, have her!"

She almost snatched the little creature out of Nurse's astonished arms,
and as the carriage drew up at the entrance steps sprang out, and put
the baby into Dr. Maybright's arms.

"There!" she said; "I took her away, but I give her back. I was in a
passion and angry when I took her away; now I repent, and am sorry, and
I give her back to you? Don't you see, I can't do more than give her
back to you? That is our way out in Victoria. Don't you slow English
people understand? I was angry; now I am sorry. Why do you all stand
round and stare at me like that? Can anybody be more than sorry, or do
more than give back what they took?"

"It is sometimes impossible to give back what we took away, Flower,"
replied the Doctor, very gravely.

He was standing in the midst of his children; his face was white; his
eyes had a strained look in them; the strong hands with which he clasped
little Pearl trembled. He did not look again at Flower, who shrank away
as if she had received a blow, and crept upstairs.

For the rest of the day she was lost sight of; there was a great deal of
commotion and excitement. Polly, when she was brought home, was
sufficiently ill and suffering to require the presence of a doctor;
little Pearl showed symptoms of cold, and for her, too, a physician
prescribed.

Why not Dr. Maybright? The children were not accustomed to strange faces
and unfamiliar voices when they were ill or in pain. Polly had a curious
feeling when the new doctor came to see her; he prescribed and went
away. Polly wondered if the world was coming to an end; she was in
greater pain than she had ever endured in her life, and yet she felt
quiet and peaceful. Had she gone up a step or two of the mountain she so
longed to climb? Did she hear the words of her mother's favorite song,
and was a Guide--_the_ Guide--holding her childish hand?

The hour of the long day passed somehow.

If there was calm in Polly's room, and despair more or less in poor
Flower's, the rest of the house was kept in a state of constant
excitement. The same doctor came back again; doors were shut and opened
quickly; people whispered in the corridors. As the hours flew on, no one
thought of Flower in her enforced captivity, and even Polly, but for
Maggie's ceaseless devotion, might have fared badly.

All day Flower Dalrymple remained in her room. She was forgotten at
meal-times. Had David been at home, this would not have been the case;
but Helen had sent David and her own little brothers to spend the day at
Mrs. Jones's farm. Even the wildest spirits can be tamed and brought to
submission by the wonderful power of hunger, and so it came to pass that
in the evening a disheveled-looking girl opened the door of her pretty
room over the porch, and slipped along the passages and downstairs.
Flower went straight to the dining-room; she intended to provide herself
with bread and any other food she could find, then to return to her
solitary musings. She thought herself extremely neglected, and the
repentance and sense of shame which she had more or less experienced in
the morning and the memory of Dr. Maybright's words and the look in has
grave eyes had faded under a feeling of being unloved, forsaken,
forgotten. Even David had never come near her--David, who lived for
her. Was she not his queen as well as sister? Was he not her dutiful
subject as well as her little brother?

All the long day that Flower had spent in solitude her thoughts grew
more and more bitter, and only hunger made her now forsake her room. She
went into the dining-room; it was a long, low room, almost entirely
lined with oak. There was a white cloth on the long center table, in the
middle of which a lamp burnt dimly; the French windows were open; the
blinds were not drawn down. As Flower opened the door, a strong cold
breeze caused the lamp to flare up and smoke, the curtains to shake, and
a child to move in a restless, fretful fashion on her chair. The child
was Firefly; her eyes were so swollen with crying that they were almost
invisible under their heavy red lids; her hair was tossed; the rest of
her little thin face was ghastly pale.

"Is that you, Flower?" she exclaimed. "Are you going to stay here? If
you are, I'll go away."

"What do you mean?" said Flower. "_You_ go away? You can go or stay,
just as you please. I have come here because I want some food, and
because I've been shamefully neglected and starved all day. Ring the
bell, please, Fly. I really must order up something to eat."

Fly rose from her chair. She had long, lanky legs and very short
petticoats, and as she stood half leaning against the wall, she looked
so forlorn, pathetic, and yet comical, that Flower, notwithstanding her
own anger and distress, could not help bursting out laughing.

"What is the matter?" she said. "What an extraordinary little being you
are! You look at me as if you were quite afraid of me. For pity's sake,
child, don't stare at me in that grewsome fashion. Ring the bell, as I
tell you, and then if you please you can leave the room."

There was a very deep leather arm-chair near the fireplace. Into this
now Flower sank. She leant her head comfortably against its cushions,
and gazed at Firefly with a slightly sarcastic expression.

"Then you don't know!" said Fly, suddenly. "You sit there and look at
me, and you talk of eating, as if any one could eat. You don't know. You
wouldn't sit there like that if you really knew."

"I think you are the stupidest little creature I ever met!" responded
Flower. "I'm to know something, and it's wonderful that I care to eat. I
tell you, child, I haven't touched food all day, and I'm starving.
What's the matter? Speak! I'll slap you if you don't."

"There's bread on the sideboard," said Fly. "I'm sorry you're starving.
It's only that father is ill; that--that he's very ill. I don't suppose
it is anything to you, or you wouldn't have done it."

"Give me that bread," said Flower. She turned very white, snatched a
piece out of Fly's hand, and put it to her lips. She did not swallow it,
however. A lump seemed to rise in her throat.

"I'm faint for want of food," she said in a minute. "I'd like some wine.
If David was here, he'd give it to me. What's that about your father?
Ill? He was quite well this morning; he spoke to me."

She shivered.

"I'm awfully faint," she said in a moment. "Please, Fly, be merciful.
Give me half a glass of sherry."

Fly started, rushed to the sideboard, poured a little wine into a glass,
and brought it to Flower.

"There!" she said in a cold though broken-hearted voice. "But you
needn't faint; he's not your father; you wouldn't have done it if he was
your father."

Flower tossed off the wine.
