bodies of those who were, as he believed, cut off and murdered;
embarked on board ship, and sailed down the coast. A few days later
he put in to another bay, and there remained some time.

Here a strange scene was enacted, which has cast a shadow over the
reputation of the great sea captain. Calling his officers together,
he accused one of them, Captain Doughty, of treachery. He alleged
that the plots against him were commenced before leaving Plymouth;
and yet, as he had promoted Captain Doughty to the command of one
of the ships, when upon the voyage, it is difficult to understand
how he can, at that time, have believed that he was unfaithful.
Nor, again, does it appear in what way his treachery could have
injured the admiral, for as all the officers and crew were devoted
to him, Captain Doughty might have tried, in vain, to lead them
aside from his authority. He professed, indeed, the highest regard
for the man he accused, and spoke to the captains of the great
goodwill and inward affection, even more than brotherly, which he
held towards him. And yet, he averred that it was absolutely
necessary that Captain Doughty should be put upon his trial.

Captain Doughty, it is said, stricken with remorse at his conduct,
acknowledged himself to have deserved death; for that he had
conspired not only for the overthrow of the expedition, but for the
death of the admiral, who was not a stranger, but a dear and true
friend to him; and he besought the assembly to take justice into
their hands, in order to save him from committing suicide.

The forty officers and gentlemen who formed the court, after
examining the proofs, judged that "he had deserved death, and that
it stood by no means with their safety to let him live, and
therefore they remitted the matter thereof, with the rest of the
circumstances, to the general."

Then Captain Drake offered to the prisoner either that he should be
executed there and then, or that he should be left alone when the
fleet sailed away, or that he should be sent back to England, there
to answer his deeds before the lords of her majesty's council.
Captain Doughty asked for twenty-four hours to consider his
decision, and then announced his preference for instant execution,
saying that death were better than being left alone in this savage
land, and that the dishonor of being sent back to England would be
greater than he could survive.

The next day Mr. Francis Fletcher, the pastor and preacher of the
fleet, held a solemn service. The general and the condemned man
received the sacrament together, after which they dined "also at
the same table together, as cheerful in sobriety as ever in their
lives they had done afore time, each cheering the other up, and
taking their leave by drinking each to other, as if some journey
only had been in hand." After dinner, Captain Doughty came forth,
kneeled down at the block, and was at once beheaded by the provost
marshal.

Such is the story of this curious affair, as told by the
chroniclers. But it must be remembered that these were favorable to
Captain Drake, and it certainly seems extraordinary that, upon such
a voyage as this, Captain Doughty could not have been deprived of
his command and reduced to the rank of a simple adventurer; in
which he could, one would think, have done no harm whatever to the
expedition.

At the island where this execution took place the fleet abode two
months, resting the crews, wooding, watering, and trimming the
ships, and bringing the fleet into a more compact compass;
destroying the Mary, a Portuguese prize, and arranging the whole of
the crews in three ships, so that they might the more easily keep
together. On August the 17th they set sail, and on the 20th reached
the entrance to the Straits, Cape Virgins. Here the admiral caused
his fleet, in homage to the Queen, to strike their foresails,
acknowledging her to have the full interest and honor in the
enterprise; and further, in remembrance of his honored patron, Sir
Christopher Hatton, he changed the name of the ship in which he
himself sailed from the Pelican to the Golden Hind, this animal
forming part of the chancellor's armorial bearings.

They now entered the narrow Straits of Magellan, which are in many
places no wider than a river; and in the night passed a burning
mountain, which caused no little surprise to those who had never
beheld anything of the kind. Here all were astonished by the sight
of huge numbers of penguins, which were then for the first time
discovered by Englishmen. These strange birds, with their long
bodies, short necks, and absence of wings, greatly astonished them;
and were so tame that, in the course of an hour or two, they killed
no less than three thousand of them, and found them to be excellent
food. One of these islands the admiral christened Saint George.

Sailing on for some days, they came to a bay in which they found
many natives, who came out in a canoe whose beauty and form were
considered, by all, to be far superior to anything that they had
hitherto beheld; which was the more singular, inasmuch as these
people were of a very low type. However, they appear in those days
to have been more advanced in civilization than their descendants
now are.

On the 6th of September they entered the South Sea, Drake having
been the fourth commander who had sailed through the Straits. The
first passage was made by Magellan in 1520, the second by Loyasa in
1526, the third by Juan de Ladrilleros from the Pacific side. In
this voyage the English commander had far better weather than had
been experienced by his predecessors, accomplishing in a fortnight
a voyage which had taken them some months.

His good fortune, however, here deserted them; for upon the very
day after they entered the South Sea, a contrary wind fell upon
them, and increased to a powerful hurricane. This augmented rather
than decreased in force, and on the night of September the 30th the
Marigold, Captain John Thomas, was separated from the rest of the
fleet, and was never heard of, after.

Until the 7th of October they did not again see land, being driven
far to the south. They then discovered an island, and entering a
harbor came to anchor. The shelter, however, was a poor one, and
the gale blew so furiously that, in the night, the Elizabeth was
blown from her anchors, and lost sight of the Golden Hind. It is a
question whether this event was not partly caused by the captain,
Winter, who certainly behaved as if he had the fixed intention of
returning to England. He never made any serious effort to rejoin
the Golden Hind; but, after remaining for some little time in those
quarters, he sailed for England, reaching home in safety some
months afterwards.

They christened the bay "The Parting of Friends," and the Golden
Hind was driven down again into 55 degrees south latitude. Fresh
gales fell upon them and, as has been said, it was not till October
the 28th, after fifty-two days of almost unexampled bad weather,
that the sky cleared, and they were able to renew their journey.
They searched the islands in all directions for their missing
friends, and in remembrance of them the admiral gave them the name
of the Elizabethedes.

Hoping that Captain Winter had sailed north, the Golden Hind's head
was turned in that direction, with great hope that they might meet
her in latitude 30 degrees; which had been before appointed as a
place of rendezvous, should the fleet happen to be separated.
Touching at many points, they inquired everywhere of the natives,
but could hear no word of any ship having been seen before.

At the island of Mocha they had a misadventure. The island was
thickly inhabited by many Indians, whom the cruel conduct of the
Spaniards had driven from the mainland. With these people the
admiral hoped to have traffic, and the day after his landing they
brought down fruit and vegetables and two fat sheep, receiving in
return many little presents. They seemed to be well content, and
the next morning early, all being ready for a general traffic, the
admiral repaired to the shore again, with two-thirds of his men,
with water barrels to fill up the ship. As they were peaceably
engaged in this task the natives, to the number of five hundred,
suddenly sprang from an ambush, and with their arrows shot very
grievously at the English.

The general himself was struck in the face, under his right eye and
close by his nose. Nine other persons of the party were all wounded
grievously. The rest gained the boats, and all put off. None of the
wounded died; which, considering that there was no surgeon on board
the ship, was looked upon by the mariners as a special miracle in
their favor.

There was a great talk of returning to shore, to punish the men who
had so treacherously attacked them. But the admiral, seeing that
many of the men were hurt, and believing that the attack had been
the result of the cruel treatment bestowed upon the natives by the
Spaniards, with whom they had naturally confounded our men,
determined to leave them alone; and the same night sailed north,
seeking some convenient spot where the men could land, and obtain a
supply of fresh provisions.

Such a place they found at Philip's Bay, in latitude 32 degrees.
Here they came to an anchor; and an Indian, described as a comely
personage of a goodly stature, his apparel being a white garment
reaching scarcely to his knees, came on board in a canoe. His arms
and legs were naked; his hair upon his head very long, and without
a beard; of very gentle, mild, and humble nature, and tractable to
learn the use of everything. He was courteously entertained and,
receiving gifts, returned to the shore; where his companions, being
much pleased with his reception, at once did all that they could
for the fleet, and brought down provisions and other things
desired.

The natives also offered to guide them to a better harbor where,
the people being more numerous, they could obtain a greater store
of the things desired. The offer was accepted, and on the 4th of
December, piloted by him, they came to a harbor in such a place as
was wished for. This was the Spanish harbor of Valparaiso, and
here, indeed, they found all that they desired, and that without
payment. The Spaniards, having no idea of the English being in the
vicinity, received them with all honor; but as soon as the mistake
was discovered they fled, and the town fell into their hands. In a
ship in the harbor, called the Grand Captain, 1800 jars of wine and
a large quantity of gold were found. The churches were plundered of
their ornaments and relics, and the storehouses of the city laid
under contribution of all things desired.

Sailing again on the 19th of December, they touched to the
southward of the town of Coquimbo, where fourteen of them landed.
The Spaniards here, however, appeared to be bolder than their
comrades in other towns; for a hundred of them, all well mounted,
with three hundred natives, came up against them. This force being
descried, the English retreated, first from the mainland to a rock
within the sea, and thence to their boat. One man, however, Richard
Minnioy, refused to retire before the Spaniards; and remained,
defying the advancing body, until they arrived. He, of course, fell
a victim to his obstinacy; and the Spaniards, having beheaded the
body, placed it against a post, and used it as a target for the
Indians. At nightfall they left it, and the English returned to
shore in their boat, and buried it.

The next day, finding a convenient place, they remained for a
month; refitting the ships and resting the crews, obtaining an
abundance of fish and other provisions such as they required; fresh
water, however, being absent.

Sailing along, they came to Iquique and, landing here, they lighted
upon a Spaniard who lay asleep, and had lying by him thirteen bars
of silver. Thinking it cruel to awaken him, they removed the money,
and allowed him to take his sleep out in security. Continuing their
search for water they landed again, and near the shore met a
Spaniard, with an Indian boy, driving eight "Peruvian sheep," as
the chronicler calls them; these being, of course, the llamas,
which were used as beasts of burden. Each sheep bore two leathern
bags, in each of which was fifty pounds weight of refined silver.
The chronicler says:

"We could not endure to see a gentleman Spaniard turned carrier so;
and therefore, without entreaty, we offered our services, and
became drivers; only his directions were not so perfect that we
could keep the way which he intended, for almost as soon as he was
parted from us we, with our new kind of carriages, were come unto
our boats."

Beyond this Cape lay certain Indian towns, and with the natives of
these, who came out on frail rafts, they trafficked knives, beads,
and glasses, for dried fish. Here they saw more of the llamas,
which are described at great length by the historians of the
expedition; who considered, and rightly, that they were
extraordinary and most useful animals. If however this assertion,
that upon one of their backs "did sit at one time three well-grown
and tall men, and one boy" be true, they must have been
considerably larger in those days than at present.

It was but a few days later that they arrived at Arica, at which
place also they gleaned considerable booty, and thence proceeded to
Lima, which they reached seven days after leaving Arica.

After their long voyage out to sea they again bore north, and
reached the land at the Bay of San Francisco. Here they complained
bitterly of the cold; which is not a little singular, inasmuch as
the time of the year was June, a period at which the heat at San
Francisco is, at present, excessive. It must be assumed, therefore,
that some altogether exceptional season prevailed during this
portion of the voyage.

Here they were well north of the Spanish possessions, and fell
among a people who knew nothing of the white man. A native in a
canoe speedily came out to the ship, as soon as she cast anchor;
and, standing at a long distance, made delivery of a very prolix
oration, with many gestures and signs, moving his hand, turning and
twisting his head and body, and ending with a great show of
reverence and submission. He returned to shore. Again, and for a
third time, he came out and went through the same ceremony; after
which he brought a little basket of rushes, filled with an herb
which is called there tambac, which he threw into the boat. Then he
again returned to shore.

The people came out, many of them in boats, but would not approach
the vessel; and upon the third day the vessel, having received a
leak at sea, was brought to anchor nearer the shore, and
preparations were made to land her stores.




Chapter 18: San Francisco Bay.



After his experience of the treachery of the native, the admiral
determined to build a fort to protect the party on shore. The
people, seeing these preparations, appeared in large numbers and
approached, but their attitude expressed astonishment rather than
hostility. They then, laying down their arms, gathered round the
little party of white men; but as they brought their women with
them, the admiral concluded that no hostility was intended, and
allowed them freely to mix with the whites. Their attitude and
deportment showed that they looked upon them as gods, paying
worship in the most abject manner. In order to show them that his
men were but human, the admiral ordered them to eat and drink, that
the people might observe that they were but men, as they. Even this
failed to convince them and, during the whole time that they
remained there, they were treated as being creatures of celestial
origin.

Two days later, the natives returned in great numbers. A leader at
their head again delivered a long and tedious oration, "to which,"
according to the chronicler, "these people appear to be much
addicted." This oration was delivered with strange and violent
gestures, the speaker's voice being extended to the uttermost
strength of nature, and his words falling so thick, one in the neck
of another, that he could hardly fetch his breath again.

When he had concluded, the people bowed to the earth, giving a long
cry of "Oh," which appears to have answered to our "Amen." Then the
men came forward, and the women went through a number of exercises,
which appear to have shocked and appalled our seamen.

"As if they had been desperate, they used violence against
themselves, crying and shrieking piteously, tearing their flesh
with their nails from their cheeks in a monstrous manner, the blood
streaming down over their bodies. Then, holding their hands above
their heads so that they might not save their bodies from harm,
they would with fury cast themselves upon the ground; never
respecting whether it were clean or soft, but dash themselves in
this manner on hard stones, knobby hillocks, stocks of wood, and
prickly bushes, or whatever else were in their way; iterating the
same course again and again, some nine or ten times each, others
holding out for fifteen or sixteen times, till their strength
failed them."

The admiral, horrified by this cruel exhibition of reverence,
ordered his men to fall to prayers; and signified to them that the
God whom we did serve did not approve of such measures as they had
taken.

Three days later the king himself came down, and the ceremonies
were repeated. The king then offered to the admiral the monarchy of
that land, and perceiving that this would please them, and having
in mind the honor and glory of her majesty, Captain Francis
accepted the crown, and with many ceremonies was installed king of
that country, taking possession of the land in the name of the
Queen. It is not a little singular that this, one of the richest
and most valuable portions of the United States, should thus have
become by right, alike, of discovery and of free gift of the
people, a possession of England.

For some days the people continued their cruel exercises upon
themselves, and so fixed were they in their idolatry that, even
when forcibly prevented acting this way, they would, immediately
they were released, set to with even redoubled fury to cut and
injure themselves.

After a time, their worship took a new form. All the people of the
country having wounds, shrunken limbs, or diseases of any kind were
brought down to be cured; and the people were much grieved that an
instantaneous cure could not be effected, but that our men
proceeded, by the application of lotions, plasters, and unguents,
to benefit those who had anticipated immediate remedy.

Altogether, the account given by the voyagers of the people of this
part of America is most favorable They appear to have been of a
tractable, free, and loving nature, without guile or treachery.
They were finely built men, and one of them could carry easily,
uphill and down, a weight which two or three Englishmen could
scarcely lift. They were swift at running, and could catch a fish
in the sea, if it were in water within their depth.

When the ship was repaired, the admiral, with many of his officers,
made a journey into the interior, and found that it was a goodly
country, with a very fruitful soil. There were many thousands of
large and fair deer, grazing in herds. This country was christened,
by the admiral, Albion; partly from the color of its cliffs, partly
in remembrance of his country. On the shore a monument was set up,
and on it a plate of brass was affixed, engraven with the Queen's
name, the date of the arrival of the ship, and of the free giving
up of the province and kingdom into her majesty's hand; and a piece
of current English money was fastened beneath a hole made in the
brass plate, so that it might remain as a proof that the English
had taken possession of this land, to which the Spaniards had never
approached.

As the stores were being taken on board again, and the natives saw
the preparations for embarkation, the joy with which the arrival of
these white beings had been received was changed into sorrow, and
all the people went about mourning and crying. For many days this
continued, and the parting, when the ship set sail on the 23rd of
July, was a very sorrowful one, the people climbing to the top of
the hills, so as to keep the ship in sight as long as they could,
and making great fires and burning thereon sacrifices to the
departing gods.

The admiral had now made up his mind to abandon the search for a
passage round the north of America. The cold had become even
greater, while they remained in the bay. The natives themselves
were wrapped in black cloths, and huddled together for warmth; and
those in the ship suffered exceedingly. Moreover, the shores of the
country trended far more to the west than had been expected, and
the admiral concluded that, far to the north, the shores of America
and Asia must unite. He thought, too, that in that country must be
very lofty mountains, covered with snow; for so alone could he
account for the exceeding coldness of the wind. Believing,
therefore, that no passage could be made in that way, and seeing
that the ship had already gone through heavy tempests, and the men,
although still of good heart, yet were longing for a return home
after their great labors, he steered to the west, making the
Moluccas his aim.

During the voyage from Lima along the coast of South America, the
boys had met with no special adventures. Upon the day after they
came on board ship, Ned and Tom were called by the admiral into his
cabin, and there recounted to him, at great length, all the
adventures that they had gone through. He wondered greatly at their
recital, and commended them exceedingly for the prudence and
courage which they had shown. The account of the strange places,
never before trodden by the foot of white men, which they had seen,
