turn down the shady side of High Street, within view of the stationer's
shop.

Their business was not protracted, for in about three minutes he saw
them emerge, with faces longer than ever, and turn their steps hurriedly
and dismally towards Templeton.

When they were out of sight, Pledge crossed the road and casually turned
in at Mr Webster's door.

"Well, Webster, anything new?"

"No, sir; nothing in your line, I'm afraid," said the shopman.

"By the way," said Pledge, carelessly, "was that my fag I saw coming out
here just now?"

"Mr Heathcote?" said Webster, frowning.  "Yes, that was he, sir, and
two friends of his.  I'm afraid he's getting into bad company, Mr
Pledge."

"Are you?  What makes you think that?"

"It's an unpleasant matter altogether," said Mr Webster, "and likely to
be more so.  The fact is, sir, I've been robbed."

And he proceeded to give Pledge an account of the loss of the pencil-
case, and of the efforts of the boys to get the matter hushed up.

Pledge heard it with an amused smile.

"They've just been here to try and buy me off," said the indignant
shopkeeper, "but I'm going to make an example of them.  I'm sorry to do
it, Mr Pledge, but it's only fair to myself, isn't it, sir?"

"I don't know," said Pledge; "I don't see that it will do you much good.
You'd better leave it to me."

"Leave it to you?"

"Well, I expect I can get back your pencil as easily as you can, if
they've got it.  You're sure they have got it?"

"I'm certain Master Coote took it; certain as I stand here.  What
they've done with it among them I can't say."

"Well, don't be in a hurry.  I'm a monitor, you know, and it's as much
to my interest to follow the thing up as to yours.  If you'll take my
advice, you won't be in a hurry to prosecute.  Wait a week."

"Very good, sir," said the bookseller, to whom it was really a relief to
postpone final action for a day or two, at least.  If Pledge, meanwhile,
should succeed in bringing the culprit to book, it would still rest with
Mr Webster to decide whether to make an example of him or not Pledge
departed, and the bookseller turned to dust his shop out for the day.
In this occupation he had not proceeded far, when his brush, penetrating
into a crack in his counter, caused something within to rattle.  Being a
tidy man, and not favouring dust or dirt of any sort, even out of sight,
he proceeded to probe the hole in order to clear away the obstruction,
when, to his amazement and consternation, he discovered, snugly lying in
the hollow, the lost pencil-case!

Mr Webster's first thought was, "Artful young rogues!  They've brought
it back, and hidden it here to escape punishment!"

And yet, when he came to think of it, all the dust in that hole could
not have settled there during the last half-hour; nor--and he was sure
of this--had either of the boys, on their last two visits, been anywhere
near that side of his shop.

After all, he had "run his head against a stone wall," and narrowly
escaped ruining himself as far as Templeton was concerned.  For he knew
the young gentlemen of that school well enough to be sure, after a
blunder like this, that the place would soon have become too hot to hold
him.

Mr Webster positively gasped at the thought of his narrow escape, and
forgot all about Pledge, and the culprit, and the culprit's friends, in
his self congratulation.

About mid-day, however, he was suddenly reminded of them all, by the
vision of Dick darting into the shop.

"Webster," said that youth, in tones of breathless entreaty, "_do_ let
us off this once!  Coote really never took the pencil, and if you have
him taken up, it will be ruination!  I shall get in a row for coming
down now, but I couldn't help.  We'll do anything if you don't take
Coote up.  I'll get my father to pay you what you like.  Will you,
please, Webster?"

The boy delivered this appeal so rapidly and earnestly that Webster had
no time to stop him; but when Dick paused, he said:--

"Make yourself comfortable, Mr Richardson, I've found the pencil."

Dick literally shouted, as he sprang forward and seized the bookseller's
hand:--

"Found it!  Oh, what a brick you are!"

"Yes; it had fallen into that hole, and I just turned it out.  Lucky for
you and your friend it did.  And I'm not sorry, either, for I'd no fancy
for putting any of you to trouble; but I was bound to protect myself,
you see."

"Of course, of course.  You're a regular trump, Webster," cried Dick,
too delighted to feel at all critical of the way in which the bookseller
was extricating himself from his dilemma.  "I'm so glad; so will they
be.  Thanks, awfully, Webster.  I say, I must get a _Templeton Observer_
for the good of the shop."

And he flung down a sixpence in the bigness of his heart, and taking the
newspaper, darted back to Templeton in a state of jubilation and
happiness, which made passers-by, as he rushed down the street, turn
round and look after him.

In ten minutes Coote and Heathcote were as radiant as he; and that
afternoon the Templeton "Tub" echoed with the boisterous glee of the
three heroes, as they played leap-frog with one another in the water,
and set the rocks almost aglow with the sunshine of their countenances.

But Nemesis is proverbially a cruel old lady.  She sports with her
victims like a cat with a mouse.  And just when the poor scared things,
having escaped one terrible swoop of her hand, take breath, she comes
down remorselessly with the other hand, and dashes away hope and breath
at a blow.

And so it fared with our unlucky heroes.  No sooner had they escaped the
fangs of Mr Webster, than they found themselves writhing in the
clutches of a new terror, twice as bad and twice as awkward.

In the first flush of escape, Dick had crammed the _Templeton Observer_,
which he had paid sixpence for in celebration of the finding of the
pencil, into his pocket, and never given it another thought.  During the
evening, however, having occasion to search the pocket for another of
its numerous contents, he came upon it, and drew it out.

"What's that--the _Templeton Observer_?" asked Heathcote, becoming
suddenly serious.  "Anything in it?"

"I haven't looked," said Dick, becoming serious, too, and inwardly
anathematising the public press.

"May as well," said Heathcote.

"Perhaps there'll be something about the All England Tennis Cup in it,"
said Coote.

Dick opened the paper, and his jaw dropped at the first paragraph which
met his eye.

"Well," said Heathcote, reflecting his friend's consternation in his own
looks, "whatever is it?"

"Has Lawshaw won it, or Renford?" inquired Coote.

Dick passed the paper to Georgie, who read as follows:--

  *The mysterious disappearance of a Templeton boat*.--The boatman
  Thomas White was arrested yesterday at Glistow, and will be charged
  before the magistrates on Saturday with fraudulently pawning the boat
  _Martha_, knowing the same to be only partially his own property.  The
  case is attracting much interest in the town.  No news has yet reached
  us of the missing boat, but we hear on good authority that
  circumstances have come to light pointing to White himself as the
  thief, and we believe evidence to this effect will be offered at
  Saturday's examination.  The police are reticent on the subject.

"What was the score of sets?" asked Coote, as Heathcote put down the
paper.

The latter replied by handing the paper to the questioner and pointing
to the fatal paragraph.

Coote read it in great bewilderment.  Of course he knew all about Tom
White's row and the missing _Martha_.  Every Templeton fellow, from
Mansfield down to Gosse, knew it.  But why should Dick and Heathcote
look so precious solemn about it?

"By Jove!" said he, "I wish they'd catch the fellow.  What's the use of
the police being reticent?"

"Coote, old man," said Dick, in a tone which made the youth addressed
open his eyes, "do you know how the _Martha_ got lost?"

"Stolen," said Coote, "by a fellow who was skulking about on the sands."

"Wrong.  She was turned adrift; someone loosed the anchor rope when the
tide was coming in."

"How do you know that?"

"Because I was the fellow."

"And I helped," said Heathcote.

"My eye! what a regular row!" said Coote.

Whereupon the "Firm" swore eternal friendship, and resolved to sink or
swim together.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE HERMIT COMES OUT OF HIS CELL.

Mansfield never flattered himself that Templeton would right itself by a
single turn of his hand, nor did he flatter himself that Templeton would
ever love Jupiter as they had loved the old Saturn who had preceded him.
And in neither expectation was he out of his reckoning.

After a week or two the sole result of the new _regime_ seemed to be
that the bad lot had plunged further into their evil ways.  The "Select
Sociables" had increased the number of their members to thirty, and made
it an indispensable qualification for every candidate that he should
have suffered punishment at the hands of the masters or monitors.  It
got to be known that it was war to the knife, and fellows flocked to the
post of danger and begged to be admitted to the club.

All this Mansfield saw, but it did not disconcert him.  He was glad to
see a clear line being drawn, which made it impossible for any but the
practised hypocrites to hang out false colours and pretend to be what
they were not.  It was half the battle to the Captain to know exactly
who were friends and who were enemies.

He may sometimes have thought, with a passing sigh, of the affection
which everybody, good and bad, had had for dear old Ponty, and wished he
could expect as much.  But he dashed the thought aside as folly.  His
duty was to make war on rebels, not to win them over by blandishments.

So he set his face like steel to the work, and made the name of monitor
a caution in Templeton.  And, it is fair to say, he was well backed up.
Cresswell, Cartwright, Swinstead, and others of their sort rallied round
him, and, at the risk of their own popularity, and sometimes against
their better judgment, took up the rule of iron.  Even the hermit
Freckleton came out of his den now and then on the side of justice.

The cad Bull, who had neither the wit nor the temper to play a double
part, threw up his monitorship in disgust and went over to the enemy,
carrying with him one or two of the empty heads of the Fifth.  Pledge
alone looked on the whole revolution as a joke.

But even Pledge found it hard to make a case against the new rulers;
for, if their severity was great, their justice was still greater.  If
they spared no one else, neither did they spare themselves.  There was
something almost ferociously honest and upright about Mansfield, and his
lieutenants soon caught his spirit and made it impossible for anyone,
even for Pledge, to point at them and say that either fear or favour
moved them.

It was probably on this very account that Pledge deemed it well to treat
the new state of things as a comedy, and not with serious attention.

A monitors' meeting was summoned for the morning after Pledge's call on
Mr Webster, and he attended it with a pleasant smile on his face, as
one who was always glad to come and see how his schoolfellows amused
themselves.

The rest of the meeting was grim and serious.

"It's time we did something to put down this Club," said Mansfield.
"They are drawing in all sorts of fellows now, and the longer we put it
off the worse it will be."

"What shall we do?" asked Freckleton.

"I think we ought to be able to do it without going to Winter about it,"
said Cresswell.

"Would it do to start an opposition club?" suggested Swinstead.

"Or make it penal for any fellow to belong to it," said Cartwright.

"Or send a deputation," said Pledge, laughing, "and ask them please not
to put the Sixth in such an awkward fix!"

"You see," said the captain, ignoring, as he usually did, Pledge's
sarcasms, "whatever we do, some are sure to be irreconcilable.  I would
like to give any who wish a chance of coming out, and then we shall know
what to do with the rest.  Does anyone know when they meet?"

"I believe there's a meeting this evening," said Cartwright; "at least,
my fag Coote told me a couple of days ago that he had a particular
engagement this evening, and was sorry he couldn't say what it was, for
he'd promised never to speak of the Club to anyone, least of all to a
monitor."

There was a general smile at the expense of the artless Coote, and then
Mansfield said:--

"Well, one of us had better go there and give them a caution.  Will you
go, Freckleton?"

"I?" exclaimed the Hermit, aghast.

"Yes, please, old man," said the Captain; "you'd do it better than
anyone."

"Wouldn't you like me to go?" asked Pledge.

"There's one other thing I want to speak about," said Mansfield.
"There's been a lot of breaking bounds lately among the juniors.  I
caught your fag yesterday, Cresswell, and gave him lines.  Your fag too,
Pledge, I have seen several times lately going out without leave."

"Dear me! how shocking!" said Pledge.

"If monitors don't see that their own fags keep the rules," said
Mansfield, "there's not much chance of getting the school generally to
keep them.  In your case, Pledge, I happen to know you yourself gave
Heathcote leave to go out more than once this term.  I'm going to put a
stop to that."

"Are you really?" said Pledge.

"Yes," said Mansfield, flashing with his eyes, but otherwise cool.

Whereupon the meeting broke up.

Freckleton had by no means a congenial task before him.

All this term he had been unable to settle down in his hermit's cell.
Mansfield had always been bringing him out for this and that special
duty, till he was becoming quite a public character; and, unfortunately
for him, he had done the few services for which he had been told off so
well, that Mansfield had no notion whatever of letting him crawl back to
obscurity.

The Captain knew what he was about in selecting the Hermit to open the
campaign against the "Select Sociables."  A secret lawless society in a
school is like a secret lawless society in a country--a pest to be dealt
with carefully.  Mansfield knew well enough that he himself was not the
man to do it; nor was the downright Cresswell, nor the hot-headed
Cartwright.  It needed the wisdom of the serpent as well as the paw of
the lion to do it, and if anyone was likely to succeed, it was
Freckleton.

For Freckleton, hermit as he was, seemed to know more about every fellow
in Templeton than anyone else.  Where and when he made their
acquaintance, no one knew and no one inquired.  But certain it was no
one knew the weak points of this boy and the good points of that better
than he.  And, as we have seen already, he was a "dark" man; hardly
anyone knew him.  They knew he had won the Bishop's Scholarship and was
reputed prodigiously learned.  For the rest, except that he was harmless
and kindly, fellows hardly seemed to know him at all.  The "Select
Sociables" were in full congress.  They had instituted a fine of a penny
for non-attendance, which had worked wonders.  And to-night every member
was in his place, except only Heathcote and Coote, who, as the reader
knows, had something else to think of just then.

The behaviour of these two young gentlemen was giving the club some
uneasiness.  They were not alive to their duties as "Sociables."  And
they had got into the abominable habit of obeying monitors and
associating with questionable characters, such as Richardson, Aspinall,
and the like.

A motion had just been passed calling upon the two delinquents to appear
at the next meeting and answer for their conduct, when the door opened
and Freckleton entered.

"Good evening, gentlemen," said he.  "I'm not sure if I'm a member, but
I hope I don't intrude."

The "Sociables" stared at him, half in anger, half in bewilderment, as
he helped himself to a chair and sat down with his back to the door.

"The fact is," said he with a weary look, "I've lived such a retired
life here, I hardly know where to find fellows I want.  I've been
hunting high and low for half a dozen fellows with brains in their
heads, and someone told me if I came here I should find plenty."

There was a titter not unmingled with a few frowns, as the Hermit spread
himself comfortably on his chair and looked round him.

"It's as hard to find a fellow with brains nowadays as it was for
Diogenes to find an honest man, once.  You know who Diogenes was, don't
you, Gossy?" added he, turning suddenly on that young bravo.

Gosse blushed crimson at finding himself so unexpectedly singled out;
and faltered out that he had forgotten.

"Forgotten?" said Freckleton, joining in the general laugh at Gosse's
expense; "and you knew so well once!  Ask Bull; he knows; he's in the
Sixth, and _very_ clever.  Why, Bull (I hope he's not present)--"

Another laugh.  For Bull sat in his place the size of life, with his
bloated face almost as red as Gosse's.

"Bull actually found the Sixth so dull and unintellectual that he left
us, in order to cultivate the acquaintance of Culver, and fellows of
culture and scholarship like him.  It was a great loss to us.  We've
hardly had an idea in the Sixth since Bull left."

This double hit greatly delighted the majority of the "Sociables;"
scarcely less so than Bull's red cheeks, and the gape with which Culver
received the reference to himself.

"You're not wanted here," Bull exclaimed; "get out!"

"There!  Isn't that clever?" said the Hermit, in apparent admiration.
"Did ever you hear a sentence so well put together, and so eloquently
delivered.  Why, not even the 'too-too' Wrangham (I hope Wrangham's not
here)--"

Blushing was the order of the day.  Wrangham tried hard to look
unconcerned, but as the eyes of the Club turned round in his direction,
the tell-tale roses came on his cadaverous cheeks and mounted to his
forehead.

"The 'too-too' Wrangham, who loves lilies because they are pure, and
calls teapots 'consummate' because--well, I don't exactly know why--he
couldn't have put his one idea so neatly--"

"Look here, Freckleton," said Spokes, feeling it due to the dignity of
the Club to put an end to this scene; "this is a private meeting.
You've no right to be here.  Nobody wants you."

"Dear me! was that the silvery voice of toffee-loving Spokes?" said the
Hermit, amid a shout of laughter; for everyone knew Spokes's weak point.
"He says 'Look here!'  Really I cannot, until a sponge has been passed
over the honest face and shorn it of some of its clinging sweetness.
But, gentlemen of the 'Select'--'Select' is the word, isn't it?"

"If you don't go out, you'll get chucked out," said Bull.

"Oh, wonderful English! wonderful elocution!" said the Hermit.  "Ah, it
is good to be here.  Ah! he comes, he comes!"

It was a critical moment as the burly Bull came down the room.  Had he
done so five minutes sooner Freckleton might have found himself single-
handed.  But already his genial banter had told among the more
susceptible of his hearers, and he could count at any rate on fair play.
For the rest, he had little anxiety.

"Wait a moment," said he, rising to his feet, and motioning to Bull to
wait: "Sociables, Bull wants to fight me.  Do you want me to fight him?"

"Yes, yes," shouted every one, delighted at the prospect of a fray, and
many of them quite indifferent as to who conquered.

"Very well, gentlemen," said the Hermit; "I will obey you on one
condition, and one only."
