
"Well, that's my own opinion, too, bo.  But, after all, that's all that
ships is good for, anyway; just to sail from land to land and take
people and things from place to place.  The sea's between like."

"You look at it the wrong way, mate.  Certain of us men have sense
enough to live on the sea, and keep away from land, except for water
and provision.  We go from sea to sea, and land 's between."

"And what would you do for a country if we had no land?  You 're always
talking about lovin' your country, bosun."

"Ay, that I do," said the old man.  "I look upon a country, that is a
land country, as a kind of necessary evil.  My country 's this ship,
and yon flag, what it means and stands for.  It means liberty, free
waters, no interference with peaceful traders on the high seas,
following their rightful pursuits, by British ships-of-war.  Every man
that has ever been aboard of one of those floating hells knows what
liberty is not, well enough.  No taxing of us by a Parliament on t'
other side of the world, neither.  No king but the captain.  Freedom!
So free that the lubberliest landsman on shore has a right to govern
himself--if he can--subject to discipline and the commands of his
superior officer, of course; and, besides, it's like a man's wife; if
he's got to have one, he may beat her and abuse her, perhaps, but
nobody else shall.  No!  Land's a pretty poor sort of a thing in
general, but that aft there is the best there is going, and it 's our
own.  We 'll die for it, yes, for love of it, if it comes to that, even
if we do hate it, on general principles mind, you understand."

There was evidently a trace of Irish blood in the old sailor, it would
seem, and so saying, with a wave of his hand, which brushed aside
further argument, he turned abruptly on his heel and walked aft.  In
spite of all his words, which only reflected the usual opinion of
sailors, in those days at least, he yielded to no man in patriotism and
devotion to the cause of liberty and the land that gave him birth.  And
no man in all Washington's army had done better service, marched more
cheerfully, or fought harder than this veteran seaman.  The men on the
forecastle generally agreed with him in his propositions, but the
obstinate old carpenter, with the characteristic tenacity of the
ancient tar, maintained the discussion forward, until the sharp voice
of the officer of the deck sent all hands to the braces.  The ship was
brought to the wind on the starboard tack, a manoeuvre which was
followed in succession by the other vessels of the squadron, which had
been previously directed to keep, though still within signal, at long
distances from each other during the day, closing up at night, in order
to spread a broad clew and give greater chance of meeting the enemy.

The young captain paced the quarter-deck alone--no man is ever so much
alone among his fellows as the commander of a ship--a prey to his own
sad thoughts.  Those who had known him the gayest of gay young sailors
in Philadelphia were at a loss to account for the change which had come
over him.  He had become the gravest of the grave, his cheery laugh was
heard no more, and the baffled young belles of Charleston had voted him
a confirmed woman-hater; though his melancholy, handsome face, graceful
person, distinguished bearing, and high station might have enabled him
to pick and choose where he would.  But there was room in his heart for
no more passions.  Even his love of country and liberty had degenerated
into a slow, cold hate for the British, and a desperate resolve to do
his duty, and make his animosity tell when he struck.  A dangerous man
under whom to sail, gentleman of the Randolph, and a dangerous man to
meet, as well.  He could not forget Kate, and, except in the
distraction of a combat, life was a mere mechanical routine for him.
But because he had been well trained he went through it well--biding
his time.




CHAPTER XXXI

_Seymour's Desperate Resolution_

Six rather uneventful days passed by, during which prizes to the number
of five fell to the lot of the squadron, one loaded with military
stores, and another with provisions of great value.  The lively little
Fair American, being far to windward of the fleet, had also a smart
action with a heavily armed British privateer, which struck her flag
before the others could get within range, and was found to be loaded
with valuable portable goods, the siftings of a long and successful
cruise.  Young Wilton had manoeuvred and fought his ship well, and had
been publicly complimented in general orders by Seymour for skill and
gallantry.  The fleet had been exercised in signals and in various
simple evolutions, the weather was most pleasant, the men in excellent
spirits, and all that was necessary to complete their happiness was the
appearance of the looked-for squadron of the enemy.  The eager lookouts
swept the seas unweariedly, but in vain, until early in the afternoon
of the sixth day, the fleet being in Longitude 58 degrees 18 minutes
West, Latitude 14 degrees 30 minutes North, about forty leagues east of
Martinique, heading due west on the starboard tack, it was reported to
Seymour, who was reading in the cabin, that the Fair American, again
far in the lead and somewhat to windward, had signalled a large sail
ahead.  A short time should make her visible, if the vessels continued
on the present course, and, after having called his fleet about him by
signal, Seymour stood on for a nearer look at the stranger.  An hour
later she was visible from the deck of the Randolph, a very large ship,
evidently a man-of-war under easy sail.  The careful watchers could
count three tiers of guns through the glass, which proclaimed her a
ship of the line.  From her motions, and the way she rose before them,
she was evidently a very speedy ship, capable of outsailing every
vessel of Seymour's little fleet without difficulty, except possibly
the brig Fair American.  It would be madness for the squadron of
converted and lightly armed merchantmen to attack a heavy ship of that
class,--all who got near enough to do so would probably be sunk or
captured; yet the approaching vessel must be delayed or checked, or the
result would be equally serious to the fleet.  Seymour at once formed a
desperate resolution.  Signalling to the four State cruisers and the
six prizes to tack to the northeast, escape if possible, and afterward
make the best of their way back to Charleston, he himself stood on with
the little Randolph to engage the mighty stranger.  At first the older
seamen could scarce believe their eyes.  Was it possible that Captain
Seymour, in a small thirty-two-gun frigate, was about to engage
deliberately and wilfully in a combat with a ship of the line, a
seventy-four!--the difference in the number of guns giving no
indication of the difference in the offensive qualities of the two
ships, which might better be shown by a ratio of four or five to one in
favor of the ship of the line.  It was like matching a bull terrier
against a mastiff.  The men half suspected some wily manoeuvre which
they could not divine; but as the moments fled away and they saw the
rest of the fleet and the prizes slipping rapidly away to the
northeast, the Fair American lagging unaccountably behind the rest of
the fleet, while they still held their even course, they began to
comprehend that they were to fight to save the fleet, and Seymour meant
to sacrifice them deliberately, if necessary, in the hope of so
crippling the enemy that his other little cruisers, and the prizes,
might escape.  They were not daunted, however--your true Jack is a
reckless fellow--by the daring and desperate nature of the plan; quite
the contrary!

In a few moments the familiar tones of Bentley's powerful voice,
seconded by the cheery calls of his mates, rang through the frigate,--

"All hands clear ship for action--Ahoy!"

The piercing whistling of the pipes which followed was soon drowned by
the steady and stirring roll of the drums, accompanied by the shrill
notes of the fifes, beating to quarters.  The old call, which has been
the prelude to every action on the sea, ushering in with the same
dreadful note of preparation every naval conflict for twice two hundred
years, went rolling along the decks.  At the first tap of the drum the
men sprang, with the eagerness of unleashed hounds before the quarry,
to their several stations.

In an instant the orderly ship was a babel of apparently hopeless
confusion; the men running hastily to and fro about their various
duties, the sharp commands of the officers, the shrill piping of the
whistles, and the deep voices of the gun captains and the boatswain's
mates, made the usually quiet deck a pandemonium.  Some of the seamen
stowed the hammocks on the rail to serve as a guard against shot and
splinters, others triced up stout netting fore and aft, as a protection
against boarders.  The light and agile sail-trimmers rove extra slings
on the yards, and put stoppers on the more important rigging, and
tightened and strengthened the boats' gripes.  The cabin bulkheads were
unceremoniously knocked down and stowed away, giving a clean sweep fore
and aft the decks.  The pumps were rigged and tried, and hose led along
the deck.  Arm chests were broken out and opened, and cutlasses and
pistols distributed, and the racks filled with boarding-pikes.
Division tubs filled with water were placed beside the guns, and the
decks sanded lest they should grow slippery with blood.  The magazine,
surrounded by a wetted woollen screen to prevent fire, was opened, and
grape and solid shot broken out and piled in the racks about the
hatchways near the guns, the heavy sea lashings of which were cast
loose by the different crews, after which they were loaded and run out
and temporarily secured, the slow matches having been carefully
examined and lighted.  The oldest quartermasters took their places near
the helm, and others, assisted by a small body of men, manned the
relieving tackles below, to be used in case, as frequently happened,
the wheel should be shot away.  The officers, many of whom put on
boarding caps of light steel with dropped cheek pieces, and covered
with fur, fastened on their arms, looked to the priming of their
pistols, and then hastened to their various stations.

Most of the watch officers, under the direction of the first lieutenant
or executive officer, were to take charge of the different gun
divisions in the batteries; though one of them remained aft near the
captain, to look after the spars and rigging, command the
sail-trimmers, and see that any order of the captain touching the
moving of the ship was promptly carried out.  The surgeon and his mates
went below into the gloomy cockpit, spreading out the foreboding array
of ghastly instruments and appliances, ready for the many demands
certain to be made upon them.  Some of the ubiquitous midshipmen
commanded little groups of expert riflemen in the tops, which were well
provided with hand grenades; others assisted the division lieutenants;
and several were detailed as aids to the commanding officer.  The
little company of marines, under its own officers, was drawn up on the
quarter-deck to keep down the fire of the enemy's small-arm men, and be
ready to repel boarders, or head an attack, if the ships should come in
contact.  In that case grapnels, strong iron hooks securely fastened to
the ends of stout ropes or slender iron chains, were provided at
convenient intervals along the bulwarks, ready for catching and lashing
the two ships together.

The men, their other duties performed, gradually settled down at the
guns, or about the masts, or in the tops, in their several stations,
many of them naked to the waist, and their deep voices could be heard
answering to their names as they were mustered by the officers.  In an
incredibly short time the whole was done, and the impressive quiet was
broken only by the excited voice of the first lieutenant, Nason--a
young officer, and this his first serious battle--reporting to the
gloomy captain that the ship was clear and ready for action.

Seymour had of course taken personal charge of the deck himself.  Oh,
he thought, after scanning closely the approaching ship with great
care, if he had only a ship of the line under his command, instead of
this little frigate, how gladly would he have entered the coming
conflict!  Or if his own small vessel had been, instead, one of those
heavy frigates which afterward did so much to uphold the glory of
American arms, and exhibit the skill and audacity of American seamen,
in their subsequent conflict with Great Britain, he might have had a
better chance; but none realized more entirely than he did himself the
utter hopelessness of the undertaking which was before him.  At the
same time he was determined to carry it through, seeing, as few others
could, the absolute necessity for the sacrifice, if he were to effect
the escape of his fleet.  Calling the men aft, he spoke briefly to
them, pointing out the necessity for the conflict, and the nobility of
this sacrifice.  He entreated them, in a few brave, manly, thrilling
words, to stand by him to the last, for the love of their country and
the honor of their flag.  As for him, he declared it to be his fixed
purpose never to give up the ship, but to sink alongside rather,
trusting before that happened, however, so to damage his mighty
antagonist as to compel her to relinquish the pursuit.  The men, filled
with the desire for battle, and inspired by his heroic words, were
nerved up to the point where they would cheerfully have attacked not
one line-of-battle ship but a whole fleet!  They answered him with
frantic cheers, swearing and vowing that they would stand by him to the
bitter end; and then, everything having been done that could be done,
in perfect silence the taut frigate boldly approached her massive enemy.




CHAPTER XXXII

_The Prisoners on the Yarmouth_

It is usually not difficult for an individual to define the conditions
of happiness.  If I only had so and so, or if I only were so and so,
and the thing is done.  Each successive state, however, suggests one
more happy, and each gratified wish leads to another desire more
imperative.  Miss Katharine Wilton, however, did not confine her
conditions to units.  There were in her case three requisites for
happiness,--perfect happiness,--and could they have been satisfied, in
all probability she would have come as near to the wished-for state as
poor humanity on this earth ever does come to that beatific condition.
She certainly thought so, and with characteristic boldness had not
refrained from communicating her thoughts to her father.

The astonishing feature of the situation was that he was inclined to
agree with her.  There was nothing astonishing in itself in his
agreement with her, for he usually did agree with her, but in that her
conditions were really his own.  For it is rare, blessedly so, that two
people feel that they require the same thing to complete the joy of
life, and when they parallel on three points 't is most remarkable.
Even two lovers require each other--very different things, I am sure.
Stop!  I am not so sure about the third proviso with the colonel.  I
say the third, because Miss Wilton put it number three, though perhaps
it was like a woman's postscript, which somehow suggests the paraphrase
of a familiar bit of Scripture,--the last, not will be, but should be,
first!

Here are the requisites.  One: The flag floating gracefully from the
peak of the spanker gaff above them, in the light air of the sunny
afternoon, should be the stars and stripes, instead of the red cross of
St. George!  Two: The prow of the ship should be turned to the wooded
shores of Virginia, and the Old Dominion should be her destination
instead of the chalk cliffs of England!  Three: that a certain
handsome, fair, blue-eyed, gallant sailor, who answered to the name of
John Seymour, should be by her side instead of another, even though
that other were one who had once saved her life, and to whose care and
kindness and forethought she was much indebted.  Her present attendant
was certainly a gentleman; and to an unprejudiced eye--which hers
certainly was not--quite as handsome and distinguished and gallant as
was his favored rival, and boasting one advantage over the other in
that he bore a titled name--not such a desideratum among American girls
at that time, however, as it was afterwards destined to become; and in
a girl of the stamp of Miss Katharine Wilton, possibly no advantage at
all.

But, could the heart of that fair damsel be known, all talk of
advantage or disadvantage, or this or that compensating factor, was
absolutely idle!  She was not a girl who did things by halves; and the
feeling which had prompted her to give herself to the young sailor,
though of sudden origin, had grown and grown during the days of absence
and confinement, till, in depth and intensity, it matched his own.  She
was not now so sure that, among the other objects of her adoration, he
would have to take the second place; that, in case of division, her
heart would lead her to think first of her country.  Insensibly had his
image supplanted every other, and with all the passionate devotion of
her generous southern nature she loved him.

Lord Desborough had ample opportunity for ascertaining this fact.  He
had seen her risk her life for Seymour's own.  He could never forget
the glorious picture she made standing across the prostrate form of
that young man, pistol in hand, keeping the mob at bay, never wavering,
never faltering, clear-eyed, supreme.  He would be almost willing to
die to have her do the like for him.  He could still hear the echo of
that bitter cry,--"Seymour!  Seymour!"--which rang through the house
when they had dragged her away.  These things were not pleasant
reminiscences, but, like most other unpleasant memories, they would not
down.  In spite of all this, however, he had allowed himself--nay, his
permission he vowed had not been asked--to fall violently in love with
this little colonial maiden, and a country maiden at that!  Not being
psychologically inclined, he had never attempted to analyze her charm
or to explain his sensations.  Realizing the fact, and being young and
therefore hopeful, he had not allowed himself to despair.  Really, he
had some claims upon her.  Had he not interfered, she would have been
murdered that night in the dining-room.  He had earned the gratitude
then and there of her father, and of herself as well; and he had earned
more of it too when he had shot dead a certain brutal marauding
blackguard by the name of Johnson, at the first convenient opportunity,
having received incidentally, in return for his message of death, a
bullet in his own breast to remind him that there are always two
persons and two chances in a duel.  A part of the debt of the Wiltons
had been paid by the assiduous and solicitous care with which
they--Katharine chiefly, of course--had nursed him through the long and
dangerous illness consequent upon his wound.  It was his interest which
had prevented further ill treatment of them by the brutal and tyrannous
Dunmore, and, had Katharine so elected, would have secured her freedom.
She had, however, to Desborough's great delight, chosen to accompany
her father to England, where he was to be sent as a prisoner of high
political consequence.

After waiting many weary days at the camp of the fugitive and deposed
governor at Gwynn's Island, they had been separated from Desborough,
and unceremoniously hustled on board the frigate Radnor, which was
under orders for England.  They had stopped long enough at Norfolk to
witness Dunmore's savage and vindictive action in bombarding and
burning that helpless town; and from that point Katharine had been
enabled to send her letter to Seymour, through a friendly American spy,
just before taking departure for their long voyage across the seas.
The orders of the Radnor had been changed at the last moment, however,
and she had been directed to go in pursuit of Jones and the Ranger,
which it was currently reported had got to sea from the Delaware Bay,
bound for Canada and the Newfoundland coast.  No vessel being ready for
England at that time, the two prisoners had been transferred,
fortunately for them, to a small ship bound to the naval station at
Barbadoes; and thence, after another weary dreary wait, had been sent
on board his Britannic majesty's ship Yarmouth, Captain John Vincent,
bound home for England.  The first lieutenant of this ship happened to
