THE MARQUIS GRANTS AN INTERVIEW

The old Marquis was face to face with a terribly difficult problem.
That the Eagle had been brought back did not admit of doubt.  St.
Laurent had seen it, and the officers who had been present at the
midnight meeting in the Major's rooms made no attempt whatever to deny
it.  Marteau admitted it.  But it had disappeared.  He had not the
faintest idea where it was.  The most rigorous search had so far failed
to discover it.  Marteau had been questioned, appealed to, threatened,
with no results whatsoever.  His lips were sealed and no pressure that
could be brought to bear sufficed to open them.  He did not deny that
he knew where the Eagle was.  He simply remained silent, immutably
silent, when he was asked where.

From the few loyalist officers in the regiments and in the town a court
had been convened and Marteau had been put on trial.  He had been found
guilty--indeed, there was no other verdict possible, since he calmly
admitted everything--of treason, disobedience of orders, a whole
catalogue of crimes.  The Marquis acted on the old feudal idea that he
possessed all the rights of the ancient nobility, the high and low, the
middle justice.  And, indeed, he represented the King with full powers.
The court, completely under his influence, had condemned the young
soldier to death.  Marteau might have appealed, he might have
protested, but he did neither.  He accepted the inevitable.  What was
the difference?  No appeal would have been entertained, no protest
would have availed.  It all came to this, he would either have to give
up the Eagle or his life.

Well, life was not worth very much to him, as he had said.  Even though
he realized from her desperate avowal of the night before that the
interest of the Countess in him was more than she would have admitted,
had not the words been surprised and wrung from her by his deadly
peril, he knew that there was absolutely nothing to be hoped for in
that direction.  Even though his comrades, alarmed by the imminence of
his danger, and aroused by the energetic determination of the old
Marquis, besought him to give up the Eagle, he refused.  He would have
considered himself a forsworn man had he done so.

The Marquis had visited the prisoner and had condescended to make a
personal appeal to him, imploring him by that old duty and friendship
which had subsisted between the families, but his appeals had been as
fruitless as his commands and his threats.  The old noble was iron
hard.  He had no sympathy with the Empire or its Emperor, but the
determination of the young officer did arouse a certain degree of
admiration.  He would fain have spared him if he could, but, as he had
sacrificed everything he possessed for the King, and counted the
sacrifice as nothing, his sympathies did not abate his determination to
punish treason and contumacy one whit.

The Marquis was accustomed to having things his own way, and the long
period of exile had not changed his natural bent of mind in that
particular.  He was angry, too, at the stubbornness which he
nevertheless admired.  In other directions the Marquis was balked.  He
had seen through the little drama that had been played by Marteau and
the Countess Laure in her bedchamber.  That was one reason why he would
fain have saved him, because he had so gallantly allowed himself to
occupy the hideous role which he had assumed, to save the girl's honor.
The Marquis had not the faintest suspicion that there was anything
wrong in the situation, or even that his niece had actually given her
heart to this man.  Such a thought could not be entertained at all.

It was inconceivable, but he knew that, however innocent might have
been that meeting, if it had been prearranged the world would consider
the Countess disgraced, unless the explanation which Marteau had
suggested was allowed to become current.  He had summoned his niece
before him, and had sought in every way to force her to tell him the
whole truth, but she had partaken, in some degree, of Marteau's
stubbornness.  All she would say was, that Marteau was innocent of any
crime or any wrong.  But, when the bewildered Marquis asked her if she
had invited him there, and if he was there by her permission, she had
indignantly repudiated the suggestion as an insult, which left him more
puzzled than before.

The idea that Marteau had come there to hide the Eagle had never
entered the Marquis' mind for all his acuteness.  He had asked the girl
whether Marteau had brought anything into the room or taken anything
from it, and she had answered truthfully that when she saw him he had
been exactly as when they saw him.  The testimony of the Marquis and
the two Englishmen rendered it unnecessary for the Countess to be
present at the court-martial.  There was nothing material she could
add, and, indeed, it was not for attempted theft, or assault, that
Marteau had been condemned--the Marquis had suppressed that as much as
possible--but for his conduct with the Eagle.

It was the fifth of March, a warm and sunny day in the south of France,
even amid the mountains and hills of ancient Dauphine.  Great things
were toward, although the Marquis did not yet know it.  The execution
of the condemned was set for the next day.  At ten o'clock in the
morning the regiment was to be paraded and Marteau was to be shot.  He
had asked that he might be granted a soldier's death, and the Marquis
had seen fit to grant the request.

There were very few troops in Grenoble which could be counted as loyal
to the King, but there were some.  From them the Marquis intended to
draw his firing party, and with them he intended to over-awe the
regiment if there should be any outbreak.  He was too keen a judge of
humanity, and too well able to read the characters of men not to
realize the whole regiment was in a mutinous temper over the Eagle
episode, that they looked upon Marteau as a martyr, and that there
might be outbreaks and grave difficulties before he was shot.  Well,
difficulties did not daunt the stout-hearted, inflexible old noble.  He
rather enjoyed them.  He rather welcomed this occasion, too, because he
intended to be master now, and, having once mastered the regiment, he
felt he would have no difficulty in controlling it in any future
emergency.

To him, as he sat in his cabinet maturing his plans for the morrow,
came a message from his niece, asking admittance.  The privilege was,
of course, instantly granted, and Laure d'Aumenier presently entered
the room.

"Have you come, my child," began the old man, regarding her tenderly,
for in the few years she had been with him he had learned to estimate
the worth of her character and love her as she deserved, "to explain
this mystery, to tell me why you declare that the presence of a man in
the room of a woman of my house at three o'clock in the morning is
innocent?  I repeat," he went on reassuringly, "that I cannot conceive
of or admit any wrong on your part, and that makes the situation more
impossible of explanation."

"My uncle," answered the Countess, "I can only say that Monsieur Jean
Marteau is not guilty, as he seems."

"And I can quite believe that," said the old Marquis.  "Indeed, our
English friend, who for all his bluntness is not without discrimination
and good sense, has said as much to me.  He declared with great
emphasis that there was something in it all which he could not
understand."

"And you--what did you say?"

"I asked him if that was meant for any reflection on the honor of my
family, for if it were I should accord him the pleasure of crossing
swords with me and in the end run him through."

"And he said----"

"He disclaimed absolutely the idea.  He is as convinced of your
sweetness, your innocence and purity, as I am."

"And Captain Yeovil?"

"He lacks his father's insight and finesse.  He is young.  He takes
matters as he sees them, and fancies Marteau the common, vulgar thief
he appeared."

"Impossible!" cried the Countess.  "He is----"

"No doubt he is not especially prepossessed in favor of Monsieur
Marteau, who has presumed to love you, and perhaps that accounts for
his willingness to believe anything derogatory of him."

"He is blind, and I----"

"But you are not declining his hand on that account!"

"No, the marriage stands.  I could wish that it did not," said the
woman passionately.  "I could be happier if he suspected me of
anything, however base, and in his suspicion set me free."

"Hark ye, Laure," said the Marquis earnestly.  "I am an old man, and
the life I have led has not served to maintain my youth.  What I am
engaged in now does not conduce to that ease of body and peace of mind
which promotes long life.  To you I say what I have said to no one
else.  We are standing, as it were, on a volcano.  The army is in no
sense loyal to the King.  I advised that it be disbanded absolutely,
but I was overruled.  It is seething with sedition.  The envoys of the
powers at Vienna are playing, idling, debating endlessly, and while
they play and idle and talk in their fools' paradise, the Emperor, he
who is so called by misguided France, will return.  I should not be
surprised at any moment to receive tidings that he has landed."

"And that is what they mean when they speak about the violets blooming
again?"

"Yes, that is it.  And, do you know as I walked in the garden this
morning I found this."

He tossed the first tiny purple violet of the spring on the table
before her.

"But he will be dead before the Emperor comes," murmured the woman, her
hand upon her heart.

"Put that thought out of your mind, my child," said the old man.
"Think rather of Captain Yeovil."

"I hate him," said the Countess, which was most unjust, for he had done
nothing at all to deserve such an expression on her part.

"Hate is the passion of old age," said the Marquis slowly, "love that
of youth.  I told you that my race would soon be run.  I am an old man.
I have suffered much.  I shall be content to die if I can serve my King
here a little after all these years of weary waiting.  The title-deeds
that young man gave back do not cover much.  The estate has been
divided and granted to strangers.  It is practically all gone but the
old chateau.  I have little or nothing to leave you beyond those small
amounts which your father used to send me, which I never would touch
because they came from a disloyal France.  The Yeovils are true and
worthy people.  The boy is a gallant lad, a brave soldier, even if not
overly acute.  Sir Gervaise is a man of consideration and of great
wealth.  You are portionless.  He is most generous.  I am very happy in
the thought that you will be taken care of.  I know what it is to be
alone and poor."

"I cannot bear----"

"We have to bear a great many things that we do not wish to in this
life.  You owe me some consideration.  I still retain my faith and
confidence in you.  I have not pressed you to the wall with hard
questions about last night."

"I know, I know, but----"

"And, as the head of the house, I must have even from the children the
obedience which is my due."

"I do not wish to fail in my duty toward you, monsieur, but----"

"And your word, the word of a d'Aumenier, has been plighted.  You
entered into this engagement of your own free will.  There was no
constraint."

"But there was pressure."

"Yes, certainly, I know what is best for you, but you were not forced
in any way, and your troth, having been plighted, your word given"--the
old man stopped, looked at her solemnly, his long fingers tapping
lightly on the table--"it must be kept," he said, with that air of
absolute finality which none could assume better than he.

"It shall be, although it kills me."

"If I live I shall see that it is; and if I die I have your promise?"

"You have."

"That is well.  You will live to thank me and bless me.  I have
fancied, of late, that your heart had been allowed to decline a little
to this Marteau.  Oh, he is a brave man and true, I know.  I take no
stock in his confession of theft or assault upon you.  Why, I would
have cut him down where he stood, or have him kill me if I believed
that!  But he is of another race, another blood.  The Eagle does not
stoop to the barnyard fowl.  The heart of a woman is a strange thing.
It leads her in strange ways if she follows its impulses.  Thank God
there are men who can and will direct and control those impulses.  Put
him out of your mind.  It is best.  To-morrow he will be a dead man.
At any rate, I am rather glad of that," said the Marquis, half
reflectively, knowing what trouble he might have made if he were to be
allowed to live on.  It was cold-blooded, but he could sacrifice
Marteau for his niece's happiness, and find abundant justification in
the annals of his house, where he could read of many Marteaux who had
been sacrificed or had sacrificed themselves for the d'Aumeniers.

"I--I will promise," faltered the girl, "but on one condition."

"I like it not when youth makes conditions with age.  Nevertheless,
what is in your mind?"

"I want to see Marteau again."

"Impossible!"

"Wait," said the woman quickly.  "Is it not true, have I not heard that
he is condemned outwardly because he brought an Eagle here and it is
gone?"

"Yes, that is true."

"And has it not been said that if he produced the Eagle his life could
be spared and he could go?"

"That is also true."

"And would it not allay the dissatisfaction of the regiment and
contribute to the establishment of your authority if he gave it up?"

"My authority is established by the King."

"The maintenance of it, then.  Would it not enable you to control and
hold in check these people, if you could show that you had not been
balked?"

"That may be," said the Marquis.  "Go on."

"And, if he should produce the Eagle----"

"I would save his life, but he would be a discredited man among his
comrades, if I know anything about it."

"Oh, not that, surely."

"Surely; and I may tell you that if I were in his place I would do
exactly as he has done."

The woman stepped nearer and put her hand to her head.

"Nevertheless, I must see him.  Have mercy!" she entreated piteously.

"Why?  Do you think you can persuade him to produce the Eagle--to his
discredit, be it remembered?" asked the old man, surveying her keenly,
realizing at last the extraordinary interest she took in Marteau.

"But it is his life if he does not."

"Do you care so much for--his life?"

"Yes," answered the woman, looking the Marquis straight in the eyes.

He recognized a will as inflexible as his own.  It aroused his
admiration.  He arose to his feet.  He bowed before her.

"Mademoiselle," he said firmly, "you have the strength of our house.
Perhaps it might be well if he could be induced to produce the Eagle
and be thus discredited in the eyes of his comrades.  It would tend to
make my authority more secure.  It would be to the advantage of the
King."

"Yes, yes."

"But what argument can you bring?"

"I--I do not know."

"Alas, my child, you know more than you will tell.  Oh, I recognize
that it is useless to appeal, and impossible to constrain.  Well, you
give me your word of honor that whatever happens you will carry through
the engagement with Captain Yeovil, and that we will together arrange a
proper time and that you----"

"I give it."

"Your hand," said the Marquis.  "Without there!"  He raised his voice.
An orderly appeared.  "Send Monsieur St. Laurent to me."

"Monsieur," continued the old man, as the officer presented himself,
"you will conduct the Countess Laure d'Aumenier to the small
drawing-room; you will leave her there; you will then go to the
guard-house and bring thence the prisoner, Marteau; you will conduct
him to mademoiselle, my niece, and you will leave them together for
half an hour; you will see that the prisoner is carefully guarded, that
sentries are posted outside of the windows, and you, yourself, will
remain with other escort, in front of the door."

"But out of hearing," said the young woman quickly.

"That, of course.  And on your honor, on your duty, on your allegiance,
you will say absolutely nothing about this to any one.  Do you
understand?"

"I understand, monsieur.  I shall obey," said St. Laurent, a youth of
rare quality, as has been seen.

