"These seniors are a nuisance," said Telson, after a pause; "and the
worst of it is, we can't well pay them out."

"Not in school, or in the Big either," said King.  "We might stick
nettles in their beds, you know," suggested Bosher, "or something of
that sort."

"Rather low, that," said Parson, "and not much fun."

"Would leeches be better?" said Bosher, who had lately been giving
himself to scientific investigation.

It was considered leeches might not be bad, but there was rather too
much uncertainty about their mode of action.  That was a sort of thing
more in Cusack's and the Welchers' line than the present company's.

"I tell you what," said Telson, struck with an idea, "we might get at
them in Parliament; they're always so jolly fond of talking about fair
play there, and every one being equal.  Do you know, I think we might
have a little fling there!"

"Not at all a bad idea," said Parson, admiringly--"jolly fine idea!  We
can do what those cads do in the newspapers--obstruct the business!
Rattling idea!"

"Yes; and fancy Messrs. Telson, Parson, Bosher, and Co. being
suspended," said King.

"They couldn't do it, I tell you," said Bosher; "we'd kick up a shine
about freedom of speech, and all that.  Anyhow, it would be rather a
spree, whether we were kicked out or not.  We'd be a `party' you know!"

The idea took, and an animated consultation took place.  Parson, for a
junior, was very well up in the "rules of the House," and at his
suggestion the notice-paper for to-morrow's assembly was got hold of and
filled with "amendments."

"Call them amendments," said he, "and they can't say anything."

"Oh, all serene," said Telson, who had implicit confidence in his
friend.

"For instance, here you are," said Parson.  "`Mr Coates to move that
Classics is a nobler study than Mathematics.'  Amendment proposed:
`Instead of "nobler" say "viler."'  Proposed by Bosher, further
amendment: `Instead of "nobler" say "beastlier."'  Proposed by
Telson--(`Hear, hear,' from Telson)--further amendment: `Instead of
"nobler" say "more idiotic."'  You see it can easily be worked, and when
we've done with `nobler' we can start on the `is' and amend it to `are,'
do you twig?  There'll have to be a division over each.  I say it'll be
an awful lark!"

Little dreaming of the delightful treat in store for it, Willoughby
assembled next afternoon, expecting nothing better than a dull debate on
the well-worn question of classics _versus_ mathematics.  They were
destined to experience more than one surprise before the meeting was
over.

Riddell, who had spent a dismal day, not knowing what to do or think,
and vainly hoping that Wyndham might by his own free confession solve
the bitter problem, came to the meeting.  It was the least wretched
thing he could do.  Anything was better than sitting alone and brooding
over his secret.

For the first time he received a cheer as he entered and took his
accustomed place.  Willoughby was grateful to him for that catch in the
Rockshire match.  How, at any other time, the captain would have
rejoiced over that cheer!  But now he hardly heard it.

All the other heroes of the match received a similar ovation in
proportion to the service they had done, and when, just at the last
moment, Fairbairn, Coates, and Crossfield came in together, the "House"
rose at them and cheered tremendously.

The business was preceded by the usual questions, none of which,
however, were very important.  After the captain's performance last
week, and perhaps still more after his speech in the House a week or two
ago, honourable men had shown themselves less active in "baiting" him
and asking him offensive questions, and on this occasion he was only
interrogated once, and that was by Cusack, who wanted to know whether
they were not going to get a whole holiday in honour of the Rockshire
match?  The captain replied that he had heard nothing about it.

Bosher was put up to ask Bloomfield whether he considered Eutropius fit
reading for young boys?  Loud cheers from all the small boys in question
greeted the inquiry, in the midst of which Bloomfield cunningly replied
that the honourable member had better give notice of the question for
next time.

Then rose Telson, with all the dignity of office, and solemnly inquired
of Mr Stutter, the Premier, whether he was aware that a new party had
lately been formed in the House, consisting of Messrs. Telson, Parson,
Bosher, King, and Wakefield, called the "Skyrockets," whose object was
to look after the interests of the juniors all over the school, and who
would be glad to receive fresh members at one shilling a head?

Stutter, who was scarcely heard in the uproar which followed this
sensational announcement, meekly replied that he had not heard a word
about it, an answer which, for some reason or other, provoked almost as
much laughter as the question.

"All very well for them to grin," growled Telson, who had expected a
somewhat different reception to his important question: "wait till we
start on the amendments."

The opportunity soon arrived.  Coates being called upon to open the
debate, let off the speech he had prepared, and if he did not convince
the House that classics was a nobler study than mathematics, he at least
showed that he had convinced himself.

The "Skyrockets" had barely the patience to hear him out, and the moment
he had done, Parson started to his feet, and shouted, "Mr Chairman and
gentlemen, I beg to move an amendment--"

Here Bloomfield, whom the sight of the notice-paper had prepared for
what was coming, interposed, "When I am ready for the honourable member
I will call on him.  The motion is not yet seconded."

"No, no!  That won't wash, will it, you fellows?" cried Parson,
excitedly, planting himself firmly in his place, and evidently seeing
through the deep designs of the enemy.  "Bother seconding!  I mean to
move my amendment, if I stick here all night!  (Terrific Skyrocket
cheers.)  We kids have been snubbed long enough, and we're going to make
a stand!"  ("Question," "Order.") "All very well for you to sing out
`Order'--"

The Chairman:

"Will the honourable member--"

"No, he won't!" screamed Parson, with the steam well up; "and he's not
going to!  I've got a right to be heard--we've all got a right to be
heard, and we're going to be heard, what's more!  (Tremendous cheers
from the club.)  We're all equal here, aren't we, you chaps?"
("Rather!")

Here Fairbairn rose to order, but Parson was too quick for him.

"No, no!" he cried, "we don't want any of your jaw!  We're not going to
be shut up by you!  We're a party, I tell you, and we're bound to stick
out!"  ("Hear, hear," from Bosher.) "We expected you'd be trying to sit
on us, but we made up our minds we won't be sat on!  (Prolonged cheers.)
I've not begun my speech yet--(laughter)--and I don't mean to till you
hold your rows!"

Here there were loud cries of "Order" from various parts of the House,
which, however, only served to inspirit the speaker, who proceeded at
the top of his voice, "It's no use your going on like that.  (I say, you
chaps," added he, turning round to his companions, "back me up, I'm
getting husky.)  You think we're a lot of fools--"

("We're a lot of fools!" chimed in the chorus, by way of backing up
their orator.)

"But we're not as green as we look!"

("Green as we look!")

"You all seem to think it funny!"

("Think it funny!")

"But you needn't think you'll shut _us_ up!"

("Shut us up!")

Here another attempt was made on the part of the chairman to reduce the
meeting to order.  Above the laughter and cheering and hooting he cried
at the top of his voice, "Unless you stop your foolery, Parson, I'll
have you turned out!"

"Will you?  Who's going to stop my foolery?" yelled Parson.

("Stop my foolery?") howled the chorus.

"Try it on, that's all!  You don't think we funk you!"

("We funk you!")

"Do you suppose we don't know what we're doing?"

("We don't know what we're doing?")

"Look out, you fellows!  Hold on!"

This last remark was caused by a rush upon the devoted band, with a view
to carry out the edict of the chairman.

Parson went on with his oration till he was secured, hand and foot, and
carried forcibly to the door, and even then continued to address the
house, struggling and kicking between every syllable.  His backers,
equally determined, clung on to the forms and desks, and continued to
shout and scream and caterwaul till they were one by one ejected.

Even then they maintained their noble stand for freedom of speech by
howling through the key-hole and kicking at the door, till finally a
select band of volunteers was dispatched "to clear the approaches to the
House" and drive the Skyrockets to their own distant studies, where they
organised a few brawls on their own account, and ended the afternoon
very hoarse, very tired, but by no means cast down.

"Jolly spree, wasn't it?" said Parson, when it was all over, fanning
himself with a copybook and readjusting his collar.

"Stunning!" said Telson; "never thought they'd stand it so long.  No end
of a speech, that of yours!"

"Yes," said Parson, complacently; "most of it impromptu, too!  Managed
to spin it out, I fancy!"

"Rather," said King, admiringly.  "I began to make mine after you'd got
kicked out, but couldn't get out much of it."

"Well, all I can say is it was a jolly lark.  I feel quite hungry after
it," said Telson.  "Any of that jam left, old man?"

And so these heroes appropriately celebrated their glorious field-day
with a no less glorious banquet, which amply compensated for all the
little inconveniences they had had to endure in the course of the
afternoon's entertainment.

Meanwhile, rather more serious work was going on in the Great Hall.

The Skyrockets being ejected, the house proceeded in a somewhat humdrum
fashion to discuss the relative merits of classics and mathematics.
Several of the seniors and a few Limpets had prepared speeches, which
they duly delivered.  Contrary to the expectation of most present,
Riddell took no part in the discussion.  As head classic, a speech from
him had been quite counted on; but not even the calls of the one side or
the taunts of the other could get him on to his feet.

The fact was, he only half heard what was going on.  His thoughts were
far away, busied with a far more serious inward debate than that on the
notice-paper.

At length he could remain idle no longer.  He must go and find out
Wyndham, or see the doctor, or pay another visit to Tom the boat-boy--
anything rather than this suspense and misery and inaction.

He took advantage of a more than ordinarily dreary speech from Tedbury
to rise and make his retreat quietly from the room.

But before he had reached the door Tedbury's voice abruptly ceased and
Wibberly's was heard saying, "Mr Chairman, I see Mr Riddell is leaving
the meeting.  Will you allow me to ask him a question before he goes?"

There was something strange about this interruption, and also in the
manner in which the question was asked, which drew the sudden attention
of the House, and all eyes were turned on the captain.

He stopped and turned in his usual nervous, half-inquiring way,
apparently not quite sure what had been said or who had spoken.

"Mr Wibberly," said Bloomfield, "wishes to ask a question of Mr
Riddell."

"It is merely this," said Wibberly, rapidly, and giving no time for any
objection to be raised on the point of order.  "I wish to ask Mr
Riddell whether he has found out yet who cut the rudder-line of
Parrett's boat at the boat-race, or whether he suspects anybody, and, if
so, whom?"

At this unlooked-for question a hubbub immediately arose.  Several
schoolhouse fellows protested against the proceedings being interrupted
in this way, and even Bloomfield exclaimed across the table, "For
goodness' sake, Wibberly, don't bring up that wretched subject again."

But those who had watched Riddell had seen him turn suddenly pale at the
question, and for a moment make as though he would rush from the room.
But he stopped himself, and turned like a hunted deer on the questioner.

A dead silence fell on the assembly, as Wibberly coolly said, "I will
repeat the questions.  Has Mr Riddell found out who cut the rudder-
lines? or does he suspect any one? and, if so, who is it?"

Every eye turned on Riddell.  The brief pause had given him time to
collect himself and fight out the inward battle; and now he answered
steadily, "I do suspect some one.  But until I am perfectly sure I shall
not say who it is."

So saying, he quietly left the room.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

EVERYTHING GONE WRONG.

Riddell was fairly committed to his task now.  Like the good old general
who burned his ships when he landed on the enemy's shores, he had cut
off from himself the slightest possibility of a retreat, and must now
either go right through with the matter or confess himself a miserable
failure.

The consciousness of this nerved him with unlooked-for courage, and he
walked from the Parliament that afternoon a very different being from
the boy who had entered it.  He had entered it cowed, irresolute,
wretched; he left it indeed still wretched, but with his spirit roused
and his mind made up.  His duty lay clear before him, and whatever it
cost he must do it.

Whether Wibberly was himself the writer of the mysterious letter, or
whether some one had prompted him to ask the question, or whether his
asking it just at this time was a mere coincidence, he did not trouble
to decide.

He felt rather grateful to him than otherwise for having asked it, just
as one is occasionally grateful to the thunder-clap for clearing the
air.

The first thing without doubt was to find Wyndham, and come to a clear
understanding as to whether or not he was the culprit; and the captain
lost no time in attempting to put this resolve into practice.

It would not do, he knew, immediately after the scene in the Parliament,
when everybody would be on the tip-toe of curiosity, to be seen holding
a secret interview with any particular boy.  He therefore decided wisely
to wait till the usual time when Wyndham was in the habit of coming to
his study to do his lessons.  Meanwhile, to make sure of his coming, he
sent him a message by Cusack to tell him to be sure and turn up.

Cusack, little suspecting the importance of this simple message,
delivered it glibly, and being of course brimful of the excitement of
the hour, he remained a little to regale Wyndham with a history of the
afternoon's events.

"Oh, I say," said he, "you weren't at Parliament this afternoon.  There
was no end of a shine on."

"Was there?" asked Wyndham.

"Rather.  What do you think, those young Parrett's cads came down in a
body and kicked up the biggest row you ever saw--said they were a club,
and made no end of beasts of themselves, and got kicked out at last, and
serve them right too."

"They're always fooling about at something," said Wyndham.

"That they are.  They want a good taking down, and we mean to do it next
week in the junior house match."

"Ah," said Wyndham, who amid all his recent troubles could never forget
that he was a second-eleven man.  "Ah, I heard the juniors' match was to
come off.  What day is it to be?"

"Thursday."

"Oh, I must come and have a look at you.  Is Welch's going to win?"

"Going to try, and I fancy we're pretty fair.  They've been lazy, you
know, in Parrett's, and so we get a pull there.  Oh, but I was saving
that row with the kids wasn't all this afternoon.  Just at the end that
cad Wibberly got up and asked Riddell some more about the boat-race--
they're always hammering away at that, and what do you think Riddell
said--guess!"

"I can't," said Wyndham.

"Why he said he knew who the chap was who had cut the strings, or
fancied he did!"

"Who is it?" exclaimed Wyndham, excitedly.

"That's what he won't say.  And of course there's an awful row on.  They
say they'll make him tell, or kick him out of the school or something.
They're in no end of a rage."

"Why doesn't he tell who it is?" asked Wyndham.

"Oh, he says he's not sure, or something like that.  But I dare say
he'll tell you all about it this evening.  You're to be sure and turn
up, he says, at preparation time."

And off went this vivacious messenger, leaving Wyndham in a considerable
state of astonishment and perturbation.

What did Riddell want him for?  He had not seen him since that evening,
a week ago, when he had so nearly confessed to him about Beamish's.  He
hardly liked not to go now, although he knew it would be hard to avoid
letting out the wretched secret which he had promised Gilks and Silk to
keep.

Besides, uneasy as he was about this, he could not help feeling excited
about what Cusack had just told him of the boat-race affair.  And most
likely, when he came to consider, Riddell would be so full of that that
he might perhaps not say any more about Beamish's.  So Wyndham decided
to go, and in due time presented himself with his books at the captain's
study.

He could see at once that Riddell was in one of his serious moods, and
his heart sank, for he had no doubt what was coming, and felt that,
unless he were to break his promise, matters were sure to be made worse.

"I'm glad you've come," said Riddell; "you went off so suddenly the
other evening."

"Yes," said Wyndham; "the lock-up bell rang, and I was bound to be in my
house before it stopped."

"You know what I want to see you about now, Wyndham?" said the captain,
nervously.

"Yes," replied the boy, doggedly; "I suppose I do."

There was a long, uncomfortable pause, at the end of which Riddell said,
"Surely, Wyndham, you are not going to leave it to me to clear up this
matter?"

"What do you mean?" asked the boy, burying his face in his hands, and
utterly unnerved by the tones of his friend's voice.

"I mean this," said Riddell, as firmly as he could, "that there are only
two courses open.  Either you must confess what you have done, of your
own accord, or it will be my duty to do it for you."

"I don't see how it's your duty to tell everybody," said the boy.  "I
should get expelled to a dead certainty!"

"It must either be one or the other," said the captain.

"Oh, Riddell!" exclaimed the boy, springing to his feet, "don't say
that!  I know I've been a cad, and let myself be led into it; but surely
it's not so bad as all that!  You've always been a brick to me, I know,
and I've not been half grateful enough.  But do let us off this time!
please do!  I can't tell you anything; I would gladly, only I've
promised.  You wouldn't have me break my promise?  If you tell of me I
shall be expelled I know I shall!  Do help me out this time!"

"Poor fellow!" said Riddell, who was not proof against this sort of
appeal from any one, least of all from one he loved.

The boy was quick in the energy of his despair to follow up his
advantage.

"I'd make it good any other way--any way you like--but don't have me
expelled, Riddell.  Think of them all at home, what a state they would
be in!  I know I deserve it; but can't you get me out of it?"

"If you were to go to the doctor and tell him everything--" began
Riddell.

"Oh, that's just what I can't do!" exclaimed Wyndham.  "I'd do it like a
shot if it was only myself in it.  I don't know how you found it all
out, I'm sure; but I can't go and tell the doctor, even if it was to get
me off being expelled."

It was no use going on like this.  Riddell was getting unmanned every
moment, and Wyndham by these wild appeals was only prolonging the agony.

"Wyndham, old fellow," said the captain, in tones full of sympathy and
pity, "if I had dreamt all this was to happen I would never have come to
Willoughby at all.  I know what troubles you have had this term, and how
bravely you have been trying to turn over a new leaf.  I'd give anything
to be able to help you out of this, but I tell you plainly I don't see
how to do it.  If you like, I'll go with you to the doctor, and--"

"No, no!" exclaimed Wyndham, wildly, "I can't do that!  I can't do
that!"

"Then," said Riddell, gravely, "I must go to him by myself."

Wyndham looked up and tried to speak, and then fairly broke down.

"If the honour of the whole school were not involved--"

Wyndham looked up in a startled way.  "The honour of the school?  What
has it got to do with my going to--"

What strange fatality was there about Riddell's study-door that it
always opened at the most inopportune times?

Just as Wyndham began to speak it opened again, and Bloomfield, of all
persons, appeared.

"I want to speak to you, Riddell," he said.

The words were uttered before he had noticed that the captain was not
alone, or that his visitor was young Wyndham, in a state of great
distress--hardly greater than that of Riddell himself.

As soon as he did perceive it he drew back, and said, "I beg your
pardon; I didn't know any one was here."

"I'll go," said Wyndham, hurriedly, going to the door, and hardly
lifting his eyes from the ground as he passed.

Bloomfield could hardly help noticing his strange appearance, or
wondering at it.

"Anything wrong with young Wyndham?" said he, not sorry to have some way
of breaking the ice.

"He's in trouble," said the captain.  "Won't you sit down?"

It was a very long time since the head of Parrett's and the captain of
the school had met in this polite way.  But Bloomfield for some time
past had shown signs of coming round to see that the position which had
been forced upon him, and which he had been very ready at first to
accept, was not a satisfactory one.  And, greatly to the disgust of some
of his fellow-monitors, he had shown this more than once by friendly
advances towards his rival.  But, so far, he had never got to the length
of calling upon him in his study.

Riddell was scarcely surprised to see him, although he was quite
unprepared for the very amicable way in which he began.

"I'm sorry to interrupt you," said Bloomfield, "but I've been intending
to come over the last day or two."

"It's very good of you," said Riddell.

"The fact is," said Bloomfield, a little nervously, "ever since that
debate in Parliament some weeks ago, when you spoke about all pulling
together, I've felt that our fellows haven't done as much as they ought
in that way--I know I haven't."

Riddell did not exactly know what to say.  He could not say that the
Parrett's fellows _had_ "pulled together" for the good of the school, so
he said nothing.

"I'm getting rather sick of it," continued Bloomfield, digging his hands
in his pockets.

"So am I," said the captain.

"You know," said Bloomfield, "it was that wretched boat-race affair
which made things as bad as they were.  Our fellows wouldn't have kept
it up so long if that hadn't happened."

Riddell began to get more and more uneasy.  He had expected this was
coming, and there was no escaping it.

"It was an awfully ugly business, of course," continued Bloomfield; "and
though no one suspected fellows like you and Fairbairn of such a thing,
our fellows, you know, were pretty sure some one was at the bottom of
it."

Riddell could not help thinking, in the midst of his uneasiness, how
very sagacious the Parrett's fellows had been to make the discovery!

"And now," said Bloomfield, looking up, and feeling relieved to have his
speech nearly done--"now that you've found out who it is, and it's all
going to be cleared up, I think things ought to come all right."

