offered his arm to the French consul, who accepted it politely, though
with feelings of surprise.  Thus they walked out two and two into the
street, and marched down the principal thoroughfare, across the great
square, and straight into the palace.

The amazement of the Algerines at this sight was great, for they were
well aware of the bad feeling which had for many years existed between
the leading couple in this little procession, or rather between their
predecessors, some of whom had taken undignified, not to say
disgraceful, methods of displaying their jealousy.

"Allah!" exclaimed the Algerines, turning up their eyes, "the English
and French consuls walking together!  Surely the old prophecy is about
to come true, `When Christians are at peace among themselves the
downfall of Algiers is decreed!'"

It is said that there really does exist a very old prophecy to this
effect among the Mussulmans of Algeria, and certain it is that the
prophecy was ultimately fulfilled, but at the time of which we write it
was only anticipated.

Demanding an immediate audience, the party were admitted into the
presence-chamber, where they created feelings of great surprise in the
breasts of the pirate-king and his piratical courtiers.

When Rais Ali had tremblingly translated the demand which had been made
with stern dignity by his master, the Dey flew into a towering rage, and
actually foamed at the mouth, as he replied--

"Why art thou not glad that I thus punish your old enemy?  Was not
England lately at war with Denmark?"

"I am not glad," answered the British consul, "because it is against the
spirit of Christianity to cultivate feelings of revenge, and the fact
that we were not long since at war with Denmark is no doubt the very
reason why the Danes have found it difficult to pay, at the exact time,
the debt which they will unquestionably discharge before long; but if
your highness continues to act thus to their representative, in despite
of his inviolable character, and in defiance of treaties wherein it is
specified that the persons and families of consuls are to be held
sacred, you may rest assured that no civilised nation will continue to
treat with you."

"What care the Deys of Algiers for the persons of consuls, which you
deem so sacred?" said Omar savagely.  "Hast thou not heard that in time
past we have blown the consuls of refractory nations from the months of
our cannon?"

"I have," replied the Colonel calmly, "and I have also heard that
Algiers has been several times bombarded, and nearly reduced to ashes.
I do not presume to use threats to your highness," added the consul
firmly, though respectfully, "but I am here as spokesman of these
representatives of various powers, to assure you that if you do not
release the consul of Denmark immediately, we will all write to our
respective governments to send vessels of war to remove us from a court
where the law of nations is not respected."

Omar attempted to bluster a little more, but had sense enough to
perceive that he had already gone too far, and at length consented to
grant the consuls' demands.  The condemned consul was immediately set at
liberty, and his brethren returned to his residence in the same manner
as they had left it, with this difference, that the French and English
consuls walked in front, with the representative of Denmark between
them.

This incident, as may be imagined, did not improve Omar's temper.
Immediately after it, he issued some stringent decrees in reference to
the slaves, and ordered the execution of six chief men of the State,
whose presence in the city had been a source of danger to the
consolidation of his power.  Among other things, he made some stern laws
in reference to runaway slaves; and, having his attention drawn to the
fact that the scrivano-grande of the late Achmet, and his assistant
secretary, had not yet been discovered, he not only ordered the search
for them to be continued with increased diligence, but took the unusual
method of offering a reward to any one who should find or bring news of
them.

This caused the matter to be widely talked about, and among others who
heard of the proclamation was a little Moorish girl named Ziffa.

Now this Ziffa was the only daughter of Hadji Baba, the Court
story-teller, who, like the Vicar of Bray, managed to remain in office,
no matter who should come into or go out of power.

We are sorry to have to record the fact that Ziffa was a bad child--a
particularly naughty little girl.  She told lies, and was a little
thief, besides being fond of that despicable habit styled eavesdropping.
She listened behind doors and curtains and at key-holes without feeling
a particle of shame!  It is probable that the child's attention would
not have been arrested by the proclamation of the Dey, if it had not
chanced that, during a visit which she was asked to pay to the garden of
the British consul for the purpose of playing with Agnes Langley, she
overheard Rais Ali and Ted Flaggan mention the name of Lucien Rimini.
The seaman had found it necessary to take Rais into his confidence, and
little Ziffa, in the exercise of her disgraceful vocation of
eavesdropper, had overheard a little of their conversation about the
Riminis.  She did not, however, hear much, and, having no interest in
the Riminis, forgot all about it.

On hearing the proclamation, however, she bethought her that something
might be made out of the matter, if she could only manage to get her
little friend Agnes to play the part of spy, and find out about things
for her.  Opportunity was not long wanting.  She had an engagement that
very day to go out to the consul's garden to spend the day with Agnes,
and a faithful old negro servant of her father was to conduct her
thither.

Ziffa was extremely fond of finery.  Just as she was about to set out,
her eye fell on a splendid diamond ring which lay on her father's
dressing-table.  Hadji Baba was very fond of this ring, as it had been a
gift to him from Achmet, his former master, and he never went abroad
without it, but a hasty summons to the palace had, on this occasion,
caused him to forget it.  As it was made for the little finger of Hadji
Baba, which was remarkably thin, it exactly fitted the middle finger of
Ziffa which was uncommonly fat.  Seizing the ring, she thrust it into
her bosom, resolving to astonish her friend Agnes.  Then, running
down-stairs to the old servant, she was soon on her way to the consul's
garden.

"Agnes," she said, on finding herself alone with her friend, "I want you
to do something for--"

"Oh what a lovely ring!" exclaimed Agnes, as Ziffa drew it out of her
breast and put it on.

"Yes, isn't it pretty?  But I must not let my old servant see it, lest
he should tell my father, who'd be very angry if he knew I had taken
it."

Agnes was taken by surprise, and remained silent.  She had been so
carefully trained to tell her father and mother everything, and to trust
them, that it was a new and disagreeable idea to her the thought of
doing anything secretly.

"Well, this is what I want," continued Ziffa; "I want you to listen to
the talk of Rais Ali and the sailor who lives with you, when they don't
know you are near, and tell me all that they say about a family named
Rimini--will you?"

"Oh, I can't do that," said Agnes decidedly; "it would be wrong."

"What would be wrong?" asked Mrs Langley, coming out from a side-walk
in the garden at that moment to fetch the children in to lunch.

Agnes blushed, looked down, and said nothing.  Her mother at once
dropped the subject, and led them into the house, where she learned from
Agnes the nature of her little friend's proposal.

"Take no further notice of it, dear," said her mother, who guessed the
reason of the child's curiosity.

Leaving the friends at lunch in charge of Paulina Ruffini, she hastened
to find Ted Flaggan, whom she warned to be more careful how he conversed
with his friend Rais.

"What puzzles me, ma'am," said Ted, "is, how did the small critter
understand me, seein' that she's a Moor?"

"That is easily explained: we have been teaching her English for some
time, I regret to say, for the purpose of making her more of a companion
to my daughter, who is fond of her sprightly ways.  I knew that she was
not quite so good a girl as I could have wished, but had no idea she was
so deceitful.  Go, find Rais Ali at once, and put him on his guard,"
said Mrs Langley, as she left the seaman and returned to the house.

Now, if there ever was a man who could not understand either how to
deceive, or to guard against deception, or to do otherwise than take a
straight course, that man was Ted Flaggan, and yet Ted thought himself
to be an uncommonly sharp deceiver when occasion required.

Having received the caution above referred to, he thrust his hands into
his coat-pockets, and with a frowning countenance went off in search of
Rais Ali.  Mariner-like, he descried him afar on the horizon of vision,
as it were, bearing down under full sail along a narrow path between two
hedges of aloes and cactus, which led to the house.

By a strange coincidence, Agnes and her friend came bounding out into
the shrubbery at that moment, having finished their brief luncheon, and
Ziffa chanced to catch sight of the stout mariner as he hastened to meet
his friend.

With the intuitive sharpness of an Eastern mind she observed the fact,
and with the native acuteness of a scheming little vixen, she guessed
that something _might_ turn up.  Acting on the thought, she shouted--

"Wait a little, Agnes; I will hide: you shall find me."

Innocent Agnes obediently waited, while Ziffa ran down the wrong side of
the cactus hedge, and kept up with the seaman--a little in rear of him.

"Ho!  Ally Babby," shouted Ted Flaggan, when he was within hail--it
might be a hundred yards or so--of his friend, "what d'ee think? that
little brown-faced chip of Hadji Baba has been up here eavesdropping,
and has got to windward of us a'most.  Leastwise she knows enough o' the
Riminis to want to know more--the dirty little spalpeen."

"Thank you," thought Ziffa, as she listened.

When Flaggan had varied his remarks once or twice, by way of translating
them, Rais Ali shook his head.

"That bad," said he, "ver' bad.  We mus' be tremendous cautious.
Ziffa's a little brute."

"Ha!" thought Ziffa.

"You don't say so?" observed Flaggan.  "Well, now, I'd scarce have
thought we had reason to be so fearful of a small thing, with a stupid
brown face like that."

"Brute!" muttered Ziffa inaudibly.

"Oh! she werry sharp chile," returned Rais, "werry sharp--got ears and
eyes from the sole of hers head to de top of hers feets."

Ziffa said nothing, either mentally or otherwise, but looked rather
pleased.

"Well," continued Rais, "we won't mention the name of Rimini again
nowhars--only w'en we can't help it, like."

"Not a whisper," said Flaggan; "but, be the way, it'll be as well,
before comin' to that state of prudent silence, that you tell me if the
noo hole they've gone to is near the owld wan.  You see it's my turn to
go up wi' provisions to-morrow night, and I hain't had it rightly
explained, d'ye see?"

Here Rais Ali described, with much elaboration, the exact position of
the new hole to which the Rimini family had removed, at the head of
Frais Vallon, and Mademoiselle Ziffa drank it all in with the most
exuberant satisfaction.

Shortly afterwards Agnes Langley found her friend hiding close to the
spot in the garden where she had last seen her.

That night Hadji Baba made an outrageous disturbance in his household as
to the lost diamond ring, and finally fixed, with the sagacity of an
unusually sharp man, on his old negro as being the culprit.

Next morning he resolved to have the old man before the cadi, after
forenoon attendance at the palace.  While there, he casually mentioned
to Omar the circumstance of the theft of his ring, and asked leave to
absent himself in the afternoon to have the case tried.

"Go," said Omar gravely, "but see that thou forget not to temper justice
with mercy.--By the way, tell me, friend Hadji, before thou goest, what
was the meaning of that strange request of thine the other day, and on
which thou hast acted so much of late?"

The story-teller turned somewhat pale, and looked anxious.

The strange request referred to was to the effect that the Dey should
give him no more gifts or wages, (in regard to both of which he was not
liberal), but that instead thereof he, Hadji Baba, should be allowed to
whisper confidentially in the Dey's ear on all public occasions without
umbrage being taken, and that the Dey should give him a nod and smile in
reply.  Omar, who was a penurious man, had willingly agreed to this
proposal, and, as he now remarked, Baba had made frequent use of the
license.

"Pardon me, your highness," said Baba; "may I speak the truth without
fear of consequences?"

"Truly thou mayest," replied the Dey; "and it will be well that thou
speakest nothing _but_ the truth, else thou shalt have good reason to
remember the consequences."

"Well, then, your highness," returned Baba boldly, "feeling that my
income was not quite so good as my position at Court required, and
desiring earnestly to increase it without further taxing the resources
of your highness's treasury, I ventured to make the request which I did,
and the result has been--has been--most satisfactory."

"Blockhead!" exclaimed the irritable Dey, "that does not explain the
nature of the satisfaction."

"Your slave was going to add," said Hadji Baba hastily, "that my
frequent whispering in your ear, and your highness's gracious nods and
smiles in reply, have resulted in my being considered one of the most
influential favourites in the palace, so that my good word is esteemed
of the utmost value, and paid for accordingly."

Omar laughed heartily at this, and Hadji Baba, much relieved, retired to
have his case tried before the cadi, taking his daughter with him, for
she had assured him that she had seen the old servant take it.

The old servant pleaded not guilty with earnest solemnity.

"Are you quite sure you saw him take the ring?" demanded the cadi of
Ziffa.

"Quite sure," replied the girl.

"And you are sure you did _not_ take it?" he asked of the negro.

"Absolutely certain," answered the old man.

"And you are convinced that you once had the ring, and now have it not?"
he said, turning to Hadji Baba.

"Quite."

"The case is very perplexing," said the cadi, turning to the
administrators of the law who stood at his elbow; "give the master and
the servant each one hundred strokes of the bastinado, twenty at a time,
beginning with the servant."

The officers at once seized on the old negro, threw him down and gave
him twenty blows.  They then advanced to Hadji Baba, and were about to
seize him, when he cried out--

"Beware what thou doest!  I am an officer of the Dey's palace and may
not be treated thus with impunity."

The cadi, who either did not, or pretended not, to believe the
statement, replied sententiously--

"Justice takes no note of persons.--Proceed."

The officers threw Baba on his face, and were about to proceed, when
Ziffa in alarm advanced with the ring and confessed her guilt.

Upon this the cadi was still further perplexed, for he could not now
undo the injustice of the blows given to the negro.  After a few
minutes' severe thought he awarded the diamond ring to the old servant,
and the two hundred blows to the master as being a false accuser.

The award having been given, the case was dismissed, and Hadji Baba went
home with smarting soles, resolved to punish Ziffa severely.

"Spare me!" said Ziffa, whimpering, when her father, seizing a rod, was
about to begin.

"Nay, thou deservest it," cried Baba, grasping her arm.

"Spare me!" repeated Ziffa, "and I will tell you a great secret, which
will bring you money and credit."

The curiosity of the story-teller was awakened.

