the grave earnest face of his friend with increased interest.

There was a touch of sadness in the tone of the Eskimo as he replied--

"No; I sometimes wonder--for their minds seem to remain in the childish
condition; though Okiok and Simek do seem at times as if they were
struggling into more light.  I often wonder that they think so little,
and think so foolishly; but I do not speak much about it; it only makes
them fear that I am growing mad."

"I have never asked you, Angut--do your tribes in the north here hold
the same wild notions about the earth and heavens as the southern
Eskimos do?"

"I believe they do," replied Angut; "but I know not all they think in
the south.  In this land they think,"--here a smile of good-natured pity
flickered for a moment on the man's face--"that the earth rests on
pillars, which are now mouldering away by age, so that they frequently
crack.  These pillars would have fallen long ago if they had not been
kept in repair by the angekoks, who try to prove the truth of what they
say by bringing home bits of them--rotten pieces of wood.  And the
strange thing is, that the people believe them!"

"Why don't you believe them, Angut?"

"I know not why."

"And what do your kinsmen think about heaven?" asked Rooney.

"They think it is supported on the peak of a lofty mountain in the
north, on which it revolves.  The stars are supposed to be ancient
Greenlanders, or animals which have managed in some mysterious way to
mount up there, and who shine with varied brightness, according to the
nature of their food.  The streaming lights of winter are the souls of
the dead dancing and playing ball in the sky."

"These are strange ideas," observed Rooney; "what have you to say about
them?"

"I think they are childish thoughts," replied the Eskimo.

"What, then, are your thoughts about these stars and streaming lights?"
persisted the seaman, who was anxious to understand more of the mind of
his philosophical companion.

"I know not what I think.  When I try to think on these things my mind
gets confused.  Only this am I sure of--that they are, they must be, the
wonderful works of the Good Spirit."

"But how do you know that?" asked Rooney.

Angut looked at his questioner very earnestly for a few moments.

"How does Ridroonee know that he is alive?" he asked abruptly.

"Oh, as to that, you know, everything tells me that I am alive.  I look
around, and I see.  I listen, and I hear.  I think, and I understand--
leastwise to some extent,--and I _feel_ in mind and heart."

"Now will I answer," said Angut.  "Everything tells me that the Great
Spirit is good, and the Maker of all things.  I look, and I see Him in
the things that exist.  I listen, and I hear Him in the whispering wind,
in the running water, in the voice of man and beast.  I think, and I
understand Him to some extent, and I _feel_ Him both in mind and heart."

"I believe you are right, Angut, and your words bring strongly to my
remembrance many of the words of the Great Spirit that my mother used to
teach me when I was a little boy."

From this point in the conversation Angut became the questioner, being
anxious to know all that the Kablunet had to tell about the mysterious
Book, of which he had spoken to him more than once, and the teachings of
his mother.

It was long past midnight when the descending moon warned them to turn
their steps towards the ice-cave where they had left their slumbering
companions.

"The frost is sharp to-night," remarked Rooney as they were about to
enter.

Angut turned round, and cast a parting glance on sea and sky.

"If it holds on like this," continued the sailor, "the ice will be firm
enough to carry us to land in the morning."

"It will not hold on like this," said Angut.  "The Innuit are very
ignorant, but they know many things about the weather, for they are
always watching it.  To-morrow will be warm.  We cannot escape.  It will
be safest and wisest to remain where we are."

"Remaining means starving," said the sailor in a desponding tone.

"It may be so; we cannot tell," returned the Eskimo.

With these uncomfortable reflections, the two men entered the cavern
quietly, so as not to disturb their comrades.  Spreading their bearskins
on the ice-floor, they laid heads on ice-pillows, and soon fell into
that dreamless, restful slumber which is the usual accompaniment of
youth, health, and vigour.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

SHOWS A GLOOMY PROSPECT--STARVATION THREATENED, AND WONDERFULLY AVERTED.

Angut was a true prophet.  When Rooney awoke next morning, his ears told
him that the rushing of ice-cold rivulets through ice-valleys, and the
roar of ice-born cataracts had increased considerably during the hours
of darkness.

The warmth which caused this did not, indeed, at first strike him, for
the air of the cavern and the character of his bed had chilled him so
much that he was shivering with cold.  On glancing at his still sleeping
comrades in misfortune, he observed that these tough creatures slept
with the peaceful aspect of infants, whom, being both fat and rotund,
they resembled in nearly everything except size.

Rising and going quietly out, he beat his arms vigorously across his
chest until circulation was fully restored.  Then he mounted a
neighbouring ice-ledge, and saw at a glance that their case had become
desperate.

"Angut was right," he murmured bitterly, and then stood for a long time
contemplating the scene in silence.

Considered apart from their circumstances, the scene was indeed
glorious.  Not only had the warmth of the air begun to swell the
rivulets which leaped and brawled down the pale-green slopes around him,
but the pack had opened out, so as to completely change the aspect of
the sea.  Instead of being clothed with ice, showing only a lane of
water here and there, it was now an open sea crowded with innumerable
ice-islets of every fantastic shape and size.

It added something to the bitterness of the poor man's feelings that
this state of things would, he knew, have been the very best for their
escape in kayaks and oomiaks, for a profound calm prevailed, and the
sea, where clear of ice, glittered in the rising sun like a shield of
polished gold.

He was roused from his meditations by the sound of footsteps behind him.
Turning quickly, he beheld Ippegoo holding his jaws with both hands and
with an expression of unutterable woe on his face.

"Halo, Ippe, what's wrong with you?"

A groan was the reply, and Rooney, although somewhat anxious, found it
difficult to restrain a laugh.

"I've got--oh! oh! oh! oh!--a mad tooth," gasped the poor youth.

"A mad tooth!  Poor fellow!--we call that _toothache_ where I come
from."

"What care I whether you call it mad tooth or _tootik_?" cried Ippegoo
petulantly.  "It is horrible! dreadful! awful!--like fire and fury in
the heart."

The sufferer used one or two more Eskimo expressions, suggestive of
excruciating agony, which are not translatable into English.

"If I only had a pair of pincers, but--look, Ippe, look," said Rooney,
pointing to the sea, in the hope of distracting his mind from present
pain by referring to threatening danger; "look--our kayaks being lost,
we have no hope of escaping, so we must starve."

His little device, well-meant though it was, failed.  A groan and glance
of indifference was the Eskimo's reply, for starvation and danger were
familiar and prospective evils, whereas toothache was a present horror.

We fear it must be told of Ippegoo that he was not celebrated for
endurance of pain, and that, being fond of sympathy, he was apt to give
full vent to his feelings--the result, perhaps, of having an
over-indulgent mother.  Toothache--one of the diseases to which
Greenlanders are peculiarly liable--invariably drew forth Ippegoo's
tenderest feelings for himself, accompanied by touching lamentations.

"Come, Ippe, be more of a man.  Even your mother would scold you for
groaning like that."

"But it is so shriekingly bad!" returned the afflicted youth, with
increasing petulance.

"Of course it is.  I know that; poor fellow!  But come, I will try to
cure you," said Rooney, who, under the impression that violent physical
exertion coupled with distraction of mind would produce good effect, had
suddenly conceived a simple ruse.  "Do you see yon jutting ice-cliff
that runs down to a point near the edge of the berg?"

"Yes, I see," whimpered Ippegoo.

"Well, it will require you to run at your top speed to get there while
you count fifteen twenties.  Now, if you run there within that time--at
your very top speed, mind--" Rooney paused, and looked serious.

"Yes; well?" said Ippegoo, whose curiosity had already begun to check
the groans.

"If you run there," continued the seaman, with a look and tone of deep
solemnity, "at the very toppest speed that you can do, and look round
that ice-point, you will see--"

"What?" gasped Ippegoo excitedly--for he was easily excited.

"_Something_," returned Rooney mysteriously.  "I cannot tell exactly
what you will see, because I am not an angekok, and have no torngak to
tell me; but I am quite sure that you will see _something_!  Only, the
benefit of seeing it will depend on your running as fast as you can.
Now, are you ready?"

"Yes, quite ready," exclaimed the youth, tightening his girdle of
sealskin eagerly.

"Well then--_away_!" shouted Rooney.

Off went Ippegoo at a pace which was obviously the best that he was
capable of putting forth.  Rooney counted as he ran, and in a much
shorter time than had been specified he reached the point, for the level
track, or what we may style sea-shore, of the berg was not a bad
race-course.  Suddenly, however, he came to an abrupt halt, and threw up
his arms as if in amazement.  Then he turned round and ran back at a
pace that was even greater than he had achieved on the outward run.
Rooney was himself greatly surprised at this, for, as the youth drew
nearer, the expression of his face showed that he had indeed seen
"something" which had not been in the seaman's calculations.  He
spluttered and gasped as he came near, in his effort to speak.

"What is it?--take time, lad," said Rooney quietly.

"A b-bear! a bear!" cried Ippegoo.

"What! did it run at you?" asked Rooney, becoming slightly excited in
his turn, and keeping his eye on the ice-point.

"N-no; no.  It was sitting on--on its tail--l-looking at the--the
s-sea."

"And we've no weapon bigger than an Eskimo knife," exclaimed the sailor,
with a frown of discontent--"not even a bit of stick to tie the knife
to.  What a chance lost!  He would have kept us in food for some weeks.
Well, well, this _is_ bad luck.  Come, Ippe, we'll go back to the cave,
and consult about this."

On returning to the cheerless retreat, they found the rest of the party
just awakening.  The men were yawning and rubbing their eyes, while the
women, with characteristic activity and self-denial, were gathering
together the few scraps of food that remained from the previous night's
supper.

"There is a bear just round the point--so Ippe says--what's to be done?"
asked Rooney on entering.

Up jumped the four men and two boys as if they had been made of
indiarubber.

"Attack it," cried Arbalik.

"Kill it," exclaimed Norrak.

"And eat it," said Ermigit.

"What will you attack it with?" asked Simek in a slightly contemptuous
tone--"with your fingernails?  If so, you had better send Sigokow to do
battle, for she could beat the three of you."

The youths stood abashed.

"We have no spears," said Simek, "and knives are useless.  Bad luck
follows us."

"It is my opinion," said Okiok, "that whatever we do, or try to do, we
had better eat something before doing it.  Bring the victuals, Nuna."

"Okiok is right," said Angut; "and Arbalik had better go out and watch
while we consult, so as to give us timely warning if the bear comes this
way."

Without a word, Arbalik caught up a piece of blubber, and went out of
the cave to enjoy his frugal breakfast while acting sentinel.  The
others, sitting down on their respective bearskins, ate and consulted
hastily.  The consultation was of little use, for they were utterly
helpless, and the breakfast was not much more profitable, for there was
far too little of it.  Still, as Rooney truly remarked when the last
morsel was consumed, it was better than nothing.

"Well now, my friends," said Angut at last, "since our food is done, and
all our talk has come to nothing, I propose that we go out in a body to
see this bear.  As we cannot kill him, we must get rid of him by driving
him away, for if we let him remain on the berg, he will come upon us
when we are asleep, perhaps, and kill us."

"Yes, that is best," said Okiok.  "If we separate, so as to distract
him, and then make a united rush from all points, shrieking, that will
drive him into the sea."

"Let us put Ippe in front," suggested Simek, with a twinkling eye; "he
yells better than any of us."

"'Specially when he's got the toothache," added Rooney.

The object of this touch of pleasantry smiled in a good-humouredly
imbecile manner.  It was clear that his malady had been cured, at least
for the time.

"But we must be very cautious," remarked Rooney, becoming serious, as
they rose to proceed on their adventure.  "It would not do to let any of
our party get hurt.  To my thinking, the women should take to the
ice-cliffs before we begin, and get upon pinnacles, up which the bear
could not climb."

While he was speaking, Arbalik came running in with the information that
the bear was approaching.

"Has it seen you?" asked Angut, as they all ran out.

"I think not.  From the way it walks, I think it has no suspicion of any
one being on the berg."

In a few seconds they reached the point of the promontory or cliff in
which their cave lay, and each member of the party peeped round with
excessive caution, and there, sure enough, they beheld a white Polar
bear of truly formidable size.  But it had changed its course after
Arbalik saw it, for by that time it had turned up one of the ice-valleys
before-mentioned and begun to ascend into the interior of the berg.  The
slow, heavy gait of the unwieldy animal suggested to Rooney the idea
that an active man could easily get out of its way, but the cat-like
activity with which it bounded over one or two rivulets that came in its
way quickly dissipated that idea.

"The farther he goes up that valley," whispered Simek, "the more trouble
we shall have in driving him into the sea."

"He does not seem to know his own mind," remarked Okiok, as the bear
again changed his course, and entered one of the small gorges that
opened into the larger valley.

"He knows it well enough," said Ermigit.  "Don't you see he is making
for the ice-top, where these gulls are sitting?  The fool expects to
catch them asleep."

Ermigit seemed to have guessed rightly, for after clambering up the
ice-gorge referred to until he gained a high ledge or plateau, he began
regularly to stalk the birds with the sly patience of a cat.

There was much in the bear's favour, for the recent fall of a pinnacle
had covered the ledge with shattered blocks of all shapes and sizes, in
the shelter of which it could creep towards its prey.  Our Eskimos
watched the proceeding open-mouthed, with profound interest.  To within
twenty yards or so of its game did that white-robed Arctic hunter
approach.  Then it crouched for a rush at the unconscious birds, for no
other lump of ice lay between them and their foe.

The charge was vigorously made, almost too vigorously, for when the
birds flew lightly off the ledge, and descended to a narrower one a
little farther down, it was all the bear could do to check itself on the
very edge of the precipice.  If it had gone over, the consequences would
have been dire, for the precipice was, not sheer, but still a very steep
slope of ice, several hundred feet deep, which terminated in those
rugged masses on the berg-shore that had fallen from the cliffs above.
There was only one break in the vast slope, namely, the narrow ledge
half-way down on which the birds had taken refuge.

Going to the extreme edge of the precipice, the bear sat down on his
haunches, and hungrily contemplated the birds, which were now beyond his
reach, twittering noisily as if to tantalise him.

"I would that I had a spear," growled Okiok.

"I would venture at him even with a big stick," said Simek.

"My friends," said Rooney, with sudden animation, "listen to me.  If you
will promise me to keep very quiet, and not to follow me whatever may
happen, I will show you how Kablunets overcome difficulties."

Of course the Eskimos were ready to make any promises that might be
required of them, and looked at their friend with surprise as he threw
off his sealskin coat and tightened the belt round his waist.  But they
were still more surprised, when, without another word, he set off, in
only shirt and trousers, to climb the valley of ice, and make for the
spot where the bear sat in melancholy meditation.

While ascending, Rooney took care to avail himself of the rugged nature
of the ice, so as to conceal himself entirely from the bear--though this
