
"Mr. Gale," Captain Edwards said, "will you ride forward at once,
with six men, to the advanced party. When you get there, take such
measures as you may think fit; and send me back word as to the
strength and position of the enemy."

With six of the Guides, Will at once rode forward; while Captain
Edwards halted, until the little column was gathered closely
together: the camels and dhoolies, with sick men, in the center;
the soldiers, in readiness for action, around them.

A soldier now ran up with a slip of paper, upon which Will had
scribbled, in pencil:

"The enemy are apparently in considerable force. The defile opens
here. They are disposed among rocks and boulders, on either side."

Will, on arriving at the advanced party, had found at once that the
force of the enemy was too strong for him to attempt to move
forward, at present. He had posted the men behind boulders by the
wayside, ordering them to pick off any man that showed himself; and
they were soon engaged in a sharp musketry skirmish with the enemy.
One of their number had fallen at the first discharge; and Will,
taking his rifle, used it with effect, until the head of the convoy
arrived.

It was now fast becoming dark, and the flashes of the enemy's fire,
from behind the rocks, showed how numerous were the assailants.

"There must be a couple of thousands of the scoundrels," Will said
to Captain Edwards, as the latter came up to ascertain the state of
affairs. "Hampered with the convoy, the position is an awkward one.
It is fortunate they attacked where they did; for we can hold our
own here while, if they had waited till we got fairly down into
this comparatively open valley, and then attacked us on both
flanks, it would have been very awkward.

"We must try and clear them out. We cannot stop here all night. It
is freezing very sharp, now; and the cold will be intense, in an
hour or two."

"I will take thirty men," Captain Edwards said, "and skirmish along
among the rocks on the left. Do you take as many more, and move
along the right of the path. The remaining forty shall stay here,
under my sergeant, to guard the convoy from an attack in rear, in
case any of the enemy should come down the defile behind us."

The fight soon became exceedingly hot. Making their way along the
rocks, on either side of the path, the Guides slowly drove the
enemy before them. It was hard work, however, for the tribesmen
fought steadily and, as those in front fell back upon those lower
down the valley, their resistance became every moment more
obstinate. Eight of Will's party had already fallen; but although,
sword in hand, he was leading them, encouraging them with voice and
gesture, not a bullet had as yet struck him.

Presently Captain Edwards, having crossed the valley, stood by his
side.

"We are at a standstill," he said. "Nine of my men are killed or
wounded, already; and the fellows are as thick as peas. I am afraid
we shall never be able to force our way through.

"There," he exclaimed, as a sound of firing was heard in the rear,
"they have come down on the convoy from behind. We had better, I
think, fall back a bit; and take post near the mouth of the defile.
We must defend ourselves, as best we can, till morning."

The movement was steadily executed, the wounded men being carried
with them as they retired. The tribesmen advanced as they fell
back--not venturing to press them, however; for the rear guard kept
their faces towards them, and any who ventured to show themselves
instantly paid the penalty of their rashness.

For an hour the fight went on. It was night now, and dark as pitch
in the deep valley in which the fight was going on; the position of
the combatants being only indicated by the flickering flashes of
the muskets. The Afghans were gradually creeping nearer, as the
Guides could see, by the flashes.

"If the fellows only make a determined rush at us," Captain Edwards
said to Will, "it will go hard with us. Fortunately, they are as
much in the dark as we are, and will find it difficult to gather
for a rush."

"I think we may hold out till morning but, by that time, news that
we are blockaded here will spread throughout the hills, and we may
have 10,000 of them down on us. I think, if you will give me leave,
the best plan will be for me to try and make my way down to
Jugdulluk, to bring up help from there."

"You would never get through," Captain Edwards advised. "It is a
brave offer, Gale, but could not be done."

"I think it might be done," Will said. "It is as dark as pitch. I
will take my lad with me, and will borrow a native cap and cloak
from one of the bearers--there are some Afghans among them. I will
take off my patrol jacket, and leave it behind me, and my boots. We
will crawl along in the dark.

"If--as is likely enough--we stumble against some of them, we will
say we are wounded, and are making our way to the rear. They cannot
see us in the dark, and my Afghan will pass muster; and Yossouf
will certainly not be suspected. If I am discovered and killed, he
will go forward and deliver the message."

The plan seemed to offer every possibility of success; and Captain
Edwards, seeing how serious the position was, consented to allow
Will to attempt it.

A few words to Yossouf sufficed to inform him of the task Will was
about to undertake, and he at once agreed to share the danger. A
rough sheepskin cap was obtained for Will from one of the camel
men. His tunic was thrown off, and a posteen--or Afghan sheepskin
coat--was put on, in its place. He took a long matchlock, which the
camel man carried, slung over his shoulders; took off his boots,
and thrust a pair of loose Afghan shoes into his belt. Yossouf
needed no preparations, beyond borrowing a matchlock.

Wringing Captain Edwards' hand, Will stooped on his hands and knees
and, with Yossouf a pace or two ahead, began to crawl down the
path. Before starting, the orders had been sent round to the
soldiers to fire at the rocks on either side of the path, but on no
account to fire down the road, itself. As he expected, Will found
this clear of Afghans, for a considerable distance. A heavy fire
had, previous to their starting, been directed down this path; to
prevent the Afghans from gathering there in the darkness,
preparatory to making a rush. They came across several dead bodies,
but the enemy were all behind rocks, on one side or other of the
road.

When they had crawled a hundred yards, they were past the front
line, from which the Afghans were keeping up a heavy fire; but Will
knew that, from their numbers, they must extend far back down the
valley and, indeed, from almost every rock the flashes of the
matchlocks blazed out, as the lurking tribesmen fired in the
direction of the mouth of the defile.

They were nearly a quarter of a mile down when an Afghan--who had
been crouching behind a rock, close to the path--advanced into the
road to fire, when he stumbled against Yossouf.

"What are you doing?" he exclaimed.

"We are both wounded, by the Kaffirs," Yossouf answered; "and are
making our way back, to bind up our wounds. I think my arm is
broken; but I mean to come back again, to have a few more shots at
the infidels."

"Good!" the Afghan replied. "How goes it in front?"

"Their fire is lessening," Yossouf said. "We must have killed many.
We shall finish with them in the morning, if not before."

The Afghan fired, and then retired behind his rock to load again;
while Will and Yossouf continued their way.

A few hundred yards farther, they rose to their feet. Will slipped
on the Afghan shoes; and they then proceeded, at a rapid pace, down
the pass. Several times they withdrew from the road, and hid beside
it, as they met parties of tribesmen hurrying up to join in the
attack but, in an hour after starting, they heard the welcome
challenge of the sentry, at Jugdulluk.

Saying who he was, Will was at once passed forward into the fort,
and taken to the quarters of the officer in command.

"I am Lieutenant Gale, of the 66th," Will said, "and was on my way
down the pass with the convoy of wounded, and 100 men of the
Guides, under Captain Edwards. They have been attacked at the lower
end of the defile, some four miles above, by a very strong body of
tribesmen. They are attacked front and rear.

"I have made my way through to ask you if you can despatch a force
to their rescue. Were the tribesmen attacked in their rear, now,
they might be scattered easily enough; but they are assembling very
fast and, in the morning, it will be a difficult matter to reach
them."

"We have fancied," the officer said, "for the last two hours that
we heard distant firing; but we could not be sure, for any noise
echoes so, in these mountains. I will set out at once with you,
with as many men as I can spare."



Chapter 17: At Candahar.


The garrison of Jugdulluk consisted only of 220 Sikhs. The officer
in command left seventy of these in charge of one of his
subalterns, with the injunction to exercise the most extreme
vigilance, in his absence. Then with 150 men, a subaltern, and Will
Gale, he started up the path to effect the rescue of the
beleaguered convoy.

The road wound and turned frequently among the spurs of the lofty
hills, which had cut off the sound of firing from the garrison; and
only a faint and distant murmur was audible, when they started.
After marching two miles, however, the rattle of the musketry
became clear and distinct. Upon the way the officer in command
learned, from Will, the exact position of things in front, and the
situation of the Afghans.

When within half a mile of the scene of action, fifty men were
thrown out on either side of the road; while the other fifty
advanced, very slowly, along the center The orders to the flankers
were to search among the rocks, as they advanced, and to bayonet or
shoot every Afghan they found among them.

It was not long before they came upon the enemy. Then the rifles
cracked out; and the wild shouts of the Afghans betokened their
astonishment at being thus, unexpectedly, assailed in rear.
Numerous as they were, they offered but a light resistance. Their
one thought was to effect their escape; and they hurried rapidly
away as the relief advanced, climbing the steep sides of the valley
by paths only known to themselves; and then, from the hillside far
above, opening a scattered fire, at random, down into the valley.

In five minutes, all resistance had ceased. The flanking parties
were ordered to shelter themselves behind the rocks, and to return
the fire of the natives on the hillsides; to retain the position
until the convoy passed through, and then to close behind it, as a
rear guard. With the fifty men in the road, the officer then pushed
forward; and was soon greeted by a shout of welcome from the
defenders of the defile.

There was not a minute to be lost; for the Afghans, when they
recovered from their first scare, would renew the attack; and the
party pressing down the defile on their rear--ignorant of what had
taken place below--were still keeping up an incessant fire.
Twenty-eight of the Guides were already killed, or wounded.

Several of the sick men, in the dhoolies, volunteered to walk down
to the fort, and to give up their places to those of the wounded
men who were unable to walk and, in a few minutes, the convoy moved
forward. The fifty men of tho relieving party placed themselves in
their rear and, as the tribesmen who had been attacking them from
behind rushed down through the defile, with exulting shouts--believing
that they were now secure of their victims--the Sikhs opened so heavy
a fire on them that they fell back up the defile, in disorder.

As the convoy wound down the valley, the enemy again assembled on
the hills and pursued them hotly. But the Sikhs and Guides kept up
so steady a fire that they did not venture to approach to close
quarters and, with a loss of eighteen more men, the convoy reached
the shelter of the fort. Conscious of their inability to attack
this position, the Afghans drew off.

On returning to his friends, Will had resumed his uniform; and now,
on reaching the fort, Captain Edwards expressed to him his warmest
thanks for the hazardous adventure that he had undertaken.

"I shall, of course," he concluded, "furnish a full report of the
affair to the general; and I should think he would recommend you
for the Victoria Cross. If any fellow ever deserved it, you do so;
for it seemed, to me, almost certain death to venture through the
pass. I never expected to see you again; and I was never more glad,
in my life, than I was when the firing began down below in the
valley, and knew that help was at hand for, had you failed, it
would have been all up with us. I doubt if we should have seen the
morning and, at any rate, few of us would have been left, by that
time."

The convoy reached Jellalabad without further adventure, and
Captain Edwards reported to the general the events of the march. He
was requested to give a full written report of the affair; and the
general stated that, in forwarding it, he should certainly append a
recommendation that Lieutenant Gale should receive the Victoria
Cross, for his gallantry in venturing through the Afghans to fetch
assistance for the convoy.

Will himself, as soon as he reached Jellalabad, hurried away to the
cantonment of the Norfolk Rangers; who were in a village, a mile
distant from the town. He was not recognized, as he passed through
the soldiers scattered about the village street; and was soon at
the principal house, where the colonel had his quarters. On sending
in his name, he was at once shown into the room where the colonel
was at work.

"I am indeed glad to see you," the latter said, rising and shaking
him heartily by the hand; "and I congratulate you, most warmly, on
your promotion. I promised to do what I could for you, when you
joined; but I did not expect that it would be so soon."

"I am indeed obliged to you, colonel, for your kindness," Will
said; "and am conscious how much I owe to you."

"Not at all, my boy, not at all. It was General Roberts, himself,
who recommended you for your commission; and I was only too glad to
back up his recommendation, to the best of my power. We all thought
you were gone, when you were reported as missing at Ali-Kheyl, and
we heard from the sentry that--having gone forward, to investigate
the origin of a noise he had reported to you--you were suddenly
fired upon; and that he saw no more of you, as he ran back to the
picket. I was glad, indeed, when the report was received from poor
Cavagnari that, upon his arrival at Cabul, he had found you there,
just recovering from your wounds.

"Then, of course, we gave you up again, when we heard of the
massacre of the mission; and it seemed like a resurrection from the
dead when I got a letter from Roberts, saying you were found again,
and that he was recommending you for a commission.

"I see by the Gazette you are appointed to the 66th, and we were
expecting to see you on your way down. Had you any difficulty in
getting through the passes?"

"The convoy was attacked, sir, by the tribesmen, when near
Jugdulluk; but the garrison came out to our rescue, and we got
through safely. But we had thirty men killed or wounded."

"A smart affair!" the colonel said. "And now, of course, you will
take up your quarters with us, for a day or two, before you go on.
The officers will all be glad to see you; and you will be able to
tell us all about the attack on the mission, and the recent
fighting. Roberts has been having some hot work, there.

"We have been grumbling horribly at our bad luck. We thought, at
the time, we were fortunate at being sent back to India, when peace
was signed, instead of being kept in the Khurum valley. But the
consequence has been that we have been out of it all. However, we
must look upon you as our representative."

Will hesitated about staying, but the colonel overruled his
objection; saying that, as there would be no fighting until the
spring, there could be no particular hurry for him to join his
regiment. A spare room was placed at his disposal, in the colonel's
quarters, and Will was soon made at home. The officers flocked in,
upon hearing of his arrival; and all congratulated him, most
warmly, upon his promotion. An hour later, a mounted orderly rode
