"I suppose you haven't got a crust of bread in your pocket?" but pulled
up in time.  Pity to spoil my appetite for breakfast at Dungeon Ghyl.
Ugh! if I sit here I shall rust up, and not be able to move.  _Must_ go
on.

10 a.m.--Top of Rosset Ghyl.  Not very swell time to get from the top of
the Pike here in five hours.  All a chance whether I get down at all,
now--I'm about finished up.  Wish those Cambridge fellows--

Here the diary ends abruptly; but, in case our readers are curious to
know the end of our hero's adventure, they will be interested to learn
that at the identical moment when the writer reached this point in his
diary, the Cambridge fellows _did_ turn up.  They had, indeed, been out
searching the hills from very early morning for the wanderer.  As he did
not arrive the night before at Wastdale, they had concluded he had given
up the ascent, and returned to Dungeon Ghyl.  But when early that
morning a guide had come over from Dungeon Ghyl, and reported that the
young gentleman had certainly not returned there, the two 'Varsity men
became alarmed, and turned out to search.  There was no sign of him on
the Wastdale side of the mountain; and, getting more and more alarmed,
they went on to the summit.  There they discovered a crushed-up _Daily
News_ and two or three stained pages of a guide-book.  Glad of any clue,
they followed the track down towards Dungeon Ghyl, and at last came upon
the poor fellow, fairly exhausted with hunger, fatigue, and rheumatism.
They gave him what partially revived him, and then with the care and
tenderness of two big brothers carried him down the steep side of Rosset
Ghyl, and so on to the hotel.  There they kept him under their special
care, day and night, and never left him till he was well enough to
return home to his anxious family.

Since then Bartholomew Bumpus has made several ascents of Scafell Pike,
but he has never again, I believe, stayed up there all night to see the
sunrise.  Nor has he, when he could possibly help it, gone up
unaccompanied by at least one Cambridge fellow.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

VERY MUCH ABROAD.

_Being the impressions of foreign travel, communicated chiefly to a
particular friend by Thomas Hooker, minor, of Rugby, during the course
of a Continental tour in France and Switzerland in the company of his
brother, James Hooker, major, also of Rugby_.

London, _July_ 31.

Dear Gus,--Here's a spree!  The pater's got an idea into his head that
young fellows ought to see something of foreign parts, and store their
minds with the beauties of Nature in her grandest--I forget what--
anyhow, we backed him up; and Jim and I are to start abroad on our own
hooks on Friday.  How's that for luck?  The pater has settled what
hotels we go to in Paris and Switzerland, and he's sketched out a route
for us every day we're away.  The grind is, he's awfully particular we
should write home every day and keep accounts.  Jim will have to do
that, and I'll keep you up.  It really is a very good thing for fellows
to travel and expand their minds, you know.  We're starting from Holborn
Viaduct at 9:30 on Friday.  I'll write and let you know my impressions,
as the pater calls it; and you might let your young sister see them too,
if you like.

Yours truly, T.  Hooker.

Paris, _August_ 3.

Dear Gus,--We had an awful squeak for the train at Holborn, owing to
Jim's hatbox falling off the cab and his insisting on going back to pick
it up.  It seems to me rather humbug taking chimneys at all, but he says
that's all I know of foreign travel; so I caved in and brought mine too.

Another thing that nearly lost the train was a row about the luggage.
The fellows wanted to do me out of two bob because they said my
portmanteau was four pounds overweight!  There was nearly a shindy, I
can tell you, only Jim said we'd better walk into the chap on our way
back.  Anyhow, I wasn't going to be done, so I unlocked my portmanteau
and took out my spare jacket and a pair of bags, and carried them over
my arm, and that made the weight all right.  The fellows tried to grin,
of course, but I fancy they were rather blue about it.

Our tickets cost 45 shillings 6 pence each, not counting grub on the
way, which about finished up a L5 note for the two of us.

Jim and I had a stunning time in the train.  There was only one other
old chap in the carriage.  When the fellow came for the tickets outside
Dover, Jim happened to be up on the luggage rack, and the fellow would
never have spotted him if the rack hadn't given way.  Then he got
crusty, and we all but got left behind by the steamer.

Beastly tubs those steamers are!  I wonder why they don't make some that
go steady.  And they ought to make the seats facing the side of the
vessel, and not with your back to it.  You miss such a lot of the view.
I sat with my face to the side of the vessel most of the way.  I don't
exactly know what became of Jim.  He said afterwards he'd been astern
watching the English coast disappear.  I suppose that accounted for his
looking so jolly blue.  We weren't sorry to clear out of that boat, I
can tell you.

Jim was first up the gangway, and I was third, owing to dropping my
spare bags half-way up and having to pick them up.  There was an awfully
civil French fellow at the top of the gangway, who touched his hat to
me.  I couldn't make out what he said, but I fancied he must be asking
for a tip, so I gave him a copper.  That seemed to make him awfully
wild, and he wanted to know my name.  I had to tell him, and he wrote it
down; but as he didn't get my address, I hope there won't be a fuss
about it.  I didn't see any harm in tipping him, but I suppose it's
against French law, and I don't mean to do it any more.

There was an awfully rum lot of chaps in our carriage between Calais and
Paris.  You'd have thought they had never seen a pair of bags before in
their life; for they stared at mine all the way from Calais to Amiens,
where we got out for refreshment.  I thought it best to take my bags
with me to the buffet, as they might have humbugged about with them if
I'd left them in the carriage.

They ought to make English compulsory in French schools.  The duffers in
the buffet didn't even know what a dough-nut was!  Not even when Jim
looked it up in the dixy and asked for _noix a pate_.  The idiot asked
us if we meant "rosbif," or "biftik," or "palal"--that's all the English
they seemed to know, and think English fellows feed off nothing else.
However, we did get some grub, and paid for it too.  When we got back to
the carriage I took the precaution of sticking my bags on the rack above
Jim's head; so all the fellows stared at him the rest of the way, and I
got a stunning sleep.

We had an awful doing, as Bunker would call it--by the way, did he pull
off his tennis match against Turner on breaking-up day?--when we got to
Paris.  The row at Holborn was a fool to it.  Just fancy, they made Jim
and me open both our portmanteaux and hat-boxes before they would let us
leave the station!  I can tell you, old man, I'm scarcely cool yet after
that disturbance, and if it hadn't been for Jim I guess they'd have
found out how a "Rug" can kick out!  Jim says it's the regular thing,
and they collar all the cigars they can find.  All I can say is, it's
robbery and cool cheek, and I wish you or some of the fellows would
write to the _Times_ or the _Boy's Own Paper_ and get it stopped.  We
had to turn every blessed thing out on the counter, and pack up again
afterwards.  It's a marvel to me how the mater stowed all the things
away.  I couldn't get half of them back, and had to shove the rest into
my rug and tie it up at the corners like a washerwoman's bundle.  Jim's
too easy-going by half.  I'm certain, if he'd backed me up, we could
have hacked over the lot of them; and I shouldn't have lost that spare
pair of bags, which I forgot all about in the shindy.  I hope there'll
be a war with France soon.  We were jolly fagged when we got to the inn,
I can tell you.  The old woman had got the pater's letter, so she
expected us.  She's rather an ass, and must have been getting up her
English for our benefit, for she's called us "nice young Englese
gentilman" about a hundred times already.

I don't think Jim's got over the blues he had watching the English coast
yesterday.  He's asleep still, so I'm writing this while I'm waiting for
him to come to breakfast.  I shall not wait much longer, I can tell you.
Ta-ta!  Remember me to any of the old crowd you see; also to your young
sister.

Yours truly, Thomas Hooker.

P.S.--By the way, see what your French dixy says for doughnut, and let
me know by return.  We're going on to Switzerland in a day or two.

Paris, _August_ 6.

Dear Gus,--The dictionary word of yours won't wash here.  We've tried it
all round Paris, and you might as well talk Greek to them.  I don't
believe there's any word in the language for dough-nut.  Jim's not bad
at French, either.  We should be regularly floored if it wasn't for him.
And I expect they guess by his accent he comes from Rugby, for fellows
all touch their hats to him.

You know the pater gave us a list of places to go and see in Paris--the
Louvre and the Luxembourg, and all that.  Well, he never stuck down
where they were, and we've had to worry it out for ourselves.  Jim
stopped a fellow this morning and asked him, "Ou est la chemin pour
Luxembourg?"  The fellow took off his hat and was awfully civil, and
said, "Par ici, messieurs," and took us a walk of about three miles, and
landed us at a railway station.  He thought we wanted to go to
Luxembourg in Germany, or wherever it is--fare about three cool sovs.
The fellow hung about us most of the rest of the day, expecting a tip.
Likely idea that, after the game he'd had with us!  We couldn't shake
him off till we bolted into one of the swimming baths on the river.
That smoked him out.  Most of these chaps draw the line at a tub.  Would
you believe it? at our inn, they never seem to have heard of soap in
their lives, and we got quite tired of saying "savon" before we found
some in a shop.  Jim thinks they use it all up for soup.  What we get at
the inn tastes like it.

Jim is rather a cute beggar.  We went to a cafe yesterday to get some
grub, and he wanted a glass of milk.  We had both clean forgotten the
French for milk, and we'd left the dixy at the inn.  We tried to make
the fellow understand, but he was an ass.  We pointed to a picture of a
cow hanging on the wall and smacked our lips; and he grinned and rubbed
his hands, and said, "Ah, oui.  Rosbif! jolly rosbif!"  Did you ever
hear of such a born idiot?  At last Jim had an idea and said, "Apportez-
nous du cafe-au-lait sans le cafe."  That fetched it.  The fellow
twigged at once.  Not bad of Jim, was it?

Jolly slow place Paris.  The swimming baths are the only place worth
going to.  Jim went in off the eight-foot springboard.  You should have
seen the natives sit up at the neat dive he made.

I hope the pater's not going to ask too much about the Louvre, because
we scamped it.  The fact is, there was a little unpleasantness with one
of the fellows, owing to Jim's cane happening to scratch one of the
pictures by a chap named Rubens.  It was quite an accident, as we were
only trying to spike a wasp on the frame, and Jim missed his shot.  The
fellow there made a mule of himself, and lost his temper.  So we didn't
see the fun of staying, and cut.

Montreux, Lake of Geneva, _August_ 10.

Couldn't finish this before we left Paris.  We meant to start for here
on Friday, but settled to come on on Thursday night after all.  You
needn't go telling them at home, but between you and me it was a bit of
a bolt.

The fact was, we went to a church called Notre Dame in the morning--not
nearly such a snug place as Rugby Chapel, and they charge a penny apiece
for the chairs.  So we cut the inside and thought we'd go up to the top.
It wasn't a bad lark, and you get a stunning view.  The swimming baths
looked about the size of a sheet of school paper.  There was a door open
into the belfry, and as nobody was about, we never thought it would be
any harm to have a ring up.  We couldn't get the big bell to go, but
most of the others did, and it was enough to deafen you.

I suppose they must have heard the row below, for when we looked down we
saw a regular crowd of fellows in the square underneath looking up our
way.  After that we thought we might as well shut up, and were just
going to cut down, when a fellow belonging to the place, who had been
somewhere on the top, came rushing round the parapet, flourishing a
stick and yelling like a trooper in awfully bad French.  We had a good
start of him, especially as we shut the door at the top of the stairs
behind us.  Besides he was fat; so we easily pulled it off.

There was an old woman at the bottom who kept the ticket place.  She
twigged _it_ was a bolt, and tried to stop us; but she couldn't _get_
out of her box.  So we strolled out easily and cabbed it back to the
inn.  It was an awful game to see the crowd still staring up at the
tower as we drove off.  The fat fellow got down just as we were turning
the corner.  I don't think he guessed we were cabbing it.  Anyhow, we
didn't see any one chasing the cab.  Jim said we were rather well out of
it; and we settled we might as well drive on to the swimming baths and
stay there for an hour or so till things had quieted down, and then go
on to Switzerland by the evening train, especially, Jim said, as the
pater might not like to get his name mixed up in a French row.

Beastly uncomfortable carriages on the Swiss railway from Paris.  There
was the same humbug about the luggage at a little station in the middle
of the night, but we were too fagged to cut up rough.  We were jolly
glad to get here at last, I can tell you.

I must shut up now, as I've got to write to pater.  It's a regular go.
We forgot he'd be sending the money to Paris, and now we've only got
about half-a-sov. between us!  Remember me to your young sister.

Yours truly, T.  Hooker.

Montreux, _August_ 10.

Dear Father,--We didn't see the Luxembourg, as a fellow directed us to
the wrong place.  We had several bathes in the Seine.  Jim got on very
well with his French, and I think we are both improved.  We should be
glad of some more money, as we are nearly out.  I bought a present for
you in Paris, which I think you will like when you see it.  If you could
send the money here by return it would do.  I suppose what you sent to
Paris missed us, as we came here a day sooner than we expected.

We went up Notre Dame the last day we were in Paris.  There is a fine
view from the top.  It is surprising how few of the French you meet in
the swimming baths.  We had the place to ourselves one day.  It's eight
feet at the deep end.  Jim and I both think foreign travel is good for a
fellow, and we shall hope to have a reply to this by return.

Your loving son, Tom.

Montreux, _August_ 11.

Dear Gus,--We're regularly stuck up, as the money hasn't come yet.  I
hope it will come soon, or the old girl at the inn here will think we're
cadgers.  We had a stunning row on the lake yesterday; the boats are
only a bob an hour, so we thought we might go in for it.  We raced a
steamer for about half a mile, and weren't done then, only Jim's oar
came off the pin (they haven't such things as row-locks here), and that
upset us.

Of course it didn't matter, as we could swim; but the fellows in the
steamer kicked up an awful shine about it, and came and hauled us up,
boat and all.  It was rather awkward, as we had nothing to tip them
with.  We got out at a dismal sort of place called Chillon.  We told the
captain if he was ever in London the pater would be glad to see him.

We had a grind getting back here with the boat, as it came on dark and
misty, and we couldn't see where Montreux had got to.  Jim got rather
chawed up too by the cold, so I sculled.  The wind was against us, and
it was rather a hard pull, especially when you couldn't see the land at
all.  I managed to keep pretty warm with rowing, but old Jim's teeth
chattered like a steam-engine.  It came on a regular squall, and I
didn't see the fun of sculling after about a couple of hours.  So Jim
and I huddled up to keep warm, and let her drift.  We were jolly glad to
see a light after a bit, and yelled to let them know where we were.
They didn't hear, though, so we just stuck on and chanced it.  The old
tub drifted ashore all right, side on, though she upset just as we got
to land.  It was lucky the water was shallow, as we were too cold to
swim.  As it was, old Jim nearly came to grief.  It was no end of a job
hauling in the boat.  She was rather knocked about.  We had drifted back
to Chillon, exactly where we started from.

The keeper of the castle put us up for the night and was no end of a
brick.  There was rather a row with the boat fellow when we got back to
Montreux.  He got crusty about the boat being damaged, and wanted about
two sovs!  As it happened, we hadn't got anything, as we gave the fellow
at the castle five francs, and that cleared us out.  We told the boat
fellow to call at the inn to-morrow, and I hope to goodness the money
will have turned up, as it's a bit awkward.  Jim has a cold.

Yours truly T.  Hooker.

Please remember me to your young sister.

Montreux, _August_ 13.

Dear Father,--Thanks awfully for the money; it was jolly to get it, and
mother's letter.  It is very hilly about here.  Jim's cold is getting
better.  Would you mind telegraphing to us who is the winner of the
Australian cricket match to-morrow, and how many Grace scored?  In
haste, Your loving son, Tom.

Riffel Hotel, _August_ 18.

Dear Gus,--We're awfully high up here--awful rum little inn it is.  It
was chock full, and Jim and I have to sleep under the table.  There are
about a dozen other fellows who have to camp out too, so it's a rare
spree.

We're going to have a shot at the Matterhorn to-morrow if it's fine.  It
looks easy enough, and Jim and I were making out the path with a
telescope this afternoon.  It's rather a crow to do the Matterhorn.
Some muffs take guides up, but they cost four or five pounds, so we're
going without.

That boat fellow at Montreux got to be a regular nuisance.  In fact,
that's why we came on here a day earlier.  He came up twice a day to the
inn, and we couldn't shake him off.  We gave him a sov., which was twice
what he had a right to.  He swore he'd have two pounds or bring up a
policeman with him next time.  So we thought the best way was to clear
out by the early train next morning, and I guess he was jolly blue when
he found us gone.  I send with this a faint sketch of some of the
natives!  What do you say to their rig?

It was a pretty good grind up to Zermatt, and we walked it up the
valley.  There wasn't much to see on the way, and it's a frightfully
stony road.  There were some fellows playing lawn-tennis at the hotel at
Zermatt.  One of them wasn't half bad.  His serves twisted to the leg
and were awfully hard to get up.  Jim and I wouldn't have minded a game,
only the fellows seemed to think no one wanted to play but themselves.
We may get a game to-morrow on our way to the Matterhorn.  It was a
tremendous fag getting up here from Zermatt.  I don't know why fellows
all come on, as there's no tennis court or anything up here.

There's an ice-field up here called a glacier, but it's an awful fraud
if you want skating--rough as one of Bullford's fields at Rugby.  A
fellow told me it bears all the year round, but it's got a lot of holes,
so we don't think we'll try it.  I expect we shall be home next week, as
the pater thinks we've run through our money rather too fast.  Remember
me to your people and your young sister.

Yours truly, T.  Hooker.

Zermatt, _August_ 20.

Dear Gus,--We didn't do the Matterhorn after all, as Jim screwed his
foot.  He's awfully unlucky, and if it hadn't been for the accident we
might have got to the top; and of course it stops tennis too.  We did
get one game before we started up.  Jim gave me fifteen in two games
each set.  I pulled off the first, but he whacked me the other two.
It's a beastly rough court, though, and the mountain was awfully in the
light.

We hadn't much difficulty finding the way to the Matterhorn, as there
was a sign-post at the end of the village.  We thought we might as well
take the easy side, as the front of the hill is pretty stiff.  Of course
we had to take a good long round, which was a nuisance, as we meant to
be back for _table d'hote_ at seven.  When we got properly on to the
side we put it on, but it was a good long grind, I can tell you.  We
weren't sorry to get up to a snow slope and cool ourselves.

They ought to sweep a path across the snow, or fellows are very likely
to lose their way.  We lost ours, but we had a good lark on the snow
snowballing.  It got deep in one part, so we had to clamber up the rocks
at the side to get to the top of the slope.  It's rather deceptive,
distance, on the snow, for it took us an hour to do what seemed only a
few yards.  We got on to a flat bit after awhile, and had another turn
on the snow.

It was rather a game rolling things down the slope.  They went at an
awful pace.  The nuisance is the snow has a way of slipping from under
