Good Mrs Twitter carefully avoided the risk of hurting the poor woman's
feelings by needless reference to jail.

"I expect him this day three weeks, ma'am," replied Mrs Frog.

"That will do nicely," returned Mrs Twitter.  "You see, my husband
knows a gentleman who takes great pleasure in getting con--in getting
men like Ned, you know, into places, and giving them a chance of--of
getting on in life, you understand?"

"_Yes_, ma'am, we must all try to git on in life if we would keep in
life," said Mrs Frog, sadly.

"Well, there is a situation open just now, which the gentleman--the same
gentleman who was so kind in helping us after the fire; you see we all
need help of one another, Mrs Frog--which the gentleman said he could
keep open for a month, but not longer, so, as I happened to be passing
your house to-night on my way to the Yard, to the mothers' meeting, I
thought I'd just look in and tell you, and ask you to be sure and send
Ned to me the moment he comes home."

"I will, ma'am, and God bless you for thinkin' of us so much."

"Remember, now," said Mrs Twitter, impressively, "_before_ he has time
to meet any of his old comrades.  Tell him if he comes straight to me he
will hear something that will please him very much.  I won't tell you
what.  That is my message to him.  And now, how is my Mita?  Oh!  I need
not ask.  There she lies like a little angel!"  (Mrs Twitter rose and
went to the crib, but did not disturb the little sleeper.) "I wish I saw
roses on her little cheeks and more fat, Mrs Frog."

Mrs Frog admitted that there was possible improvement in the direction
of roses and fat, but feared that the air, (it would have been more
correct to have said the smoke and smells), of the court went against
roses and fat, somehow.  She was thankful, however, to the good Lord for
the health they all enjoyed in spite of local disadvantages.

"Ah!" sighed Mrs Twitter, "if we could only transport you all to
Canada--"

"Oh! ma'am," exclaimed Mrs Frog, brightening up suddenly, "we've had
_such_ a nice letter from our Bobby.  Let her see it, Hetty."

"Yes, and so nicely written, too," remarked Hetty, with a beaming face,
as she handed Bobby's production to the visitor, "though he doesn't
quite understand yet the need for capital letters."

"Never mind, Hetty, so long as he sends you capital letters," returned
Mrs Twitter, perpetrating the first pun she had been guilty of since
she was a baby; "and, truly, this is a charming letter, though short."

"Yes, it's rather short, but it might have been shorter," said Mrs
Frog, indulging in a truism.

Mrs Twitter was already late for the mothers' meeting, but she felt at
once that it would be better to be still later than to disappoint Mrs
Frog of a little sympathy in a matter which touched her feelings so
deeply.  She sat down, therefore, and read the letter over, slowly,
commenting on it as she went along in a pleasant sort of way, which
impressed the anxious mother with, not quite the belief, but the
sensation that Bobby was the most hopeful immigrant which Canada had
received since it was discovered.

"Now, mind, send Ned up _at once_," said the amiable lady when about to
quit the little room.

"Yes, Mrs Twitter, I will; good-night."



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

NED FROG'S EXPERIENCES AND SAMMY TWITTER'S WOES.

But Ned Frog, with strong drink combined, rendered fruitless all the
efforts that were put forth in his behalf at that time.

When discharged with a lot of other jail-birds, none of whom, however,
he knew, he sauntered leisurely homeward, wondering whether his wife was
alive, and, if so, in what condition he should find her.

It may have been that better thoughts were struggling in his breast for
ascendency, because he sighed deeply once or twice, which was not a
usual mode with Ned of expressing his feelings.  A growl was more common
and more natural, considering his character.

Drawing nearer and nearer to his old haunts, yet taking a roundabout
road, as the moth is drawn to the candle, or as water descends to its
level, he went slowly on, having little hope of comfort in his home, and
not knowing very well what to do.

As he passed down one of the less frequented streets leading into
Whitechapel, he was arrested by the sight of a purse lying on the
pavement.  To become suddenly alive, pick it up, glance stealthily
round, and thrust it into his pocket, was the work of an instant.  The
saunter was changed into a steady businesslike walk.  As he turned into
Commercial Street, Ned met Number 666 full in the face.  He knew that
constable intimately, but refrained from taking notice of him, and
passed on with an air and expression which were meant to convey the idea
of infantine innocence.  Guilty men usually over-reach themselves.
Giles noted the air, and suspected guilt, but, not being in a position
to prove it, walked gravely on, with his stern eyes straight to the
front.

In a retired spot Ned examined his "find."  It contained six sovereigns,
four shillings, threepence, a metropolitan railway return ticket,
several cuttings from newspapers, and a recipe for the concoction of a
cheap and wholesome pudding, along with a card bearing the name of Mrs
Samuel Twitter, written in ink and without any address.

"You're in luck, Ned," he remarked to himself, as he examined these
treasures.  "Now, old boy you 'aven't stole this 'ere purse, so you
ain't a thief; you don't know w'ere Mrs S.T. lives, so you can't find
'er to return it to 'er.  Besides, it's more than likely she won't feel
the want of it--w'ereas I feels in want of it wery much indeed.  Of
course it's my dooty to 'and it over to the p'lice, but, in the first
place, I refuse to 'ave any communication wi' the p'lice, friendly or
otherwise; in the second place, I 'ad no 'and in makin' the laws, so I
don't feel bound to obey 'em; thirdly, I'm both 'ungry an' thirsty, an'
'ere you 'ave the remedy for them afflictions, so, fourthly--'ere goes!"

Having thus cleared his conscience, Ned committed the cash to his vest
pocket, and presented the purse with its remaining contents to the rats
in a neighbouring sewer.

Almost immediately afterwards he met an Irishman, an old friend.

"Terence, my boy, well met!" he said, offering his hand.

"Hooroo!  Ned Frog, sure I thought ye was in limbo!"

"You thought right, Terry; only half-an-hour out.  Come along, I'll
stand you somethin' for the sake of old times.  By the way, have you
done that job yet?"

"What job?"

"Why, the dynamite job, of course."

"No, I've gi'n that up," returned the Irishman with a look of contempt.
"To tell you the honest truth, I don't believe that the way to right
Ireland is to blow up England.  But there's an Englishman you'll find at
the Swan an' Anchor--a sneakin' blackguard, as would sell his own mother
for dhrink--he'll help you if you wants to have a hand in the job.  I'm
off it."

Notwithstanding this want of sympathy on that point, the two friends
found that they held enough in common to induce a prolonged stay at the
public-house, from which Ned finally issued rather late at night, and
staggered homewards.  He met no acquaintance on the way, and was about
to knock at his own door when the sound of a voice within arrested him.

It was Hetty, praying.  The poor wife and daughter had given up hope of
his returning at so late an hour that night, and had betaken themselves
to their usual refuge in distress.  Ned knew the sound well, and it
seemed to rouse a demon in his breast, for he raised his foot with the
intention of driving in the door, when he was again arrested by another
sound.

It was the voice of little Matty, who, awaking suddenly out of a
terrifying dream, set up a shrieking which at once drowned all other
sounds.

Ned lowered his foot, thrust his hands into his pockets, and stood
gazing in a state of indecision at the broken pavement for a few
minutes.

"No peace there," he said, sternly.  "Prayin' an' squallin' don't suit
me, so good-night to 'ee all."

With that he turned sharp round, and staggered away, resolving never
more to return!

"Is that you, Ned Frog?" inquired a squalid, dirty-looking woman,
thrusting her head out of a window as he passed.

"No, 'tain't," said Ned, fiercely, as he left the court.

He went straight to a low lodging-house, but before entering tied his
money in a bit of rag, and thrust it into an inner pocket of his vest,
which he buttoned tight, and fastened his coat over it.  Paying the
requisite fourpence for the night's lodging, he entered, and was
immediately hailed by several men who knew him, but being in no humour
for good fellowship, he merely nodded and went straight up to his lowly
bed.  It was one of seventy beds that occupied the entire floor of an
immense room.  Police supervision had secured that this room should be
well ventilated, and that the bedding should be reasonably clean, though
far from clean-looking, and Ned slept soundly in spite of drink, for, as
we have said before, he was unusually strong.

Next day, having thought over his plans in bed, and, being a man of
strong determination, he went forth to carry them into immediate
execution.  He went to a lofty tenement in the neighbourhood of Dean and
Flower Street, one of the poorest parts of the city, and hired a garret,
which was so high up that even the staircase ended before you reached
it, and the remainder of the upward flight had to be performed on a
ladder, at the top of which was a trap-door, the only entrance to Ned's
new home.

Having paid a week's rent in advance he took possession, furnished the
apartment with one old chair, one older table, one bundle of straw in a
sack, one extremely old blanket, and one brand-new pipe with a
corresponding ounce or two of tobacco.  Then he locked the trap-door,
put the key in his pocket, and descended to the street, where at
Bird-fair he provided himself with sundry little cages and a few birds.
Having conveyed these with some food for himself and the little birds to
his lodging he again descended to the street, and treated himself to a
pint of beer.

While thus engaged he was saluted by an old friend, the owner of a low
music-hall, who begged for a few minutes' conversation with him outside.

"Ned," he said, "I'm glad I fell in with you, for I'm uncommon 'ard up
just now."

"I never lends money," said Ned, brusquely turning away.

"'Old on, Ned, I don't want yer money, bless yer.  I wants to _give_ you
money."

"Oh! that's quite another story; fire away, old man."

"Well, you see, I'm 'ard up, as I said, for a man to keep order in my
place.  The last man I 'ad was a good 'un, 'e was.  Six futt one in 'is
socks, an' as strong as a 'orse, but by ill luck one night, a
sailor-chap that was bigger than 'im come in to the 'all, an' they 'ad a
row, an' my man got sitch a lickin' that he 'ad to go to hospital, an'
'e's been there for a week, an' won't be out, they say, for a month or
more.  Now, Ned, will you take the job?  The pay's good an' the fun's
considerable.  So's the fightin', sometimes, but you'd put a stop to
that you know.  An', then, you'll 'ave all the day to yourself to do as
you like."

"I'm your man," said Ned, promptly.

Thus it came to pass that the pugilist obtained suitable employment as a
peacemaker and keeper of order, for a time at least, in one of those
disreputable places of amusement where the unfortunate poor of London
are taught lessons of vice and vanity which end often in vexation of
spirit, not only to themselves, but to the strata of society which rest
above them.

One night Ned betook himself to this temple of vice, and on the way was
struck by the appearance of a man with a barrow--a sort of book-stall on
wheels--who was pushing his way through the crowded street.  It was the
man who at the temperance meeting had begun with "bah!" and "pooh!" and
had ended by putting on the Blue Ribbon.  He had once been a comrade of
Ned Frog, but had become so very respectable that his old chum scarcely
recognised him.

"Hallo!  Reggie North, can that be you?"

North let down his barrow, wheeled round, and held out his hand with a
hearty, "how are 'ee, old man?  W'y you're lookin' well, close cropped
an' comfortable, eh!  Livin' at Her Majesty's expense lately?  Where
d'ee live now, Ned?  I'd like to come and see you."

Ned told his old comrade the locality of his new abode.

"But I say, North, how respectable you are!  What's come over you? not
become a travellin' bookseller, have you?"

"That's just what I am, Ned."

"Well, there's no accountin' for taste.  I hope it pays."

"Ay, pays splendidly--pays the seller of the books and pays the buyers
better."

"How's that?" asked Ned, in some surprise, going up to the barrow; "oh!
I see, Bibles."

"Yes, Ned, Bibles, the Word of God.  Will you buy one?"

"No, thank 'ee," said Ned, drily.

"Here, I'll make you a present o' one, then," returned North, thrusting
a Bible into the other's hand; "you can't refuse it of an old comrade.
Good-night.  I'll look in on you soon."

"You needn't trouble yourself," Ned called out as his friend went off;
and he felt half inclined to fling the Bible after him, but checked
himself.  It was worth money! so he put it in his pocket and went his
way.

The hall was very full that night, a new comic singer of great promise
having been announced, and oh! it was sad to see the youths of both
sexes, little more than big boys and girls, who went there to smoke, and
drink, and enjoy ribald songs and indecent jests!

We do not mean to describe the proceedings.  Let it suffice to say that,
after one or two songs and a dance had been got through, Ned, part of
whose duty it was to announce the performances, rose and in a loud voice
said--

"Signor Twittorini will now sing."

The Signor stepped forward at once, and was received with a roar of
enthusiastic laughter, for anything more lugubrious and woe-begone than
the expression of his face had never been seen on these boards before.
There was a slight look of shyness about him, too, which increased the
absurdity of the thing, and it was all _so natural_, as one half-tipsy
woman remarked.

So it was--intensely natural--for Signor Twittorini was no other than
poor Sammy Twitter in the extremest depths of his despair.
Half-starved, half-mad, yet ashamed to return to his father's house, the
miserable boy had wandered in bye streets, and slept in low
lodging-houses as long as his funds lasted.  Then he tried to get
employment with only partial success, until at last, recollecting that
he had been noted among his companions for a sweet voice and a certain
power of singing serio-comic songs, he thought of a low music-hall into
which he had staggered one evening when drunk--as much with misery as
with beer.  The manager, on hearing a song or two, at once engaged him
and brought him out.  As poor Sammy knew nothing about acting, it was
decided that he should appear in his own garments, which, being
shabby-genteel, were pretty well suited for a great Italian singer in
low society.

But Sammy had over-rated his own powers.  After the first burst of
applause was over, he stood gazing at the audience with his mouth half
open, vainly attempting to recollect the song he meant to sing, and
making such involuntary contortions with his thin visage, that a renewed
burst of laughter broke forth.  When it had partially subsided, Sammy
once more opened his mouth, gave vent to a gasp, burst into tears, and
rushed from the stage.

This was the climax!  It brought down the house!  Never before had they
seen such an actor.  He was inimitable, and the people made the usual
demand for an _encore_ with tremendous fervour, expecting that Signor
Twittorini would repeat the scene, probably with variations, and finish
off with the promised song.  But poor Sammy did not respond.

"I see,--you can improvise," said the manager, quite pleased, "and I've
no objection when it's well done like that; but you'd better go on now,
and stick to the programme."

"I can't sing," said Sammy, in passionate despair.

"Come, come, young feller, I don't like actin' _off_ the stage, an' the
audience is gittin' impatient."

"But I tell you I can't sing a note," repeated Sam.

"What!  D'ye mean to tell me you're not actin'?"

"I wish I was!" cried poor Sam, glancing upward with tearful eyes and
clasping his hands.

"Come now.  You've joked enough.  Go on and do your part," said the
puzzled manager.

"But I tell you I'm _not_ joking.  I couldn't sing just now if you was
to give me ten thousand pounds!"

It might have been the amount of the sum stated, or the tone in which it
was stated--we know not--but the truth of what Sam said was borne so
forcibly in upon the manager, that he went into a violent passion;
sprang at Sam's throat; hustled him towards a back door, and kicked him
out into a back lane, where he sat down on an empty packing case,
covered his face with his hands, bowed his head on his knees, and wept.

The manager returned on the stage, and, with a calm voice and manner,
which proved himself to be a very fair actor, stated that Signor
Twittorini had met with a sudden disaster--not a very serious one--
which, however, rendered it impossible for him to re-appear just then,
but that, if sufficiently recovered, he would appear towards the close
of the evening.

This, with a very significant look and gesture from Ned Frog, quieted
the audience to the extent at least of inducing them to do nothing worse
than howl continuously for ten minutes, after which they allowed the
performances to go on, and saved the keeper of order the trouble of
knocking down a few of the most unruly.

Ned was the first to quit the hall when all was over.  He did so by the
