"Why do you wear that? It isn't pretty," said Hughie.

"Never you mind whether it is pretty or not," retorted Irene.

"Well, I'll try not; but a fellow must make remarks. You know, you look
ripping in your white dresses, and that silk thing you wear in the
evening; but I don't like that."

"Don't you? Well, I do. Anyhow, I'm going to wear it to-day while we are
having our fun on the lake. It's just a perfect day for the lake. Do you
know, there's a storm coming on."

As Irene spoke she fixed her bright eyes on the sky. It was blue over
the house; but in the distance, coming rapidly nearer and nearer, was a
terrible black cloud--a cloud almost as black as ink--and already there
were murmurs in the trees and cawings among the birds, the breeze
growing stronger and stronger--the prelude to a great agitation of
nature.

"I suppose we won't go on the lake to get drowned," said Hughie. "That
is a thunder-cloud."

"Never mind; it will be all the greater fun. I am in my red dress, and
you can put on any shabby clothes you happen to have. If you are going
to be a counter-jumper you must have got some very shabby things."

"Why do you speak to me in that tone?" said Hughie.

"Oh, I don't know. I didn't mean anything. You can put on anything you
like, and you needn't come if you don't want to; but I thought you were
a plucky sort of chap."

"You may be quite sure I am. Of course I will come with you. Let us run
down to the boat-house. Perhaps," continued Hughie, struggling with the
promise he had made to Rosamund, "the storm may go off in another
direction, and we sha'n't have it."

"I see you are awfully afraid of it, and it mayn't come here at all,"
said Irene, who knew perfectly well that it would, for the cloud was
coming more and more in the direction of the house each moment.

In a very short time the two children were in the boat, Irene taking
both the oars, and giving Hughie simple directions to steer straight for
the stream in the middle of the lake.

"Now I will give him a real rousing fright," she said to herself. "After
that perhaps he will be my slave, the same as Carter was. Anyhow, I have
a crow to pluck with him; and the storm, and my knowledge of the water,
and his absolute ignorance will enable me to win the day."

Aloud, she said in a gentle voice, "Perhaps you'd like to take the
oars?"

"I will if you like," said Hughie; "but the fact is, I'm not very good
at rowing. I have never been much in a boat."

"Ah! I thought as much. But I can teach you. Come and sit here."

They had just entered the stream, which made the lake dangerous even on
a calm day. Hughie stumbled to his feet; Irene sat in the stern, took
the ropes, and skillfully guided the boat into the centre of the stream.
It began to rock tremendously.

"Now pull! Pull hard!" she said to the boy.

Just then a blinding flash of lightning came across their faces.

"Oh!" said Hughie, "the storm is on us. It will rain in a few minutes.
Hadn't we better get back?"

"What a coward you are!" said Irene. "It is the most awful fun to be out
on the lake in a storm like this. Ah! do you hear that growl?"

"But I can't manage the boat a bit."

"I thought all boys could manage boats. You don't expect a girl to do
it--a girl out in the midst of a storm of this sort? Besides, I must put
up my umbrella or I shall be soaked."

"But I told you it would rain. You shouldn't have come out," said
Hughie, who felt more annoyed, distressed, and angry than he had ever
felt in his life before. He felt that suddenly the boat was quite
unmanageable, that it was rocking and racing and taking them he did not
know where.

All of a sudden Irene sprang to her feet.

"Get back into the stern," she said. "Sit quite still, and let me take
the oars. I wanted to see if you could row. I see you can't. There is
another flash of lightning. Don't be frightened. I know you are; but try
to keep it under. I have something to say to you."

She seated herself, and the two children faced each other. The flash of
lightning was followed by a crashing peal of thunder. The trees bowed
low to meet the gale; the frightened birds, the swans and others, took
shelter where they could best find it; but as yet there was not a drop
of rain.

"How hot it is!" said Irene. "Let us fly down the stream."

"What do you mean by that?" said Hughie, whose freckled face was deadly
white.

"I will tell you if you like; but don't speak."

He looked at her with fascinated eyes. In her red dress, with her
witch-like face and glancing, dancing, naughty eyes, she became to him
for the moment an object of absolute terror. Was this the gentle and
exceedingly pretty girl whom little Agnes so adored? He was alone with
her, and they were, so to speak, flying through the water, although she
scarcely touched the oars, allowing them to lie almost idle by her side.

Suddenly she shipped them and bent toward him.

"We needn't row any more," she said. "We are in the current. The current
will take us. Hughie, can you swim?"

"I don't know anything about swimming," he said.

"Well, that is rather bad for you; for in about five minutes of this
sort of thing we go right down the cascade at the end of the lake and
among the breakers. The boat will be upset, and you will have to fight
for your life, unless I choose to save you. I could save you, for I have
perfect control of myself in the water."

"But you don't mean to say you are going to do anything of that sort!
Can't we get into the calmer part of the lake? I don't understand you,"
said Hughie.

"But I understand you. You don't like me, and I don't like you. From the
very first you have been disagreeable. I like your little sister, but
you don't want me to like her."

"Well, I think you are a bit rough on old Em," was Hughie's remark.

"What a flash that was!" said Irene; and her eyes danced with cruel
pleasure. "Ah! here comes the rain."

A terrific hail-shower drenched the two children as they sat within the
rocking boat. For the first time in her life Irene was really slightly
frightened. Had she dared too much? Even she might not be able to get
the boat out of the current just at present; and if she did not, and
they really got among the breakers and over the cascade in the present
storm, it might be beyond her power to save Hughie. As to herself, she
was not at all afraid. She felt she could swim through anything and over
anything; but she was not certain that she could swim and support a boy
so big and strong as Hughie.

Then there rose before her vision the face of Rosamund--Rosamund's face
with its noble expression, its clear, steadfast, dark eyes--Rosamund
with her ringing voice. Oh, what influence for good she had exercised
over Irene's wild, worthless, almost terrible life, and yet she was
disobeying all her precepts now, and frightening poor Hughie almost to
death!

"I tell you what it is," she said in a husky voice; "we will both try to
get out of this current if you will make me a promise."

"It seems to me that I am spending my whole life in making promises,"
said Hughie. "But I will make any promise if that will help you now. Oh,
what a flash that was! I expect we shall both be struck by the
lightning."

"I suppose that doesn't matter. I suppose you are not afraid to die, are
you?"

"I haven't thought of it," said the boy. "People of fourteen don't think
much about dying, do they? But I don't think I'd be specially afraid. It
might be a sort of relief to poor old Em to have only one of us to
keep. But for you there is your mother and little Agnes."

"Yes; I wouldn't like to die on account of little Agnes," replied Irene
very gravely. "I love her just as though she were my own little child."

"Well, I am her brother. I suppose you ought to be pleasant to me
because I happen to be her brother, and Emily happens to be her sister,"
retorted the lad.

"That is true enough. I will tell you why I did this. I brought you out
into the current to test your courage. If I do nothing, if we both sit
still as we are now, in all probability you will be drowned; but if you
will exert yourself and help me with all your might and main, then I
will respect you as a truly courageous person, and perhaps we'll be
better friends than we have hitherto been."

"What do you want me to do? I will do anything," said the boy.

"Well, look here. I will take one oar and you take the other, and we
must get out of this current whatever happens. As soon as we are out of
it we are safe. Oh, never mind the lightning, and don't listen to the
thunder."

"It almost blinds me," said Hughie, passing his hand across his eyes as
he spoke, dazzled by the vividness of the ever-increasing storm. Irene
gave him strict directions.

"You are strong," she said. "When you see me pull, you must pull, too,
and you must be very quick, for the nearer we get to the cascade the
swifter runs the current. On a calm day I could save you, there wouldn't
be a bit of fear; but on a rough day, in a storm like this, I mightn't
be able to manage it. Now then, a strong pull, and a pull all together!"

The boy obeyed her directions. Whatever she might have thought of him a
minute ago, he was indeed no coward. He pulled with all his might and
main. Irene did likewise, and in a few minutes' time they were out of
the dangerous current, in smooth water. But it was a close shave, and
the girl's hands trembled and for a minute she dropped her oar.

"Never mind," she said to Hughie.

"But you look as white as death, just as though you would faint. Did
that last flash touch your hair? It seemed to me that it was almost hot
on my cheeks."

"No, it wasn't that; and the storm is going off," said Irene. "Somehow I
am ashamed of myself. I oughtn't to have been so mean."

"Please tell me."

"I have tested you, and you are brave. You are not a coward like poor
Carter."

"Who is Carter?"

"A governess I once had. I took her on to the lake, and into the central
current, and she was in such terror! I wanted her to go away, and I
wouldn't get out of the current, however hard she implored. But I
promised to save her when we got among the breakers if only she would go
afterward. She promised, and I did save her, and she is all right now;
and Frosty--your dear Emily, I mean--and she are the best of friends.
And I am friendly with her, too. I have been much better lately--much
better since dear Rosamund came--only somehow I felt that you defied me,
and I wanted to test you. I have tested you, and I respect you, for you
weren't really frightened that time, and you did row all right. What a
strong arm you have! I wish I had an arm like that."

Hughie colored with absolute pleasure.

"You are a plucky un," he said; "but I didn't know that you really
wanted to drown me."

"Of course I didn't want to drown you. I knew a storm was coming on,
and that it would be very rough in the current to-day, and I wanted to
test you; and you have proved worthy of the test, and we are in safe
water now. The storm is dying away, too; and shall it be _pax_? Shall we
be friends for the remainder of your stay at The Follies?"

"I think you are a splendid girl, although you are quite the queerest I
ever came across," said the boy.

"And you are awfully plucky. Now, I tell you what it is. Mothery and I
will do our best to make you a gentleman by and by. You won't be too
proud if mother and I help Frosty--your Emily, as you call her--to make
you into something better than a counter-jumper?"

"Would you indeed?" he asked, his eyes glowing, and the color coming
into his cheeks. "You know, I always hated the thought of it, for my
people were gentry. My mother was such a refined woman, something like
sweet little Agnes, and it always cut me to the very heart to think that
I was going down in the social scale."

"You sha'n't," said Irene. And now the pair, dripping wet, landed at the
little landing-stage.

Hughie helped Irene to put the boat into the boat-house, and then they
stood there together until the storm died away, and the rain had ceased,
and the birds were singing once more. Then they silently shook hands
each with the other, without uttering a word.




CHAPTER XXII.

NOT A COUNTER-JUMPER.


The holidays came to an end on the whole satisfactorily. Irene was by no
means perfect; even Agnes showed signs of being spoiled owing to the new
_regime_. Hughie expressed a strong desire to be back at school. Miss
Frost never ceased to watch the two, and the struggle within her breast
did not die out. Lady Jane alone was thankful for the marked improvement
in her child. Not that she saw very much of Irene, for Irene and Agnes
were together almost all day long; Agnes the petted darling of the elder
girl, Irene yielding to her every whim, delighting in the daring spirit
which slowly but surely began to awaken in the little one. Nevertheless,
the servants were unmolested, Miss Frost had a peaceful time, Lady Jane
began to breathe freely, and even Hughie turned to other occupations and
more or less forgot Irene and his little sister. He had never told any
one of that awful time which he had spent with Irene in the boat. That
secret he kept confined within his own breast; but he never could forget
it; the moment when his young manhood seemed to forsake him, when the
spirit of cowardice arose before him, and he felt certain that he should
die; the longing which arose to his lips to implore Irene at any cost to
save him; the way he kept back the words. Then her test and his
acceptance of it, the victory he had really won over her, the knowledge
that in the future she would treat him with respect.

Irene, with all her faults, was true to her word, and one day just when
the long summer holidays were coming to an end, and when every one was
talking and thinking again of school life and school affairs, and its
joys and sorrows, Irene went and sat down on a low stool by her mother's
side.

"You are sending me next week to the Merrimans'," she said. "I don't at
all know whether I shall be able to endure it. You think me greatly
improved, but I don't know that I am improved. Be that as it may,
however, I want to ask you a great favor, mothery."

"What is that, my darling?" asked Lady Jane.

"You, of course, mean to go away. Rosamund said that you would. She said
you would take a rest, and forget all the worries that your naughty,
naughty child has given you all these years. You will do that, won't
you, mothery darling?"

"Yes, I will go away," said Lady Jane. "I have arranged it. But what is
your request, Irene?"

"Well, it has something to do with Hughie. You know about Miss Frost?"

"I know she is an excellent creature."

"She is; and you know how fond I am of little Agnes."

"No wonder. She is a sweet little soul," said Lady Jane; "although,
sometimes, Irene"----

"Please don't!" said Irene, putting her hand to her mother's lips. "I
have made a resolution. Agnes is to be my child in the future. She is to
live with me always and always, mother. I couldn't do without her. She
is my doll, my baby, my plaything--the creature that keeps me human.
With Rosamund on one side and Agnes on the other, I can be good,
mothery. But if you were to take either or both of them away, I should
be worse than ever. Miss Frost must give Agnes up to me."

"I don't think she will be able to stand that. I don't see how you can
expect it."

"Well, I do expect it, and I don't mean to discuss the point now. Agnes
comes with me, does she not, to Mrs. Merriman's school?"

"She does. Rosamund's mother is paying for her during this term."

"And Miss Frost goes, too?"

"Yes, dear, certainly."

"Well, now, there is Hughie. Miss Frost says that she cannot give him
the education sufficient to make a gentleman of him. But, mother, he is
a nice boy--he is, really."

"He is quite a plain boy," said Lady Jane--"very different from his
little sister--a little rough, I call him."

"But he is quite nice, all the same. Anyhow, mother, I wish it--I want
him to be made a gentleman. I want him to be sufficiently educated, and
I want us to help Miss Frost. We needn't take all the burden off her
shoulders, for I know you pay her very well indeed; but I want him to be
left at school until he is old enough to take up some profession. I
don't know what he would like. I'll run and ask him now; may I?"

"But, first of all, let me consider. Why should I have this on me? I
have--although you never seem to remember it, you naughty little
Irene--a great many expenses."

"Yes, but you are rich, and I am your only child. I want Hughie, just
because he is Agnes's brother, to be a gentleman. Agnes's brother can't
be a counter-jumper, can he, mothery?"

"What a horrid expression! Where did you learn it, Irene?"

