"Why, you are becoming jealous, lad," said Sutherland, with a laugh.

"No, I'm not _becoming_ jealous; I'm jealous already," returned the boy,
with an air that was half jocular, half serious.  "However, I'll
exercise patience a little longer, but I'm determined not to let Little
Bill be sacrificed for the sake of sick-nursing."

With this announcement of his unalterable resolve to stand to his guns,
and a "Brayvo, youngster!" from Jenkins, they parted and went on their
several ways.

It was found, when Fort Garry was reached, that the rumour of a visit
from the Sioux Indians was correct, and that some preparation was being
made for their reception, as well as precautions against any mischief
that might be contemplated, though there was not much to be apprehended
on that score, for the Sioux were believed to be among the bravest as
well as the most powerful of the nations east of the Rocky Mountains,
and less addicted to treachery or cruelty than most other tribes.

Two days later the Sioux made their appearance.  They formed only a
small band of warriors, but were a wild-looking though fine set of men;
erect, muscular, tall fellows, with the free bearing of practised
warriors, and in all the paint, charcoal, feathers, and leather-costume,
bear-claw collars, etcetera, peculiar to the western wilderness.

Their object, they said, was to smoke the pipe of peace with their
enemies the Saulteaux, and to see with their own eyes the wonderful
things that by report the Palefaces were doing in Red River.

"The Sioux have heard," said their principal chief, at a palaver with
the Governor, "that the Palefaces are building wooden Wigwams in number
like the stones on the shores of Lake Winnipeg; that they are growing
much grain; that they have set up many strange things which they compel
the wind to work for them, and so grind their grain; that they have
great heaps of powder and ball, and big wigwams that are bursting with
things that the Sioux love to exchange for the meat and skins of the
buffalo and other beasts great and small.  We have come to see all this
with our own eyes, for most of us are young men who have only heard of
such things from our fathers.  Waugh!"

Of course everything was said to encourage this laudable desire for
knowledge.  The visitors were shown over the fort.  Food was given to
them, and tobacco; then the pipe of peace was smoked with a band of
Saulteaux, which chanced to be on a friendly visit to the settlement at
the time, after which, as was customary on such occasions, both parties
mixed together and strolled about to see the settlers.

One party of them found their way to Prairie Cottage.  At some of the
houses nearer the fort they had learned the method of lifting the latch
of a door so as to obtain entrance.  Finding no one outside at the
cottage, they entered the central hall with the soft, quiet tread of the
panther.  As no one chanced to be there, they continued their
explorations with childlike simplicity, and thus most unexpectedly found
themselves in the bedroom of Dan Davidson, where Little Bill had just
read himself and his brother-invalid into a sound sleep.  Both wakened
up at once, and the boy sat bolt upright in blazing astonishment, but
Dan, who had heard of their arrival in the Settlement, received them
with a few words of welcome.

Fortunately for all parties, Okematan presented himself just then,
having, while at work in the garden, seen the party of Sioux arrive.  He
did his best to act the host, explaining to the visitors the cause of
Dan's weakness, and, by Dan's directions, offering them tobacco and
pipes.

While they were thus engaged, old McKay entered.

"I saw you comin', lads," he said, heartily.  "What cheer? what cheer?"
he added, shaking hands with them all round.

The Sioux were obviously much pleased with their reception, especially
when Mrs Davidson, Jessie, and Elspie, who had been out walking,
returned and joined the party.

After showing the Indians everything in the house, old McKay--who
constituted himself their guide,--took them out to see the live stock
and the farm.  He led them first into the garden.

It chanced at this time that there was a "snake in the grass" not far
off.  This was no other than the bad Indian Kateegoose.

Why some people are what we call naturally bad, like Kateegoose, while
others are what we call naturally good, like Okematan, is a mystery the
investigation of which we propose postponing to a more convenient
season.  Of course no sane person will maintain that this mystery frees
fallen man from responsibility.  If it did, we could no longer hang for
murder.  It would be the bounden duty of every judge, in that case, to
acquit every murderer with "Poor fellow, it was his fate; he could not
help it!" and send him away with a pat on the shoulder, and an order for
coffee and buns, perhaps, in his pocket.  As none but sane persons,
however, will read my book, it is not necessary to enlarge further on
this head.

Certain it is that Kateegoose was "bad"--obdurately bad--had been so
from his very cradle, if he ever had one, which is doubtful, and bade
fair to continue so to his grave.  Sutherland had button-holed him more
than once, but apparently in vain.  It is only fair to the savage to say
that he listened patiently to the Elder's remonstrances, and attentively
to his exhortations, and assumed an aspect of mild contrition that might
or might not have been sincere--as far as appearance went.

Now, it unfortunately happened that among the Sioux braves there was a
man who had done Kateegoose a deadly injury of some sort, which nothing
short of blood could wipe out.  Kateegoose, in familiar parlance,
spotted him at once, and dogged his steps through the Settlement,
watching his opportunity for revenge.  In savage life this dogging
process would not have been possible, but in a comparatively crowded
settlement, and in the midst of all the surprising novelties that
surrounded the Palefaces, it was all too easy; for Kateegoose took care
to keep as much as possible in the background, and well under cover of
houses, cottages, carts, stacks, and wigwams; besides which he had
painted his face in such a manner, and so modified his costume, that his
own acquaintances among the settlers--he had no friends--failed to
recognise him.  They, in their comparative ignorance of savage life, set
him down as one of the visitors, while the visitors, if they noticed him
at all, esteemed him one of the cross-breeds of the Settlement.

The only man who saw through the disguise of Kateegoose was Okematan,
who could not understand why he had adopted it, and who resolved to keep
a sharp eye on him.

The enemy of Kateegoose was one of the younger Sioux chiefs.  He led the
party which visited Prairie Cottage.

The garden of the Cottage, at its lower end towards the river,
approached close to the confines of a thick coppice.  It formed the
extremity of a belt of woodland which at that time bordered the river.
There a small summer-house had been erected by Dan and Peter Davidson
for the benefit of their mother and their sister Jessie.

Kateegoose, while dogging his foe, recognised this as a spot very
suitable for his fell purpose, as the contiguous wood afforded a ready
means of escape after the deed should be done.

While old McKay was conducting the Sioux slowly through the garden,
Kateegoose glided swiftly through the thicket to the spot where the
summer-house stood, and took up a position behind it, so that the party
in making the round of the garden would necessarily pass close to him.

From the window of Dan's room, Little Bill observed part of these
mysterious movements and suspected mischief.  Without uttering a word he
left the room, opened the front door, and gave a low whistle, which had
been set up as a private signal between him and Okematan.  In a few
seconds the Cree chief was by his side.

"Oke, there's mischief intended.  You'll have to be quick," he said,
quickly explaining what he had seen.

"Rejoin the party at once," he added, "and look out--sharp."

The chief nodded and walked away.  So swift, yet so quiet, had been his
movements that none of the whites of the party had observed his
departure from them.  The Sioux, however, had noticed it, and their
suspicions were aroused, especially when they saw him rejoin the party,
and observed that he walked rather closer to them than before.  But they
were proud warriors and refused by word, look, or movement, to indicate
their suspicions.  They carried bows in their hands, arrows in their
quivers, tomahawks and scalping-knives in their belts, but they scorned
to make any visible demonstration of being on guard in the midst of
Paleface friends, though they gave intense and undivided attention to
the movements of Okematan.

This concentration of attention on the wrong man was, of course, rather
favourable to the designs of Kateegoose, so that, when the party passed
the summer-house, he was enabled to spring upon his enemy, unobserved
for the first moment, with knife upraised.  But the stab from which the
Sioux chief could not have escaped was rendered harmless by the prompt
action of Okematan, who threw up his left arm, turned the blow aside,
and received a slight wound in doing so.

There was no time to repeat the blow.  With a yell of mingled defiance
and disappointment the would-be assassin leaped the garden fence,
bounded into the thicket, and disappeared.  A flight of Sioux arrows
entered the bush almost the moment after.  The young chief and his
friends also leaped the fence, and followed in pursuit.

The Sioux were swift and agile undoubtedly, but so was Kateegoose, and
he had the advantage of knowing the ground, while the trail--by which,
in ordinary circumstances, the Red-man can track his enemy through the
forest--was not available there in consequence of its being so mingled
up with the crossing and re-crossing of the innumerable tracks of
settlers.  The result was that Kateegoose made his escape.

The Colonists were very indignant at the perpetration of this cowardly
act, for it compromised their character for hospitality; and, if they
could have laid hands on the savage at the time, it is not impossible
that Lynch-law might have been applied to him.  The Governor also was
greatly annoyed, and in the afternoon of the following day made the
visitors a number of presents, besides providing for them a feast; but
all his good intentions were spoiled by Kateegoose, who had the audacity
to come forward and deliberately shoot his foe while the Sioux were at
meat.  The ball passed quite through the Sioux chief's body, and wounded
the man who was next to him.  After this dastardly act the villain fled,
and again got safe away.

The enraged Sioux, seizing their weapons, would have wreaked their
vengeance on the Saulteaux, if they could have discovered any; but these
wily savages had cleared away at the first note of alarm, and not one
was to be found.  To have attacked the whites with so small a party
would have been useless as well as unjust.  They therefore left the
colony in fierce anger.

It chanced that La Certe had pitched his tent the day before on a stream
not far-distant from the colony.  The Sioux had to pass that way, and,
espying the wigwam, turned aside to wreak their vengeance on whomsoever
it might contain.  Fortunately the owner of the mansion and his wife had
gone out fishing in a canoe, and taken the child with them.  All that
the Sioux could do, therefore, was to appropriate the poor man's goods
and chattels; but as the half-breed had taken his gun, ammunition, and
fishing-tackle with him, there was not much left to appropriate.  Having
despoiled the mansion, they set fire to it and went their way.

Returning in the evening, La Certe found his house a heap of ashes, and
himself reduced to a state of destitution.  This being his normal state,
however, he was not profoundly affected.  Neither was his wife; still
less was his child.

He said no word, but carried the contents of the canoe on shore.  His
wife, equally reticent, helped him.  His child, lighting its father's
pipe, sat down to smoke and look on.

They turned the canoe bottom up to serve as a partial shelter; they
kindled a huge fire before it; they set up three large fat ducks to
roast in front of it, and were soon busy with a simple but satisfying
supper.  After washing this down with an unstimulating draught of pure
water, they put the baby to bed under the bow of the canoe, filled their
pipes, and sat down before the ruddy blaze to mingle their hopes, joys,
prospects, and sorrows in a halo of smoke--the very personification of
primitive contentment and felicity.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

VERY PERPLEXING INTERVIEWS WITH LITTLE BILL.

Things in the colony had at this time come to what may be styled a
complicated pass, for distress and starvation were rampant on the one
hand, while on the other hand the weather was superb, giving prospect at
last of a successful harvest.

The spring buffalo-hunt had been but partially successful, so that a
number of the buffalo runners had to make arrangements to support
themselves by fishing during the autumn in lakes Winnipeg and Manitoba.

In these great fresh-water seas there is an unlimited quantity of rich
and finely flavoured whitefish, or Titameg, besides other fish.  But
Titameg are only to be caught in large quantities during autumn, and of
course much of the success of fishing depends on weather--one gale
sometimes visiting the fishermen with ruin--ruin all the more complete
that the nets which may be carried away have in many cases to be paid
for out of the produce of the season's fishing.

In addition to the buffalo-hunters, who were obliged to support
themselves by fishing, there was a large number of idle half-breeds, of
a much lower type than these plain hunters, who had to betake themselves
to the same pursuit.  These were the "ne'er-do-weels" of the colony; men
who, like La Certe, with more or less--usually less--of his good-nature,
seemed to hold that all the industrious people in the world were created
to help or to support them and their families.  Of course when the
industrious people were unsuccessful, these idlers were obliged to work
for their living, which, being unaccustomed to do anything energetic,
they found it hard and difficult to do, and generally regarded
themselves as the harshly used victims of a tyrannous fate.

There was one thing, however, at which these idlers were very expert and
diligent--they begged well, and with persistency.  No wonder; for their
lives often depended on their persistent and successful begging.  The
Company and the private storekeepers were always more or less willing to
risk their goods by advancing them on credit.  Before the summer was
over, most of these people had got their supplies and were off to the
fishing grounds, regardless of the future, with large quantities of tea
and tobacco, and happy as kings are said to be--but never are, if
history be true!

Among these, of course, was La Certe.  That typical idler had made the
most of his misfortunes.  Everybody had heard what the Sioux had done to
him, and everybody had pitied him.  Pity opens the heart, and that opens
the hand; and, when the poor man entered a store with the polite manner
of a French Canadian and the humble aspect of a ruined man, he scarcely
required to beg.  One man lent him a tent.  Another lent him a canoe.
From the Company's store at Fort Garry he received a fair outfit of
nearly all that he could require.  Further down the Settlement there was
a private store-keeper with a jovial countenance.

"O it was a sad, sad sight!" he said to this man on entering the
store--"so very sad to see my tent in ashes, and nothing left--nothing--
absolutely!"  The jovial man was moved.  He gave La Certe what he asked
for--even pressed things on him, and also bestowed on him a considerable
"gratuity."

Still further down the Settlement the unfortunate man found the store,
or shop, of another friend.  This man was saturnine of countenance, but
moderately liberal of heart.  La Certe approached him with an air so
pitiful that the saturnine man melted like snow in the sunshine or wax
under heat.

"I have heard of your loss," he said, "and I will give you credit _this_
time, La Certe, though you _are_ so bad at paying your debts.  But I
won't give you much."

"I do not want much," returned the afflicted man in tones of deep
humility--"only a little--a very little."

By asking much more than he required, La Certe obtained as much as he
wanted from the saturnine man, and thus he finally started for Lake
Winnipeg with a canoe laden, almost to sinking, with the good things of
this life.

The fineness of that summer brought forth the fruits of the earth in
great luxuriance, and it really seemed as if at last the Scotch settlers
were going to reap some reward for all their prolonged perseverance and
industry.  The long rest, the good feeding, the sunshine of nature, and
the starlight of Elspie's eyes had a powerful effect on Dan Davidson's
health, so that, by the time autumn arrived and the prospects of a
splendid harvest became more certain every day, he had recovered much of
his usual strength of body and vigour of mind.

Little Bill also felt the genial influences around him, and, to the
intense joy of Archie, became visibly fatter and stronger, while his
large blue eyes lost some of that wistfully solemn appearance with which
they had been wont to gaze inquiringly into people's faces.

One afternoon Billie, having walked to the summer house in the Prairie
Cottage garden, along with Archie, was left alone there at his own
request, for, unlike other boys, he was fond of occasional solitary
meditation.

"Now mind, Little Bill--you whistle if you want me," said Archie, when
about to leave him.  "I'll hear you, for I'm only going to the
carpenter's shed."

"I will, Archie, if I want you; but I don't think I shall, for I can
walk by myself now, quite easily, as far as the house."

But Little Bill was not destined to be left to solitary meditations that
day, for his brother had not left him more than a few minutes when a
footstep was heard on the path outside, and next moment Fred Jenkins
presented himself at the opening of the summer-house.  The face of the
mariner betrayed him, for he was too honest by nature to dissemble
effectively.

"Well, Fred, how are you?  You seem a little disappointed, I think."

"Not exactly disappointed, Little Bill, but sort o' ways scumbusticated,
so to speak--perplexed, if I may say so.  Kind o' ways puzzled, d'ee
see?"

There was something very amusing in the manner of the strapping seaman
as he sat down beside the puny little boy, with a bashful expression on
his handsome face, as if he were about to make a humiliating confession.

"What troubles you, Jenkins?" asked Billie, with the air of a man who is
ready to give any amount of advice, or, if need be, consolation.

The seaman twisted his eyebrows into a complex form, and seemed
uncertain how to proceed.  Suddenly he made up his mind.

"Was you ever in love, Little Bill?" he asked abruptly, and with a smile
that seemed to indicate a feeling that the question was absurd.

"O yes," answered the boy quite coolly.  "I've been in love with brother
Archie ever since I can remember."

Jenkins looked at his little friend with a still more complicated knot
of puzzlement in his eyebrows, for he felt that Billie was scarcely
fitted by years or experience to be a useful confidant.  After resting
his hands on his knees, and his eyes on the ground, for some time, he
again made up his mind and turned to Billie, who sat with his large eyes
fixed earnestly on the countenance of his tall friend, wondering what
perplexed him so much, and waiting for further communications.

