"Brer Fox talk so close ter de fatal trufe, dat Brer Wolf got tooken wid
de dry grins, yit he up'n 'spon', sezee:--

"'I des lak ter know who in de name er goodness wanter eat tough creetur
lak dat ole Mr. Benjermun Ram--dat w'at I lak ter know,' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he holler en laugh, he did, en den he up'n say:--

"'Ah-yi, Brer Wolf! You ax me w'at I goes hongry fer, w'en ole Mr.
Benjermun Ram up dar in he house, yit you done bin hongry manys en manys
de time, en still ole Mr. Benjermun Ram up dar in he house. Now, den,
how you gwine do in a case lak dat?' sez Brer Fox, sezee.

"Brer Wolf, he strak de een' er he cane down 'pun de groun', en he say,
sezee:--

"'I done say all I got ter say, en w'at I say, dat I'll stick ter. Dat
ole creetur lots too tough.'

"Hongry ez he is, Brer Fox laugh way down in he stomach. Atter w'ile he
'low:--

"'Well, den, Brer Wolf, stidder 'sputin' 'longer you, I'm gwine do w'at
you say; I'm gwine ter go up dar en git a bait er ole Mr. Benjermun Ram,
en I wish you be so good ez ter go 'long wid me fer comp'ny,' sezee.

"Brer Wolf jaw sorter fall w'en he year dis, en he 'low:--

"'Eh-eh, Brer Fox! I druther go by my own--'lone se'f,' sezee.

"'Well, den,' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'you better make 'as'e,' sezee,
''kaze 't ain't gwine ter take me so mighty long fer ter go up dar en
make hash out'n ole Mr. Benjermun Ram,' sezee.

"Brer Wolf know mighty well," said Uncle Remus, snapping his huge tongs
in order to silence a persistent cricket in the chimney, "dat ef he dast
ter back out fum a banter lak dat he never is ter year de las' un it fum
Miss Meadows en Miss Motts en de gals, en he march off todes Mr.
Benjermun Ram house.

"Little puff er win' come en blow'd up some leafs, en Brer Wolf jump lak
somebody shootin' at 'im, en he fly mighty mad w'en he year Brer Fox
laugh. He men' he gait, he did, en 't wa'n't 'long 'fo' he 'uz knockin'
at Mr. Benjermun Ram do'.

"He knock at de do', he did, en co'se he 'speck somebody fer ter come
open de do'; but stidder dat, lo' en beholes yer come Mr. Benjermun Ram
'roun' de house. Dar he wuz--red eye, wrinkly hawn en shaggy head. Now,
den, in case lak dat, w'at a slim-legged man lak Brer Wolf gwine do? Dey
ain't no two ways, he gwine ter git 'way fum dar, en he went back ter
whar Brer Fox is mo' samer dan ef de patter-rollers wuz atter 'im.

"Brer Fox, he laugh en he laugh, en ole Brer Wolf, he look mighty glum.
Brer Fox ax 'im is he done kilt en e't Mr. Benjermun Ram, en ef so be,
is he lef' any fer him. Brer Wolf say he ain't feelin' well, en he don't
lak mutton nohow. Brer Fox 'low:--

"'You may be puny in de min', Brer Wolf, but you ain't feelin' bad in de
leg, 'kaze I done seed you wuk um.'

"Brer Wolf 'low he des a-runnin' fer ter see ef 't won't mak 'im feel
better. Brer Fox, he say, sezee, dat w'en he feelin' puny, he ain't ax
no mo' dan fer somebody fer ter git out de way en let 'im lay down.

"Dey went on in dis a-way, dey did, twel bimeby Brer Fox ax Brer Wolf ef
he'll go wid 'im fer ter ketch Mr. Benjermun Ram. Brer Wolf, he 'low, he
did:--

"'Eh-eh, Brer Fox! I fear'd you'll run en lef' me dar fer ter do all de
fightin'.'

"Brer Fox, he 'low dat he'll fix dat, en he tuck'n got 'im a
plough-line, en tied one een' ter Brer Wolf en t'er een' ter he own
se'f. Wid dat dey put out fer Mr. Benjermun Ram house. Brer Wolf, he
sorter hang back, but he 'shame' fer ter say he skeer'd, en dey went on
en went on plum twel dey git right spang up ter Mr. Benjermun Ram house.

"W'en dey git dar, de ole creetur wuz settin' out in de front po'ch
sorter sunnin' hisse'f. He see um comin', en w'en dey git up in hailin'
distance, he sorter cle'r up he th'oat, he did, en holler out:--

"'I much 'blije to you, Brer Fox, fer ketchin' dat owdashus vilyun en
fetchin' 'im back. My smoke-'ouse runnin' short, en I'll des chop 'im up
en pickle 'im. Fetch 'im in, Brer Fox! fetch 'im in!'

"Des 'bout dat time ole Miss Ram see dem creeturs a-comin', en
gentermens! you mought er yeard er blate plum ter town. Mr. Benjermun
Ram, he sorter skeer'd hisse'f, but he keep on talkin':--

"'Fetch 'im in, Brer Fox! fetch 'im in! Don't you year my ole 'oman
cryin' fer 'im? She ain't had no wolf meat now in gwine on mighty nigh a
mont'. Fetch 'im in, Brer Fox! fetch 'im in!'

"Fus' Brer Wolf try ter ontie hisse'f, den he tuck'n broke en run'd, en
he drag ole Brer Fox atter 'im des lak he ain't weigh mo'n a poun', en I
let you know hit 'uz many a long day 'fo' Brer Fox git well er de
thumpin' he got."

"Uncle Remus," said the little boy after a while, "I thought wolves
always caught sheep when they had the chance."

"Dey ketches lam's, honey, but bless yo' soul! dey ain't ketch deze yer
ole-time Rams wid red eye en wrinkly hawn."

"Where was Brother Rabbit all this time?"

"Now, den, honey, don't less pester wid ole Brer Rabbit right now. Des
less gin 'im one night rest, mo' speshually w'en I year de seven stares
say yo' bed-time done come. Des take yo' foot in yo' han' en put right
out 'fo' Miss Sally come a-callin' you, 'kaze den she'll say I'm
a-settin' yer a-noddin' en not takin' keer un you."

The child laughed and ran up the path to the big-house, stopping a
moment on the way to mimic a bull-frog that was bellowing at a
tremendous rate near the spring.


FOOTNOTE:

[65] Wild; fierce; dangerous; courageous. The accent is on the second
syllable, ser-_vi_-gous; or, ser-_vi_-gus, and the g is hard. Aunt Tempy
would have said "vigrous."




L

BRER RABBIT PRETENDS TO BE POISONED


Not many nights after the story of how Mr. Benjamin Ram frightened
Brother Wolf and Brother Fox, the little boy found himself in Uncle
Remus's cabin. It had occurred to him that Mr. Ram should have played on
his fiddle somewhere in the tale, and Uncle Remus was called on to
explain. He looked at the little boy with an air of grieved
astonishment, and exclaimed:--

"Well, I be bless if I ever year der beat er dat. Yer you bin
a-persooin' on atter deze yer creeturs en makin' der 'quaintunce, en yit
look lak ef you 'uz ter meet um right up dar in der paff you'd fergit
all 'bout who dey is."

"Oh, no, I would n't, Uncle Remus!" protested the child, glancing at the
door and getting a little closer to the old man.

"Yasser! you'd des nat'ally whirl in en fergit 'bout who dey is. 'T
ain't so mighty long sence I done tole you 'bout ole Mr. Benjermun Ram
playin' he fiddle at Brer Wolf house, en yer you come en ax me how come
he don't take en play it at 'im 'g'in. W'at kinder lookin' sight 'ud dat
ole creetur a-bin ef he'd jump up en grab he fiddle en go ter playin' on
it eve'y time he year a fuss down de big road?"

The little boy said nothing, but he thought the story would have been a
great deal nicer if Mr. Benjamin Ram could have played one of the
old-time tunes on his fiddle, and while he was thinking about it, the
door opened and Aunt Tempy made her appearance. Her good-humor was
infectious.

"Name er goodness!" she exclaimed, "I lef' you all settin' yer way las'
week; I goes off un I does my wuk, un I comes back, un I fines you
settin' right whar I lef' you. Goodness knows, I dunner whar you gits
yo' vittles. I dunner whar I ain't bin sence I lef' you all settin' yer.
I let you know I bin a-usin' my feet un I been a-usin' my han's. Dat's
me. No use ter ax how you all is, 'kaze you looks lots better'n me."

"Yas, Sis Tempy, we er settin' yer whar you lef' us, en der Lord, he bin
a-pervidin'. W'en de vittles don't come in at de do' hit come down de
chimbly, en so w'at de odds? We er sorter po'ly, Sis Tempy, I'm 'blige
ter you. You know w'at de jay-bird say ter der squinch owl! 'I'm sickly
but sassy.'"

Aunt Tempy laughed as she replied: "I 'speck you all bin a-havin' lots
er fun. Goodness knows I wish many a time sence I bin gone dat I 'uz
settin' down yer runnin' on wid you all. I ain't bin gone fur--dat's so,
yit Mistiss put me ter cuttin'-out, un I tell you now dem w'at cuts out
de duds fer all de niggers on dis place is got ter wuk fum soon in de
mawnin' plum tel bed-time, dey ain't no two ways. 'T ain't no wuk youk'n
kyar' 'bout wid you needer, 'kaze you got ter spread it right out on de
flo' un git down on yo' knees. I mighty glad I done wid it, 'kaze my
back feel like it done broke in a thous'n pieces. Honey, is Brer Remus
bin a-tellin' you some mo' er dem ole-time tales?"

Aunt Tempy's question gave the little boy an excuse for giving her brief
outlines of some of the stories. One that he seemed to remember
particularly well was the story of how Brother Rabbit and Brother Fox
killed a cow, and how Brother Rabbit got the most and the best of the
beef.

"I done year talk uv a tale like dat," exclaimed Aunt Tempy, laughing
heartily, "but 't ain't de same tale. I mos' 'shame' ter tell it."

"You gittin' too ole ter be blushin', Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus with
dignity.

"Well den," said Aunt Tempy, wiping her fat face with her apron: "One
time Brer Rabbit un Brer Wolf tuck'n gone off som'ers un kilt a cow, un
w'en dey come fer ter 'vide out de kyarkiss, Brer Wolf 'low dat bein's
he de biggest he oughter have de mos', un he light in, he did, un do
like he gwine ter take it all. Brer Rabbit do like he don't keer much,
but he keer so bad hit make 'im right sick. He tuck'n walk all 'roun' de
kyarkiss, he did, un snuff de air, un terreckly he say:--

"'Brer Wolf!--O Brer Wolf!--is dis meat smell 'zuckly right ter you?'

"Brer Wolf, he cuttin' un he kyarvin' un he ain't sayin' nothin'. Brer
Rabbit, he walk all 'roun' un 'roun' de kyarkiss. He feel it un he kick
it. Terreckly he say:--

"'Brer Wolf!--O Brer Wolf!--Dis meat feel mighty flabby ter me; how it
feel ter you?'

"Brer Wolf, he year all dat's said, but he keep on a-cuttin' un a
kyarvin'. Brer Rabbit say:--

"'You kin talk er not talk, Brer Wolf, des ez youer min' ter, yit ef I
ain't mistooken in de sign, you'll do some tall talkin' 'fo' youer done
wid dis beef. Now you mark w'at I tell you!'

"Brer Rabbit put out fum dar, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' yer he come back
wid a chunk er fier, un a dish er salt. W'en Brer Wolf see dis, he
say:--

"'W'at you gwine do wid all dat, Brer Rabbit?'

"Brer Rabbit laugh like he know mo' dan he gwine tell, un he say:--

"'Bless yo' soul, Brer Wolf! I ain't gwine ter kyar er poun' er dis meat
home tel I fin' out w'at de matter wid it. No I ain't--so dar now!'

"Den Brer Rabbit built 'im a fier un cut 'im off a slishe er steak un
br'ilte it good un done, un den he e't little uv it. Fus' he'd tas'e un
den he'd nibble; den he'd nibble un den he'd tas'e. He keep on tel he
e't right smart piece. Den he went'n sot off little ways like he waitin'
fer sump'n'.

"Brer Wolf, he kyarve un he cut, but he keep one eye on Brer Rabbit.
Brer Rabbit sot up dar same ez Judge on de bench. Brer Wolf, he watch
his motions. Terreckly Brer Rabbit fling bofe han's up ter he head un
fetch a groan. Brer Wolf cut un kyarve un watch Brer Rabbit motions.
Brer Rabbit sorter sway backerds un forrerds un fetch 'n'er groan. Den
he sway fum side to side un holler 'O Lordy!' Brer Wolf, he sorter 'gun
ter git skeer'd un he ax Brer Rabbit w'at de matter. Brer Rabbit, he
roll on de groun' un holler:--

"'O Lordy, Lordy! I'm pizen'd, I'm pizen'd! O Lordy! I'm pizen'd! Run
yer, somebody, run yer! De meat done got pizen on it. Oh, do run yer!'

"Brer Wolf git so skeer'd dat he put out fum dar, un he wa'n't out er
sight skacely 'fo' Brer Rabbit jump up fum dar un cut de pidjin-wing, un
't wa'n't so mighty long atter dat 'fo' Brer Rabbit done put all er dat
beef in his smoke-house."

"What became of Brother Wolf?" the little boy inquired.

"Brer Wolf went atter de doctor," continued Aunt Tempy, making little
tucks in her apron, "un w'en he come back Brer Rabbit un de beef done
gone; un, bless goodness, ef it had n't er bin fer de sign whar Brer
Rabbit built de fier, Brer Wolf would er bin mightly pester'd fer ter
fine der place whar de cow bin kilt."

At this juncture, 'Tildy, the house-girl, came in to tell Aunt Tempy
that one of the little negroes had been taken suddenly sick.

"I bin huntin' fer you over de whole blessid place," said 'Tildy.

"No, you ain't--no, you ain't. You ain't bin huntin' nowhar. You know'd
mighty well whar I wuz."

"Law, Mam' Tempy, I can't keep up wid you. How I know you down yer
courtin' wid Unk Remus?"

"Yo' head mighty full er courtin', you nas' stinkin' huzzy!" exclaimed
Aunt Tempy.

Uncle Remus, strange to say, was unmoved. He simply said:--

"W'en you see dat ar 'Tildy gal pirootin' 'roun' I boun' you ole Brer
Affikin Jack ain't fur off. 'T won't be so mighty long 'fo' de ole
creetur'll show up."

"How you know dat, Unk Remus?" exclaimed 'Tildy, showing her white teeth
and stretching her eyes. "Hit's de Lord's trufe; Mass Jeems done writ a
letter ter Miss Sally, en' he say in dat letter dat Daddy Jack ax 'im
fer ter tell Miss Sally ter tell me dat he'll be up yer dis week. Dat
ole Affikin ape got de impidence er de Ole Boy. He dunner who he foolin'
'longer!"




LI

MORE TROUBLE FOR BRER WOLF


The next night the little boy hardly waited to eat his supper before
going to Uncle Remus's house; and when Aunt Tempy failed to put in an
appearance as early as he thought necessary, he did not hesitate to go
after her. He had an idea that there was a sequel to the story she had
told the night before, and he was right. After protesting against being
dragged around from post to pillar by children, Aunt Tempy said:--

"Atter Brer Rabbit tuck'n make out he 'uz pizen'd un git all de beef, 't
wa'n't long 'fo' he chance to meet ole Brer Wolf right spang in de
middle uv de road. Brer Rabbit, he sorter shied off ter one side, but
Brer Wolf hail 'im:--

"'W'oa dar, my colty! don't be so gayly. You better be 'shame' yo'se'f
'bout de way you do me w'en we go inter cahoots wid dat beef.'

"Brer Rabbit, he up'n ax Brer Wolf how all his folks. Brer Wolf say:--

"'You'll fin' out how dey all is 'fo' dis day gone by. You took'n took
de beef, en now I'm a-gwine ter take'n take you.'

"Wid dis Brer Wolf make a dash at Brer Rabbit, but he des lack a little
bit uv bein' quick 'nuff, en Brer Rabbit he des went a-sailin' thoo de
woods. Brer Wolf, he tuck atter 'im, en yer dey had it--fus' Brer Rabbit
en den Brer Wolf. Brer Rabbit mo' soopler dan Brer Wolf, but Brer Wolf
got de 'vantage er de win', en terreckly he push Brer Rabbit so close
dat he run in a holler log.

"Brer Rabbit bin in dat log befo' en he know dey's a hole at de t'er
een', en he des keep on a-gwine. He dart in one een' en he slip out de
udder. He ain't stop ter say goo'-bye; bless you! he des keep on gwine.

"Brer Wolf, he see Brer Rabbit run in de holler log, en he say ter
hisse'f:--

"'Heyo, dey bin callin' you so mighty cunnin' all dis time, en yer you
done gone en shot yo'se'f up in my trap.'

"Den Brer Wolf laugh en lay down by de een' whar Brer Rabbit went in, en
pant en res' hisse'f. He see whar Brer B'ar burnin' off a new groun', en
he holler en ax 'im fer ter fetch 'im a chunk er fier, en Brer B'ar he
fotch it, en dey sot fier ter de holler log, en dey sot dar en watch it
till it burn plum up. Den dey took'n shuck han's, en Brer Wolf say he
hope dat atter dat dey'll have some peace in de neighborhoods."

Uncle Remus smiled a knowing smile as he filled his pipe, but Aunt Tempy
continued with great seriousness:--

"One time atter dat, Brer Wolf, he took'n pay a call down ter Miss
Meadows, en w'en he git dar en see Brer Rabbit settin' up side uv one er
de gals, he like to 'a' fainted, dat he did. He 'uz dat 'stonish'd dat
he look right down-hearted all endurin' uv de party.

"Brer Rabbit, he bow'd his howdies ter Brer Wolf un shuck han's 'long
wid 'im, des like nothin' ain't never happen 'twixt 'um, en he up'n
say:--

"'Ah-law, Brer Wolf! Youer much mo' my fr'en' dan you ever 'speckted ter
be, en you kin des count on me right straight 'long.'

"Brer Wolf say he feel sorter dat a-way hisse'f, en he ax Brer Rabbit
w'at make 'im change his min' so quick.

"'Bless you, Brer Wolf, I had needs ter change it,' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee.

"Brer Wolf, he ax 'im how come.

"'All about bein' burnt up in a holler log, Brer Wolf, en w'en you gits
time I wish you be so good ez ter bu'n me up some mo',' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee.

"Brer Wolf, he ax 'im how so. Brer Rabbit say:--

"'I'm fear'd ter tell you, Brer Wolf, 'kaze I don't want de news ter git
out.'

"Brer Wolf vow he won't tell nobody on de top side er de worl'. Brer
Rabbit say:--

"I done fin' out, Brer Wolf, dat w'en you git in a holler tree en
somebody sets it a-fier, dat de nat'al honey des oozles out uv it, en
mor'n dat, atter you git de honey all over you, 't ain't no use ter try
ter burn you up, 'kaze de honey will puzzuv you. Don't 'ny me dis favor,
Brer Wolf, 'kaze I done pick me out a n'er holler tree,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee.

"Brer Wolf, he wanter put right out den en dar, en Brer Rabbit say dat
des de kinder man w'at he bin huntin' fer. Dey took deyse'f off en 't
wa'n't long 'fo' dey came ter de tree w'at Brer Rabbit say he done pick
out. W'en dey git dar, Brer Wolf, he so greedy fer ter git a tas'e er de
honey dat he beg en beg Brer Rabbit fer ter let 'im git in de holler.
Brer Rabbit, he hol' back, but Brer Wolf beg so hard dat Brer Rabbit
'gree ter let 'im git in de holler.

"Brer Wolf, he got in, he did, en Brer Rabbit stuff de hole full er dry
leaves en trash, en den he got 'im a chunk er fier en totch 'er off. She
smoked en smoked, en den she bust out in a blaze. Brer Rabbit, he pile
up rocks, en brush, en sticks, so Brer Wolf can't git out. Terreckly
Brer Wolf holler:--

"'Gittin' mighty hot, Brer Rabbit! I ain't see no honey yit.'

"Brer Rabbit he pile on mo' trash, en holler back:--

"'Don't be in no hurry, Brer Wolf; you'll see it en tas'e it too.'

"Fier burn en burn, wood pop like pistol. Brer Wolf, he holler:

"'Gittin' hotter en hotter, Brer Rabbit. No honey come yit.'

"'Hol' still, Brer Wolf, hit'll come.'

"'Gimme a'r, Brer Rabbit; I'm a-chokin'.'

"'Fresh a'r make honey sour. Des hol' still, Brer Wolf!'

"'_Ow!_ she gittin' hotter en hotter, Brer Rabbit!'

"'Des hol' right still, Brer Wolf; mos' time fer de honey!'

"'_Ow! ow!_ I'm a-burnin', Brer Rabbit!'

"'Wait fer de honey, Brer Wolf.'

"'I can't stan' it, Brer Rabbit.'

"'Stan' it like I did, Brer Wolf.'

"Brer Rabbit he pile on de trash en de leaves. He say:--

"'I'll gin you honey, Brer Wolf; de same kinder honey you wanted ter
gimme.'

"En it seem like ter me," said Aunt Tempy, pleased at the interest the
little boy had shown, "dat it done Brer Wolf des right."




LII

BRER RABBIT OUTDOES MR. MAN


The little boy had heard Uncle Remus lamenting that his candle was
getting rather short, and he made it his business to go around the house
and gather all the pieces he could find. He carried these to the old
man, who received them with the liveliest satisfaction.

"Now dish yer sorter look lak sump'n', honey. W'en ole Brer Jack come
back, en Sis Tempy git in de habits er hangin' 'roun', we'll des light
