breath to listen. There was no doubt that Old Mr. Toad was singing just as
he had said he was going to, and it was just as true that his song was one
of the sweetest if not _the_ sweetest of all the chorus from and around the
Smiling Pool. It was very hard to believe, but Peter and Jimmy and Unc'
Billy both saw and heard, and that was enough. Their respect for Old Mr.
Toad grew tremendously as they listened.

"How does he do it?" whispered Peter.

"With that bag under his chin, of course," replied Jimmy Skunk. "Don't you
see it's only when that is swelled out that he sings? It's a regular music
bag. And I didn't know he had any such bag there at all."

"I wish," said Peter Rabbit, feeling of his throat, "that I had a music bag
like that in my throat."

And then he joined in the laugh of Jimmy and Unc' Billy, but still with
something of a look of wistfulness in his eyes.




VI


PETER DISCOVERS SOMETHING MORE

  There are stranger things in the world to-day
    Than ever you dreamed could be.
  There's beauty in some of the commonest things
    If only you've eyes to see.

Ever since Peter Rabbit was a little chap and had first ran away from home,
he had known Old Mr. Toad, and never once had Peter suspected that he could
sing. Also he had thought Old Mr. Toad almost ugly-looking, and he knew
that most of his neighbors thought the same way. They were fond of Old Mr.
Toad, for he was always good-natured and attended strictly to his own
affairs; but they liked to poke fun at him, and as for there being anything
beautiful about him, such a thing never entered their heads.

Now that they had discovered that he really has a very beautiful voice,
they began to look on him with a great deal more respect. This was
especially so with Peter. He got in the habit of going over to the Smiling
Pool every day, when the way was clear, just to sit on the bank and listen
to Old Mr. Toad.

"Why didn't you ever tell us before that you could sing?" he asked one day,
as Old Mr. Toad looked up at him from the Smiling Pool.

"What was the use of wasting my breath?" demanded Old Mr. Toad. "You
wouldn't have believed me if I had. You didn't believe me when I did tell
you."

Peter knew that this was true, and he couldn't find any answer ready. At
last he ventured another question. "Why haven't I ever heard you sing
before?"

"You have," replied Old Mr. Toad tartly. "I sang right in this very place
last spring, and the spring before, and the spring before that. You've sat
on that very bank lots of times while I was singing. The trouble with you,
Peter, is that you don't use your eyes or your ears."

Peter looked more foolish than ever. But he ventured another question. It
wouldn't be Peter to let a chance for questions go by. "Have I ever heard
you singing up on the meadows or in the Old Orchard?"

"No," replied Old Mr. Toad, "I only sing in the springtime. That's the time
for singing. I just _have_ to sing then. In the summer it is too hot, and
in the winter I sleep. I always return to my old home to sing. You know I
was born here. All my family gathers here in the spring to sing, so of
course I come too."

Old Mr. Toad filled out his queer music bag under his chin and began to
sing again. Peter watched him. Now it just happened that Old Mr. Toad was
facing him, and so Peter looked down straight into his eyes. He never had
looked into Mr. Toad's eyes before, and now he just stared and stared, for
it came over him that those eyes were very beautiful, very beautiful
indeed.

"Oh!" he exclaimed, "what beautiful eyes you have, Mr. Toad!"

"So I've been told before," replied Old Mr. Toad. "My family always has had
beautiful eyes. There is an old saying that every Toad has jewels in his
head, but of course he hasn't, not real jewels. It is just the beautiful
eyes. Excuse me, Peter, but I'm needed in that chorus." Old Mr. Toad once
more swelled out his throat and began to sing.

Peter watched him a while longer, then hopped away to the dear Old
Briarpatch, and he was very thoughtful.

"Never again will I call anybody homely and ugly until I know all about
him," said Peter, which was a very wise decision. Don't you think so?




VII


A SHADOW PASSES OVER THE SMILING POOL

  Here's what Mr. Toad says;
    Heed it well, my dear:
  "Time to watch for clouds is
   When the sky is clear."

He says that that is the reason that he lives to a good old age, does Old
Mr. Toad. I suppose he means that when the sky is cloudy, everybody is
looking for rain and is prepared for it, but when the sun is shining, most
people forget that there is such a thing as a storm, so when it comes
suddenly very few are prepared for it. It is the same way with danger and
trouble. So Old Mr. Toad very wisely watches out when there seems to be the
least need of it, and he finds it always pays.

It was a beautiful spring evening. Over back of the Purple Hills to which
Old Mother West Wind had taken her children, the Merry Little Breezes, and
behind which jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had gone to bed, there was still a
faint, clear light. But over the Green Meadows and the Smiling Pool the
shadows had drawn a curtain of soft dusk which in the Green Forest became
black. The little stars looked down from the sky and twinkled just to see
their reflections twinkle back at them from the Smiling Pool. And there and
all around it was perfect peace. Jerry Muskrat swam back and forth, making
little silver lines on the surface of the Smiling Pool and squeaking
contentedly, for it was the hour which he loves best. Little Friend the
Song Sparrow had tucked his head under his wing and gone to sleep among the
alders along the Laughing Brook and Redwing the Blackbird had done the same
thing among the bulrushes. All the feathered songsters who had made joyous
the bright day had gone to bed.

But this did not mean that the glad spring chorus was silent. Oh, my, no!
No indeed! The Green Meadows were silent, and the Green Forest was silent,
but as if to make up for this, the sweet singers of the Smiling Pool, the
hylas and the frogs and Old Mr. Toad, were pouring out their gladness as if
they had not been singing most of the departed day. You see it was the hour
they love best of all, the hour which seems to them just made for singing,
and they were doing their best to tell Old Mother Nature how they love her,
and how glad they were that she had brought back sweet Mistress Spring to
waken them from their long sleep.

It was so peaceful and beautiful there that it didn't seem possible that
danger of any kind could be lurking near. But Old Mr. Toad, swelling out
that queer music bag in his throat and singing with all his might, never
once forgot that wise saying of his, and so he was the first to see what
looked like nothing so much as a little detached bit of the blackness of
the Green Forest floating out towards the Smiling Pool. Instantly he
stopped singing. Now that was a signal. When he stopped singing, his
nearest neighbor stopped singing, then the next one and the next, and in a
minute there wasn't a sound from the Smiling Pool save the squeak of Jerry
Muskrat hidden among the bulrushes. That great chorus stopped as abruptly
as the electric lights go out when you press a button.

Back and forth over the Smiling Pool, this way and that way, floated the
shadow, but there was no sign of any living thing in the Smiling Pool.
After awhile the shadow floated away over the Green Meadows without a
sound.

"Hooty the Owl didn't get one of us that time," said Old Mr. Toad to his
nearest neighbor with a chuckle of satisfaction. Then he swelled out his
music bag and began to sing again. And at once, as abruptly as it had
stopped, the great chorus began again as joyous as before, for nothing had
happened to bring sadness as might have but for the watchfulness of Old Mr.
Toad.




VIII


OLD MR. TOAD'S BABIES

  The Smiling Pool's a nursery
    Where all the sunny day
  A thousand funny babies
    Are taught while at their play.

Really the Smiling Pool is a sort of kindergarten, one of the most
interesting kindergartens in the world. Little Joe Otter's children learn
to swim there. So do Jerry Muskrat's babies and those of Billy Mink, the
Trout and Minnow babies, and a lot more. And there you will find the
children and grandchildren of Grandfather Frog and Old Mr. Toad.

Peter Rabbit had known for a long time about the Frog babies, but though he
knew that Old Mr. Toad was own cousin to Grandfather Frog, he hadn't known
anything about Toad babies, except that at a certain time in the year he
was forever running across tiny Toads, especially on rainy days, and each
little Toad was just like Old Mr. Toad, except for his size. Peter had
heard it said that Toads rain down from the sky, and sometimes it seems as
if this must be so. Of course he knew it couldn't be, but it puzzled him a
great deal. There wouldn't be a Toad in sight. Then it would begin to rain,
and right away there would be so many tiny Toads that it was hard work to
jump without stepping on some.

He remembered this as he went to pay his daily call on Old Mr. Toad in the
Smiling Pool and listen to his sweet song. He hadn't seen any little Toads
this year, but he remembered his experiences with them in other years, and
he meant to ask about them.

Old Mr. Toad was sitting in his usual place, but he wasn't singing. He was
staring at something in the water. When Peter said "Good morning," Old Mr.
Toad didn't seem to hear him. He was too much interested in what he was
watching. Peter stared down into the water to see what was interesting Old
Mr. Toad so much, but he saw nothing but a lot of wriggling tadpoles.

"What are you staring at so, Mr. Sobersides?" asked Peter, speaking a
little louder than before.

Old Mr. Toad turned and looked at Peter, and there was a look of great
pride in his face. "I'm just watching my babies. Aren't they lovely?" said
he.

Peter stared harder than ever, but he couldn't see anything that looked
like a baby Toad.

"Where are they?" asked he. "I don't see any babies but those of
Grandfather Frog, and if you ask me, I always did think tadpoles about the
