really fond of anything but live stock."

"He's fond of teasing people, I guess," I responded. "Are you really
going to church to-morrow in that dress, Sis?"

"If mother'll let me I'll have to," said poor Cecily. "I won't let Mr.
Campbell triumph over me. And I DO want to have as many names as Kitty
has. And I DO want to help the poor little Korean children. But it will
be simply dreadful. I don't know whether I hope mother will or not."

I did not believe she would, but Aunt Janet sometimes could be depended
on for the unexpected. She laughed and told Cecily she could please
herself. Felicity was in a rage over it, and declared SHE wouldn't go to
church if Cecily went in such a rig. Dan sarcastically inquired if all
she went to church for was to show off her fine clothes and look at
other people's; then they quarrelled and didn't speak to each other for
two days, much to Cecily's distress.

I suspect poor Sis wished devoutly that it might rain the next day; but
it was gloriously fine. We were all waiting in the orchard for the Story
Girl who had not begun to dress for church until Cecily and Felicity
were ready. Felicity was her prettiest in flower-trimmed hat, crisp
muslin, floating ribbons and trim black slippers. Poor Cecily stood
beside her mute and pale, in her faded school garb and heavy copper-toed
boots. But her face, if pale, was very determined. Cecily, having put
her hand to the plough, was not of those who turn back.

"You do look just awful," said Felicity. "I don't care--I'm going to
sit in Uncle James' pew. I WON'T sit with you. There will be so many
strangers there, and all the Markdale people, and what will they think
of you? Some of them will never know the reason, either."

"I wish the Story Girl would hurry," was all poor Cecily said. "We're
going to be late. It wouldn't have been quite so hard if I could have
got there before anyone and slipped quietly into our pew."

"Here she comes at last," said Dan. "Why--what's she got on?"

The Story Girl joined us with a quizzical smile on her face. Dan
whistled. Cecily's pale cheeks flushed with understanding and gratitude.
The Story Girl wore her school print dress and hat also, and was
gloveless and heavy shod.

"You're not going to have to go through this all alone, Cecily," she
said.

"Oh, it won't be half so hard now," said Cecily, with a long breath of
relief.

I fancy it was hard enough even then. The Story Girl did not care a
whit, but Cecily rather squirmed under the curious glances that were
cast at her. She afterwards told me that she really did not think she
could have endured it if she had been alone.

Mr. Campbell met us under the elms in the churchyard, with a twinkle in
his eye.

"Well, you did it, Miss," he said to Cecily, "but you should have been
alone. That was what I meant. I suppose you think you've cheated me
nicely."

"No, she doesn't," spoke up the Story Girl undauntedly. "She was all
dressed and ready to come before she knew I was going to dress the same
way. So she kept her bargain faithfully, Mr. Campbell, and I think you
were cruel to make her do it."

"You do, eh? Well, well, I hope you'll forgive me. I didn't think she'd
do it--I was sure feminine vanity would win the day over missionary
zeal. It seems it didn't--though how much was pure missionary zeal and
how much just plain King spunk I'm doubtful. I'll keep my promise, Miss.
You shall have your five dollars, and mind you put my name in the round
space. No five-cent corners for me."




CHAPTER XXIV. A TANTALIZING REVELATION


"I shall have something to tell you in the orchard this evening," said
the Story Girl at breakfast one morning. Her eyes were very bright and
excited. She looked as if she had not slept a great deal. She had spent
the previous evening with Miss Reade and had not returned until the rest
of us were in bed. Miss Reade had finished giving music lessons and was
going home in a few days. Cecily and Felicity were in despair over this
and mourned as those without comfort. But the Story Girl, who had been
even more devoted to Miss Reade than either of them, had not, as I
noticed, expressed any regret and seemed to be very cheerful over the
whole matter.

"Why can't you tell it now?" asked Felicity.

"Because the evening is the nicest time to tell things in. I only
mentioned it now so that you would have something interesting to look
forward to all day."

"Is it about Miss Reade?" asked Cecily.

"Never mind."

"I'll bet she's going to be married," I exclaimed, remembering the ring.

"Is she?" cried Felicity and Cecily together.

The Story Girl threw an annoyed glance at me. She did not like to have
her dramatic announcements forestalled.

"I don't say that it is about Miss Reade or that it isn't. You must just
wait till the evening."

"I wonder what it is," speculated Cecily, as the Story Girl left the
room.

"I don't believe it's much of anything," said Felicity, beginning to
clear away the breakfast dishes. "The Story Girl always likes to make so
much out of so little. Anyhow, I don't believe Miss Reade is going to be
married. She hasn't any beaus around here and Mrs. Armstrong says
she's sure she doesn't correspond with anybody. Besides, if she was she
wouldn't be likely to tell the Story Girl."

"Oh, she might. They're such friends, you know," said Cecily.

"Miss Reade is no better friends with her than she is with me and you,"
retorted Felicity.

"No, but sometimes it seems to me that she's a different kind of friend
with the Story Girl than she is with me and you," reflected Cecily. "I
can't just explain what I mean."

"No wonder. Such nonsense," sniffed Felicity. "It's only some girl's
secret, anyway," said Dan, loftily. "I don't feel much interest in it."

But he was on hand with the rest of us that evening, interest or no
interest, in Uncle Stephen's Walk, where the ripening apples were
beginning to glow like jewels among the boughs.

"Now, are you going to tell us your news?" asked Felicity impatiently.

"Miss Reade IS going to be married," said the Story Girl. "She told me
so last night. She is going to be married in a fortnight's time."

"Who to?" exclaimed the girls.

"To"--the Story Girl threw a defiant glance at me as if to say, "You
can't spoil the surprise of THIS, anyway,"--"to--the Awkward Man."

For a few moments amazement literally held us dumb.

"You're not in earnest, Sara Stanley?" gasped Felicity at last.

"Indeed I am. I thought you'd be astonished. But I wasn't. I've
suspected it all summer, from little things I've noticed. Don't you
remember that evening last spring when I went a piece with Miss Reade
and told you when I came back that a story was growing? I guessed it
from the way the Awkward Man looked at her when I stopped to speak to
him over his garden fence."

"But--the Awkward Man!" said Felicity helplessly. "It doesn't seem
possible. Did Miss Reade tell you HERSELF?"

"Yes."

"I suppose it must be true then. But how did it ever come about? He's
SO shy and awkward. How did he ever manage to get up enough spunk to ask
her to marry him?"

"Maybe she asked him," suggested Dan.

The Story Girl looked as if she might tell if she would.

"I believe that WAS the way of it," I said, to draw her on.

"Not exactly," she said reluctantly. "I know all about it but I can't
tell you. I guessed part from things I've seen--and Miss Reade told me a
good deal--and the Awkward Man himself told me his side of it as we came
home last night. I met him just as I left Mr. Armstrong's and we were
together as far as his house. It was dark and he just talked on as if he
were talking to himself--I think he forgot I was there at all, once
he got started. He has never been shy or awkward with me, but he never
talked as he did last night."

"You might tell us what he said," urged Cecily. "We'd never tell."

The Story Girl shook her head.

"No, I can't. You wouldn't understand. Besides, I couldn't tell it just
right. It's one of the things that are hardest to tell. I'd spoil it if
I told it--now. Perhaps some day I'll be able to tell it properly. It's
very beautiful--but it might sound very ridiculous if it wasn't told
just exactly the right way."

"I don't know what you mean, and I don't believe you know yourself,"
said Felicity pettishly. "All that I can make out is that Miss Reade is
going to marry Jasper Dale, and I don't like the idea one bit. She is
so beautiful and sweet. I thought she'd marry some dashing young man.
Jasper Dale must be nearly twenty years older than her--and he's so
queer and shy--and such a hermit."

"Miss Reade is perfectly happy," said the Story Girl. "She thinks the
Awkward Man is lovely--and so he is. You don't know him, but I do."

"Well, you needn't put on such airs about it," sniffed Felicity.

"I am not putting on any airs. But it's true. Miss Reade and I are the
only people in Carlisle who really know the Awkward Man. Nobody else
ever got behind his shyness to find out just what sort of a man he is."

"When are they to be married?" asked Felicity.

"In a fortnight's time. And then they are coming right back to live at
Golden Milestone. Won't it be lovely to have Miss Reade always so near
us?"

"I wonder what she'll think about the mystery of Golden Milestone,"
remarked Felicity.

Golden Milestone was the beautiful name the Awkward Man had given his
home; and there was a mystery about it, as readers of the first volume
of these chronicles will recall.

"She knows all about the mystery and thinks it perfectly lovely--and so
do I," said the Story Girl.

"Do YOU know the secret of the locked room?" cried Cecily.

"Yes, the Awkward Man told me all about it last night. I told you I'd
find out the mystery some time."

"And what is it?"

"I can't tell you that either."

"I think you're hateful and mean," exclaimed Felicity. "It hasn't
anything to do with Miss Reade, so I think you might tell us."

"It has something to do with Miss Reade. It's all about her."

"Well, I don't see how that can be when the Awkward Man never saw or
heard of Miss Reade until she came to Carlisle in the spring," said
Felicity incredulously, "and he's had that locked room for years."

"I can't explain it to you--but it's just as I've said," responded the
Story Girl.

"Well, it's a very queer thing," retorted Felicity.

"The name in the books in the room was Alice--and Miss Reade's name is
Alice," marvelled Cecily. "Did he know her before she came here?"

"Mrs. Griggs says that room has been locked for ten years. Ten years ago
Miss Reade was just a little girl of ten. SHE couldn't be the Alice of
the books," argued Felicity.

"I wonder if she'll wear the blue silk dress," said Sara Ray.

"And what will she do about the picture, if it isn't hers?" added
Cecily.

"The picture couldn't be hers, or Mrs. Griggs would have known her for
the same when she came to Carlisle," said Felix.

"I'm going to stop wondering about it," exclaimed Felicity crossly,
aggravated by the amused smile with which the Story Girl was listening
to the various speculations. "I think Sara is just as mean as mean when
she won't tell us."

"I can't," repeated the Story Girl patiently.

"You said one time you had an idea who 'Alice' was," I said. "Was your
idea anything like the truth?"

"Yes, I guessed pretty nearly right."

"Do you suppose they'll keep the room locked after they are married?"
asked Cecily.

"Oh, no. I can tell you that much. It is to be Miss Reade's own
particular sitting room."

"Why, then, perhaps we'll see it some time ourselves, when we go to see
Miss Reade," cried Cecily.

"I'd be frightened to go into it," confessed Sara Ray. "I hate things
with mysteries. They always make me nervous."

"I love them. They're so exciting," said the Story Girl.

"Just think, this will be the second wedding of people we know,"
reflected Cecily. "Isn't that interesting?"

"I only hope the next thing won't be a funeral," remarked Sara Ray
gloomily. "There were three lighted lamps on our kitchen table last
night, and Judy Pineau says that's a sure sign of a funeral."

"Well, there are funerals going on all the time," said Dan.

"But it means the funeral of somebody you know. I don't believe in
it--MUCH--but Judy says she's seen it come true time and again. I hope
if it does it won't be anybody we know very well. But I hope it'll be
somebody I know a LITTLE, because then I might get to the funeral. I'd
just love to go to a funeral."

"That's a dreadful thing to say," commented Felicity in a shocked tone.

Sara Ray looked bewildered.

"I don't see what is dreadful in it," she protested.

"People don't go to funerals for the fun of it," said Felicity severely.
"And you just as good as said you hoped somebody you knew would die so
you'd get to the funeral."

