out if he had any of the big, fat hickory nuts. Now Striped Chipmunk had
_all_ of those fat hickory nuts safely hidden in his splendid new
storehouse, but he didn't intend to let Happy Jack know it. So he just
pretended not to see Happy Jack, or to know that he was anywhere near,
but acted as if he was just going about his own business. Really he was
just having the best time ever fooling Happy Jack.

    "The corn is ripe; the nuts do fall;
      Acorns are sweet and plump.
    I soon will have my storehouse full
      Inside the hollow stump."

Striped Chipmunk sang this just as if no one was anywhere near, and he
was singing just for joy. Of course Happy Jack heard it and he grinned.

"So your storehouse is in a hollow stump, my smart little cousin!" said
Happy Jack to himself. "If that's the case, I'll soon find it."

Striped Chipmunk scurried along, and now he took pains to always keep in
sight. Happy Jack followed, hiding behind the trees. Pretty soon Striped
Chipmunk picked up a plump acorn and put it in the pocket of his right
cheek. Then he picked up another and put that in the pocket in his left
cheek. Then he crowded another into each; and his face was swelled so
that you would hardly have guessed that it was Striped Chipmunk if you
had chanced to meet him. My, my, he was a funny sight! Happy Jack
grinned again as he watched, partly because Striped Chipmunk looked so
funny, and partly because he knew that if Striped Chipmunk was going to
eat the acorns right away, he wouldn't stuff them into the pockets in
his cheeks. But he had done this very thing, and so he must be going to
take them to his storehouse.

Off scampered Striped Chipmunk, and after him stole Happy Jack, his eyes
shining with excitement. Pretty soon he saw an old stump which looked as
if it must be hollow. Happy Jack grinned more than ever as he carefully
hid himself and watched. Striped Chipmunk scrambled up on the old stump,
looked this way and that way, as if to be sure that no one was watching
him, then with a flirt of his funny little tail he darted into a little
round doorway. He was gone a long time, but by and by out he popped,
looked this way and that way, and then scampered off in the direction
from which he had come. Happy Jack didn't try to follow him. He waited
until he was sure that Striped Chipmunk was out of sight and hearing,
and then he walked over to the old stump.

"It's his storehouse fast enough," said Happy Jack.




CHAPTER VIII

HAPPY JACK TURNS BURGLAR

    As trees from little acorns, so
    Great sums from little pennies grow.

    _Happy Jack._


Happy Jack Squirrel stood in front of the old stump into which he had
seen Striped Chipmunk go with the pockets in his cheeks full of acorns,
and out of which he had come with the pockets of his cheeks quite empty.

"It certainly is his storehouse, and now I'll find out if he is the one
who got all those big, fat hickory nuts," muttered Happy Jack.

First he looked this way, and then he looked that way, to be sure that
no one saw him, for what he was planning to do was a very dreadful
thing, and he knew it. Happy Jack was going to turn burglar. A burglar,
you know, is one who breaks into another's house or barn to steal, which
is a very, very dreadful thing to do. Yet this is just what Happy Jack
Squirrel was planning to do. He was going to get into that old stump,
and if those big, fat hickory nuts were there, as he was sure they were,
he was going to take them. He tried very hard to make himself believe
that it wouldn't be stealing. He had watched those nuts in the top of
the tall hickory tree so long that he had grown to think that they
belonged to him. Of course they didn't, but he had made himself think
they did.

Happy Jack walked all around the old stump, and then he climbed up on
top of it. There was only one doorway, and that was the little round
hole through which Striped Chipmunk had entered and then come out. It
was too small for Happy Jack to even get his head through, though his
cousin, Chatterer the Red Squirrel, who is much smaller, could have
slipped in easily. Happy Jack sniffed and sniffed. He could smell nuts
and corn and other good things. My, how good they did smell! His eyes
shone greedily.

Happy Jack took one more hasty look around to see that no one was
watching, then with his long sharp teeth he began to make the doorway
larger. The wood was tough, but Happy Jack worked with might and main,
for he wanted to get those nuts and get away before Striped Chipmunk
should return, or any one else should happen along and see him. Soon the
hole was big enough for him to get his head inside. It was a storehouse,
sure enough. Happy Jack worked harder than ever, and soon the hole was
large enough for him to get wholly inside.

What a sight! There was corn! and there were chestnuts and acorns! and
there were a few hickory nuts, though these did not look so big and fat
as the ones Happy Jack was looking for! Happy Jack chuckled to himself,
a wicked, greedy chuckle, as he looked. And then something happened.

"Oh! Oh! Stop it! Leave me alone!" yelled Happy Jack.




CHAPTER IX

HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL'S SAD MISTAKE

A Squirrel always is thrifty. Be as wise as a Squirrel.

_Happy Jack._


"Let me go! Let me go!" yelled Happy Jack, as he backed out of the
hollow stump faster than he had gone in, a great deal faster. Can you
guess why? I'll tell you. It was because he was being pulled out. Yes,
Sir, Happy Jack Squirrel was being pulled out by his big, bushy tail.

Happy Jack was more frightened than hurt. To be sure, it is not at all
comfortable to have one's tail pulled, but Happy Jack wouldn't have
minded this so much had it not been so unexpected, or if he could have
seen who was pulling it. And then, right inside Happy Jack didn't feel a
bit good. Why? Well, because he was doing a dreadful thing, and he
_knew_ that it was a dreadful thing. He had broken into somebody's
storehouse to steal. He was sure that it was Striped Chipmunk's
storehouse, and he wouldn't admit to himself that he was going to steal,
actually _steal_. But all the time, right down deep in his heart, he
knew that if he took any of those hickory nuts it would be stealing.

But Happy Jack had been careless. When he had made the doorway big
enough for him to crawl inside, he had left his tail hanging outside.
Some one had very, very softly stolen up and grabbed it and begun to
pull. It was so sudden and unexpected that Happy Jack yelled with
fright. When he could get his wits together, he thought of course
Striped Chipmunk had come back and was pulling his tail. When he thought
that, he got over his fright right away, for Striped Chipmunk is such a
little fellow that Happy Jack knew that he had nothing; to fear from
him.

So as fast as he could, Happy Jack backed out of the hole and whirled
around. Of course he expected to face a very angry little Chipmunk. But
he didn't. No, Sir, he didn't. Instead, he looked right into the angry
face of his other cousin, Chatterer the Red Squirrel. And Chatterer
_was_ angry! Oh my, my, how angry Chatterer was! For a minute he
couldn't find his voice, because his anger fairly choked him. And when
he did, how his tongue did fly!

"You thief! You robber! What are you doing in my storehouse?" he
shrieked.

Happy Jack backed away hurriedly, for though he is much bigger than
Chatterer, he has a very wholesome respect for Chatterer's sharp teeth,
and when he is very angry, Chatterer is a great fighter.

"I--I didn't know it was your storehouse," said Happy Jack, backing
away still further.

"It doesn't make any difference if you didn't; you're a thief just the
same!" screamed Chatterer and rushed at Happy Jack. And what do you
think Happy Jack did? Why, he just turned tail and ran, Chatterer after
him, crying "Thief! Robber! Coward!" at the top of his lungs, so that
every one in the Green Forest could hear.




CHAPTER X

STRIPED CHIPMUNK'S HAPPY THOUGHT

    Waste seems to me a dreadful sin;
    It works to lose and not to win.

    Thrift will win; it cannot lose.
    Between them 'tis for you to choose.

    _Happy Jack._


Striped Chipmunk sat on a mossy old log, laughing until his sides ached.
"Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho!"
laughed Striped Chipmunk, holding his sides. Over in the Green Forest he
could still hear Chatterer the Red Squirrel crying "Thief! Robber!" as
he chased his big cousin, Happy Jack, and every time he heard it,
Striped Chipmunk laughed harder.

You see, Striped Chipmunk had known all the time that Happy Jack was
spying on him, and he had had no end of fun fooling Happy Jack by
suddenly disappearing and then bobbing into view. He had known that
Happy Jack was following him so as to find out where his storehouse was.
Then Striped Chipmunk had remembered the storehouse of Chatterer the Red
Squirrel. He had filled the pockets in his cheeks with acorns and gone
straight over to Chatterer's storehouse and put them inside, knowing
that Happy Jack would follow him and would think that that was his
storehouse. And that is just what happened.

Then Striped Chipmunk had hidden himself where he could see all that
happened. He had seen Happy Jack look all around, to make sure that no
one was near, and then tear open the little round doorway of Chatterer's
storehouse until it was big enough for him to squeeze through. He had
seen Chatterer come up, fly into a rage, and pull Happy Jack out by the
tail. Indeed, he had had to clap both hands over his mouth to keep from
laughing out loud. Then Happy Jack had turned tail and run away with
Chatterer after him, shouting "Thief" and "Robber" at the top of his
voice, and this had tickled Striped Chipmunk still more, for he knew
that Chatterer himself is one of the greatest thieves in the Green
Forest. So he sat on the mossy old log and laughed and laughed and
laughed.

Finally Striped Chipmunk wiped the tears from his eyes and jumped up.
"My, my, this will never do!" said he.

    "Idle hands and idle feet
      Never filled a storehouse yet;
    But instead, so I've heard say,
      Into mischief surely get."

"Here it is almost Thanksgiving and--" Striped Chipmunk stopped and
scratched his head, while a funny little pleased look crept into his
face. "I wonder if Happy Jack and Chatterer would come to a
Thanksgiving dinner," he muttered. "I believe I'll ask them just for
fun."

Then Striped Chipmunk hurried home full of his new idea and chuckled as
he planned his Thanksgiving dinner. Of course he couldn't have it at his
own house. That wouldn't do at all. In the first place, the doorway
would be altogether too small for Happy Jack. Anyway, his home was a
secret, his very own secret, and he didn't propose to let Happy Jack and
Chatterer know where it was, even for a Thanksgiving dinner. Then he
thought of the big, smooth, mossy log he had been sitting on that very
morning.

"The very place!" cried Striped Chipmunk, and scurried away to find
Happy Jack Squirrel and Chatterer the Red Squirrel to invite them to his
Thanksgiving dinner.




CHAPTER XI

STRIPED CHIPMUNK'S THANKSGIVING DINNER

    There's nothing quite so sweet in life
    As making up and ending strife.

    _Happy Jack._


Striped Chipmunk jumped out of bed very early Thanksgiving morning. It
was going to be a very busy day. He had invited Happy Jack the Gray
Squirrel, and Chatterer the Red Squirrel, to eat Thanksgiving dinner
with him, and each had promised to be there. Striped Chipmunk chuckled
as he thought how neither of his guests knew that the other was to be
there. He washed his face and hands, brushed his hair, and ate his
breakfast. Then he scurried over to his splendid new storehouse, which
no one knew of but himself, and stuffed the pockets in his cheeks with
good things to eat. When he couldn't stuff another thing in, he scurried
over to the nice, mossy log on the edge of the Green Forest, and there
he emptied his pockets, for that was to be his dining table.

Back and forth, back and forth between his secret storehouse and the
smooth, mossy log hurried Striped Chipmunk. He knew that Happy Jack and
the Chatterer have great appetites, and he wanted to be sure that there
was plenty of good things to eat. And as he scurried along, he sang a
little song.

    "Thanksgiving comes but once a year,
    But when it comes it brings good cheer.
    For in my storehouse on this day
    Are piles of good things hid away.
    Each day I've worked from early morn
    To gather acorns, nuts, and corn,
    Till now I've plenty and to spare
    Without a worry or a care.
    So light of heart the whole day long,
    I'll sing a glad Thanksgiving song."

Promptly at the dinner hour Happy Jack appeared coming from one
direction, and Chatterer the Red Squirrel coming from another direction.
They didn't see each other until just as they reached Striped Chipmunk's
smooth, mossy log. Then they stopped and scowled. Striped Chipmunk
pretended not to notice anything wrong and bustled about, talking all
the time as if his guests were the best of friends.

On the smooth, mossy log was a great pile of shining yellow corn. There
was another pile of plump ripe acorns, and three little piles of dainty
looking brown seeds. But the thing that Happy Jack couldn't keep his
eyes off was right in the middle. It was a huge pile of big, fat hickory
nuts. Now who could remain ill-tempered and cross with such a lot of
goodies spread before him? Certainly not Happy Jack or his cousin,
Chatterer the Red Squirrel. They just had to smile in spite of
themselves, and when Striped Chipmunk urged them to sit down and help
themselves, they did. In three minutes they were so busy eating that
they had forgotten all about their quarrel and were laughing and
chatting like the best of friends.

"It's quite a family party, isn't it?" said Striped Chipmunk, for you
know they are all cousins.

Whitefoot the Wood Mouse happened along, and Striped Chipmunk insisted
that he should join the party. Later Sammy Jay came along, and nothing
would excuse him from sharing in the feast, too. When everybody had
