restored; and sometimes, also, it has happened that the gods of the
infernal regions have mistaken their aim, and seized one person instead
of another. In any view, it is right to afford the opportunity for
correcting these mistakes, so as not to expose to the flames a person
who is still alive. Hence the propriety of these pauses, each of which
continues half of the quarter of an hour.

Having arrived at the place for burning the dead, they dig a trench
about six or seven feet in length. This is consecrated by the muntrums.
It is slightly sprinkled with water to lay the dust, and a few pieces of
money in gold are scattered upon it. Here the pile is erected of dried
wood, on which the body is laid out at full length. Over the body a
quantity of twigs are laid, which are sprinkled with punchakaryam The
chief of the funeral then takes on his shoulders a pitcher of water, and
goes around the pile three times, letting the water run through a hole
made in it. After this he breaks the pitcher in pieces near the head of
the corpse.

At last the torch is brought for setting fire to the pile, and is handed
to the chief of the funeral. Before he receives it, however, he is
obliged to make some grimaces to prove his sorrow. He rolls about on the
ground, beats his breast, and makes the air resound with his cries. The
assistants also cry, or appear to cry. Fire being applied to the four
corners of the pile, the crowd retire, except the four Brahmins who
carried the body; they remain until the whole is consumed.

The funerals of the Sudras differ in some particulars from those of the
Brahmins. Deafening sounds of drums, trumpets, and other instruments of
music, not in use among the Brahmins, accompany their funerals. To
increase the noise, they sometimes shoot off an instrument which
somewhat resembles a small cannon. I do not now think of any other
particular worthy of mention.

By the ceremonies which are performed at their funerals, this wretched
people expect to secure the pardon of all the sins of those who have
died. Alas, what a delusion! O, that Christians had sent the Gospel to
this dark land in the days when they sent it to our heathen fathers.
Then might the Hindoos now be seeking the expiation of their sins,
through the blood of the ever-blessed Redeemer. Of this Redeemer,
however, they know nothing. They enter eternity, not that their souls
may be consumed as their bodies have been, but to endure the flames of
divine wrath for ever and ever. Alas, alas, that it should be so! O,
that the generation of Christians now living would lay these things to
heart, and do what they can, through grace, to rescue those who are yet
within the reach of hope from so tremendous a doom. What, my dear
children, will you do for this purpose?




CHAPTER VI.

THE GODS OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--The word heathen is applied to those who worship
idols, or who do not know any thing about the true God. This is the case
with this people. They say that there is one supreme being, whom they
call BRAHM; but he is very different from Jehovah, and is never
worshipped. Generally, he is fast asleep. In the place of Brahm, they
worship many gods--gods of all colors: some black, some white, some
blue, some red--gods of all shapes and sizes: some in the shape of
beasts, some in the shape of men; some partly in the shape of beasts,
and partly in the shape of men, having four, or ten, or a hundred, or a
thousand eyes, heads, and hands. They ride through the air on elephants,
buffaloes, lions, sheep, deer, goats, peacocks, vultures, geese,
serpents, and rats. They hold in their hands all kinds of weapons,
offensive and defensive, thunderbolts javelins, spears, clubs, bows,
arrows, shields, flags, and shells. They are of all employments. There
are gods of the heavens above and of the earth below, gods of wisdom and
of folly, gods of war and of peace, gods of good and of evil, gods of
pleasure, gods of cruelty and wrath, whose thirst must be satiated with
torrents of blood. These gods fight and quarrel with one another. They
lie, steal, commit adultery, murder, and other crimes. They pour out
their curses when they cannot succeed in their wicked plots, and invent
all kinds of lying tales to hide their wickedness.

There are three principal gods, who compose what is called the Hindoo
triad. Their names are Brumha, Vrishnoo, and Siva. They were somehow
drawn from Brahm's essence, on one occasion when he was awake. Brumha,
they say, is the creator of the world, Vrishnoo the preserver, and Siva
the destroyer. Brumha has no temple erected for his worship, on account
of a great falsehood which he told. I will tell you what it was. Once,
as it is said, there was a dispute between him and Vrishnoo, as to who
is the greatest. While thus disputing, Siva appeared between the two as
a fire-post and told them that he who would find the bottom or the top
of the post first, would show that he is the greatest. Vrishnoo
immediately changed himself into a hog, and began to root up the earth
with the hope of finding the bottom of the post. Brumha changed himself
into a swan, flew up towards the top of the post, and cried out, I have
found it, when he had not. This, you know, my dear children, was a
falsehood. For this falsehood, it is said, no temple is erected for his
worship.

Vrishnoo was a thief and a liar. He was once dwelling in the house of a
dairyman, and he used constantly to be stealing butter and curdled milk
from the dairyman's wife. She did not know, for a long time, what became
of her butter and curdled milk; but at last she found out that Vrishnoo
was the thief. To punish him for his theft, she tied him to a rice
mortar.

Siva's conduct was very bad. I will tell you but one thing about him. On
one occasion he was playing at cards with his wife Parvathe. Vrishnoo
was appointed to determine who was the best player. After playing for a
little season Parvathe won the game. Siva then beckoned to Vrishnoo to
declare that he, instead of Parvathe, had won it. This he did. In
consequence of this falsehood, he was cursed by Parvathe, and changed
into a snake.

And now, my dear children, why do I tell you about these gods? I tell
you for the purpose of making you thankful that you were born in a
Christian land, where you have the Bible to teach you better things. Had
you not the Bible, you would worship just such wretched beings as these
poor Hindoos worship. Perhaps you know that our Saxon fathers, before
they had the Bible, were as great idolaters as are this people. They
worshipped Thor and Woden and other similar idols, and they were even in
the habit of offering up human sacrifices Surely, if there is any thing
which should make you give your hearts to your Saviour and love him
above all things, it is God's gift of the Bible to you.




CHAPTER VII.

THE THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY MILLIONS OF THE GODS OF THE HINDOOS--THE
CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE--THE TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS--THE DIFFERENT
HELLS.


My dear children--I told you that in one of those seasons when Brahm was
awake, Brumha, Vrishnoo, and Siva were somehow drawn from Brahm's
essence. The three hundred and thirty millions of the gods of the
Hindoos were also drawn from this essence; as were all the atoms which
compose the earth, the sun, moon, and stars. At first, these atoms were
all in disorder. For the purpose of reducing them to order, Brahm
created what is called the great mundane egg. Into this egg he himself
entered, under the form, of Brumha, taking with him all these atoms.
After remaining in this egg four thousand three hundred millions of
years, to arrange these atoms, he burst its shell and came out, with a
thousand heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand arms. With him, he
brought out all those harmonized atoms, which, when separated, produced
this beautiful universe that we see above and around us.

The universe, as it came from the mundane egg, is generally divided into
fourteen worlds: seven inferior or lower worlds, and seven superior or
upper worlds. The seven lower worlds are filled with all kinds of wicked
and loathsome creatures. Our earth, which is the first of the upper
worlds, it is said, is flat. The following figure will give you some
idea of it.

[Illustration: Concentric circles with labels on each from outermost to
innermost: Sea of Sweet Water. Sea of Milk. Sea of Sour Curds. Sea of
Clarified Butter. Sea of Spirituous Liquors. Sea of Sugar Cane Juice.
Sea of Salt Water. Earth.]

That part of the earth which is inhabited consists of seven circular
islands, or continents each of which is surrounded by a different ocean.
The island in the centre, where we dwell, is surrounded by a sea of salt
water, the second island is surrounded by a sea of sugar-cane juice, the
third island is surrounded by a sea of spirituous liquors, the fourth is
surrounded by a sea of clarified butter, the fifth is surrounded by a
sea of sour curds, the sixth is surrounded by a sea of milk, the seventh
is surrounded by a sea of sweet water.

In all the worlds above ours are mansions where the gods reside. In the
third is the heaven of Indra. This is the heaven to which it is said the
widow goes, after she has burned herself to death on the funeral pile of
her husband Its palaces are of the purest gold. And such are the
quantities of diamonds, and jasper, and sapphire, and emerald, and all
manner of precious stones there, that it shines with a brightness
superior to that of twelve thousand suns. Its streets are of the
clearest crystal, fringed with gold. In the seventh, or the highest of
the upper worlds, is the heaven where Brumha chiefly resides. This far
exceeds all the other heavens in point of beauty.

In the inferior worlds it is stated that there are one hundred thousand
hells. These are provided for such as have been great criminals. The
Hindoos say, that those who have not been very wicked, can make an
atonement for their sins in this world. Should they neglect to do this,
they must suffer for it in another birth. They believe in what is called
the transmigration of souls, or the passing of the soul, after death,
into another body. The soul must suffer in the next birth, if not
purified in this. Hence it is asserted, that if a man is a stealer of
gold from a Brahmin, he is doomed to have whitlows on his nails; if a
drinker of spirits, black teeth; if a false detractor, fetid breath; if
a stealer of grain, the defect of some limb; if a stealer of clothes,
leprosy; if a horse-stealer, lameness; if a stealer of a lamp, total
blindness. If he steals grain in the husk, he will be born a rat; if
yellow mixed metal, a gander; if money, a great stinging gnat; if fruit,
an ape; if the property of a priest, a crocodile.

Those persons whose sins are too great to be forgiven in this world,
must be sent to one of the hells to winch I have alluded. Weeping,
wailing, shrieking, they are dragged to the palace of _Yama_, the king
of those doleful regions. On arriving there, they behold him clothed
with terror, two hundred and forty miles in height, his eyes as large as
a lake of water, his voice as loud as thunder, the hairs of his body as
long as palm-trees, a flame of fire proceeding from his mouth, the noise
of his breath like the roaring of a tempest, and in his right hand a
terrific iron club. Sentence is passed, and the wretched beings are
doomed to receive punishment according to the nature of their crimes.
Some are made to tread on burning sands, or sharp-edged stones. Others
are rolled among thorns and spikes and putrefying flesh. Others are
dragged along the roughest places by cords passed through the tender
parts of the body. Some are attacked by jackals, tigers, and elephants.
Others are pierced with arrows, beaten with clubs, pricked with needles,
seared with hot irons, and tormented by flies and wasps. Some are
plunged into pans of liquid fire or boiling oil. Others are dashed from
lofty trees, many hundred miles high.

The torment of these hells does not continue for ever. After criminals
have been punished for a longer or shorter time, their souls return to
the earth again in the bodies of men. Here they may perform such good
acts as may raise them to one of the heavens of the gods; or commit
crimes, which may be the means of their being sent again to the abodes
of misery.

Things will go on in this way until the universe comes to an end, when
every thing is to disappear, and to be swallowed up in Brahm.

The Hindoos say, that it is now more than one hundred and fifty billions
of years since the world was created. After it has continued about one
hundred and fifty billions of years more, it is to come to an end. Then
Brumha is to die, and to be swallowed up with the universe in the sole
existing Brahm.

By what you have heard, you will learn that the Hindoos expect, by their
sufferings, to make an atonement for their sins. But there is no
atonement for sin, except through the blood of Jesus Christ. We must
come as lost sinners to our heavenly Father, confess our transgressions
to him, and plead for his forgiveness, only through the sufferings and
death which Christ endured. My dear children, have you done this? If
not, do it speedily, or the regions of the lost must soon be your
everlasting abode.




CHAPTER VIII.

HINDOO CASTES.


My dear Children--The people of India are divided into castes, as they
are called. Their sacred books declare, that after Brumha had peopled
the heavens above and the worlds below, he created the human race,
consisting of four classes or castes. From his mouth proceeded the
Brahmin caste. Those of this class are the highest and noblest beings on
earth, and hold the office of priests. At the same time there flowed
from his mouth the _Vedas_, or sacred books, of which the Brahmins are
the sole teachers To their fellow-men, they were to give such parts of
these books as they thought best. From Brumha's arm proceeded the
military caste. The business of this class is to defend their country
when attacked by enemies. From his breast proceeded the third caste,
consisting of farmers and merchants. From his feet, the member of
inferiority, proceeded the Sudras, or servile caste. Carpenters,
braziers, weavers, dyers, and the manual cultivators of the soil, are
included in this class.

Caste is not a civil, but a sacred institution. You must get some one
older than yourself to explain what this means. Caste is a difference of
_kind_. Hence, a man of one caste can never be changed into a man of
another caste, any more than a lion can be changed into a mole, or a
mole into a lion. Each caste has its laws, the breaking of which is
attended with great disgrace, and even degradation below all the other
castes. For instance, if a Brahmin should, by eating any forbidden
thing, break his caste, he would sink below all the other castes. He
would become an outcast, or pariah. For beneath the fourth, or lowest
caste, there is a class of people belonging to no caste--a class of
outcasts, held in the utmost abhorrence.

By the system of castes, the Hindoos have been divided into so many
selfish sections, each scowling on all the rest with feelings of hatred
and contempt. The spirit which upholds it, is similar to that spirit
which says, "Stand by thyself, for I am holier than thou," and, of
course, is nothing but pride. This is one of the greatest obstacles to
the spread of Christianity in this dark land, and for the exhibition of
which we were lately obliged to cut off many of the members of our
churches.

The Brahmins, in consequence of their being of the highest caste, and of
their having been taught from their infancy to regard all other classes
of men with the utmost contempt, are very proud. They make great efforts
to keep themselves pure, in their sense of the word, both without and
within. They are exceedingly afraid of being defiled by persons of other
castes. They have the utmost dread even of being touched by a pariah.
For them to eat with any of these pariahs, or to go into their houses,
or to drink water which they have drawn, or from vessels which they have
handled, is attended with the loss of their caste. A Brahmin who should
enter their houses, or permit them to enter his, would be cut off from
his caste, and could not be restored without many troublesome ceremonies
and great expense. The pariahs are considered to be so low, that if a
Brahmin were to touch them, even with the end of a long pole, he would
be looked upon as polluted In some districts they are obliged to make a
long circuit, when they perceive Brahmins in the way, that their breath
may not infect them, or their shadow fall upon them as they pass. In
some places their very approach is sufficient to pollute a whole
neighborhood.

The Brahmins carry their ideas of purity very far. Should a Sudra happen
to look upon the vessels in which they cook their food, they would be
considered as defiled. They can never touch any kind of leather or skin,
except the skin of the tiger and antelope. The most disagreeable of all
American fashions, in their eyes, is that of boots and gloves. They
rarely eat their food from plates; and when they do so, it is only at
home. They use the leaf of the plantain or other trees as a substitute.
To offer them any thing to eat on a metal or earthen plate which others
have used, would be considered a great affront. For the same reason,
they will neither use a spoon nor a fork when they eat; and they are
astonished that any one, after having applied them to their mouths, and
infected them with saliva, should repeat the act a second time. They
have a great abhorrence of the toothpick, if used a second time. When
they eat any thing dry, they throw it into their mouths, so that the
fingers may not approach the lips.

They do not drink as we do, by applying the cup to the lips. This would
be considered a gross impropriety. They pour the water into their
months. The reason why they do these things is, because they consider
the saliva to be the most filthy secretion that comes from the body. It
is on this account that no one is ever permitted to spit within doors.

The use of animal food they consider to be defiling. Not only will they
not eat animal food, but they will eat nothing that has the principle of
life in it. On this account, they cannot eat eggs of any kind. I was
once breaking an egg in my medicine-room at Panditeripo, while a Brahmin
was present. He told me that, under such circumstances, he could not
remain with me any longer. In his view, I was committing a great sin. To
kill an ox or a cow, is considered by them as a crime which can never be
atoned for, and to eat their flesh is a defilement which can never be
washed away. To kill a cow is, by _Hindoo_ law, punishable with death.

The touch of most animals, particularly that of the dog, defiles a
Brahmin. Should a dog touch them, they would be obliged instantly to
plunge into water, and wash their clothes, in order to get rid of such a
stain. Notwithstanding this, the dog is one of the gods worshipped by
the Hindoos.

The Hindoos consider themselves to be unclean if they have assisted at a
funeral. When the ceremony is over, they immediately plunge into water
for the sake of purification. Even the news of the death of a relative,
a hundred miles off, has the same effect. The person who hears such news
is considered unclean until he has bathed. In unison with this feeling,
a person is no sooner dead, than he is hastened away to be buried or
burned; for, until this is done, those in the house can neither eat nor
drink, nor go on with their occupations.

A Brahmin who is particular in his delicacy, must be careful what he
treads upon. He is obliged to wash his body or bathe, if he happens to
tread on a bone, or a broken pot, a bit of rag, or a leaf from which one
has been eating. He must also be careful where he sits down. Some
devotees always carry their seats with them, that is, a tiger or
antelope's skin, which are always held pure. Some are contented with a
mat. They may sit down on the ground without defilement, provided it has
been newly rubbed over with cow-dung. This last specific is used daily
to purify their houses from the defilement occasioned by comers, and
goers. When thus applied, diluted with water, it has unquestionably one
good effect. It completely destroys the fleas and other insects, with
which they are very much annoyed.

There is one thing more which I wish to mention. It is, that all the
high castes consider the use of intoxicating drinks to be defiling. I
hope that you, my dear children, will always have the same opinion, and
never touch them any sooner than you would touch arsenic or other
poisons.

A person may be restored to his caste, provided he has not committed an
unpardonable offence. This is done as follows. After he has gained the
consent of his relations to be restored he prostrates himself very
humbly before them, they being assembled for that purpose, and submits
to the blows or other punishment which they may think proper to inflict,
or pays the fine which they may have laid upon him. Then, after
shedding tears of sorrow, and making promises that, by his future
conduct, he will wipe away the stain of his expulsion from caste, he
makes the shaashtaangkum before the assembly. This being done, he is
declared fit to be restored to his tribe.

When a man has been expelled from his caste for some great offence,
those who restore him sometimes slightly burn his tongue with a piece of
gold made hot. They likewise apply to different parts of the body redhot
iron stamps, which leave marks that remain for ever. Sometimes they
compel the offender to walk on burning embers; and to complete the
purification, he must drink the punchakaryam, which literally means the
_five things_; these all come from the cow, and must be mixed together.
The first three of these I will mention, namely, the milk, butter, and
curds. The other two, for the sake of delicacy, I must not mention.
After the ceremony of punchakaryam is finished the person who has been
expelled from his caste must give a grand feast. This finishes all he
has to do, and he is then restored to favor.

There are certain offences which, when committed cut off all hope that
the offender will ever be restored to his caste. For instance, should he
eat the flesh of the cow, no presents which he might make, nor any fines
which lie might be disposed to pay, no, not even the punchakaryam
itself, would be of any avail for his restoration or purification.

I will make a remark here, which I might have made before. It is, that
in Christian countries, there is a spirit of pride which much resembles
the spirit of caste. Many are to be found who are very proud that they
have descended from rich and honorable _ancestors_, and who look down,
almost with disdain, upon those in other situations. I need hardly tell
you that this is a very wicked spirit, and entirely opposed to the
spirit of the Gospel. No matter what may be our high thoughts of
ourselves, we appear but very low in the sight of Him who created us. We
are all sinners, and, as such, are offensive in his sight. If we would
go to heaven, the first thing which we have to do, is to humble
ourselves for the pride of our hearts, and become as little children
before him. We must have that spirit of which the apostle speaks, when
he says, "Let each esteem others better than themselves." With a humble
spirit we may approach a holy God, with the assurance that he will, for
Christ's sake, forgive all our sins.

