rock, and rescuing nine of their fellow creatures from a watery grave,
and with the help of the crew in returning, landed all safe at the
light-house.

Happy Grace Darling! she needed no other reward than the joy of her own
heart and the warm thanks of those she had helped to deliver; but the
news of the heroic deed soon spread, and wondering and admiring
strangers came from far and near to see Grace and that lonely
light-house. Nay more, they showered gifts upon her, and a public
subscription was raised with a view of rewarding her bravery, to the
amount of seven hundred pounds. She continued to live with her parents
on their barren isles, finding happiness in her simple duties and in
administering to their comfort, until her death, which took place little
more than three years after the wreck of the Forfarshire steamer.




WATERSPOUTS.

These wonderful appearances are caused by the action of currents of wind
meeting in the atmosphere from different quarters. They are sometimes
seen on land, but much more frequently at sea, where they are very
dangerous visitors. I will try to give you some idea of what they are,
and perhaps the picture may help you a little. I dare say you have often
noticed little eddies of wind whirling up dust and leaves, or any light
substances which happened to be in the way; when these occur on a larger
scale they are called whirlwinds.

[Illustration: WATERSPOUTS.]

Now if a cloud happens to be exactly in the point where two such furious
currents of wind meet, it is turned round and round by them with great
speed and is condensed into the form of a cone; this whirling motion
drives from the centre of the cloud all the particles contained in it,
producing what is called a vacuum, or empty space, into which the water
or any thing else lying beneath it has an irresistible tendency to rush.
Underneath the dense impending cloud, the sea becomes violently
agitated, and the waves dart rapidly towards the centre of the troubled
mass of water: on reaching it they disperse in vapor, and rise, whirling
in a spiral direction towards the cloud. The descending and ascending
columns unite, the whole presenting the appearance of a hollow cylinder,
or tube of glass, empty within. This, Maltebrun tells us, and he further
adds, "it glides over the sea without any wind being felt; indeed
several have been seen at once, pursuing different directions. When the
cloud and the marine base of the waterspout move with equal velocity,
the lower cone is often seen to incline sideways, or even to bend, and
finally to burst in pieces. A noise is then heard like the noise of a
cataract falling in a deep valley. Lightning frequently issues from the
very bosom of the waterspout, particularly when it breaks; but no
thunder is ever heard."

Sailors, to prevent the danger which would arise from coming in contact
with one of these tremendous columns, discharge a cannon into it: the
ball passing through it breaks the watery cylinder, and causes it to
burst, just as a touch causes your beautiful soap-bubbles to vanish, and
turn to water again. These waterspouts, at sea, generally occur between
the tropics, and I believe frequently after a calm, such as the poet
has described in the following lines:

  "Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down,
    'Twas sad as sad could be,
  And we did speak only to break
    The silence of the sea!

  "All in a hot and copper sky,
    The bloody sun at noon,
  Right up above the mast did stand.
    No bigger than the moon.

  "Day after day, day after day,
    We stuck, nor breath, nor motion;
  As idle as a painted ship
    Upon a painted ocean.

  "Water, water, every where,
    And all the boards did shrink;
  Water, water, every where
    And not a drop to drink!"

Happily "dead calms" do not generally last so long as to lead to any
serious result. Sailors have a superstitious and foolish belief that
whistling in a calm will bring up a breeze, and they do this in a
drawling, beseeching tone, on some prominent part of the vessel. Poor
fellows! what a pity that their thoughts should not more frequently be
directed to Him "who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand,
and meted out heaven with a span," and whose works and wonders in the
deep "they that go down to the sea in ships" have such abundant
opportunity for observing.




HEAVING THE LEAD.


Here we have a sailor in the act of heaving the lead, or taking
soundings, which is a thing extremely necessary to be done when a ship
is approaching the shore, as there is great danger of her running on a
sand-bank or striking on a sunken rock. I will now tell you how it is
managed. A sailor gets over the ship's side, as you see in the
engraving, and takes his station in what are called "the chains;" he
holds in his hand a coil of rope, with the length in fathoms marked upon
it; this rope has a mass of lead attached to the end of it. At the
bottom of the lead, is a hollow place, into which a piece of tallow
candle is stuck, which brings up distinguishing marks from the bottom of
the sea, such as small shells, sand, or mud, adhering to it. If the
tallow be only indented it is supposed to have fallen on bare rocks. A
correct account of the soundings is entered in the logbook; this book
contains a description of the ship's course, the direction of the wind,
and other circumstances, during every hour of each day and night. Having
arranged the rope so as to allow it to fall freely when cast, the sailor
throws the lead forward into the water, giving rope sufficient to allow
it to touch the bottom; then with a sudden jerk, such as long practice
alone can enable him to give, he raises the weight, and after examining
the mark on the rope made by the water, calls out lustily, so that all
forward can hear, "By the mark seven," or "By the deep nine," according
to the case, or whatever the number of fathoms may be. The lead-line is
marked into lengths of six feet, called fathoms, by knots, or pieces of
leather, or old sail-cloth. In narrow or intricate channels, it is
sometimes needful to place a man in the chains on each side of the ship,
as the depth will vary a fathom or more even in the breadth of the
vessel, and it is of great consequence that the leadsmen give the depth
correctly, as a wrong report might cause the ship to run aground. The
time that the leadsman is employed in taking soundings is often a period
of deep anxiety to the crew and passengers, especially if the vessel be
near an unknown coast. When the decrease in the number of fathoms is
sudden, the captain knows that danger is near, and quickly gives orders
to alter the ship's course: the sailors instantly obey his directions;
but sometimes not all their activity and energy can save the vessel; she
strikes and becomes a wreck.

Turn to the 27th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles in your Bible, and
you will there read the deeply interesting account of Paul's shipwreck
on the island Melita. Life has often been compared to a voyage--and
aptly so.

You will find that you, like the mariner, are exposed to many dangers,
and that you are never for one moment safe in trusting to your own skill
to guide your little bark. In watchfulness and prayer, look to your
Heavenly Pilot for directions under every circumstance, often examining
your own heart, as the seaman heaves the lead in danger. Then will you
be safely guided through storms and calms, amid rocks and shoals, and
reach at last the blessed haven of eternal rest and peace.




THE BALLOON AT SEA.


A balloon is a hollow globe, made of silk, rendered air-tight by a
coating of gum and resin, and enclosed within a strong network. When
filled with gas it is so much lighter than the air which surrounds us,
that it will rise with heavier bodies suspended to it. In a sort of car
or boat attached, men, who are called "aeronauts," have performed
journeys through the air.

The balloon was invented by a Frenchman named Montgolfier. Great
expectations were at first entertained of this art of sailing through
the air, but as yet it has not proved of much practical use. Many
disasters have at different times befallen balloon voyagers.

Many years ago, Major Mooney ascended in his balloon from Norwich,
expecting from the direction of the wind that he might descend near
Ipswich; but when he had risen about one mile from the earth, a violent
current carried him and his balloon towards Yarmouth. The balloon fell
on the sea, about nine miles from land. The Major supported himself for
some time in the water, by holding firmly to the balloon, and was at
last rescued from his dangerous situation by the crew of a cutter which
was cruising on the coast.

This was a disastrous voyage, but I think it will interest you to hear
of a more successful one, performed by three gentlemen, one of whom,
Mr. Green, has introduced some great improvements in the art of filling
and guiding balloons. These gentlemen left the earth in the car of a
very large balloon, at half-past one o'clock, on Monday, the 7th of
November, 1836, intending to proceed to some point on the continent of
Europe not very distant from Paris. They were provided with provisions
for a fortnight; these, with sand-bags for ballast, cordage, and all
needful apparatus for such a journey were placed in the bottom of the
car, while all around hung cloaks, carpet bags, barrels of wood and
copper, barometers, telescopes, lamps, spirit-flasks, coffee-warmers,
&c, for you know it would be impossible for them afterwards to supply
any thing which might have been forgotten.

Thus duly furnished, the balloon was rapidly borne away by a moderate
breeze over the fertile fields of Kent to Dover. It was forty-eight
minutes past four when the first sound of the waves on the sea-beach
broke on the voyagers' ears: the sun was sinking below the horizon, and
as the balloon was rapidly borne into the region of mist which hung over
the ocean, we must suppose something of dread and uncertainty attended
the adventurer's minds. Scarcely, however, had they completed some
arrangements, intended to render the balloon more buoyant in the heavy
atmosphere, than again the sound of waves surprised them, and below were
seen glittering the well-known lights of Calais and the neighboring
shores. Passing over Calais the aeronauts lowered a blue-light to give
notice of their presence, but could not tell whether the inhabitants
perceived it. By this time night had completely closed in, and still the
silken ball pursued its course. So long as lights were burning in the
towns and villages which it passed in rapid succession, the solitary
voyagers looked down on the scene with delight; sometimes they could
even catch the hum of the yet busy multitude, or the bark of a
watch-dog; but midnight came, and the world was hushed in sleep.

As soon as the people were again stirring below, the guide-rope was
hauled into the balloon, and the grappling-iron lowered; and after
sundry difficulties from the danger of getting entangled in a wood, and
grievously affrighting two ladies, who stood awhile petrified with
amazement at the unusual apparition, the voyagers succeeded in alighting
in a grassy valley, about six miles from the town of Weilburg, in the
Duchy of Nassau. Here every attention and accommodation was afforded
them, and thus ended this remarkable journey, an extent of about five
hundred British miles having been passed over in the space of eighteen
hours.




AN ADVENTURE OF PAUL JONES.


John Paul Jones was a famous naval commander in the service of the
United States, during the revolutionary war. He was a native of
Scotland, but having come to Virginia and settled before the war broke
out, he joined the patriots as soon as hostilities commenced, and
rendered the most important services through the whole of the long and
arduous contest, by which our independence was acquired.

The following account of one of his adventures is given by his
biographer.

Eager to retaliate upon Britain for some predatory exploits of her
sailors on the American coast, and exasperated by the resolution which
the English government had taken, to treat all the supporters of
independence as traitors and rebels, Captain Paul Jones entered the
Irish Channel, and approaching his native shores, not as a friend, but
as a determined enemy. On the night of the 22d of April, 1778, he came
to anchor in the Solway Firth, almost within sight of the trees which
sheltered the house in which he first drew the breath of life.

Early next morning, he rowed for the English coast, at the head of
thirty-one volunteers, in two boats, with the intention of destroying
the shipping, about two hundred sail, which lay in the harbor of
Whitehaven.

In this daring attempt he would probably have succeeded without
difficulty, had not the strength of the opposing tide retarded his
progress so much, that day began to dawn before he could gain the shore.
He despatched the smaller of the two boats to the north of the port to
set fire to the vessels, whilst he led the remainder of the party to the
more hazardous duty of securing the fort, which was situated on a hill
to the south. It was a cold morning, and the sentinels little aware that
an enemy was so near, had retired into the guard-room for warmth,
affording Jones an opportunity to take them by surprise, of which he did
not fail to avail himself. Climbing over the shoulders of the tallest of
his men, he crept silently through one of the embrasures and was
instantly followed by the rest. Their first care was to make fast the
door of the guard-room, and their next to spike the cannon, thirty-six
in number. Having effected this without bloodshed, they proceeded to
join the detachment which had been sent to the north; and finding that a
false alarm had deterred them from executing their orders, Jones
instantly proceeded to set fire to the vessels within his reach. By this
time, however, the inhabitants were roused, and the invaders were
obliged to retreat, leaving three ships in flames, of which one alone
was destroyed.

On the same day with this adventure, another memorable occurrence took
place, which contributed, for a time, to add greatly to the odium which
the first had brought on his name in Britain, but which, in the end,
enabled him to prove that he was possessed of the most heroic qualities.
In cruising off the coast of Galloway, it occurred to him, that, if he
could get into his power a man of high rank and influence in the state,
he should able, by retaining him as a hostage, to ensure to the American
prisoners of war more lenient treatment than was threatened by the
British government. Knowing that the Earl of Selkirk possessed a seat at
St. Mary's Isle, a beautiful peninsula at the mouth of the Dee, and
being ill-informed with regard to the political connections of that
nobleman, he destined him for the subject of his experiment. With that
view, he landed on the Isle, about noon, with two officers and a few
men; but, before they had proceeded far, he learned that his lordship
was from home. Finding his object frustrated, he now wished to return;
but his crew were not so easily satisfied. Their object was plunder; and
as they consisted of men in a very imperfect state of discipline, and
with whom it would have been dangerous to contend, he allowed them to
proceed. He exacted from them, however, a promise that they should be
guilty of no violence; that the men should not enter the house, and that
the officers, after having made their demands, should accept what might
be put into their hands without scrutiny. These conditions were
punctually obeyed. The greater part of the Selkirk plate was carried off
in triumph by the crew, and Paul Jones was, for a time, stigmatized as a
freebooter; but he nobly vindicated his character, by taking the
earliest opportunity of purchasing the whole of it, out of his own
private funds, and remitting it safe to its original owner, without
accepting the smallest remuneration. National prejudice has
misrepresented this transaction; and in order to excite the popular
indignation against Jones, it has been common to state, that this
attempt on the person, and as it was supposed the property, of Lord
Selkirk, was aggravated by ingratitude, his father having eaten of that
nobleman's bread. Nothing can be more false. Neither Mr. Paul, nor any
of his kindred, ever was in the earl's employ, or had ever the most
distant connection with his lordship or his family; and in a
correspondence which took place between our hero and Lady Selkirk,
relative to the restitution of the plate, a most honorable testimony was
gratefully paid by the latter to the captain's character.

[Illustration; NELSON SAVED BY HIS COXSWAIN.]




ADMIRAL NELSON.


Nelson lost the sight of one eye at the siege of Calvi, by a shot
driving the sand and gravel into it, and he lost his arm by a shot in an
expedition against Teneriffe; but the most dangerous of his exploits
were, boarding the battery at San Bartolomeo, boarding the San Joseph,
the boat action in the Bay of Cadiz, and the famous battles of the Nile
and Trafalgar. Of these, perhaps, the boat action during the blockade of
Cadiz was the most severe. While making an attempt against the Spanish
gunboats, he was attacked by D. Miguel Tregayen, in an armed launch,
carrying twenty-six men; fearful odds against his ten bargemen, captain,
and coxswain. Eighteen Spaniards were killed, the rest wounded, and the
launch captured.

[Illustration: ADMIRAL NELSON.]

The Spaniards were more than two to one, and yet he beat them; but it
was a hard and desperate struggle, hand to hand and blade to blade.
Twice did John Sykes, the coxswain, save Nelson's life, by parrying off
blows that would have destroyed him, and once did he interpose his head
to receive the blow of a Spanish sabre; but he would willingly have died
for his admiral.

Poor Sykes was wounded badly, but not killed.

When Nelson's health was established after the loss of his arm, he sent
to the minister of St. George's, Hanover Square, the following desire to
offer up his thanksgiving:--"An officer desires to return thanks to
Almighty God for his perfect recovery from a severe wound, and also for
the many mercies bestowed on him." Thus showing that he was humble
enough to be thankful to God, and continued so in the midst of all his
successes.

The following is an instance of his coolness in the hour of danger. The
late Lieutenant-General the Hon. Sir William Stewart, as
lieutenant-colonel of the rifle-brigade, embarked to do duty in the
fleet which was led by Sir Hyde Parker and Nelson, to the attack of
Copenhagen in 1801. "I was," says he, "with Lord Nelson when he wrote
the note to the Crown Prince of Denmark, proposing terms of arrangement.
A cannon ball struck off the head of the boy who was crossing the cabin
with the light to seal it. "Bring another candle," said his lordship. I
observed, that I thought it might very well be sent as it was, for it
would not be expected that the usual forms could be observed at such a
moment. "That is the very thing I should wish to avoid, Colonel,"
replied he, "for if the least appearance of precipitation were
perceptible in the manner of sending this note, it might spoil all."
Another candle being now brought, his lordship sealed the letter,
carefully enclosed in an envelope, with a seal bearing his coat of arms
and coronet, and delivered it to the officer in waiting to receive it.
It is said that the moment was a critical one, and that Lord Nelson's
note decided the event."

A seaman of the name of Hewson, who had served under Nelson, was working
as a caster in a manufactory at Birmingham when Nelson visited that
place. Among other manufactories, the admiral paid a visit to that where
Hewson was at work as a brass-founder; and though no employment
disfigures a workman more with smoke and dust than the process of
casting, the quick eye of Nelson recognized in the caster an old
associate. "What, Hewson, my lad," said he, "are you here?" Hewson laid
hold of the hair that hung over his forehead, and making an awkward bow,
replied, "Yes, your honor." "Why, how comes this about! You and I are
old acquaintances; you were with me in the Captain when I boarded the
San Joseph, were you not?" Hewson again laid hold of of his hair, and
bowing, replied, "Yes, your honor." "I remember you well," said Nelson;
"you were one of the cleverest fellows about the vessel! If any thing
was to be done, Hewson was the lad to do. Why, what do you here, working
like a negro? Take this," throwing him money, "and wash the dust down
your throat."

Hewson withdrew to a neighboring alehouse, boasting of the character the
admiral had given him. Month after month passed away, but Hewson
returned not--his shop-tools were abandoned, and no one could account
for his absence. At length a stripling, in a sailor's jacket, entered
the manufactory and said, "he was come to settle his father's affairs."
This was no other than Hewson's son, from whose account it appeared,
that when Hewson, somewhat elevated with liquor, but more with the
praise the admiral had bestowed on him, quitted Birmingham, he walked
his way down to Portsmouth, entered once more on board Lord Nelson's
ship, and fell with him in the battle of Trafalgar.

At the battle of Trafalgar, Collingwood, in the Royal Sovereign, led the
lee-line of fourteen ships, Nelson, in the Victory, was at the head of
the weather-line, consisting of fourteen ships. Besides these there were
four frigates.

The ships of France and Spain, opposed to the British, were in number
thirty-three, with seven large frigates. The odds were great against the
English, but the superior tactics, and well-known bravery of Nelson,
clothed him with power, that more than made up the difference. When
every thing was prepared for the engagement, Nelson retired into his
cabin alone, and wrote down the following prayer.

"May the great God, whom I worship grant to my country, and for the
benefit of Europe in general, a great and glorious victory, and may no
misconduct in any one tarnish it, and may humanity after victory, be the
predominant feature in the British fleet! For myself, individually, I
commit my life to Him that made me; and may his blessing alight on my
endeavors for serving my country faithfully! To him I resign myself, and
the just cause which is entrusted to me to defend. Amen! Amen! Amen!"

He wore on the day of the battle his admiral's frock coat, and on his
left breast, over his heart, four stars of the orders of honor, which
had been conferred upon him. Those around thought it was dangerous to
wear his stars, lest he should be too plainly seen by the enemy, but
they were afraid to tell him so, because he had said, "In honor I gained
them, and in honor I will die with them."

The effect produced by the signal given by Lord Nelson, "England expects
every man to do his duty!" was wonderful; it ran from ship to ship,
from man to man, from heart to heart, like a train of gunpowder.
