forsook their society, repaired for safety to towns and cities, there
built his habitation and kept his residence.

One day as he was skimming along the streets he happened to see a large
parcel of those very Birds imprisoned in a cage on the shoulders of a
bird-catcher.

"Unhappy wretches," said he.  "You now feel punishment for your former
neglect; but those who, having no foresight of their own, despise the
wholesome admonition of their friends, deserve the mischief which their
own obstinacy or negligence brings upon their heads."



The Fox and the Crow

A Fox once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese in its beak and
settle on a branch of a tree.  "That's for me, as I am a Fox," said
Master Reynard, and he walked up to the foot of the tree.  "Good-day,
Mistress Crow," he cried.  "How well you are looking to-day; how glossy
your feathers, how bright your eye.  I feel sure your voice must
surpass that of other birds, just as your figure does; let me hear but
one song from you that I may greet you as the Queen of Birds."

The Crow lifted up her head and began to caw her best, but the moment
she opened her mouth the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be
snapped up by Master Fox.  "That will do," said he.  "That was all I
wanted.  In exchange for your cheese I will give you a piece of advice
for the future--Do not trust flatterers!"



The Dog and His Shadow

A Dog, bearing in his mouth a piece of meat that he had stolen, was
once crossing a smooth stream by means of a plank.  Looking into the
still, clear water, he saw what he took to be another dog as big as
himself, carrying another piece of meat.

Snapping greedily to get this as well, he let go the meat that he
already had, and it fell to the bottom of the stream.



The Ass and His Master

A Diligent Ass, already loaded beyond his strength by a severe Master
whom he had long served, and who kept him on very short commons,
happened one day in his old age to be oppressed with a more than
ordinary burden of earthenware.  His strength being much impaired, and
the road steep and uneven, he unfortunately made a misstep, and, unable
to recover himself, fell down and broke all the vessels to pieces.  His
Master, transported with rage, began to beat him most unmercifully,
against whom the poor Ass, lifting up his head as he lay on the ground,
thus strongly remonstrated:

"Unfeeling wretch!  To thine own avaricious cruelty in first pinching
me on food, and then loading me beyond my strength, thou owest the
misfortune which thou so unjustly imputest to me."



The Wolf and the Crane

A Wolf once devoured his prey so ravenously that a bone stuck in his
throat, giving him great pain.  He ran howling up and down in his
suffering and offered to reward handsomely any one who would pull the
bone out.

A Crane, moved by pity as well as by the prospect of the money,
undertook the dangerous task, and having removed the bone, asked for
the promised reward.

"Reward!" cried the Wolf; "pray, you greedy fellow, what greater reward
can you possibly require?  You have had your head in my mouth, and
instead of biting it off I have let you pull it out unharmed.  Get away
with you, and don't come again within reach of my paw."



The Hares and the Frogs

The Hares once took serious counsel among themselves whether death
itself would not be preferable to their miserable condition.  "What a
sad state is ours," they said, "never to eat in comfort, to sleep ever
in fear, to be startled by a shadow, and to fly with beating heart at
the rustling of the leaves.  Better death by far," and off they went
accordingly to drown themselves in a neighbouring lake.

Some scores of Frogs, who were enjoying the moonlight on the bank,
scared at the approach of the Hares, jumped into the water.  The splash
awoke fresh fears in the breasts of the timid Hares, and they came to a
full stop in their flight.

Seeing this, one wise old fellow among them cried: "Hold, brothers!  It
seems that, weak and fearful as we are, beings exist that are more weak
and fearful still.  Why, then, should we seek to die?  Let us rather
make the best of our ills and learn to bear them as we should."



The Invalid Lion

A Lion, who had grown too old and feeble to go out and hunt for prey,
could hardly find enough food to keep him from starving.  But at last
he thought of a plan for bringing the game within his reach.

He kept quite still in his den and made believe that he was very ill.
When the other animals heard of his distress, they came, one by one, to
look at him and ask him how he felt.  No sooner were they within his
reach, however, than he seized upon them and ate them up.

After a good many beasts had lost their lives in this way a Fox came
along.

"How do you feel to-day, friend Lion?" he asked, taking care to stand
at a safe distance from the den.

"I am very ill," answered the Lion.  "Won't you come inside a little
while?  It does me a great deal of good to see my kind friends."

"Thank you," said the Fox; "but I notice that all the tracks point
toward your den and none point away from it," and so saying, he trotted
merrily away.



The Travellers and the Bear

Two Men, about to journey through a forest, agreed to stand by each
other in any dangers that might befall.  They had not gone far before a
savage Bear rushed out from a thicket and stood in their path.

One of the Travellers, a light, nimble fellow, climbed up into a tree.
The other fell flat on his face and held his breath.

The Bear came up and smelled at him, and, taking him for dead, went off
again into the wood.  The man in the tree then came down, and,
rejoining his companion, asked him, with a mischievous smile, what was
the wonderful secret that the Bear had whispered into his ear,

"Why," replied the other sulkily, "he told me to take care for the
future and not to put any confidence in such cowardly rascals as you
are!"



The Fox Without a Tail

A Fox was once caught in a trap by his tail, and in order to get away
was forced to leave it behind him.  Knowing that without a tail he
would be a laughing-stock for all his fellows, he resolved to try to
induce them to part with theirs.  At the next assembly of Foxes,
therefore, he made a speech on the unprofitableness of tails in
general, and the inconvenience of a Fox's tail in particular, adding
that he had never felt so easy as since he had given up his own.

When he had sat down, a sly old fellow rose, and waving his long brush
with a graceful air, said, with a sneer, that if, like the last
speaker, he had been so unfortunate as to lose his tail, nothing
further would have been needed to convince him; but till such an
accident should happen, he should certainly vote in favour of tails.



The Crab and Its Mother

One fine day two Crabs came out from their home to take a stroll on the
sand.  "Child," said the mother, "you are walking very ungracefully.
You should accustom yourself to walking straight forward without
twisting from side to side."

"Pray, mother," said the young one, "do but set the example yourself,
and I will follow you!"



The Jackdaw with Borrowed Plumes

A Jackdaw, having dressed himself in feathers which had fallen from
some Peacocks, strutted about in the company of those birds and tried
to pass himself off as one of them.

They soon found him out, however, and pulled their plumes from him so
roughly, and in other ways so battered him, that he would have been
glad to rejoin his humble fellows, but they, in their turn, would have
nothing to do with him, and driving him from their society, told him to
remember that it is not only fine feathers that make fine birds.



The Farmer and His Dog

A Farmer who had just stepped into the field to close a gap in one of
his fences found on his return the cradle, where he had left his only
child asleep, turned upside down, the clothes all torn and bloody, and
his Dog lying near it besmeared also with blood.  Convinced at once
that the creature had destroyed his child, he instantly dashed out its
brains with the hatchet in his hand; when, turning up the cradle, he
found the child unhurt and an enormous serpent lying dead on the floor,
killed by the faithful Dog, whose courage and fidelity in preserving
the life of his son deserved another kind of reward.

These affecting circumstances afforded him a striking lesson upon how
dangerous it is hastily to give way to the blind impulse of a sudden
passion.



The Fox and the Countryman

A Fox, having been hunted hard and chased a long way, saw a Countryman
at work in a wood and begged his assistance to some hiding-place.  The
man said he might go into his cottage, which was close by.

He was no sooner in than the huntsmen came up.  "Have you seen a Fox
pass this way?" said they.  The Countryman said "No," but pointed at
the same time toward the place where the Fox lay.  The huntsmen did not
take the hint, however, and made off again at full speed.

The Fox, who had seen all that took place through a chink in the wall,
thereupon came out and was walking away without a word.

"Why, how now!" said the Countryman, "haven't you the manners to thank
your host before you go?"

"Nay, nay," said the Fox; "if you had been as honest with your finger
as you were with your tongue, I shouldn't have gone without saying
good-bye."



Belling the Cat

A certain Cat that lived in a large country house was so vigilant and
active in the performance of her duties that the Mice, finding their
numbers grievously thinned, held a council with closed doors to
consider what they had best do.

Many plans had been started and dismissed, when a young Mouse, rising
and catching the eye of the President, said that he had a proposal to
make that he was sure must meet with the approval of all.  "If," said
he, "the Cat should wear around her neck a little bell, every step she
took would make it tinkle; then, ever forewarned of her approach, we
should have time to reach our holes.  By this simple means we should
live in safety and defy her power."

The speaker resumed his seat with a complacent air, and a murmur of
applause arose from the audience.

An old gray Mouse, with a merry twinkle in his eye, now got up and said
that the plan of the last speaker was an admirable one, but he feared
it had one drawback.  He had not told them who should put the bell
around the Cat's neck!



The Old Woman and Her Maids

A certain Old Woman had several Maids, whom she used to call to their
work every morning at the crowing of the Cock.

The Maids, finding it grievous to have their sweet sleep disturbed so
early, killed the Cock, thinking that when he was quiet they might
enjoy their warm beds a little longer.

The Old Woman, however, vexed at the loss of the Cock, and suspecting
them to be concerned in his death, from that time made them rise soon
after midnight!



The Dog in the Manger

There was once a Dog who lay all day long in a manger where there was
plenty of hay.  It happened one day that a Horse, a Cow, a Sheep, and a
Goat came one by one and wanted to eat the hay.  The Dog growled at
them and would not let them have so much as a mouthful.  Then an Ox
came and looked in, but the Dog growled at him also.

"You selfish fellow," said the Ox; "you cannot eat the hay.  Why do you
want to keep it all to yourself?"



The Old Man and His Sons

An old Man had many Sons, who were always falling out with one another.
He had often exhorted them to live together in harmony, but without
result.

One day he called them around him and, producing a bundle of sticks,
bade them each in turn to break it across.  Each put forth all his
strength, but the bundle still resisted their efforts.

Then, cutting the cord which bound the sticks together, he told his
Sons to break them separately.  This was done with the greatest ease.

"See, my Sons," exclaimed he, "the power of unity!  Bound together by
brotherly love, you may defy almost every mortal ill; divided, you will
fall a prey to your enemies."



Hercules and the Wagoner

As a Wagoner was driving his wain through a miry lane, the wheels stuck
fast in the clay and the Horses could get on no farther.  The Man
immediately dropped on his knees and began crying and praying with all
his might to Hercules to come and help him.

"Lazy fellow!" cried Hercules, "get up and stir yourself.  Whip your
Horses stoutly, and put your shoulder to the wheel.  If you want my
help then, you shall have it."



The Goose with the Golden Eggs

One day a poor countryman going to the nest of his Goose found there a
golden egg all yellow and glittering.  When he took it up it felt as
heavy as lead and he was minded to throw it away, because he thought a
trick had been played on him.

On second thoughts, he took it home, however, and soon found to his
delight that it was an egg of pure gold.  Every morning the same thing
occurred, and he soon became prosperous by selling his eggs.

As he grew rich he grew greedy; and thinking to get at once all the
gold the Goose could give, he killed it and opened it only to
find--nothing!



The Frogs Desiring a King

The Frogs, living an easy, free sort of life among the lakes and ponds,
once prayed Jupiter to send them a King.

Jove, being at that time in a merry mood, threw them a Log, saying, as
he did so, "There, then, is a King for you."

Awed by the splash, the Frogs watched their King in fear and trembling,
till at last, encouraged by his stillness, one more daring than the
rest jumped upon the shoulder of the monarch.  Soon, many others
followed his example, and made merry on the back of their unresisting
King.  Speedily tiring of such a torpid ruler, they again petitioned
