Veronica had persuaded her mother to let her stay longer in the Industrial
School than was usual with the young girls of the neighborhood. Even up to
the day of her confirmation, she had taken sewing lessons twice from a
most accomplished teacher. A short time before Easter, the teacher had
assured Gertrude that Veronica had made such extraordinary progress, that
she was already prepared to teach, and that she had completed the course
taught at that school, and could learn no more there. Veronica certainly
deserved farther training and the teacher suggested that it would be well
worth while for her to take lessons in embroidery of lame Sabina in
Fohrensee. She would then be sure of a position as a teacher, as high as
her utmost ambition could desire.

It had always been Gertrude's plan to have Veronica learn to work at the
saddler's business, as there is a good deal of the fine work which is
suitable for women, and which it needs a woman's hand to carry out. She
hoped that in this way her children could always remain together and with
her. The fine embroidery for which lame Sabina was noted, it did not seem
to her at all necessary for Veronica to learn, but she was willing to
leave the decision to her. As soon as Veronica heard of this new work to
be learned, she was eager to begin upon it, and she left her mother no
peace until she extracted from her the promise that directly after the
confirmation, this new undertaking should be entered upon.

A few days after Easter Sunday, Veronica went to take her first lesson. It
was very early in the morning when she started to go down to Fohrensee; so
early that people were just beginning to open their windows, and only here
and there a sleepy face was to be seen at the door of a house. She had to
go early in order to get in a good day's work, for she was to come home at
night, and it was an hour's walk each way. She knew well the old cottage
with the beautiful carnations illuminating its windows, which was the home
of lame Sabina. The windows were already open, and the door also. She
entered and her new life began.

Up in Tannenegg, Dietrich sat at his work, singing and whistling merrily.
His mother, busy with her household affairs went hither and thither about
the house, from sitting room to kitchen, and then with the feeding-bucket,
out on the grass plat before the house, where a flock of handsome fowl
were pecking about. All was still quiet in the neighboring houses, but
over by the well stood the never-idle Judith, beating and turning her
clothes as she washed them. Along the road with uncertain steps came the
old sexton, swinging the big church-keys in his hand; he had been ringing
the early morning peal. As he lifted his cap a little to salute Judith at
the well, she called out,

"Good day, neighbor, I was just thinking it would be a good exchange if
the old folks were to lie abed at this hour and let the young ones pull
the bell rope."

"Well, some one must be doing it," said the other, and passed on his way.

Judith had been busy at her washing full two hours longer, when in the
doorway of the sexton's house appeared a young fellow, whose figure,
almost as broad as it was long, filled the opening, with scarce anything
to spare. He tried to yawn, but there was not room enough to stretch his
arms, so he stepped outside for the purpose, and there he gaped so
heartily that all the inside of his big mouth and throat was distinctly
visible.

"There's nothing in it, Blasi! I've had a good look at it," cried Judith.
"If you had been here two hours ago, you might have seen a sight. A girl
with a whole mouthful of gold! What do you say to that?"

Blasi caught at this, and brought his jaws together with a snap.

"What! full of gold?" he exclaimed, and opened his sleepy eyes to their
utmost extent. "Why doesn't the foolish thing carry it in her pocket?
Where does she come from?"

"That's no concern of yours. You will never come up with her," replied
Judith.

"Tell me, for all that," urged Blasi, coming toward Judith, "I can go
after her, and I've no doubt I shall come up with her, and then there's no
telling what may happen. Come, where did she go, now? Do you know her
name?"

"Her name is Early Morn, Blasi," said Judith pleasantly. "Did you never
hear the saying, 'There's gold in the mouth of the early morn.'"

Blasi made a wry face and began in an angry tone,

"There's nothing very clever in that"--but just then he remembered that
when he came out of the house he had intended to come over and say
something quite different to Judith; so he changed his tone quickly, and
said,

"Can you lend me a franc or two; I have just time to do a little business
before eleven o'clock, and then I must be back to ring the noon bell; I
must try to help father, a little."

"No, no, Blasi, I have no francs for you," said Judith decidedly. "It
wants three hours yet of being eleven o'clock. Use those big arms of
yours, and they'll bring you francs enough." And so saying, she lifted her
clothes-basket on her head, and walked away.

Blasi stood looking after her, a moment, then he sauntered off, with both
hands in his pockets, up the road towards, the shoemaker's old house.
There sat Jost before the door, hammering away at something as if for dear
life. Blasi drew near, and stood watching the busy hands of his friend,
who presently cried out angrily,

"So it is holiday with you, is it, you lazy-bones? It is maddening to see
one fellow go wandering about with his hands in his pockets, while another
has to sit on his three-legged stool, hammering away at the soles of
these--these--these Tanneneggers' boots. To-morrow is Cherry-festival in
Fohrensee, and every one is going; and I, I must get their boots ready! I
wish a thunder-storm would come and wash this away, and that, and the
whole lot of 'em!" As he spoke he tossed away first the mended boots, then
the hammer, and last of all the three-legged stool, away, as far as he
could throw them, down into the meadow. He was white with rage.

"What stuff!" said Blasi, dryly. "You are paid for your cobbling; you are
better off than I am. I haven't a rap, and am in debt besides. I was going
to ask you if you couldn't lend me a franc. You have money, I know."

"Oh yes, you sleepy-head! It's very likely I have money for you, when I'm
in such need of it myself! Go ask Dietrich; he has his pockets full, and a
big heap besides. But don't be such a fool as to ask him for just one mean
little franc; ask for five. I'll use two or three of them; tell him you'll
pay him again in a week."

Blasi seemed rather undecided.

"I should have gone to him long ago," he said, "but his mother is always
about, and she looks at a fellow as a bird does when somebody is trying to
rob her nest. I'm afraid of her."

"Poh! it's all right enough to borrow a little money if you're going to
pay it back again. Don't be a fool! Go along!" and Jost enforced his
advise with an emphatic shove that sent Blasi rolling along much faster
than he wished to go. He grumbled a little at this unpleasant style of
progression, and muttered between his teeth,

"He's no right to treat me so; I'm as good as he is, any day."

When he reached Gertrude's garden, he stood still and looked over the
hedge. Dietrich's mother was there, planting her vegetable bed. He
sauntered back and forth for awhile, and when he saw her go to the other
corner of the garden, he thought he could now get without being seen, into
the room where he heard Dietrich whistling at his work. He went round the
garden, and was just going in at the back gate, when he came plump against
Gertrude. He went by quickly as if he had had no idea of going in; and
then hung about watching his chance, but as time did not stand still
while he waited, it was bye-and-bye eleven o'clock, and he had to go off
to ring the noon bell.

In the afternoon, neighbor Judith was hoeing in her little garden. Blasi
stood hesitating in his door-way, and then came out and stood watching her
at her work.

"I am always surprised, Blasi," said Judith, looking up from her work, "to
see you in company with a fellow, who steals your money from your pockets,
before you know it is there. I would not have anything to do with such a
one."

"What? who?" asked Blasi, fumbling in his empty pockets. "Who picks my
pockets? Who are you talking about? I know I did have some; I wish you
would tell me the thief."

"I'll tell no tales," said Judith, working away.

"Bah! tell me, won't you? A fellow can't defend himself unless he knows
who is attacking him," growled Blasi. "You might say who you mean."

"Well, I will. Go and take him by the ear. His name is Idleness!" As
Judith spoke, she raised her head, and looked Blasi full in the face; then
she bent to her work again.

The lad was angry. He had hoped that he was going to get something back of
which he had been robbed, and that Judith would help him as she had been a
witness of the theft.

"Oh, what a fuss you make over a few minutes," he said crossly; "I have to
go at four o'clock to ring the bell. I think I ought to take a little from
the old man."

"I should say you took more from him than he had. It has just struck half
past two; do you know how many minutes there are in an hour and a half?"

"There's no getting along with you," said Blasi, turning away.

"Well, you get along finely without me, so go on and prosper," said Judith
quickly as the lad disappeared.

Blasi had by no means given up his project. He did not see anyone in
Gertrude's garden as he passed along. He clambered up on the lattice by
the hedge and peeped through the open window into the room. Dietrich's
mother was seated near her son; both were working steadily, the young
fellow was chattering and laughing gaily, and his mother answered and
laughed too, but they did not stop working all the while. Blasi saw
plainly that this was not the time to make his request. He would wait
until the mother had gone to the kitchen, as she was sure to do
bye-and-bye. Four o'clock came and the great business of his day was at
hand; it was time to ring the bell, and he had to go. At last when evening
came Blasi found his opportunity. He stood watching outside the door, when
suddenly Dietrich threw it open, and started off with rapid strides.

Blasi called out, "Wait, wait a minute, can't you? What's your hurry?"

Dietrich turned about.

"What do you want? Tell me quickly. I'm going to meet Veronica; she can't
come home alone through the woods after dusk."

"Well, look here," said Blasi, breathing hard with his haste, and holding
Dietrich by the arm. "You see, I'm in trouble for want of a few francs or
so. Can't you lend them to me? I'll give them back again very soon."

"I haven't that much about me now. Stop a minute--yes, here are two francs
and here's a half; will that be enough?" and throwing the money to Blasi,
the young man hastened away.

As evening drew on, Gertrude stood at the end of the garden and looked
down the road. She listened to every sound that came from below. She was
waiting for her children's voices, for the sound of their footsteps; her
children, who made her life, her happiness, her hope! Ah! there they are!
that is Dietrich's voice talking eagerly, while Veronica's bell-like
laugh sounds clear through the still evening air. With a heart filled to
overflowing with happiness, Gertrude went forth to meet them.

As they sat together round the table in their usual cheerful mood, the
mother asked for an account of this, Veronica's first day among strangers,
and how she liked her new work.

"Very much indeed, mother," was the answer, and the young girl's face
beamed with a smile that swept away all trace of the clouds that sometimes
marred its beauty.

"I can't tell you how delightful it is to be able to earn so much. But
after all, mother dear, the best part is that I can come home to you at
night."

"That's what I think too," said Dietrich quickly, and you had but to look
in his eyes to see that he spoke the truth.

"And I am as glad as either of you," said Gertrude smiling. "It has been a
long day for me. It seems a great while since you started off this
morning, Veronica."

"What! when your only son was sitting by you all day long?" asked Dietrich
playfully.

"Oh, you know what I mean. I need you both to make me perfectly happy, and
cannot spare either of you;" and she looked from one to the other with
caressing glances.

Veronica told them all about the new teacher and the new work, and it was
late in the evening before the three separated for the night.




CHAPTER V.

UPON UNSAFE PATHS.


After this evening, Dietrich was scarcely ever able to go on his walk
alone. Blasi had always some pretext for joining him, and when Jost found
out that regularly every evening his friend took the same walk at the same
hour, he too discovered that he had a great deal to tell him, and to
consult him about. The two accompanied him through the wood, and when they
emerged from it on the other side, they usually saw a graceful figure
coming along the white road that led up the hill from Fohrensee. Then
without a word on the subject, as by tacit agreement, they stopped, shook
hands, and separated; the other two turned back toward the village, and
Dietrich went on. They felt instinctively that this was the best thing to
do. Dietrich, certainly, found out that his companions were not to
Veronica's mind, when one evening, the three being so engaged in talk that
they had not noticed that they were later than usual, Veronica came into
the wood before they left it, and she recognized Blasi and Jost, although
they turned quickly back.

"They can't have the best of consciences," said Veronica, as Dietrich
joined her; "if they had only straight-forward business on hand, why did
they take themselves off so hastily, as soon as I came in sight?"

"Can't you understand that we may have something to talk about, that we
do not wish you to hear?" asked Dietrich.

The girl was silent a few moments, and then she said, rather seriously,

"It would suit me far better, if you were not so much in company with
those two fellows. Blasi is absolutely idle, and cannot be nice, and Jost
is really bad; you can see that in his face. He never dares to look me
full in the eye; he always avoids a direct glance, as if he feared that
his eyes would betray him. I believe he is thoroughly false."

"No, no, you should not judge him so harshly," said Dietrich,
good-humoredly. "He is not what you think him; he is a good friend to me,
and has already taught me a great deal that I should never have got at
without his help. He is a very clever fellow."

Veronica let the matter drop, but it was plain that she had not changed
her opinion.

The days grew longer and brighter. The wood was filled with sweeter
perfumes evening after evening, as the two friends sauntered along their
homeward path, and in each young heart the feeling grew and ripened, that
still sweeter and more beautiful days were to come.

One afternoon in May, Veronica paced leisurely along the white hill-road,
her eyes fixed on the tall oak on the borders of the wood, which marked
the place where the foot-path came out upon the high road. Everything was
quiet; not a human being in sight. She reached the spot and looked
anxiously into the wood. She listened; she peered between the trees; all
was solitude. The tree-tops, softly murmuring, rocked gently to and fro,
and through the branches she saw the sunset glow. For the first time, the
young girl entered the wood alone. It was quite dark, in there. She passed
along with rapid step, among the solemn pines, hastening faster and
faster, as the trees seemed to draw together about her. When she came out
upon the open pathway, she saw Dietrich coming across the field in hot
haste. He was breathless when he reached her.

"I don't like to have you come alone through the wood, Veronica," he said,
"I thought I should be in time, but I could not get rid of those two
fellows. I tried to get away two or three times, but they always had
something more to say, and kept me."

"Where were you, Dietrich?"

"They had some business with me; that is, Jost had something to tell me,
and Blasi was there too. Jost did not care to speak of it on the open
street, and so we went into the Rehbock; and that is what made me so late.
Why, what's the matter, Veronica? Are you ill?"

She was as pale as a ghost.

"What! You've been to the Rehbock, Dietrich!" she exclaimed in evident
distress. "Oh, don't go there! Please don't go to that place again!"

"Oh, now we are to have the old story over again, are we?" said the young
man, laughing, "you have taken some foolish whim into your head; you
really don't know why yourself. What's your prejudice against that house
in particular?"

"I do know why; and it is no whim," said Veronica, earnestly. "I will tell
you all about it. That house has been a terror to me ever since I can
remember anything. We were both so young that you probably do not
recollect it at all. We both went with mother to the doctor's, but you
didn't go into the house, I remember now. Mother told the doctor that my
father was killed at the Rehbock. I have never forgotten it since. I am
constantly seeing him lying dead before my eyes; lying there struck down
dead. I often dream about it, and in my dreams I am there--and--and
sometimes when I look at his dead form in my dreams, it is not my father
any more, but it is you--you, Dietrich, whom they have struck down dead at
the Rehbock."

Dietrich was going to laugh at these words, but he glanced into Veronica's
face and was silent. She was more in earnest than he had thought. He tried
to quiet and reassure her, by saying that it was only a dream, and nothing
to be afraid of. The dream came naturally enough, because she was always
dwelling upon the tragedy of her father's death, and in dreams every one
knows that faces are always changing. His explanation, however, did not
make much impression upon Veronica. She said no more about it; but not all
Dietrich's efforts were sufficient to chase the shadows from her face that
evening, although he exerted himself to be even more amusing than usual.
Gertrude observed her silence, as they sat about the table, and looked
anxiously at her. When they had separated for the night, Dietrich went
into his mother's room to have a talk with her. He told her what Veronica
had said, and begged her to reason with the young girl and urge her to lay
aside these groundless fears which had taken possession of her. He
represented to his mother, that of course he sometimes had things to talk
over with his companions, and that there surely was no harm in their going
to the Rehbock together for their conversations, and he begged her to make
Veronica see the whole affair in a reasonable light. Gertrude was shocked
to find that the child had heard and understood what she had said to the
doctor, and distressed that she had taken it so much to heart. She
promised to speak to Veronica, but she also cautioned her son against
forming an intimacy with Jost and Blasi. Dietrich cheerfully gave his
word; declaring that he was not particularly fond of their company. The
