candy. "If you weren't I should be blue . . . very blue . . .  almost navy
blue. Dreams and make-believes are all very well in the daytime and the
sunshine, but when dark and storm come they fail to satisfy. One wants
real things then. But you don't know this . . . seventeen never knows
it. At seventeen dreams DO satisfy because you think the realities are
waiting for you further on. When I was seventeen, Anne, I didn't think
forty-five would find me a white-haired little old maid with nothing but
dreams to fill my life."

"But you aren't an old maid," said Anne, smiling into Miss Lavendar's
wistful woodbrown eyes. "Old maids are BORN . . . they don't BECOME."

"Some are born old maids, some achieve old maidenhood, and some have old
maidenhood thrust upon them," parodied Miss Lavendar whimsically.

"You are one of those who have achieved it then," laughed Anne, "and
you've done it so beautifully that if every old maid were like you they
would come into the fashion, I think."

"I always like to do things as well as possible," said Miss Lavendar
meditatively, "and since an old maid I had to be I was determined to be
a very nice one. People say I'm odd; but it's just because I follow my
own way of being an old maid and refuse to copy the traditional pattern.
Anne, did anyone ever tell you anything about Stephen Irving and me?"

"Yes," said Anne candidly, "I've heard that you and he were engaged
once."

"So we were . . . twenty-five years ago . . . a lifetime ago. And we
were to have been married the next spring. I had my wedding dress made,
although nobody but mother and Stephen ever knew THAT. We'd been engaged
in a way almost all our lives, you might say. When Stephen was a little
boy his mother would bring him here when she came to see my mother; and
the second time he ever came . . .  he was nine and I was six . . . he
told me out in the garden that he had pretty well made up his mind to
marry me when he grew up. I remember that I said 'Thank you'; and when
he was gone I told mother very gravely that there was a great weight off
my mind, because I wasn't frightened any more about having to be an old
maid. How poor mother laughed!"

"And what went wrong?" asked Anne breathlessly.

"We had just a stupid, silly, commonplace quarrel. So commonplace that,
if you'll believe me, I don't even remember just how it began. I hardly
know who was the more to blame for it. Stephen did really begin it, but
I suppose I provoked him by some foolishness of mine. He had a rival or
two, you see. I was vain and coquettish and liked to tease him a little.
He was a very high-strung, sensitive fellow. Well, we parted in a temper
on both sides. But I thought it would all come right; and it would have
if Stephen hadn't come back too soon. Anne, my dear, I'm sorry to say"
. . . Miss Lavendar dropped her voice as if she were about to confess a
predilection for murdering people, "that I am a dreadfully sulky person.
Oh, you needn't smile, . . .  it's only too true. I DO sulk; and Stephen
came back before I had finished sulking. I wouldn't listen to him and I
wouldn't forgive him; and so he went away for good. He was too proud to
come again. And then I sulked because he didn't come. I might have sent
for him perhaps, but I couldn't humble myself to do that. I was just
as proud as he was . . . pride and sulkiness make a very bad combination,
Anne. But I could never care for anybody else and I didn't want to.
I knew I would rather be an old maid for a thousand years than marry
anybody who wasn't Stephen Irving. Well, it all seems like a dream now,
of course. How sympathetic you look, Anne . . . as sympathetic as only
seventeen can look. But don't overdo it. I'm really a very happy,
contented little person in spite of my broken heart. My heart did break,
if ever a heart did, when I realized that Stephen Irving was not coming
back. But, Anne, a broken heart in real life isn't half as dreadful as
it is in books. It's a good deal like a bad tooth . . . though you won't
think THAT a very romantic simile. It takes spells of aching and gives
you a sleepless night now and then, but between times it lets you enjoy
life and dreams and echoes and peanut candy as if there were nothing the
matter with it. And now you're looking disappointed. You don't think
I'm half as interesting a person as you did five minutes ago when you
believed I was always the prey of a tragic memory bravely hidden beneath
external smiles. That's the worst . . . or the best . . .  of real life,
Anne. It WON'T let you be miserable. It keeps on trying to make you
comfortable . . . and succeeding...even when you're determined to be
unhappy and romantic. Isn't this candy scrumptious? I've eaten far more
than is good for me already but I'm going to keep recklessly on."

After a little silence Miss Lavendar said abruptly,

"It gave me a shock to hear about Stephen's son that first day you were
here, Anne. I've never been able to mention him to you since, but I've
wanted to know all about him. What sort of a boy is he?"

"He is the dearest, sweetest child I ever knew, Miss Lavendar . . .  and
he pretends things too, just as you and I do."

"I'd like to see him," said Miss Lavendar softly, as if talking to
herself. "I wonder if he looks anything like the little dream-boy who
lives here with me . . . MY little dream-boy."

"If you would like to see Paul I'll bring him through with me sometime,"
said Anne.

"I would like it . . . but not too soon. I want to get used to the
thought. There might be more pain than pleasure in it . . . if he looked
too much like Stephen . . . or if he didn't look enough like him. In a
month's time you may bring him."

Accordingly, a month later Anne and Paul walked through the woods to
the stone house, and met Miss Lavendar in the lane. She had not been
expecting them just then and she turned very pale.

"So this is Stephen's boy," she said in a low tone, taking Paul's hand
and looking at him as he stood, beautiful and boyish, in his smart
little fur coat and cap. "He . . . he is very like his father."

"Everybody says I'm a chip off the old block," remarked Paul, quite at
his ease.

Anne, who had been watching the little scene, drew a relieved breath.
She saw that Miss Lavendar and Paul had "taken" to each other, and that
there would be no constraint or stiffness. Miss Lavendar was a very
sensible person, in spite of her dreams and romance, and after
that first little betrayal she tucked her feelings out of sight and
entertained Paul as brightly and naturally as if he were anybody's son
who had come to see her. They all had a jolly afternoon together and
such a feast of fat things by way of supper as would have made old Mrs.
Irving hold up her hands in horror, believing that Paul's digestion
would be ruined for ever.

"Come again, laddie," said Miss Lavendar, shaking hands with him at
parting.

"You may kiss me if you like," said Paul gravely.

Miss Lavendar stooped and kissed him.

"How did you know I wanted to?" she whispered.

"Because you looked at me just as my little mother used to do when she
wanted to kiss me. As a rule, I don't like to be kissed. Boys don't. You
know, Miss Lewis. But I think I rather like to have you kiss me. And of
course I'll come to see you again. I think I'd like to have you for a
particular friend of mine, if you don't object."

"I . . . I don't think I shall object," said Miss Lavendar. She turned
and went in very quickly; but a moment later she was waving a gay and
smiling good-bye to them from the window.

"I like Miss Lavendar," announced Paul, as they walked through the beech
woods. "I like the way she looked at me, and I like her stone house, and
I like Charlotta the Fourth. I wish Grandma Irving had a Charlotta the
Fourth instead of a Mary Joe. I feel sure Charlotta the Fourth wouldn't
think I was wrong in my upper story when I told her what I think about
things. Wasn't that a splendid tea we had, teacher? Grandma says a boy
shouldn't be thinking about what he gets to eat, but he can't help it
sometimes when he is real hungry. YOU know, teacher. I don't think Miss
Lavendar would make a boy eat porridge for breakfast if he didn't like
it. She'd get things for him he did like. But of course" . . .  Paul was
nothing if not fair-minded . . . "that mightn't be very good for him. It's
very nice for a change though, teacher. YOU know."




XXIV

A Prophet in His Own Country


One May day Avonlea folks were mildly excited over some "Avonlea
Notes," signed "Observer," which appeared in the Charlottetown 'Daily
Enterprise.' Gossip ascribed the authorship thereof to Charlie Sloane,
partly because the said Charlie had indulged in similar literary flights
in times past, and partly because one of the notes seemed to embody a
sneer at Gilbert Blythe. Avonlea juvenile society persisted in regarding
Gilbert Blythe and Charlie Sloane as rivals in the good graces of a
certain damsel with gray eyes and an imagination.

Gossip, as usual, was wrong. Gilbert Blythe, aided and abetted by Anne,
had written the notes, putting in the one about himself as a blind. Only
two of the notes have any bearing on this history:

"Rumor has it that there will be a wedding in our village ere the
daisies are in bloom. A new and highly respected citizen will lead to
the hymeneal altar one of our most popular ladies.

"Uncle Abe, our well-known weather prophet, predicts a violent storm
of thunder and lightning for the evening of the twenty-third of May,
beginning at seven o'clock sharp. The area of the storm will extend over
the greater part of the Province. People traveling that evening will do
well to take umbrellas and mackintoshes with them."

"Uncle Abe really has predicted a storm for sometime this spring," said
Gilbert, "but do you suppose Mr. Harrison really does go to see Isabella
Andrews?"

"No," said Anne, laughing, "I'm sure he only goes to play checkers with
Mr. Harrison Andrews, but Mrs. Lynde says she knows Isabella Andrews
must be going to get married, she's in such good spirits this spring."

Poor old Uncle Abe felt rather indignant over the notes. He suspected
that "Observer" was making fun of him. He angrily denied having assigned
any particular date for his storm but nobody believed him.

Life in Avonlea continued on the smooth and even tenor of its way.
The "planting" was put in; the Improvers celebrated an Arbor Day. Each
Improver set out, or caused to be set out, five ornamental trees. As the
society now numbered forty members, this meant a total of two hundred
young trees. Early oats greened over the red fields; apple orchards
flung great blossoming arms about the farmhouses and the Snow Queen
adorned itself as a bride for her husband. Anne liked to sleep with her
window open and let the cherry fragrance blow over her face all night.
She thought it very poetical. Marilla thought she was risking her life.

"Thanksgiving should be celebrated in the spring," said Anne one evening
to Marilla, as they sat on the front door steps and listened to the
silver-sweet chorus of the frogs. "I think it would be ever so much
better than having it in November when everything is dead or asleep.
Then you have to remember to be thankful; but in May one simply can't
help being thankful . . .  that they are alive, if for nothing else. I
feel exactly as Eve must have felt in the garden of Eden before the
trouble began. IS that grass in the hollow green or golden? It seems to
me, Marilla, that a pearl of a day like this, when the blossoms are out
and the winds don't know where to blow from next for sheer crazy delight
must be pretty near as good as heaven."

Marilla looked scandalized and glanced apprehensively around to make
sure the twins were not within earshot. They came around the corner of
the house just then.

"Ain't it an awful nice-smelling evening?" asked Davy, sniffing
delightedly as he swung a hoe in his grimy hands. He had been working
in his garden. That spring Marilla, by way of turning Davy's passion for
reveling in mud and clay into useful channels, had given him and Dora
a small plot of ground for a garden. Both had eagerly gone to work in
a characteristic fashion. Dora planted, weeded, and watered carefully,
systematically, and dispassionately. As a result, her plot was already
green with prim, orderly little rows of vegetables and annuals. Davy,
however, worked with more zeal than discretion; he dug and hoed and
raked and watered and transplanted so energetically that his seeds had
no chance for their lives.

"How is your garden coming on, Davy-boy?" asked Anne.

"Kind of slow," said Davy with a sigh. "I don't know why the things
don't grow better. Milty Boulter says I must have planted them in the
dark of the moon and that's the whole trouble. He says you must never
sow seeds or kill pork or cut your hair or do any 'portant thing in the
wrong time of the moon. Is that true, Anne? I want to know."

"Maybe if you didn't pull your plants up by the roots every other day to
see how they're getting on 'at the other end,' they'd do better," said
Marilla sarcastically.

"I only pulled six of them up," protested Davy. "I wanted to see if
there was grubs at the roots. Milty Boulter said if it wasn't the moon's
fault it must be grubs. But I only found one grub. He was a great big
juicy curly grub. I put him on a stone and got another stone and smashed
him flat. He made a jolly SQUISH I tell you. I was sorry there wasn't
more of them. Dora's garden was planted same time's mine and her things
are growing all right. It CAN'T be the moon," Davy concluded in a
reflective tone.

"Marilla, look at that apple tree," said Anne. "Why, the thing is human.
It is reaching out long arms to pick its own pink skirts daintily up and
provoke us to admiration."

"Those Yellow Duchess trees always bear well," said Marilla
complacently. "That tree'll be loaded this year. I'm real glad. . .
they're great for pies."

But neither Marilla nor Anne nor anybody else was fated to make pies out
of Yellow Duchess apples that year.

The twenty-third of May came . . . an unseasonably warm day, as none
realized more keenly than Anne and her little beehive of pupils,
sweltering over fractions and syntax in the Avonlea schoolroom. A hot
breeze blew all the forenoon; but after noon hour it died away into a
heavy stillness. At half past three Anne heard a low rumble of thunder.
She promptly dismissed school at once, so that the children might get
home before the storm came.

As they went out to the playground Anne perceived a certain shadow and
gloom over the world in spite of the fact that the sun was still shining
brightly. Annetta Bell caught her hand nervously.

"Oh, teacher, look at that awful cloud!"

Anne looked and gave an exclamation of dismay. In the northwest a mass
of cloud, such as she had never in all her life beheld before, was
rapidly rolling up. It was dead black, save where its curled and fringed
edges showed a ghastly, livid white. There was something about it
indescribably menacing as it gloomed up in the clear blue sky; now and
again a bolt of lightning shot across it, followed by a savage growl. It
hung so low that it almost seemed to be touching the tops of the wooded
hills.

Mr. Harmon Andrews came clattering up the hill in his truck wagon,
urging his team of grays to their utmost speed. He pulled them to a halt
opposite the school.

"Guess Uncle Abe's hit it for once in his life, Anne," he shouted. "His
storm's coming a leetle ahead of time. Did ye ever see the like of that
cloud? Here, all you young ones, that are going my way, pile in, and
those that ain't scoot for the post office if ye've more'n a quarter of
a mile to go, and stay there till the shower's over."

Anne caught Davy and Dora by the hands and flew down the hill, along the
Birch Path, and past Violet Vale and Willowmere, as fast as the twins'
fat legs could go. They reached Green Gables not a moment too soon and
were joined at the door by Marilla, who had been hustling her ducks and
chickens under shelter. As they dashed into the kitchen the light seemed
to vanish, as if blown out by some mighty breath; the awful cloud rolled
over the sun and a darkness as of late twilight fell across the world.
At the same moment, with a crash of thunder and a blinding glare of
lightning, the hail swooped down and blotted the landscape out in one
white fury.

Through all the clamor of the storm came the thud of torn branches
striking the house and the sharp crack of breaking glass. In three
minutes every pane in the west and north windows was broken and the
hail poured in through the apertures covering the floor with stones, the
smallest of which was as big as a hen's egg. For three quarters of an
hour the storm raged unabated and no one who underwent it ever forgot
it. Marilla, for once in her life shaken out of her composure by sheer
terror, knelt by her rocking chair in a corner of the kitchen, gasping
and sobbing between the deafening thunder peals. Anne, white as paper,
had dragged the sofa away from the window and sat on it with a twin on
either side. Davy at the first crash had howled, "Anne, Anne, is it the
Judgment Day? Anne, Anne, I never meant to be naughty," and then
had buried his face in Anne's lap and kept it there, his little body
quivering. Dora, somewhat pale but quite composed, sat with her hand
clasped in Anne's, quiet and motionless. It is doubtful if an earthquake
would have disturbed Dora.

Then, almost as suddenly as it began, the storm ceased. The hail
stopped, the thunder rolled and muttered away to the eastward, and the
sun burst out merry and radiant over a world so changed that it seemed
an absurd thing to think that a scant three quarters of an hour could
have effected such a transformation.

Marilla rose from her knees, weak and trembling, and dropped on her
