
"Why and wherefore?" asked Anne, sitting down beside him.

"'Cause the new teacher that come when Mr. Holmes got sick give me ten
sums to do for Monday. It'll take me all day tomorrow to do them. It
isn't fair to have to work Saturdays. Milty Boulter said he wouldn't do
them, but Marilla says I've got to. I don't like Miss Carson a bit."

"Don't talk like that about your teacher, Davy Keith," said Mrs. Rachel
severely. "Miss Carson is a very fine girl. There is no nonsense about
her."

"That doesn't sound very attractive," laughed Anne. "I like people to
have a little nonsense about them. But I'm inclined to have a better
opinion of Miss Carson than you have. I saw her in prayer-meeting last
night, and she has a pair of eyes that can't always look sensible. Now,
Davy-boy, take heart of grace. 'Tomorrow will bring another day' and
I'll help you with the sums as far as in me lies. Don't waste this
lovely hour 'twixt light and dark worrying over arithmetic."

"Well, I won't," said Davy, brightening up. "If you help me with the
sums I'll have 'em done in time to go fishing with Milty. I wish old
Aunt Atossa's funeral was tomorrow instead of today. I wanted to go to
it 'cause Milty said his mother said Aunt Atossa would be sure to rise
up in her coffin and say sarcastic things to the folks that come to see
her buried. But Marilla said she didn't."

"Poor Atossa laid in her coffin peaceful enough," said Mrs. Lynde
solemnly. "I never saw her look so pleasant before, that's what. Well,
there weren't many tears shed over her, poor old soul. The Elisha
Wrights are thankful to be rid of her, and I can't say I blame them a
mite."

"It seems to me a most dreadful thing to go out of the world and not
leave one person behind you who is sorry you are gone," said Anne,
shuddering.

"Nobody except her parents ever loved poor Atossa, that's certain, not
even her husband," averred Mrs. Lynde. "She was his fourth wife. He'd
sort of got into the habit of marrying. He only lived a few years after
he married her. The doctor said he died of dyspepsia, but I shall always
maintain that he died of Atossa's tongue, that's what. Poor soul, she
always knew everything about her neighbors, but she never was very well
acquainted with herself. Well, she's gone anyhow; and I suppose the next
excitement will be Diana's wedding."

"It seems funny and horrible to think of Diana's being married," sighed
Anne, hugging her knees and looking through the gap in the Haunted Wood
to the light that was shining in Diana's room.

"I don't see what's horrible about it, when she's doing so well," said
Mrs. Lynde emphatically. "Fred Wright has a fine farm and he is a model
young man."

"He certainly isn't the wild, dashing, wicked, young man Diana once
wanted to marry," smiled Anne. "Fred is extremely good."

"That's just what he ought to be. Would you want Diana to marry a wicked
man? Or marry one yourself?"

"Oh, no. I wouldn't want to marry anybody who was wicked, but I think
I'd like it if he COULD be wicked and WOULDN'T. Now, Fred is HOPELESSLY
good."

"You'll have more sense some day, I hope," said Marilla.

Marilla spoke rather bitterly. She was grievously disappointed. She knew
Anne had refused Gilbert Blythe. Avonlea gossip buzzed over the fact,
which had leaked out, nobody knew how. Perhaps Charlie Sloane had
guessed and told his guesses for truth. Perhaps Diana had betrayed it
to Fred and Fred had been indiscreet. At all events it was known; Mrs.
Blythe no longer asked Anne, in public or private, if she had heard
lately from Gilbert, but passed her by with a frosty bow. Anne, who
had always liked Gilbert's merry, young-hearted mother, was grieved in
secret over this. Marilla said nothing; but Mrs. Lynde gave Anne many
exasperated digs about it, until fresh gossip reached that worthy lady,
through the medium of Moody Spurgeon MacPherson's mother, that Anne had
another "beau" at college, who was rich and handsome and good all in
one. After that Mrs. Rachel held her tongue, though she still wished in
her inmost heart that Anne had accepted Gilbert. Riches were all very
well; but even Mrs. Rachel, practical soul though she was, did not
consider them the one essential. If Anne "liked" the Handsome Unknown
better than Gilbert there was nothing more to be said; but Mrs. Rachel
was dreadfully afraid that Anne was going to make the mistake of
marrying for money. Marilla knew Anne too well to fear this; but she
felt that something in the universal scheme of things had gone sadly
awry.

"What is to be, will be," said Mrs. Rachel gloomily, "and what isn't
to be happens sometimes. I can't help believing it's going to happen in
Anne's case, if Providence doesn't interfere, that's what." Mrs. Rachel
sighed. She was afraid Providence wouldn't interfere; and she didn't
dare to.

Anne had wandered down to the Dryad's Bubble and was curled up among the
ferns at the root of the big white birch where she and Gilbert had so
often sat in summers gone by. He had gone into the newspaper office
again when college closed, and Avonlea seemed very dull without him. He
never wrote to her, and Anne missed the letters that never came. To be
sure, Roy wrote twice a week; his letters were exquisite compositions
which would have read beautifully in a memoir or biography. Anne felt
herself more deeply in love with him than ever when she read them; but
her heart never gave the queer, quick, painful bound at sight of his
letters which it had given one day when Mrs. Hiram Sloane had handed her
out an envelope addressed in Gilbert's black, upright handwriting. Anne
had hurried home to the east gable and opened it eagerly--to find a
typewritten copy of some college society report--"only that and nothing
more." Anne flung the harmless screed across her room and sat down to
write an especially nice epistle to Roy.

Diana was to be married in five more days. The gray house at Orchard
Slope was in a turmoil of baking and brewing and boiling and stewing,
for there was to be a big, old-timey wedding. Anne, of course, was to
be bridesmaid, as had been arranged when they were twelve years old, and
Gilbert was coming from Kingsport to be best man. Anne was enjoying the
excitement of the various preparations, but under it all she carried a
little heartache. She was, in a sense, losing her dear old chum; Diana's
new home would be two miles from Green Gables, and the old constant
companionship could never be theirs again. Anne looked up at Diana's
light and thought how it had beaconed to her for many years; but soon it
would shine through the summer twilights no more. Two big, painful tears
welled up in her gray eyes.

"Oh," she thought, "how horrible it is that people have to grow up--and
marry--and CHANGE!"




Chapter XXIX

Diana's Wedding


"After all, the only real roses are the pink ones," said Anne, as she
tied white ribbon around Diana's bouquet in the westward-looking gable at
Orchard Slope. "They are the flowers of love and faith."

Diana was standing nervously in the middle of the room, arrayed in her
bridal white, her black curls frosted over with the film of her wedding
veil. Anne had draped that veil, in accordance with the sentimental
compact of years before.

"It's all pretty much as I used to imagine it long ago, when I wept over
your inevitable marriage and our consequent parting," she laughed. "You
are the bride of my dreams, Diana, with the 'lovely misty veil'; and
I am YOUR bridesmaid. But, alas! I haven't the puffed sleeves--though
these short lace ones are even prettier. Neither is my heart wholly
breaking nor do I exactly hate Fred."

"We are not really parting, Anne," protested Diana. "I'm not going far
away. We'll love each other just as much as ever. We've always kept that
'oath' of friendship we swore long ago, haven't we?"

"Yes. We've kept it faithfully. We've had a beautiful friendship, Diana.
We've never marred it by one quarrel or coolness or unkind word; and
I hope it will always be so. But things can't be quite the same after
this. You'll have other interests. I'll just be on the outside. But
'such is life' as Mrs. Rachel says. Mrs. Rachel has given you one of
her beloved knitted quilts of the 'tobacco stripe' pattern, and she says
when I am married she'll give me one, too."

"The mean thing about your getting married is that I won't be able to be
your bridesmaid," lamented Diana.

"I'm to be Phil's bridesmaid next June, when she marries Mr. Blake, and
then I must stop, for you know the proverb 'three times a bridesmaid,
never a bride,'" said Anne, peeping through the window over the pink
and snow of the blossoming orchard beneath. "Here comes the minister,
Diana."

"Oh, Anne," gasped Diana, suddenly turning very pale and beginning to
tremble. "Oh, Anne--I'm so nervous--I can't go through with it--Anne, I
know I'm going to faint."

"If you do I'll drag you down to the rainwater hogshed and drop you in,"
said Anne unsympathetically. "Cheer up, dearest. Getting married can't
be so very terrible when so many people survive the ceremony. See how
cool and composed I am, and take courage."

"Wait till your turn comes, Miss Anne. Oh, Anne, I hear father coming
upstairs. Give me my bouquet. Is my veil right? Am I very pale?"

"You look just lovely. Di, darling, kiss me good-bye for the last time.
Diana Barry will never kiss me again."

"Diana Wright will, though. There, mother's calling. Come."

Following the simple, old-fashioned way in vogue then, Anne went down to
the parlor on Gilbert's arm. They met at the top of the stairs for the
first time since they had left Kingsport, for Gilbert had arrived only
that day. Gilbert shook hands courteously. He was looking very well,
though, as Anne instantly noted, rather thin. He was not pale; there was
a flush on his cheek that had burned into it as Anne came along the hall
towards him, in her soft, white dress with lilies-of-the-valley in the
shining masses of her hair. As they entered the crowded parlor together
a little murmur of admiration ran around the room. "What a fine-looking
pair they are," whispered the impressible Mrs. Rachel to Marilla.

Fred ambled in alone, with a very red face, and then Diana swept in on
her father's arm. She did not faint, and nothing untoward occurred to
interrupt the ceremony. Feasting and merry-making followed; then, as the
evening waned, Fred and Diana drove away through the moonlight to their
new home, and Gilbert walked with Anne to Green Gables.

Something of their old comradeship had returned during the informal
mirth of the evening. Oh, it was nice to be walking over that well-known
road with Gilbert again!

The night was so very still that one should have been able to hear the
whisper of roses in blossom--the laughter of daisies--the piping of
grasses--many sweet sounds, all tangled up together. The beauty of
moonlight on familiar fields irradiated the world.

"Can't we take a ramble up Lovers' Lane before you go in?" asked Gilbert
as they crossed the bridge over the Lake of Shining Waters, in which the
moon lay like a great, drowned blossom of gold.

Anne assented readily. Lovers' Lane was a veritable path in a fairyland
that night--a shimmering, mysterious place, full of wizardry in the
white-woven enchantment of moonlight. There had been a time when such
a walk with Gilbert through Lovers' Lane would have been far too
dangerous. But Roy and Christine had made it very safe now. Anne found
herself thinking a good deal about Christine as she chatted lightly to
Gilbert. She had met her several times before leaving Kingsport, and had
been charmingly sweet to her. Christine had also been charmingly
sweet. Indeed, they were a most cordial pair. But for all that, their
acquaintance had not ripened into friendship. Evidently Christine was
not a kindred spirit.

"Are you going to be in Avonlea all summer?" asked Gilbert.

"No. I'm going down east to Valley Road next week. Esther Haythorne
wants me to teach for her through July and August. They have a summer
term in that school, and Esther isn't feeling well. So I'm going to
substitute for her. In one way I don't mind. Do you know, I'm beginning
to feel a little bit like a stranger in Avonlea now? It makes me
sorry--but it's true. It's quite appalling to see the number of
children who have shot up into big boys and girls--really young men and
women--these past two years. Half of my pupils are grown up. It makes me
feel awfully old to see them in the places you and I and our mates used
to fill."

Anne laughed and sighed. She felt very old and mature and wise--which
showed how young she was. She told herself that she longed greatly to go
back to those dear merry days when life was seen through a rosy mist
of hope and illusion, and possessed an indefinable something that had
passed away forever. Where was it now--the glory and the dream?

"'So wags the world away,'" quoted Gilbert practically, and a trifle
absently. Anne wondered if he were thinking of Christine. Oh, Avonlea
was going to be so lonely now--with Diana gone!




Chapter XXX

Mrs. Skinner's Romance


Anne stepped off the train at Valley Road station and looked about to
see if any one had come to meet her. She was to board with a certain
Miss Janet Sweet, but she saw no one who answered in the least to her
preconception of that lady, as formed from Esther's letter. The only
person in sight was an elderly woman, sitting in a wagon with mail bags
piled around her. Two hundred would have been a charitable guess at her
weight; her face was as round and red as a harvest-moon and almost
as featureless. She wore a tight, black, cashmere dress, made in the
fashion of ten years ago, a little dusty black straw hat trimmed with
bows of yellow ribbon, and faded black lace mits.

"Here, you," she called, waving her whip at Anne. "Are you the new
Valley Road schoolma'am?"

"Yes."

"Well, I thought so. Valley Road is noted for its good-looking
schoolma'ams, just as Millersville is noted for its humly ones. Janet
Sweet asked me this morning if I could bring you out. I said, 'Sartin
I kin, if she don't mind being scrunched up some. This rig of mine's
kinder small for the mail bags and I'm some heftier than Thomas!' Just
wait, miss, till I shift these bags a bit and I'll tuck you in somehow.
It's only two miles to Janet's. Her next-door neighbor's hired boy is
coming for your trunk tonight. My name is Skinner--Amelia Skinner."

Anne was eventually tucked in, exchanging amused smiles with herself
during the process.

"Jog along, black mare," commanded Mrs. Skinner, gathering up the reins
in her pudgy hands. "This is my first trip on the mail rowte. Thomas
wanted to hoe his turnips today so he asked me to come. So I jest sot
down and took a standing-up snack and started. I sorter like it. O'
course it's rather tejus. Part of the time I sits and thinks and the
rest I jest sits. Jog along, black mare. I want to git home airly.
Thomas is terrible lonesome when I'm away. You see, we haven't been
married very long."

"Oh!" said Anne politely.

"Just a month. Thomas courted me for quite a spell, though. It was real
romantic." Anne tried to picture Mrs. Skinner on speaking terms with
romance and failed.

"Oh?" she said again.

"Yes. Y'see, there was another man after me. Jog along, black mare. I'd
been a widder so long folks had given up expecting me to marry again.
But when my darter--she's a schoolma'am like you--went out West to teach
I felt real lonesome and wasn't nowise sot against the idea. Bime-by
Thomas began to come up and so did the other feller--William Obadiah
