
Aunt Dilsey got out the cards and carded the cotton smooth and fine.
Then she fastened a roll of this cotton to the spindle and sent the
wheel whirling around with a "Zum-m-m-m--Zum-m-m-m!"

Mary stood and watched the old woman.

[Illustration: Mary watching Aunt Dilsey at spinning wheel]

"Aunt Dilsey," she said, "the spinning wheel sings a song, and I know
what it says. Grandmother told me. It says,

  'A hum and a whirl,
  A twist and a twirl,
  This is for the girl
  With the golden curl!
  Zum-m-m-m-m-m!
  Zum-m-m-m-m-m!'"

"And that means you, honey," said Aunt Dilsey.

When the yarn was ready, Aunt Dilsey fastened it in the loom and began
to weave. The threads went over and under, over and under. As Aunt
Dilsey wove, she hummed. Mary stood by and sang this song,

  "Over and under and over we go,
  Weaving the cotton as white as the snow,
  Weaving the cloth for a dress, oh, ho!
  As over and under and over we go."

After the cloth had been woven, Aunt Dilsey took it out of the loom.
Then she bleached it until it was as white as snow. Now it was ready to
be made into a dress.

"Mother, do tell me how you are going to make the dress," said Mary.
"Will it have ruffles on it like Sue's? Will it have trimming on it? And
how many buttons will you put on it? Sue's dress has twelve; I know, for
I counted them."

Mother did not answer all these questions; she just smiled as the
scissors went snip, snip into the cloth. But she did cut out ruffles,
and Aunt Maria began to hem them.

[Illustration: Mary with her mother and grandmother]

By and by grandmother came into the room.

"Mary," she said, "here is some lace I got in England. Mother may put it
on your dress."

How happy Mary was! She danced for joy.

Mother put on the lace, and grandmother worked the buttonholes. How many
do you suppose she worked? Why, she worked twelve!

When the dress was finished, it was just like Sue's. Only it was a great
deal finer, for Mary's dress had three ruffles and Sue's had only two!
And, then, there was the lace from England!




THE PLAID DRESS


"I want a warm plaid dress," said a little girl. "The days are colder,
and the frost will soon be here. But how can I get it? Mother says that
she cannot buy one for me."

The old white sheep in the meadow heard her, and he bleated to the
shepherd, "The little girl wants a warm plaid dress. I will give my
wool. Who else will help?"

The kind shepherd said, "I will." Then he led the old white sheep to the
brook and washed its wool. When it was clean and white, he said, "The
little girl wants a warm plaid dress. The sheep has given his wool, and
I have washed it clean and white. Who else will help?"

"We will," said the shearers. "We will bring our shears and cut off the
wool."

The shearers cut the soft wool from the old sheep, and then they called,
"The little girl wants a new dress. The sheep has given his wool. The
shepherd has washed it; and we have sheared it. Who else will help?"

[Illustration: Shearer shearing the sheep]

"We will," cried the carders. "We will comb it out straight and smooth."

Soon they held up the wool, carded straight and smooth, and they cried,
"The little girl wants a new dress. The sheep has given his wool. The
shepherd has washed the wool. The shearers have cut it, and we have
carded it. Who else will help?"

"We will," said the spinners. "We will spin it into thread."

"Whirr, whirr!" How fast the spinning wheels turned, singing all the
time.

Soon the spinners said, "The little girl wants a new dress. The sheep
has given his wool. The shepherd has washed the wool. The shearers have
cut it. The carders have carded it, and we have spun it into thread. Who
else will help?"

"We will," said the dyers. "We will dye it with beautiful colors."

Then they dipped the woven threads into bright dye, red and blue and
green and brown.

As they spread the wool out to dry, the dyers called: "The little girl
wants a new dress. The sheep has given his wool. The shepherd has washed
the wool. The shearers have cut it. The carders have carded it. The
spinners have spun it, and we have dyed it with bright beautiful colors.
Who else will help?"

"We will," said the weavers. "We will make it into cloth."

[Illustration: Weaver at loom]

"Clickety-clack! clickety-clack!" went the loom, as the colored thread
was woven over and under over and under. Before long it was made into
beautiful plaid cloth.

Then the little girl's mother cut and made the dress. It was a beautiful
plaid dress, and the little girl loved to wear it. Every time she put it
on, she thought of her friends who had helped her,--the sheep, the
shearers, the carders, the spinners, the dyers, the weavers, and her own
dear mother.




THE GODDESS OF THE SILKWORM


Hoangti was the emperor of China. He had a beautiful wife whose name was
Si-ling. The emperor and his wife loved their people and always thought
of their happiness.

In those days the Chinese people wore clothes made of skins. By and by
animals grew scarce, and the people did not know what they should wear.
The emperor and empress tried in vain to find some other way of clothing
them.

One morning Hoangti and his wife were in the beautiful palace garden.
They walked up and down, up and down, talking of their people.

Suddenly the emperor said, "Look at those worms on the mulberry trees,
Si-ling. They seem to be spinning."

Si-ling looked, and sure enough, the worms were spinning. A long thread
was coming from the mouth of each, and each little worm was winding this
thread around its body.

Si-ling and the emperor stood still and watched the worms. "How
wonderful!" said Si-ling.

The next morning Hoangti and the empress walked under the trees again.
They found some worms still winding thread. Others had already spun
their cocoons and were fast asleep. In a few days all of the worms had
spun cocoons.

"This is indeed a wonderful, wonderful thing!" said Si-ling. "Why, each
worm has a thread on its body long enough to make a house for itself!"

Si-ling thought of this day after day. One morning as she and the
emperor walked under the trees, she said, "I believe I could find a way
to weave those long threads into cloth."

"But how could you unwind the threads?" asked the emperor.

[Illustration: Hoangti and Si-ling walking among the trees]

"I'll find a way," Si-ling said. And she did; but she had to try many,
many times.

She put the cocoons in a hot place, and the little sleepers soon died.
Then the cocoons were thrown into boiling water to make the threads
soft. After that the long threads could be easily unwound.

Now Si-ling had to think of something else; she had to find a way to
weave the threads into cloth. After many trials, she made a loom--the
first that was ever made. She taught others to weave, and soon hundreds
of people were making cloth from the threads of the silkworm.

The people ever afterward called Si-ling "The Goddess of the Silkworm."
And whenever the emperor walked with her in the garden, they liked to
watch the silkworms spinning threads for the good of their people.




THE FLAX

I


It was spring. The flax was in full bloom, and it had dainty little blue
flowers that nodded in the breeze.

"People say that I look very well," said the flax. "They say that I am
fine and long and that I shall make a beautiful piece of linen. How
happy I am! No one in the world can be happier."

"Oh, yes," said the fence post, "you may grow and be happy, and you may
sing, but you do not know the world as I do. Why, I have knots in me."
And it creaked;

  "Snip, snap, snurre,
  Basse, lurre,
  The song is ended."

"No, it is not ended," said the flax. "The sun will shine, and the rain
will fall, and I shall grow and grow. No, no, the song is not ended."

One day some men came with sharp reap hooks. They took the flax by the
head and cut it off at the roots. This was very painful, you may be
sure.

Then the flax was laid in water and was nearly drowned. After that it
was put on a fire and nearly roasted. All this was frightful. But the
flax only said, "One cannot be happy always. By having bad times as well
as good, we become wise."

After the flax had been cut and steeped and roasted, it was put on a
spinning wheel. "Whir-r-r, whir-rr-r," went the spinning wheel; it went
so fast that the flax could hardly think.

"I have been very happy in the sunshine and the rain," it said. "If I am
in pain now, I must be contented."

At last the flax was put in the loom. Soon it became a beautiful piece
of white linen.

"This is very wonderful," said the flax. "How foolish the fence post was
with its song of--

  'Snip, snap, snurre,
  Basse, lurre,
  The song is ended.'

The song is not ended, I am sure. It has only just begun.

"After all that I have suffered, I am at last made into beautiful linen.
How strong and fine I am, and how long and white! This is even better
than being a plant bearing flowers. I have never been happier than I am
now."

After some time the linen was cut into pieces and sewed with needles.
That was not pleasant; but at last there were twelve pretty white
aprons.

"See," said the flax, "I have been made into something. Now I shall be
of some use in the world. That is the only way to be happy."


II


Years passed by, and the linen was so worn that it could hardly hold
together.

"The end must come soon," said the flax.

At last the linen did fall into rags and tatters; it was torn into
shreds and boiled in water. The flax thought the end had come.

But no, the end was not yet. After being made into pulp and dried, the
flax became beautiful white paper.

"This is a surprise, a glorious surprise," it said. "I am finer than
ever, and I shall have fine things written on me. How happy I am!"

And sure enough, the most beautiful stories and verses were written upon
it. People read the stories and verses, and they were made wiser and
better. Their children and their children's children read them, too, and
so the song was not ended.

--HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.

[Illustration: Girl reading a book]




THE WONDERFUL WORLD


  Great, wide, beautiful, wonderful World,
  With the wonderful water round you curled,
  And the wonderful grass upon your breast,
  World, you are beautifully drest.

  The wonderful air is over me,
  And the wonderful wind is shaking the tree--
  It walks on the water, and whirls the mills,
  And talks to itself on the top of the hills.

  You friendly Earth, how far do you go,
  With the wheat-fields that nod and the rivers that flow,
  With cities and gardens, and cliffs and isles,
  And people upon you for thousands of miles?

  Ah! you are so great, and I am so small,
  I hardly can think of you, World, at all;
  And yet, when I said my prayers to-day,
  A whisper within me seemed to say,
  "You are more than the Earth, though you are such a dot!
  You can love and think, and the Earth cannot!"

--William Brighty Rands.




[Illustration: The Hillman at the housewife's door]

THE HILLMAN AND THE HOUSEWIFE


As every one knows, fairies are always just. They are kind to others,
and in return they expect others to be kind to them. In some countries
across the sea there are fairies called Hillmen.

Now, there once lived a certain housewife who liked to make bargains.
She gave away only those things for which she had no use, and then
expected always to get something in return.

One day a Hillman knocked at her door.

"Can you lend us a saucepan?" he asked. "There's a wedding on the hill,
and all the pots are in use."
