trustee once writ to my Aunt Jane and that's how it begins."

"Respected Madam," wrote the Story Girl. "We want to ask a very great
favour of you and we hope you will kindly grant it if you can. Our
favourite cat, Paddy, is very sick, and we are afraid he is going to
die. Do you think you could cure him? And will you please try? We are
all so fond of him, and he is such a good cat, and has no bad habits. Of
course, if any of us tramps on his tail he will scratch us, but you know
a cat can't bear to have his tail tramped on. It's a very tender part
of him, and it's his only way of preventing it, and he doesn't mean any
harm. If you can cure Paddy for us we will always be very, very grateful
to you. The accompanying small offerings are a testimonial of our
respect and gratitude, and we entreat you to honour us by accepting
them.

"Very respectfully yours,

"SARA STANLEY."

"I tell you that last sentence has a fine sound," said Peter admiringly.

"I didn't make that up," admitted the Story Girl honestly. "I read it
somewhere and remembered it."

"I think it's TOO fine," criticized Felicity. "Peg Bowen won't know the
meaning of such big words."

But it was decided to leave them in and we all signed the letter.

Then we got our "testimonials," and started on our reluctant journey
to the domains of the witch. Sara Ray would not go, of course, but she
volunteered to stay with Pat while we were away. We did not think
it necessary to inform the grown-ups of our errand, or its nature.
Grown-ups had such peculiar views. They might forbid our going at
all--and they would certainly laugh at us.

Peg Bowen's house was nearly a mile away, even by the short cut past the
swamp and up the wooded hill. We went down through the brook field and
over the little plank bridge in the hollow, half lost in its surrounding
sea of farewell summers. When we reached the green gloom of the woods
beyond we began to feel frightened, but nobody would admit it. We
walked very closely together, and we did not talk. When you are near the
retreat of witches and folk of that ilk the less you say the better, for
their feelings are so notoriously touchy. Of course, Peg wasn't a witch,
but it was best to be on the safe side.

Finally we came to the lane which led directly to her abode. We were all
very pale now, and our hearts were beating. The red September sun hung
low between the tall spruces to the west. It did not look to me just
right for a sun. In fact, everything looked uncanny. I wished our errand
were well over.

A sudden bend in the lane brought us out to the little clearing where
Peg's house was before we were half ready to see it. In spite of my fear
I looked at it with some curiosity. It was a small, shaky building with
a sagging roof, set amid a perfect jungle of weeds. To our eyes, the odd
thing about it was that there was no entrance on the ground floor, as
there should be in any respectable house. The only door was in the upper
story, and was reached by a flight of rickety steps. There was no sign
of life about the place except--sight of ill omen--a large black cat,
sitting on the topmost step. We thought of Uncle Roger's gruesome hints.
Could that black cat be Peg? Nonsense! But still--it didn't look like
an ordinary cat. It was so large--and had such green, malicious eyes!
Plainly, there was something out of the common about the beastie!

In a tense, breathless silence the Story Girl placed our parcels on
the lowest step, and laid her letter on the top of the pile. Her brown
fingers trembled and her face was very pale.

Suddenly the door above us opened, and Peg Bowen herself appeared on the
threshold. She was a tall, sinewy old woman, wearing a short, ragged,
drugget skirt which reached scantly below her knees, a scarlet print
blouse, and a man's hat. Her feet, arms, and neck were bare, and she had
a battered old clay pipe in her mouth. Her brown face was seamed with a
hundred wrinkles, and her tangled, grizzled hair fell unkemptly over
her shoulders. She was scowling, and her flashing black eyes held no
friendly light.

We had borne up bravely enough hitherto, in spite of our inward,
unconfessed quakings. But now our strained nerves gave way, and sheer
panic seized us. Peter gave a little yelp of pure terror. We turned and
fled across the clearing and into the woods. Down the long hill we tore,
like mad, hunted creatures, firmly convinced that Peg Bowen was after
us. Wild was that scamper, as nightmare-like as any recorded in our
dream books. The Story Girl was in front of me, and I can recall the
tremendous leaps she made over fallen logs and little spruce bushes,
with her long brown curls streaming out behind her from their scarlet
fillet. Cecily, behind me, kept gasping out the contradictory sentences,
"Oh, Bev, wait for me," and "Oh, Bev, hurry, hurry!" More by blind
instinct than anything else we kept together and found our way out of
the woods. Presently we were in the field beyond the brook. Over us was
a dainty sky of shell pink, placid cows were pasturing around us; the
farewell summers nodded to us in the friendly breezes. We halted, with a
glad realization that we were back in our own haunts and that Peg Bowen
had not caught us.

"Oh, wasn't that an awful experience?" gasped Cecily, shuddering. "I
wouldn't go through it again--I couldn't, not even for Pat."

"It come on a fellow so suddent," said Peter shamefacedly. "I think I
could a-stood my ground if I'd known she was going to come out. But when
she popped out like that I thought I was done for."

"We shouldn't have run," said Felicity gloomily. "It showed we were
afraid of her, and that always makes her awful cross. She won't do a
thing for Pat now."

"I don't believe she could do anything, anyway," said the Story Girl. "I
think we've just been a lot of geese."

We were all, except Peter, more or less inclined to agree with her. And
the conviction of our folly deepened when we reached the granary and
found that Pat, watched over by the faithful Sara Ray, was no better.
The Story Girl announced that she would take him into the kitchen and
sit up all night with him.

"He sha'n't die alone, anyway," she said miserably, gathering his limp
body up in her arms.

We did not think Aunt Olivia would give her permission to stay up; but
Aunt Olivia did. Aunt Olivia really was a duck. We wanted to stay with
her also, but Aunt Janet wouldn't hear of such a thing. She ordered us
off to bed, saying that it was positively sinful in us to be so worked
up over a cat. Five heart-broken children, who knew that there are many
worse friends than dumb, furry folk, climbed Uncle Alec's stairs to bed
that night.

"There's nothing we can do now, except pray God to make Pat better,"
said Cecily.

I must candidly say that her tone savoured strongly of a last resort;
but this was owing more to early training than to any lack of faith on
Cecily's part. She knew and we knew, that prayer was a solemn rite, not
to be lightly held, nor degraded to common uses. Felicity voiced this
conviction when she said,

"I don't believe it would be right to pray about a cat."

"I'd like to know why not," retorted Cecily, "God made Paddy just as
much as He made you, Felicity King, though perhaps He didn't go to
so much trouble. And I'm sure He's abler to help him than Peg Bowen.
Anyhow, I'm going to pray for Pat with all my might and main, and I'd
like to see you try to stop me. Of course I won't mix it up with more
important things. I'll just tack it on after I've finished asking the
blessings, but before I say amen."

More petitions than Cecily's were offered up that night on behalf of
Paddy. I distinctly heard Felix--who always said his prayers in a loud
whisper, owing to some lasting conviction of early life that God could
not hear him if he did not pray audibly--mutter pleadingly, after the
"important" part of his devotions was over, "Oh, God, please make Pat
better by the morning. PLEASE do."

And I, even in these late years of irreverence for the dreams of youth,
am not in the least ashamed to confess that when I knelt down to say my
boyish prayer, I thought of our little furry comrade in his extremity,
and prayed as reverently as I knew how for his healing. Then I went to
sleep, comforted by the simple hope that the Great Father would, after
"important things" were all attended to, remember poor Pat.

As soon as we were up the next morning we rushed off to Uncle Roger's.
But we met Peter and the Story Girl in the lane, and their faces were as
the faces of those who bring glad tidings upon the mountains.

"Pat's better," cried the Story Girl, blithe, triumphant. "Last night,
just at twelve, he began to lick his paws. Then he licked himself all
over and went to sleep, too, on the sofa. When I woke Pat was washing
his face, and he has taken a whole saucerful of milk. Oh, isn't it
splendid?"

"You see Peg Bowen did put a spell on him," said Peter, "and then she
took it off."

"I guess Cecily's prayer had more to do with Pat's getting better than
Peg Bowen," said Felicity. "She prayed for Pat over and over again. That
is why he's better."

"Oh, all right," said Peter, "but I'd advise Pat not to scratch Peg
Bowen again, that's all."

"I wish I knew whether it was the praying or Peg Bowen that cured Pat,"
said Felix in perplexity.

"I don't believe it was either of them," said Dan. "Pat just got sick
and got better again of his own accord."

"I'm going to believe that it was the praying," said Cecily decidedly.
"It's so much nicer to believe that God cured Pat than that Peg Bowen
did."

"But you oughtn't to believe a thing just 'cause it would be more
comfortable," objected Peter. "Mind you, I ain't saying God couldn't
cure Pat. But nothing and nobody can't ever make me believe that Peg
Bowen wasn't at the bottom of it all."

Thus faith, superstition, and incredulity strove together amongst us, as
in all history.



CHAPTER XXV. A CUP OF FAILURE

One warm Sunday evening in the moon of golden-rod, we all, grown-ups and
children, were sitting in the orchard by the Pulpit Stone singing sweet
old gospel hymns. We could all sing more or less, except poor Sara Ray,
who had once despairingly confided to me that she didn't know what she'd
ever do when she went to heaven, because she couldn't sing a note.

That whole scene comes out clearly for me in memory--the arc of primrose
sky over the trees behind the old house, the fruit-laden boughs of the
orchard, the bank of golden-rod, like a wave of sunshine, behind the
Pulpit Stone, the nameless colour seen on a fir wood in a ruddy sunset.
I can see Uncle Alec's tired, brilliant, blue eyes, Aunt Janet's
wholesome, matronly face, Uncle Roger's sweeping blond beard and red
cheeks, and Aunt Olivia's full-blown beauty. Two voices ring out for
me above all others in the music that echoes through the halls of
recollection. Cecily's sweet and silvery, and Uncle Alec's fine tenor.
"If you're a King, you sing," was a Carlisle proverb in those days. Aunt
Julia had been the flower of the flock in that respect and had become a
noted concert singer. The world had never heard of the rest. Their music
echoed only along the hidden ways of life, and served but to lighten the
cares of the trivial round and common task.

That evening, after they tired of singing, our grown-ups began talking
of their youthful days and doings.

This was always a keen delight to us small fry. We listened avidly to
the tales of our uncles and aunts in the days when they, too--hard fact
to realize--had been children. Good and proper as they were now, once,
so it seemed, they had gotten into mischief and even had their quarrels
and disagreements. On this particular evening Uncle Roger told many
stories of Uncle Edward, and one in which the said Edward had preached
sermons at the mature age of ten from the Pulpit Stone fired, as the
sequel will show, the Story Girl's imagination.

"Can't I just see him at it now," said Uncle Roger, "leaning over
that old boulder, his cheeks red and his eyes burning with excitement,
banging the top of it as he had seen the ministers do in church. It
wasn't cushioned, however, and he always bruised his hands in his
self-forgetful earnestness. We thought him a regular wonder. We loved to
hear him preach, but we didn't like to hear him pray, because he
always insisted on praying for each of us by name, and it made us feel
wretchedly uncomfortable, somehow. Alec, do you remember how furious
Julia was because Edward prayed one day that she might be preserved from
vanity and conceit over her singing?"

"I should think I do," laughed Uncle Alec. "She was sitting right there
where Cecily is now, and she got up at once and marched right out of the
orchard, but at the gate she turned to call back indignantly, 'I guess
you'd better wait till you've prayed the conceit out of yourself before
you begin on me, Ned King. I never heard such stuck-up sermons as you
preach.' Ned went on praying and never let on he heard her, but at the
end of his prayer he wound up with 'Oh, God, I pray you to keep an
eye on us all, but I pray you to pay particular attention to my sister
Julia, for I think she needs it even more than the rest of us, world
without end, Amen.'"

Our uncles roared with laughter over the recollection. We all laughed,
indeed, especially over another tale in which Uncle Edward, leaning too
far over the "pulpit" in his earnestness, lost his balance altogether
and tumbled ingloriously into the grass below.

"He lit on a big Scotch thistle," said Uncle Roger, chuckling, "and
besides that, he skinned his forehead on a stone. But he was determined
to finish his sermon, and finish it he did. He climbed back into the
pulpit, with the tears rolling over his cheeks, and preached for
ten minutes longer, with sobs in his voice and drops of blood on his
forehead. He was a plucky little beggar. No wonder he succeeded in
life."

"And his sermons and prayers were always just about as outspoken as
those Julia objected to," said Uncle Alec. "Well, we're all getting on
in life and Edward is gray; but when I think of him I always see him
a little, rosy, curly-headed chap, laying down the law to us from
the Pulpit Stone. It seems like the other day that we were all
here together, just as these children are, and now we are scattered
everywhere. Julia in California, Edward in Halifax, Alan in South
America, Felix and Felicity and Stephen gone to the land that is very
far off."

There was a little space of silence; and then Uncle Alec began, in a
low, impressive voice, to repeat the wonderful verses of the ninetieth
Psalm--verses which were thenceforth bound up for us with the beauty
of that night and the memories of our kindred. Very reverently we all
listened to the majestic words.

"Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and
the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.... For a
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as
a watch in the night.... For all our days are passed away in thy wrath;
we spend our years as a tale that is told. The days of our years are
threescore and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years
yet is their strength, labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off and we
fly away.... So teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.... Oh, satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice
and be glad all our days.... And let the beauty of the Lord our God be
upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work
of our hands establish thou it."

The dusk crept into the orchard like a dim, bewitching personality. You
could see her--feel her--hear her. She tiptoed softly from tree to
tree, ever drawing nearer. Presently her filmy wings hovered over us and
through them gleamed the early stars of the autumn night.

The grown-ups rose reluctantly and strolled away; but we children
lingered for a moment to talk over an idea the Story Girl broached--a
good idea, we thought enthusiastically, and one that promised to add
considerable spice to life.

We were on the lookout for some new amusement. Dream books had begun to
pall. We no longer wrote in them very regularly, and our dreams were not
what they used to be before the mischance of the cucumber. So the Story
Girl's suggestion came pat to the psychological moment.

"I've thought of a splendid plan," she said. "It just flashed into my
mind when the uncles were talking about Uncle Edward. And the beauty of
it is we can play it on Sundays, and you know there are so few things it
is proper to play on Sundays. But this is a Christian game, so it will
be all right."

"It isn't like the religious fruit basket game, is it?" asked Cecily
anxiously.

We had good reason to hope that it wasn't. One desperate Sunday
afternoon, when we had nothing to read and the time seemed endless,
Felix had suggested that we have a game of fruit-basket; only instead
of taking the names of fruits, we were to take the names of Bible
characters. This, he argued, would make it quite lawful and proper to
play on Sunday. We, too desirous of being convinced, also thought so;
and for a merry hour Lazarus and Martha and Moses and Aaron and sundry
other worthies of Holy Writ had a lively time of it in the King orchard.
Peter having a Scriptural name of his own, did not want to take another;
but we would not allow this, because it would give him an unfair
advantage over the rest of us. It would be so much easier to call
out your own name than fit your tongue to an unfamiliar one. So Peter
retaliated by choosing Nebuchadnezzar, which no one could ever utter
three times before Peter shrieked it out once.

In the midst of our hilarity, however, Uncle Alec and Aunt Janet came
down upon us. It is best to draw a veil over what followed. Suffice it
to say that the recollection gave point to Cecily's question.

"No, it isn't that sort of game at all," said the Story Girl. "It is
this; each of you boys must preach a sermon, as Uncle Edward used to
do. One of you next Sunday, and another the next, and so on. And whoever
