but he has given me one, and he shall go in peace.'

'Rope, O rope!' cried the voice again, 'twine yourself round his neck
and strangle him.'

'No,' replied the rope; 'you have left me for many years past to fall to
pieces with the damp. He has stretched me out in the sun. Let him go in
peace.'

'Dog, my good dog,' cried the voice, more and more angry, 'jump at his
throat and eat him up.'

'No,' replied the dog; 'though I have served you long, you never
gave me any bread. He has given me as much as I want. Let him go in
peace.'

'Iron gate, iron gate,' cried the voice, growling like thunder, 'fall on
him and grind him to powder.'

'No,' replied the gate; 'it is a hundred years since you left me to
rust, and he has oiled me. Let him go in peace.'


VI


Once outside, the young adventurer put his oranges into a bag that hung
from his saddle, mounted his horse, and rode quickly out of the forest.

Now, as he was longing to see the princesses, he was very anxious to
come to a river or a fountain, but, though he rode for hours, a river or
fountain was nowhere to be seen. Still his heart was light, for he felt
that he had got through the most difficult part of his task, and the
rest was easy.

About mid-day he reached a sandy plain, scorching in the sun. Here he
was seized with dreadful thirst; he took his gourd and raised it to his
lips.

But the gourd was empty; in the excitement of his joy he had forgotten
to fill it. He rode on, struggling with his sufferings, but at last he
could bear it no longer.

He let himself slide to the earth, and lay down beside his horse, his
throat burning, his chest heaving, and his head going round. Already he
felt that death was near him, when his eyes fell on the bag where the
oranges peeped out.

Poor Desire, who had braved so many dangers to win the lady of his
dreams, would have given at this moment all the princesses in the world,
were they pink or golden, for a single drop of water.

'Ah!' he said to himself. 'If only these oranges were real fruit--fruit
as refreshing as what I ate in Flanders! And, after all, who knows?'

This idea put some life into him. He had the strength to lift himself up
and put his hand into his bag. He drew out an orange and opened it with
his knife.

Out of it flew the prettiest little female canary that ever was seen.

'Give me something to drink, I am dying of thirst,' said the golden
bird.

'Wait a minute,' replied Desire, so much astonished that he forgot his
own sufferings; and to satisfy the bird he took a second orange, and
opened it without thinking what he was doing. Out of it flew another
canary, and she too began to cry:

'I am dying of thirst; give me something to drink.'

Then Tubby's son saw his folly, and while the two canaries flew away
he sank on the ground, where, exhausted by his last effort, he lay
unconscious.


VII


When he came to himself, he had a pleasant feeling of freshness all
about him. It was night, the sky was sparkling with stars, and the earth
was covered with a heavy dew.

The traveller having recovered, mounted his horse, and at the first
streak of dawn he saw a stream dancing in front of him, and stooped down
and drank his fill.

He hardly had courage to open his last orange. Then he remembered that
the night before he had disobeyed the orders of the old man. Perhaps
his terrible thirst was a trick of the cunning witch, and suppose, even
though he opened the orange on the banks of the stream, that he did not
find in it the princess that he sought?

He took his knife and cut it open. Alas! out of it flew a little canary,
just like the others, who cried:

'I am thirsty; give me something to drink.'

Great was the disappointment of Desire. However, he was determined not
to let this bird fly away; so he took up some water in the palm of his
hand and held it to its beak.

Scarcely had the canary drunk when she became a beautiful girl, tall and
straight as a poplar tree, with black eyes and a golden skin. Desire had
never seen anyone half so lovely, and he stood gazing at her in delight.

On her side she seemed quite bewildered, but she looked about her with
happy eyes, and was not at all afraid of her deliverer.

He asked her name. She answered that she was called the Princess Zizi;
she was about sixteen years old, and for ten years of that time the
witch had kept her shut up in an orange, in the shape of a canary.

'Well, then, my charming Zizi,' said the young Prince, who was longing
to marry her, 'let us ride away quickly so as to escape from the wicked
witch.'

But Zizi wished to know where he meant to take her.

'To my father's castle,' he said.

He mounted his horse and took her in front of him, and, holding her
carefully in his arms, they began their journey.


VIII


Everything the Princess saw was new to her, and in passing through
mountains, valleys, and towns, she asked a thousand questions. Desire
was charmed to answer them. It is so delightful to teach those one
loves!

Once she inquired what the girls in his country were like.

'They are pink and white,' he replied, 'and their eyes are blue.'

'Do you like blue eyes?' said the Princess; but Desire thought it was
a good opportunity to find out what was in her heart, so he did not
answer.

'And no doubt,' went on the Princess, 'one of them is your intended
bride?'

Still he was silent, and Zizi drew herself up proudly.

'No,' he said at last. 'None of the girls of my own country are
beautiful in my eyes, and that is why I came to look for a wife in the
land of the sun. Was I wrong, my lovely Zizi?'

This time it was Zizi's turn to be silent.


IX


Talking in this way they drew near to the castle. When they were about
four stone-throws from the gates they dismounted in the forest, by the
edge of a fountain.

'My dear Zizi,' said Tubby's son, 'we cannot present ourselves before
my father like two common people who have come back from a walk. We must
enter the castle with more ceremony. Wait for me here, and in an hour I
will return with carriages and horses fit for a princess.'

'Don't be long,' replied Zizi, and she watched him go with wistful eyes.

When she was left by herself the poor girl began to feel afraid. She
was alone for the first time in her life, and in the middle of a thick
forest.

Suddenly she heard a noise among the trees. Fearing lest it should be
a wolf, she hid herself in the hollow trunk of a willow tree which hung
over the fountain. It was big enough to hold her altogether, but she
peeped out, and her pretty head was reflected in the clear water.

Then there appeared, not a wolf, but a creature quite as wicked and
quite as ugly. Let us see who this creature was.


X


Not far from the fountain there lived a family of bricklayers. Now,
fifteen years before this time, the father in walking through the forest
found a little girl, who had been deserted by the gypsies. He carried
her home to his wife, and the good woman was sorry for her, and brought
her up with her own sons. As she grew older, the little gypsy became
much more remarkable for strength and cunning than for sense or beauty.
She had a low forehead, a flat nose, thick lips, coarse hair, and a skin
not golden like that of Zizi, but the colour of clay.

As she was always being teased about her complexion, she got as noisy
and cross as a titmouse. So they used to call her Titty.

Titty was often sent by the bricklayer to fetch water from the fountain,
and as she was very proud and lazy the gypsy disliked this very much.

It was she who had frightened Zizi by appearing with her pitcher on her
shoulder. Just as she was stooping to fill it, she saw reflected in the
water the lovely image of the Princess.

'What a pretty face!' she exclaimed, 'Why, it must be mine! How in the
world can they call me ugly? I am certainly much too pretty to be their
water carrier!'

So saying, she broke her pitcher and went home.

'Where is your pitcher?' asked the bricklayer.

'Well, what do you expect? The pitcher may go many times to the
well....'

'But at last it is broken. Well, here is a bucket that will not break.'

The gypsy returned to the fountain, and addressing once more the image
of Zizi, she said:

'No; I don't mean to be a beast of burden any longer.' And she flung the
bucket so high in the air that it stuck in the branches of an oak.

'I met a wolf,' she told the bricklayer, 'and I broke the bucket across
his nose.'

The bricklayer asked her no more questions, but took down a broom and
gave her such a beating that her pride was humbled a little.

Then he handed to her an old copper milk-can, and said:

'If you don't bring it back full, your bones shall suffer for it.'


XI


Titty went off rubbing her sides; but this time she did not dare to
disobey, and in a very bad temper stooped down over the well. It was not
at all easy to fill the milk-can, which was large and round. It would
not go down into the well, and the gypsy had to try again and again.

At last her arms grew so tired that when she did manage to get the
can properly under the water she had no strength to pull it up, and it
rolled to the bottom.

On seeing the can disappear, she made such a miserable face that Zizi,
who had been watching her all this time, burst into fits of laughter.

Titty turned round and perceived the mistake she had made; and she felt
so angry that she made up her mind to be revenged at once.

'What are you doing there, you lovely creature?' she said to Zizi.

'I am waiting for my lover,' Zizi replied; and then, with a simplicity
quite natural in a girl who so lately had been a canary, she told all
her story.

The gypsy had often seen the young Prince pass by, with his gun on his
shoulder, when he was going after crows. She was too ugly and ragged
for him ever to have noticed her, but Titty on her side had admired him,
though she thought he might well have been a little fatter.

'Dear, dear!' she said to herself. 'So he likes yellow women! Why, I am
yellow too, and if I could only think of a way----'

It was not long before she did think of it.

'What!' cried the sly Titty, 'they are coming with great pomp to fetch
you, and you are not afraid to show yourself to so many fine lords and
ladies with your hair down like that? Get down at once, my poor child,
and let me dress your hair for you!'

The innocent Zizi came down at once, and stood by Titty. The gypsy began
to comb her long brown locks, when suddenly she drew a pin from her
stays, and, just as the titmouse digs its beak into the heads of linnets
and larks, Titty dug the pin into the head of Zizi.

No sooner did Zizi feel the prick of the pin than she became a bird
again, and, spreading her wings, she flew away.

'That was neatly done,' said the gypsy. 'The Prince will be clever if
he finds his bride.' And, arranging her dress, she seated herself on the
grass to await Desire.


XII


Meanwhile the Prince was coming as fast as his horse could carry him.
He was so impatient that he was always full fifty yards in front of the
lords and ladies sent by Tubby to bring back Zizi.

At the sight of the hideous gypsy he was struck dumb with surprise and
horror.

'Ah me!' said Titty, 'so you don't know your poor Zizi? While you were
away the wicked witch came, and turned me into this. But if you only
have the courage to marry me I shall get back my beauty.' And she began
to cry bitterly.

Now the good-natured Desire was as soft-hearted as he was brave.

'Poor girl,' he thought to himself. 'It is not her fault, after all,
that she has grown so ugly, it is mine. Oh! why did I not follow the old
man's advice? Why did I leave her alone? And besides, it depends on
me to break the spell, and I love her too much to let her remain like
this.'

So he presented the gypsy to the lords and ladies of the Court,
explaining to them the terrible misfortune which had befallen his
beautiful bride.

They all pretended to believe it, and the ladies at once put on the
false princess the rich dresses they had brought for Zizi.

She was then perched on the top of a magnificent ambling palfrey, and
they set forth to the castle.

But unluckily the rich dress and jewels only made Titty look uglier
still, and Desire could not help feeling hot and uncomfortable when he
made his entry with her into the city.

Bells were pealing, chimes ringing, and the people filling the streets
and standing at their doors to watch the procession go by, and they
could hardly believe their eyes as they saw what a strange bride their
Prince had chosen.

In order to do her more honour, Tubby came to meet her at the foot of
the great marble staircase. At the sight of the hideous creature he
almost fell backwards.

'What!' he cried. 'Is this the wonderful beauty?'

'Yes, father, it is she,' replied Desire with a sheepish look. 'But she
has been bewitched by a wicked sorceress, and will not regain her beauty
until she is my wife.'

'Does she say so? Well, if you believe that, you may drink cold water
and think it bacon,' the unhappy Tubby answered crossly.

But all the same, as he adored his son, he gave the gypsy his hand and
led her to the great hall, where the bridal feast was spread.


XIII


The feast was excellent, but Desire hardly touched anything. However, to
make up, the other guests ate greedily, and, as for Tubby, nothing ever
took away his appetite.

When the moment arrived to serve the roast goose, there was a pause, and
Tubby took the opportunity to lay down his knife and fork for a little.
But as the goose gave no sign of appearing, he sent his head carver to
find out what was the matter in the kitchen.

Now this was what had happened.

While the goose was turning on the spit, a beautiful little canary
hopped on to the sill of the open window.

'Good-morning, my fine cook,' she said in a silvery voice to the man who
was watching the roast.

'Good-morning, lovely golden bird,' replied the chief of the scullions,
who had been well brought up.

'I pray that Heaven may send you to sleep,' said the golden bird, 'and
that the goose may burn, so that there may be none left for Titty.'

And instantly the chief of the scullions fell fast asleep, and the goose
was burnt to a cinder.

When he awoke he was horrified, and gave orders to pluck another goose,
to stuff it with chestnuts, and put it on the spit.

While it was browning at the fire, Tubby inquired for his goose a second
time. The Master Cook himself mounted to the hall to make his excuses,
and to beg his lord to have a little patience. Tubby showed his patience
by abusing his son.

'As if it wasn't enough,' he grumbled between his teeth, 'that the boy
should pick up a hag without a penny, but the goose must go and burn
now. It isn't a wife he has brought me, it is Famine herself.'


XIV


While the Master Cook was upstairs, the golden bird came again to perch
on the window-sill, and called in his clear voice to the head scullion,
who was watching the spit:

'Good-morning, my fine Scullion!'

'Good-morning, lovely Golden Bird,' replied the Scullion, whom the
Master Cook had forgotten in his excitement to warn.

'I pray Heaven,' went on the Canary, 'that it will send you to sleep,
and that the goose may burn, so that there may be none left for Titty.'

And the Scullion fell fast asleep, and when the Master Cook came back he
found the goose as black as the chimney.

In a fury he woke the Scullion, who in order to save himself from blame
told the whole story.

'That accursed bird,' said the Cook; 'it will end by getting me sent
away. Come, some of you, and hide yourselves, and if it comes again,
catch it and wring its neck.'

He spitted a third goose, lit a huge fire, and seated himself by it.

The bird appeared a third time, and said: 'Good-morning, my fine Cook.'

'Good-morning, lovely Golden Bird,' replied the Cook, as if nothing
had happened, and at the moment that the Canary was beginning, 'I pray
Heaven that it may send,' a scullion who was hidden outside rushed out
and shut the shutters. The bird flew into the kitchen. Then all the
cooks and scullions sprang after it, knocking at it with their aprons.
At length one of them caught it just at the very moment that Tubby
entered the kitchen, waving his sceptre. He had come to see for himself
why the goose had never made its appearance.

The Scullion stopped at once, just as he was about to wring the Canary's
neck.


XV


'Will some one be kind enough to tell me the meaning of all this?' cried
the Lord of Avesnes.

'Your Excellency, it is the bird,' replied the Scullion, and he placed
it in his hand.

'Nonsense! What a lovely bird!' said Tubby, and in stroking its head he
touched a pin that was sticking between its feathers. He pulled it out,
and lo! the Canary at once became a beautiful girl with a golden skin
who jumped lightly to the ground.

'Gracious! what a pretty girl!' said Tubby.

'Father! it is she! it is Zizi!' exclaimed Desire, who entered at this
moment.

And he took her in his arms, crying: 'My darling Zizi, how happy I am to
see you once more!'

'Well, and the other one?' asked Tubby.

The other one was stealing quietly to the door.

'Stop her! called Tubby. 'We will judge her cause at once.'

And he seated himself solemnly on the oven, and condemned Titty to
be burned alive. After which the lords and cooks formed themselves in
lines, and Tubby betrothed Desire to Zizi.


XVI


The marriage took place a few days later. All the boys in the country
side were there, armed with wooden swords, and decorated with epaulets
made of gilt paper.

Zizi obtained Titty's pardon, and she was sent back to the brick-fields,
followed and hooted at by all the boys. And this is why to-day the
country boys always throw stones at a titmouse.

On the evening of the wedding-day all the larders, cellars, cupboards
and tables of the people, whether rich or poor, were loaded as if by
enchantment with bread, wine, beer, cakes and tarts, roast larks, and
even geese, so that Tubby could not complain any more that his son had
married Famine.

Since that time there has always been plenty to eat in that country, and
since that time, too, you see in the midst of the fair-haired blue-eyed
women of Flanders a few beautiful girls, whose eyes are black and whose
skins are the colour of gold. They are the descendants of Zizi.(21)

(21) Charles Deulin, Contes du Roi Gambrinus.




THE TWELVE BROTHERS
