
Cousin Helen heard no more, but presently steps sounded outside her door,
and Katy looked in to ask if she were dressed, and if she might bring Rose
in, a request which was gladly granted. It was a pretty sight to see Rose
with Cousin Helen. She knew all about her already from Clover and Katy,
and fell at once under the gentle spell which seemed always to surround
that invalid sofa, begged leave to say "Cousin Helen" as the others did,
and was altogether at her best and sweetest when with her, full of
merriment, but full too of a deference and sympathy which made her
particularly charming.

"I never did see anything so lovely in all my life before," she told
Clover in confidence. "To watch her lying there looking so radiant and so
peaceful and so interested in Katy's affairs, and never once seeming to
remember that except for that accident she too would have been a bride
and had a wedding! It's perfectly wonderful! Do you suppose she is never
sorry for herself? She seems the merriest of us all."

"I don't think she remembers herself often enough to be sorry. She is
always thinking of some one else, it seems to me."

"Well, I am glad to have seen her," added Rose, in a more serious tone
than was usual to her. "She and grandmamma are of a different order of
beings from the rest of the world. I don't wonder you and Katy always were
so good; you ought to be with such a Cousin Helen."

"I don't think we were as good as you make us out, but Cousin Helen has
really been one of the strong influences of our lives. She was the making
of Katy, when she had that long illness; and Katy has made the rest of
us."

Little Rose from the first moment became the delight of the household, and
especially of Amy Ashe, who could not do enough for her, and took her off
her mother's hands so entirely that Rose complained that she seemed to
have lost her child as well as her husband. She was a sedate little
maiden, and wonderfully wise for her years. Already, in some ways she
seemed older than her erratic little mother, of whom, in a droll fashion,
she assumed a sort of charge. She was a born housewife.

"Mamma, you have fordotten your wings," Clover would hear her saying.
"Mamma, you has a wip in your seeve, you must mend it," or "Mamma, don't
fordet dat your teys is in the top dwawer,"--all these reminders and
advices being made particularly comical by the baby pronunciation. Rose's
theory was that little Rose was a messenger from heaven sent to buffet her
and correct her mistakes.

"The bane and the antidote," she would say. "Think of my having a child
with powers of ratiocination!"

Rose came down the night of her arrival after a long, freshening nap,
looking rested and bonny in a pretty blue dress, and saying that as
little Rose too had taken a good sleep, she might sit up to tea if the
family liked. The family were only too pleased to have her do so. After
tea Rose carried her off, ostensibly to go to bed, but Clover heard a
great deal of confabulating and giggling in the hall and on the stairs,
and soon after, Rose returned, the door-bell rang loudly, and there
entered an astonishing vision,--little Rose, costumed as a Cupid or a
carrier-pigeon, no one knew exactly which, with a pair of large white
wings fastened on her shoulders, and dragging behind her by a loop of
ribbon a sizeable basket quite full of parcels.

Straight toward Katy she went, and with her small hands behind her back
and her blue eyes fixed full on Katy's face, repeated with the utmost
solemnity the following "poem:"

    "I'm a messender, you see,
     Fwom Hymen's Expwess Tumpany.
     All these little bundles are
     For my Aunty Taty Tarr;
     If she knows wot's dood for her
     She will tiss the messender."


[Illustration:


    "I'm a messender, you see,
     Fwom Hymen's Expwess Tumpany."]


"You sweet thing!" cried Katy, "tissing the messender" with all her heart.
"I never heard such a dear little poem. Did you write it yourself,
Roslein?"

"No. Mamma wote it, but she teached it to me so I tould say it."

The bundles of course contained wedding gifts. Rose seemed to have brought
her trunk full of them. There were a pretty pair of salt-cellars from Mrs.
Redding, a charming paper-knife of silver, with an antique coin set in the
handle, from Sylvia, a hand-mirror mounted in brass from Esther Dearborn,
a long towel with fringed and embroidered ends from Ellen Gray, and from
dear old Mrs. Redding a beautiful lace-pin set with a moonstone. Next came
a little _repousse_ pitcher marked, "With love from Mary Silver," then a
parcel tied with pink ribbons, containing a card-case of Japanese leather,
which was little Rose's gift, and last of all Rose's own present, a
delightful case full of ivory brushes and combs. Altogether never was such
a satisfactory "fardel" brought by Hymen's or any other express company
before; and in opening the packages, reading the notes that came with them
and exclaiming and admiring, time flew so fast that Rose quite forgot the
hour, till little Rose, growing sleepy, reminded her of it by saying,--

"Mamma, I dess I'd better do to bed now, betause if I don't I shall be too
seepy to turn to Aunt Taty's wedding to-mowwow."

"Dear me!" cried Rose, catching the child up. "This is simply dreadful!
what a mother I am! Things _are_ come to a pass indeed, if babes and
sucklings have to ask to be put to bed. Baby, you ought to have been
christened Nathan the Wise."

She disappeared with Roslein's drowsy eyes looking over her shoulder.

Next afternoon came Ned, and with him, to Katy's surprise and pleasure,
appeared the good old commodore who had played such a kind part in their
affairs in Italy the year before. It was a great compliment that he should
think it worth while to come so far to see one of his junior officers
married; and it showed so much real regard for Ned that everybody was
delighted. These guests were quartered with Mrs. Ashe, but they took most
of their meals with the Carrs; and it was arranged that they, with Polly
and Amy, should come to an early breakfast on the marriage morning.

After Ned's arrival things did seem to grow a little fuller and busier,
for he naturally wanted Katy to himself, and she was too preoccupied to
keep her calm grasp on events; still all went smoothly, and Rose declared
that there never was such a wedding since the world was made,--no tears,
no worries, nobody looking tired, nothing disagreeable!

Clover's one great subject of concern was the fear that it might rain.
There was a little haze about the sunset the night before, and she
expressed her intention to Cousin Helen of lying awake all night to see
how things looked.

"I really feel as if I could not bear it if it should storm," she said,
"after all this fine weather too; and I know I shall not sleep a wink,
anyway."

"I think we can trust God to take care of the weather even on Katy's
wedding-day," replied Cousin Helen, gently.

And after all it was she who lay awake. Pain had made her a restless
sleeper, and as her bed commanded the great arch of western sky, she saw
the moon, a sharp-curved silver shape, descend and disappear a little
before midnight. She roused again when all was still, solemn darkness
except for a spangle of stars, and later, opened her eyes in time to catch
the faint rose flush of dawn reflected from the east. She raised herself
on her elbow to watch the light grow.

"It is a fair day for the child," she whispered to herself. "How good God
is!" Then she slept again for a long, restful space, and woke refreshed,
so that Katy's secret fear that Cousin Helen might be ill from excitement,
and not able to come to her wedding, was not realized.

Clover, meantime, had slept soundly all night. She and Katy shared the
same room, and waked almost at the same moment. It was early still; but
the sisters felt bright and rested and ready for work, so they rose at
once.

They dressed in silence, after a little whispered rejoicing over the
beautiful morning, and in silence took their Bibles and sat down side by
side to read the daily portion which was their habit. Then hand in hand
they stole downstairs, disturbing nobody, softly opened doors and windows,
carried bowls and jars out on the porch, and proceeded to arrange a great
basket full of roses which had been brought the night before, and set in
the dew-cool shade of the willows to keep fresh.

Before breakfast all the house had put on festal airs. Summer had come
early to Burnet that year; every garden was in bud and blossom, and every
one who had flowers had sent their best to grace Katy's wedding. The whole
world seemed full of delicious smells. Each table and chimney-piece bore a
fragrant load; a great bowl of Jacqueminots stood in the middle of the
breakfast-table, and two large jars of the same on the porch, where Clover
had arranged various seats and cushions that it might serve as a sort of
outdoor parlor.

Nobody who came to that early breakfast ever forgot its peace and
pleasantness and the sweet atmosphere of affection which seemed to pervade
everything about it. After breakfast came family prayers as usual, Dr.
Carr reading the chapter, and the dear old commodore joining with a hearty
nautical voice in,--

    "Awake my soul! and with the sun,"

which was a favorite hymn with all of them. Ned shared Katy's book, and
his face and hers alone would have been breakfast enough for the company
if everything else had failed, as Rose remarked to Clover in a whisper,
though nobody found any fault with the more substantial fare which Debby
had sent in previously. Somehow this little mutual service of prayer and
praise seemed to fit in with the spirit of the day, and give it its
keynote.

"It's just the sweetest wedding," Mrs. Ashe told her brother. "And the
wonderful thing is that everything comes so naturally. Katy is precisely
her usual self,--only a little more so."

"I'm under great obligations to Amy for having that fever," was Ned's
somewhat indirect answer; but his sister understood what he meant.

Breakfast over, the guests discreetly removed themselves; and the whole
family joined in resetting the table for the luncheon, which was to be at
two, Katy and Ned departing in the boat at four. It was a simple but
abundant repast, with plenty of delicious home-cooked food,--oysters and
salads and cold chicken; fresh salmon from Lake Superior; a big Virginia
ham baked to perfection, red and translucent to its savory centre; hot
coffee, and quantities of Debby's perfect rolls. There were strawberries,
also, and ice-cream, and the best of home-made cake and jellies, and
everywhere vases of fresh roses to perfume the feast. When all was
arranged, there was still time for Katy to make Cousin Helen a visit, and
then go to her room for a quiet rest before dressing; and still that same
unhurried air pervaded the house.

There had been a little discussion the night before as to just how the
bride should make her appearance at the decisive moment; but Katy had
settled it by saying simply that she should come downstairs, and Ned could
meet her at the foot of the staircase.

"It is the simplest way," she said; "and you know I don't want any fuss. I
will just come down."

"I dare say she's right," remarked Rose; "but it seems to me to require a
great deal of courage."

And after all, it didn't. The simple and natural way of doing a thing
generally turns out the easiest. Clover helped Katy to put on the
wedding-gown of soft crape and creamy white silk. It was trimmed with old
lace and knots of ribbon, and Katy wore with it two or three white roses
which Ned had brought her, and a pearl pendant which was his gift. Then
Clover had to go downstairs to receive the guests, and see that Cousin
Helen's sofa was put in the right place; and Rose, who remained behind,
had the pleasure of arranging Katy's veil. The yellow-white of the old
blonde was very becoming, and altogether, the effect, though not
"stylish," was very sweet. Katy was a little pale, but otherwise exactly
like her usual self, with no tremors or self-consciousness.

Presently little Rose came up with a message.

"Aunty Tover says dat Dr. Tone has tum, and everything is weddy, and you'd
better tum down," she announced.

Katy gave Rose a last kiss, and went down the hall. But little Rose was so
fascinated by the appearance of the white dress and veil that she kept
fast hold of Katy's hand, disregarding her mother's suggestion that she
should slip down the back staircase, as she herself proposed to do.

"No, I want to do with my Aunt Taty," she persisted.

So it chanced that Katy came downstairs with pretty little Rose clinging
to her like a sort of impromptu bridesmaid; and meeting Ned's eyes as he
stood at the foot waiting for her, she forgot herself, lost the little
sense of shyness which was creeping over her, and responded to his look
with a tender, brilliant smile. The light from the hall-door caught her
face and figure just then, the color flashed into her cheeks; and she
looked like a beautiful, happy picture of a bride, and all by
accident,--which was the best thing about it; for pre-arranged effects are
not always effective, and are apt to betray their pre-arrangement.

Then Katy took Ned's arm, little Rose let go her hand, and they went into
the parlor and were married.

Dr. Stone had an old-fashioned and very solemn wedding service which he
was accustomed to use on such occasions. He generally spoke of the bride
as "Thy handmaiden," which was a form that Clover particularly
deprecated. He had also been known to advert to the world where there is
neither marrying nor giving in marriage as a great improvement on this,
which seemed, to say the least, an unfortunate allusion under the
circumstances. But upon this occasion his feelings were warmed and
touched, and he called Katy "My dear child," which was much better than
"Thy handmaiden."

When the ceremony was over, Ned kissed Katy, and her father kissed her,
and the girls and Dorry and Phil; and then, without waiting for any one
else, she left her place and went straight to where Cousin Helen lay on
her sofa, watching the scene with those clear, tender eyes in which no
shadow of past regrets could be detected. Katy knelt down beside her, and
they exchanged a long, silent embrace. There was no need for words between
hearts which knew each other so well.

After that for a little while all was congratulations and good wishes. I
think no bride ever carried more hearty good-will into her new life than
did my Katy. All sorts of people took Ned off into corners to tell him
privately what a fortunate person he was in winning such a wife. Each
fresh confidence of this sort was a fresh delight to him, he so thoroughly
agreed with it.

"She's a prize, sir!--she's a prize!" old Mr. Worrett kept repeating,
shaking Ned's hand with each repetition. Mrs. Worrett had not been able to
come. She never left home now on account of the prevailing weakness of
carryalls; but she sent Katy her best love and a gorgeous broom made of
the tails of her own peacocks.

"Aren't you sorry you are not going to stay and have a nice time with us
all, and help eat up the rest of the cake?" demanded Clover, as she put
her head into the carriage for a last kiss, two hours later.

"Very!" said Katy; but she didn't look sorry at all.

"There's one comfort," Clover remarked valiantly, as she walked back to
the house with her arm round Rose's waist. "She's coming back in
December, when the ship sails, and as likely as not she will stay a year,
or perhaps two. That's what I like about the navy. You can eat your cake,
and have it too. Husbands go off for good long times, and leave their
wives behind them. I think it's delightful!"

"I wonder if Katy will think it quite so delightful," remarked Rose.
"Girls are not always so anxious to ship their husbands off for what you
call 'good long times.'"

"I think she ought. It seems to me perfectly unnatural that any one should
want to leave her own family and go away for always. I like Ned dearly,
but except for this blessed arrangement about going to sea, I don't see
how Katy could."

"Clover, you are a goose. You'll be wiser one of these days, see if you
aren't," was Rose's only reply.




CHAPTER IV.

TWO LONG YEARS IN ONE SHORT CHAPTER.


Katy's absence left a sad blank in the household. Every one missed her,
but nobody so much as Clover, who all her life long had been her
room-mate, confidante, and intimate friend.

It was a great help that Rose was there for the first three lonely days.
Dulness and sadness were impossible with that vivacious little person at
hand; and so long as she stayed, Clover had small leisure to be mournful.
Rose was so bright and merry and affectionate that Elsie and John were
almost as much in love with her as Clover herself, and sat and sunned
themselves in her warmth, so to speak, all day long, while Phil and Dorry
fairly quarrelled as to which should have the pleasure of doing little
services for her and Baby Rose.

If she could have remained the summer through, all would have seemed easy;
but that of course was impossible. Mr. Browne appeared with a provoking
punctuality on the morning of the fourth day, prepared to carry his family
away with him. He spent one night at Dr. Carr's, and they all liked him
very much. No one could help it, he was so cordial and friendly and
pleasant. Still, for all her liking, Clover could have found it in her
heart to quite detest him as the final moment drew near.

"Let him go home without you," she urged coaxingly. "Stay with us all
summer,--you and little Rose! He can come back in September to fetch you,
and it would be so delightful to us."

"My dear, I couldn't live without Deniston till September," said the
disappointing Rose. "It may not show itself to a casual observer, but I am
really quite foolish about Deniston. I shouldn't be happy away from him at
all. He's the only husband I've got,--a 'poor thing, but mine own,' as
the 'immortal William' puts it."

"Oh, dear," groaned Clover. "That is the way that Katy is going to talk
about Ned, I suppose. Matrimony is the most aggravating condition of
things for outsiders that was ever invented. I wish nobody _had_ invented
it. Here it would be so nice for us to have you stay, and the moment that
provoking husband of yours appears, you can't think of any one else."

"Too true--much too true. Now, Clovy, don't embitter our last moments with
reproaches. It's hard enough to leave you as it is, when I've just found
you again after all these years. I've had the most beautiful visit that
ever was, and you've all been awfully dear and nice. 'Kiss me quick and
let me go,' as the song says. I only wish Burnet was next door to West
Cedar Street!"

Next day Mr. Browne sailed away with his "handful of Roses," as Elsie
sentimentally termed them (and indeed, Rose by herself would have been a
handful for almost any man); and Clover, like Lord Ullin, was "left
lamenting." Cousin Helen remained, however; and it was not till she too
departed, a week later, that Clover fully recognized what it meant to have
Katy married. Then indeed she could have found it in her heart to emulate
Eugenie de la Ferronayes, and shed tears over all the little inanimate
objects which her sister had left behind,--the worn-out gloves, the old
dressing slippers in the shoe-bag. But dear me, we get used to everything,
and it is fortunate that we do! Life is too full, and hearts too flexible,
and really sad things too sad, for the survival of sentimental regrets
over changes which do not involve real loss and the wide separation of
death. In time, Clover learned to live without Katy, and to be cheerful
still.

Her cheerfulness was greatly helped by the letters which came regularly,
and showed how contented Katy herself was. She and Ned were having a
beautiful time, first in New York, and making visits near it, then in
Portsmouth and Portland, when the frigate moved on to these harbors, and
in Newport, which was full and gay and amusing to the last degree. Later,
in August, the letters came from Bar Harbor, where Katy had followed, in
company with the commodore's wife, who seemed as nice as her husband; and
Clover heard of all manner of delightful doings,--sails, excursions,
receptions on board ship, and long moonlight paddles with Ned, who was an
expert canoeist. Everybody was so wonderfully kind, Katy said; but Ned
wrote to his sister that Katy was a great favorite; every one liked her,
and his particular friends were all raging wildly round in quest of girls
just like her to marry. "But it's no use; for, as I tell them," he added,
"that sort isn't made in batches. There is only one Katy; and happily she
belongs to me, and the other fellows must get along as they can."

This was all satisfactory and comforting; and Clover could endure a little
loneliness herself so long as her beloved Katy seemed so happy. She was
very busy besides, and there _were_ compensations, as she admitted to
herself. She liked the consequence of being at the head of domestic
affairs, and succeeding to Katy's position as papa's special
daughter,--the person to whom he came for all he wanted, and to whom he
told his little secrets. She and Elsie became more intimate than they had
ever been before; and Elsie in her turn enjoyed being Clover's lieutenant
as Clover had been Katy's. So the summer did not seem long to any of them;
and when September was once past, and they could begin to say, "month
after next," the time sped much faster.

"Mrs. Hall asked me this morning when the Worthingtons were coming," said
Johnnie, one day. "It seems so funny to have Katy spoken of as 'the
Worthingtons.'"

"I only wish the Worthingtons would write and say when," remarked Clover.
"It is more than a week since we heard from them."

The next day brought the wished-for letter, and the good news that Ned had
a fortnight's leave, and meant to bring Katy home the middle of November,
and stay for Thanksgiving. After that the "Natchitoches" was to sail for
an eighteen months' cruise to China and Japan; and then Ned would probably
have two years ashore at the Torpedo Station or Naval Academy or
somewhere, and they would start a little home for themselves.

"Meantime," wrote Katy, "I am coming to spend a year and a half with you,
if urged. Don't all speak at once, and don't mind saying so, if you don't
want me."

The bitter drop in this pleasant intelligence--there generally is one, you
know--was that the fortnight of Ned's stay was to be spent at Mrs. Ashe's.
"It's her only chance to see Ned," said Katy; "so I know you won't mind,
for afterward you will have me for such a long visit."

But they _did_ mind very much!

"I don't think it's fair," cried Johnnie, hotly, while Clover and Elsie
exchanged disgusted looks; "Katy belongs to us."

"Katy belongs to her husband, on the contrary," said Dr. Carr,
overhearing her; "you must learn that lesson once for all, children.
There's no escape from the melancholy fact; and it's quite right and
natural that Ned should wish to go to his sister, and she should want to
have him."

"Ned! yes. But Katy--"

"My dear, Katy _is_ Ned," answered Dr. Carr, with a twinkle. Then noticing
the extremely unconvinced expression of Johnnie's face, he added more
seriously, "Don't be cross, children, and spoil all Katy's pleasure in
coming home, with your foolish jealousies. Clover, I trust to you to take
these young mutineers in hand and make them listen to reason."

Thus appealed to, Clover rallied her powers, and while laboring to bring
Elsie and John to a proper frame of mind, schooled herself as well, so as
to be able to treat Mrs. Ashe amiably when they met. Dear, unconscious
Polly meanwhile was devising all sorts of pleasant and hospitable plans
designed to make Ned's stay a sort of continuous fete to everybody. She
put on no airs over the preference shown her, and was altogether so kind
and friendly and sweet that no one could quarrel with her even in thought,
and Johnnie herself had to forgive her, and be contented with a little
whispered grumble to Dorry now and then over the inconvenience of
possessing "people-in-law."

And then Katy came, the same Katy, only, as Clover thought, nicer,
brighter, dearer, and certainly better-looking than ever. Sea air had
tanned her a little, but the brown was becoming; and she had gained an
ease and polish of manner which her sisters admired very much. And after
all, it seemed to make little difference at which house they stayed, for
they were in and out of both all day long; and Mrs. Ashe threw her doors
open to the Carrs and wanted some or all of them for every meal, so that
except for the name of the thing, it was almost as satisfactory to have
Katy over the way as occupying her old quarters.

The fortnight sped only too rapidly. Ned departed, and Katy settled
herself in the familiar corner to wait till he should come back again.
Navy wives have to learn the hard lesson of patience in the long
separations entailed by their husbands' profession. Katy missed Ned
sorely, but she was too unselfish to mope, or to let the others know how
hard to bear his loss seemed to her. She never told any one how she lay
awake in stormy nights, or when the wind blew,--and it seemed to blow
oftener than usual that winter,--imagining the frigate in a gale, and
whispering little prayers for Ned's safety. Then her good sense would come
back, and remind her that wind in Burnet did not necessarily mean wind in
Shanghai or Yokohama or wherever the "Natchitoches" might be; and she
would put herself to sleep with the repetition of that lovely verse of
Keble's "Evening Hymn," left out in most of the collections, but which was
particularly dear to her:--

    "Thou Ruler of the light and dark,
     Guide through the tempest Thine own Ark;
     Amid the howling, wintry sea,
     We are in port if we have Thee."

So the winter passed, and the spring; and another summer came and went,
with little change to the quiet Burnet household, and Katy's brief life
with her husband began to seem dreamy and unreal, it lay so far behind.
And then, with the beginning of the second winter came a new anxiety.

Phil, as we said in the last chapter, had grown too fast to be very
strong, and was the most delicate of the family in looks and health,
though full of spirit and fun. Going out to skate with some other boys the
week before Christmas, on a pond which was not so securely frozen as it
looked, the ice gave way; and though no one was drowned, the whole party
had a drenching, and were thoroughly chilled. None of the others minded it
much, but the exposure had a serious effect on Phil. He caught a bad cold
which rapidly increased into pneumonia; and Christmas Day, usually such a
bright one in the Carr household, was overshadowed by anxious forebodings,
for Phil was seriously ill, and the doctor felt by no means sure how
things would turn with him. The sisters nursed him devotedly, and by
March he was out again; but he did not get _well_ or lose the persistent
little cough, which kept him thin and weak. Dr. Carr tried this remedy and
that, but nothing seemed to do much good; and Katy thought that her father
looked graver and more anxious every time that he tested Phil's
temperature or listened at his chest.

"It's not serious yet," he told her in private; "but I don't like the look
of things. The boy is just at a turning-point. Any little thing might set
him one way or the other. I wish I could send him away from this damp lake
climate."

But sending a half-sick boy away is not such an easy thing, nor was it
quite clear where he ought to go. So matters drifted along for another
month, and then Phil settled the question for himself by having a slight
hemorrhage. It was evident that something must be done, and speedily--but
what? Dr. Carr wrote to various medical acquaintances, and in reply
pamphlets and letters poured in, each designed to prove that the
particular part of the country to which the pamphlet or the letter
referred was the only one to which it was at all worth while to consign an
invalid with delicate lungs. One recommended Florida, another Georgia, a
third South Carolina; a fourth and fifth recommended cold instead of heat,
and an open air life with the mercury at zero. It was hard to decide what
was best.

"He ought not to go off alone either," said the puzzled father. "He is
neither old enough nor wise enough to manage by himself, but who to send
with him is the puzzle. It doubles the expense, too."

"Perhaps I--" began Katy, but her father cut her short with a gesture.

"No, Katy, I couldn't permit that. Your husband is due in a few weeks now.
You must be free to go to him wherever he is, not hampered with the care
of a sick brother. Besides, whoever takes charge of Phil must be prepared
for a long absence,--at least a year. It must be either Clover or myself;
and as it seems out of the question that I shall drop my practice for a
year, Clover is the person."

"Phil is seventeen now," suggested Katy. "That is not so very young."

"No, not if he were in full health. Plenty of boys no older than he have
gone out West by themselves, and fared perfectly well. But in Phil's
condition that would never answer. He has a tendency to be low-spirited
about himself too, and he needs incessant care and watchfulness."

"Out West," repeated Katy. "Have you decided, then?"

"Yes. The letter I had yesterday from Hope, makes me pretty sure that St.
Helen's is the best place we have heard of."

"St. Helen's! Where is that?"

"It is one of the new health-resorts in Colorado which has lately come
into notice for consumptives. It's very high up; nearly or quite six
thousand feet, and the air is said to be something remarkable."

"Clover will manage beautifully, I think; she is such a sensible little
thing," said Katy.

"She seems to me, and he too, about as fit to go off two thousand miles by
themselves as the Babes in the Wood," remarked Dr. Carr, who, like many
other fathers, found it hard to realize that his children had outgrown
their childhood. "However, there's no help for it. If I don't stay and
grind away at the mill, there is no one to pay for this long journey.
Clover will have to do her best."

"And a very good best it will be you'll see," said Katy, consolingly.
"Does Dr. Hope tell you anything about the place?" she added, turning over
the letter which her father had handed her.

"Oh, he says the scenery is fine, and the mean rain-fall is this, and the
mean precipitation that, and that boarding-places can be had. That is
pretty much all. So far as climate goes, it is the right place, but I
presume the accommodations are poor enough. The children must go prepared
to rough it. The town was only settled ten or eleven years ago; there
hasn't been time to make things comfortable," remarked Dr. Carr, with a
truly Eastern ignorance of the rapid way in which things march in the far
West.

Clover's feelings when the decision was announced to her it would be hard
to explain in full. She was both confused and exhilarated by the sudden
weight of responsibility laid upon her. To leave everybody and everything
she had always been used to, and go away to such a distance alone with
Phil, made her gasp with a sense of dismay, while at the same time the
idea that for the first time in her life she was trusted with something
really important, roused her energies, and made her feel braced and
valiant, like a soldier to whom some difficult enterprise is intrusted on
the day of battle.
