priest and put on the coat of a soldier."

"Another sign," said John to himself, as they continued the descent.
"Even the priests will fight."

When they were once more in the narrow streets of Montmartre, John said
farewell to Bougainville.

"Geronimo," he said, "I expect to see you leading a victorious charge
directly into the heart of the German army."

"If I can meet your hopes I will, Monsieur Scott," said the young
Frenchman gayly, "and now, _au revoir_, I depart for my uniform and
arms, which must be of the best."

John smiled as he walked down the hill. His heart had warmed toward the
little Apache who might not be any Apache at all. Nevertheless the name
Geronimo seemed to suit him, and he meant to think of him by it until
his valor won him a better.

He saw from the slopes the same endless stream of people leaving Paris.
They knew that the Germans were near, and report brought them yet
nearer. The tale of the monster guns had traveled fast, and the shells
might be falling among them at any moment. Aeroplanes dotted the skies,
but they paid little attention to them. They still thought of war under
the old conditions, and to the great mass of the people flying machines
were mere toys.

But John knew better. Those journeys of his with Lannes through the
heavens and their battles in the air for their lives were unforgettable.
Stopping on the last slope of Montmartre he studied space with his
glasses. He was sure that he saw captive balloons on the horizon where
the German army lay, and one shape larger than the rest looked like a
Zeppelin, but he did not believe those monsters had come so far to the
south and west. They must have an available base.

His heart suddenly increased its beat. He saw a darting figure and he
recognized the shape of the German Taube. Then something black shot
downward from it, and there was a crash in the streets of Paris,
followed by terrible cries.

He knew what had happened. He caught another glimpse of the Taube
rushing away like a huge carnivorous bird that had already seized its
prey, and then he ran swiftly down the street. The bomb had burst in a
swarm of fugitives and a woman was killed. Several people were wounded,
and a panic had threatened, but the soldiers had restored order already
and ambulances soon took the wounded to hospitals.

John went on, shocked to the core. It was a new kind of war. The flying
men might rain death from the air upon a helpless city, but their
victims were more likely to be women and children than armed men. For
the first time the clean blue sky became a sinister blanket from which
dropped destruction.

The confusion created by the bomb soon disappeared. The multitude of
Parisians still poured from the city, and long lines of soldiers took
their place. John wondered what the French commanders would do. Surely
theirs was a desperate problem. Would they try to defend Paris, or would
they let it go rather than risk its destruction by bombardment? Yet its
fall was bound to be a terrible blow.

Lannes was on the steps of the Opera House at the appointed time,
coming with a brisk manner and a cheerful face.

"I want you to go with me to our house beyond the Seine," he said. "It
is a quaint old place hidden away, as so many happy homes are in this
city. You will find nobody there but my mother, my sister Julie, and a
faithful old servant, Antoine Picard, and his daughter, Suzanne."

"But I will be a trespasser?"

"Not at all. There will be a warm welcome for you. I have told them of
you, how you were my comrade in the air, and how you fought."

"Pshaw, Lannes, it was you who did most of the fighting. You've given me
a reputation that I can't carry."

"Never mind about the reputation. What have you been doing since I left
you this morning?"

"I spent a part of the time in the lantern of the Basilica on
Montmartre, and I had with me a most interesting friend."

Lannes looked at him curiously.

"You did not speak of any friend in Paris at this time," he said.

"I didn't because I never heard of him until a few hours ago. I made his
acquaintance while I was going up Montmartre, but I already consider
him, next to you, the best friend I have in France."

"Acquaintanceship seems to grow rapidly with you, Monsieur Jean the
Scott."

"It has, but you must remember that our own friendship was pretty
sudden. It developed in a few minutes of flight from soldiers at the
German border."

"That is so, but it was soon sealed by great common dangers. Who is your
new friend, John?"

"A little Apache named Pierre Louis Bougainville, whom I have nicknamed
Geronimo, after a famous Indian chief of my country. He has already gone
to fight for France, and, Philip, he made an extraordinary impression
upon me, although I don't know just why. He is short like Napoleon, he
has the same large and beautifully shaped head, and the same penetrating
eyes that seem able to look you through and through. Maybe it was a
spark of genius in him that impressed me."

"It may be so," said Lannes thoughtfully. "It was said, and said truly
that the First Republic meant the open career to all the talents, and
the Third offers the same chance. One never can tell where military
genius is going to appear and God knows we need it now in whatever shape
or form it may come. Did you hear of the bomb?"

"I saw it fall. But, Phil, I don't see the object in such attacks. They
may kill a few people, nearly always the unarmed, but that has no real
effect on a war."

"They wish to spread terror, I suppose. Lend me your glasses, John."

Lannes studied the heavens a long time, minutely examining every black
speck against the blue, and John stood beside him, waiting patiently.
Meanwhile the throng of fleeing people moved on as before, silent and
somber, even the children saying little. John was again stirred by the
deepest emotion of sympathy and pity. What a tremendous tragedy it would
be if New York were being abandoned thus to a victorious foe! Lannes
himself had seemed to take no notice of the flight, but John judged he
had made a powerful effort of the will to hide the grief and anger that
surely filled his heart.

"I don't see anything in the air but our own machines," said Lannes, as
he returned the glasses. "It was evidently a dash by the Taube that
threw the bomb. But we've stayed here long enough. They're waiting for
us at home."

He led the way through the multitude, relapsing into silence, but
casting a glance now and then at his own peculiar field, the heavens.
They reached the Place de la Concorde, and stopped there a moment or
two. Lannes looked sadly at the black drapery hanging from the stone
figure that typified the lost city of Strassburg, but John glanced up
the great sweep of the Place to the Arc de Triomphe, where he caught
again the glittering shaft of sunlight that he had accepted as a sign.

"We may be looking upon all this for the last time," said Lannes, in a
voice of grief. "Oh, Paris, City of Light, City of the Heart! You may
not understand me, John, but I couldn't bear to come back to Paris
again, much as I love it, if it is to be despoiled and ruled by
Germans."

"I do understand you, Philip," said John cheerfully, "but you mustn't
count a city yours until you've taken it. The Germans are near, but
they're not here. Now, lead on. It's not like you to despair!"

Lannes shook himself, as if he had laid violent hands upon his own body,
and his face cleared.

"That was the last time, John," he said. "I made that promise before,
but I keep it this time. You won't see me gloomy again. Henceforward
it's hope only. Now, we must hurry. My mother and Julie will be growing
anxious, for we are overdue."

They crossed the Seine by one of the beautiful stone bridges and entered
a region of narrow and crooked streets, which John thought must be a
part of old Paris. In an American city it would necessarily have been a
quarter of the poor, but John knew that here wealth and distinction were
often hidden behind these modest doors.

He began to feel very curious about Lannes' family, but he was careful
to ask no questions. He knew that the young Frenchman was showing great
trust and faith in him by taking him into his home. They stopped
presently before a door, and Lannes rang a bell. The door was opened
cautiously in a few moments, and a great head surmounted by thick, gray
hair was thrust out. A powerful neck and a pair of immense shoulders
followed the head. Sharp eyes under heavy lashes peered forth, but in an
instant, when the man saw who was before him, he threw open the door and
said:

"Welcome, Monsieur."

John had no doubt that this was the Antoine Picard of whom Lannes had
spoken, and he knew at the first glance that he beheld a real man. Many
people have the idea that all Frenchmen are little, but John knew
better.

Antoine Picard was a giant, much over six feet, and with the limbs and
chest of a piano-mover. He was about sixty, but age evidently had made
no impression upon his strength. John judged from his fair complexion
that he was from Normandy. "Here," young Scott said to himself, "is one
of those devoted European family servants of whom I've heard so often."

He regarded the man with interest, and Picard, in return, measured and
weighed him with a lightning glance.

Lannes laughed.

"It's all right, Antoine," he said. "He's the young man from that far
barbarian country called America, who escaped from Germany with me, only
he's no barbarian, but a highly civilized being who not only likes
France, but who fights for her. John, this is Antoine Picard, who rules
and protects this house."

John held out his hand, American fashion, and it was engulfed in the
mighty grasp of the Norseman, as he always thought of him afterward.

"Madame, your mother, and Mademoiselle, your sister, have been anxious,"
said Picard.

"We were delayed," said Lannes.

They stepped into a narrow hall, and Picard shut the door behind them,
shooting into place a heavy bolt which sank into its socket with a click
like the closing of the entrance to a fortress. In truth, the whole
aspect of the house reminded John of a stronghold. The narrow hall was
floored with stone, the walls were stone and the light was dim. Lannes
divined John's thoughts.

"You'll find it more cheerful, presently," he said. "As for us, we're
used to it, and we love it, although it's so old and cold and dark. It
goes back at least five centuries."

"I suppose some king must have slept here once," said John. "In England
they point out every very old house as a place where a king passed the
night, and make reverence accordingly."

Lannes laughed gayly.

"No king ever slept here so far as I know," he said, "but the great
Marshal Lannes, whose name I am so proud to bear, was in this house more
than once, and to me, a staunch republican, that is greater than having
had a king for a tenant. The Marshal, as you may know, although he took
a title and served an Emperor, was always a republican and in the early
days of the empire often offended Napoleon by his frankness and brusque
truths. But enough of old things; we'll see my mother."

He led the way up the steps, of solid stone, between walls thick enough
for a fortress, and knocked at a door. A deep, full voice responded
"Enter!" and pushing open the door Lannes went in, followed by John.

It was a large room, with long, low windows, looking out over a sea of
roofs toward the dome of the Invalides and Napoleon's arch of triumph. A
tall woman rose from a chair, and saying "My son!" put her hands upon
Lannes shoulders and kissed him on the forehead. She was fair like her
son, and much less than fifty years of age. There was no stoop in her
shoulders and but little gray in her hair. Her eyes were anxious, but
John saw in them the Spartan determination that marked the women of
France.

"My friend, John Scott, of whom I have already spoken to you, Madame my
mother," said Lannes.

John bowed. He knew little of French customs, particularly in the heart
of a French family, and he was afraid to extend his hand, but she gave
him hers, and let it rest in his palm a moment.

"Philip has told me much of you," she said in her deep, bell-like voice,
"and although I know little of your far America, I can believe the best
of it, if its sons are like you."

John flushed at the compliment, which he knew to be so sincere.

"Thank you, Madame," he said. "While my country can take no part in this
war, many of my countrymen will fight with you. France helped us once,
and some of us, at least, will help France now."

She smiled gravely, and John knew that he was welcome in her house.
Lannes would see to that anyhow, but he wished to make a good impression
on his own account.

"I know that Philip risks his life daily," she said. "He has chosen the
most dangerous of all paths, the air, but perhaps in that way he can
serve us most."

She spoke with neither complaint nor reproach, merely as if she were
stating a fact, and her son added briefly:

"You are right, mother. In the air I can work best for our people. Ah,
John, here is my sister, who is quite curious about the stranger from
across the sea."

A young girl came into the room. She was tall and slender, not more than
seventeen, very fair, with blue eyes and hair of pure gold. John was
continually observing that while many of the French were dark and small,
in accordance with foreign opinion that made them all so, many more were
blonde and tall. Lannes' sister was scarcely more than a lovely child,
but his heart beat more quickly.

Lannes kissed her on the forehead, just as he kissed his mother.

"Julie," he said lightly and yet proudly, "this is the young American
hero of whom I was telling you, my comrade in arms, or rather in the
air, and adopted brother. Mr. John Scott, my sister, Mademoiselle Julie
Lannes."

She made a shy curtsey and John bowed. It was the first time that he was
ever in the heart of an old French home, and he did not know the rules,
but he felt that he ought not to offer his hand. Young girls, he had
always heard, were kept in strict seclusion in France, but the great war
and the approach of the German army might make a difference. In any
event, he felt bold enough to talk to her a little, and she responded, a
beautiful color coming into her face.

"Dinner is ready for our guest and you," said Madame Lannes, and she led
the way into another apartment, also with long, low windows, where the
table was set. The curtains were drawn from the windows, and John caught
through one of them a glimpse of the Seine, of marching troops in long
blue coats and red trousers, and of the great city, massing up beyond
like a wall.

He felt that he had never before sat down to so strange a table. The
world without was shaking beneath the tread of the mightiest of all
wars, but within this room was peace and quiet. Madame was like a Roman
matron, and the young Julie, though shy, had ample dignity. John liked
Lannes' manner toward them both, his fine subordination to his mother
and his protective air toward his sister. He was glad to be there with
them, a welcome guest in the family.

The dinner was served by a tall young woman. Picard's daughter Suzanne,
to whom Lannes had referred, and she served in silence and with
extraordinary dexterity one of the best dinners that he ever ate.

As the dinner proceeded John admired the extraordinary composure of the
Lannes family. Surely a woman and a girl of only seventeen would feel
consternation at the knowledge that an overwhelming enemy was almost
within sight of the city they must love so much. Yet they did not refer
to it, until nearly the close of the dinner, and it was Madame who
introduced the subject.

"I hear, Philip," she said, "that a bomb was thrown today from a German
aeroplane into the Place de l'Opera, killing a woman and injuring
several other people."
