frightened. She could not go back into the ark, for the little window
was closed, and there was no land anywhere on which she could take
refuge. Just think for a moment what a dreadful situation it was! There
was nothing for her to do but to fly up, straight up, out of reach from
the tossing waves and dashing spray.

The Kingfisher was fresh and vigorous, and her wings were strong and
powerful, for she had been resting long days in the quiet ark, eating
the provisions which Father Noah had thoughtfully prepared for his many
guests. So up, up she soared, above the very clouds, on into the blue
ether which lies beyond. And lo! as she did so, her sober gray dress
became a brilliant blue, the color caught from the azure of those clear
heights. Higher and higher she flew, feeling so free and happy after her
long captivity, that she quite forgot Father Noah and the errand upon
which she had been sent. Up and up she went, higher than the sun, until
at last she saw him rising far beneath her, a beautiful ball of fire,
more dazzling, more wonderful than she had ever guessed.

"Hola!" she cried, beside herself with joy at the sight. "There is the
dear sun, whom I have not seen for many days. And how near, how
beautiful he is! I will fly closer still, now that I have come so near.
I will observe him in all his splendor, as no other bird, not even the
high-flying, sharp-eyed Eagle, has ever seen him."

And with that the foolish Kingfisher turned her course downward, with
such mad, headlong speed that she had scarcely time to feel what
terrible, increasing heat shot from the sun's rays, until she was so
close upon him that it was too late to escape. Oh, but that was a
dreadful moment! The feathers on her poor little breast were scorched
and set afire, and she seemed in danger not only of spoiling her
beautiful new blue dress but of being burned into a wretched little
cinder. Horribly frightened at her danger, the Kingfisher turned once
more, but this time toward the rolling waters which covered the earth.
Down, down she swooped, until with the hiss of burning feathers she
splashed into the cold wetness, putting out the fire which threatened to
consume her. Once, twice, thrice, she dipped into the grateful coolness,
flirting the drops from her blue plumage, now alas! sadly scorched.

When the pain of her burns was somewhat relieved she had time to think
what next she should do. She longed for rest, for refuge, for Father
Noah's gentle, caressing hand to which she had grown accustomed during
those stormy weeks of companionship in the ark. But where was Father
Noah? Where was the ark? On all the rolling sea of water there was no
movement of life, no sign of any human presence. Then the Kingfisher
remembered her errand, and how carelessly she had performed it. She had
been bidden to return quickly; but she had wasted many hours--she could
not tell how many--in her forgetful flight. And now she was to be
punished indeed, if she could not find her master and the ark of refuge.

The poor Kingfisher looked wildly about. She fluttered here and there,
backward and forward, over the weary stretch of waves, crying piteously
for her master. He did not answer; there was no ark to be found. The sun
set and the night came on, but still she sought eagerly from east to
west, from north to south, always in vain. She could never find what she
had so carelessly lost.

The truth is that during her absence the Dove, who had done her errand
faithfully, returned at last with the olive leaf which told of one spot
upon the earth's surface at last uncovered by the waves. Then the ark,
blown hither and thither by the same storm which had driven the
Kingfisher to fly upward into the ether-blue, had drifted far and far
to Mount Ararat, where it ran aground. And Father Noah, disembarking
with his family and all the assembled animals, had broken up the ark,
intending there to build him a house out of the materials from which it
was made. But this was many, many leagues from the place where the poor
Kingfisher, lonely and frightened, hovered about, crying piteously for
her master.

And even when the waters dried away, uncovering the earth in many
places, so that the Kingfisher could alight and build herself a nest,
she was never happy nor content, but to this day flies up and down the
water-ways of the world piping sadly, looking eagerly for her dear
master and for some traces of the ark which sheltered her. And the
reflection which she makes in the water below shows an azure-blue body,
like a reflection of the sky above, with some of the breast-feathers
scorched to a rusty red. And now you know how it all came about.




THE WREN WHO BROUGHT FIRE


Centuries and centuries ago, when men were first made, there was no such
thing as fire known in all the world. Folk had no fire with which to
cook their food, and so they were obliged to eat it raw; which was very
unpleasant, as you may imagine! There were no cheery fireplaces about
which to sit and tell stories, or make candy or pop corn. There was no
light in the darkness at night except the sun and moon and stars. There
were not even candles in those days, to say nothing of gas lamps or
electric lights. It is strange to think of such a world where even the
grown folks, like the children and the birds, had to go to bed at dusk,
because there was nothing else to do.

But the little birds, who lived nearer heaven than men, knew of the fire
in the sun, and knew also what a fine thing it would be for the tribes
without feathers if they could have some of the magic element.

One day the birds held a solemn meeting, when it was decided that men
must have fire. Then some one must fly up to the sun and bring a
firebrand thence. Who would undertake this dangerous errand? Already by
sad experience the Kingfisher had felt the force of the sun's heat,
while the Eagle and the Wren, in the famous flight which they had taken
together, had learned the same thing. The assembly of birds looked at
one another, and there was a silence.

"I dare not go," said the Kingfisher, trembling at the idea; "I have
been up there once, and the warning I received was enough to last me for
some time."

"I cannot go," said the Peacock, "for my plumage is too precious to
risk."

"I ought not to go," said the Lark, "for the heat might injure my pretty
voice."

"I must not go," said the Stork, "for I have promised to bring a baby to
the King's palace this evening."

"I cannot go," said the Dove, "for I have a nestful of little ones who
depend upon me for food."

"Nor I," said the Sparrow, "for I am afraid." "Nor I!" "Nor I!" "Nor I!"
echoed the other birds.

"I _will_ not go," croaked the Owl, "for I simply do not wish to."

Then up spoke the little Wren, who had been keeping in the background
of late, because he was despised for his attempt to deceive the birds
into electing him their king.

"I will go," said the Wren. "I will go and bring fire to men. I am of
little use here. No one loves me. Every one despises me because of the
trick which I played the Eagle, our King. No one will care if I am
injured in the attempt. I will go and try."

"Bravely spoken, little friend," said the Eagle kindly. "I myself would
go but that I am the King, and kings must not risk the lives upon which
hangs the welfare of their people. Go you, little Wren, and if you are
successful you will win back the respect of your brothers which you have
forfeited."

The brave little bird set out upon his errand without further words. And
weak and delicate though he was, he flew and he flew up and up so
sturdily that at last he reached the sun, whence he plucked a firebrand
and bore it swiftly in his beak back toward the earth. Like a falling
star the bright speck flashed through the air, drawing ever nearer and
nearer to the cool waters of Birdland and the safety which awaited him
there. The other birds gathered in a flock about their king and
anxiously watched the Wren's approach.

Suddenly the Robin cried out, "Alas! He burns! He has caught fire!" And
off darted the faithful little friend to help the Wren. Sure enough, a
spark from the blazing brand had fallen upon the plumage of the Wren,
and his poor little wings were burning as he fluttered piteously down,
still holding the fire in his beak.

The Robin flew up to him and said, "Well done, brother! You have
succeeded. Now give me the fire and I will relieve you while you drop
into the lake below us to quench the flame which threatens your life."

So the Robin in his turn seized the firebrand in his beak and started
down with it. But, like the Wren, he too was soon fluttering in the
blaze of his own burning plumage, a little living firework, falling
toward the earth.

Then up came the Lark, who had been watching the two unselfish birds.
"Give me the brand, brother Robin," she cried, "for your pretty feathers
are all ablaze and your life is in danger."

So it was the Lark who finally brought the fire safely to the earth and
gave it to mankind. But the Robin and the Wren, when they had put out
the flame which burned their feathers, appeared in the assembly of the
birds, and were greeted with great applause as the heroes of the day.
The Robin's breast was scorched a brilliant red, but the poor, brave
little Wren was wholly bare of plumage. All his pretty feathers had been
burned away, and he stood before them shivering and piteous.

"Bravo! little Wren," cried King Eagle. "A noble deed you have done this
day, and nobly have you won back the respect of your brother birds and
earned the everlasting gratitude of men. Now what shall we do to help
you in your sorry plight?" After a moment's thought he turned to the
other birds and said, "Who will give a feather to help patch a covering
for our brave friend?"

"I!" and "I!" and "I!" and "I!" chorused the generous birds. And in turn
each came forward with a plume or a bit of down from his breast. The
Robin first, who had shared his peril, brought a feather sadly scorched,
but precious; the Lark next, who had helped in the time of need. The
Eagle bestowed a kingly feather, the Thrush, the Nightingale,--every
bird contributed except the Owl.

But the selfish Owl said, "I see no reason why I should give a feather.
Hoot! No! The Wren brought me into trouble once, and I will not help him
now. Let him go bare, for all my aid."

"Shame! Shame!" cried the birds indignantly. "Old Master Owl, you ought
to be ashamed. But if you are so selfish we will not have you in our
society. Go back to your hollow tree!"

"Yes, go back to your hollow tree," cried the Eagle sternly; "and when
winter comes may you shiver with cold as you would have left the brave
little Wren to shiver this day. You shall ruffle your feathers as much
as you like, but you will always feel cold at heart, because your heart
is selfish."

And indeed, since that day for all his feathers the Owl has never been
able to keep warm enough in his lonely hollow tree.

But the Wren became one of the happiest of all the birds, and a favorite
both with his feathered brothers and with men, because of his brave
deed, and because of the great fire-gift which he had brought from the
sun.




HOW THE BLUEBIRD CROSSED


Of course every one knows that the Bluebird was made from a piece of the
azure sky itself. One has only to match his wonderful color against the
April heaven to be sure of that. Therefore the little Bluebird was
especially dear to the Spirit of the sky, the Father in Heaven.

One day this venturesome little bird started out upon a long journey
across the wide Pacific Ocean toward this New World which neither
Columbus nor any other man had yet discovered. Under him tossed the
wide, wide sea, rolling for miles in every direction, with no land
visible anywhere on which a little bird might rest his foot. For this
was also before there were any islands in all that stretch of waters.
Soon the poor little Bluebird became very weary and wished he had not
ventured upon so long a flight. His wings began to droop and he sank
lower and lower toward the sea which seemed eager to overwhelm his
blueness with its own. He had come so far over the salty wastes that he
was very thirsty; but with water, water everywhere there was not a drop
to drink. The poor little bird glanced despairingly up toward the blue
sky from which he had been made and cried,--

"O Spirit of the blue sky, O my Father in Heaven, help your child the
Bluebird! Give me, I pray you, a place to rest and refreshment for my
thirsty throat, or I perish in the cruel blue waters!"

At these sorrowful words the kind Father took pity upon his little
Bluebird. And what do you think? He made a baby earthquake which heaved
a rocky point of land up through the waves, just big enough for a little
bird's perch. It was a tiny reef, and a crack in the rock held but a few
drops of the rain which began to fall; but it meant at least a moment's
safety and draught of life for the weary bird, and glad enough he was to
reach it.

He had not been there long, however, when a big wave almost washed him
away. He was not yet safe. Still he lacked the rest and refreshment
which he so sorely needed. For the raindrops were soon turned brackish
by the waves which dashed upon the reef from all sides, and the Bluebird
had to keep hopping up and down to avoid being drowned in the tossing
spray. He was more tired than ever, and this continuous exercise made
him even more thirsty. Once more he prayed to the Father for help. And
once more the kind Spirit of the Sky heard him from the blueness.

This time there was a terrible earthquake, until the sea boiled and
rolled into huge waves as if churned by a mighty churn at the very
bottom of things, and with a terrified scream the Bluebird flew high
into the air.

But when the noise and the rumbling died away and once more the sea lay
calm and still, what do you think the Bluebird saw? The great ocean
which had once stretched an unbroken sheet of blue as far as the eye
could see was now dotted here and there by islands, big islands and
little islands, groups and archipelagoes of them, just as on the map one
sees them to-day peppering the Pacific Ocean. Samoa came up, and Tonga,
and Tulima, and many others with names quite as bad, if not worse. From
one island to another the Bluebird flew, finding rest and refreshment on
each, until he reached the mainland in safety. And there the islands
remain to this day for other travelers to visit, breaking their journey
from west to east or from east to west. There are forests and cascades,
springs of fresh and pleasant water, delicious fruits, wonderful birds
and animals, and finally a race of strange, dark men. (But they came
long, long after.)

So the Bluebird crossed the Pacific, folk tell. Was it not wonderful how
the kind Father came to scatter those many islands in the Pacific
Ocean,--stepping-stones for a tiny little Bluebird so that he need not
wet his feet in crossing that wide salty river?




THE PEACOCK'S COUSIN


Long, long ago in the days of wise King Solomon, the Crow and the
Pheasant were the best of friends, and were always seen going about
together, wing in wing. Now the Pheasant was the Peacock's own
cousin,--a great honor, many thought, for the Peacock was the most
gorgeous of all the birds. But it was not altogether pleasant for the
Pheasant, because at that time he wore such plain and shabby old
garments that his proud relative was ashamed of him, and did not like to
be reminded that they were of the same family. When the Peacock went
strutting about with his wonderful tail spread fan-wise, and with his
vain little eyes peering to see who might be admiring his beauty, the
Peacock's cousin and his friend the Crow, who was then a plain _white_
bird, would slink aside and hide behind a tree, whence they would peep
enviously until the Peacock had passed by. Then the Peacock's cousin
would say,--

"Oh, how beautiful, how grand, how noble he is! How came such a lordly
bird to have for a cousin so homely a creature as I?"

But the Crow would answer, trying to comfort his friend, "Yes, he is
gorgeous. But listen, what a harsh and disagreeable voice he has! And
see how vain he is. I would not be so vain had I so scandalous a tale in
my family history."

Then the Crow told the Peacock's cousin how his proud relative came to
have so unmusical a voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Adam and Eve were living peacefully in their fair garden, while
Satan was still seeking in vain a way to enter there, the Peacock was
the most beautiful of all the companions who surrounded the happy pair.
His plumage shone like pearl and emerald, and his voice was so melodious
that he was selected to sing the Lord's praises every day in the streets
of heaven. But he was then, as now, very, very vain; and Satan, prowling
about outside the wall of Paradise, saw this.

"Aha!" he said to himself, "here is the vainest creature in all the
world. He is the one I must flatter in order to win entrance to the
garden, where I am to work my mischief. Let me approach the Peacock."

Satan stole softly to the gate and in a wheedling voice called to the
Peacock,--

"O most wonderful and beautiful bird! Are you one of the birds of
Paradise?"

"Yes, I am one of the dwellers in the happy garden," answered the
Peacock, strutting. "But who are you who slink about so secretly, as if
afraid of some one?"

"I am one of the cherubim who are appointed to sing the Lord's praises,"
answered the wicked Satan. "I have stopped for a moment to visit the
Paradise which He has prepared for the blest, and I find as my first
glimpse of its glories you, O most lovely bird! Will you conceal me
under your rainbow wings and bring me within the walls?"

"I dare not," answered the Peacock. "The Lord allows none to enter here.
He will be angry and will punish me."

"O charming bird!" went on Satan with his smooth tongue, "take me with
you, and I will teach you three mysterious words which shall preserve
you forever from sickness, age, and death."

At this promise the Peacock was greatly tempted and began to hesitate in
his refusals. And at last he said,--

"I dare not myself let you in, O stranger, but if you keep your promise
I will send the Serpent, who is wiser than I and who may more easily
find some way to let you enter unobserved."

So it was through the Peacock that Satan met the vile Serpent, whose
shape he assumed in order to enter the garden and tempt Eve with the
apple. And for the Peacock's share in the doings of that dreadful day
the Lord took away his beautiful voice and sent him forth from the
pleasant garden to chatter harshly in this workaday world, where his
gorgeousness and his vanity are but a reminder to men of the shame which
he brought upon their ancestors.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And therefore," said the Crow, concluding his gossip, "therefore, dear
Pheasant, I see no reason why we should envy your cousin. We are very
plain citizens of Birdland, but we are at least respectable. I like you
much better, having nothing to make you vain, nothing of which to be
ashamed."

       *       *       *       *       *

So the Crow spoke, in the wisdom which he had learned from Solomon. But
the Peacock's cousin refused to be comforted. The shabbiness of his coat
preyed upon his mind, and he fancied that the other birds jeered at him
because in such old clothes he dared to be the Peacock's cousin. It
seemed to him that every day the Peacock himself grew more haughty and
more patronizing.

One day the Crow and the Peacock's cousin were sauntering through the
Malay woods when they met the Peacock face to face. The Crow looked
defiant and stood jauntily; but the Pheasant tried to shrink out of
sight. The Peacock, however, had spied his poor relative, and was filled
with cousinly resentment at his appearance.

He stopped short. He stood upon one leg. He puffed and ruffled himself,
spreading out his thousand-eyed tail so that its colors flashed
wonderfully in the sunshine. He frilled his neck feathers and snapped
his mean little eyes maliciously; then turning his back on the shabby
couple said, as he stepped airily away,--

"Ah, I have dropped some of my old feathers back there a little way. You
can have them if you like, Pheasant. They will freshen you up a bit; you
really are looking shockingly seedy. But for mercy's sake don't wear
them in my presence! I can't bear to see any one parading in my cast-off
elegance." Then the Peacock minced away.

The Peacock's cousin stamped on the ground and flapped his wings with
rage. If he had been a girl he would have burst into tears. "I cannot
stand this," he cried. "To be treated as if I were a beggar! To be given
old clothes to wear! Crow, Crow, if you were any kind of friend you
would help me. But you stand staring there and see me insulted, without
turning a feather! What is the use of all your wisdom that you learned
from King Solomon if you cannot help a friend in need? I tell you, I
must have some better garments, or I shall die of mortification."

"Don't be excited," said the Crow soothingly. "I have been thinking the
matter over, and I believe I can do something. Listen. Yesterday I found
brushes and a box of colors in a room of the King's palace. They
belonged to the Court Painter. Now they belong to me, for I have hidden
them away in a hollow tree where no one else can find them. I thought
they might be useful, and I think so still."

"Well, well! What do you propose to do with paints and brushes?" cried
the Peacock's cousin impatiently.

"I propose to paint you, to varnish you, to gild you," patiently
answered the Crow.

"Oh, you dear Crow!" exclaimed the other, clapping his wings. "You will
make me brilliant and beautiful! You will make me worthy of the
Peacock, will you not? How clever of you to think of such a thing!"

"Yes," replied the Crow; "I watched the Court Painter at work in the
garden one day, and I know how it is done. I will make you as gorgeous
as you wish. But you must return the compliment. If you are to be an
ornament of fashion, so must I be; for are we not inseparable cronies?
And when you become beautiful it would not do for you to be seen with
such a dowdy as I am."

"You dear creature!" said the Peacock's cousin affectionately; "of
course we will share alike. I will paint you as soon as I see how you
succeed with me. Ah, I know your skill in everything. You will be a fine
artist, my friend! But come, let us get to work at once."

So the flattered Crow led him to the hollow tree where he had concealed
the brushes and the gilding and the India ink, and all the gorgeous
changeable tints which an Eastern artist uses in his paintings. "Here we
are," said the Crow. "Now let us see what we shall see, when Master Crow
turns painter."

The Crow set to work with a will, splashing on the colors generously,
gold and green and bronze iridescence. He had the Peacock in mind, and
though he did not exactly copy the plumage of that wonderful bird, he
managed to suggest the cousinship of the Pheasant in the golden eyes of
his long and beautiful tail. When he had finished, the Crow was
delighted with his work.

"Ah!" he cried. "Now bend over this fountain, my dear friend, and
observe yourself. I think you do credit to my skill as an artist, eh?"

The Peacock's cousin hurried down to the water-pool, all in a flutter of
excitement. And when he saw his image he cried, "How beautiful, how
truly beautiful, I am! Why, I am quite as handsome as Peacock himself.
Surely, now he need not be ashamed to call me cousin. I shall move in
the most fashionable circles. Heavens! Look at my lovely tail! Look at
my burnished feathers! I must go immediately and show my new dress to
Cousin Peacock. I should not be surprised if he became jealous of my
gorgeousness." And off he started as fast as he could go.

"Hold on!" cried the Crow. "Don't run away so quickly. You have
forgotten something. Don't you remember that you promised to paint me
beautiful like yourself?"
