and reawakened the long-dormant chords that used to echo to the tones
and scenes of other days. With a slight shiver, Harry returned to his
apartment, and kneeled to thank God for protecting and preserving his
absent friends, and especially for sending him "good news from a far
land." The letter with the British post-marks on it was placed under
his pillow. It occupied his waking and sleeping thoughts that night,
and it was the first thing he thought of and reread on the following
morning, and for many mornings afterwards. Only those can fully
estimate the value of such letters who live in distant lands, where
letters are few--very, very few--and far between.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Changes--Harry and Hamilton find that variety is indeed charming--The
latter astonishes the former considerably.


Three months passed away, but the snow still lay deep and white and
undiminished around York Fort. Winter--cold, silent, unyielding
winter--still drew its white mantle closely round the lonely dwelling
of the fur-traders of the Far North.

Icicles hung, as they had done for months before, from the eaves of
every house, from the tall black scaffold on which the great bell hung,
and from the still taller erection that had been put up as an outlook
for "_the ship_" in summer. At the present time it commanded a bleak
view of the frozen sea. Snow covered every housetop, and hung in
ponderous masses from their edges, as if it were about to fall; but it
never fell--it hung there in the same position day after day, unmelted,
unchanged. Snow covered the whole land, and the frozen river, the
swamps, the sea-beach, and the sea itself, as far as the eye could
reach, seemed like a pure white carpet. Snow lined the upper edge of
every paling, filled up the key-hole of every door, embanked about half
of every window, stuck in little knobs on the top of every picket, and
clung in masses on every drooping branch of the pine trees in the
forest. Frost--sharp, biting frost--solidified, surrounded, and
pervaded everything. Mercury was congealed by it; vapour was condensed
by it; iron was cooled by it until it could scarcely be touched without
(as the men expressed it) "burning" the fingers. The water-jugs in
Bachelors' Hall and the water-buckets were frozen by it, nearly to the
bottom; though there was a good stove there, and the Hall was not
_usually_ a cold place by any means. The breath of the inhabitants was
congealed by it on the window-panes, until they had become coated with
ice an inch thick. The breath of the men was rendered white and opaque
by it, as they panted and hurried to and fro about their ordinary
avocations; beating their gloved hands together, and stamping their
well-wrapped-up feet on the hard-beaten snow to keep them warm. Old
Bobin's nose seemed to be entirely shrivelled up into his face by it,
as he drove his ox-cart to the river to fetch his daily supply of
water. The only things that were not affected by it were the fires,
which crackled and roared as if in laughter, and twisted and leaped as
if in uncontrollable glee at the bare idea of John Frost acquiring, by
any artifice whatever, the smallest possible influence over _them_!
Three months had elapsed, but frost and snow, instead of abating, had
gone on increasing and intensifying, deepening and extending its work,
and riveting its chains. Winter--cold, silent, unyielding winter--still
reigned at York Fort, as though it had made it a _sine qua non_ of its
existence at all that it should reign there for ever!

But although everything was thus wintry and cold, it was by no means
cheerless or dreary. A bright sun shone in the blue heavens with an
intenseness of brilliancy that was quite dazzling to the eyes, that
elated the spirits, and caused man and beast to tread with a more
elastic step than usual. Although the sun looked down upon the scene
with an unclouded face, and found a mirror in every icicle and in every
gem of hoar-frost with which the objects of nature were loaded, there
was, however, no perceptible heat in his rays. They fell on the white
earth with all the brightness of midsummer, but they fell powerless as
moonbeams in the dead of winter.

On the frozen river, just in front of the gate of the fort, a group of
men and dogs were assembled. The dogs were four in number, harnessed to
a small flat sledge of the slender kind used by Indians to drag their
furs and provisions over the snow. The group of men was composed of Mr.
Rogan and the inmates of Bachelors' Hall, one or two men who happened
to be engaged there at the time in cutting a new water-hole in the ice,
and an Indian, who, to judge from his carefully-adjusted costume, the
snow-shoes on his feet, and the short whip in his hand, was the driver
of the sledge, and was about to start on a journey. Harry Somerville
and young Hamilton were also wrapped up more carefully than usual.

"Good-bye, then, good-bye," said Mr. Rogan, advancing towards the
Indian, who stood beside the leading dog, ready to start. "Take care of
our young friends; they've not had much experience in travelling yet;
and don't over drive your dogs. Treat them well, and they'll do more
work. They're like men in that respect." Mr. Rogan shook the Indian by
the hand, and the latter immediately flourished the whip and gave a
shout, which the dogs no sooner heard than they uttered a simultaneous
yell, sprang forward with a jerk, and scampered up the river, closely
followed by their dark-skinned driver.

"Now, lads, farewell," said the old gentleman, turning with a kindly
smile to our two friends, who were shaking hands for the last time with
their comrades. "I'm sorry you're going to leave us, my boys. You've
done your duty well while here, and I would willingly have kept you a
little longer with me, but our governor wills it otherwise. However, I
trust that you'll be happy wherever you may be sent. Don't forget to
write to me. God bless you. Farewell."

Mr. Rogan shook them heartily by the hand, turned short round, and
walked slowly up to his house, with an expression of sadness on his
mild face; while Harry and Hamilton, having once more waved farewell to
their friends, marched up the river side by side in silence. They
followed the track left by the dog-sledge, which guided them with
unerring certainty, although their Indian leader and his team were out
of sight in advance.

A week previous to this time an Indian arrived from the interior,
bearing a letter from headquarters, which directed that Messrs.
Somerville and Hamilton should be forthwith despatched on snow-shoes to
Norway House. As this establishment is about three hundred miles from
the sea-coast, the order involved a journey of nearly two weeks'
duration through a country that was utterly destitute of inhabitants.
On receiving a command from Mr. Rogan to prepare for an early start,
Harry retired precipitately to his own room, and there, after cutting
unheard of capers, and giving vent to sudden, incomprehensible shouts,
all indicative of the highest state of delight, he condescended to tell
his companions of his good fortune, and set about preparations without
delay. Hamilton, on the contrary, gave his usual quiet smile on being
informed of his destination, and returning somewhat pensively to
Bachelors' Hall, proceeded leisurely to make the necessary arrangements
for departure. As the time drew on, however, a perpetual flush on his
countenance, and an unusual brilliancy about his eye, showed that he
was not quite insensible to the pleasures of a change, and relished the
idea more than he got credit for. The Indian who had brought the letter
was ordered to hold himself in readiness to retrace his steps, and
conduct the young men through the woods to Norway House, where they
were to await further orders. A few days later the three travellers, as
already related, set out on their journey.

After walking a mile up the river, they passed a point of land which
shut out the fort from view. Here they paused to take a last look, and
then pressed forward in silence, the thoughts of each being busy with
mingled recollections of their late home and anticipations of the
future. After an hour's sharp walking they came in sight of the guide,
and slackened their pace.

"Well, Hamilton," said Harry, throwing off his reverie with a deep
sigh, "are you glad to leave York Fort, or sorry?"

"Glad, undoubtedly," replied Hamilton, "but sorry to part from our old
companions there. I had no idea, Harry, that I loved them all so much.
I feel as if I should be glad were the order for us to leave them
countermanded even now."

"That's the very thought," said Harry, "that was passing through my own
brain when I spoke to you. Yet somehow I think I should feel uncommonly
sorry after all if we were really sent back. There's a queer
contradiction, Hammy: we're sorry and happy at the same time! If I were
the skipper now, I would found a philosophical argument upon it."

"Which the skipper would carry on with untiring vigour," said Hamilton,
smiling, "and afterwards make an entry of in his log. But I think,
Harry, that to feel the emotion of sorrow and joy at the same time is
not such a contradiction as it at first appears."

"Perhaps not," replied Harry; "but it seems very contradictory to _me_,
and yet it's an evident fact, for I'm _very_ sorry to leave _them_, and
I'm _very_ happy to have you for my companion here."

"So am I, so am I," said the other heartily. "I would rather travel
with you, Harry, than with any of our late companions, although I like
them all very much."

The two friends had grown, almost imperceptibly, in each other's esteem
during their residence under the same roof, more than either of them
would have believed possible. The gay, reckless hilarity of the one did
not at first accord with the quiet gravity and, as his comrades styled
it, _softness_ of the other. But character is frequently misjudged at
first sight, and sometimes men who on a first acquaintance have felt
repelled from each other have, on coming to know each other better,
discovered traits and good qualities that ere long formed enduring
bonds of sympathy, and have learned to love those whom at first they
felt disposed to dislike or despise. Thus Harry soon came to know that
what he at first thought and, along with his companions, called
softness in Hamilton in reality gentleness of disposition and thorough
good-nature, united in one who happened to be utterly unacquainted with
the _knowing_ ways of this peculiarly sharp and clever world, while in
the course of time new qualities showed themselves in a quiet,
unobtrusive way that won upon his affections and raised his esteem. On
the other hand, Hamilton found that although Harry was volatile, and
possessed of an irresistible tendency to fun and mischief, he never by
any chance gave way to anger, or allowed malice to enter into his
practical jokes. Indeed, he often observed him to restrain his natural
tendencies when they were at all likely to give pain, though Harry
never dreamed that such efforts were known to any one but himself.
Besides this, Harry was peculiarly _unselfish_, and when a man is
possessed of this inestimable disposition, he is, not _quite_ but _very
nearly_, perfect!

After another pause, during which the party had left the open river and
directed their course through the woods, where the depth of the snow
obliged them to tread in each other's footsteps, Harry resumed the
conversation.

"You have not yet told me, by-the-by, what old Mr. Rogan said to you
just before we started. Did he give you any hint as to where you might
be sent to after reaching Norway House?"

"No; he merely said he knew that clerks were wanted both for Mackenzie
River and the Saskatchewan districts, but he did not know which I was
destined for."

"Hum! exactly what he said to me, with the slight addition that he
strongly suspected that Mackenzie River would be my doom. Are you
aware, Hammy my boy, that the Saskatchewan district is a sort of
terrestrial paradise, and Mackenzie River equivalent to Botany Bay?"

"I have heard as much during our conversations in Bachelors' Hall,
but--Stop a bit, Harry; these snow-shoe lines of mine have got loosened
with tearing through this deep snow and these shockingly thick bushes.
There--they are right now; go on. I was going to say that I don't--oh!"

This last exclamation was elicited from Hamilton by a sharp blow caused
by a branch which, catching on part of Harry's dress as he plodded on
in front, suddenly rebounded and struck him across the face. This is of
common occurrence in travelling through the woods, especially to those
who from inexperience walk too closely on the heels of their companions.

"What's wrong now, Hammy?" inquired his friend, looking over his
shoulder.

"Oh, nothing worth mentioning--rather a sharp blow from a branch,
that's all."

"Well, proceed; you've interrupted yourself twice in what you were
going to say. Perhaps it'll come out if you try it a third time."

"I was merely going to say that I don't much care where I am sent to,
so long as it is not to an outpost where I shall be all alone."

"All very well, my friend; but seeing that outposts are, in comparison
with principal forts, about a hundred to one, your chance of avoiding
them is rather slight. However, our youth and want of experience is in
our favour, as they like to send men who have seen some service to
outposts. But I fear that, with such brilliant characters as you and I,
Hammy, youth will only be an additional recommendation, and
inexperience won't last long.--Hollo! what's going on yonder?"

Harry pointed as he spoke to an open spot in the woods about a quarter
of a mile in advance, where a dark object was seen lying on the snow,
writhing about, now coiling into a lump, and anon extending itself like
a huge snake in agony.

As the two friends looked, a prolonged howl floated towards them.

"Something wrong with the dogs, I declare!" cried Harry.

"No doubt of it," replied his friend, hurrying forward, as they saw
their Indian guide rise from the ground and flourish his whip
energetically, while the howls rapidly increased.

A few minutes brought them to the scene of action, where they found the
dogs engaged in a fight among themselves, and the driver, in a state of
vehement passion, alternately belabouring and trying to separate them.
Dogs in these regions, like the dogs of all other regions, we suppose,
are very much addicted to fighting--a propensity which becomes
extremely unpleasant if indulged while the animals are in harness, as
they then become peculiarly savage, probably from their being unable,
like an ill-assorted pair in wedlock, to cut or break the ties that
bind them. Moreover, they twist the traces into such an ingeniously
complicated mass that it renders disentanglement almost impossible,
even after exhaustion has reduced them to obedience. Besides this, they
are so absorbed in worrying each other that for the time they are
utterly regardless of their driver's lash or voice. This naturally
makes the driver angry, and sometimes irascible men practise shameful
cruelties on the poor dogs. When the two friends came up they found the
Indian glaring at the animals, as they fought and writhed in the snow,
with every lineament of his swarthy face distorted with passion, and
panting from his late exertions. Suddenly he threw himself on the dogs
again, and lashed them furiously with the whip. Finding that this had
no effect, he twined the lash round his hand, and struck them violently
over their heads and snouts with the handle; then falling down on his
knees, he caught the most savage of the animals by the throat, and
seizing its nose between his teeth almost bit it off. The appalling
yell that followed this cruel act seemed to subdue the dogs, for they
ceased to fight, and crouched, whining, in the snow.

With a bound like a tiger young Hamilton sprang upon the guide, and
seizing him by the throat, hurled him violently to the ground.
"Scoundrel!" he cried, standing over the crestfallen Indian with
flushed face and flashing eyes, "how dare you thus treat the creatures
of God?"

The young man would have spoken more, but his indignation was so fierce
that it could not find vent in words. For a moment he raised his fist,
as if he meditated dashing the Indian again to the ground as he slowly
arose; then, as if changing his mind, he seized him by the back of the
neck, thrust him towards the panting dogs, and stood in silence over
him with the whip grasped firmly in his hand, while he disentangled the
traces.

This accomplished, Hamilton ordered him in a voice of suppressed anger
to "go forward"--an order which the cowed guide promptly obeyed, and in
a few minutes more the two friends were again alone.

"Hamilton, my boy," exclaimed Harry, who up to this moment seemed to
have been petrified, "you have perfectly amazed me! I'm utterly
bewildered."

"Indeed, I fear that I have been very violent," said Hamilton, blushing
deeply.

"Violent!" exclaimed his friend. "Why, man, I've completely mistaken
your character. I--I--"

"I hope not, Harry," said Hamilton, in a subdued tone; "I hope not.
Believe me, I am not naturally violent. I should be very sorry were you
to think so. Indeed, I never felt thus before, and now that it is over
I am amazed at myself; but surely you'll admit that there was great
provocation. Such terrible cruelty to--"

"My dear fellow, you quite misunderstand me. I'm amazed at your pluck,
your energy. _Soft_ indeed! we have been most egregiously mistaken.
Provocation! I just think you had; my only sorrow is that you didn't
give him a little more."

"Come, come, Harry; I see you would be as cruel to him as he was to the
poor dog. But let us press forward; it is already growing dark, and we
must not let the fellow out of sight ahead of us."

"_Allons donc_," cried Harry; and hastening their steps, they travelled
silently and rapidly among the stems of the trees, while the shades of
night gathered slowly round them.

That night the three travellers encamped in the snow under the shelter
of a spreading pine. The encampment was formed almost exactly in a
similar manner to that in which they had slept on the night of their
exploits at North River. They talked less, however, than on that
occasion, and slept more soundly. Before retiring to rest, and while
Harry was extended, half asleep and half awake, on his green blanket,
enjoying the delightful repose that follows a hard day's march and a
good supper, Hamilton drew near to the Indian, who sat sullenly smoking
a little apart from the young men. Sitting down beside him, he
administered a long rebuke in a low, grave tone of voice. Like rebukes
generally, it had the effect of making the visage of the Indian still
more sullen. But the young man did not appear to notice this; he still
continued to talk. As he went on, the look grew less and less sullen,
until it faded entirely away, and was succeeded by that grave, quiet,
respectful expression peculiar to the face of the North American Indian.

Day succeeded day, night followed night, and still found them plodding
laboriously through the weary waste of snow, or encamping under the
trees of the forest. The two friends went through all the varied stages
of experience which are included in what is called "becoming used to
the work," which is sometimes a modified meaning of the expression
"used up." They started with a degree of vigour that one would have
thought no amount of hard work could possibly abate. They became aware
of the melancholy fact that fatigue unstrings the youngest and toughest
sinews. They pressed on, however, from stern necessity, and found, to
their delight, that young muscles recover their elasticity even in the
midst of severe exertion. They still pressed on, and discovered, to
their dismay, that this recovery was only temporary, and that the
second state of exhaustion was infinitely worse than the first. Still
they pressed on, and raised blisters on their feet and toes that caused
them to limp wofully; then they learned that blisters break and take a
long time to heal, and are much worse to walk upon during the healing
process than they are at the commencement--at which time they
innocently fancied that nothing could be more dreadful. Still they
pressed on day after day, and found to their satisfaction that such
things can be endured and overcome; that feet and toes can become hard
like leather, that muscles can grow tough as india-rubber, and that
spirits and energy can attain to a pitch of endurance which nothing
within the compass of a day's march can by any possibility overcome.
They found also, from experience, that their conversation changed, both
in manner and subject, as they progressed on their journey. At first
they conversed frequently and on various topics, chiefly on the
probability of their being sent to pleasant places or the reverse. Then
they spoke less frequently, and growled occasionally, as they advanced
in the painful process of training. After that, as they began to get
hardy, they talked of the trees, the snow, the ice, the tracks of wild
animals they happened to cross, and the objects of nature generally
that came under their observation. Then as their muscles hardened and
their sinews grew tough, and the day's march at length became first a
matter of indifference, and ultimately an absolute pleasure, they
chatted cheerfully on any and every subject, or sang occasionally, when
the sun shone out and cast an _appearance_ of warmth across their path.
Thus onward they pressed, without halt or stay, day after day, through
wood and brake, over river and lake, on ice and on snow, for miles and
miles together, through the great, uninhabited, frozen wilderness.




CHAPTER XXIV.

Hopes and fears--An unexpected meeting--Philosophical talk between the
hunter and the parson.


On arriving at Norway House, Harry Somerville and his friend Hamilton
found that they were to remain at that establishment during an
indefinite period of time, until it should please those in whose hands
their ultimate destination lay to direct them how and where to proceed.
This was an unlooked-for trial of their patience; but after the first
exclamation of disappointment, they made up their minds, like wise men,
to think no more about it, but bide their time, and make the most of
present circumstances.

"You see," remarked Hamilton, as the two friends, after having had an
audience of the gentleman in charge of the establishment, sauntered
towards the rocks that overhang the margin of Playgreen Lake--"you see,
it is of no use to fret about what we cannot possibly help. Nobody
within three hundred miles of us knows where we are destined to spend
next winter. Perhaps orders may come in a couple of weeks, perhaps in a
couple of months, but they will certainly come at last. Anyhow, it is
of no use thinking about it, so we had better forget it, and make the
best of things as we find them."

"Ah!" exclaimed Harry, "your advice is, that we should by all means be
happy, and if we can't be happy, be as happy as we can. Is that it?"

"Just so. That's it exactly."

"Ho! But then you see, Hammy, you're a philosopher and I'm not, and
that makes all the difference. I'm not given to anticipating evil, but
I cannot help dreading that they will send me to some lonely, swampy,
out-of-the-way hole, where there will be no society, no shooting, no
riding, no work even to speak of--nothing, in fact, but the miserable
satisfaction of being styled 'bourgeois' by five or six men, wretched
outcasts like myself."

"Come, Harry," cried Hamilton; "you are taking the very worst view of
it. There certainly are plenty of such outposts in the country, but you
know very well that young fellows like you are seldom sent to such
places."

"I don't know that," interrupted Harry. "There's young M'Andrew: he was
sent to an outpost up the Mackenzie his second year in the service,
where he was all but starved, and had to live for about two weeks on
boiled parchment. Then there's poor Forrester: he was shipped off to a
place--the name of which I never could remember--somewhere between the
head-waters of the Athabasca Lake and the North Pole. To be sure, he
had good shooting, I'm told, but he had only four labouring men to
enjoy it with; and he has been there _ten_ years now, and he has more
