and fell in pieces on the ground; and as they all turned to look they
found the floor covered with precious stones which had fallen out of it.
But the guests were less astonished at the brilliancy of the diamonds
than at the beauty of the bride, which was beyond anything they had ever
seen or heard of. The night was passed in singing and dancing, and then
the bride and bridegroom went to their own house, where they lived till
they died, and had many children, who were famous throughout Japan for
their goodness and beauty.

(Japanische Marchen.)




THE MONKEY AND THE JELLY-FISH

Children must often have wondered why jelly-fishes have no shells, like
so many of the creatures that are washed up every day on the beach. In
old times this was not so; the jelly-fish had as hard a shell as any
of them, but he lost it through his own fault, as may be seen in this
story.

The sea-queen Otohime, whom you read of in the story of Uraschimatoro,
grew suddenly very ill. The swiftest messengers were sent hurrying to
fetch the best doctors from every country under the sea, but it was all
of no use; the queen grew rapidly worse instead of better. Everyone had
almost given up hope, when one day a doctor arrived who was cleverer
than the rest, and said that the only thing that would cure her was the
liver of an ape. Now apes do not dwell under the sea, so a council of
the wisest heads in the nation was called to consider the question how a
liver could be obtained. At length it was decided that the turtle, whose
prudence was well known, should swim to land and contrive to catch a
living ape and bring him safely to the ocean kingdom.

It was easy enough for the council to entrust this mission to the
turtle, but not at all so easy for him to fulfil it. However he swam to
a part of the coast that was covered with tall trees, where he thought
the apes were likely to be; for he was old, and had seen many things. It
was some time before he caught sight of any monkeys, and he often grew
tired with watching for them, so that one hot day he fell fast asleep,
in spite of all his efforts to keep awake. By-and-by some apes, who
had been peeping at him from the tops of the trees, where they had been
carefully hidden from the turtle's eyes, stole noiselessly down, and
stood round staring at him, for they had never seen a turtle before, and
did not know what to make of it. At last one young monkey, bolder than
the rest, stooped down and stroked the shining shell that the strange
new creature wore on its back. The movement, gentle though it was, woke
the turtle. With one sweep he seized the monkey's hand in his mouth, and
held it tight, in spite of every effort to pull it away. The other apes,
seeing that the turtle was not to be trifled with, ran off, leaving
their young brother to his fate.

Then the turtle said to the monkey, 'If you will be quiet, and do what
I tell you, I won't hurt you. But you must get on my back and come with
me.'

The monkey, seeing there was no help for it, did as he was bid; indeed
he could not have resisted, as his hand was still in the turtle's mouth.

Delighted at having secured his prize, the turtle hastened back to the
shore and plunged quickly into the water. He swam faster than he had
ever done before, and soon reached the royal palace. Shouts of joy broke
forth from the attendants when he was seen approaching, and some of them
ran to tell the queen that the monkey was there, and that before long
she would be as well as ever she was. In fact, so great was their relief
that they gave the monkey such a kind welcome, and were so anxious to
make him happy and comfortable, that he soon forgot all the fears that
had beset him as to his fate, and was generally quite at his ease,
though every now and then a fit of home-sickness would come over him,
and he would hide himself in some dark corner till it had passed away.

It was during one of these attacks of sadness that a jelly-fish happened
to swim by. At that time jelly-fishes had shells. At the sight of the
gay and lively monkey crouching under a tall rock, with his eyes closed
and his head bent, the jelly-fish was filled with pity, and stopped,
saying, 'Ah, poor fellow, no wonder you weep; a few days more, and they
will come and kill you and give your liver to the queen to eat.'

The monkey shrank back horrified at these words and asked the jelly-fish
what crime he had committed that deserved death.

'Oh, none at all,' replied the jelly-fish, 'but your liver is the only
thing that will cure our queen, and how can we get at it without killing
you? You had better submit to your fate, and make no noise about it, for
though I pity you from my heart there is no way of helping you.' Then he
went away, leaving the ape cold with horror.

At first he felt as if his liver was already being taken from his body,
but soon he began to wonder if there was no means of escaping this
terrible death, and at length he invented a plan which he thought would
do. For a few days he pretended to be gay and happy as before, but when
the sun went in, and rain fell in torrents, he wept and howled from dawn
to dark, till the turtle, who was his head keeper, heard him, and came
to see what was the matter. Then the monkey told him that before he left
home he had hung his liver out on a bush to dry, and if it was always
going to rain like this it would become quite useless. And the rogue
made such a fuss and moaning that he would have melted a heart of stone,
and nothing would content him but that somebody should carry him back to
land and let him fetch his liver again.

The queen's councillors were not the wisest of people, and they decided
between them that the turtle should take the monkey back to his native
land and allow him to get his liver off the bush, but desired the turtle
not to lose sight of his charge for a single moment. The monkey knew
this, but trusted to his power of beguiling the turtle when the time
came, and mounted on his back with feelings of joy, which he was,
however, careful to conceal. They set out, and in a few hours were
wandering about the forest where the ape had first been caught, and
when the monkey saw his family peering out from the tree tops, he swung
himself up by the nearest branch, just managing to save his hind leg
from being seized by the turtle. He told them all the dreadful things
that had happened to him, and gave a war cry which brought the rest of
the tribe from the neighbouring hills. At a word from him they rushed
in a body to the unfortunate turtle, threw him on his back, and tore off
the shield that covered his body. Then with mocking words they hunted
him to the shore, and into the sea, which he was only too thankful to
reach alive. Faint and exhausted he entered the queen's palace for the
cold of the water struck upon his naked body, and made him feel ill
and miserable. But wretched though he was, he had to appear before the
queen's advisers and tell them all that had befallen him, and how he had
suffered the monkey to escape. But, as sometimes happens, the turtle was
allowed to go scot-free, and had his shell given back to him, and all
the punishment fell on the poor jelly-fish, who was condemned by the
queen to go shieldless for ever after.

(Japanische Marchen.)




THE HEADLESS DWARFS

There was once a minister who spent his whole time in trying to find
a servant who would undertake to ring the church bells at midnight, in
addition to all his other duties.

Of course it was not everyone who cared to get up in the middle of the
night, when he had been working hard all day; still, a good many had
agreed to do it. But the strange thing was that no sooner had the
servant set forth to perform his task than he disappeared, as if the
earth had swallowed him up. No bells were rung, and no ringer ever came
back. The minister did his best to keep the matter secret, but it leaked
out for all that, and the end of it was that no one would enter his
service. Indeed, there were even those who whispered that the minister
himself had murdered the missing men!

It was to no purpose that Sunday after Sunday the minister gave out from
his pulpit that double wages would be paid to anyone that would fulfil
the sacred duty of ringing the bells of the church. No one took the
slightest notice of any offer he might make, and the poor man was in
despair, when one day, as he was standing at his house door, a youth
known in the village as Clever Hans came up to him. 'I am tired of
living with a miser who will not give me enough to eat and drink,' said
he, 'and I am ready to do all you want.' 'Very good, my son,' replied
the minister, 'you shall have the chance of proving your courage this
very night. To-morrow we will settle what your wages are to be.'

Hans was quite content with this proposal, and went straight into the
kitchen to begin his work, not knowing that his new master was quite
as stingy as his old one. In the hope that his presence might be a
restraint upon them, the minister used to sit at the table during his
servants' meals, and would exhort them to drink much and often, thinking
that they would not be able to eat as well, and beef was dearer than
beer. But in Hans he had met his match, and the minister soon found to
his cost that in his case at any rate a full cup did not mean an empty
plate.

About an hour before midnight, Hans entered the church and locked
the door behind him, but what was his surprise when, in place of the
darkness and silence he expected, he found the church brilliantly
lighted, and a crowd of people sitting round a table playing cards. Hans
felt no fear at this strange sight, or was prudent enough to hide it if
he did, and, going up to the table, sat down amongst the players. One of
them looked up and asked, 'My friend, what are you doing here?' and Hans
gazed at him for a moment, then laughed and answered, 'Well, if anybody
has a right to put that question, it is I! And if _I_ do not put it, it
will certainly be wiser for you not to do so!'

Then he picked up some cards, and played with the unknown men as if
he had known them all his life. The luck was on his side, and soon the
money of the other gamblers found its way from their pockets into his.
On the stroke of midnight the cock crew, and in an instant lights,
table, cards, and people all had vanished, and Hans was left alone.

He groped about for some time, till he found the staircase in the tower,
and then began to feel his way up the steps.

On the first landing a glimmer of light came through a slit in the wall,
and he saw a tiny man sitting there, without a head. 'Ho! ho! my little
fellow, what are you doing there?' asked Hans, and, without waiting for
an answer, gave him a kick which sent him flying down the stairs. Then
he climbed higher still, and finding as he went dumb watchers sitting on
every landing, treated them as he had done the first.

At last he reached the top, and as he paused for a moment to look
round him he saw another headless man cowering in the very bell itself,
waiting till Hans should seize the bell-pull in order to strike him a
blow with the clapper, which would soon have made an end of him.

'Stop, my little friend!' cried Hans. 'That is not part of the bargain!
Perhaps you saw how your comrades walked down stairs, and you are going
after them. But as you are in the highest place you shall make a more
dignified exit, and follow them through the window!'

With these words he began to climb the ladder, in order to take the
little man from the bell and carry out his threat.

At this the dwarf cried out imploringly, 'Oh, brother! spare my life,
and I promise that neither I nor my comrades will ever trouble you any
more. I am small and weak, but who knows whether some day I shall not be
able to reward you.'

'You wretched little shrimp,' replied Hans, 'a great deal of good
your gratitude is likely to do me! But as I happen to be feeling in a
cheerful mood to-night I will let you have your life. But take care how
you come across me again, or you may not escape so easily!'

The headless man thanked him humbly, slid hastily down the bell rope,
and ran down the steps of the tower as if he had left a fire behind him.
Then Hans began to ring lustily.

When the minister heard the sound of the midnight bells he wondered
greatly, but rejoiced that he had at last found some one to whom he
could trust this duty. Hans rang the bells for some time, then went to
the hay-loft, and fell fast asleep.

Now it was the custom of the minister to get up very early, and to go
round to make sure that the men were all at their work. This morning
everyone was in his place except Hans, and no one knew anything about
him. Nine o'clock came, and no Hans, but when eleven struck the minister
began to fear that he had vanished like the ringers who had gone before
him. When, however, the servants all gathered round the table for
dinner, Hans at last made his appearance stretching himself and yawning.

'Where have you been all this time?' asked the minister.

'Asleep,' said Hans.

'Asleep!' exclaimed the minister in astonishment. 'You don't mean to
tell me that you can go on sleeping till mid-day?'

'That is exactly what I do mean,' replied Hans. 'If one works in the
night one must sleep in the day, just as if one works in the day one
sleeps in the night. If you can find somebody else to ring the bells at
midnight I am ready to begin work at dawn; but if you want me to ring
them I must go on sleeping till noon at the very earliest.'

The minister tried to argue the point with him, but at length the
following agreement was come to. Hans was to give up the ringing, and
was to work like the rest from sunrise to sunset, with the exception of
an hour after breakfast and an hour after dinner, when he might go to
sleep. 'But, of course,' added the minister carelessly, 'it may happen
now and then, especially in winter, when the days are short, that you
will have to work a little longer, to get something finished.'

'Not at all!' answered Hans. 'Unless I were to leave off work earlier
in summer, I will not do a stroke more than I have promised, and that is
from dawn to dark; so you know what you have to expect.'

A few weeks later the minister was asked to attend a christening in the
neighbouring town. He bade Hans come with him, but, as the town was only
a few hours' ride from where he lived, the minister was much surprised
to see Hans come forth laden with a bag containing food.

'What are you taking that for?' asked the minister. 'We shall be there
before dark.'

'Who knows?' replied Hans. 'Many things may happen to delay our journey,
and I need not remind you of our contract that the moment the sun sets
I cease to be your servant. If we don't reach the town while it is still
daylight I shall leave you to shift for yourself.'

The minister thought he was joking, and made no further remark. But when
they had left the village behind them, and had ridden a few miles, they
found that snow had fallen during the night, and had been blown by the
wind into drifts. This hindered their progress, and by the time they had
entered the thick wood which lay between them and their destination
the sun was already touching the tops of the trees. The horses ploughed
their way slowly through the deep soft snow and as they went Hans kept
turning to look at the sun, which lay at their backs.

'Is there anything behind you?' asked the minister. 'Or what is it you
are always turning round for?'

'I turn round because I have no eyes in the back of my neck,' said Hans.

'Cease talking nonsense,' replied the minister, 'and give all your mind
to getting us to the town before nightfall.'

Hans did not answer, but rode on steadily, though every now and then he
cast a glance over his shoulder.

When they arrived in the middle of the wood the sun sank altogether.
Then Hans reined up his horse, took his knapsack, and jumped out of the
sledge.

'What are you doing? Are you mad?' asked the minister, but Hans answered
quietly, 'The sun is set and my work is over, and I am going to camp
here for the night.'

In vain the master prayed and threatened, and promised Hans a large
reward if he would only drive him on. The young man was not to be moved.

'Are you not ashamed to urge me to break my word?' said he. 'If you want
to reach the town to-night you must go alone. The hour of my freedom has
struck, and I cannot go with you.'

'My good Hans,' entreated the minister, 'I really ought not to leave
you here. Consider what danger you would be in! Yonder, as you see, a
gallows is set up, and two evil-doers are hanging on it. You could not
possibly sleep with such ghastly neighbours.'

'Why not?' asked Hans. 'Those gallows birds hang high in the air, and
my camp will be on the ground; we shall have nothing to do with each
other.' As he spoke, he turned his back on the minister, and went his
way.

There was no help for it, and the minister had to push on by himself, if
he expected to arrive in time for the christening. His friends were
much surprised to see him drive up without a coachman, and thought some
accident had happened. But when he told them of his conversation with
Hans they did not know which was the most foolish, master or man.

It would have mattered little to Hans had he known what they were saying
or thinking of him. He satisfied his hunger with the food he had in his
knapsack, lit his pipe, pitched his tent under the boughs of a tree,
wrapped himself in his furs, and went sound asleep. After some hours,
he was awakened by a sudden noise, and sat up and looked about him.
The moon was shining brightly above his head, and close by stood two
headless dwarfs, talking angrily. At the sight of Hans the little dwarfs
cried out:

'It is he! It is he!' and one of them stepping nearer exclaimed, 'Ah,
my old friend! it is a lucky chance that has brought us here. My bones
still ache from my fall down the steps of the tower. I dare say you
have not forgotten that night! Now it is the turn of your bones. Hi!
comrades, make haste! make haste!'

Like a swarm of midges, a host of tiny headless creatures seemed to
spring straight out of the ground, and every one was armed with a club.
Although they were so small, yet there were such numbers of them and
they struck so hard that even a strong man could do nothing against
them. Hans thought his last hour was come, when just as the fight was at
the hottest another little dwarf arrived on the scene.

'Hold, comrades!' he shouted, turning to the attacking party. 'This man
once did me a service, and I am his debtor. When I was in his power he
granted me my life. And even if he did throw you downstairs, well, a
warm bath soon cured your bruises, so you must just forgive him and go
quietly home.'

The headless dwarfs listened to his words and disappeared as suddenly as
they had come. As soon as Hans recovered himself a little he looked at
his rescuer, and saw he was the dwarf he had found seated in the church
bell.

'Ah!' said the dwarf, seating himself quietly under the tree. 'You
laughed at me when I told you that some day I might do you a good turn.
Now you see I was right, and perhaps you will learn for the future not
to despise any creature, however small.'

'I thank you from my heart,' answered Hans. 'My bones are still sore
from their blows, and had it not been for you I should indeed have fared
badly.'

'I have almost paid my debt,' went on the little man, 'but as you have
suffered already, I will do more, and give you a piece of information.
You need not remain any longer in the service of that stingy minister,
but when you get home to-morrow go at once to the north corner of the
church, and there you will find a large stone built into the wall, but
not cemented like the rest. The day after to-morrow the moon is full,
and at midnight you must go to the spot and get the stone out of the
wall with a pickaxe. Under the stone lies a great treasure, which has
been hidden there in time of war. Besides church plate, you will find
bags of money, which have been lying in this place for over a hundred
years, and no one knows to whom it all belongs. A third of this money
you must give to the poor, but the rest you may keep for yourself.' As
he finished, the cocks in the village crowed, and the little man was
nowhere to be seen. Hans found that his limbs no longer pained him, and
lay for some time thinking of the hidden treasure. Towards morning he
fell asleep.

The sun was high in the heavens when his master returned from the town.
