from his neighbour, harnessed the cart to it, sat his grandmother on the
back seat so that she could not fall out when he drove, and away they
went. When the sun rose they were in front of a large inn. Little Klaus
got down, and went in to get something to drink. The host was very rich.
He was a very worthy but hot-tempered man.

'Good morning!' said he to Little Klaus. 'You are early on the road.'

'Yes,' said Little Klaus. 'I am going to the town with my grandmother.
She is sitting outside in the cart; I cannot bring her in. Will you not
give her a glass of mead? But you will have to speak loud, for she is
very hard of hearing.'

'Oh yes, certainly I will!' said the host; and, pouring out a large
glass of mead, he took it out to the dead grandmother, who was sitting
upright in the cart.

'Here is a glass of mead from your son,' said the host. But the dead
woman did not answer a word, and sat still. 'Don't you hear?' cried the
host as loud as he could. 'Here is a glass of mead from your son!'

Then he shouted the same thing again, and yet again, but she never moved
in her place; and at last he grew angry, threw the glass in her face, so
that she fell back into the cart, for she was not tied in her place.

'Hullo!' cried Little Klaus, running out of the door, and seizing the
host by the throat. 'You have killed my grandmother! Look! there is a
great hole in her forehead!'

'Oh, what a misfortune!' cried the host, wringing his hands. 'It all
comes from my hot temper! Dear Little Klaus! I will give you a bushel of
money, and will bury your grandmother as if she were my own; only don't
tell about it, or I shall have my head cut off, and that would be very
uncomfortable.'

So Little Klaus got a bushel of money, and the host buried his
grandmother as if she had been his own.

Now when Little Klaus again reached home with so much money he sent his
boy to Big Klaus to borrow his bushel measure.

'What's this?' said Big Klaus. 'Didn't I kill him? I must see to this
myself!'

So he went himself to Little Klaus with the measure.

'Well, now, where did you get all this money?' asked he, opening his
eyes at the heap.

'You killed my grandmother--not me,' said Little Klaus. 'I sold her, and
got a bushel of money for her.'

'That is indeed a good price!' said Big Klaus; and, hurrying home, he
took an axe and killed his grandmother, laid her in the cart, and drove
off to the apothecary's, and asked whether he wanted to buy a dead body.

'Who is it, and how did you get it?' asked the apothecary.

'It is my grandmother,' said Big Klaus. 'I killed her in order to get a
bushel of money.'

'You are mad!' said the apothecary. 'Don't mention such things, or you
will lose your head!' And he began to tell him what a dreadful thing
he had done, and what a wicked man he was, and that he ought to be
punished; till Big Klaus was so frightened that he jumped into the cart
and drove home as hard as he could. The apothecary and all the people
thought he must be mad, so they let him go.

'You shall pay for this!' said Big Klaus as he drove home. 'You shall
pay for this dearly, Little Klaus!'

So as soon as he got home he took the largest sack he could find, and
went to Little Klaus and said: 'You have fooled me again! First I killed
my horses, then my grandmother! It is all your fault; but you sha'n't do
it again!' And he seized Little Klaus, pushed him in the sack, threw it
over his shoulder, crying out 'Now I am going to drown you!'

He had to go a long way before he came to the river, and Little Klaus
was not very light. The road passed by the church; the organ was
sounding, and the people were singing most beautifully.

Big Klaus put down the sack with Little Klaus in it by the church-door,
and thought that he might as well go in and hear a psalm before going on
farther. Little Klaus could not get out, and everybody was in church; so
he went in.

'Oh, dear! oh, dear!' groaned Little Klaus in the sack, twisting and
turning himself. But he could not undo the string.

There came by an old, old shepherd, with snow-white hair and a long
staff in his hand. He was driving a herd of cows and oxen. These pushed
against the sack so that it was overturned.

'Alas!' moaned Little Klans, 'I am so young and yet I must die!'

'And I, poor man,' said the cattle-driver, 'I am so old and yet I cannot
die!'

'Open the sack,' called out Little Klaus; 'creep in here instead of me,
and you will die in a moment!'

'I will gladly do that,' said the cattle-driver; and he opened the sack,
and Little Klaus struggled out at once.

'You will take care of the cattle, won't you?' asked the old man,
creeping into the sack, which Little Klaus fastened up and then went on
with the cows and oxen. Soon after Big Klaus came out of the church, and
taking up the sack on his shoulders it seemed to him as if it had become
lighter; for the old cattle-driver was not half as heavy as Little
Klaus.

'How easy he is to carry now! That must be because I heard part of the
service.'

So he went to the river, which was deep and broad, threw in the sack
with the old driver, and called after it, for he thought Little Klaus
was inside:

'Down you go! You won't mock me any more now!'

Then he went home; but when he came to the cross-roads, there he met
Little Klaus, who was driving his cattle.

'What's this?' said Big Klaus. 'Haven't I drowned you?'

'Yes,' replied Little Klaus; 'you threw me into the river a good
half-hour ago!'

'But how did you get those splendid cattle?' asked Big Klaus.

'They are sea-cattle!' said Little Klaus. 'I will tell you the whole
story, and I thank you for having drowned me, because now I am on dry
land and really rich! How frightened I was when I was in the sack! How
the wind whistled in my ears as you threw me from the bridge into the
cold water! I sank at once to the bottom; but I did not hurt myself for
underneath was growing the most beautiful soft grass. I fell on this,
and immediately the sack opened; the loveliest maiden in snow-white
garments, with a green garland round her wet hair, took me by the hand,
and said! ''Are you Little Klaus? Here are some cattle for you to begin
with, and a mile farther down the road there is another herd, which
I will give you as a present!'' Now I saw that the river was a great
high-road for the sea-people. Along it they travel underneath from
the sea to the land till the river ends. It was so beautiful, full of
flowers and fresh grass; the fishes which were swimming in the water
shot past my ears as the birds do here in the air. What lovely people
there were, and what fine cattle were grazing in the ditches and dykes!'

'But why did you come up to us again?' asked Big Klaus. 'I should not
have done so, if it is so beautiful down below!'

'Oh!' said Little Klaus, 'that was just so politic of me. You heard
what I told you, that the sea-maiden said to me a mile farther along the
road--and by the road she meant the river, for she can go by no other
way--there was another herd of cattle waiting for me. But I know what
windings the river makes, now here, now there, so that it is a long way
round. Therefore it makes it much shorter if one comes on the land and
drives across the field to the river. Thus I have spared myself quite
half a mile, and have come much quicker to my sea-cattle!'

'Oh, you're a lucky fellow!' said Big Klaus. 'Do you think I should also
get some cattle if I went to the bottom of the river?'

'Oh, yes! I think so,' said Little Klaus. 'But I can't carry you in a
sack to the river; you are too heavy for me! If you like to go there
yourself and then creep into the sack, I will throw you in with the
greatest of pleasure.'

'Thank you,' said Big Klaus; 'but if I don't get any sea-cattle when I
come there, you will have a good hiding, mind!'

'Oh, no! Don't be so hard on me!' Then they went to the river. When
the cattle, which were thirsty, caught sight of the water, they ran as
quickly as they could to drink.

'Look how they are running!' said Little Klaus. 'They want to go to the
bottom again!'

'Yes; but help me first,' said Big Klaus, 'or else you shall have a
beating!'

And so he crept into the large sack, which was lying on the back of
one of the oxen. 'Put a stone in, for I am afraid I may not reach the
bottom,' said Big Klaus.

'It goes all right!' said Little Klaus; but still he laid a big stone in
the sack, fastened it up tight, and then pushed it in. Plump! there was
Big Klaus in the water, and he sank like lead to the bottom.

'I doubt if he will find any cattle!' said Little Klaus as he drove his
own home.




PRINCE RING (30)

(30) From the Icelandic.

Once upon a time there was a King and his Queen in their kingdom.

They had one daughter, who was called Ingiborg, and one son, whose name
was Ring. He was less fond of adventures than men of rank usually were
in those days, and was not famous for strength or feats of arms. When he
was twelve years old, one fine winter day he rode into the forest along
with his men to enjoy himself. They went on a long way, until they
caught sight of a hind with a gold ring on its horns. The Prince was
eager to catch it, if possible, so they gave chase and rode on without
stopping until all the horses began to founder beneath them. At last the
Prince's horse gave way too, and then there came over them a darkness so
black that they could no longer see the hind. By this time they were far
away from any house, and thought it was high time to be making their way
home again, but they found they had got lost now. At first they all kept
together, but soon each began to think that he knew the right way best;
so they separated, and all went in different directions.

The Prince, too, had got lost like the rest, and wandered on for a time
until he came to a little clearing in the forest not far from the sea,
where he saw a woman sitting on a chair and a big barrel standing
beside her. The Prince went up to her and saluted her politely, and she
received him very graciously. He looked down into the barrel then, and
saw lying at the bottom an unusually beautiful gold ring, which pleased
him so much that he could not take his eyes off it. The woman saw this,
and said that he might have it if he would take the trouble to get it;
for which the Prince thanked her, and said it was at least worth trying.
So he leaned over into the barrel, which did not seem very deep, and
thought he would easily reach the ring; but the more he stretched down
after it the deeper grew the barrel. As he was thus bending down into it
the woman suddenly rose up and pushed him in head first, saying that
now he could take up his quarters there. Then she fixed the top on the
barrel and threw it out into the sea.

The Prince thought himself in a bad plight now, as he felt the barrel
floating out from the land and tossing about on the waves.

How many days he spent thus he could not tell, but at last he felt that
the barrel was knocking against rocks, at which he was a little cheered,
thinking it was probably land and not merely a reef in the sea. Being
something of a swimmer, he at last made up his mind to kick the bottom
out of the barrel, and having done so he was able to get on shore, for
the rocks by the sea were smooth and level; but overhead there were high
cliffs. It seemed difficult to get up these, but he went along the foot
of them for a little, till at last he tried to climb up, which at last
he did.

Having got to the top, he looked round about him and saw that he was
on an island, which was covered with forest, with apples growing, and
altogether pleasant as far as the land was concerned. After he had been
there several days, he one day heard a great noise in the forest, which
made him terribly afraid, so that he ran to hide himself among the
trees. Then he saw a Giant approaching, dragging a sledge loaded with
wood, and making straight for him, so that he could see nothing for it
but to lie down just where he was. When the Giant came across him, he
stood still and looked at the Prince for a little; then he took him up
in his arms and carried him home to his house, and was exceedingly kind
to him. He gave him to his wife, saying he had found this child in the
wood, and she could have it to help her in the house. The old woman was
greatly pleased, and began to fondle the Prince with the utmost delight.
He stayed there with them, and was very willing and obedient to them in
everything, while they grew kinder to him every day.

One day the Giant took him round and showed him all his rooms except the
parlour; this made the Prince curious to have a look into it, thinking
there must be some very rare treasure there. So one day, when the Giant
had gone into the forest, he tried to get into the parlour, and managed
to get the door open half-way. Then he saw that some living creature
moved inside and ran along the floor towards him and said something,
which made him so frightened that he sprang back from the door and shut
it again. As soon as the fright began to pass off he tried it again, for
he thought it would be interesting to hear what it said; but things went
just as before with him. He then got angry with himself, and, summoning
up all his courage, tried it a third time, and opened the door of the
room and stood firm. Then he saw that it was a big Dog, which spoke to
him and said:

'Choose me, Prince Ring.'

The Prince went away rather afraid, thinking with himself that it was no
great treasure after all; but all the same what it had said to him stuck
in his mind.

It is not said how long the Prince stayed with the Giant, but one
day the latter came to him and said he would now take him over to the
mainland out of the island, for he himself had no long time to live. He
also thanked him for his good service, and told him to choose some-one
of his possessions, for he would get whatever he wanted. Ring thanked
him heartily, and said there was no need to pay him for his services,
they were so little worth; but if he did wish to give him anything he
would choose what was in the parlour. The Giant was taken by surprise,
and said:

'There, you chose my old woman's right hand; but I must not break my
word.'

Upon this he went to get the Dog, which came running with signs of great
delight; but the Prince was so much afraid of it that it was all he
could do to keep from showing his alarm.

After this the Giant accompanied him down to the sea, where he saw a
stone boat which was just big enough to hold the two of them and the
Dog. On reaching the mainland the Giant took a friendly farewell of
Ring, and told him he might take possession of all that was in the
island after he and his wife died, which would happen within two weeks
from that time. The Prince thanked him for this and for all his other
kindnesses, and the Giant returned home, while Ring went up some
distance from the sea; but he did not know what land he had come to, and
was afraid to speak to the Dog. After he had walked on in silence for a
time the Dog spoke to him and said:

'You don't seem to have much curiosity, seeing you never ask my name.'

The Prince then forced himself to ask, 'What is your name?'

'You had best call me Snati-Snati,' said the Dog. 'Now we are coming to
a King's seat, and you must ask the King to keep us all winter, and to
give you a little room for both of us.'

The Prince now began to be less afraid of the Dog. They came to the King
and asked him to keep them all the winter, to which he agreed. When the
King's men saw the Dog they began to laugh at it, and make as if they
would tease it; but when the Prince saw this he advised them not to do
it, or they might have the worst of it. They replied that they didn't
care a bit what he thought.

After Ring had been with the King for some days the latter began to
think there was a great deal in him, and esteemed him more than the
others. The King, however, had a counsellor called Red, who became very
jealous when he saw how much the King esteemed Ring; and one day he
talked to him, and said he could not understand why he had so good an
opinion of this stranger, who had not yet shown himself superior to
other men in anything. The King replied that it was only a short time
since he had come there. Red then asked him to send them both to cut
down wood next morning, and see which of them could do most work.
Snati-Snati heard this and told it to Ring, advising him to ask the King
for two axes, so that he might have one in reserve if the first one
got broken. Next morning the King asked Ring and Red to go and cut down
trees for him, and both agreed. Ring got the two axes, and each went his
own way; but when the Prince had got out into the wood Snati took one of
the axes and began to hew along with him. In the evening the King came
to look over their day's work, as Red had proposed, and found that
Ring's wood-heap was more than twice as big.

'I suspected,' said the King, 'that Ring was not quite useless; never
have I seen such a day's work.'

Ring was now in far greater esteem with the King than before, and Red
was all the more discontented. One day he came to the King and said, 'If
Ring is such a mighty man, I think you might ask him to kill the wild
oxen in the wood here, and flay them the same day, and bring you the
horns and the hides in the evening.'

'Don't you think that a desperate errand?' said the King, 'seeing they
are so dangerous, and no one has ever yet ventured to go against them?'

Red answered that he had only one life to lose, and it would be
interesting to see how brave he was; besides, the King would have good
reason to ennoble him if he overcame them. The King at last allowed
himself, though rather unwillingly, to be won over by Red's persistency,
and one day asked Ring to go and kill the oxen that were in the wood for
him, and bring their horns and hides to him in the evening. Not knowing
how dangerous the oxen were, Ring was quite ready, and went off at once,
to the great delight of Red, who was now sure of his death.

As soon as Ring came in sight of the oxen they came bellowing to meet
him; one of them was tremendously big, the other rather less. Ring grew
terribly afraid.

'How do you like them?' asked Snati.

'Not well at all,' said the Prince.

'We can do nothing else,' said Snati, 'than attack them, if it is to go
well; you will go against the little one, and I shall take the other.'

With this Snati leapt at the big one, and was not long in bringing
him down. Meanwhile the Prince went against the other with fear and
trembling, and by the time Snati came to help him the ox had nearly got
him under, but Snati was not slow in helping his master to kill it.

Each of them then began to flay their own ox, but Ring was only half
through by the time Snati had finished his. In the evening, after they
had finished this task, the Prince thought himself unfit to carry all
the horns and both the hides, so Snati told him to lay them all on his
back until they got to the Palace gate.

The Prince agreed, and laid everything on the Dog except the skin of the
smaller ox, which he staggered along with himself. At the Palace gate he
left everything lying, went before the King, and asked him to come that
length with him, and there handed over to him the hides and horns of the
oxen. The King was greatly surprised at his valour, and said he knew no
one like him, and thanked him heartily for what he had done.
