Hop-o'-my-Thumb had, and whether the said youths were not scoundrels?
And when the boy refused to say that they were (for they had been kind
to him), Melchior said that his tastes were evidently as bad as ever,
and even hinted at the old transportation threat. This was too much;
the boy went angrily back to his window corner, and Melchior--like too
many of us!--lost the opportunity of making peace for the sake of
wagging his own tongue.

"'But he will come round in a few minutes,' he thought A few minutes
passed, however, and there was no sign. A few minutes more, and there
was a noise, a shout; Melchior looked up, and saw that the boy had
jumped through the open window into the road, and had been picked up
by the men in the dog-cart, and was gone.

"And so at last my hero was alone. At first he enjoyed it very much.
He shook out his hair, wrapped himself in the rug, stared through the
opera-glass, and did the fine gentleman very well indeed. But though
everyone allowed him to be the finest young fellow on the road, yet
nobody seemed to care for the fact as much as he did; they talked, and
complimented, and stared at him, but he got tired of it. For he could
not arrange his hair any better; he could not dispose the rug more
gracefully, or stare more perseveringly through the glass; and if he
could, his friends could do nothing more than they had done. In fact,
he got tired of the crowd, and found himself gazing through the
window, not to see his fine friends, but to try and catch sight of his
brothers and sisters. Sometimes he saw the youngest brother, looking
each time more wild and reckless; and sometimes the sister, looking
more and more miserable; but he saw no one else.

"At last there was a stir among the people, and all heads were turned
towards the distance, as if looking for something. Melchior asked what
it was, and was told that the people were looking for a man, the hero
of many battles, who had won honour for himself and for his country in
foreign lands, and who was coming home. Everybody stood up and gazed,
Melchior with them. Then the crowd parted, and the hero came on. No
one asked whether he were handsome or genteel, whether he kept good
company, or wore a tiger-skin rug, or looked through an opera-glass?
They knew what he had _done_, and it was enough.

"He was a bronzed hairy man, with one sleeve empty, and a breast
covered with stars; but in his face, brown with sun and wind,
overgrown with hair and scarred with wounds, Melchior saw his second
brother! There was no doubt of it. And the brother himself, though he
bowed kindly in answer to the greetings showered on him, was gazing
anxiously for the old coach, where he used to ride and be so
uncomfortable, in that time to which he now looked back as the
happiest of his life.

"'I thank you, gentlemen. I am indebted to you, gentlemen. I have been
away long. I am going home.'

"'Of course he is!' shouted Melchior, waving his arms widely with
pride and joy. 'He is coming home; to this coach, where he was--oh,
it seems but an hour ago! Time goes so fast. We were great friends
when we were young together. My brother and I, ladies and gentlemen,
the hero and I--my brother--the hero with the stars upon his
breast--he is coming home!'

"Alas! what avail stars and ribbons on a breast where the life-blood
is trickling slowly from a little wound? The crowd looked anxious; the
hero came on, but more slowly, with his dim eyes straining for the old
coach; and Melchior stood with his arms held out in silent agony. But
just when he was beginning to hope, and the brothers seemed about to
meet, a figure passed between--a figure in a cloak.

"'I have seen you many times, Friend, face to face,' said the hero;
'but now I would fain have waited for a little while.'

"'To enjoy his well-earned honours,' murmured the crowd.

"'Nay,' he said, 'not that; but to see my home, and my brothers and
sisters. But if it may not be, friend Death, I am ready, and tired
too.' With that he held out his hand, and Death lifted up the hero of
many battles like a child, and carried him away, stars and ribbons and
all.

"'Cruel Death!' cried Melchior; 'was there no one else in all this
crowd, that you must take him?'

"His friends condoled with him; but they soon went on their own ways;
and the hero seemed to be forgotten; and Melchior, who had lost all
pleasure in the old bowings and chattings, sat sadly gazing out of the
window, to see if he could see any one for whom he cared. At last, in
a grave dark man, who was sitting on a horse, and making a speech to
the crowd, he recognized his clever untidy brother.

"'What is that man talking about?' he asked of some one near him.

"'That man!' was the answer. 'Don't you know? He is _the_ man of the
time. He is a philosopher. Everybody goes to hear him. He has found
out that--well--that everything is a mistake.'

"'Has he corrected it?' said Melchior.

"'You had better hear for yourself,' said the man. 'Listen.'

"Melchior listened, and a cold clear voice rang upon his ear,
saying:--

"'The world of fools will go on as they have ever done; but to the
wise few, to whom I address myself, I would say--Shake off at once and
for ever the fancies and feelings, the creeds and customs that shackle
you, and be true. We have come to a time when wise men will not be
led blindfold in the footsteps of their predecessors, but will tear
away the bandage and see for themselves. I have torn away mine, and
looked. There is no Faith--it is shaken to its rotten foundation;
there is no Hope--it is disappointed every day; there is no Love at
all. There is nothing for any man or for each, but his fate; and he is
happiest and wisest who can meet it most unmoved.'

"'It is a lie!' shouted Melchior. 'I feel it to be so in my heart. A
wicked foolish lie! Oh! was it to teach such evil folly as this that
you left home and us, my brother? Oh, come back! come back!'

"The philosopher turned his head coldly, and smiled. 'I thank the
gentleman who spoke,' he said, still in the same cold voice, 'for his
bad opinion, and for his good wishes. I think the gentleman spoke of
home and kindred. My experience of life has led me to find that home
is most valued when it is left, and kindred most dear when they are
parted. I have happily freed myself from such inconsistencies. I am
glad to know that fate can tear me from no place that I care for more
than the next where it shall deposit me, nor take away any friends
that I value more than those it leaves. I recommend a similar
self-emancipation to the gentleman who did me the honour of
speaking.'

"With this the philosopher went his way, and the crowd followed him.

"'There is a separation more bitter than death,' said Melchior.

"At last he pulled the check-string, and called to Godfather Time in
an humble entreating voice.

"'It is not your fault,' he began; 'it is not your fault, Godfather;
but this drive has been altogether wrong. Let us turn back and begin
again. Let us all get in afresh and begin again.'

"'But what a squeeze with all the brats!' said Godfather Time,
ironically.

"'We should be so happy,' murmured Melchior, humbly; 'and it is very
cold and chilly; we should keep each other warm.'

"'You have the tiger-skin rug and the opera-glass, you know,' said
Time.

"'Ah, do not speak of me!' cried Melchior, earnestly. 'I am thinking
of them. There is plenty of room; the little one can sit on my knee;
and we shall be so happy. The truth is, Godfather, that I have been
wrong. I have gone the wrong way to work. A little more love, and
kindness, and forbearance, might have kept my sisters with us, might
have led the little one to better tastes and pleasures, and have
taught the other by experience the truth of the faith and hope and
love which he now reviles. Oh, I have sinned! I have sinned! Let us
turn back, Godfather Time, and begin again. And oh! drive very slowly,
for partings come only too soon.'

"'I am sorry,' said the old man in the same bitter tone as before, 'to
disappoint your rather unreasonable wishes. What you say is admirably
true, with this misfortune, that your good intentions are too late.
Like the rest of the world you are ready to seize the opportunity when
it is past. You should have been kind _then_. You should have advised
_then_. You should have yielded _then_. You should have loved your
brothers and sisters while you had them. It is too late now.'

"With this he drove on, and spoke no more, and poor Melchior stared
sadly out of the window. As he was gazing at the crowd, he suddenly
saw the dog-cart, in which were his brother and his wretched
companions. Oh, how old and worn he looked! and how ragged his clothes
were! The men seemed to be trying to persuade him to do something that
he did not like, and they began to quarrel; but in the midst of the
dispute he turned his head and caught sight of the old coach; and
Melchior seeing this, waved his hands, and beckoned with all his
might. The brother seemed doubtful; but Melchior waved harder, and
(was it fancy?) Time seemed to go slower. The brother made up his
mind; he turned and jumped from the dog-cart as he had jumped from the
old coach long ago, and ducking in and out among the horses and
carriages, ran for his life. The men came after him; but he ran like
the wind--pant, pant, nearer, nearer; at last the coach was reached,
and Melchior seized the prodigal by his rags and dragged him in.

"'Oh, thank GOD, I have got you safe, my brother!'

"But what a brother! with wasted body and sunken eyes; with the old
curly hair turned to matted locks, that clung faster to his face than
the rags did to his trembling limbs; what a sight for the
opera-glasses of the crowd! What a subject for the tongues that were
ever wagging, and complimenting, and backbiting, and lying, all in a
breath, and without sense or scruple! What a sight and a subject for
the fine friends, for whose good opinion Melchior had been so anxious?
Do you think he was as anxious now? Do you think he was troubled by
what they either saw or said; or was ashamed of the wretched prodigal
lying among the cushions? I think not. I think that for the most
foolish of us there are moments in life (of real joy or real sorrow)
when we judge things by a higher standard, and care vastly little for
what 'people say'. The only shame that Melchior felt was that his
brother should have fared so hardly in the trials and temptations of
the world outside, while he had sat at ease among the cushions of the
old coach, that had been the home of both alike. Thank GOD,
it was the home of both now! And poor Hop-o'-my-Thumb was on the front
seat at last, with Melchior kneeling at his feet, and fondly stroking
the head that rested against him.

"'Has powder come into fashion, brother?' he said. 'Your hair is
streaked with white.'

"'If it has,' said the other, laughing, 'your barber is better than
mine, Melchior, for your head is as white as snow.'

"'Is it possible? are we so old? has Time gone so very fast? But what
are you staring at through the window? I shall be jealous of that
crowd, brother.'

"'I am not looking at the crowd,' said the prodigal in a low voice;
'but I see--'

"'You see what?' said Melchior.

"'A figure in a cloak, gliding in and out--'

"Melchior sprang up in horror. 'No! no!' he cried, hoarsely. 'No!
surely no!'

"Surely yes! Too surely the well-known figure came on; and the
prodigal's sunken eyes looked more sunken still as he gazed. As for
Melchior, he neither spoke nor moved, but stood in a silent agony,
terrible to see. All at once a thought seemed to strike him; he seized
his brother, and pushed him to the furthest corner of the seat, and
then planted himself firmly at the door just as Death came up and put
his hand into the coach. Then he spoke in a low steady voice, more
piteous than cries or tears.

"'I humbly beseech you, good Death, if you must take one of us, to
take me. I have had a long drive, and many comforts and blessings, and
am willing if unworthy to go. He has suffered much, and had no
pleasure; leave him for a little to enjoy the drive in peace, just for
a very little; he has suffered so much, and I have been so much to
blame; let me go instead of him.'

"Alas for Melchior! It is decreed in the Providence of GOD,
that, although the opportunities for doing good, which are in the
power of every man, are beyond count or knowledge, yet, the
opportunity once neglected, no man by any self-sacrifice can atone for
those who have fallen or suffered by his negligence. Poor Melchior! An
unalterable law made him the powerless spectator of the consequences
of his neglected opportunities. 'No man may deliver his brother, or
make agreement unto GOD for him, for it cost more to redeem
their souls, so that he must let that alone for ever.' And is it ever
so bitter to 'let alone,' as in a case where we might have acted and
did not?

"Poor Melchior! In vain he laid both his hands in Death's outstretched
palm; they fell to him again as if they had passed through air; he was
pushed aside--Death passed into the coach--'one was taken and the
other left.'

"As the cloaked figure glided in and out among the crowd, many turned
to look at his sad burden, though few heeded him. Much was said; but
the general voice of the crowd was this: 'Ah! he is gone, is he? Well!
a born rascal! It must be a great relief to his brother!' A conclusion
which was about as wise, and about as near the truth, as the world's
conclusions generally are. As for Melchior, he neither saw the figure
nor heard the crowd, for he had fallen senseless among the cushions.

"When he came to his senses, he found himself lying still upon his
face; and so bitter was his loneliness and grief, that he lay still
and did not move. He was astonished, however, by the (as it seemed to
him) unusual silence. The noise of the carriages had been deafening,
and now there was not a sound. Was he deaf? or had the crowd gone? He
opened his eyes. Was he blind? or had the night come? He sat right up,
and shook himself, and looked again. The crowd _was_ gone; so, for
matter of that, was the coach; and so was Godfather Time. He had not
been lying among cushions, but among pillows; he was not in any
vehicle of any kind, but in bed. The room was dark, and very still;
but through the 'barracks' window, which had no blind, he saw the
winter sun pushing through the mist, like a red hot cannon-ball
hanging in the frosty trees; and in the yard outside, the cocks were
crowing.

"There was no longer any doubt that he was safe in his old home; but
where were his brothers and sisters? With a beating heart he crept to
the other end of the bed; and there lay the prodigal, but with no
haggard cheeks or sunken eyes, no grey locks or miserable rags, but a
rosy yellow-haired urchin fast asleep, with his head upon his arm. 'I
took his pillow,' muttered Melchior, self-reproachfully.

"A few minutes later, young Hop-o'-my-Thumb (whom Melchior dared not
lose sight of for fear he should melt away) seated comfortably on his
brother's back, and wrapped up in a blanket, was making a tour of the
'barracks.'

"'It's an awful lark,' said he, shivering with a mixture of cold and
delight.

"If not exactly a _lark_, it was a very happy tour to Melchior, as,
hope gradually changing into certainty, he recognized his brothers in
one shapeless lump after the other in the little beds. There they all
were, sleeping peacefully in a happy home, from the embryo hero to the
embryo philosopher, who lay with the invariable book upon his pillow,
and his hair looking (as it always did) as if he lived in a high wind.

"'I say,' whispered Melchior, pointing to him, 'what did he say the
other day about being a parson?'

"'He said he should like to be one,' returned Hop-o'-my-Thumb; 'but
you said he would frighten away the congregation with his looks. And
then, you know, he got very angry, and said he didn't know priests
need be dandies, and that everybody was humbuggy alike, and thought of
nothing but looks; but that he would be a philosopher like Diogenes,
who cared for nobody, and was as ugly as an ape, and lived in a tub.'

"'He will make a capital parson,' said Melchior, hastily, 'and I shall
tell him so to-morrow. And when I'm squire here, he shall be vicar,
and I'll subscribe to all his dodges without a grumble. I'm the eldest
son. And, I say, don't you think we could brush his hair for him in a
morning, till he learns to do it himself?'

"'Oh, I will!' was the lively answer; 'I'm an awful dab at brushing.
Look how I brush your best hat!'

"'True,' said Melchior. 'Where are the girls to-night?'

"'In the little room at the end of the long passage,' said
Hop-o'-my-Thumb, trembling with increased chilliness and enjoyment.
'But you're never going there! we shall wake the company, and they
will all come out to see what's the matter.'

"'I shouldn't care if they did,' said Melchior, 'it would make it feel
more real.'

"As he did not understand this sentiment, Hop-o'-my-Thumb said
nothing, but held on very tightly; and they crept softly down the cold
grey passage in the dawn. The girls' door was open; for the girls were
afraid of robbers, and left their bed-room door wide open at night, as
a natural and obvious means of self-defence. The girls slept together;
and the frill of the pale sister's prim little night-cap was buried in
the other one's uncovered curls.

"'How you do tremble!' whispered Hop-o'-my-Thumb; 'are you cold?' This
inquiry received no answer; and after some minutes he spoke again. 'I
say, how very pretty they look! don't they?'

"But for some reason or other, Melchior seemed to have lost his voice;
but he stooped down and kissed both the girls very gently, and then
the two brothers crept back along the passage to the 'barracks.'

"'One thing more,' said Melchior; and they went up to the mantelpiece.
'I will lend you my bow and arrows to-morrow, on one condition--'

"'Anything!' was the reply, in an enthusiastic whisper.

"'That you take that old picture for a target, and never let me see it
again.'

"It was very ungrateful! but perfection is not in man; and there was
something in Melchior's muttered excuse--

"'I couldn't stand another night of it.'

