in the boat under the shadows of the bank every one of the latter
wondered that the pursuers remained out in the stream, when there was
need of unimpeded vision.  They half expected their enemies to turn to
the left and come directly for them.  But nothing of the kind took
place.  The craft headed down the river, the sound of the paddles so
slight that only the closely listening ear could hear them, until it
melted in the gloom and vanished from sight.

It was a vast relief for the moment, but little comfort could our
friends take from the fact.  Their enemies were not likely to go far,
when they would suspect that something of the nature described had
occurred, and they would return and grope along shore for their
victims.  So certain was Dr. Marlowe of this turn that he believed the
wisest course was for the entire party to abandon the boat, and, as may
be said, "take to the woods."  They had the whole night before them,
and, with his intimate knowledge of the roads, paths and trails of the
country and jungles, he was confident of guiding them beyond danger and
to some place where, when morning dawned, there would be little to fear
in the way of discovery.

This course would have been taken except for the absence of Jack
Everson.  There was no way of apprising him of the change of plan, and,
with his ignorance of the topography of their surroundings, he would be
certain to go astray, and for any one in his situation, to go astray
meant death.




CHAPTER VII.

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING.

Meanwhile, Mr. Jack Everson found matters exceedingly interesting.

When he informed his friends that he would rejoin them in the course of
a few minutes the possibility of anything interfering with his promise
did not occur to him.  That danger threatened every member of the
little company may be set down as self-evident, but what could happen
to disturb him in the brief interval spent in running up the slope,
dashing into the house and back again to the river's side?

Such were his thoughts as he entered the shadows and hurriedly
approached the front veranda.  Although he had reached this spot within
the preceding twenty-four hours the evening meal and the preparations
for flight had given him sufficient knowledge of the interior to remove
all difficulty in going straight to the table in the dining-room and
taking the forgotten revolver therefrom.

The first tingle of misgiving came to the young man when he was close
to the porch and about to step upon it.  He remembered that it was
himself who had extinguished the lamp on the table as the three were
about to pass into the hall and out of doors, but lo! a light was
shining from that very room.  What could it mean?

"That's deuced queer," he thought, coming to an abrupt halt; "I screwed
down that lamp and blew into the chimney in the orthodox fashion, so it
couldn't have been that I unconsciously left the wick burning."

At this juncture he made another significant discovery.  The front door
which he had seen Dr. Marlowe close was partly open.  The inference was
inevitable: some one was in the house.  In the brief time that had
passed one or more persons had entered and were busy at that moment in
the interior.  Perhaps they had been watching among the shadows on the
outside for the occupants to leave the way open for them to pass within.

Prudence dictated that Jack Everson should not linger another moment.
Indeed, he ought to have counted himself fortunate that he had made his
discovery in time to save himself from running into a trap.  He should
return to his friends with the alarming news and help them in getting
away with the utmost haste possible.  But Jack did nothing of the sort.

The chief cause of his lingering was his desire to obtain the revolver
belonging to Miss Marlowe.  Recalling the paucity of firearms among the
people on the boat he felt that a single weapon could be ill spared.
But above and beyond this cold truth was a vague, shuddering suspicion,
amounting to a belief, that the young woman would soon need that very
weapon; that, without it she would become another of the unspeakable
victims of the fiends who made the Sepoy Mutiny one of the most hideous
blots that darken the pages of history.  He compressed his lips and
swore that the revolver should be recovered, if the thing were
possible, failing in which he would compel her to take his own.

The first thing was to learn whether there was more than one person in
the house and what business had brought them there.  His own return was
not expected, so that that advantage was in his favor.  He stepped
lightly upon the veranda and, like a burglar in his stocking feet,
passed across the porch and pushed back the door far enough to admit
him.  This required but a few inches, and the hinges gave out not the
slightest creak.  The entrance to the dining-room was closed, so that
all was darkness, but he plainly saw the yellow thread along the edges
of the door, caused by the lamp in the room beyond.

Once within the hall he listened intently, but could not detect the
slightest sound within the building.  He had already drawn his
revolver, and held it ready for instant use.  Knowing the value of
seconds, he began moving along the hall toward the door, which was only
a few paces distant, and had passed half the space when a muttered
execration escaped him, for his foot struck some object that was kicked
the remaining length of the hall with a clatter that he verily believed
must have been heard by his friends on the boat.

No use now for precaution.  Determined to have the other weapon, but
not unmindful of the peril involved, he strode the few remaining steps
and hastily shoved open the door of the dining-room.  If a foe was
there with the revolver he was quite likely to hold it levelled at the
intruder, because of which Jack, when he burst into the room, held his
own weapon pointed, so as to prevent any enemy from "getting the drop"
on him.

For one moment the young man believed it was all a mistake and that,
despite the precaution taken upon leaving the house, he had not
extinguished the lamp, whose wick had recovered its vigor, but the
suspicion was hardly formed when he knew there was no foundation for
it.  In the first place no lamp ever acts that way, and, the front door
having been closed, could not open of itself.  More convincing than all
was the fact that Mary Marlowe's revolver, which had brought him back,
was missing.

Diagonally across the dining-room from where Jack Everson stood was the
door leading to the rear of the house.  This was open for three or four
inches, and while searching the apartment with all the keenness of his
powerful vision, he distinctly saw it move.  The distance was no more
than an inch, but he was not mistaken, and knew it had been drawn that
much nearer shut.  Since no air was stirring the conclusion was
inevitable that some one was on the other side who was aware of the
entrance of the American.

The position of the lamp on the table threw the crevice caused by the
slight opening of the door in shadow, and all was blank darkness
beyond.  But, looking in that direction, Jack caught the gleam of a
pair of eyes, peering from the gloom like the orbs of a jungle tiger
gathering himself for a spring.  Nothing could be seen but the glow of
the eyes, that seemed to have something of the phosphorescence of the
cat species, but he could not mistake the meaning of what he saw.

Jack had partly lowered his revolver, after the first glance around the
room, but it now came to a level again with the suddenness of lightning
and was pointed straight at the gleaming eyes, as he spoke in a low,
deadly tone:

"Come forth or I'll send a bullet through your infernal brain!"

Never was man more fairly caught.  In the language of the West, Jack
Everson had the drop on him, and none could be more alive to the fact
than the fellow who was thus taken at disadvantage.  It was merited
punishment for his foolhardiness in inviting his own discomfiture.  At
first the chances of the two were equal, but the white man was more
alive to the situation.

The Asiatic showed his appreciation of the situation by stepping
forward into the lamplight.

Incredible as it may seem, he not only held a pistol in his right hand,
but it was half raised and pointed at Jack Everson.




CHAPTER VIII.

MUSTAD.

The East Indian who stood before Jack Everson, thoroughly cowed and
submissive, was unusually tall, dark, and thin to emaciation.  He wore
a turban, a light linen jacket which encompassed his chest to below the
waist, with a sash or girdle, loose flapping trousers and sandals.  In
the girdle at his waist was a long, formidable knife or yataghan, which
he would have been glad to bury in the heart of the man who had thus
brought him to his knees.

When Jack Everson demanded to know his identity the fellow replied in a
low voice that was not lacking in a certain musical quality:

"Mustad!"

The young man half expected the answer.

"What business brings you here?"

"He is my master; I work for him.  I have been to see my aged mother,
who is very ill.  I have just returned to serve my master."

"That is not true!  You went away to bring some of your people to kill
the doctor and his family."

"Sahib does Mustad great wrong," replied that individual in a grieved
voice.  "I love my master and my mistress.  I am not ungrateful.  I
would give my life sooner than harm a hair of their heads.  Where have
they gone?"

It was the last question that removed all lingering doubt of the
native's treachery.  He had returned to bring about their overthrow,
but knew not where to look for them.  When he could ascertain whither
they had fled he and his brother miscreants would be at their heels.

"Suppose I should tell you that they had gone to Meerut or Delhi?"

"Allah be praised!" exclaimed the other devoutly; "for then they will
be safe."

"Is there no trouble in Meerut or Delhi?"

"What trouble can there be!" asked Mustad, with well-feigned
simplicity.  "It is in those cities that the missionaries and many of
the Inglese live.  They have lived there many years.  What harm could
befall them?"

By this time Jack Everson had lost all doubt of the perfidy of the man.
He could not fail to know what had taken place within the preceding
twenty-four hours in the cities named, and he lacked his usual cunning
when he tried to deceive his questioner.

The young man saw that it was a waste of time to question Mustad.  No
reliance could be placed on anything he said.

"You will wait here, then, until Dr. Marlowe comes back?"

Mustad vigorously nodded his head and replied:

"I shall wait, and my eyes will be filled with tears until I see the
good man and his child again.  When will they come to their home?"

"Well, the best thing you can do is to wait here until you see them
again."

As Jack made this remark he took a quick step forward and picked up the
revolver.  He did not pause to examine it, but was sure that none of
the chambers had been discharged.  Slipping the weapon into his coat
pocket, and still grasping his own, he said:

"I think I shall go out on the veranda and await the return of the
doctor."

As he made this remark he committed a mistake for which there was no
excuse.  Instead of backing out of the room he turned about and started
through the open door into the hall.  The walking cane against which he
had once struck his foot still lay where he had kicked it, and he
tripped over it a second time.  The mishap, slight as it was, saved his
life.  As he stumbled in the gloom something whizzed like the rush of a
cobra's head past his temple, nipping his hat and striking the opposite
wall with force enough to kill two or three men.  It was the yataghan
of Mustad, who had drawn and hurled it with inconceivable quickness and
with an aim so unerring that it would have brained the unsuspecting
American but for his fortunate stumble.

The furious Jack whirled around with the purpose of sending a bullet
through the brain of the wretch, but something like a shadow flitted
through the lamplight while Jack was in the act of turning and, before
he could secure any aim, the scoundrel had vanished.  Determined not to
be balked the young man let fly, and then, bounding across the room,
snapped back the door, meaning to repeat the shot at the first glimpse
of Mustad.  But the latter was familiar with all the turnings of the
house, while Jack knew nothing of that portion of the building.  He
could neither see nor hear anything, and did not deem it prudent to use
the lamp to help in the search, though it was hard to retire from the
field and leave the miscreant unpunished.

To do so, however, was the wiser course, and again he moved into the
hall.  This time he backed thither, though, since Mustad had no weapon,
it was impossible that the attempt upon the young man's life should be
repeated.  The outer door was opened, and once more he stood on the
veranda.

Before venturing across the lawn in the direction of the river he spent
a minute or two in peering into the surrounding gloom and listening.
He may have been mistaken, but he fancied he heard more than one person
moving stealthily about in the house.  Once he was sure he caught the
sound of whispered words, so that the astounding fact was established
that during the few minutes occupied in talking with Mustad he had a
friend within instant call.

"All of which goes to prove that these people are cowards at heart,"
was the sage conclusion of Jack Everson.  "They will throw away their
lives for the sake of Islamism, and they will fight like wildcats if a
man turns his back upon them; but when he stands face to face they are
whipped curs."

Since there was no doubt that Mustad and his companions would be on the
alert to note the course taken by Everson, so as to learn what had
become of his friends, the young man saw the need of misleading them.
He took care not to return to the river over his own trail.  Instead of
doing so he moved to the right, as if on his way to the nearby town of
Akwar.  When satisfied he was beyond range of the keen vision of those
in the house of Dr. Marlowe he made an abrupt change, which led him
toward the Ganges, forgetting, when he did so, that there might be
natives in the vicinity who were not in the building at all.




CHAPTER IX.

SCOUTING.

Had Mr. Jack Everson spent a few years in Hindoostan he would not have
made the blunders that we are obliged to record concerning his
movements after parting from his friends on the boat.  He had acquitted
himself pluckily while in the house of the physician, but his escape
from death at the hands of Mustad and his companion was providential
and, under similar circumstances, was not likely to be repeated once in
a thousand times.

Moreover, with his knowledge, already gained, of Asiatic cunning, he
ought to have reflected that if two of their dusky enemies were within
the house there were likely to be others in the immediate neighborhood.
It looked as if Mustad had entered the dwelling expecting to find the
physician there.  He was prepared with an excuse for his abrupt
departure and an explanation that would satisfy his indulgent master
and mistress.  Keeping his companion in the background the wretch could
then complete his plans for turning the party over to the fury of their
brother murderers, who probably were calmly waiting on the outside for
the signal.

Nothing of all this, we repeat, entered the head of Jack until he had
made the change in the course he was following and had passed down the
slope to the river bank.  His effort to mislead his enemies necessarily
took him some distance above the point where he had left the boat, and
he now set out to find his way to it.  It was while he was engaged in
doing so that he became aware that he was followed.

"Well, I'll be hanged!" he muttered, coming to an abrupt stop; "it
seems to me that these infernal imps are everywhere."

He had not seen any one, but a rustling, grating noise in the shadow of
the nearest tree told him where the immediate danger lay.  Believing
that an unexpected course was best he wheeled and ran at full speed
toward the tree, which contained a large number of dense,
wide-spreading branches.

The result was surprising.  Instead of one native, two leaped out from
cover and ran away at full speed.  They had been stealing after him, on
the watch for a chance to bring him down by a blow in the back, when
the tables were turned in this unexpected manner.  Jack, therefore, had
no hesitation in firing at the one on his right, and immediately after
at his companion, whose superior speed had placed him considerably in
advance.  As a consequence, he missed the latter, while the first
emitted a screech, leaped high in air and sprawled forward on his face
as dead as Julius Caesar.

The fact that his pursuers were two in number led the young man to
believe they were Mustad and his companion, whom he had heard in the
house.  A few minutes later he made another halt.  He was able, despite
the gloom, to identify the spot where he had left the boat, but it was
not in sight.

"I told them not to wait for me, and they acted on my suggestion.  They
can't be far off, and I hope have run into no trouble."

The occurrences of the last quarter of an hour gave Jack a vivid idea
of the increasing peril.  The natives from the nearby town were hunting
for the physician, his daughter and himself, all of whom had not left
the house a minute too soon and now, while he paused on the shore of
the river and listened, he too caught the sound that had filled his
friends with dread.  There were no noises from the jungles to the
eastward, though at times the outcries are terrifying, and the shouts
and shrieks of the mutineers and their victims at Meerut and Delhi were
too far away to reach his ears, but he heard now and then the faint
sound of paddles out on the stream.

"Anderson spoke of using paddles," reflected Jack, "but it was a
misnomer, for they have none, and they would not have pushed so far out
from shore when they knew I expected to return so soon.  All that
proves that a party of devils have also a boat and are hunting for the
one in which our new friends are groping for safety."

This threatened to make a new complication, but the plain course for
Jack was to keep along the shore of the river and press his search for
the craft, which he was certain was not far off.

His experience had taught him the need of unceasing vigilance, and as
he advanced, he scrutinized the ground in front and on every hand, like
a scout stealing into a hostile camp.  Within less time than he counted
upon he saw the boat lying close to shore, where his friends were
awaiting him.  As soon as he recognized the craft he announced himself
in a guarded undertone, to guard against any mistake, and the next
moment clambered aboard, where, it need not be said, he was warmly
welcomed.

After they had exchanged greetings the doctor asked:

"Did I not hear the report of your pistol a little while ago?"

"Inasmuch as I discharged it very probably you did."

Thereupon Jack told of what he had seen and done since leaving the boat
to recover the pistol of Miss Marlowe.  It was a story of deep interest
to all, and his account of his meeting with the faithless Mustad deeply
stirred his master.

"Despite my denunciation of the fellow I confess I had a lingering
suspicion that I might have been mistaken; but all doubt now is
removed.  There is no native in all India to be more dreaded than he."

"I have a faint hope that it was he with whom I made my fourth
bull's-eye," remarked Jack.

"Hardly likely.  Probably there were two others skulking on the outside
and waiting for a chance at us."

"But they had all the chance they could have asked at _me_."

"It may have been the doctor and his daughter whom they were the most
eager to secure," suggested Mr. Turner.

"That is my belief," added Anderson.

"And mine, too," joined the doctor himself.  "It seems to be a trait of
our perverse human nature to hate with the deepest intensity those who
have done us the greatest kindness."

This remark meant more to Jack Everson than to any one else, for he
believed that it was the daughter who was the special object of the
natives.  That reminded him of the weapon he had secured.

"Here," he said, "take it before I forget to return it."

"You risked a good deal for my sake," she said gratefully, accepting
the weapon, "and I cannot thank you sufficiently----  Well, I declare!"

She was in the act of placing the pistol in the pocket of her dress
when she made the discovery that her weapon was already there.  Jack
Everson had taken Mustad's own property from him.




CHAPTER X.

ALONG SHORE.

The curious incident served to lift for a brief time the oppression
