for his health.  She, however, ordered him at once to take his place
inside and eat his dinner.  The henpecked husband dared not refuse, and
he was accordingly compelled to take part in the meal, while constantly
occupied in thinking that the Huron was waiting for him; but, as
patience is one of the cardinal virtues of the North American Indian,
Hans was sure of finding him at the rendezvous upon his return.

Some twenty minutes later, Hans Vanderbum was at the tree, where he had
first caught sight of Oonomoo.  It was not long before the latter came
from his concealment, and, after exchanging words upon unimportant
subjects, for the purpose of concealing his curiosity, he inquired in
regard to Miss Prescott.

"She tells me to tell you dat she's dere, and is hopeful, and ain't
hurt, and hopes you won't hurt yourself to git her away."

"Oonomoo won't hurt his self--Shawnee won't hurt Oonomoo--he git gal
away too."

"Oh, I like for to forgot.  She tells me 'bout Lieutenant Canfield de
same as she tells you.  Will you see him?"

"See him dis mornin'--waitin' in woods fur me--see him 'gin--tell what
gal said."

"I'm glad for to hear it, Oonomoo.  I shpose you'll be back this way
ag'in one dese days."

"Be back soon--have somebody with me--tell gal so--look out fur
whistle--keep ears open--hear _dis_ time."

"Yaw, I will.  I heerd you dis oder time, too; but didn't t'ink 'twas
you.  I'll know de next time.  You going now?"

The Huron signified that he was, and took his departure as quietly as
he had come.  Hans watched as the dusky figure flitted in and out among
the trees and finally disappeared in the distance.  Then, muttering to
himself, he returned to the village.

The day was unusually warm for the season; there was little activity in
the Indian town.  Hans noticed that many of the Shawnees were still
lingering along the Miami, although what object other than that of mere
languor could induce them to remain, he could not possibly conceive.
Reaching his own wigwam, he was confounded with joy to learn that the
captive, Miss Prescott, was to be domiciled in it.  He could scarce
believe it until Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock told him that she was to
be strictly guarded, used as her slave and never to be out of her sight
for one minute.  In case of her escape, Hans Vanderbum was to be held
responsible for it, his life paying the forfeit.

"Dat is quare," he muttered.  "I guess Oonomoo can fix it, if dey
_does_ do it."

It perhaps is well to remark here, by way of explanation, that the time
in which the incidents occurred, which we intend to relate, was a few
years subsequent to the great victory of Anthony Wayne over the
combined forces of the various Indian tribes in the West.  As a
consequence of this splendid achievement and the no less splendid
victory gained in the renowned treaty of Greenville, a long and almost
undisturbed peace along the frontier was inaugurated, where, for years
before, all had been strife of the most revolting kind.  But, profound
peace and security never existed on the border until the final removal
of the Indians beyond the Mississippi.  Isolated families, small bodies
of men, and the lonely traveler through the forest, never were secure
from the stealthy attacks of the red-men.  Deep in the gloom of the
solemn wilderness, many a deadly conflict occurred between the hunter
and the Indian.  Often the victim sunk noiselessly to the turf, and his
bones bleached for years in these wilds, while none but his slayer knew
of his fate.

Captain Prescott, placing great faith in the treaty of Greenville, had
erected a fine mansion upon a tract of land received from Government.
His residence was upon the extreme frontier.  He had misgivings when he
removed his wife and two daughters to that wilderness home.  He
provided a number of trusty servants for their protection in his
absence with the army.  Circumstances transpired which prevented his
fulfilling his promise to return home to remain, and he continued
absent nearly three years, occasionally making a short visit, and
returning to his duties again before he had fairly greeted his family.

On one of these visits, Captain Prescott took, as his companion, a
young Lieutenant named Canfield.  It so happened that this visit lasted
several days, and a period of greater happiness to the young Lieutenant
probably never occurred.  Mary Prescott, at that time, could not
properly be called a woman, except in the grace and dignity of her
character.  She inherited the rich fancy, the nervous sensibility, and
stern will of her father, and what may seem like a contradiction, the
gentleness and modesty of her mother.  She was the youngest child, and,
naturally enough, the pet of the others; but, the parents were too
sensible to spoil her by flattery or foolish indulgence.  She was of
that age when the female mind is most susceptible to the great passion
of our nature in its most romantic phase, when Lieutenant Canfield
visited their house.  His frank bearing, his gentlemanly deportment,
and, above all, the favorable reports which her father gave of his
gallant conduct, conspired to enlist young Mary in his favor.

[Illustration: Mary Prescott.]

They were scarcely thrown into each other's society before the natural,
though sometimes tardy, results of the virtues we have mentioned were
seen.  The tell-tale blush--the voice unconsciously lowered to the most
thrilling softness--the timid glance--the deep-drawn sigh--the absent,
vacant appearance when separated for a short time from each other--the
supreme happiness when together--all were signs which escaped not the
eyes of the sister and mother, although the matter-of-fact father
failed to notice such trifles.  His days of courtship had become a
fable, if they were not forgotten.

If there were any displeasure at this state of affairs upon the part of
her mother, it was only because she believed her daughter too young to
entertain thoughts of marriage.  Like a wise and prudent parent,
however, she did not seek to accomplish an impossibility--that of
preventing what no parent yet succeeded in preventing.  Having great
confidence in the young Lieutenant, from the representations of her
husband, she merely resolved to be discreet with him.  Accordingly,
when, on the day of his departure, he found courage to mention his love
of Mary to her parents, the mother took it upon her to reply that she
entertained no objection to his suit, but, from the youth of her
daughter, he must not expect their consent to a union for several
years.  At the same time she gracefully hinted that the suddenness of
his passion might well excite suspicion that it was hardly genuine.
Delighted beyond measure at this answer, Lieutenant Canfield added that
he would not claim her hand until both father and mother were fully
satisfied, and until he had proven to them that he was worthy of their
daughter.  Thus matters stood when Captain Prescott and the Lieutenant
took their departure.

Matters were somehow or other so arranged that the Lieutenant found
opportunity to visit the family of Captain Prescott oftener than the
Captain himself.  On these occasions, the mother was pleased to observe
that while the attachment between him and her daughter became more and
more marked, the Lieutenant always manifested the most scrupulous
respect for the wishes of her parents, and never breathed a word to her
that he believed could occasion the slightest objection upon their part.

Besides these visits, the lovers found ready means for exchanging their
expressions of affection through the faithful Huron, Oonomoo, who made
stated journeys from Captain Prescott's mansion to his post.  On these
occasions, he went loaded with missives from one party to another,
carrying back as many as he brought.  He was a great favorite with the
whites, who appreciated his chivalrous faithfulness and fidelity, and
loaded him with many expressions of their esteem.  He had the
reputation of being the fleetest runner, the most successful scout and
best hunter in the West.  Volumes would be required to record all the
exploits told of him--of the marvelous number of scalps which hung in
his lodge, and of the many hair-breadth escapes he had had.  It was
said he had a wife and child hid somewhere in the recesses of the
forest, to whom he made stated visits, and whom his deadly enemies, the
Shawnees, had sought in vain for years.  He was now about thirty-five
years of age, and had been known as a scout and friend of the whites
for full a dozen years.

Somewhat less than two years after the first meeting of Lieutenant
Canfield with the daughter of Captain Prescott, the wife and eldest
daughter of the latter made a journey of pleasure to a neighboring
settlement.  Mary would have accompanied them, had she not received an
intimation from Oonomoo that her lover proposed to make her a visit
about that time.  She accordingly remained at home with the servants.

Two nights afterwards, when the darkness was almost impenetrable, a
large war-party of Shawnees suddenly attacked the place.  The negroes
had no time for defense, and only sought their own safety in flight.
But one, however, escaped, the rest falling beneath the merciless
tomahawk.  Mary Prescott was carried off a prisoner.




CHAPTER III.

OONOMOO AND THE SHAWNEES.


  Through forty foes his path he made,
  And safely reached the forest-glade.--SCOTT.


After parting from Hans Vanderbum, the Huron sped noiselessly through
the woods, taking a direction that would lead him to a point on the
river fully three hundred yards below where he had signaled the German.
The stream making a bend there, he would thus escape the observation of
the Shawnees along the bank, at the point where the fisherman had been
engaged in his labors.

So silent, yet rapid, was the motion of Oonomoo, that his figure
flitted through the rifts in the wood like a shadow.  His head
projected slightly forward, in the attitude of acute attention, and his
black, restless eyes constantly flitted from one point to the other,
scarcely resting for a second upon any single object.  In his left hand
he trailed his long rifle, while his right rested upon the buckhorn
handle of the knife in his belt.

He had progressed a considerable distance thus, when the Huron's gait
decreased very rapidly.  He was now in the vicinity of the river, where
he had left his canoe drawn up on the bank.  It was necessary to
reconnoiter thoroughly before venturing to approach it.  Accordingly,
he halted.  The movement of the panther in approaching his foe was not
more stealthy and cautious than was his.

At length, reaching the shelter of a tree, and cautiously peering
around, the Huron caught sight of the stern of his canoe.  One glance
and his dark eyes flashed fire!  The Shawnees had been there!

What sign caught the notice of Oonomoo?  What kindled the fire in his
dark eye?  What caused one hand to close over his knife, and the other
to grasp his rifle?  It was a sign of his enemy.  Too well the
sagacious Huron knew that the Shawnee was lying in wait for him.

The canoe, which Oonomoo left behind him, during his interview with
Hans Vanderbum, lay precisely as it was first deposited.  Not a
surrounding limb, shrub or leaf had, so far as he could see, been
disturbed since he left the spot.  And yet the evidence which presented
itself to the eyes of the Indian was as palpable and unmistakable as
would have been the appearance of enemies themselves.

Oonomoo had carefully drawn his bark canoe up the river-bank and
concealed it as well as the circumstances would admit.  He had then
deposited his long Indian paddle in it, leaving the blade projecting
over the stern.  The paddle _was now several inches further to one side
than it had been left by him_!

This was the entire evidence.  It was abundantly sufficient to satisfy
the Huron.  He did not doubt for an instant.  His only uncertainty was
in regard to the precise location of his foes.  A few minutes'
observation satisfied him that they were not between the canoe and the
river.  His course of action was accordingly determined.  It would have
been the easiest matter in the world for him to have escaped by
swimming the river; but as an opportunity for a contest of skill with
his enemies was offered, he was too proud not to embrace it at once.
Retreating several rods, he continued his way upstream in his usual
cautious manner, until he had gone perhaps a furlong above his canoe,
when he approached and entered the stream.

The Miami, at this point, was so heavily wooded, that it was impossible
to pass close under its shore without entering the water.  Once within
this and in a stooping position, a person would be invisible to any one
on the same bank, although he could be plainly seen from the opposite
shore.  Oonomoo now commenced his descent of the river with the
intention of recovering his canoe.  This was necessarily a tedious and
prolonged operation, as a single misstep, a slip or splash of the water
might betray him to his enemies.  But, he was equal to the task, and
never hesitated for a moment except to listen for some sign of his
enemies.

The Shawnees, by the merest accident, had discovered the Huron's canoe
and examined it.  Satisfied that it belonged to none of their tribe,
and most probably had been left there by some hostile scout, they
carefully allowed it to remain as they had found it, and endeavored to
restore everything around to its natural position, so as not to arouse
the suspicion of the owner upon his return.  This done, they withdrew
and awaited with loaded rifles for his reappearance.  We have shown how
a most trifling error in regard to the paddle placed the Huron on his
guard.

It was perhaps a half-hour after Oonomoo had commenced his descent of
the river, that the canoe, without any perceptible jar, slid an inch or
two down the bank.  So quietly and cautiously was this effected, that,
had the Shawnees been looking directly at it, their suspicion would not
have been aroused.

Some ten or fifteen minutes later, the boat moved about the same
distance further.  The expectant Shawnees, clutching their rifles, were
listening anxiously for some sound that might indicate the approach of
their foe, and paid little heed to the canoe itself.  Ever and anon, it
retreated an inch or two down the bank in the same mysterious
manner--going short distances and so very slowly that no one but a
thoroughly suspicious Indian would have believed there was any human
agency connected with it.

The canoe was fully an hour and a half in moving a single foot, during
which time the Huron managed, by the most consummate skill, to sustain
it in such a manner that the shrubbery and undergrowth around appeared
to occupy relatively the same position that they did before it had been
disturbed.  The river shore was only some twenty or thirty feet
distant, and from where Oonomoo lay, the way was almost entirely clear
to it, so that when he chose to make any sudden dash or movement, no
hindering cause could possibly offer itself.

One of the Shawnees chanced to glance at the canoe.  At the same
instant, his keen eye detected its changed position, imperceptible
almost as it was.  With a guttural exclamation he arose and moved
toward it, followed by his two companions.  They had taken scarcely a
step, when they saw the boat slide swiftly forward several feet, and
then suddenly rising to the perpendicular position, whisk off through
the bush at a still more rapid rate.  Two twinkling moccasins, that
looked as if they were its support, as they doubled over each other,
fully explained to the Shawnees the cause of this singular scene.

With a loud yell, the three dashed forward, while the Huron ran at the
top of his speed over the slight distance that lay between him and the
river.  Reaching the shore, he changed the canoe from his rear to his
front, and holding it like a shield above and before him.  With one
foot in the edge of the water, he concentrated all his strength for the
effort and leaped far out in the stream--the canoe falling with a loud
splash perfectly flat upon the surface.  The impetus thus given caused
it to shoot like an arrow for a long distance, when the Huron,
inclining his body to the left, careened it so much, that his own
person was concealed from any who might be upon the shore, while, by
reaching his hand over into the current, he was enabled to use it as a
paddle, and continue his onward motion.

Oonomoo was fully aware that the delicate structure of the canoe was no
obstruction at all against a rifle-shot.  Accordingly, while descending
the river, he had taken precaution to insure his safety, in case of
such an occurrence as had now transpired.  A large, rotten limb, hardly
the length of his own body, was carried with him.  At the moment of
lifting the canoe from the ground, the limb was placed within it, and
thus was carried back to the edge of the river.  Lying flat upon his
face, this limb was about the thickness of the Huron's waist, and by
skillfully balancing the boat, it was interposed directly between him
and his foes.  The only parts of his person which possibly could be
struck were his feet and the arm stretched over the side of the canoe.
The former necessarily being in the stern, it was hardly probable that
they would be wounded.  There was such risk of the arm that Oonomoo
drew it within the boat for a few moments.  He had scarcely done so,
when the reports of two rifles, and the peculiar zip of the bullets as
they cut through the side of the canoe and buried themselves in the
rotten wood, proved how wise was the precaution he had taken.

Quick as thought, the hand of the Huron was in the water again, where,
as he vigorously used it, it flashed like some fish at play.  The
Shawnees, who plainly discerned the two holes their bullets had made,
could scarcely believe their daring foe had escaped injury.  But they
were forced to believe he was still living from the fact that the canoe
steadily progressed across and was not carried down-stream by the
current.  The whoop of the Shawnees had been heard by their comrades
further down the bank.  As the canoe reached the middle of the river,
they caught a sight of it, and readily conjectured the true state of
the case.  In a twinkling, two of their own were launched in pursuit.
Discovering this, Oonomoo arose to the upright position, and dipping
his paddle deep in the water, sent his boat forward with astonishing
swiftness.  As it lightly touched the bank, he leaped ashore and pulled
it up after him.  Then uttering a defiant yell, he turned, and to show
the scorn in which he held the Shawnees, walked slowly and deliberately
into the forest.  Once fairly beyond their sight, however, his pace
quickened, and when the sun sunk low in the western horizon, he was
many a mile from the Miami.




CHAPTER IV.

THE YOUNG LIEUTENANT AND CATO.


  Suddenly rose from the South a light, as in autumn the blood-red
  Moon climbs the crystal walls of heaven, and o'er the horizon,
  Titan-like, stretches its hundred hands upon mountain and meadow,
  Seizing the rocks and the rivers and piling huge shadows together.
          --LONGFELLOW.


From a long distance the conflagration had been visible, its light
throwing a red glare far up in the sky, and revealing the huge clouds
that swept forward like crimson avalanches, while the surrounding trees
glowed as if their branches were burning hot.  Those nearest had their
bark blistered and their leaves curled and scorched from the intense
heat.  A conflagration at night, when viewed from a distance, always
seems awful in its sublimity.  There is something calculated to inspire
terror in the illuminated dome of the heavens and the onward sweep of
this fearful element, when viewed in a civilized country; but it is
only in the wilderness, away from the abode of man, that such an
exhibition partakes of all the elements of grandeur and terror.

The solitary hunter, as he stood upon the banks of some lonely stream,
leaned on his rifle and gazed with a beating heart at the brilliant
redness that lit up so much of the sky.  The beasts in their lair
turned their glowing eyeballs toward the dreadful illumination, and
stood transfixed with fear until its light died away; while the dark
face of the vengeful Shawnee grew darker and more terrible as he gazed
upon this work of his own hands.  A silence, deep and profound, rested
like a pall upon the wilderness and remained there until darkness again
held undisputed reign.

Lieutenant Canfield had seen the glowing light from a great distance,
when its appearance was much like that of the moon as it comes up in
the horizon.  Little did he suspect its true nature.  It was not until
the next morning that he encountered Oonomoo, the Huron, who related
the particulars of the attack of the Shawnee party upon the house of
Captain Prescott and the capture of his daughter.  Had not the
impulsive Lieutenant thus learned of his beloved's safety from
massacre, had he not received the assurance of an immediate attempt for
her recapture, there is no telling to what imprudent lengths he might
have gone in his blind devotion to the young captive.  Oonomoo remained
with him but a short time, when he departed on his mission to the
Shawnee village, and the lover continued on toward the estate of
Captain Prescott.

It was nearly noon when Lieutenant Canfield reached the place--now
nothing but a mass of charred and blackened ruins.  Leaving his horse
in the woods, he dismounted and examined the remains of the mansion and
smaller buildings.  The ghastly corpses of the negroes still lay upon
the ground, having been undisturbed, and with a feeling of
heart-sickness the young soldier passed them by.  In his profession, he
had witnessed many revolting sights, but none that affected him more
than this.  He shuddered, as he reflected that the very barbarians who
had wantonly inflicted his woe were the captors of the adored daughter
of Captain Prescott, and that they had inflicted as shocking outrages
even upon such defenseless captives as she.

Walking thus moodily forward, he was suddenly brought to a standstill
by coming in front of an awkward, odd-looking structure, which excited
his wonder in no small degree.  The charred remains of the logs of one
of the buildings had been collected together and piled one above the
other, so that they bore some resemblance to a rudely-fashioned oven.
From the circumstances of the case, these must have been arranged in
this manner subsequently to the visit of the Shawnees, and it was this
fact which awakened the curiosity of the Lieutenant.  His first
supposition was that it was the doings of the Huron.  But what reason
could he have had for rearing such a structure?  What possible purpose
could it serve him?

All at once it flashed upon the Lieutenant that it was the work of the
Shawnees themselves, and he began to view the contrivance with some
apprehension.  This feeling was considerably strengthened when he
either heard or fancied he heard the movement of some one within it.
Prudence dictated that he should place a little more distance between
it and himself.  Accordingly he began to retreat, walking backward and
keeping his gaze fixed upon it, ready for any demonstration from his
concealed enemies.

Suddenly something within the hollow of the structure fell with a dull
thump that nearly lifted the Lieutenant from his feet.  At the same
moment he heard a suppressed growl, as if made by a caged bear.  He now
began to feel more wonder than fear.

"What in the name of creation is the meaning of that concern, and what
sort of animal is caged in it?" he muttered, staying his retreat.

The Lieutenant debated whether or not to approach and examine the
interior of the odd-looking hut.  It seemed hardly possible that any
human being could be within, although it was certain there was some
living object there.

"At any rate I'll stir him up," he concluded, resolutely approaching.
The growls were now redoubled, and he really believed some four-footed
animal was the cause of all the uproar.

"It may be the Shawnees have attempted a little pleasantry after their
bloody work, and caged up some poor creature within those logs,"
thought he.  "I'll let him loose if such be the case."

He placed his hand upon the stump of a log nearest to him, when a
thunderbolt appeared to have exploded before him.  He started back as
though he had received an electric shock.  A perfect battery of howls
was leveled against him, and for a moment his ears were stunned with
the deafening uproar.  He determined, however, to solve the mystery.
Giving the structure a push that brought it tumbling to the ground, he
sprung back and held his rifle prepared for any foe, were he a
four-footed or a two-footed one.  Instead of either, what was his
amazement to see a negro, as black as midnight, emerge from the ruins,
and cringe at his feet.

"Oh, Mr. Injine, please don't shoot! please don't kill me!  Nice, good
Mr. Injine, don't hurt me!  Please don't tomahawk poor Cato!  He never
hurt an Injine in all his life.  Please don't!  Oh, don't!  don't!
don't! boo-hoo! oo!-oo-oo!"

"Get up, get up, Cato, and don't make a fool of yourself," said the
Lieutenant, recognizing in the frightened negro the favorite servant of
Captain Prescott's family.

"Oh, please don't hurt me!  Please don't kill poor Cato!  He never hurt
good Injine in all his life!  Please, good, nice Mr. Injine, let me go,
and I'll do anyt'ing you wants me to, and lubs you as long as I lib.
Please, don't hurt poor nigger Cato," repeated the servant, fairly
beside himself with terror.

"If you don't want to be killed, get up," said the young officer,
sternly enough to bring Cato to his senses; but only after he had been
assisted by what he supposed to be a ferocious Indian, ready to brain
him, was he enabled to rise and to keep his feet.

[Illustration: "If you don't want to be killed, get up," said the young
officer.]

"Don't you know me, Cato?" asked the Lieutenant, laughing heartily at
the woe-begone appearance of the negro.

"Hebens, golly! ain't you an Injine, Massa Canfield?" he asked, his
knees still shaking with terror.

"Do I look like one?"

"Guess you isn't, arter all," added the negro, with more assurance.
"Hebens, golly!  _I ain't afeard_!" he suddenly exclaimed,
straightening up proudly.  "Didn't t'ink Cato was afeard, Massa
Canfield?"

"I must say that the circumstantial evidence of your cowardice is hard
to resist."

The negro's eyes enlarged as he heard the large words of the soldier,
and his looks showed that he had no idea of their meaning.

"Doesn't t'ink I's _afeard_?"

"Why did you build such a looking concern as that?"

"Why I build dat?  To keep de rain off of me."

"It hasn't rained at all for several days."

"Know dat, but, den, expect maybe 'twill.  Bes' to be ready for it when
_does_ come."

"But, as there were no evidences of a storm coming very soon, why
should you get in there just now?"

"Storms out in dese parts bust berry suddent sometimes.  Oughter know
dat, Massa Canfield."

"Yes, I do; but, why in the name of common sense did you set up such a
growling when I came near your old cabin?"

"Did I growl at you?"

"Yes: made as much noise as a grizzly bear could have done."

"Done it jist for fun, Massa.  Hebens, golly! wanted to see if you was
afeard, too."
