
I must say I had no wish to pry further into their bloody practices;
but Bill seemed bent on it, so I turned and went. We passed rapidly
through the bush, being guided in the right direction by the shouts of
the savages. Suddenly there was a dead silence, which continued for
some time, while Bill and I involuntarily quickened our pace until we
were running at the top of our speed across the narrow neck of land
previously mentioned. As we reached the verge of the wood, we
discovered the savages surrounding the large war-canoe, which they were
apparently on the point of launching. Suddenly the multitude put their
united strength to the canoe; but scarcely had the huge machine begun
to move, when a yell, the most appalling that ever fell upon my ear,
rose high above the shouting of the savages. It had not died away when
another and another smote upon my throbbing ear; and then I saw that
these inhuman monsters were actually launching their canoe over the
living bodies of their victims. But there was no pity in the breasts of
these men. Forward they went in ruthless indifference, shouting as they
went, while high above their voices rang the dying shrieks of those
wretched creatures, as, one after another, the ponderous canoe passed
over them, burst the eyeballs from their sockets, and sent the
life-blood gushing from their mouths. O reader, this is no fiction. I
would not, for the sake of thrilling you with horror, invent so
terrible a scene. It was witnessed. It is true--true as that accursed
sin which has rendered the human heart capable of such diabolical
enormities!

When it was over, I turned round and fell upon the grass with a deep
groan; but Bill seized me by the arm, and lifting me up as if I had
been a child, cried--

"Come along, lad; let's away!"--and so, staggering and stumbling over
the tangled underwood, we fled from the fatal spot.

During the remainder of that day, I felt as if I were in a horrible
dream. I scarce knew what was said to me, and was more than once blamed
by the men for idling my time. At last the hour to return aboard came.
We marched down to the beach, and I felt relief for the first time when
my feet rested on the schooner's deck.

In the course of the evening I overheard part of a conversation between
the captain and the first mate, which startled me not a little. They
were down in the cabin, and conversed in an undertone; but the skylight
being off, I overheard every word that was said.

"I don't half like it," said the mate, "It seems to me that we'll only
have hard fightin' and no pay."

"No pay!" repeated the captain, in a voice of suppressed anger, "Do you
call a good cargo all for nothing no pay?"

"Very true," returned the mate; "but we've got the cargo aboard. Why
not cut your cable and take French leave o' them? What's the use o'
tryin' to kill the blackguards when it'll do us no manner o' good?"

"Mate," said the captain in a low voice, "you talk like a fresh-water
sailor. I can only attribute this shyness to some strange delusion; for
surely" (his voice assumed a slightly sneering tone as he said this),
"surely I am not to suppose that _you_ have become soft-hearted!
Besides, you are wrong in regard to the cargo being aboard; there's a
good quarter of it lying in the woods, and that blackguard chief knows
it and won't let me take it off. He defied us to do our worst
yesterday."

"Defied us! did he?" cried the mate with a bitter laugh. "Poor,
contemptible thing!"

"And yet he seems not so contemptible but that you are afraid to attack
him."

"Who said I was afraid?" growled the mate sulkily. "I'm as ready as any
man in the ship. But, captain, what is it that you intend to do?"

"I intend to muffle the sweeps and row the schooner up to the head of
the creek there, from which point we can command the pile of
sandal-wood with our gun. Then I shall land with all the men except
two, who shall take care of the schooner and be ready with the boat to
take us off. We can creep through the woods to the head of the village,
where these cannibals are always dancing round their suppers of human
flesh, and if the carbines of the men are loaded with a heavy charge of
buck-shot we can drop forty or fifty at the first volley. After that
the thing will be easy enough. The savages will take to the mountains
in a body, and we shall take what we require, up anchor, and away."

To this plan the mate at length agreed. As he left the cabin I heard
the captain say--

"Give the men an extra glass of grog, and don't forget the buck-shot."

The reader may conceive the horror with which I heard this murderous
conversation. I immediately repeated it to Bill, who seemed much
perplexed about it. At length he said--

"I'll tell you what I'll do, Ralph. I'll swim ashore after dark and fix
a musket to a tree not far from the place where we'll have to land, and
I'll tie a long string to the trigger, so that when our fellows cross
it they'll let it off, and so alarm the village in time to prevent an
attack, but not in time to prevent us gettin' back to the boat. So,
Master Captain," added Bill, with a smile that for the first time
seemed to me to be mingled with good-natured cheerfulness, "you'll be
balked at least for once in your life by Bloody Bill."

After it grew dark, Bill put this resolve in practice. He slipped over
the side with a musket in his left hand, while with his right he swam
ashore and entered the woods. He soon returned, having accomplished his
purpose, and got on board without being seen, I being the only one on
deck.

When the hour of midnight approached the men were mustered on deck, the
cable was cut, and the muffled sweeps got out. These sweeps were
immensely large oars, each requiring a couple of men to work it. In a
few minutes we entered the mouth of the creek, which was indeed the
mouth of a small river, and took about half-an-hour to ascend it,
although the spot where we intended to land was not more than six
hundred yards from the mouth, because there was a slight current
against us, and the mangroves which narrowed the creek impeded the
rowers in some places. Having reached the spot, which was so darkened
by overhanging trees that we could see with difficulty, a small kedge
anchor attached to a thin line was let softly down over the stern.

"Now, lads," whispered the captain, as he walked along the line of men,
who were all armed to the teeth, "don't be in a hurry, aim low, and
don't waste your first shots."

He then pointed to the boat, into which the men crowded in silence.
There was no room to row; but oars were not needed, as a slight push
against the side of the schooner sent the boat gliding to the shore.

"There's no need of leaving two in the boat," whispered the mate, as
the men stepped out; "we shall want all our hands. Let Ralph stay."

The captain assented, and ordered me to stand in readiness with the
boat-hook, to shove ashore at a moment's notice if they should return,
or to shove off if any of the savages should happen to approach. He
then threw his carbine into the hollow of his arm and glided through
the bushes, followed by his men. With a throbbing heart I awaited the
result of our plan. I knew the exact locality where the musket was
placed, for Bill had described it to me, and I kept my straining eyes
fixed upon the spot. But no sound came, and I began to fear that either
they had gone in another direction or that Bill had not fixed the
string properly. Suddenly I heard a faint click, and observed one or
two bright sparks among the bushes. My heart immediately sank within
me, for I knew at once that the trigger had indeed been pulled, but
that the priming had not caught. The plan, therefore, had utterly
failed. A feeling of dread now began to creep over me as I stood in the
boat, in that dark, silent spot, awaiting the issue of this murderous
expedition. I shuddered as I glanced at the water that glided past like
a dark reptile. I looked back at the schooner, but her hull was just
barely visible, while her tapering masts were lost among the trees
which overshadowed her. Her lower sails were set, but so thick was the
gloom that they were quite invisible.

Suddenly I heard a shot. In a moment a thousand voices raised a yell in
the village; again the cry rose on the night air, and was followed by
broken shouts as of scattered parties of men bounding into the woods.
Then I heard another shout loud and close at hand. It was the voice of
the captain cursing the man who had fired the premature shot. Then came
the order, "Forward!" followed by a wild hurrah of our men as they
charged the savages. Shots now rang in quick succession, and at last a
loud volley startled the echoes of the woods. It was followed by a
multitude of wild shrieks, which were immediately drowned in another
hurrah from the men; the distance of the sound proving that they were
driving their enemies before them towards the sea.

While I was listening intently to these sounds, which were now mingled
in confusion, I was startled by the rustling of the leaves not far from
me. At first I thought it was a party of savages who had observed the
schooner, but I was speedily undeceived by observing a body of
natives--apparently several hundreds, as far as I could guess in the
uncertain light--bounding through the woods towards the scene of
battle. I saw at once that this was a party who had outflanked our men,
and would speedily attack them in the rear. And so it turned out; for
in a short time the shouts increased tenfold, and among them I thought
I heard a death-cry uttered by voices familiar to my ear.

At length the tumult of battle ceased, and from the cries of exultation
that now arose from the savages, I felt assured that our men had been
conquered. I was immediately thrown into dreadful consternation. What
was I now to do? To be taken by the savages was too horrible to be
thought of; to flee to the mountains was hopeless, as I should soon be
discovered; and to take the schooner out of the creek without
assistance was impossible. I resolved, however, to make the attempt, as
being my only hope, and was on the point of pushing off, when my hand
was stayed, and my blood chilled by an appalling shriek, in which I
recognised the voice of one of the crew. It was succeeded by a shout
from the savages. Then came another and another shriek of agony, making
my ears to tingle, as I felt convinced they were murdering the pirate
crew in cold blood. With a bursting heart and my brain whirling as if
on fire, I seized the boat-hook to push from shore, when a man sprang
from the bushes.

"Stop! Ralph, stop!--there now, push off," he cried, and bounded into
the boat so violently as nearly to upset her. It was Bill's voice! In
another moment we were on board--the boat made fast, the line of the
anchor cut, and the sweeps run out. At the first stroke of Bill's giant
arm the schooner was nearly pulled ashore, for in his haste he forgot
that I could scarcely move the unwieldy oar. Springing to the stern, he
lashed the rudder in such a position as that, while it aided me, it
acted against him, and so rendered the force of our strokes nearly
equal. The schooner now began to glide quickly down the creek; but
before we reached its mouth, a yell from a thousand voices on the bank
told that we were discovered. Instantly a number of the savages plunged
into the water and swam towards us; but we were making so much way that
they could not overtake us. One, however, an immensely powerful man,
succeeded in laying hold of the cut rope that hung from the stern, and
clambered quickly upon deck. Bill caught sight of him the instant his
head appeared above the taffrail; but he did not cease to row, and did
not appear even to notice the savage until he was within a yard of him.
Then, dropping the sweep, he struck him a blow on the forehead with his
clenched fist that felled him to the deck. Lifting him up, he hurled
him overboard, and resumed the oar. But now a greater danger awaited
us, for the savages had outrun us on the bank, and were about to plunge
into the water ahead of the schooner. If they succeeded in doing so,
our fate was sealed. For one moment Bill stood irresolute. Then,
drawing a pistol from his belt, he sprang to the brass gun, held the
pan of his pistol over the touch-hole, and fired. The shot was
succeeded by the hiss of the cannon's priming; then the blaze and the
crushing thunder of the monstrous gun burst upon the savages with such
deafening roar that it seemed as if their very mountains had been rent
asunder.

This was enough. The moment of surprise and hesitation caused by the
unwonted sound gave us time to pass the point; a gentle breeze, which
the dense foliage had hitherto prevented us from feeling, bulged out
our sails; the schooner bent before it, and the shouts of the
disappointed savages grew fainter and fainter in the distance as we
were slowly wafted out to sea.




Chapter XXVII

Reflections--The wounded man--The squall--True consolation--Death.


There is a power of endurance in human beings, both in their bodies and
in their minds, which, I have often thought, seems to be wonderfully
adapted and exactly proportioned to the circumstances in which
individuals may happen to be placed--a power which, in most cases, is
sufficient to carry a man through and over every obstacle that may
happen to be thrown in his path through life, no matter how high or how
steep the mountain may be, but which often forsakes him the moment the
summit is gained, the point of difficulty passed, and leaves him
prostrated, with energies gone, nerves unstrung, and a feeling of
incapacity pervading the entire frame that renders the most trifling
effort almost impossible.

During the greater part of that day I had been subjected to severe
mental and much physical excitement, which had almost crushed me down
by the time I was relieved from duty in the course of the evening. But
when the expedition whose failure has just been narrated was planned,
my anxieties and energies had been so powerfully aroused that I went
through the protracted scenes of that terrible night without a feeling
of the slightest fatigue. My mind and body were alike active and full
of energy. No sooner was the last thrilling fear of danger past,
however, than my faculties went utterly relaxed; and when I felt the
cool breezes of the Pacific playing around my fevered brow, and heard
the free waves rippling at the schooner's prow, as we left the hated
island behind us, my senses forsook me, and I fell in a swoon upon the
deck.

From this state I was quickly aroused by Bill, who shook me by the arm,
saying--

"Hallo, Ralph boy! rouse up, lad; we're safe now. Poor thing! I believe
he's fainted." And, raising me in his arms, he laid me on the folds of
the gaff top-sail, which lay upon the deck near the tiller. "Here, take
a drop o' this; it'll do you good, my boy," he added, in a voice of
tenderness which I had never heard him use before, while he held a
brandy-flask to my lips.

I raised my eyes gratefully as I swallowed a mouthful; next moment my
head sank heavily upon my arm, and I fell fast asleep. I slept long,
for when I awoke the sun was a good way above the horizon, I did not
move on first opening my eyes, as I felt a delightful sensation of rest
pervading me, and my eyes were riveted on and charmed with the gorgeous
splendour of the mighty ocean that burst upon my sight. It was a dead
calm; the sea seemed a sheet of undulating crystal, tipped and streaked
with the saffron hues of sunrise, which had not yet merged into the
glowing heat of noon; and there was a deep calm in the blue dome above
that was not broken even by the usual flutter of the sea-fowl. How long
I would have lain in contemplation of this peaceful scene I know not,
but my mind was recalled suddenly and painfully to the past and the
present by the sight of Bill, who was seated on the deck at my feet,
with his head reclining, as if in sleep, on his right arm, which rested
on the tiller. As he seemed to rest peacefully, I did not mean to
disturb him, but the slight noise I made in raising myself on my elbow
caused him to start and look round.

"Well, Ralph, awake at last, my boy? You have slept long and soundly,"
he said, turning towards me.

On beholding his countenance I sprang up in anxiety. He was deadly
pale, and his hair, which hung in dishevelled locks over his face, was
clotted with blood. Blood also stained his hollow cheeks and covered
the front of his shirt, which, with the greater part of his dress, was
torn and soiled with mud.

"O Bill!" said I with deep anxiety, "what is the matter with you? You
are ill. You must have been wounded."

"Even so, lad," said Bill in a deep, soft voice, while he extended his
huge frame on the couch from which I had just risen. "I've got an ugly
wound, I fear, and I've been waiting for you to waken, to ask you to
get me a drop o' brandy and a mouthful o' bread from the cabin lockers.
You seemed to sleep so sweetly, Ralph, that I didn't like to disturb
you. But I don't feel up to much just now."

I did not wait till he had done talking, but ran below immediately, and
returned in a few seconds with a bottle of brandy and some broken
biscuit. He seemed much refreshed after eating a few morsels and
drinking a long draught of water mingled with a little of the spirits.
Immediately afterwards he fell asleep, and I watched him anxiously
until he awoke, being desirous of knowing the nature and extent of his
wound.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, on awaking suddenly after a slumber of an hour,
"I'm the better of that nap, Ralph; I feel twice the man I was;" and he
attempted to rise, but sank back again immediately with a deep groan.

"Nay, Bill, you must not move, but lie still while I look at your
wound. I'll make a comfortable bed for you here on deck, and get you
some breakfast. After that you shall tell me how you got it. Cheer up,
Bill," seeing that he turned his head away; "you'll be all right in a
little, and I'll be a capital nurse to you, though I'm no doctor."

I then left him, and lighted a fire in the caboose. While it was
kindling, I went to the steward's pantry and procured the materials for
a good breakfast, with which, in little more than half-an-hour, I
returned to my companion. He seemed much better, and smiled kindly on
me as I set before him a cup of coffee and a tray with several eggs and
some bread on it.

"Now then, Bill," said I cheerfully, sitting down beside him on the
deck, "let's fall to. I'm very hungry myself, I can tell you; but--I
forgot--your wound," I added, rising; "let me look at it."

I found that the wound was caused by a pistol-shot in the chest. It did
not bleed much, and as it was on the right side, I was in hopes that it
might not be very serious. But Bill shook his head. "However," said he,
"sit down, Ralph, and I'll tell you all about it.

"You see, after we left the boat an' began to push through the bushes,
we went straight for the line of my musket, as I had expected; but by
