"I admire you for your determination," said Molly. "I never knew that an
Irish girl could have so much spunk in her."

"And why not? Aren't we about the finest race on God's earth?"

"Oh, come, come," said Molly; "you mustn't overdo it. Even you sometimes
carry things a trifle too far."

Just then the train came in. There was the usual bustle of passengers
alighting and others getting in; the next moment the girls had taken
their seats in a crowded compartment and were off to town. They arrived
in London between twelve and one o'clock, and found themselves landed at
Waterloo. Now, Waterloo is not the nicest station in the world for two
very young girls to arrive at midnight, particularly when they have not
the faintest idea where to go.

"Let us go straight to the waiting room and ask the woman there what we
had best do," said Molly, who still immensely enjoyed taking the lead.

Nora followed her companion quite willingly. Her worst fears about her
father were held in abeyance, now that she was really on her way to
him. The girls entered the waiting room. A tired-looking woman was busy
putting out the gas, and reducing the room to darkness for the night.
She turned round as the girls came in.

"I'm shutting up, ladies," she said.

"Oh, but please advise us," said Molly.

"How so, miss? What am I to do?"

"You'll be paid well," said Molly, "so you need not look so angry. Can
you take us home to your place until the morning?"

"What does this mean?" said the woman.

"Oh, I'll explain," said Molly. "We're two runaways. I don't mind
telling you that we are, because it's a fact. It is important that
we should leave home. We don't want to be traced. Will you give us
lodging?--any sort. We don't mind how small the room is. We want to be
at Euston at an early hour in the morning; we are going to Holyhead."

"Dear, dear!" said the woman; "and does this really mean money?"

"It means five shillings," said Molly.

"Ten" was on Nora's lips; but Molly silenced her with a look.

"There's no use in overpaying her; she won't be half as civil,"
whispered Molly to Nora.

"It's five shillings you'll get," she repeated in a firm voice. "Here, I
have got the change; you can look in my purse."

"Molly opened her purse as she spoke. The woman, a Mrs. Terry by name,
did look in. She saw the shine of gold and several half-crowns.

"Well, to be sure!" she said. "But you'll promise not to get me into a
scrape?"

"We won't even ask you your name. You can let us out of the house in
time for us to catch the first train from Euston. We shall be off and
away before we are discovered."

"And we'll remember you all our lives if you'll help us," said Nora.
Then she added, tears filling her pretty eyes, "It's my father, please,
kind woman; he has been shot at and is very ill."

"And who wants to keep you from your father, you poor thing?" said the
woman. "Oh, if it's that, and there's no lovers in the question, I don't
mind helping you both. It don't do for young girls to be wandering about
the streets alone at night. You come with me, honeys. I can't take you
for nothing, but I'll give you supper and breakfast, and the best bed I
can, for five shillings."

Accordingly, in Mrs. Terry's company, the two girls left Waterloo
Station. She walked down a somewhat narrow side-street, crossed another,
and they presently found themselves in a little, old-fashioned square.
The square was very old indeed, belonging to quite a dead-and-gone
period of the world. The woman stopped at a house which once had been
large and stately; doubtless in days gone by it had sheltered goodly
personages and had listened to the laughter of the rich and well-to-do;
but in its old age the house was let out in tenements, and Mrs. Terry
owned a couple of rooms at the very top.

She took the girls up the dirty stairs, opened the door of a not
uncomfortable sitting room, and ushered them in.

"There now, honeys," she said; "the best I can do for you both is the
sofa for one and my bed for the other."

"No, no," said Nora, "we would not dream of taking your bed; and, for
that matter, I could not sleep," she added. "If you will let me have a
couple of chairs I shall lie down on them and wait as best I can until
the morning. Oh, I have often done it at home and thought it great fun."

"Well, you must each have a bit of supper first; it don't do for young
girls to go to bed hungry, more particularly when they have a journey
before them. I'll get you some bread and cheese and a glass of milk
each--unless, indeed, you would prefer beer?"

"Oh, no, we would much rather have milk," said Molly.

The woman bustled about, and soon came in with a jug of milk, a couple
of glasses, some bread, and some indifferent butter.

"You can have the cheese if you really want it," she said.

"No; this will do beautifully," answered Nora.

"Well then, my dears, I'll leave you now for the night. The lamp will
burn all night. It will be lonely for young girls to be in the dark; and
I'll promise to call you at five o'clock. There's a train leaves Euston
between six and seven that you had better catch, unless you want them as
is hindering you from flight to stop you. I am interested in this poor
young lady who wants to see her father."

"Oh, thank you; you are a perfect darling!" said Nora. "I'll come and
see you some day when I am happy again, and tell you all about it."

"Bless your kind heart, honey! I'm glad to be able to do something for
those who are in trouble. Now then, lie down and have a bit of sleep.
I'll wake you sure and certain, and you shan't stir, the two of you,
until you have had a hot cup of tea each."

Mrs. Terry was as good as her word. She called the girls in good time,
and gave them quite a comfortable breakfast before they started. The tea
was hot; the bread was good--what else did they want?

Nora awoke from a very short and broken slumber.

"Soon I shall be back again," she thought. "No matter how changed and
ruined the place is, I shall be with him once more. Oh, my darling, my
heart's darling, I shall kiss you again! Oh! I am happy at the thought."

Mrs. Terry herself accompanied them to Euston. It was too early to get a
cab; she asked them if they were good walkers. They said they were. She
took them by the shortest routes; and, somewhat tired, but still full of
a strange exultation, they found themselves at the great station. Mrs.
Terry saw them into their train, and with many loudly uttered blessings
started them on their journey. She would not touch anything more than
the five shillings, and tears were in her eyes as she looked her last at
them.

"God bless them, and particularly that little Irish girl. Haven't she
just got the cunningest, sweetest way in all the world?" thought the
good woman. "I do hope her father will be better when she gets to him.
Don't she love him just!"

Yes, it had been the most daring scheme, the wildest sort of adventure,
for two girls to undertake, and yet it was crowned with success. They
were too far on their journey for Mrs. Hartrick, however much she might
wish it, to rescue them. She might be as angry as she pleased; but
nothing now could get them back. She accordingly did the very best
thing she could do--telegraphed to Mr. Hartrick to say that they had
absolutely run away, but begged of him to meet them in Dublin. This
the good man did. He met them both on the pier, received them quietly,
without much demonstration; but then, looking into Nora's anxious face,
his own softened.

"You have come, Nora, and against my will," he said. "Are you sorry?"

"Not a bit, Uncle George," she answered. "I would have come against the
wills of a thousand uncles if father were ill."

"Then I have nothing to say," he answered, with a smile, "at least to
you; but, Molly, I shall have something to talk to you about presently."

"It was very good of you to meet us, father. Was mother terribly angry?"

"What could you expect her to be? You have behaved very badly."

"I don't think so. I did the only possible thing to save Nora's heart
from breaking."

"It seems to me," said Mr. Hartrick slowly, "that you all think of
nothing but the heart of Nora. I am almost sorry now that I ever asked
her to come to us in England."

"Oh, it's home again; it's home again!" cried the Irish girl as she
paced up and down the platform. "Molly, do listen to the brogue. Isn't
it just delicious? Come along, and let's talk to this poor old Irish
beggar."

"Oh, but he doesn't look at all pleasant," said Molly, backing a little.

"Bless the crayther, but he is pleasant," said Nora. "I must go and have
a chat with him." She caught hold of Molly's hand, and dragged her to
the edge of the pavement, where an old man, with almost blind eyes, was
seated in front of a large basket of rosy apples.

"And how are you this morning, father?" said Nora.

"Oh, then, it's the top of the morning to yez, honey," was the instant
reply. "And how is yourself?"

"Very well indeed," said Nora.

"Then it's I that am delighted to see yez, though see yez I can't. Oh,
then, I hope that it's a long life and plenty you'll have before you,
my sweet, dear, illigant young lady--a good bed to lie on, and plenty to
eat and drink. If you has them, what else could ail yez? Good-by to yez;
good-by to yez."

Nora slipped a couple of pence into his hand.

"The blessings of the Vargin and all the Saints be on your head, miss.
Oh! it's I that am glad to see yez. God's blessing on yez a thousand
times."

Nora took the old man's hand and wrung it. He raised the white little
hand to his lips and kissed it.

"There now," he said, "I have kissed yez; and these lips shan't see
wather again for many a long day--that they shan't. I wouldn't wash off
the taste of your hand, honey, for a bag of yellow gold."

"What an extraordinary man!" said Molly. "Have you known him all your
life?"

"Known him all my life!" said Nora. "Never laid eyes on him before;
that's the way we always talk to one another. Oh, I can tell you we love
each other here in Ireland."

"It seems so," answered Molly, in some astonishment. "Dear me! if you
address a total stranger so, how will you speak to those you really
love?"

"You wait and see," answered Nora, her dark-blue eyes shining, and a
mist of tears dimming their brightness; "you wait and see. Ah, it's past
words we are sometimes; but you wait and you'll soon see."

Mr. O'Shanaghgan was pronounced better, although Mr. Hartrick had to
admit that he was weak and fretful; and, now that Nora had come, it was
extremely likely that her presence would do her father a sight of good.

"I knew it, Uncle George," she answered as they seated themselves in the
railway carriage preparatory to going back to O'Shanaghgan--"I knew it,
and that was why I came. You, uncle, are very wise," she added; "and
yours is a beautiful, neat, orderly country; and you are very kind, and
very clever; and you have been awfully good to the Irish girl--awfully
good; and she is very ignorant; and you know a great deal; but one thing
she does know best, and that is, the love and the longing in the heart
of her own dear father. Oh, hurrah! I'm home again; I'm home again! Erin
go bragh! Erin go bragh!"




CHAPTER XXVIII.


THE WILD IRISH.

The somewhat slow Irish train jogged along its way; it never put itself
out, did that special train, starting when it pleased, and arriving when
it chose at its destination. Its guard, Jerry by name, was of a like
mind with itself; there was no hurry about Jerry; he took the world
"aisy," as he expressed it.

"What's the good of fretting?" he used to say. "What can't be cured must
be endured. I hurry no man's cattle; and my train, she goes when she
likes, and I aint going to hurry her, not I."

On one occasion Jerry was known to remark to a somewhat belated
traveler:

"Why, then, miss, is it hurrying ye are to meet the train? Why, then,
you can take your time."

"Oh, Jerry!" said this anxious person, fixing her eyes on his face in
great excitement, "I forgot a most important parcel at a shop half a
mile away."

"Run and fetch it, then, honey," replied Jerry, "and I'll keep her a bit
longer."

This the lady accordingly did. When she returned, the heads of all the
other angry passengers were out of the windows expostulating with Jerry
as to the cause of the delay.

"Hurry up, miss," he said then. He popped her into a compartment, and
she, as he called the train, moved slowly out of the station.

At times, too, without the smallest provocation, Jerry would stop this
special train because a little "pigeen" had got off one of the trucks
and was running along the line. He and the porter shouted and raced
after the animal, caught it, and brought it back to the train. On
another occasion he calmly informed a rather important passenger, "Ye
had best get out here, for she's bust." "She" happened to be the engine.

Into this train now got English Molly and Irish Nora. Mr. Hartrick
pronounced it quite the vilest service he had ever traveled by. He began
to grumble the moment he got into the train.

"It crawls," he said; "and it absolutely has the cheek to call itself an
express."

But Nora, with her head out of the window, was shouting to Jerry, who
came toward her full of blessings, anxious to shake her purty white
hand, and telling her that he was as glad as a shower of gould to have
her back again in the old country.

At last, however, the slow, very slow journey came to an end; and just
after sunset the party found themselves at the little wayside station.
Here a sight met Nora's eyes which displeased her exceedingly. Instead
of the old outside car which her father used to drive, with the shabby
old retainer, whose livery had long ago seen its best days, there
arrived a smart groom, in the newest of livery, with a cockade in his
hat. He touched his hat respectfully to Mr. Hartrick, and gave a quick
glance round at Nora and Molly.

"Is the brougham outside, Dennis?" was Mr. Hartrick's response.

"Yes, sir; it has been waiting for half an hour; the train is a bit
late, as usual, sir."

"You need not tell me that this train is ever in time," said Mr.
Hartrick. "Well, girls, come along; I told Dennis to meet us, and here
we are."

Molly thought nothing at all of the neat brougham, with its pair of
spirited grays; she was accustomed to driving in the better-class of
carriage all her life; but Nora turned first pale and then crimson. She
got into the carriage, and sat back in a corner; tears were brimming to
her eyes.

"This is the first. How am I to bear all the rest?" she said to herself.

Mr. Hartrick, who had hoped that Nora would be pleased with the
brougham, with Dennis himself, with the whole very stylish get-up, was
mortified at her silence, and, taking her hand, tried to draw her out.

"Well, little girl," he said, "I hope you will like the improvements
I have made in the Castle. I have done it all at your instigation,
remember."

"At my instigation?" cried Nora. "Oh, no, Uncle George, that you have
not."

He looked at her in some amazement, then closed his lips, and said
nothing more. Molly longed to get her father alone, in order to explain
Nora's peculiar conduct.

"It is difficult for an Englishman to understand her," thought Molly.
"I do, and I think her altogether charming; but father, who has gone to
this enormous expense and trouble, will be put out if she does not show
a little gratitude. I will tell her that she must; I will take the very
first opportunity."

And now they were turning in at the well-known gates. These gates were
painted white, whereas they had been almost reduced to their native
wood. The avenue was quite tidy, no weeds anywhere; but Nora almost
refused to look out. One by one the familiar trees seemed to pass by her
as she was bowled rapidly along in the new brougham, as if they were so
many ghosts saying good-by. But then there was the roar--the real, real,
grand roar--of the Atlantic in her ears. No amount of tidiness, nothing
could ever alter that sound.

"Oh, hurrah for the sea!" she said. She flung down the window and popped
out her head.

Mr. Hartrick nodded to Molly. "She will see a great deal more to delight
her than just the old ocean," he said.

Molly was silent. They arrived at the house; the butler was standing on
the steps, a nice, stylish-looking Englishman, in neat livery. He came
