I will go and dress if you will keep guard here with your rifle."

At the end of the gallery a figure was standing; it was Isobel Hannay.

"I have heard you are going out again, Mr. Bathurst."

"Yes, I am going to see what I can do in the way of making terms for
us."

"You may not come back again," she said nervously.

"That is, of course, possible, Miss Hannay, but I do not think the risk
is greater than that run by those who stay here."

"I want to speak to you before you go," she said; "I have wanted to
speak so long, but you have never given me an opportunity. We may never
meet again, and I must tell you how sorry I am--how sorry I have been
ever since for what I said. I spoke as a foolish girl, but I know better
now. Have I not seen how calm you have been through all our troubles,
how you have devoted yourself to us and the children, how you have kept
up all our spirits, how cheerfully you have worked, and as our trouble
increased we have all come to look up to you and lean upon you. Do say,
Mr. Bathurst, that you forgive me, and that if you return we can be
friends as we were before."

"Certainly I forgive you if there is anything to forgive, Miss Hannay,"
he said gravely. "Nothing that you or anyone can say can relieve me of
the pain of knowing that I have been unable to take any active part in
your defense, that I have been forced to play the part of a woman rather
than a man; but assuredly, if I return, I shall be glad to be again your
friend, which, indeed. I have never ceased to be at heart."

Perhaps she expected something more, but it did not come. He spoke
cordially, but yet as one who felt that there was an impassible barrier
between them. She stood irresolute for a moment, and then held out her
hand. "Goodby, then," she said.

He held it a moment. "Goodby, Miss Hannay. May God keep you and guard
you."

Then gently he led her to the door, and they passed out together. A
quarter of an hour later he rejoined the Doctor, having brought with him
a few short lengths of bamboo.

"I will put these across the hole when I get out," he said, "lay some
sods over them, and cover them up with leaves, in case anyone should
enter the bushes tomorrow. It is not likely, but it is as well to take
the precaution. One of you had better stay on guard until I come back.
It would not do to trust any of the natives; those that remain are all
utterly disheartened and broken down, and might take the opportunity
of purchasing their lives by going out and informing the enemy of the
opening into the gallery. They must already know of its existence from
the men who have deserted. But, fortunately, I don't think any of them
are aware of its exact direction; if they had been, we should have had
them countermining before this."

Having carefully closed up the opening, Bathurst went to the edge of the
bushes and listened. He could hear voices between him and the house,
but all was quiet near at hand, and he began to move noiselessly along
through the garden. He had no great fear of meeting with anyone here.
The natives had formed a cordon round the wall, and behind that there
would be no one on watch, and as the batteries were silent, all were
doubtless asleep there. In ten minutes he stood before the charred
stumps that marked the site of his bungalow. As he did so, a figure
advanced to meet him.

"It is you, sahib. I was expecting you. I knew that you would come this
evening."

"I don't know how you knew it but I am heartily glad to see you."

"You want to see Por Sing? Come along with me and I will take you to
him; but there is no time to lose;" and without another word he walked
rapidly away, followed by Bathurst.

When they got into the open the latter could see that his companion was
dressed in an altogether different garb to that in which he had before
seen him, being attired as a person of some rank and importance. He
stopped presently for Bathurst to come up with him.

"I have done what I could to prepare the way for you," he said. "Openly
I could for certain reasons do nothing, but I have said enough to make
him feel uncomfortable about the future, and to render him anxious to
find a way of escape for himself if your people should ever again get
the mastery."

"How are things going, Rujub? We have heard nothing for three weeks. How
is it at Cawnpore?"

"Cawnpore has been taken by the Nana. They surrendered on his solemn
oath that all should be allowed to depart in safety. He broke his oath,
and there are not ten of its defenders alive. The women are all in
captivity."

Bathurst groaned. He had hardly hoped that the handful of defenders
could have maintained themselves against such overpowering numbers, but
the certainty as to their fate was a heavy blow.

"And Lucknow?" he asked.

"The Residency holds out at present, but men say that it must soon
fall."

"And what do you say?"

"I say nothing," the man said; "we cannot use our art in matters which
concern ourselves."

"And Delhi?"

"There is a little force of whites in front of Delhi; there are tens of
thousands of Sepoys in the town, but as yet the whites have maintained
themselves. The chiefs of the Punjaub have proved faithless to their
country, and there the British rule is maintained."

"Thank God for that!" Bathurst exclaimed; "as long as the Punjaub holds
out the tables may be turned. And the other Presidencies?"

"Nothing as yet," Rujub said, in a tone of discontent.

"Then you are against us, Rujub?"

The man stopped.

"Sahib, I know not what I wish now. I have been brought up to hate the
whites. Two of my father's brothers were hung as Thugs, and my father
taught me to hate the men who did it. For years I have worked quietly
against you, as have most of those of my craft. We have reason to hate
you. In the old times we were honored in the land--honored and feared;
for even the great ones knew that we had powers such as no other men
have. But the whites treat us as if we were mere buffoons, who play
for their amusement; they make no distinction between the wandering
conjurer, with his tricks of dexterity, and the masters, who have powers
that have been handed down from father to son for thousands of years,
who can communicate with each other though separated by the length of
India; who can, as you have seen, make men invisible; who can read
the past and the future. They see these things, and though they cannot
explain them, they persist in treating us all as if we were mere
jugglers.

"They prefer to deny the evidence of their own senses rather than admit
that we have powers such as they have not; and so, even in the eyes of
our own countrymen, we have lost our old standing and position, while
the whites would bribe us with money to divulge the secrets in which
they profess to disbelieve. No wonder that we hate you, and that we
long for the return of the old days, when even princes were glad to ask
favors at our hands. It is seldom that we show our powers now. Those who
aid us, and whose servants we are, are not to be insulted by the powers
they bestow upon us being used for the amusement of men who believe in
nothing.

"The Europeans who first came to India have left records of the strange
things they saw at the courts of the native princes. But such things are
no longer done for the amusement of our white masters. Thus, then, for
years I have worked against you; and just as I saw that our work was
successful, just as all was prepared for the blow that was to sweep the
white men out of India, you saved my daughter; then my work seemed to
come to an end. Would any of my countrymen, armed only with a whip, have
thrown themselves in the way of a tiger to save a woman--a stranger--one
altogether beneath him in rank--one, as it were, dust beneath his feet?
That I should be ready to give my life for yours was a matter of course;
I should have been an ungrateful wretch otherwise. But this was not
enough. At one blow the work I had devoted myself to for years was
brought to nothing. Everything seemed to me new; and as I sat by my
daughter's bedside, when she lay sick with the fever, I had to think it
all out again. Then I saw things in another light. I saw that, though
the white men were masterful and often hard, though they had little
regard for our customs, and viewed our beliefs as superstitious,
and scoffed at the notion of there being powers of which they had no
knowledge, yet that they were a great people. Other conquerors, many
of them, India has had, but none who have made it their first object to
care for the welfare of the people at large. The Feringhees have wrung
nothing from the poor to be spent in pomp and display; they permit no
tyranny or ill doing; under them the poorest peasant tills his fields in
peace.

"I have been obliged to see all this, and I feel now that their
destruction would be a frightful misfortune. We should be ruled by our
native lords; but as soon as the white man was gone the old quarrels
would break out, and the country would be red with blood. I did not see
this before, because I had only looked at it with the eyes of my own
caste; now I see it with the eyes of one whose daughter has been saved
from a tiger by a white man. I cannot love those I have been taught to
hate, but I can see the benefit their rule has given to India.

"But what can I do now? I am in the stream, and I must go with it. I
know not what I wish or what I would do. Six months ago I felt certain.
Now I doubt. It seemed to me that in a day the English Raj would be
swept away. How could it be otherwise when the whole army that had
conquered India for them were against them? I knew they were brave, but
we have never lacked bravery. How could I tell that they would fight one
against a hundred?

"But come, let us go on. Por Sing is expecting you. I told him that
I knew that one from the garrison would come out to treat with him
privately tonight, and he is expecting you, though he does not know who
may come."

Ten minutes walking, and they approached a large tent surrounded by
several smaller ones. A sentry challenged when they approached, but
on Rujub giving his name, he at once resumed his walk up and down, and
Rujub, followed by Bathurst, advanced and entered the tent. The Zemindar
was seated on a divan smoking a hookah. Rujub bowed, but not with the
deep reverence of one approaching his superior.

"He is here," he said.

"Then you were not mistaken, Rujub?"

"How could I be when I knew?" Rujub said. "I have done what I said, and
have brought him straight to you. That was all I had to do with it; the
rest is for your highness."

"I would rather that you should be present," Por Sing said, as Rujub
turned to withdraw.

"No," the latter replied; "in this matter it is for you to decide.
I know not the Nana's wishes, and your highness must take the
responsibility. I have brought him to you rather than to the commander
of the Sepoys, because your authority should be the greater; it is you
and the other Oude chiefs who have borne the weight of this siege, and
it is only right that it is you who should decide the conditions of
surrender. The Sepoys are not our masters, and it is well they are
not so; the Nana and the Oude chiefs have not taken up arms to free
themselves from the English Raj to be ruled over by the men who have
been the servants of the English."

"That is so," the Zemindar said, stroking his beard; "well, I will talk
with this person."

Rujub left the tent. "You do not know me, Por Sing?" Bathurst said,
stepping forward from the entrance where he had hitherto stood; "I am
the Sahib Bathurst."

"Is it so?" the Zemindar said, laying aside his pipe and rising to his
feet; "none could come to me whom I would rather see. You have always
proved yourself a just officer, and I have no complaint against you. We
have often broken bread together, and it has grieved me to know that you
were in yonder house. Do you come to me on your own account, or from the
sahib who commands?"

"I come on my own account," Bathurst said; "when I come as a messenger
from him, I must come openly. I. know you to be an honorable man, and
that I could say what I have to say to you and depart in safety. I
regard you as one who has been misled, and regret for your sake that you
should have been induced to take part with these mutineers against us.
Believe me, chief, you have been terribly misled. You have been told
that it needed but an effort to overthrow the British Raj. Those who
told you so lied. It might have seemed easy to destroy the handful of
Europeans scattered throughout India, but you have not succeeded in
doing it. Even had you done so, you would not have so much as begun
the work. There are but few white soldiers here. Why? Because England
trusted in the fidelity of her native troops, and thought it necessary
to keep only a handful of soldiers in India, but if need be, for every
soldier now here she could send a hundred, and she will send a hundred
if required to reconquer India. Already you may be sure that ships are
on the sea laden with troops; and if you find it so hard to overcome the
few soldiers now here, what would you do against the great armies that
will pour in ere long? Why, all the efforts of the Sepoys gathered
at Delhi are insufficient to defeat the four or five thousand British
troops who hold their posts outside the town, waiting only till the
succor arrives from England to take a terrible vengeance. Woe be then
to those who have taken part against us; still more to those whose hands
are stained with British blood."

"It is too late now," the native said gloomily, "the die is cast; but
since I have seen how a score of men could defend that shattered house
against thousands, do you think I have not seen that I have been wrong?
Who would have thought that men could do such a thing? But it is too
late now."

"It is not too late," Bathurst said; "it is too late, indeed, to undo
the mischief that has been done, but not too late for you to secure
yourself against some of the consequences. The English are just; and
when they shall have stamped out this mutiny, as assuredly they will do,
they will draw a distinction between mutinous soldiers who were false
to their salt, and native chiefs who fought, as they believed, for the
independence of their country. But one thing they will not forgive,
whether in Sepoy or in prince, the murder of man, woman, or child in
cold blood: for that there will be no pardon.

"But it is not upon that ground that I came to appeal to you, but as
a noble of Oude--a man who is a brave enemy, but who could never be a
butcher. We have fought against each other fairly and evenly; the time
has come when we can fight no longer, and I demand of you, confidently,
that, if we surrender, the lives of all within those walls shall be
respected, and a safe conduct be granted them down the country. I know
that such conditions were granted to the garrison at Cawnpore, and that
they were shamelessly violated; for that act Nana Sahib will never be
forgiven. He will be hunted down like a dog and hung when he is caught,
just as if he had been the poorest peasant. But I have not so bad an
opinion of the people of India as to believe them base enough to follow
such an example, and I am confident that if you grant us those terms,
you will see that the conditions are observed."

"I have received orders from Nana Sahib to send all prisoners down to
him," Por Sing said, in a hesitating voice.

"You will never send down prisoners from here," Bathurst replied firmly.
"You may attack us again, and after the loss of the lives of scores more
of your followers you may be successful, but you will take no prisoners,
for at the last moment we will blow the house and all in it into the
air. Besides, who made Nana Sahib your master? He is not the lord of
Oude; and though doubtless he dreams of sovereignty, it is a rope, not
a throne, that awaits him. Why should you nobles of Oude obey the orders
of this peasant boy, though he was adopted by the Peishwa? The Peishwa
himself was never your lord, and why should you obey this traitor, this
butcher, this disgrace to India, when he orders you to hand over to him
the prisoners your sword has made?"

"That is true," Por Sing said gloomily; "but the Sepoys will not agree
to the terms."

"The Sepoys are not your masters," Bathurst said; "we do not surrender
to them, but to you. We place no confidence in their word, but we have
every faith in the honor of the nobles of Oude. If you and your friends
grant us the terms we ask, the Sepoys may clamor, but they will not
venture to do more. Neither they nor Nana Sahib dare at this moment
affront the people of Oude.

"There are Sepoys round Lucknow, but it is the men of Oude who are
really pressing the siege. If you are firm, they will not dare to break
with you on such a question as the lives of a score of Europeans. If you
will give me your word and your honor that all shall be spared, I will
come out in the morning with a flag of truce to treat with you. If not,
we will defend ourselves to the last, and then blow ourselves into the
air."

"And you think," Por Sing said doubtfully, "that if I agreed to this, it
would be taken into consideration should the British Raj be restored."

"I can promise you that it will," Bathurst said. "It will be properly
represented that it is to you that the defenders of Deennugghur, and the
women and children with them, owe their lives, and you may be sure that
this will go a very long way towards wiping out the part you have taken
in the attack on the station. When the day of reckoning comes, the
British Government will know as well how to reward those who rendered
them service in these days, as to punish those who have been our foes."

"I will do it," Por Sing said firmly. "Do not come out until the
afternoon. In the morning I will talk with the other Zemindars, and
bring them over to agree that there shall be no more bloodshed. There is
not one of us but is heartily sick of this business, and eager to put an
end to it. Rujub may report what he likes to the Nana, I will do what is
right."

After a hearty expression of thanks, Bathurst left the tent. Rujub was
awaiting him outside.

"You have succeeded?" he asked.

"Yes; he will guarantee the lives of all the garrison, but he seemed to
be afraid of what you might report to Nana Sahib."

"I am the Nana's agent here," Rujub said; "I have been working with
him for months. I would I could undo it all now. I was away when they
surrendered at Cawnpore. Had I not been, that massacre would never have
taken place, for I am one of the few who have influence with him. He is
fully cognizant of my power, and fears it."

They made their way back without interruption to the clump of bushes
near the house.

"When shall I see you again?" Bathurst asked.

"I do not know," replied Rujub, "but be sure that I shall be at hand to
aid you if possible should danger arise."



CHAPTER XVIII.


As soon as Bathurst began to remove the covering of the hole, a voice
came from below.

"Is that you, Bathurst?"

"All right, Doctor."

"Heaven be praised! You are back sooner than I expected, by a long way.
I heard voices talking, so I doubted whether it was you."

"The ladder is still there, I suppose, Doctor?"

"Yes; it is just as you got off it. What are you going to do about the
hole?"

"Rujub is here; he will cover it up after me."

"Then you were right," the Doctor said, as Bathurst stepped down beside
him; "and you found the juggler really waiting for you?"

"At the bungalow, Doctor, as I expected."

"And what have you done? You can hardly have seen Por Sing; it is not
much over an hour since you left."

"I have seen him, Doctor; and what is more, he has pledged his word for
our safety."

"Thank God for that, lad; it is more than I expected. This will be news
indeed for the poor women. And do you think he will be strong enough to
keep his pledge?"

"I think so; he asked me to wait until tomorrow afternoon before going
out with a flag of truce, and said that by that time he would get the
other Zemindars to stand by him, and would make terms whether the Sepoys
liked it or not."

"Well, you shall tell us all about it afterwards, Bathurst; let us take
the news in to them at once; it is long since they had good tidings
of any kind; it would be cruel to keep them in suspense, even for five
minutes."

There was no noisy outburst of joy when the news was told. Three weeks
before it would have been received with the liveliest satisfaction, but
now the bitterness of death was well nigh past; half the children lay
in their graves in the garden, scarce one of the ladies but had lost
husband or child, and while women murmured "Thank God!" as they clasped
their children to them, the tears ran down as they thought how different
it would have been had the news come sooner. The men, although equally
quiet, yet showed more outward satisfaction than the women. Warm grasps
of the hands were exchanged by those who had fought side by side
during these terrible days, and a load seemed lifted at once off their
shoulders.

Bathurst stayed but a moment in the room after this news was told, but
went in with Dr. Wade to the Major, and reported to him in full the
conversation that had taken place between himself and Por Sing.

"I think you are right, Bathurst; if the Oude men hold together, the
Sepoys will scarcely risk a breach with them. Whether he will be able to
secure our safety afterwards is another thing."

"I quite see that, Major; but it seems to me that we have no option but
to accept his offer and hope for the best."

"That is it," the Doctor agreed. "It is certain death if we don't
surrender; there is a chance that he will be able to protect us if we
do. At any rate, we can be no worse off than we are here."

Isobel had been in with Mrs. Doolan nursing the sick children when
Bathurst arrived, but they presently came out. Isobel shook hands with
him without speaking.

"We are all heavily indebted to you, Mr. Bathurst," Mrs. Doolan said.
"If we escape from this, it will be to you that we humanly owe our
lives."

She spoke in a voice that all in the room could hear.

"Your are right, Mrs. Doolan," the Doctor said; "and I think that there
are some who must regret now the manner in which they have behaved to
Bathurst since this siege began."

"I do for one," Captain Doolan said, coming forward.

"I have regretted it for some time, though I have not had the manliness
to say so. I am heartily sorry. I have done you a great and cruel
injustice. I ought to have known that the Doctor, who knew you vastly
better than I did, was not likely to be mistaken. Putting that aside,
I ought to have seen, and I did see, though I would not acknowledge
it even to myself, that no man has borne himself more calmly and
steadfastly through this siege than you have, and that by twice
venturing out among the enemy you gave proof that you possessed as much
courage as any of us. I do hope that you will give me your hand."

All the others who had held aloof from Bathurst came forward and
expressed their deep regret for what had occurred.

Bathurst heard them in silence.

"I do not feel that there is anything to forgive," he said quietly. "I
am glad to hear what you say, and I know you mean it, and I accept
the hands you offer, but what you felt towards me has affected me
but little, for your contempt for me was as nothing to my contempt of
myself. Nothing can alter the fact that here, where every man's hand was
wanted to defend the ladies and children, my hand was paralyzed;
that whatever I may be at other times, in the hour of battle I
fail hopelessly; nothing that I can do can wipe out, from my own
consciousness, that disgrace."

"You exaggerate it altogether, Bathurst," Wilson broke in hotly. "It is
nonsense your talking like that, after the way you jumped down into the
middle of them with that mace of yours. It was splendid."

"More than that, Mr. Bathurst," Mrs. Doolan said, "I think we women know
what true courage is; and there is not one of us but has, since this
siege began, been helped and strengthened by your calmness--not one but
has reason to be grateful for your kindness to our children during this
terrible time. I won't hear even you speak against yourself."

"Then I will not do so, Mrs. Doolan," he said, with a grave smile. "And
now I will go and sit with the Major for a time. Things are quieter
tonight than they have been for some time past, and I trust he will get
some sleep."

So saying, he quietly left the room.

"I don't believe he has slept two hours at a time since the siege
began," Mrs. Doolan said, with tears in her eyes. "We have all
suffered--God only knows what we have suffered!--but I am sure that he
has suffered more than any of us. As for you men, you may well say you
are sorry and ashamed of your treatment of him. Coward, indeed! Mr.
Bathurst may be nervous, but I am sure he has as much courage as anyone
here. Come, Isobel, you were up all last night, and it's past two
o'clock now. We must try to get a little sleep before morning, and I
should advise everyone else off duty to do the same."

At daybreak firing commenced, and was kept up energetically all the
morning. At two o'clock a white flag was hoisted from the terrace, and
its appearance was greeted with shouts of triumph by the assailants. The
firing at once ceased, and in a few minutes a native officer carrying a
white flag advanced towards the walls.

"We wish to see the Zemindar Por Sing," Bathurst said, "to treat with
him upon the subject of our surrender."

The officer withdrew, and returned in half an hour saying that he would
conduct the officer in command to the presence of the chief of the
besieging force. Captain Doolan, therefore, accompanied by Bathurst and
Dr. Wade, went out. They were conducted to the great tent where all
the Zemindars and the principal officers of the Sepoys were assembled.
Bathurst acted as spokesman.

"Por Sing," he said, "and you Zemindars of Oude, Major Hannay being
disabled, Captain Doolan, who is now in command of the garrison,
has come to represent him and to offer to surrender to you under the
