must be grand like a giant, so that he may live up to the wonderful
name you have given him. Mother, it will be very hard, but I promise,
I promise with all my might, to do everything you want me to do. I
will act just as if you were there and could see, mother, and I will
_always_ remember that it is beautiful for you to have gone away, for
while you were here you had so much pain and so much illness. I won't
fret, mother; no, I won't fret--I promise to be a mother to the
others, and there won't be any time to fret."

No tears came to Iris' bright eyes, but her little thin face grew
paler and paler. Presently she left the window and went slowly
downstairs again.

Fortune had now left the other children to themselves. They were
scattered about the bright day nursery, looking miserable, though they
could scarcely tell why.

"I don't believe a bit that mother is never coming back," said Orion,
in a stout, determined voice.

He was a very handsome little fellow, strongly made--he had great big
black eyes like his father's. He was standing now with his Noah's ark
in his hand.

"It is unfeeling of you to want to play with your Noah's ark to-day,
Orion," said Apollo. "Now, do you think I would go into my laboratory
and try to make a thermometer?"

"Well, at least," said Diana, speaking with a sort of jerk, and her
small face turning crimson, "whatever happens, the animals must be
fed."

"Of course they must, Diana," said Iris, coming forward, "and, Apollo,
there is not the least harm in our going into the garden, and I don't
think there is any harm in Orion playing with his Noah's ark. Come,
children; come with me. We will feed all the pets and then go into the
arbor, and, if you like, I will tell you stories."

"What sort of stories?" asked Diana, in quite a cheerful voice. She
trotted up to her sister, and gave her her hand as she spoke. She also
was a finely made child, not unlike her name.

"I 'gree with Orion," she said. "I'm quite certain sure that mother is
coming back 'fore long. Fortune did talk nonsense. She said, Iris--do
you know what she said?--she said that in the middle of the night,
just when it was black dark, you know, a white angel came into the
room and took mother in his arms and flew up to the sky with her. You
don't believe that; do you, Iris?"

"Yes, I do, Diana," answered Iris. "But I will tell you more about it
in the arbor. Come, Apollo; mother would not like us to stay in the
house just because she has gone away to the angels. Mother never was
the least little bit selfish. Come into the garden."

The three forlorn-looking little children were much comforted by Iris'
brave words. They dried their eyes, and Diana ran into the night
nursery to fetch their hats. They then ran downstairs without anyone
specially noticing them, passed through the great entrance hall, and
out on to the wide gravel sweep, which led by a side walk into the
lovely garden.

Iris held Diana by one hand and Orion by the other, and Apollo ran on
in front.

"Now, then," said Iris, when they had reached the garden, "we must
begin by feeding all the pets."

"There _are_ an awful lot of them," said Diana, in quite a cheerful
voice; "and don't you remember, Iris, the poor innocent was not buried
yesterday?"

Iris could not help giving a little shiver.

"No more it was," she said, in a low tone. "It must have quite a
private funeral. Please get some dock leaves, Apollo."

"Yes," answered Apollo.

He ran off, returning with a bunch in a moment or two.

"Take them into the dead-house," said Iris, "and sew them up and put
the poor innocent inside, and then take your spade and dig a hole in
the cemetery. We can't have a public funeral. I--I don't feel up to
it," she added, her lips trembling for the first time.

Diana nestled close up to Iris.

"You need not look sad, Iris," she said; "there's no cause, is there?
I don't believe that story 'bout mother, and if it is not true
there'll be nothing wrong in my laughing, will there?"

"You may laugh if you like, darling," answered Iris.

They all entered the arbor now, and Iris seated herself in the little
chair which mother had seen father make, and round which the beautiful
flowers of the iris had been carved.

"Laugh, Di," she said again; "I know mother won't mind."

For a full moment Diana stood silent, staring at her sister; then her
big black eyes, which had been full of the deepest gloom, brightened.
A butterfly passed the entrance to the summer-house, and Diana flew
after it, chasing it with a loud shout and a gay, hearty fit of
laughter.

Apollo came back with the stray cat, whose name was "Trust," in his
arms.

"She looks miserable, poor thing," he said. "I don't believe she has
had anything to eat to-day. She must have her breakfast, as usual;
must she not, Iris?"

"Yes; we must feed all the pets," said Iris, making a great effort to
brighten up. "Let us go regularly to work, all of us. Apollo, will you
take the birds? You may as well clean out their cages--they are sure
to want it. I will collect flies for the green frogs, and Orion, you
may pick mulberry leaves for the silk-worms."

For the next hour the children were busily employed. No one missed
them in the house. The house was full of shade, but the garden,
although mother had left it forever, was quite bright; the sun shone
as brilliantly as it did every other day; a great many fresh flowers
had come out; there was a very sweet smell from the opening roses, and
in especial the Scotch roses, white and red, made a waft of delicious
perfume as the children ran up and down.

"I'm awfully hungry," said Diana suddenly.

"But we won't go into the house for lunch to-day," said Iris. "Let us
have a fruit lunch--I think mother would like us to have a fruit lunch
just for to-day. Please, Apollo, go into the other garden and pick
some of the ripest strawberries. There were a great many ripe
yesterday, and there are sure to be more to-day. Bring a big leaf
full, and we can eat them in the summer-house."

Apollo ran off at once. He brought back a good large leaf of
strawberries, and Iris divided them into four portions. Diana and
Orion, seated on their little chairs, ate theirs with much gusto, and
just as happily as if mother had not gone away; but as to Iris,
notwithstanding her brave words and her determination not to think of
herself, the strawberries tasted like wood in her mouth. There was
also a great lump in her throat, and a feeling of depression was
making itself felt more and more, moment by moment.

Apollo sat down beside his sister, and glanced from time to time into
her face.

"I cannot think why I don't _really_ care for the strawberries
to-day," he said suddenly. "I--" His lips trembled. "Iris," he said,
gazing harder than ever at his sister, "you have got such a queer look
on your face.

"Don't notice it, please, Apollo," answered Iris.

"I wish you would cry," said the boy. "When Fortune came in and told
us the--the dreadful news, we all cried and we kissed her, and she
cried and she said she was sorry she had ever been unkind to us; but I
remember, Iris, you did not shed one tear, and you--you always seemed
to love mother the best of us all."

"And I love her still the best," said Iris, in a soft voice; "but,
Apollo, I have something else to do." And then she added, lowering her
tones, "You know, I can't be sorry about mother herself. I can only be
glad about her."

"Glad about mother! Glad that she is dead!" said the boy.

"Oh, I don't think about that part," said Iris. "She is not dead--not
really. She is only away up above the stars and the blue sky, and she
will never have any more suffering, and she will always be as happy as
happy can be, and sometime or other, Apollo, I think she will be able
to come back; and, if she can, I am sure she will. Yes, I am quite
sure she will."

"If she comes back we shall see her," said Apollo; "but she can't come
back, Iris. Dead people can't come back."

"Oh, please, don't call her that," said Iris, with a note of great
pain in her voice.

"But Fortune says that mother is dead, just like anybody else, and in
a few days she will be put into the ground. Oh, Iris! I am frightened
when I think of it. Mother was so lovely, and to think of their
putting her into the ground in a box just like--like we put the poor
innocent and the other creatures, and if that is the case she can
never come back--never, never, never!"

The little boy buried his black head of curling hair on his sister's
knee, and gave vent to a great burst of tears.

"But it is not true, Apollo," said Iris. "I mean in one way it is not
true--I can't explain it, but I know. Let us forget all the dark,
dreadful part--let us think of her, the real mother, the mother that
looked at us out of her beautiful eyes; she is not dead, she has only
gone away, and she wants us all to be good, so that we may join her
some day. She called me after the rainbow, and after the messenger of
the gods; and you, Apollo, after the bravest and the most beautiful
boy that was supposed ever to live; and Diana, too, was called after a
great Greek goddess; and Orion after the most lovely star in all the
world. Oh, surely we four little children ought to try to be great,
and good, and brave, if we are ever to meet our mother again!"

"Well, it is all very puzzling," said Apollo, "and I can't understand
things the way you can, Iris, and I have an awful ache in my throat. I
am hungry, and yet I am not hungry. I love strawberries as a rule, but
I hate them to-day. If only father would come and talk to us it would
not be quite so bad; but Fortune said we were not to go to him, that
he was shut up in his study, and that he was very unhappy. She said
that he felt it all dreadfully about mother."

"Iris," said Diana's voice at that moment, "we are not surely to have
any lessons to-day?"

She had come to the door of the summer-house, and was looking in.

"Lessons?" said Iris. She put up her hand to her forehead in a dazed
manner.

"Yes; do be quick and say. Miss Stevenson is coming down the garden
path. I do think that on the very day when mother has gone away it
would be hard if we were to have lessons; and if what you say is true,
Iris, and mother is happy, why, it does not seem fair; does it? We
ought to have a whole holiday to-day, ought we not? Just as if it was
a birthday, you know."

"I think so too," said Orion, with a shout. "I don't think we need be
bothered with old Stevie to-day." He raised his voice, and ran to meet
her. "You are not to give us any lessons to-day, Stevie," he said. "It
is a holiday, a great, _big_ holiday--it is a sort of birthday. We
were all eating strawberries, for Iris said we were not to go back to
the house."

"Oh, my poor, dear, little boy!" said Miss Stevenson. She was a
kind-hearted, although old-fashioned, governess. She bent down now and
kissed Orion, and tried to take one of his very dirty little hands in
hers.

"My dear little children--" she began again.

"Please, Miss Stevenson, don't pity us," said Iris.

Miss Stevenson started.

"My dear Iris," she said, "you don't realize what it means."

"I do," answered Iris stoutly.

"And I know what Iris means," said Apollo; "I know quite well. I feel
miserable; I have got a pain in my throat, and I cannot eat my
strawberries; but Iris says we ought not fret, for mother is much
better off."

"Then, if mother is much better off, we ought to have a holiday, same
as if it was a birthday; ought we not, Miss Stevenson?" said Diana,
puckering up her face and looking, with her keen black eyes, full at
her governess.

"You poor little innocents, what is to become of you all?" said Miss
Stevenson.

She entered the summer-house as she spoke, sank down on the nearest
chair, and burst into tears. The four children surrounded her. They
none of them felt inclined to cry at that moment. Orion, after staring
at her for some little time, gave her a sharp little tap on her arm.

"What are you crying about?" he said. "Don't you think you are rather
stupid?"

"You poor innocents!" said Miss Stevenson.

"Please don't call us that," said Diana; "that is our name for the
worms. Worms can't see, you know, and they are not to blame for being
only worms, and sometimes they get trodden on; and Iris thought we
might call them innocents, and we have always done so since she gave
us leave; but we would rather not be called by _quite_ the same name."

Miss Stevenson hastily dried her eyes.

"You certainly are the most extraordinary little creatures," she said.
"Don't you feel anything?"

"It would be horrid selfish to be sorry," said Diana "Iris says that
mother is awfully happy now."

Miss Stevenson stared at the children as if they were bewitched.

"And we are _not_ to have lessons, Stevie," said Orion; "that's
settled, isn't it?"

"Oh, my dear little child! I was not thinking of your lessons. It is
your terrible--your terrible loss that fills my mind; that and your
want of understanding. Iris, you are ten years old; I am surprised at
you."

Iris stood, looking very grave and silent, a step or two away.

"Please, Miss Stevenson," she said, after a long pause, "don't try to
understand us, for I am afraid it would be of no use. Mother talked to
me yesterday, and I know quite what to do. Mother asked me to be a
mother to the others, so I have no time to cry, nor to think of myself
at all. If you will give us a holiday to-day, will you please go away
and let us stay together, for I think I can manage the others if I am
all alone with them?"

Miss Stevenson rose hastily.

"I thought you would all have been overwhelmed," she said. "I thought
if ever children loved their mother you four did. Oh! how stunned I
feel! Yes, I will certainly go--I don't profess to understand any of
you."




CHAPTER III.

THE ARRIVAL OF THE AUNT.


About a week after the events related in the last chapter, on a
