with oak and beech and maple, and elms of great size. Nearer the house
he came to the cedars and clipped pines, like those surrounding his
mother's own home.

He opened the iron gate that led to the house, and tied his horse
inside. Here was the same desolation and silence that he had beheld at
his own home. The grass on the lawn, although withered and dry from the
intense drought that had prevailed in Kentucky that summer, was long and
showed signs of neglect. The great stone pillars of the portico, from
the shelter of which Harry and his father and their friends had fought
Skelly and his mountaineers, were stained, and around their bases were
dirty from the sand and earth blown against them. The lawn and even the
portico were littered with autumn leaves.

Dick felt the chill settling down on him again. War, not war with
armies, but war in its results, had swept over his uncle's home as truly
as it had swept over his mother's. There was no sign of a human being.
Doubtless the colored servants had fled to the Union armies, and to the
freedom which they as yet knew so little how to use. He felt a sudden
access of anger against them, because they had deserted a master so kind
and just, forgetting, for the moment that he was fighting to free them
from that very master.

All the windows were dark, but he walked upon the portico and the dry
autumn leaves rustled under his feet. He would have turned away, but
he noticed that the front door stood ajar six or eight inches. The fact
amazed him. If a servant was about, he would not leave it open, and if
robbers were in the house, they would close it in order not to attract
attention. It was a great door of massive and magnificent oak, highly
polished, with heavy bands of glittering bronze running across it. But
it was so lightly poised on its hinges, that, despite its great weight,
a child could have swung it back and forth with his little finger.
Henry Ware, who built the house after his term as governor was over, was
always proud of this door.

Dick ran his hand along one of the polished bronze bars as he had often
done when he was a boy, enjoying the cool touch of the metal. Then
he put his thumb against the edge of the door, and pushed it a little
further open. Something was wrong here, and he meant to see what it was.
He had no scruples about entering. He did not consider himself in the
least an intruder. This was his uncle's house, and his uncle and his
cousin were far away.

The door made no sound as it swung back, and soundless, too, was Dick as
he stepped within. It was dark in the big hall, but as he stood there,
listening, he became conscious of a light. It proceeded from one of the
rooms opening into the hall on the right, and a door nearly closed only
allowed a narrow band of it to fall upon the hall floor.

Dick, believing now that a robber had indeed come, drew a pistol from
his pocket, stepped lightly across the hall and looked in at the door.

He checked a cry, and it was his first thought to go away as quietly as
he had come. He had seen a man in the uniform of a Confederate colonel,
sitting in a chair, and staring out at one of the little side windows
which Dick could not see from the front, and which was now open. It was
his own uncle, Colonel George Kenton, C. S. A., his gold braided cap on
the window sill, and his sword in its scabbard lying across his knees.

But Dick changed his mind. His uncle was a colonel on one side, and he
was a lieutenant on the other, and from one point of view it was almost
high treason for them to meet there and talk quietly together, but from
another it was the most natural thing in the world, commanded alike by
duty and affection.

He pushed open the door a little further and stepped inside.

"Uncle George," he said.

Colonel Kenton sprang to his feet, and his sword clattered upon the
floor.

"Good God!" he cried. "You, Dick! Here! To-night!"

"Yes, Uncle George, it's no other."

"And I suppose you have Yankees without to take me."

"Those are hard words, sir, and you don't mean them. I'm all alone, just
as you were. I galloped south, sir, to see my mother, whom I found gone,
where, I don't know, and then I couldn't resist the temptation to come
by here and see your house and Harry's, which, as you know, sir, has
been almost a home to me, too."

"Thank God you came, Dick," said the colonel putting his arms around
Dick's shoulders, and giving him an affectionate hug. "You were right. I
did not mean what I said. There is only one other in the world whom I'd
rather see than you. Dick, I didn't know whether you were dead or alive,
until I saw your face there in the doorway."

It was obvious to Dick that his uncle's emotions were deeply stirred.
He felt the strong hands upon his shoulders trembling, but the veteran
soldier soon steadied his nerves, and asked Dick to sit down in a chair
which he drew close beside his own at the window.

"I thank God again that the notion took you to come by the house," he
said. "It's pleasant and cool here at the window, isn't it, Dick, boy?"

Dick knew that he was thinking nothing about the window and the pleasant
coolness of the night. He knew equally well the question that was
trembling on his lips but which he could not muster the courage to ask.
But he had one of his own to ask first.

"My mother?" he asked. "Do you know where she has gone?"

"Yes, Dick, I came here in secret, but I've seen two men, Judge Kendrick
and Dr. Russell. The armies are passing so close to this place, and the
guerillas from the mountains have become so troublesome, that she has
gone to Danville to stay a while with her relatives. Nearly everybody
else has gone, too. That's why the town is so silent. There were not
many left anyway, except old people and children. But, Dick, I have
ridden as far as you have to-night, and I came to ask a question which
I thought Judge Kendrick or Dr. Russell might answer--news of those who
leave a town often comes back to it--but neither of them could tell
me what I wanted to hear. Dick, I have not heard a word of Harry since
spring. His army has fought since then two great battles and many
smaller ones! It was for this, to get some word of him, that I risked
everything in leaving our army to come to Pendleton!"

He turned upon Dick a face distorted with pain and anxiety, and the boy
quickly said:

"Uncle George, I have every reason to believe that Harry is alive and
well."

"What do you know? What have you heard about him?"

"I have not merely heard. I have seen him and talked with him. It was
after the Second Manassas, when we were both with burial parties, and
met on the field. I was at Antietam, and he, of course, was there, too,
as he is with Stonewall Jackson. I did not see him in that battle, but I
learned from a prisoner who knew him that he had escaped unwounded, and
had gone with Lee's army into Virginia."

"I thank God once more, Dick, that you were moved to come by my house.
To know that both Harry and you are alive and well is joy enough for one
man."

"But it is likely, sir, that we'll soon meet in battle," said Dick.

"So it would seem."

And that was all that either said about his army. There was no attempt
to obtain information by direct or indirect methods. This was a family
meeting.

"You have a horse, of course," said Colonel Kenton.

"Yes, sir. He is on the lawn, tied to your fence. His hoofs may now be
in a flower bed."

"It doesn't matter, Dick. People are not thinking much of flower beds
nowadays. My own horse is further down the lawn between the pines, and
as he is an impatient beast it is probable that he has already dug up a
square yard or two of turf with his hoofs. How did you get in, Dick?"

"You forgot about the front door, sir, and left it open six or seven
inches. I thought some plunderer was within and entered, to find you."

"I must have been watched over to-night when forgetfulness was rewarded
so well. Dick, we've found out what we came for and neither should
linger here. Do you need anything?"

"Nothing at all, sir."

"Then we'll go."

Colonel Kenton carefully closed and fastened the window and door again
and the two mounted their horses, which they led into the road.

"Dick," said the colonel, "you and I are on opposing sides, but we can
never be enemies."

Then, after a strong handclasp, they rode away by different roads, each
riding with a lighter heart.




CHAPTER XII. THROUGH THE BLUEGRASS


Dick's horse had had a good rest, and he was fighting for his head
before they were clear of the outskirts of Pendleton. When the road
emerged once more into the deep woods the boy gave him the rein. It was
well past midnight now, and he wished to reach the army before dawn.

Soon the great horse was galloping, and Dick felt exhilaration as the
cool air of early October rushed past. The heat in both east and west
had been so long and intense, that year, that the coming of autumn was
full of tonic. Yet the uncommon dryness, the least rainy summer and
autumn in two generations, still prevailed. The hoofs of Dick's horse
left a cloud of dust behind him. The leaves of the trees were falling
already, rustling dryly as they fell. Brooks that were old friends of
his and that he had never known to go dry before were merely chains of
yellow pools in a shallow bed.

He watered his horse at one or two of the creeks that still flowed in
good volume, and then went on again, sometimes at a gallop. He passed
but one horseman, a farmer who evidently had taken an unusually early
start for a mill, as a sack of corn lay across his saddle behind him.
Dick nodded but the farmer stared open-mouthed at the youth in the blue
uniform who flew past him.

Dick never looked back and by dawn he was with the army. He found
Colonel Winchester taking breakfast under the thin shade of an oak, and
joined him.

"What did you find, Dick?" asked the colonel, striving to hide the note
of anxiety in his voice.

"I found all right at the house, but I did not see mother."

"What had become of her?"

"I learned from a friend that in order to be out of the path of the army
or of prowling bands she had gone to relatives of ours in Danville. Then
I came away."

"She did well," said Colonel Winchester. "The rebels are concentrating
about Lexington, but the battle, I think, will take place far south of
that city."

Before the day was old they heard news that changed their opinion
for the time at least. A scout brought news that a division of the
Confederate army was much nearer than Lexington; in fact, that it was
at Frankfort, the capital of the state. And the news was heightened in
interest by the statement that the division was there to assist in the
inauguration of a Confederate government of the state, so little of
which the Confederate army held.

Colonel Winchester at once applied to General Buell for permission for
a few officers like himself, natives of Kentucky and familiar with the
region, to ride forward and see what the enemy was really doing. Dick
was present at the interview and it was characteristic.

"If you leave, what of your regiment, Colonel Winchester?" said General
Buell.

"I shall certainly rejoin it in time for battle."

"Suppose the enemy should prevent you?"

"He cannot do so."

"I remember you at Shiloh. You did good work there."

"Thank you, sir."

"And this lad, Lieutenant Mason, he has also done well. But he is
young."

"I can vouch for him, sir."

"Then take twenty of your bravest and most intelligent men and ride
toward Frankfort. It may be that we shall have to take a part in this
inauguration, which I hear is scheduled for to-morrow."

"It may be so, sir," said Colonel Winchester, returning General Buell's
grim smile. Then he and Dick saluted and withdrew.

But it did not take the colonel long to make his preparations. Among his
twenty men all were natives of Kentucky except Warner, Pennington
and Sergeant Whitley. Two were from Frankfort itself, and they were
confident that they could approach through the hills with comparative
security, the little capital nestling in its little valley.

They rode rapidly and by nightfall drew near to the rough Benson Hills,
which suddenly shooting up in a beautiful rolling country, hem in the
capital. Although it was now the third day of October the little
party marked anew the extreme dryness and the shrunken condition of
everything. It was all the more remarkable as no region in the world is
better watered than Kentucky, with many great rivers, more small ones,
and innumerable creeks and brooks. There are few points in the state
where a man can be more than a mile from running water.

The dryness impressed Dick. They had dust here, as they had had it in
Virginia, but there it was trampled up by great armies. Here it was
raised by their own little party, and as the October winds swept across
the dry fields it filled their eyes with particles. Yet it was one of
the finest regions of the world, underlaid with vitalizing limestone,
a land where the grass grows thick and long and does not die even in
winter.

"If one were superstitious," said Dick, "he could think it was a
punishment sent upon us all for fighting so much, and for killing so
many men about questions that lots of us don't understand, and that at
least could have been settled in some other way."

"It's easy enough to imagine it so," said Warner in his precise way,
"but after all, despite the reasons against it, here we are fighting and
killing one another with a persistence that has never been surpassed.
It's a perfectly simple question in mathematics. Let x equal the anger
of the South, let y equal the anger of the North, let 10 equal the
percentage of reason, 100, of course, being the whole, then you have x +
y + 10 equalling 100. The anger of the two sections is consequently x +
y, equalling 100 - 10, or 90. When anger constitutes 90 per cent., what
chance has reason, which is only 10 per cent., or one-ninth of anger?"

"No chance at all," replied Dick. "That has already been proved without
the aid of algebra. Here is a man in a cornfield signaling to us. I
wonder what he wants?"

As Dick spoke, Colonel Winchester, who had already noticed the man, gave
an order to stop. The stranger, bent and knotted by hard work on the
farm, hurried toward them. He leaned against the fence a moment, gasping
for breath, and then said:

"You're Union men, ain't you? It's no disguise?"

"Yes," replied Colonel Winchester, "we're Union men, and it's no
disguise that we're wearing, Malachi White. I've seen you several times
in Frankfort, selling hay."

The farmer, who had climbed upon the fence and who was sitting on the
top rail, hands on his knees, stared at him open-mouthed.

"You've got my name right. Malachi White it is," he said, "suah enough,
but I don't know yours. 'Pears to me, however, that they's somethin'
familiar about you. Mebbe it's the way you throw back your shoulders an'
look a fellow squah in the eyes."

Colonel Winchester smiled. No man is insensible to a compliment which is
obviously spontaneous.

"I spent a night once at your house, Mr. White," he said. "I was going
to Frankfort on horseback. I was overtaken at dusk by a storm and I
reached your place just in time. I remember that I slept on a mighty
soft feather bed, and ate a splendid breakfast in the morning."

Malachi White was not insensible to compliments either. He smiled, and
the smile which merely showed his middle front teeth at first, gradually
broadened until it showed all of them. Then it rippled and stretched in
little waves, until it stopped somewhere near his ears. Dick regarded
him with delight. It was the broadest and finest smile that he had seen
in many a long month.

"Now I know you," said Malachi White, looking intently at the colonel.
"I ain't as strong on faces as some people, though I reckon I'm right
strong on 'em, too, but I'm pow'ful strong on recollectin' hear'in',
that is, the voice and the trick of it. It was fo' yea's ago when you
stopped at my house. You had a curious trick of pronouncin' r's when
