He sat down on the grass and began to smoke. We asked him questions
about himself, and he told us many of his secret sorrows--especially
about there being no work nowadays for an honest man. At last he dropped
asleep in the middle of a story about a vestry he worked for that hadn't
acted fair and square by him like he had by them, or it (I don't know if
vestry is singular or plural), and we went home. But before we went we
held a hurried council and collected what money we could from the little
we had with us (it was ninepence-halfpenny), and wrapped it in an old
envelope Dicky had in his pocket and put it gently on the billowing
middle of the poor tramp's sleeping waistcoat, so that he would find
it when he woke. None of the dogs said a single syllable while we were
doing this, so we knew they believed him to be poor but honest, and we
always find it safe to take their word for things like that.

As we went home a brooding silence fell upon us; we found out afterwards
that those words of the poor tramp's about free drinks had sunk deep in
all our hearts, and rankled there.

After dinner we went out and sat with our feet in the stream. People
tell you it makes your grub disagree with you to do this just after
meals, but it never hurts us. There is a fallen willow across the stream
that just seats the eight of us, only the ones at the end can't get
their feet into the water properly because of the bushes, so we keep
changing places. We had got some liquorice root to chew. This helps
thought. Dora broke a peaceful silence with this speech--

'Free drinks.'

The words awoke a response in every breast.

'I wonder someone doesn't,' H. O. said, leaning back till he nearly
toppled in, and was only saved by Oswald and Alice at their own deadly
peril.

'Do for goodness sake sit still, H. O.,' observed Alice. 'It would be a
glorious act! I wish WE could.'

'What, sit still?' asked H. O.

'No, my child,' replied Oswald, 'most of us can do that when we try.
Your angel sister was only wishing to set up free drinks for the poor
and thirsty.'

'Not for all of them,' Alice said, 'just a few. Change places now,
Dicky. My feet aren't properly wet at all.'

It is very difficult to change places safely on the willow. The changers
have to crawl over the laps of the others, while the rest sit tight and
hold on for all they're worth. But the hard task was accomplished and
then Alice went on--

'And we couldn't do it for always, only a day or two--just while our
money held out. Eiffel Tower lemonade's the best, and you get a jolly
lot of it for your money too. There must be a great many sincerely
thirsty persons go along the Dover Road every day.'

'It wouldn't be bad. We've got a little chink between us,' said Oswald.

'And then think how the poor grateful creatures would linger and tell us
about their inmost sorrows. It would be most frightfully interesting.
We could write all their agonied life histories down afterwards like All
the Year Round Christmas numbers. Oh, do let's!'

Alice was wriggling so with earnestness that Dicky thumped her to make
her calm.

'We might do it, just for one day,' Oswald said, 'but it wouldn't be
much--only a drop in the ocean compared with the enormous dryness of all
the people in the whole world. Still, every little helps, as the mermaid
said when she cried into the sea.'

'I know a piece of poetry about that,' Denny said.


          'Small things are best.
          Care and unrest
          To wealth and rank are given,
          But little things
          On little wings--

do something or other, I forget what, but it means the same as Oswald
was saying about the mermaid.'

'What are you going to call it?' asked Noel, coming out of a dream.

'Call what?'

'The Free Drinks game.'

          'It's a horrid shame
          If the Free Drinks game
          Doesn't have a name.
          You would be to blame
          If anyone came
          And--'

'Oh, shut up!' remarked Dicky. 'You've been making that rot up all the
time we've been talking instead of listening properly.' Dicky hates
poetry. I don't mind it so very much myself, especially Macaulay's and
Kipling's and Noel's.

'There was a lot more--"lame" and "dame" and "name" and "game" and
things--and now I've forgotten it,' Noel said in gloom.

'Never mind,' Alice answered, 'it'll come back to you in the silent
watches of the night; you see if it doesn't. But really, Noel's right,
it OUGHT to have a name.'

'Free Drinks Company.' 'Thirsty Travellers' Rest.' 'The Travellers'
joy.'

These names were suggested, but not cared for extra.

Then someone said--I think it was Oswald--'Why not "The House
Beautiful"?'

'It can't be a house, it must be in the road. It'll only be a stall.'

'The "Stall Beautiful" is simply silly,' Oswald said.

'The "Bar Beautiful" then,' said Dicky, who knows what the 'Rose and
Crown' bar is like inside, which of course is hidden from girls.

'Oh, wait a minute,' cried the Dentist, snapping his fingers like
he always does when he is trying to remember things. 'I thought of
something, only Daisy tickled me and it's gone--I know--let's call it
the Benevolent Bar!'

It was exactly right, and told the whole truth in two words.
'Benevolent' showed it was free and 'Bar' showed what was free; e.g.
things to drink. The 'Benevolent Bar' it was.

We went home at once to prepare for the morrow, for of course we meant
to do it the very next day. Procrastination is you know what--and delays
are dangerous. If we had waited long we might have happened to spend our
money on something else.

The utmost secrecy had to be observed, because Mrs Pettigrew hates
tramps. Most people do who keep fowls. Albert's uncle was in London till
the next evening, so we could not consult him, but we know he is always
chock full of intelligent sympathy with the poor and needy.

Acting with the deepest disguise, we made an awning to cover the
Benevolent Bar keepers from the searching rays of the monarch of the
skies. We found some old striped sun-blinds in the attic, and the girls
sewed them together. They were not very big when they were done, so we
added the girls' striped petticoats. I am sorry their petticoats turn
up so constantly in my narrative, but they really are very useful,
especially when the band is cut off. The girls borrowed Mrs Pettigrew's
sewing-machine; they could not ask her leave without explanations, which
we did not wish to give just then, and she had lent it to them before.
They took it into the cellar to work it, so that she should not hear the
noise and ask bothering questions.

They had to balance it on one end of the beer-stand. It was not easy.
While they were doing the sewing we boys went out and got willow poles
and chopped the twigs off, and got ready as well as we could to put up
the awning.

When we returned a detachment of us went down to the shop in the village
for Eiffel Tower lemonade. We bought seven-and-sixpence worth; then we
made a great label to say what the bar was for. Then there was nothing
else to do except to make rosettes out of a blue sash of Daisy's to show
we belonged to the Benevolent Bar.

The next day was as hot as ever. We rose early from our innocent
slumbers, and went out to the Dover Road to the spot we had marked down
the day before. It was at a cross-roads, so as to be able to give drinks
to as many people as possible.

We hid the awning and poles behind the hedge and went home to brekker.

After break we got the big zinc bath they wash clothes in, and after
filling it with clean water we just had to empty it again because it was
too heavy to lift. So we carried it vacant to the trysting-spot and left
H. O. and Noel to guard it while we went and fetched separate pails of
water; very heavy work, and no one who wasn't really benevolent would
have bothered about it for an instant. Oswald alone carried three pails.
So did Dicky and the Dentist. Then we rolled down some empty barrels
and stood up three of them by the roadside, and put planks on them.
This made a very first-class table, and we covered it with the best
tablecloth we could find in the linen cupboard. We brought out several
glasses and some teacups--not the best ones, Oswald was firm about
that--and the kettle and spirit-lamp and the tea-pot, in case any weary
tramp-woman fancied a cup of tea instead of Eiffel Tower. H. O. and Noel
had to go down to the shop for tea; they need not have grumbled; they
had not carried any of the water. And their having to go the second time
was only because we forgot to tell them to get some real lemons to put
on the bar to show what the drink would be like when you got it. The man
at the shop kindly gave us tick for the lemons, and we cashed up out of
our next week's pocket-money.

Two or three people passed while we were getting things ready, but
no one said anything except the man who said, 'Bloomin' Sunday-school
treat', and as it was too early in the day for anyone to be thirsty we
did not stop the wayfarers to tell them their thirst could be slaked
without cost at our Benevolent Bar.

But when everything was quite ready, and our blue rosettes fastened on
our breasts over our benevolent hearts, we stuck up the great placard we
had made with 'Benevolent Bar. Free Drinks to all Weary Travellers', in
white wadding on red calico, like Christmas decorations in church. We
had meant to fasten this to the edge of the awning, but we had to pin
it to the front of the tablecloth, because I am sorry to say the awning
went wrong from the first. We could not drive the willow poles into the
road; it was much too hard. And in the ditch it was too soft, besides
being no use. So we had just to cover our benevolent heads with our
hats, and take it in turns to go into the shadow of the tree on the
other side of the road. For we had pitched our table on the sunny side
of the way, of course, relying on our broken-reed-like awning, and
wishing to give it a fair chance.

Everything looked very nice, and we longed to see somebody really
miserable come along so as to be able to allieve their distress.

A man and woman were the first: they stopped and stared, but when Alice
said, 'Free drinks! Free drinks! Aren't you thirsty?' they said, 'No
thank you,' and went on. Then came a person from the village--he didn't
even say 'Thank you' when we asked him, and Oswald began to fear it
might be like the awful time when we wandered about on Christmas Day
trying to find poor persons and persuade them to eat our Conscience
pudding.

But a man in a blue jersey and a red bundle eased Oswald's fears by
being willing to drink a glass of lemonade, and even to say, 'Thank you,
I'm sure' quite nicely.

After that it was better. As we had foreseen, there were plenty of
thirsty people walking along the Dover Road, and even some from the
cross-road.

We had had the pleasure of seeing nineteen tumblers drained to the dregs
ere we tasted any ourselves. Nobody asked for tea.

More people went by than we gave lemonade to. Some wouldn't have it
because they were too grand. One man told us he could pay for his own
liquor when he was dry, which, praise be, he wasn't over and above, at
present; and others asked if we hadn't any beer, and when we said 'No',
they said it showed what sort we were--as if the sort was not a good
one, which it is.

And another man said, 'Slops again! You never get nothing for nothing,
not this side of heaven you don't. Look at the bloomin' blue ribbon on
'em! Oh, Lor'!' and went on quite sadly without having a drink.

Our Pig-man who helped us on the Tower of Mystery day went by and we
hailed him, and explained it all to him and gave him a drink, and asked
him to call as he came back. He liked it all, and said we were a real
good sort. How different from the man who wanted the beer. Then he went
on.

One thing I didn't like, and that was the way boys began to gather. Of
course we could not refuse to give drinks to any traveller who was old
enough to ask for it, but when one boy had had three glasses of lemonade
and asked for another, Oswald said--

'I think you've had jolly well enough. You can't be really thirsty after
all that lot.'

The boy said, 'Oh, can't I? You'll just see if I can't,' and went away.
Presently he came back with four other boys, all bigger than Oswald; and
they all asked for lemonade. Oswald gave it to the four new ones, but he
was determined in his behaviour to the other one, and wouldn't give him
a drop. Then the five of them went and sat on a gate a little way off
and kept laughing in a nasty way, and whenever a boy went by they called
out--

'I say, 'ere's a go,' and as often as not the new boy would hang about
with them. It was disquieting, for though they had nearly all had
lemonade we could see it had not made them friendly.

A great glorious glow of goodness gladdened (those go all together and
are called alliteration) our hearts when we saw our own tramp coming
down the road. The dogs did not growl at him as they had at the boys or
the beer-man. (I did not say before that we had the dogs with us, but
of course we had, because we had promised never to go out without them.)
Oswald said, 'Hullo,' and the tramp said, 'Hullo.' Then Alice said, 'You
see we've taken your advice; we're giving free drinks. Doesn't it all
look nice?'

'It does that,' said the tramp. 'I don't mind if I do.'

So we gave him two glasses of lemonade succeedingly, and thanked him
for giving us the idea. He said we were very welcome, and if we'd no
objection he'd sit down a bit and put on a pipe. He did, and after
talking a little more he fell asleep. Drinking anything seemed to end in
sleep with him. I always thought it was only beer and things made people
sleepy, but he was not so. When he was asleep he rolled into the ditch,
but it did not wake him up.

The boys were getting very noisy, and they began to shout things, and to
make silly noises with their mouths, and when Oswald and Dicky went over
to them and told them to just chuck it, they were worse than ever.
I think perhaps Oswald and Dicky might have fought and settled
them--though there were eleven, yet back to back you can always do it
against overwhelming numbers in a book--only Alice called out--

'Oswald, here's some more, come back!'

We went. Three big men were coming down the road, very red and hot, and
not amiable-looking. They stopped in front of the Benevolent Bar and
slowly read the wadding and red-stuff label.

Then one of them said he was blessed, or something like that, and
another said he was too. The third one said, 'Blessed or not, a drink's
a drink. Blue ribbon, though, by ----' (a word you ought not to say,
though it is in the Bible and the catechism as well). 'Let's have a
liquor, little missy.'

The dogs were growling, but Oswald thought it best not to take any
notice of what the dogs said, but to give these men each a drink. So he
did. They drank, but not as if they cared about it very much, and then
they set their glasses down on the table, a liberty no one else had
