
'Part of it has gone off in gas,' their father said. 'The rest is lime,
and it is mixed with the vinegar.'

4. 'We did not see any gas,' said Harry.

'You can't see gas. It is like air. All those bubbles were made by the
gas. It went out of the cup into the air.

'Now, get a cup of water. Come along! Where is your chalk?'

5. Father rubbed some of it into the water, and stirred it up. The water
now looked like milk.

Father poured it into the sink, and showed Harry and Dora, at the bottom
of the cup, a great many tiny grains.

6. 'Those little round things,' he said, 'are shells.'

'Shells!' said Dora, trying to see them better.

'Were live things ever in them?' asked Harry, and put a finger into the
cup to fish some out.

7. 'Yes, long, long ago. That bit of chalk had hundreds and hundreds of
shells in it. Now, mother, it is your turn! I have had mine. What do you
know about chalk?'

8. Mother smiled and began: 'There was once a very deep sea, full of
live things, little and big. And on the top of the water were crowds of
tiny things in shells, that put out long arms like threads to catch
their food.

9. 'When they died they all dropped to the bottom of the sea, and lay
there. The shells were so very little that they made a sort of mud when
they were mixed with the water.

'And now the mud is dry, and we call it chalk!'




THE MOUSE.


    an'-i-mal
    noise
    mouse
    cheese
    har'-vest
    stalk
    should
    four
    tail
    nib'-ble
    young
    beasts
    squeak
    hours
    leaves
    catch

1. Harry came running in one day to say that he had seen a little animal
in the field.

2. 'It ran so fast, I could hardly see it. I looked a long time for it,
and so did Dora, but we could not find it. Now, what do you think it
could be, mother?'

[Illustration]

3. Then in came Dora, 'It had a long tail, and was very little, and made
no noise at all.'

4. 'It may have been a mouse,' said their mother; 'very likely it was.'

'But mice live indoors, do they not, and eat cheese, and run about in
the walls, and make holes?'

5. 'How do you know all this?'

'I have heard them at grandmother's,' said Harry. 'Do they ever live out
of doors?'

6. 'A good many do. There is a pretty little thing called a
harvest-mouse. It makes a nest like a bird's, and hangs it up on a stalk
of wheat.'

[Illustration: The Harvest Mouse and Nest.]

7. 'I wish there had been one in our wheat!' said Dora. 'I should like
to see the little nest and the baby-mice peeping out. They must be very,
very small.'

8. 'Yes, the harvest-mouse is the very smallest four-footed animal we
have. Then there is a field-mouse with a long tail, and a field-mouse
with a short tail. Mr Short-tail likes to nibble at young trees.'

'Ah, that is not our mouse! He had a long tail.'

9. 'And then there is a wood-mouse.'

'Has he a short tail or long tail?' asked Harry.

'Long. I must tell you about a man who used to go out in the night in
wild places to see what birds and beasts were doing when most of us
were in bed.

10. 'One of the things he found out was that field-mice could sing!'

'Don't they squeak?'

'Yes; and he often heard them go on for hours making a kind of singing.

11. 'Sometimes they were close by him as he lay on the ground, and he
would put out his hand to catch one. But when he opened it again it was
full of grass or moss or leaves; and there was no mouse.'

'Did he never catch one?'

'Never.'




THE FIELD-MOUSE.


    tum'-bles
    ber'-ry
    brown
    mer'-ry
    scarce'-ly
    weath'-er
    nib'-bling
    fruits
    farm'-er
    stacks
    treas'-ure
    pleas'-ure
    reared'
    un-der-neath'
    shad'-ow
    mead'-ow

    1.  Where the acorn tumbles down,
          Where the ash-tree sheds its berry,
        With your fur so soft and brown,
          With your eyes so soft and merry,
        Scarcely moving the long grass,
        Field-mouse, I can see you pass.

    2.  Little thing, in what dark den,
          Lie you all the winter sleeping,
        Till warm weather comes again?
          Then once more I see you peeping
        Round about the tall tree roots,
        Nibbling at their fallen fruits.

    3.  Field-mouse, field-mouse, do not go,
          Where the farmer stacks his treasure;
        Find the nut that falls below,
          Eat the acorn at your pleasure;
        But you must not eat the grain,
        He has reared with so much pain.

    4.  Make your hole where mosses spring,
          Underneath the tall oak's shadow,
        Pretty, quiet, harmless thing,
          Play about the sunny meadow;
        Keep away from corn and house,
        None will harm you, little mouse.

[Illustration]




THE RABBIT.

[Illustration: 'Oh, look at that one going into a hole.']


    moth'-er
    rab'-bits
    dare'-say
    friends
    Sat'-ur-day
    an'-i-mals
    morn'-ing
    beat'-ing
    knock
    fight
    meant
    dan'-ger

1. Harry and Dora were coming home with their mother from a long walk,
when they saw some rabbits playing about on the grass.

2. They wished to stay and watch them, and the three sat down on a log a
little way off.

'Oh, look at that one going into a hole!' said Dora. 'See his funny
tail. Why is he going into a hole?'

3. 'That is his house,' said their mother. 'I daresay he is sleepy and
wants to go to bed.'

'He goes early, then, like the birds?'

'Yes, about sunset. He gets up a little before sunrise.

4. 'There goes another! They will soon all be gone.'

'Then we can look at their houses?'

'Only at their front doors. If you were to sit quite still over there in
the day-time, you would see the rabbits popping in and out.

5. 'After a time they would find out that you were their friends, and
then you would be able to watch their doings.'

6. Then mother told them more about the man who often stayed out all
night to see what animals did. 'One morning, before it was quite light,
he heard a tap-tap near him, and saw a rabbit beating on the ground with
his hind-feet close to another rabbit's hole.

7. 'He saw him go to another hole and tap there, and then to another.
Some holes he passed and did not knock at all.

'At last he had just begun tap-tapping in front of a hole, when out
rushed a big rabbit. They began to fight, and they both rolled down to
the bottom of the hill.

8. 'The man often saw rabbits tapping like this. Sometimes two or three
would come out to speak to the one that tapped, and they seemed to have
a friendly chat.

9. 'There was another sound they could make with their hind-feet. If one
of them made it, the others would run into their holes as fast as they
could. It meant danger.'

'What was it like?' asked Dora.

'_Tap-pat._'




IVY.


    win'-ter
    vase
    changed
    sprays
    be-tween'
    pur'-pose
    um-brel'-la
    mid'-dle
    straight
    veins
    flow'-er
    thick'-er
    thread
    ten'-der
    mouth
    use'-ful

1. Some sprigs of ivy had been standing all the winter in a vase. The
water had often been changed, and the leaves washed.

2. When spring came each spray began to put out buds. The buds were not
all at the ends of the sprays, but came out also close to the old
leaves.

3. At last there was a very small bud between every old leaf and the
stem. When the first bud opened into a leaf, Dora and Harry clapped
their hands, and called every one to look.

4. 'How clean and sweet it is!' cried Dora. 'And do you see something
like wool or hair on it?'

'How curly it is!' said Harry. 'It is not quite open yet. Why, it is
like a hand! All the leaves look rather like hands, don't they? See;
one, two, three, four, five!'

5. 'Look at this old leaf against the light,' said the mother; 'now you
can see the five long fingers. But people call them ribs, not fingers!
They are for the purpose of keeping the leaf spread out.'

6. 'Like the ribs of an umbrella,' said Harry. 'They seem very strong;
the middle one, which goes up straight from the stem, is the strongest
of all.'

[Illustration: Spray of Ivy.]

7. Dora was holding up one spray after another to the light. 'What are
all these pretty marks on the leaves, mother, lines crossing about all
ways?'

'Those are veins, dear. They carry the sap that feeds the leaves.'

8. 'What is sap?'

'The blood of plants and trees.'

'Oh,' said Dora, 'then that is the wet that comes out when I pick a
flower or cut a leaf!

9. 'But look at this!' and she held up one of the sprays.

At the end of it was a little bunch of white, curly roots. Each root was
not much thicker than a thread.

10. 'Don't touch them,' said the mother; 'roots are very tender things.'

'What is the good of them?' asked Dora.

'What is your mouth useful for?' asked her mother.

11. 'Oh, do you mean that the ivy eats and drinks?'

'Yes, that is what I mean. These roots take out of the water, or out of
the earth, all sorts of things good for the food of the plant. They then
send them up into the stem and on into the leaves.'

12. 'Mother,' said Harry, 'let us go and plant all this ivy. I am sure
it wants to try the taste of the earth!'




A TREE.


    rab'-bits
    shoots
    ta'-ble
    spread
    rough
    heard
    birch
    beech
    branch'-es
    caught
    oak
    found

1. 'Let us go over to that log where we sat when we saw the rabbits,'
said Dora to Harry.

2. 'All right! We can play at ship, and the grass shall be the sea.'

'Or we can have see-saw, if we can find some wood to lay across the
log.'

3. They were soon at the log, and on it they sat down, and looked about
them.

The log was the trunk of an old oak, and a little way off stood the
stump, with many new shoots and leaves coming out all round it.

4. Dora went and stood on it, and called out that she was on a hill. She
jumped off and on a few times, and then said it would make a good table,
and they might have tea on it.

5. Harry found that the stump had roots that spread out all round for a
long way.

'How thick and hard they are!' he said; 'come and feel this one!'

[Illustration: It is all marked in rings.]

'It is not like the roots we saw on the ivy,' she said. 'Now look at the
top of the stump. It is all marked in rings.'

6. 'In the very middle there is a little light spot, and then come dark
rings, and then more rings outside. Father once told me these rings
showed how old the trees were. And do you see lines coming away from the
middle?'

7. 'They look like the rays of the sun, which I draw on my slate,' said
Dora. 'What a rough coat this tree had! Come and feel the outside of the
log.'

'That is the bark! I have heard father talk about bark.'

8. 'Well, I shall call it the coat. It is the tree's overcoat to keep
him warm and dry. But trees do not all seem to have rough coats. Look at
that one!' and she ran over to a little birch, and pulled off some of
its thin bark.

9. 'I have found a fine tree!' cried Harry; and Dora came running to
look at it.

[Illustration: Leaves of the Beech and the Oak.]

10. It was a beech, with a great round smooth trunk and long strong
branches. Harry jumped up and caught at a leaf or two, and then went to
pick an oak-leaf. He laid them side by side on his hand and looked at
them, and found they were not at all alike.




BRICKS.


    stopped
    emp'-ty
    mor'-tar
    sound
    trow'-el
    struck
    picked
    size
    teach'-er
    re'-al-ly
    clay
    win'-ter
    breaks
    moulds
    nice'-ly
    ov'-en

1. Two men were making a wall by the road-side, and Harry and Dora
stopped to look at them.

2. Another man was going away with a horse and cart. The cart was empty,
but it had been full of red bricks. The men were putting these bricks on
the wall and making them fast with mortar.

3. Dora liked the sound which the trowel made when it struck against the
wall. Harry picked up one of the bricks and looked at it, and then Dora
must look at one too.

4. They found that the bricks were light and easy to lift. They also
saw that they were all of the same size and shape, as if they had been
made, and not dug out of the ground.

[Illustration]

5. They did not like to ask the men about them, and so they put the
bricks down, and set off on their way home.

6. As they went they met their teacher, who stopped and spoke to them,
so Harry asked her to tell them what bricks really were.

7. 'I wish there were a brick-field near,' she said, 'and then we would
go and see it! But I can tell you a little about it.

8. 'Bricks are made of clay, and clay is dug out of the ground. Men dig
it before winter comes, and let it lie out all the winter, and the frost
breaks it up nicely for them.

9. 'The next thing is to mix it well into a paste, and then it is put
into moulds.'

'What are moulds?' Harry asked.

'Well, these moulds are like boxes with no bottom or top.'

'Only sides, then?' said Dora.

10. 'Yes, they have two long sides, and two short ones, and they hold
the soft, wet clay.

'You may call them clay-puddings before they are put into the hot oven.
When they are taken out, what do you think they are? They are bricks!'

[Illustration]




A DONKEY.

[Illustration]


    bot'-tom
    lane
    don'-key
    load
    fruit
    this'-tles
