architecture it belonged,--perhaps Old Colonial would describe it as
well as anything else. It was a wide, flat, well-ventilated, hospitable
edifice (so to speak), so peculiarly constructed and applied that
Samantha Ann Ripley (of whom more anon) declared that "the reason Jabe
Slocum ketched cold so easy was that, if he didn't hold his head jess
so, it kep' a-rainin' in!"

His mouth was simply an enormous slit in his face, and served all the
purposes for which a mouth is presumably intended, save, perhaps, the
trivial one of decoration. In short (a ludicrously inappropriate word
for the subject), it was a capital medium for exits and entrances, but
no ornament to his countenance. When Rhapsena Crabb, now deceased, was
first engaged to Jabez Slocum, Aunt Hitty Tarbox said it beat her "how
Rhapseny ever got over Jabe's mouth; though she could 'a' got intew it
easy 'nough, or raound it, if she took plenty o' time." But perhaps
Rhapsena appreciated a mouth (in a husband) that never was given to
"jawin'," and which uttered only kind words during her brief span of
married life. And there was precious little leisure for kissing at
Pleasant River!

As Jabe had passed the store, a few minutes before, one of the boys had
called out, facetiously, "Shet yer mouth when ye go by the deepot,
Laigs; the train's comin' in!" But he only smiled placidly, though it
was an ancient joke, the flavor of which had just fully penetrated the
rustic skull; and the villagers could not resist titillating the sense
of humor with it once or twice a month. Neither did Jabez mind being
called "Laigs," the local pronunciation of the word "legs;" in fact,
his good humor was too deep to be ruffled. His "cistern of wrathfulness
was so small, and the supply pipe so unready," that it was next to
impossible to "put him out," so the natives said.

He was a man of tolerable education; the only son of his parents, who
had endeavored to make great things of him, and might perhaps have
succeeded, if he hadn't always had so little time at his
disposal,--hadn't been "so drove," as he expressed it. He went to the
village school as regularly as he couldn't help, that is, as many days
as he couldn't contrive to stay away, until he was fourteen. From there
he was sent to the Academy, three miles distant; but his mother soon
found that he couldn't make the two trips a day and be "under cover by
candlelight;" so the plan of a classical education was abandoned, and he
was allowed to speed the home plough,--a profession which he pursued
with such moderation that his father, when starting him down a furrow,
used to hang his dinner-pail on his arm and, bidding him good-by, beg
him, with tears in his eyes, to be back before sun-down.

At the present moment Jabe was enjoying a cud of Old Virginia plug
tobacco, and taking in no more of the landscape than he could avoid,
when Maria, having wound up to the top of Marm Berry's hill, in spite of
herself walked directly out on one side of the road, and stopped short
to make room for the passage of an imposing procession, made up of one
straw phaeton, one baby, one strange boy, and one strange dog.

Jabe eyed the party with some placid interest, for he loved children,
but with no undue excitement. Shifting his huge quid, he inquired in his
usual leisurely manner, "Which way yer goin', bub,--t' the Swamp or t'
the Falls?"

Timothy thought neither sounded especially inviting, but, rapidly
choosing the lesser evil, replied, "To the Falls, sir."

"Thy way happens to be my way, 's Rewth said to Naomi; so 'f gittin'
over the road's your objeck, 'n' y' ain't pertickler 'baout the gait ye
travel, ye can git in 'n' ride a piece. We don't b'lieve in hurryin',
Mariar 'n' me. Slow 'n' easy goes fur in a day, 's our motto. Can ye git
your folks aboard withaout spillin' any of 'em?"

No wonder he asked, for Gay was in such a wild state of excitement that
she could hardly be held.

"I can lift Gay up, if you'll please take her, sir," said Timothy; "and
if you're quite sure the horse will stand still."

"Bless your soul, she'll stan' all right; she likes stan'in' a heap
better 'n she doos goin'; runnin' away ain't no temptation to Maria
Cummins; let well enough alone 's her motto. Jump in, sissy! There ye
be! Now git yer baby-shay in the back of the wagon, bubby, 'n' we'll be
's snug 's a bug in a rug."

Timothy, whose creed was simple and whose beliefs were crystal clear,
now felt that his morning prayer had been heard, and that the Lord was
on his side; so he abandoned all idea of commanding the situation, and
gave himself up to the full ecstasy of the ride, as they jogged
peacefully along the river road.

Gay held a piece of a rein that peeped from Jabe's colossal hand (which
was said by the villagers to cover most as much territory as the hand of
Providence), and was convinced that she was driving Maria, an idea that
made her speechless with joy.

Rags' wildest dreams of squirrels came true; and, reconciled at length
to cleanliness, he was capering in and out of the woods, thinking what
an Arabian Nights' entertainment he would give the Minerva Court dogs
when he returned, if return he ever must to that miserable, squirrelless
hole.

The meadows on the other side of the river were gorgeous with yellow
buttercups, and here and there a patch of blue iris or wild sage. The
black cherry trees were masses of snowy bloom; the water at the river's
edge held spikes of blue arrowweed in its crystal shallows; while the
roadside itself was gay with daisies and feathery grasses.

In the midst of this loveliness flowed Pleasant River,

  "Vexed in all its seaward course by bridges, dams, and mills,"

but finding time, during the busy summer months, to flush its fertile
banks with beauty.

Suddenly (a word that could seldom be truthfully applied to the
description of Jabe Slocum's movements) the reins were ruthlessly drawn
from Lady Gay's hands and wound about the whipstock.

"Gorry!" ejaculated Mr. Slocum, "ef I hain't left the widder Foss
settin' on Aunt Hitty's hoss-block, 'n' I promised to pick her up when I
come along back! That all comes o' my drivin' by the store so fast on
account o' the boys hectorin' of me, so 't when I got to the turn I was
so kind of het up I jogged right along the straight road. Haste makes
waste 's an awful good motto. Pile out, young ones! It's only half a
mile from here to the Falls, 'n' you'll have to get there on Shank's
mare!"

So saying, he dumped the astonished children into the middle of the
road, from whence he had plucked them, turned the docile mare, and with
a "Git, Mariar!" went four miles back to relieve Aunt Hitty's
horse-block from the weight of the widder Foss (which was no joke!).

This turn of affairs was most unexpected, and Gay seemed on the point of
tears; but Timothy gathered her a handful of wild flowers, wiped the
dust from her face, put on the clean blue gingham apron, and established
her in the basket, where she soon fell asleep, wearied by the
excitements of the day.

Timothy's heart began to be a little troubled as he walked on and on
through the leafy woods, trundling the basket behind him. Nothing had
gone wrong; indeed, everything had been much easier than he could have
hoped. Perhaps it was the weariness that had crept into his legs, and
the hollowness that began to appear in his stomach; but, somehow,
although in the morning he had expected to find Gay's new mothers
beckoning from every window, so that he could scarcely choose between
them, he now felt as if the whole race of mothers had suddenly become
extinct.

Soon the village came in sight, nestled in the laps of the green hills
on both sides of the river. Timothy trudged bravely on, scanning all the
dwellings, but finding none of them just the thing. At last he turned
deliberately off the main road, where the houses seemed too near
together and too near the street, for his taste, and trundled his family
down a shady sort of avenue, over which the arching elms met and clasped
hands.

Rags had by this time lowered his tail to half-mast, and kept strictly
to the beaten path, notwithstanding manifold temptations to forsake it.
He passed two cats without a single insulting remark, and his entire
demeanor was eloquent of nostalgia.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Timothy disconsolately; "there's something wrong with
all the places. Either there's no pigeon-house, like in all the
pictures, or no flower garden, or no chickens, or no lady at the window,
or else there's lots of baby-clothes hanging on the wash-lines. I don't
believe I shall ever find"--

At this moment a large, comfortable white house, that had been
heretofore hidden by great trees, came into view. Timothy drew nearer to
the spotless picket fence, and gazed upon the beauties of the side yard
and the front garden,--gazed and gazed, and fell desperately in love at
first sight.

The whole thing had been made as if to order; that is all there is to
say about it. There was an orchard, and, oh, ecstasy! what hosts of
green apples! There was an interesting grindstone under one tree, and a
bright blue chair and stool under another; a thicket of currant and
gooseberry bushes; and a flock of young turkeys ambling awkwardly
through the barn. Timothy stepped gently along in the thick grass, past
a pump and a mossy trough, till a side porch came into view, with a
woman sitting there sewing bright-colored rags. A row of shining tin
pans caught the sun's rays, and threw them back in a thousand glittering
prisms of light; the grasshoppers and crickets chirped sleepily in the
warm grass, and a score of tiny yellow butterflies hovered over a group
of odorous hollyhocks.

Suddenly the person on the porch broke into this cheerful song, which
she pitched in so high a key and gave with such emphasis that the
crickets and grasshoppers retired by mutual consent from any further
competition, and the butterflies suspended operations for several
seconds:--

  "I'll chase the antelope over the plain,
  The tiger's cob I'll bind with a chain,
  And the wild gazelle with the silv'ry feet
  I'll bring to thee for a playmate sweet."

Timothy listened intently for some moments, but could not understand the
words, unless the lady happened to be in the menagerie business, which
he thought unlikely, but delightful should it prove true.

His eye then fell on a little marble slab under a tree in a shady corner
of the orchard.

"That's a country doorplate," he thought; "yes, it's got the lady's
name, 'Martha Cummins,' printed on it. Now I'll know what to call her."

He crept softly on to the front side of the house. There were flower
beds, a lovable white cat snoozing on the doorsteps, and--a lady sitting
at the open window knitting!

At this vision Timothy's heart beat so hard against his little jacket
that he could only stagger back to the basket, where Rags and Lady Gay
were snuggled together, fast asleep. He anxiously scanned Gay's face;
moistened his rag of a handkerchief at the only available source of
supply; scrubbed an atrocious dirt spot from the tip of her spirited
nose; and then, dragging the basket along the path leading to the front
gate, he opened it and went in, mounted the steps, plied the brass
knocker, and waited in childlike faith for a summons to enter and make
himself at home.




SCENE V.

_The White Farm. Afternoon._

TIMOTHY FINDS A HOUSE IN WHICH HE THINKS A BABY IS NEEDED, BUT THE
INMATES DO NOT ENTIRELY AGREE WITH HIM.


Meanwhile, Miss Avilda Cummins had left her window and gone into the
next room for a skein of yarn. She answered the knock, however; and,
opening the door, stood rooted to the threshold in speechless
astonishment, very much as if she had seen the shades of her ancestors
drawn up in line in the dooryard.

Off went Timothy's hat. He hadn't seen the lady's face very clearly when
she was knitting at the window, or he would never have dared to knock;
but it was too late to retreat. Looking straight into her cold eyes with
his own shining gray ones, he said bravely, but with a trembling voice,
"Do you need any babies here, if you please?" (Need any babies! What an
inappropriate, nonsensical expression, to be sure; as if a baby were
something exquisitely indispensable, like the breath of life, for
instance!)

No answer. Miss Vilda was trying to assume command of her scattered
faculties and find some clue to the situation. Timothy concluded that
she was not, after all, the lady of the house; and, remembering the
marble doorplate in the orchard, tried again. "Does Miss Martha Cummins
live here, if you please?" (Oh, Timothy! what induced you, in this
crucial moment of your life, to touch upon that sorest spot in Miss
Vilda's memory?)

"What do you want?" she faltered.

"I want to get somebody to adopt my baby," he said; "if you haven't got
any of your own, you couldn't find one half as dear and as pretty as she
is; and you needn't have me too, you know, unless you should need me to
help take care of her."

"You're very kind," Miss Avilda answered sarcastically, preparing to
shut the door upon the strange child; "but I don't think I care to adopt
any babies this afternoon, thank you. You'd better run right back home
to your mother, if you've got one, and know where 't is, anyhow."

"I--haven't!" cried poor Timothy, with a sudden and unpremeditated burst
of tears at the failure of his hopes; for he was half child as well as
half hero. At this juncture Gay opened her eyes, and burst into a wild
howl at the unwonted sight of Timothy's grief; and Rags, who was full of
exquisite sensibility, and quite ready to weep with those who did weep,
lifted up his woolly head and added his piteous wails to the concert. It
was a _tableau vivant_.

"Samanthy Ann!" called Miss Vilda excitedly; "Samanthy Ann! Come right
here and tell me what to do!"

The person thus adjured flew in from the porch, leaving a serpentine
trail of red, yellow, and blue rags in her wake. "Land o' liberty!" she
exclaimed, as she surveyed the group. "Where'd they come from, and what
air they tryin' to act out?"

"This boy's a baby agent, as near as I can make out; he wants I should
adopt this red-headed baby, but says I ain't obliged to take him too,
and makes out they haven't got any home. I told him I wa'n't adoptin'
any babies just now, and at that he burst out cryin', and the other two
followed suit. Now, have the three of 'em just escaped from some
asylum, or are they too little to be lunatics?"

Timothy dried his tears, in order that Gay should be comforted and
appear at her best, and said penitently: "I cried before I thought,
because Gay hasn't had anything but cookies since last night, and she'll
have no place to sleep unless you'll let us stay here just till morning.
We went by all the other houses, and chose this one because everything
was so beautiful."

"Nothin' but cookies sence--Land o' liberty!" ejaculated Samantha Ann,
starting for the kitchen.

"Come back here, Samanthy! Don't you leave me alone with 'em, and don't
let's have all the neighbors runnin' in; you take 'em into the kitchen
and give 'em somethin' to eat, and we'll see about the rest afterwards."

Gay kindled at the first casual mention of food; and, trying to clamber
out of the basket, fell over the edge, thumping her head smartly on the
stone steps. Miss Vilda covered her face with her hands, and waited
shudderingly for another yell, as the child's carnation stocking and
terra-cotta head mingled wildly in the air. But Lady Gay disentangled
herself, and laughed the merriest burst of laughter that ever woke the
echoes. That was a joke; her life was full of them, served fresh every
day; for no sort of adversity could long have power over such a nature
as hers. "Come get supper," she cooed, putting her hand in Samantha's;
adding that the "nasty lady needn't come," a remark that happily escaped
detection, as it was rendered in very unintelligible "early English."

Miss Avilda tottered into the darkened sitting-room and sank on to a
black haircloth sofa, while Samantha ushered the wanderers into the
sunny kitchen, muttering to herself: "Wall, I vow! travelin' over the
country all alone, 'n' not knee-high to a toad! They're send in' out
awful young tramps this season, but they sha'n't go away hungry, if I
know it."

Accordingly, she set out a plentiful supply of bread and butter,
gingerbread, pie, and milk, put a tin plate of cold hash in the shed for
Rags, and swept him out to it with a corn broom; and, telling the
children comfortably to cram their "everlastin' little bread-baskets
full," returned to the sitting-room.

"Now, whatever makes you so panicky, Vildy? Didn't you never see a tramp
before, for pity's sake? And if you're scar't for fear I can't handle
'em alone, why, Jabe 'll be comin' along soon. The prospeck of gittin'
to bed's the only thing that'll make him 'n' Maria hurry; 'n' they'll
both be cal'latin' on that by this time!"

"Samanthy Ann, the first question that that boy asked me was, 'If Miss
Martha Cummins lived here.' Now, what do you make of that?"

Samantha looked as astonished as anybody could wish. "Asked if Marthy
Cummins lived here? How under the canopy did he ever hear Marthy's name?
Wall, somebody told him to ask, that's all there is about it; and what
harm was there in it, anyhow?"

"Oh, I don't know, I don't know; but the minute that boy looked up at me
and asked for Martha Cummins, the old trouble, that I thought was dead
and buried years ago, started right up in my heart and begun to ache
just as if it all happened yesterday."

"Now keep stiddy, Vildy; what could happen?" urged Samantha.

"Why, it flashed across my mind in a minute," and here Miss Vilda
lowered her voice to a whisper, "that perhaps Martha's baby didn't die,
as they told her."

"But, land o' liberty, s'posin' it didn't! Poor Marthy died herself more
'n twenty years ago."

"I know; but supposing her baby didn't die; and supposing it grew up and
died, and left this little girl to roam round the world afoot and
alone?"

"You're cal'latin' dreadful close, 'pears to me; now, don't go s'posin'
any more things. You're makin' out one of them yellow-covered books,
sech as the summer boarders bring out here to read; always chock full of
doin's that never would come to pass in this or any other Christian
country. You jest lay down and snuff your camphire, an' I'll go out an'
pump that boy drier 'n a sand heap!"


Now, Miss Avilda Cummins was unmarried by every implication of her
being, as Henry James would say: but Samantha Ann Ripley was a spinster
purely by accident. She had seldom been exposed to the witcheries of
children, or she would have known long before this that, so far as she
was personally concerned, they would always prove irresistible. She
marched into the kitchen like a general resolved upon the extinction of
the enemy. She walked out again, half an hour later, with the very teeth
of her resolve drawn, but so painlessly that she had not been aware of
the operation! She marched in a woman of a single purpose; she came out
a double-faced diplomatist, with the seeds of sedition and conspiracy
lurking, all unsuspected, in her heart.

The cause? Nothing more than a dozen trifles as "light as air." Timothy
had sat upon a little wooden stool at her feet; and, resting his arms on
her knees, had looked up into her kind, rosy face with a pair of liquid
eyes like gray-blue lakes, eyes which seemed and were the very windows
of his soul. He had sat there telling his wee bit of a story; just a
vague, shadowy, plaintive, uncomplaining scrap of a story, without
beginning, plot, or ending, but every word in it set Samantha Ann
Ripley's heart throbbing.

And Gay, who knew a good thing when she saw it, had climbed up into her
capacious lap, and, not being denied, had cuddled her head into that
"gracious hollow" in Samantha's shoulder, that had somehow missed the
pressure of the childish heads that should have lain there. Then
Samantha's arm had finally crept round the wheedlesome bit of soft
humanity, and before she knew it her chair was swaying gently to and
fro, to and fro, to and fro; and the wooden rockers creaked more sweetly
than ever they had creaked before, for they were singing their first
cradle song!

Then Gay heaved a great sigh of unspeakable satisfaction, and closed her
lovely eyes. She had been born with a desire to be cuddled, and had had
precious little experience of it. At the sound of this happy sigh and
the sight of the child's flower face, with the upward curling lashes on
the pink cheeks and the moist tendrils of hair on the white forehead,
and the helpless, clinging touch of the baby arm about her neck, I
cannot tell you the why or wherefore, but old memories and new desires
began to stir in Samantha Ann Ripley's heart. In short, she had met the
enemy, and she was theirs!

Presently Gay was laid upon the old-fashioned settle, and Samantha
stationed herself where she could keep the flies off her by waving a
palm-leaf fan.

"Now, there's one thing more I want you to tell me," said she, after she
had possessed herself of Timothy's unhappy past, uncertain present, and
still more dubious future; "and that is, what made you ask for Miss
Marthy Cummins when you come to the door?"

"Why, I thought it was the lady-of-the-house's name," said Timothy; "I
saw it on her doorplate."

"But we ain't got any doorplate, to begin with."

"Not a silver one on your door, like they have in the city; but isn't
that white marble piece in the yard a doorplate? It's got 'Martha
Cummins, aged 17,' on it. I thought may be in the country they had them
in their gardens; only I thought it was queer they put their ages on
them, because they'd have to be scratched out every little while,
wouldn't they?"

"My grief!" ejaculated Samantha; "for pity's sake, don't you know a
tombstun when you see it?"

"No; what is a tombstun?"

"Land sakes! what do you know, any way? Didn't you never see a graveyard
where folks is buried?"

"I never went to the graveyard, but I know where it is, and I know
about people's being buried. Flossy is going to be buried. And so the
white stone shows the places where the people are put, and tells their
names, does it? Why, it is a kind of a doorplate, after all, don't you
see? Who is Martha Cummins, aged 17?"

"She was Miss Vildy's sister, and she went to the city, and then come
home and died here, long years ago. Miss Vildy set great store by her,
and can't bear to have her name spoke; so remember what I say. Now, this
'Flossy' you tell me about (of all the fool names I ever hearn tell of,
that beats all,--sounds like a wax doll, with her clo'se sewed on!), was
she a young woman?"

"I don't know whether she was young or not," said Tim, in a puzzled
tone. "She had young yellow hair, and very young shiny teeth, white as
