when they first saw it. They had heard stories of what a wonderful
dam-builder Paddy was, and they had expected to see something like the
smooth, grass-covered bank with which Farmer Brown kept the Big River
from running back on his low lands. Instead, all they saw was a great
pile of poles and sticks which looked like anything but a dam.

"Pooh!" exclaimed Billy Mink, "I guess we needn't worry about the
Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool, if that is the best Paddy can do.
Why, the water of the Laughing Brook will work through that in no time."

Of course Paddy heard him, but he said nothing, just kept right
on working.

"Just look at the way he has laid those sticks!" continued Billy Mink.
"Seems as if any one would know enough to lay them _across_ the Laughing
Brook instead of just the other way. I could build a better dam
than that."

Paddy said nothing; he just kept right on working.

"Yes, Sir," Billy boasted. "I could build a better dam than that. Why,
that pile of sticks will never stop the water."

"Is something the matter with your eyesight, Billy Mink?" inquired
Jerry Muskrat.

"Of course not!" retorted Billy indignantly. "Why?"

"Oh, nothing much, only you don't seem to notice that already the
Laughing Brook is over its banks above Paddy's dam," replied Jerry,
who had been studying the dam with a great deal of interest.

Billy looked a wee bit foolish, for sure enough there was a little pool
just above the dam, and it was growing bigger.

Paddy still kept at work, saying nothing. He was digging in front of
the dam now, and the mud and grass he dug up he stuffed in between the
ends of the sticks and patted down with his hands. He did this all along
the front of the dam and on top of it too, wherever he thought it was
needed. Of course this made it harder for the water to work through, and
the little pond above the dam began to grow faster. It wasn't a great
while before it was nearly to the top of the dam, which at first was
very low. Then Paddy brought more sticks. This was easier now, because
he could float them down from where he was cutting. He would put them in
place on the top of the dam, then hurry for more. Wherever it was
needed, he would put in mud. He even rolled a few stones in to help hold
the mass.

So the dam grew and grew, and so did the pond above the dam. Of course,
it took a good many days to build so big a dam, and a lot of hard work!
Every morning the little people of the Green Forest and the Green
Meadows would visit it, and every morning they would find that it
had grown a great deal in the night, for that is when Paddy likes
best to work.

By this time, the Laughing Brook had stopped laughing, and down in the
Smiling Pool there was hardly water enough for the minnows to feel safe
a minute. Billy Mink had stopped making fun of the dam, and all the
little people who live in the Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool were
terribly worried.

To be sure Paddy had warned them of what he was going to do, and had
promised that just as soon as his pond was big enough, the water would
once more run in the Laughing Brook. They tried to believe him, but they
couldn't help having just a wee bit of fear that he might not be wholly
honest. You see, they didn't know him, for he was a stranger. Jerry
Muskrat was the only one who seemed absolutely sure that everything
would be all right. Perhaps that was because Paddy is his cousin, and
Jerry couldn't help but feel proud of such a big cousin and one who was
so smart.

So day by day the dam grew, and the pond grew, and then one morning
Grandfather Frog, down in what had once been the Smiling Pool, heard a
sound that made his heart jump for joy. It was a murmur that kept
growing and growing, until at last it was the merry laugh of the
Laughing Brook. Then he knew that Paddy had kept his word and water
would once more fill the Smiling Pool.




VI

FARMER BROWN'S BOY GROWS CURIOUS


Now it happened that the very day before Paddy the Beaver decided that
his pond was big enough, and so allowed the water to run in the Laughing
Brook once more, Farmer Brown's boy took it into his head to go fishing
in the Smiling Pool. Just as usual he went whistling down across the
Green Meadows. Somehow, when he goes fishing, he always feels like
whistling. Grandfather Frog heard him coming and dived into the little
bit of water remaining in the Smiling Pool and stirred up the mud at the
bottom so that Farmer Brown's boy shouldn't see him.

Nearer and nearer drew the whistle. Suddenly it stopped right short off.
Farmer Brown's boy had come in sight of the Smiling Pool or rather, it
was what used to be the Smiling Pool. Now there wasn't any Smiling Pool,
for the very little pool left was too small and sickly-looking to smile.
There were great banks of mud, out of which grew the bulrushes. The
lily-pads were forlornly stretched out towards the tiny pool of water
remaining. Where the banks were steep and high, the holes that Jerry
Muskrat and Billy Mink knew so well were plain to see. Over at one side
stood Jerry Muskrat's house, wholly out of water.

Somehow, it seemed to Farmer Brown's boy that he must be dreaming. He
never, never had seen anything like this before, not even in the very
driest weather of the hottest part of the summer. He looked this way and
looked that way. The Green Meadows looked just as usual. The Green
Forest looked just as usual. The Laughing Brook--ha! What was the matter
with the Laughing Brook? He couldn't hear it and that, you know, was
very unusual. He dropped his rod and ran over to the Laughing Brook.
There wasn't any brook. No, sir, there wasn't any brook; just pools of
water with the tiniest of streams trickling between. Big stones over
which he had always seen the water running in the prettiest of little
white falls were bare and dry. In the little pools frightened minnows
were darting about.

Farmer Brown's boy scratched his head in a puzzled way. "I don't
understand it," said he. "I don't understand it at all. Something must
have gone wrong with the springs that supply the water for the Laughing
Brook. They must have failed. Yes, Sir, that is just what must have
happened. But I never heard of such a thing happening before, and I
really don't see how it could happen." He stared up into the Green
Forest just as if he thought he could see those springs. Of course, he
didn't think anything of the kind. He was just turning it all over in
his mind. "I know what I'll do! I'll go up to those springs this
afternoon and find out what the trouble is," he said out loud. "They are
way over almost on the other side of the Green Forest, and the easiest
way to get there will be to start from home and cut across the Old
Pasture up to the edge of the Mountain behind the Green Forest. If I try
to follow up the Laughing Brook now, it will take too long, because it
winds and twists so. Besides, it is too hard work."

With that, Farmer Brown's boy went back and picked up his rod. Then he
started for home across the Green Meadows, and for once he wasn't
whistling. You see, he was too busy thinking. In fact, he was so busy
thinking that he didn't see Jimmy Skunk until he almost stepped on him,
and then he gave a frightened jump and ran, for without a gun he was
just as much afraid of Jimmy as Jimmy was of him when he did have a gun.

Jimmy just grinned and went on about his business. It always tickles
Jimmy to see people run away from him, especially people so much bigger
than himself; they look so silly.

"I should think that they would have learned by this time that if
they don't bother me, I won't bother them," he muttered, as he rolled
over a stone to look for fat beetles. "Somehow, folks never seem to
understand me."

[Illustration]




VII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY GETS ANOTHER SURPRISE


Across the Old Pasture to the foot of the Mountain back of the Green
Forest tramped Farmer Brown's boy. Ahead of him trotted Bowser the
Hound, sniffing and snuffing for the tracks of Reddy or Granny Fox. Of
course he didn't find them, for Reddy and Granny hadn't been up in the
Old Pasture for a long time. But he did find old Jed Thumper, the big
gray Rabbit who had made things so uncomfortable for Peter Rabbit once
upon a time, and gave him such a fright that old Jed didn't look where
he was going and almost ran headfirst into Farmer Brown's boy.

"Hi, there, you old cottontail!" yelled Farmer Brown's boy, and this
frightened Old Jed still more, so that he actually ran right past his
own castle of bullbriars without seeing it.

Farmer Brown's boy kept on his way, laughing at the fright of old Jed
Thumper. Presently he reached the springs from which came the water that
made the very beginning of the Laughing Brook. He expected to find them
dry, for way down on the Green Meadows the Smiling Pool was nearly dry,
and the Laughing Brook was nearly dry, and he had supposed that of
course the reason was that the springs where the Laughing Brook started
were no longer bubbling.

But they were! The clear cold water came bubbling up out of the ground
just as it always had, and ran off down into the Green Forest in a
little stream that would grow and grow as it ran and become the Laughing
Brook. Farmer Brown's boy took off his ragged old straw hat and scowled
down at the bubbling water just as if he thought it had no business to
be bubbling there.

Of course, he didn't think just that. The fact is, he didn't know just
what he did think. Here were the springs bubbling away just as they
always had. There was the little stream starting off down into the Green
Forest with a gurgle that by and by would become a laugh, just as it
always had. And yet down on the Green Meadows on the other side of the
Green Forest there was no longer a Laughing Brook or a Smiling Pool. He
felt as if he ought to pinch himself to make sure that he was awake and
not dreaming.

"I don't know what it means," said he, talking out loud. "No, Sir, I
don't know what it means at all, but I'm going to find out. There's a
cause for everything in this world, and when a fellow doesn't know a
thing, it is his business to find out all about it. I'm going to find
out what has happened to the Laughing Brook, if it takes me a year!"

With that he started to follow the little stream which ran gurgling
down into the Green Forest. He had followed that little stream more than
once, and now he found it just as he remembered it. The farther it ran,
the larger it grew, until at last it became the Laughing Brook, merrily
tumbling over rocks and making deep pools in which the trout loved to
hide. At last he came to the edge of a little open hollow in the very
heart of the Green Forest. He knew what splendid deep holes there were
in the Laughing Brook here, and how the big trout loved to lie in them
because they were deep and cool. He was thinking of these trout now and
wishing that he had brought along his fishing-rod. He pushed his way
through a thicket of alders and then--Farmer Brown's boy stopped
suddenly and fairly gasped! He had to stop because there right in front
of him was a pond!

He rubbed his eyes and looked again. Then he stooped down and put his
hand in the water to see if it was real. There was no doubt about it. It
