   p. 132 of the ANALYSIS.

[Headnote 1: SIS' ER A, captain of the army of the Canaanitish king,
Jabin. He was utterly defeated by Barak. Fleeing on foot, he took refuge
in the tent of Jael, wife of Heber. There, while asleep, Jael drove a
nail through his temples, and so he died. His mother, finding he did not
return from the battle, "looked out at a window, and cried through the
lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming?" Read 4th and 5th
chapters of Judges.]


A MOTHER'S LOVE.

ALBERT BARNES.

1. Many of us who are advanced beyond the period of childhood, went out
from home to embark on the stormy sea of life. Of the feelings of a
father, and of his interest in our welfare, we have never entertained a
doubt, and our home was dear because he was there; but there was a
peculiarity in the feeling that it was the home of our mother. Where
_she_ lived, there was a place that we felt was _home_. There was _one
place_ where we would always be welcome, _one place_ where we would be
met with a smile, _one place_ where we would be sure of a friend.

2. The world might be indifferent to us. We might be unsuccessful in our
studies or our business. The new friends which we supposed we had made,
might prove to be false. The honor which we thought we deserved, might
be withheld from us. We might be chagrined and mortified by seeing a
rival outstrip us, and bear away the prize which we sought. But there
_was_ a place where no feelings of rivalry were found, and where those
whom the world overlooked, would be sure of a friendly greeting. Whether
pale and wan by study, care, or sickness, or flushed with health and
flattering success, we were _sure_ that we should be welcome there.

3. Though the world was cold toward us, yet there was _one_ who always
rejoiced in our success, and always was affected in our reverses; and
there was a _place_ to which we might go back from the storm which began
to pelt us, where we might rest, and become encouraged and invigorated
for a new conflict. So have I seen a bird, in its first efforts to fly,
leave its nest, and stretch its wings, and go forth to the wide world.
But the wind blew it back, and the rain began to fall, and the darkness
of night began to draw on, and there was no shelter abroad, and it
sought its way back to its nest, to take shelter beneath its mother's
wings, and to be refreshed for the struggles of a new day; but then it
flew away to think of its nest and its mother no more.

4. But not thus did we leave our home when we bade adieu to it to go
forth alone to the manly duties of life. Even amidst the storms that
then beat upon us, and the disappointments that we met with, and the
coldness of the world, we felt still that there _was one_ who
sympathized in our troubles, as well as rejoiced in our success, and
that, whatever might be abroad, when we entered the door of her
dwelling, we should be met with a smile. We expected that a mother, like
the mother of Sisera [Headnote 1], as she "looked out at her window,"
waiting for the coming of her son laden with the spoils of victory,
would look out for _our_ coming, and that _our_ return would renew her
joy and ours in our earlier days.

5. It makes a sad desolation when, from such a place, a mother is taken
away, and when, whatever may be the sorrows or the successes in life,
she is to greet the returning son or daughter no more. The home of our
childhood may be still lovely. The old family mansion--the green
fields--the running stream--the moss-covered well--the trees--the
lawn--the rose--the sweet-brier--may be there. Perchance, too, there may
be an aged father, with venerable locks, sitting in his loneliness, with
every thing to command respect and love; but she is not there. Her
familiar voice is not heard. The mother has been borne forth to sleep by
the side of her children who went before her, and the place is not what
it was.

6. There may be those there whom we much love; but _she_ is not there.
We may have formed new relations in life, tender and strong as they can
be; we may have another home, dear to us as was the home of our
childhood, where there is all in affection, kindness, and religion, to
make us happy; but _that_ home is not what it was, and it will _never_
be what it was again. It is a loosening of one of the cords which bound
us to earth, designed to prepare us for our eternal flight from every
thing dear here below, and to teach us that there is _no_ place here,
that is to be our permanent home.

QUESTIONS.--1. What renders home doubly endearing? 2. Where are we
always welcome? 3. Who always rejoices in our successes, and is affected
in our reverses? 4. Who was Sisera, and what account is given of him?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXIII.

   UN SPOT' TED, pure; unstained.
   FAL' TER, fail.
   TRA' CER Y, traces; impressions.
   IM' PRESS, mark: stamp.
   DO MIN' ION, authority; predominance.
   SHRINK, withdraw.
   PUR SU' ING, following.
   STERN ER, harsher; more rigid.
   DE FY', dare; challenge.
   WHO' SO, any person whatever.
   TO' KEN, sign; indication.
   BROTH' ER HOOD, fraternity.


THE LIFE-BOOK.

HOME JOURNAL.

1.             Write, mother, write!
   A new, unspotted book of life before thee,
     Thine is the hand to trace upon its pages
   The first few characters, to live in glory,
   Or live in shame, through long, unending ages!
               Write, mother, write!
   Thy hand, though woman's, must not faint nor falter:
     The lot is on thee,--nerve thee then with care,--
   A _mother's tracery_ time may never alter;
     Be its first impress, then, the breath of prayer!
               Write, mother, write!

2.             Write, father, write!
   Take thee a pen plucked from an eagle's pinion,
     And write _immortal actions_ for thy son;
   Teach him that man forgets man's high dominion,
     Creeping on earth, leaving _great deeds_ undone!
               Write, father, write!
   Leave on his life-book a fond father's blessing,
     To shield him 'mid temptation, toil, and sin.
   And he shall go to glory's field, possessing
     _Strength to contend, and confidence to win_.
               Write, father, write!

3.             Write, sister, write!
   Nay, shrink not, for a sister's love is holy!
     Write words the angels whisper in thine ears,--
   No bud of sweet affection, howe'er lowly,
     But planted here, will bloom in after years.
               Write, sister, write!
   Something to cheer him, his rough way pursuing,
     For manhood's lot is sterner far than ours;
   He may not pause,--he must be up and doing,
     Whilst thou sitt'st idly, dreaming among flowers.
               Write, sister, write!

4.             Write, brother, write!
   Strike a bold blow upon those kindred pages,--
     Write; shoulder to shoulder, brother, we will go;
   Heart linked to heart, though wild the conflict rages,
     We will defy the battle and the foe.
               Write, brother, write!
   We who have trodden boyhood's path together,
     Beneath the summer's sun and winter's sky,
   What matter if life brings us some foul weather,
     We may be stronger than adversity!
               Write, brother, write!

5.             Fellow immortal, write!
   One GOD reigns in the Heavens,--there is no other,--
     And _all mankind are brethren_--thus 'tis spoken,--
   And whoso aids a sorrowing, struggling brother,
     By kindly word, or deed, or friendly token,
   Shall win the favor of our heavenly Father,
     Who judges evil, and rewards the good,
   And who hath linked the race of man together,
     In one vast, universal brotherhood!
               Fellow immortal, write!

QUESTIONS.--1. What may the mother write in the Life-Book? 2. What, the
father? 3. What, the sister? 4. What, the brother? 5. What may all
write?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXIV.

   ODE, short poem.
   PA TER' NAL, coming by inheritance.
   AT TIRE', clothing; raiment.
   UN CON CERN' ED LY, without care.
   REC RE A' TION, amusement.
   IN' NO CENCE, freedom from guilt.
   MED I TA' TION, contemplation.
   UN LA MENT' ED, unmourned.


ODE ON SOLITUDE.

POPE.

Written when the author was twelve years of age.

1. Happy the man whose wish and care
     A few paternal acres bound,
   Content to breathe his native air
     In his own ground.

2. Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
     Whose flocks supply him with attire;
   Whose trees in summer yield him shade,
     In winter fire.

3. Blest who can unconcern'dly find
     Hours, days, and years glide soft away,
   In health of body, peace of mind,
     Quiet by day.

4. Sound sleep by night; study and ease,
     Together mixed; sweet recreation;
   And innocence, which most doth please
     With meditation.

5. Thus let me live, unseen, unknown;
     Thus unlamented let me die;
   Steal from the world, and not a stone
     Tell where I lie.

QUESTIONS.--1. Who, did the writer think, were happy? 2. How did he wish
to live and die? 3. Analyse the word _recreation_, (RE _back_; CREATION,
_act of bringing into life_;) act of bringing back to life; a reviving.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXV.

   AD MI RA' TION, esteem.
   FRA TER' NAL, brotherly.
   IN SIG NIF' I CANCE, worthlessness.
   CRIT' IC AL, perilous.
   THOR' OUGH LY, completely; fully.
   COM PRE HEND', understand.
   CON VIC' TION, strong belief.
   COM PE TI' TION, strife; rivalry.
   EM U LA' TION, competition.
   IN TRIN' SIC AL LY, really; truly.
   AP PRE' CI ATE, value; esteem.
   BRAWN, physical strength.
   PIN' NA CLE, summit; highest point.
   SIN' U OUS, winding; bending.
   LE GIT' I MATE, lawful.
   REQ' UI SITE, necessary.
   CON SER VA' TION, act of keeping.
   DE VEL' OP MENT, training.


GETTING THE RIGHT START.

J.G. HOLLAND.

1. The first great lesson a young man should learn, is, that _he knows
nothing;_ and that the earlier and more thoroughly this lesson is
learned, the better it will be for his peace of mind, and his success in
life. A young man bred at home, and growing up in the light of parental
admiration and fraternal pride, can not readily understand how it is,
that every one else can be his equal in talent and acquisition. If bred
in the country, he seeks the life of the town, he will very early obtain
an idea of his insignificance.

2. This is a critical period in his history. The result of his reasoning
will decide his fate. If, at this time, he thoroughly comprehend, and in
his soul admit and accept the fact, that _he knows nothing_ and _is
nothing;_ if he bow to the conviction that his mind and his person are
but ciphers, and that whatever he is _to be_, and is _to win_, must be
achieved by _hard work_, there is abundant hope of him.

3. If, on the contrary, a huge self-conceit still hold possession of
him, and he straightens stiffly up to the assertion of his old and
valueless self,--or, if he sink discouraged upon the threshold of a life
of fierce competitions, and more manly emulations, he might as well be a
dead man. The world has no use for such a man, and he has only to retire
or be trodden upon.

4. When a young man has thoroughly comprehended the fact that _he knows
nothing_, and that, intrinsically, he is of but _little value_, the next
thing for him to learn is that _the world cares nothing for him_,--that
he is the subject of no man's overwhelming admiration and esteem,--that
he must take care of himself.

5. If he be a stranger, he will find every man busy with his own
affairs, and none to look after him. He will not be noticed until he
becomes _noticeable_, and he will not become noticeable, until he _does
something_ to prove that he has an absolute value in society. No letter
of recommendation will give him this, or ought to give him this. No
family connection will give him this, except among those few who think
more of blood than brains.

6. Society demands that a young man _shall be somebody_, not only, but
that _he shall prove his right to the title_; and it has a right to
demand this. Society will not take this matter upon trust,--at least,
not for a long time; for it has been cheated too frequently. Society is
not very particular what a man does, so that it prove him to be a _man_:
then it will bow to him, and make room for him.

7. There is no surer sign of an unmanly and cowardly spirit, than a
vague desire for _help_,--a wish to _depend_, to _lean_ upon somebody,
and enjoy the fruits of the industry of others. There are multitudes of
young men who indulge in dreams of help from some quarter, coming in at
a convenient moment, to enable them to secure the success in life which
they covet. The vision haunts them of some benevolent old gentleman,
with a pocket full of money, a trunk full of mortgages and stocks, and a
mind remarkably appreciative of merit and genius, who will, perhaps,
give or lend them from ten to twenty thousand dollars, with which they
will commence and go on swimmingly.

8. To me, one of the most disgusting sights in the world, is that of a
young man with healthy blood, broad shoulders, and a hundred and fifty
pounds, more or less, of good bone and muscle, standing with his hands
in his pockets, longing for help. I admit that there are positions in
which the most independent spirit may accept of assistance,--may, in
fact, as a choice of evils, desire it; but for a man who is able to help
himself, to desire the help of others in the accomplishment of his plans
of life, is positive proof that he has received a most unfortunate
training, or that there is a leaven of meanness in his composition, that
should make him shudder.

9. When, therefore, a young man has ascertained and fully received the
fact that he does not know any thing, that the world does not care any
thing about him, that what he wins must be won by his own brain and
brawn, and that while he holds in his own hands the means of gaining his
own livelihood and the objects of his life, he can not receive
assistance without compromising his self-respect and selling his
freedom, he is in a fair position for beginning life. When a young man
becomes aware that only by _his own efforts_ can he rise into
companionship and competition with the sharp, strong, and well-drilled
minds around him, he of ready for work, and not before.

10. The next lesson is, that of _patience_, thoroughness in preparation,
and contentment with the regular channels of business effort and
enterprise. This is, perhaps, one of the most difficult to learn, of all
the lessons of life. It is natural for the mind to reach out eagerly for
immediate results.

11. As manhood dawns, and the young man catches in its first light the
pinnacles of realized dreams, the golden domes of high possibilities,
and the purpling hills of great delights, and then looks down upon the
narrow, sinuous, long, and dusty path by which others have reached
them, he is apt to be disgusted with the passage, and to seek for
success through broader channels, by quicker means. Beginning at the
very foot of the hill, and working slowly to the top, seems a very
discouraging process; and precisely at this point, have thousands of
young men made shipwreck of their lives.

12. Let this be understood, then, at starting; that the patient conquest
of difficulties, which rise in the regular and legitimate channels of
business and enterprise, is not only essential in securing the successes
which you seek, but it is essential to that preparation of your mind,
requisite for the enjoyment of your successes, and for retaining them
when gained. It is the general rule of Providence, the world over, and
in all time, that unearned success is a curse. It is the rule of
Providence, that the process of earning success, shall be the
preparation for its conservation and enjoyment.

13. So, day by day, and week by week; so, month after month, and year
after year, _work on_, and in that process gain strength and symmetry,
and nerve and knowledge, that when success, patiently and bravely worked
for, shall come, it may find you prepared to receive it and keep it. The
development which you will get in this brave and patient labor, will
prove itself, in the end, the most valuable of your successes. It will
help to make a _man_ of you. It will give you power and self-reliance.
It will give you not only _self-respect_, but the _respect of your
fellows and the public_.

QUESTIONS.--1. What is the first lesson a young man should learn?
2. What is the next lesson he should learn? 3. What does society demand
of a young man? 4. What is a sure sign of an unmanly and cowardly spirit?
5. When is a young man in a fair position for beginning life? 6. What is
a general rule of Providence?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXVI.

   PRE SUMP' TION, arrogance.
   SOPH' ISTS, professed teachers of wisdom.
   AC COST' ED, addressed.
   GEN' IUS, natural aptitude.
   IN DUC' ED, prevailed upon.
   PHI LOS' O PHER, lover of wisdom.
   BAR' BA ROUS, foreign; uncivilized.
   DIS SUADE', turn away from.
   EX CESS' IVE. overmuch.
   ES TEEM' ED, highly regarded.
   RE TRENCH, lessen; curtail.
   SU PER' FLU OUS, extravagant; needless.
   UN DER TAK' ING, engaging in.
   IN CA PAC' I TY, inability.

[Headnote 1: THE MIS' TO CLES, a celebrated Athenian statesman and
military leader, was born about 514 before Christ.]

[Headnote 2: CI' MON, an illustrious Athenian general and statesman,
born about the year 510, before Christ. He belonged to the aristocratic
party of his time, and contributed to the banishment of Themistocles,
the leader of the opposite party. He was also the political opponent of
Pericles.]

[Headnote 3: PER' I CLES, an Athenian statesman, born about 495 before
Christ. He labored to make Athens the capital of all Greece, and the
seat of art and refinement.]

[Headnote 4: PLA' TO, a celebrated Greek philosopher, born in Athens
about the year 429 before Christ. He was a pupil of Socrates.]


THE PRESUMPTION OF YOUTH.

ROLLIN.

1. The young people of Athens, amazed at the glory of
Themistocles,[Headnote 1] of Cimon,[Headnote 2] of Pericles,[Headnote 3]
and full of a foolish ambition, after having received some lessons from
the sophists, who promised to render them very great politicians,
believed themselves capable of every thing, and aspired to fill the
highest places. One of them, named Glaucon, took it so strongly in his
head that he had a _peculiar genius_ for public affairs, although he was
not yet twenty years of age, that no person in his family, nor among his
friends, had the power to divert him from a notion so little befitting
his age and capacity.

2. Socrates, who liked him on account of Plato [Headnote 4] his brother,
was the only one who succeeded in making him change his resolution.
Meeting him one day, he accosted him with so dexterous a discourse, that
he induced him to listen. He had already gained much influence over him.
"You have a desire to govern the republic?" said Socrates. "True,"
replied Glaucon. "You can not have a finer design," said the
philosopher, "since, if you succeed in it, you will be in a state to
serve your friends, to enlarge your house, and to extend the limits of
your native country.

3. "You will become known not only in Athens, but through all Greece;
and it may be that your renown will reach even to the barbarous nations,
like that of Themistocles. At last, you will gain the respect and
admiration of everybody." A beginning so flattering pleased the young
man exceedingly, and he very willingly continued the conversation.
"Since you desire to make yourself esteemed and respected, it is clear
that you think to render yourself useful to the public." "Assuredly."
"Tell me, then, I beseech you, what is the first service that you intend
to render the state?"

4. As Glaucon appeared to be perplexed, and considered what he ought to
answer,--"Probably," replied Socrates, "it will be to enrich the
republic, that is to say, to increase its revenues." "Exactly so." "And,
undoubtedly, you know in what the revenues of the state consist, and the
extent to which they may be increased. You will not have failed to make
it a private study, to the end that if one source should suddenly fail,
you may be able to supply its place immediately with another." "I assure
you," answered Glaucon, "that this is what I have never thought of."

5. "Tell me, at least, then, the necessary expenses of maintaining the
republic. You can not fail to know of what importance it is to retrench
those which are superfluous." "I confess to you that I am not more
instructed with regard to this article than the other." "Then it is
necessary to defer till another time the design that you have of
enriching the republic; for it is impossible for you to benefit the
state while you are ignorant of its revenues and expenses."

6. "But," said Glaucon, "there is still another means that you pass over
in silence,--one can enrich a state by the ruin of its enemies." "You
are right." replied Socrates, "but, in order to do that, you must be the
more powerful; otherwise you run the risk of losing that which you
possess. So, he who speaks of undertaking a war, ought to know the power
of both parties, to the end that if he finds his party the stronger, he
may boldly risk the adventure; but, if he find it the weaker, he should
dissuade the people from undertaking it.

7. "But, do you know what are the forces of our republic, by sea and by
land, and what are those of our enemies'? have you a statement of them
in writing'? You will do me the pleasure to allow me a perusal of it."
"I have none yet," replied Glaucon. "I see, then," said Socrates, "that
we shall not make war so soon, if they intrust _you_ with the
government; for there remain many things for you to know, and many cares
to take."

8. The sage mentioned many other articles, not less important, in which
he found Glaucon equally inexperienced, and he pointed out how
ridiculous they render themselves, who have the rashness to intermeddle
with government, without bringing any other preparation to the task than
_a great degree of self-esteem and excessive ambition_. "Fear, my dear
Glaucon," said Socrates, "fear, lest a too ardent desire for honors
should blind you; and cause you to take a part that would cover you with
shame, in bringing to light your incapacity, and want of talent."

9. The youth was wise enough to profit by the good advice of his
instructor, and took some time to gain private information, before he
ventured to appear in public. This lesson is for all ages.

QUESTIONS.--1. To what did the young people of Athens aspire? 2. What
did Glaucon believe he possessed? 3. Who succeeded in making him change
his resolution? 4. How did Socrates do this? 5. What did Socrates
finally say to him?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LXXXVII.

   CREST, topmost height.
   TOR' RENTS, rushing streams.
   TYPE, symbol; token.
   AE' RIE, (_a' ry_,) eagle's nest.
   VAULT' ED, arched.
   LIQ' UID, (_lik' wid_,) clear; flowing.
   BASK, lie exposed to warmth.
   CAN' O PY, covering.
   REV' EL RY, noisy merriment.
   BIDE, stay; continue.
   VO LUP' TU OUS, devoted to pleasure.
   HAUNTS, places of resort.
   EX PIRES', dies; becomes extinct.
   SMOL' DER ING, burning and smoking without vent.
   HER' IT AGE, inheritance.
   QUENCH' ED, extinguished.
   PEN' NON, flag; banner.
   WRENCH, wrest; twist off.
   CRA' VEN, base; cowardly.


SONG OF THE AMERICAN EAGLE.

1. I build my nest on the mountain's crest,
   Where the wild winds rock my eaglets to rest,--
   Where the lightnings flash, and the thunders crash,
   And the roaring torrents foam and dash;
   For my spirit free henceforth shall be
   A type of the sons of Liberty.

2. Aloft I fly from my aerie high,
   Through the vaulted dome of the azure sky;
   On a sunbeam bright take my airy flight,
   And float in a flood of liquid light;
   For I love to play in the noontide ray,
   And bask in a blaze from the throne of day.

3. Away I spring with a tireless wing,
   On a feathery cloud I poise and swing;
   I dart down the steep where the lightnings leap,
   And the clear blue canopy swiftly sweep;
   For, dear to me is the revelry
   Of a free and fearless Liberty.

4. I love the land where the mountains stand,
   Like the watch-towers high of a Patriot band;
   For I may not bide in my glory and pride,
   Though the land be never so fair and wide,
   Where Luxury reigns o'er voluptuous plains,
   And fetters the free-born soul in chains.

5. Then give to me in my flights to see
   The land of the pilgrims _ever free_!
   And I never will rove from the haunts I love
   But watch, from my sentinel-track above,
   Your banner free, o'er land and sea,
   And exult in your glorious Liberty.

6. _O, guard ye well the land where I dwell_,
   Lest to future times the tale I tell,
   When slow expires in smoldering fires
   The goodly heritage of your sires,--
   How Freedom's light rose clear and bright
