Sammy stopped on the top of the nearest tree. "Now what is that man
doing up as early as this?" muttered Sammy. Then he caught sight of
something under the man's arm. He didn't have to look twice to know what
it was. It was a gun! Yes, sir, it was a gun, a terrible gun.

"Ha!" exclaimed Sammy, and quite forgot that his stomach was empty. "Now
who can that fellow be after so early in the morning? I wonder if he is
going to the dear Old Briar-patch to look for Peter Rabbit, or if he is
going to the Old Pasture in search of Reddy Fox, or if it is Mr. and
Mrs. Grouse he hopes to kill. I think I'll sit right here and watch."

So Sammy sat in the top of the tree and watched the hunter with the
terrible gun. He saw him head straight for the Green Forest. "It's Mr.
and Mrs. Grouse after all, I guess," thought Sammy. "If I knew just
where they were I'd go over and warn them." But Sammy didn't know just
where they were and he knew that it might take him a long time to find
them, so he once more began to think of breakfast and then, right then,
another thought popped into his head. He thought of Lightfoot the Deer.

Sammy watched the hunter enter the Green Forest, then he silently
followed him. From the way the hunter moved, Sammy decided that he
wasn't thinking of Mr. and Mrs. Grouse. "It's Lightfoot the Deer, sure
as I live," muttered Sammy. "He ought to be warned. He certainly ought
to be warned. I know right where he is. I believe I'll warn him myself."

Sammy found Lightfoot right where he had expected to. "He's coming!"
cried Sammy. "A hunter with a terrible gun is coming!"




CHAPTER VI

A GAME OF HIDE AND SEEK


There was a game of hide and seek that Danny Meadow Mouse once played
with Buster Bear. It was a very dreadful game for Danny. But hard as it
was for Danny, it didn't begin to be as hard as the game Lightfoot the
Deer was playing with the hunter in the Green Forest.

In the case of Buster Bear and Danny, the latter had simply to keep out
of reach of Buster. As long as Buster didn't get his great paws on
Danny, the latter was safe. Then, too, Danny is a very small person. He
is so small that he can hide under two or three leaves. Wherever he is,
he is pretty sure to find a hiding-place of some sort. His small size
gives him advantages in a game of hide and seek. It certainly does. But
Lightfoot the Deer is big. He is one of the largest of the people who
live in the Green Forest. Being so big, it is not easy to hide.

Moreover, a hunter with a terrible gun does not have to get close in
order to kill. Lightfoot knew all this as he waited for the coming of
the hunter of whom Sammy Jay had warned him. He had learned many lessons
in the hunting season of the year before and he remembered every one of
them. He knew that to forget even one of them might cost him his life.
So, standing motionless behind a tangle of fallen trees, Lightfoot
listened and watched.

Presently over in the distance he heard Sammy Jay screaming, "Thief,
thief, thief!" A little sigh of relief escaped Lightfoot. He knew that
that screaming of Sammy Jay's was a warning to tell him where the hunter
was. Knowing just where the hunter was made it easier for Lightfoot to
know what to do.

A Merry Little Breeze came stealing through the Green Forest. It came
from behind Lightfoot and danced on towards the hunter with the terrible
gun. Instantly Lightfoot began to steal softly away through the Green
Forest. He took the greatest care to make no sound. He went in a
half-circle, stopping every few steps to listen and test the air with
his wonderful nose. Can you guess what Lightfoot was trying to do? He
was trying to get behind the hunter so that the Merry Little Breezes
would bring to him the dreaded man-scent. So long as Lightfoot could get
that scent, he would know where the hunter was, though he could neither
see nor hear him. If he had remained where Sammy Jay had found him, the
hunter might have come within shooting distance before Lightfoot could
have located him.

So the hunter with the terrible gun walked noiselessly through the Green
Forest, stepping with the greatest care to avoid snapping a stick
underfoot, searching with keen eye every thicket and likely hiding-place
for a glimpse of Lightfoot, and studying the ground for traces to show
that Lightfoot had been there.




CHAPTER VII

THE MERRY LITTLE BREEZES HELP LIGHTFOOT


Could you have seen the hunter with the terrible gun and Lightfoot the
Deer that morning on which the hunting season opened you might have
thought that Lightfoot was hunting the hunter instead of the hunter
hunting Lightfoot. You see, Lightfoot was behind the hunter instead of
in front of him. He was following the hunter, so as to keep track of
him. As long as he knew just where the hunter was, he felt reasonably
safe.

The Merry Little Breezes are Lightfoot's best friends. They always
bring to him all the different scents they find as they wander through
the Green Forest. And Lightfoot's delicate nose is so wonderful that he
can take these scents, even though they be very faint, and tell just who
or what has made them. So, though he makes the best possible use of his
big ears and his beautiful eyes, he trusts more to his nose to warn him
of danger. For this reason, during the hunting season when he moves
about, he moves in the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes may
be blowing. He knows that they will bring to him warning of any danger
which may lie in that direction.

Now the hunter with the terrible gun who was looking for Lightfoot knew
all this, for he was wise in the ways of Lightfoot and of the other
little people of the Green Forest. When he had entered the Green Forest
that morning he had first of all made sure of the direction from which
the Merry Little Breezes were coming. Then he had begun to hunt in that
direction, knowing that thus his scent would be carried behind him. It
is more than likely that he would have reached the hiding-place of
Lightfoot the Deer before the latter would have known that he was in the
Green Forest, had it not been for Sammy Jay's warning.

When he reached the tangle of fallen trees behind which Lightfoot had
been hiding, he worked around it slowly and with the greatest care,
holding his terrible gun ready to use instantly should Lightfoot leap
out. Presently he found Lightfoot's footprints in the soft ground and
studying them he knew that Lightfoot had known of his coming.

"It was that confounded Jay," muttered the hunter. "Lightfoot heard him
and knew what it meant. I know what he has done; he has circled round so
as to get behind me and get my scent. It is a clever trick, a very
clever trick, but two can play at that game. I'll just try that little
trick myself."

So the hunter in his turn made a wide circle back, and presently there
was none of the dreaded man-smell among the scents which the Merry
Little Breezes brought to Lightfoot. Lightfoot had lost track of the
hunter.




CHAPTER VIII

WIT AGAINST WIT


It was a dreadful game the hunter with the terrible gun and Lightfoot
the Deer were playing in the Green Forest. It was a matching of wit
against wit, the hunter seeking to take Lightfoot's life, and Lightfoot
seeking to save it. The experience of other years had taught Lightfoot
much of the ways of hunters and not one of the things he had learned
about them was forgotten. But the hunter in his turn knew much of the
ways of Deer. So it was that each was trying his best to outguess the
other.

When the hunter found the hiding-place Lightfoot had left at the warning
of Sammy Jay he followed Lightfoot's tracks for a short distance. It was
slow work, and only one whose eyes had been trained to notice little
things could have done it. You see, there was no snow, and only now and
then, when he had stepped on a bit of soft ground, had Lightfoot left a
footprint. But there were other signs which the hunter knew how to
read,--a freshly upturned leaf here, and here, a bit of moss lightly
crushed. These things told the hunter which way Lightfoot had gone.

Slowly, patiently, watchfully, the hunter followed. After a while he
stopped with a satisfied grin. "I thought as much," he muttered. "He
heard that pesky Jay and circled around so as to get my scent. I'll just
cut across to my old trail and unless I am greatly mistaken, I'll find
his tracks there."

So, swiftly but silently, the hunter cut across to his old trail, and in
a few moments he found just what he expected,--one of Lightfoot's
footprints. Once more he grinned.

"Well, old fellow, I've out-guessed you this time," said he to himself.
"I am behind you and the wind is from you to me, so that you cannot get
my scent. I wouldn't be a bit surprised if you're back right where you
started from, behind that old windfall." He at once began to move
forward silently and cautiously, with eyes and ears alert and his
terrible gun ready for instant use.

Now when Lightfoot, following behind the hunter, had lost the scent of
the latter, he guessed right away that the latter had found his tracks
and had started to follow them. Lightfoot stood still and listened with
all his might for some little sound to tell him where the hunter was.
But there was no sound and after a little Lightfoot began to move on. He
didn't dare remain still, lest the hunter should creep up within
shooting distance. There was only one direction in which it was safe for
Lightfoot to move, and that was the direction from which the Merry
Little Breezes were blowing. So long as they brought him none of the
dreaded man-smell, he knew that he was safe. The hunter might be behind
him--probably he was--but ahead of him, so long as the Merry Little
Breezes were blowing in his face and brought no man-smell, was safety.




CHAPTER IX

LIGHTFOOT BECOMES UNCERTAIN


Lightfoot the Deer traveled on through the Green Forest, straight ahead
in the direction from which the Merry Little Breezes were blowing. Every
few steps he would raise his delicate nose and test all the scents that
the Merry Little Breezes were bringing. So long as he kept the Merry
Little Breezes blowing in his face, he could be sure whether or not
there was danger ahead of him.

Lightfoot uses his nose very much as you and I use our eyes. It tells
him the things he wants to know. He knew that Reddy Fox had been along
ahead of him, although he didn't get so much as a glimpse of Reddy's red
coat. Once he caught just the faintest of scents which caused him to
stop abruptly and test the air more carefully than ever. It was the
scent of Buster Bear. But it was so very faint that Lightfoot knew
Buster was not near, so he went ahead again, but even more carefully
than before. After a little he couldn't smell Buster at all, so he knew
then that Buster had merely passed that way when he was going to some
other part of the Green Forest.

Lightfoot knew that he had nothing to fear in that direction so long as
the Merry Little Breezes brought him none of the dreaded man-scent, and
he knew that he could trust the Merry Little Breezes to bring him that
scent if there should be a man anywhere in front of him. You know the
Merry Little Breezes are Lightfoot's best friends. But Lightfoot didn't
want to keep going in that direction all day.

It would take him far away from that part of the Green Forest with which
he was familiar and which he called home. It might in time take him out
of the Green Forest and that wouldn't do at all. So after a while
Lightfoot became uncertain. He didn't know just what to do. You see, he
couldn't tell whether or not that hunter with the terrible gun was
still following him.

Every once in a while he would stop in a thicket of young trees or
behind a tangle of fallen trees uprooted by the wind. There he would
stand, facing the direction from which he had come, and watch and listen
for some sign that the hunter was still following. But after a few
minutes of this he would grow uneasy and then bound away in the
direction from which the Merry Little Breezes were blowing, so as to be
sure of not running into danger.

"If only I could know if that hunter is still following, I would know
better what to do," thought Lightfoot. "I've got to find out."




CHAPTER X

LIGHTFOOT'S CLEVER TRICK


Lightfoot the Deer is smart. Yes, Sir, Lightfoot the Deer is smart. He
has to be, especially in the hunting season, to save his life. If he
were not smart he would have been killed long ago. He never makes the
foolish mistake of thinking that other people are not smart. He knew
that the hunter who had started out to follow him early that morning was
not one to be easily discouraged or to be fooled by simple tricks. He
had a very great respect for the smartness of that hunter. He knew that
he couldn't afford to be careless for one little minute.

The certainty of danger is sometimes easier to bear than the uncertainty
of not knowing whether or not there really is any danger. Lightfoot felt
that if he could know just where the hunter was, he himself would know
better what to do. The hunter might have become discouraged and given up
following him. In that case he could rest and stop worrying. It would be
better to know that he was being followed than not to know. But how was
he to find out? Lightfoot kept turning this over and over in his mind as
he traveled through the Green Forest. Then an idea came to him.

"I know what I'll do. I know just what I'll do," said Lightfoot to
himself. "I'll find out whether or not that hunter is still following me
and I'll get a little rest. Goodness knows, I need a rest."

Lightfoot bounded away swiftly and ran for some distance, then he turned
and quickly, but very, very quietly, returned in the direction from
which he had just come but a little to one side of his old trail. After
a while he saw what he was looking for, a pile of branches which
woodchoppers had left when they had trimmed the trees they had cut down.
This was near the top of a little hill. Lightfoot went up the hill and
stopped behind the pile of brush. For a few moments he stood there
perfectly still, looking and listening. Then, with a little sigh of
relief, he lay down, where, without being in any danger of being seen
himself, he could watch his old trail through the hollow at the bottom
of the hill. If the hunter were still following him, he would pass
through that hollow in plain sight.

