
CHAPTER III.

THE BULLERS--MATILDA TAKES ME UP--WE FALL OUT--MR. GEORGE.


Major Buller took me home to his house after my father's death. My
father had left his affairs in his hands, and in those of a friend in
England--the Mr. Arkwright he had spoken of. I believe they were both
trustees under my mother's marriage settlement.

The Bullers were relations of mine. Mrs. Buller was my mother's cousin.
She was a kind-hearted, talkative lady, and good-looking, though no
longer very young. She dressed as gaily as my poor mother, though,
somehow, not with quite so good an effect. She copied my mother's style,
and sometimes wore things exactly similar to hers; but the result was
not the same. I have heard Mrs. Minchin say that my mother took a
malicious pleasure, at times, in wearing costumes that would have been
most trying to beauty less radiant and youthful than hers, for the fun
of seeing "poor Theresa" appear in a similar garb with less success. But
Mrs. Minchin's tales had always a sting in them!

Mrs. Buller received me very kindly. She kissed me, and told me to call
her "Aunt Theresa," which I did ever afterwards. Aunt Theresa's
daughters and I were like sisters. They showed me their best frocks, and
told me exactly all that had been ordered in the parcel that was coming
out from England.

"Don't you have your hair put in papers?" said Matilda, whose own curls
sat stiffly round her head as regularly as the rolls of a lawyer's wig.
"Are your socks like lace? Doesn't your Ayah dress you every afternoon?"

Matilda "took me up." She was four years older than I was, which
entitled her to blend patronage with her affection for me. In the
evening of the day on which I went to the Bullers, she took me by the
hand, and tossing her curls said, "I have taken you up, Margery
Vandaleur. Mrs. Minchin told Mamma that she has taken the bride up. I
heard her say that the bride was a sweet little puss, only so childish.
That's just what Mrs. Minchin said. I heard her. And I shall say so of
you, too, as I've taken you up. You're a sweet little puss. And of
course you're childish, because you're a child," adds Miss Matilda, with
an air. For had not she begun to write her own age with two figures?

Had I known then as much as I learned afterwards of what it meant to be
"taken up" by Mrs. Minchin, I might not have thought the comparison a
good omen for my friendship with Matilda. To be hotly taken up by Mrs.
Minchin meant an equally hot quarrel at no very distant date. The
squabble with the bride was not slow to come, but Matilda and I fell out
first. I think she was tyrannical, and I know I was peevish. My Ayah
spoilt me; I spoke very broken English, and by no means understood all
that the Bullers said to me; besides which, I was feverishly unhappy at
intervals about my father.

It was two months before Mrs. Minchin found out that her sweet little
puss was a deceitful little cat; but at the end of two days I had
offended Matilda, and we plunged into a war of words such as children
wage when they squabble.

"I won't show you any more of my dresses," said Matilda.

"I've seen them all," I boldly asserted; and the stroke told.

"You don't know that," said Matilda.

"Yes, I do."

"No, you don't."

"Well, show me the others then."

"No, that I won't."

"I don't care."

"I've got a blue silk coming out from England," Matilda continued, "but
you haven't."

"I've got a pink silk here," said I, "and pink shoes."

"Ah, but you can't wear them now your papa's dead," said Matilda; "Mamma
says you will have to wear black for twelve months."

I am sure Matilda did not mean to be cruel, but this blow cut me deeply.
I remember the tide of misery that seemed to flood over my mind, to this
day. I was miserable because my father was dead, and I could not go to
him for comfort. I was miserable because I was out of temper, and
Matilda had had the best of the quarrel. I was miserable--poor little
wretch!--because I could not wear my pink silk, now my father was dead.
I put my hands to my eyes, and screaming, "Papa! Papa!" I rushed out
into the verandah.

As I ran out, some one ran in; we struck against each other, and Bustle
and I rolled over on to the floor. In a moment more I was in Mr.
Abercrombie's arms, and sobbing out my woes to him.

I am sorry to say that he swore rather loudly when he heard what Matilda
had said, and I fancy that he lectured her when I had gone to Ayah, for
she came to me presently and begged my pardon. Of course we were at once
as friendly as before. Many another breach was there between us after
that, hastily made and quickly healed. But the bride and Mrs. Minchin
never came to terms.

"Mr. George" remained my devoted friend. I looked for him as I used to
look for my father. The first time I saw him after I came to the Bullers
was on the day of my father's funeral. He was there, and came back with
Major Buller. I was on Mr. George's knee in a moment, with my hand
through the crape upon his sleeve. The Major slowly unfastened his
sword-belt, and laid it down with a sigh, saying, "We've lost a good
man, Abercrombie, and a true friend."

"You don't know what a friend to me," said Mr. George impetuously. "Why,
look here, sir. A month or two ago I'd outrun the constable--I always am
getting into a mess of some sort--and Vandaleur found it out and lent me
the money."

"You're not the first youngster he has helped by many, to my knowledge,"
said Major Buller.

"But that's not all, sir," said Mr. George, standing up with me in his
arms. "When we first went in that night, you remember his speaking
privately to me once? Well, what he said was, 'I think I'm following the
rest, Abercrombie, and I wanted to speak to you about this.' He had got
my I.O.U. in his hand, and he tore it across, and said, 'Don't bother
any more about it; but keep straight, my boy, if you can, for your
people's sake.' I'm sadly given to going crooked, sir, but if anything
could make a fellow----"

Mr. George got no further in his sentence, but the Major seemed to
understand what he meant, for he spoke very kindly to him, and they left
me for a bit and walked up and down the verandah together. Just before
Mr. George left, I heard him say, "Have you heard anything of Mrs.
Vandaleur?"

"I wrote to her, in the best fashion that I could," said Major Buller.
"But there's no breaking rough news gently, Abercrombie. I ought to hear
from her soon."

But he never did hear from her. My poor mother had fled from the cholera
only to fall a victim to fever. The news of my father's death was, I
believe, the immediate cause of the relapse in which she died.

And so I became an orphan.

Shortly afterwards the regiment was ordered home, and the Bullers took
me with them.




CHAPTER IV.

SALES--MATTERS OF PRINCIPLE--MRS. MINCHIN QUARRELS WITH THE BRIDE--MRS.
MINCHIN QUARRELS WITH EVERYBODY--MRS. MINCHIN IS RECONCILED--THE VOYAGE
HOME--A DEATH ON BOARD.


I only remember a little of our voyage home in the troop-ship, but I
have heard so much of it, from the elder Buller girls and the ladies of
the regiment, that I seem quite familiar with all that happened; and I
hardly know now what I remember myself, and what has been recalled or
suggested to me by hearing the other ladies talk.

There was no lack of subjects for talk when the news came that the
regiment was ordered home. As Aunt Theresa repeatedly remarked, "There
are a great many things to be considered." And she considered them all
day long--by word of mouth.

The Colonel (that is, the new Colonel)--he had just returned from leave
in the hills--and his wife behaved rather shabbily, it was thought.
"But," as Mrs. Minchin said, "what could you expect? They say she was
the daughter of a wholesale draper in the City. And trade in the blood
always peeps out." We knew for certain that before there was a word said
about the regiment going home, it had been settled that the Colonel's
wife should go to England, where her daughters were being educated, and
take the two youngest children with her. Her passage in the mail-steamer
was all but taken, if not quite. And then, when they heard of the
troop-ship, she stayed to go home in that. "Money can be no object to
them," said Mrs. Minchin, "for one of the City people belonging to her
has died lately, and left her--I can't tell you how many thousands.
Indeed, they've heaps of money, and now he's got the regiment he ought
to retire. And I must say, I think it's very hard on you, dear Mrs.
Buller. With all your family, senior officer's wife's accommodation
would be little enough, for a long voyage."

"Which is no reason why my wife should have better accommodation than
she is entitled to, more than any other lady on board," observed Uncle
Buller. "The Quartermaster's wife has more children than we have, and
you know how much room she will get."

"Quartermaster's wife!" muttered Mrs. Minchin. "She would have been
accommodated with the women of the regiment if we had gone home three
months ago (at which time Quartermaster Curling was still only a
sergeant)."

Uncle Buller made no reply. He was not fond of Mrs. Minchin, and he
never disputed a point with her.

One topic of the day was "sales." We all had to sell off what we did not
want to take home, and the point was to choose the right moment for
doing so.

"I shan't be the first," said Aunt Theresa decidedly. "The first sales
are always failures somehow. People are depressed. Then they know that
there are plenty more to come, and they hang back. But further on,
people have just got into an extravagant humour, and would go
bargain-hunting to fifty sales a day. Later still, they find out that
they've got all they want."

"And a great deal that they don't want," put in Uncle Buller.

"Which is all the same thing," said Aunt Theresa. "So I shall sell about
the middle." Which she did, demanding her friends' condolences
beforehand on the way in which her goods and chattels would be "given
away," and receiving their congratulations afterwards upon the high
prices that they fetched.

To do Aunt Theresa justice, if she was managing, she was quite honest.

[Eleanor is shocked by some of the things I say about people in our own
rank of life. She believes that certain vulgar vices, such as cheating,
lying, gluttony, petty gossip, malicious mischief-making, etc., are
confined to the lower orders, or, as she wisely and kindly phrases it,
to people who know no better. She laughs at me, and I laugh at myself,
when I say (to support my own views) that I know more of the world than
she does; since what I know of the world beyond this happy corner of it
I learned when I was a mere child. But though we laugh, I can remember a
good deal. I have heard polished gentlemen lie, at a pinch, like the
proverbial pick-pocket, and pretty ladies fib as well as servant-girls.
Of course, I do not mean to say that as many ladies as servant-girls
tell untruths. But Eleanor would fain believe that the lie which Solomon
discovered to be "continually on the lips of the untaught" is not on the
lips of those who "know better" at all. As to dishonesty, too, I should
be sorry to say that customers cheat as much as shopkeepers, but I do
think that many people who ought to "know better" seem to forget that
their honour as well as their interest is concerned in every bargain.
The question then arises, do people in our rank know so much better on
these points of moral conduct than those below them? If Eleanor and her
parents are "old-fashioned" (and the boys think us quite behind the
times), I fancy, that perhaps high principle and a nice sense of honour
are not so well taught now as they used to be. Noble sentiments are not
the fashion. The very phrase provokes a smile of ridicule. But I do not
know whether the habit of uttering ignoble ones in "chaff" does not at
last bring the tone of mind down to the low level. It is so terribly
easy to be mean, and covetous, and selfish, and cowardly untrue, if the
people by whose good opinion one's character lives will comfortably
confess that they also "look out for themselves," and "take care of
Number One," and think "money's the great thing in this world," and hold
"the social lie" to be a necessary part of social intercourse. I know
that once or twice it has happened that young people with whom we have
been thrown have said things which have made high-principled Eleanor
stand aghast in honourable horror; and that that speechless indignation
of hers has been as much lost upon them as the touch of a feather on the
hide of a rhinoceros. Eleanor is more impatient than I am on such
subjects. I who have been trained in more than one school myself, am
sorry for those who have never known the higher teaching. Eleanor thinks
that modesty, delicacy of mind and taste, and uprightness in word and
deed, are innate in worthy characters. Where she finds them absent, she
is apt to dilate her nostrils, and say, in that low, emphatic voice
which is her excited tone, "There are some things that you cannot _put
into_ anybody!" and so turn her back for ever on the offender. Or, as
she once said to a friend of the boys, who was staying with us, in the
heat of argument, "I supposed that honourable men, like poets, are born,
not made." I, indeed, do believe these qualities to be in great measure
inherited; but I believe them also to come of training, and to be more
easily lost than Eleanor will allow. She has only lived in one moral
atmosphere. I think that the standard of a family or a social circle
falls but too easily; and in all humbleness of mind, I say that I have
reason to believe that in this respect, as in other matters, elevation
and amendment are possible.

However, this is one of the many subjects we discuss, rocking and pacing
the kitchen to the howling of the wind. We have confessed that our
experience is very small, and our opinions still unfixed in the matter,
so it is unlikely that I shall settle it to my own, or anybody's
satisfaction, in the pages of this biography.]

To return to Aunt Theresa. She was, as I said, honest. She chose a good
moment for our sale; but she did not "doctor" the things. For the credit
of the regiment, I feel ashamed to confess that everybody was not so
scrupulous. One lady sat in our drawing-room, with twenty-five pounds'
worth of lace upon her dress, and congratulated herself on having sold
some toilette-china as sound, of which she had daintily doctored two
fractures with an invaluable cement. The pecuniary gain may have been
half-a-crown. The loss in self-respect she did not seem to estimate.
Aunt Theresa would not have done it herself, but she laughed
encouragingly. It is difficult to be strait-laced with a lady who had so
much old point, and whose silks are so stiff that she can rustle down
your remonstrances. Another friend, a young officer whose personal
extravagance was a proverb even at a station in India, boasted for a
week of having sold a rickety knick-knack shelf to a man who was going
off to the hills for five-and-twenty rupees when it was not worth six. I
have heard him swear at tailors, servants, and subordinates of all
kinds, for cheating. I do not think it ever dawned upon his mind that
common honesty was a virtue in which he himself was wanting. As to Mrs.
Minchin's tales on this subject--but Mrs. Minchin's tales were not to be
relied upon.

It was about this time that Mrs. Minchin and the bride quarrelled. In a
few weeks after her arrival, the bride knew all the ladies of the
regiment and the society of the station, and then showed little
inclination to be bear-led by Mrs. Minchin. She met that terrible lady
so smartly on one occasion that she retired, worsted, for the afternoon,
and the bride drove triumphantly round the place, and called on all her
friends, looking as soft as a Chinchilla muff, and dropping at every
bungalow the tale of something that Mrs. Minchin had said, by no means
to the advantage of the inmates.

It was in this way that Aunt Theresa came to know what Mrs. Minchin had
said about her wearing half-mourning for my father and mother. That she
knew better than to go into deep black, which is trying to indefinite
complexions, but was equal to any length of grief in those lavenders,
and delicate combinations of black and white, which are so becoming to
everybody, especially to people who are not quite so young as they have
been.

In the warmth of her own indignation at these unwarrantable remarks, and
of the bride's ready sympathy, Aunt Theresa felt herself in candour
bound to reveal what Mrs. Minchin had told her about the bride's having
sold a lot of her wedding presents at the sale for fancy prices; they
being new-fashioned ornaments, and so forth, not yet to be got at the
station.

The result of this general information all round was, of course, a
quarrel between Mrs. Minchin and nearly every lady in the regiment. The
bride had not failed to let "the Colonel's lady" know what Mrs. Minchin
thought of her going home in the troop-ship, and had made a call upon
the Quartermaster's wife for the pleasure of making her acquainted with
Mrs. Minchin's warm wish that the regiment had been ordered home three
months sooner, when Mrs. Curling and the too numerous little Curlings
would not have been entitled to intrude upon the ladies' cabin.

And yet, strange to say, before we were half-way to England, Mrs.
Minchin was friendly once more with all but the bride; and the bride was
at enmity with every lady on board. The truth is, Mrs. Minchin, though a
gossip of the deepest dye, was kind-hearted, after a fashion. Her
restless energy, which chiefly expended itself in petty social plots,
and the fomentation of quarrels, was not seldom employed also in
practical kindness towards those who happened to be in favour with her.
She was really interested--for good or for evil--in those with whose
affairs she meddled, and if she was a dangerous enemy, and a yet more
dangerous friend, she was neither selfish nor illiberal.

The bride, on the other hand, had no real interest whatever in anybody's
affairs but her own, and combined in the highest degree those qualities
of personal extravagance and general meanness which not unfrequently go
together.

A long voyage is no small test of temper; and it was a situation in
which Mrs. Minchin's best qualities shone. It was proportionably
unfavourable to those of the bride. Her maid was sick, and she was
slovenly. She was sick herself, and then her selfishness and discontent
knew no check. The other ladies bore their own little troubles, and
helped each other; but under the peevish egotism of the bride, her
warmest friends revolted. It was then that Mrs. Minchin resumed her sway
amongst us.

With Aunt Theresa she was soon reconciled. Mrs. Buller's memory was
always hazy, both in reference to what she said herself, and to what was
said to her. She was too good-natured to strain it to recall past
grievances. Her indignation had not lasted much beyond that afternoon in
which the bride scattered discord among her acquaintances. She had
relieved herself by outpouring the tale of Mrs. Minchin's treachery to
Uncle Buller, and then taking him warmly to task for the indifference
with which he heard her wrongs; and had ended by laughing heartily when
he compared the probable encounter between Mrs. Minchin and the bride to
the deadly struggles of two quarrelsome "praying-mantises" in his
collection.

[Major Buller was a naturalist, and took home some rare and beautiful
specimens of Indian insects.]

It was an outbreak of sickness amongst the little Curlings which led to
the reconciliation with the Quartermaster's wife. Neither her kindness
of heart nor her love of managing other folks' matters would permit Mrs.
Minchin to be passive then. She made the first advances, and poor Mrs.
Curling gratefully responded.

"I'm sure, Mrs. Minchin," said she, "I don't wonder at any one thinking
the children would be in the way, poor dears. But of course, as Curling
said----"

"GOD bless you, my good woman," Mrs. Minchin broke in. "Don't let us go
