greatly pleased, one morning, at seeing Reuben at work in the
gardens.

"Good morning, Reuben," she said.

"Good morning, miss," he replied, touching his hat.

"I am glad you have come in Tom's place, and I hope you will be
good, and not get into scrapes, for I told papa I thought you would
not; and you see, if you do, he will turn round and blame me."

"I will try not to get into scrapes, Miss Kate," Reuben said. "I
don't do it often, you know, and I don't think there will be much
chance of it, here."

Kate nodded and walked on, and Reuben went about his work.

There was, however, much more opportunity for getting into scrapes
than Reuben imagined, although the scrapes were not of the kind he
had pictured. Being naturally careless, he had not been there a
week before, in his eagerness to get home to a particularly
interesting book, he forgot to carry out his orders to shut the
cucumber frames and, a sharp frost coming on in the night, the
plants were all killed; to the immense indignation of the gardener,
who reported the fact, with a very serious face, to the squire.

"I am afraid that boy will never do, squire. Such carelessness I
never did see, and them plants was going on beautifully."

"Confound the young rascal!" the squire said wrathfully, for he was
fond of cucumbers. "I will speak to him myself. This sort of thing
will never do."

And accordingly, the squire spoke somewhat sharply to Reuben, who
was really sorry for the damage his carelessness had caused; and he
not only promised the squire that it should not occur again, but
mentally resolved very firmly that it should not. He felt very
shamefaced when Kate passed him in the garden, with a serious shake
of her head, signifying that she was shocked that he had thus early
got into a scrape, and discredited her recommendation.

The lesson was a useful one. Henceforth Reuben paid closer
attention to his work, and even the gardener, who regarded boys as
his great trial in life, expressed himself satisfied with him.

"Since that affair of the cucumbers I must own, squire," he said a
month later, "that he is the best boy I have come across. He
attends to what I say and remembers it, and I find I can trust him
to do jobs that I have never been able to trust boys with, before.
He seems to take an interest in it, and as he is well spoken and
civil, he ought to get on and make a good gardener, in time."

"I am glad to hear a good account of him," the squire replied. "He
is sharp and intelligent, and will make his way in life, or I am
mistaken. His father was an uncommonly clever fellow, though he
made a mess of it, just at the end; and I think the boy takes after
him."

Among Reuben's other duties was that of feeding and attending to
the dogs. These consisted of two setters, a pointer, and a large
house dog, who was chained up at the entrance to the stables.
Reuben was soon excellent friends with the sporting dogs, but the
watchdog, who had probably been teased by Reuben's predecessor,
always growled and showed his teeth when he went near him; and
Reuben never dared venture within the length of his chain, but
pushed the bowl containing his food just within his reach.

One day, he had been sent on an errand to the stables. He forgot
the dog and ran close to the kennel. The animal at once sprang out.
Reuben made a rush, but he was not quick enough, and the dog caught
him by the leg. Reuben shouted, and the coachman ran out and,
seizing a fork, struck the dog and compelled him to loose his hold.

"Has he bit you badly, Reuben?"

"Well, he has bit precious hard," Reuben replied. "I think he has
nearly taken a piece out of my calf," as, on pulling up his
trousers, he showed his leg streaming with blood.

"Put it under the pump, lad. I will pump on it," the coachman said.
"He's a bad-tempered brute, and I wonder the squire keeps it."

"The brute ought to be killed," Reuben grumbled angrily. "I have
never teased it or worried it, in any way. I wish you had stuck
that fork into him, instead of hitting him with it. If you hadn't
been within reach, he would have taken the bit out of me. He will
kill somebody some day, and it were best to kill him, first."

The gardener pumped for some time on Reuben's leg; and then, going
into the kitchen, he got some strips of rag from the cook and bound
it up.

"You had best go home now," he said. "I will tell the gardener,
when he comes round, what has happened to you. I doubt you will
have to lay up, for a day or two."

As Reuben limped home, he met Tom Thorne walking with another boy.

"Hello, Reuben!" the latter exclaimed. "What's come to you? Yer
trousers bee all tore."

"That brute of a house dog at the squire's has had hold of me,"
Reuben answered. "The savage beast has had a try, a good many
times; but this time he got hold, and he has bit me pretty sharp."

Reuben had to keep his leg quiet for three days but, the third
evening, he was well enough to go down the village to the
schoolhouse. After the lesson was over he walked for some distance
up the road, for his leg was very stiff; and he thought it would be
a good thing to try and walk it off, as he intended to go to work
next morning. On getting up early in the morning, however, he found
it was still stiff and sore; but he thought he had better go and
try to work for a bit.

"I am glad you are back again," the gardener said, when he saw him,
"for there's a lot of work on hand; but I see you are still lame.
The coachman tells me it were a nasty bite."

"It's pretty sore still," Reuben replied, "and I don't think I can
walk about much; but I thought I might help in some other way."

"Very well," the gardener said. "There are a lot of plants which
want shifting into larger pots. You do them, and I will take up the
fork and dig up that piece of ground I want to put the young
lettuces into."

Reuben worked hard till half-past eight, and then went off to his
breakfast. On his return, he was told the squire wished to speak to
him.

"It's about that dog, I expect," the gardener remarked. "I suppose
you know he were poisoned last night."

"No, I didn't know," Reuben replied; "but it's a precious good job.
I wish he had been poisoned before he got his teeth into me."

Reuben, on going round to the back door, was shown into the
library, where the squire was sitting. The coachman was with him.

"Now then, Reuben," the squire said, "I want you to tell me the
truth about this matter. The coachman told me, three days ago, that
you had been bitten by the yard dog, and I made up my mind to get
rid of him, on the first opportunity; but I find he was poisoned,
yesterday evening."

He stopped as if expecting Reuben to say something; but the boy,
having nothing to say, merely replied:

"Yes, sir, so the gardener has told me."

"What do you know about it, Reuben?"

"I don't know anything about it, sir," Reuben replied, opening his
eyes.

"Now, look here, lad," the squire said gravely, "I am disposed to
think well of you; and although I consider it a serious offence
your poisoning the dog, I shall consider it very much worse if you
deny it."

"But I didn't poison it, sir," Reuben affirmed. "I never dreamt of
such a thing."

The squire set his lips hard together.

"Just tell me your story over again," he said to the coachman.

"Well, yesterday evening, squire, I went down into the village to
buy some 'bacca. Just as I got back to the gate, out runs a boy. It
was too dark for me to see his face, but I naturally supposed it
were Reuben, so I said, 'Hello, Reuben, how's the leg?' But the
moment I spoke, he turned off from the path and ran away.

"Well, I thought it was queer, but I went on to the stable. About a
quarter of an hour afterwards, and as I was a-cleaning up the bits,
I heard Wolf howl. He kept on at it, so I took a lantern and went
out to see what was the matter. He was rolling about, and seemed
very bad. I stood a-looking at him, wondering what were best to do,
when sudden he gave a sort of yell, and rolled over, and he was
dead. I thought it was no good telling you about it till this
morning; and thinking it over, and seeing how sudden like it was, I
come to the 'pinion as how he had been poisoned; and naturally
thinking that, as he had bit Reuben, and as how Reuben said he
ought to be killed, and seeing as I had met the boy a quarter an
hour afore the dog was took bad, it came to me as how he had done
it.

"This morning I knew for certain as the dog had been poisoned, for
just outside of the reach of his chain there was that piece of
paper a-lying, as you have got before you."

It was a piece of blue paper, about four inches square, on which
was printed: "Rat poison."

"You hear that, Reuben? What have you to say?" the squire asked.

"I have got nothing to say, sir," Reuben answered, "except that
whoever the boy was, it wasn't me, and that I know nothing about
it."

"Well, Reuben, it will be easy for you to clear yourself, by saying
where you were at the time.

"What o'clock was it, Robert, that you saw the boy?"

"It was just a quarter past eight, squire. The quarter struck just
as I opened the gate."

"Were you out or at home at that hour, Reuben?"

"I was out, sir. I went to the schoolmaster's."

"What time did you leave there?"

"I left at eight, sir."

"Then if you got in just after eight, it is clear that you were not
the boy," the squire said. "If your mother tells me that you were
in at five minutes past eight, that settles the question, as far as
you are concerned."

"I didn't get in till half-past eight, sir," Reuben said. "I walked
about for a bit, after I came out from school, to try and get the
stiffness out of my leg, so as to be able to come to work this
morning."

"Was anyone with you, Reuben? Is there anyone to say what you did
with yourself, between eight and half-past eight?"

"No, sir," Reuben said quietly. "I didn't speak to a soul; and
didn't see a soul, so far as I know, from the time I came out of
the gate of the schoolhouse till I got home."

"Does your mother sell packets of this poison?" the squire said,
pointing to the paper.

Reuben looked at the paper.

"Yes, sir; I believe she does."

"Well, my lad," the squire said, "you must acknowledge that the
case looks very ugly against you. You are known to have borne bad
feelings against the dog; naturally enough, I admit. A boy about
your size was seen by Robert in the dark, coming out of the gate;
and that he was there for no good purpose is proved by the fact
that he ran away when spoken to. A quarter of an hour later, the
dog dies of poison. That poison you certainly could get at home
and, by your own admission, you were out and about at the time the
dog was poisoned. The case looks very bad against you."

"I don't care how bad it looks," Reuben said, passionately. "It
wasn't me, squire, if that were the last word I ever had to speak."

"Very well," the squire said coldly. "In my mind, the evidence is
overwhelming against you. I have no intention of pursuing the
matter further; nor will I, for your father's and mother's sake,
bring public disgrace upon you; but of course I shall not retain
you here further, nor have anything to do with you, in the future."

Without a word, Reuben turned and left the room. Had he spoken, he
would have burst into a passion of tears. With a white face, he
walked through the village and entered his mother's shop.

"What? Back again, Reuben?" she said. "I thought your leg was too
bad to work."

"It isn't my leg, mother," he said, in a choking voice. "The squire
has dismissed me. He says I have poisoned his dog."

"Says you poisoned his dog, Reuben! Whatever put such an idea into
his head?"

"The coachman saw a boy coming out of the yard, at a quarter past
eight last night. It was too dark for him to say for certain, but
he thought it was me. A quarter of an hour later the dog died of
poison, and this morning they picked up a cover of one of those rat
powders you sell. I couldn't say where I was at a quarter past
eight, when the coachman saw the boy; for as you know, mother, I
told you I had walked out a bit, after I came out from the school,
to get the stiffness out of my leg. So, altogether, the squire has
made up his mind 'tis me, and so he has sent me away."

Reuben had summed up the points against himself in a broken voice,
and now broke into a passion of tears. His mother tried in vain to
pacify him; but indeed her own indignation, at her boy being
charged with such a thing, was so great that she could do little to
console him.

"It's shameful!" she exclaimed, over and over again. "I call it
downright wicked of the squire to suspect you of such a thing."

"Well, mother, it does look very bad against me," Reuben said,
wiping his eyes at last, "and I don't know as the squire is so much
to be blamed for suspecting me. I know and you know that it wasn't
me; but there's no reason why the squire should know it. Somebody
has poisoned his dog, and that somebody is a boy. He knows that I
was unfriendly with the dog so, putting things together, I don't
see as he could help suspecting me, and only my word the other way.
It seems to me as if somebody must have done it to get me in a row,
for I don't know that the dog had bit anyone else. If it is anyone,
I expect it's Tom Thorne. He has never been friends with me, since
that affair of the school window."

"I will go at once and speak to his father," Mrs. Whitney said,
taking down her bonnet from the wall.

"No, mother, you can't do that," Reuben exclaimed. "We have got
nothing against him. The squire has ten times as good reason to
suspect me, as I have to suspect Tom Thorne; so as we know the
squire's wrong, it's ten times as likely we shall be wrong.
Besides, if he did it, of course he would deny it, he is the worst
liar in the village; and then folks would say I wasn't satisfied
with doing it myself, but I wanted to throw the blame on to him,
just as he did on me before. No, it won't do, mother."

Mrs. Whitney saw that it wouldn't do, and sat down again. Reuben
sat thinking, for some time.

"I must go away, mother," he said at last. "I can't stop here.
Every one in the village will get to know of it, and they will
point at me as the boy as poisoned the squire's dog, and then lied
about it. I couldn't stand that, mother."

"And you sha'n't stand it, my boy," Mrs. Whitney said, "not a day.
I will give up the cottage and move into Lewes, at once. I didn't
go there before, for I am known there, and don't like folk to see
how much I have come down in the world."

"No, mother, you stop here, and I will go up to London. They say
there is lots of work there, and I suppose I can get on as well as
another."

"I will not hear of your doing such a thing. I should never expect
to hear of you again. I should always be thinking that you had got
run over, or were starving in the streets, or dying in a workhouse.
No, Reuben, my plan's best. It's just silliness my not liking to
settle in Lewes; for of course it's better going where one is
known, and I should be lost in a strange place. No; I daresay I
shall find a cottage there, and I shall manage to get a living
somehow--perhaps open a little shop like this, and then you can be
apprenticed, and live at home."

An hour later, Mrs. Ellison called. Reuben had gone upstairs to lie
down, for his leg was very painful. Mrs. Whitney did not give her
visitor time to begin.

"I know what you have called about, Mrs. Ellison, and I don't want
to talk about it with you. The squire has grievously wronged my
boy. I wouldn't have believed it of him, but he's done it; so now,
ma'm, I give a week's notice of this house, and here's my rent up
to that time, and I will send you the key when I go. And now, ma'm,
as I don't want any words about it, I think it will be better if
you go, at once."

Mrs. Ellison hesitated a moment. Never, from the time she entered
the village as the squire's wife, had she been thus spoken to; but
she saw at once, in Mrs. Whitney's face, that it were better not to
reply to her; and that her authority as the squire's wife had, for
once, altogether vanished. She therefore took up the money which
Mrs. Whitney had laid on the counter and, without a word, left the
shop.

"I do believe, William," she said as, greatly ruffled and
indignant, she gave an account of the interview to the squire,
"that the woman would have slapped my face, if I had said anything.
She is the most insolent creature I ever met."

"Well, my dear," the squire said seriously, "I can hardly wonder at
the poor woman's indignation. She has had a hard time of it, and
this must be a sad blow. Naturally she believes in her son's
innocence, and we must not altogether blame her, if she resents his
dismissal. It's a sad business altogether, and I know it will be a
worry and trouble to me for months. Mind, I don't doubt that the
boy did it; it does not seem possible that it should be otherwise.
Still, it is not absolutely proved; and upon my word, I wish now I
had said nothing at all about it. I like the boy, and I liked his
father before him; and as this story must get about, it cannot but
do him serious damage. Altogether it is a most tiresome business,
and I would give a hundred pounds if it hadn't taken place."

"I really do not see why you should worry about it, William. The
boy has always been a troublesome boy, and perhaps this lesson may
do him good."

The squire did not attempt to argue the question. He felt really
annoyed and put out and, after wandering over the ground and
stables, he went down to the schoolhouse after the children had
been dismissed.

"Have you heard, Shrewsbury, about that boy Whitney?"

"No, sir, I have heard nothing about him," the schoolmaster said.
"He was here yesterday evening, as usual. His leg is no worse, I
hope. Those dog bites are always nasty things."

"I wish it had been worse," the squire said testily; "then he would
