"Yes, ma'am, it was a surprise to me, and something of a shock too, I
may say, for I had rather she had got a nice comfortable place nearer
home."

"Yes, it is a pity I did not hear of this vacancy at Lady Hazeldean's a
day or two sooner, for I can quite understand how anxious you must feel
at a young girl like Kate leaving home."

"Yes, ma'am, and if it had been anybody but my own brother that offered
it, she should not have gone, but he has been a good friend to me, and
I cannot afford to offend him.  If I could only have written and told
him I had a place in view for her, it would have been different.  I
suppose, ma'am, if you had heard of this nursery-maid's place a week
earlier, you would have recommended Kate for it, as she spoke to you, I
think, before Mary Green."

"Yes, she did, and I recommended her to Lady Hazeldean, when I called
there and heard of it, for I thought it would be just the place for
Kate; and I must say I felt a little vexed as well as disappointed that
you did not come to see me last Monday week about it."

The widow stared at her visitor.  "I never knew that I was expected,"
she said.

"Has not Kate told you since, that she forgot to deliver my message
when she came home on Sunday?  I told her to ask you to call and see me
on Monday morning, for I could not conveniently leave home on that day,
and I had promised Lady Hazeldean she should see you and Kate as soon
as possible."

"And Kate knew that and never told me!" gasped the widow.

"No, no, perhaps if I had explained it all to her she would not have
forgotten it, but I could not do that in school, and so I merely told
her I wished to see you on Monday morning," said Miss Eldon, quickly.

"Kate, how could you have forgotten such a message?" said her mother,
sharply.

But Kate stood with downcast face, and said not a word.

"You must not be angry, Mrs. Haydon; it was excusable, I am sure, if
you had just received these London letters," said the lady, gently.

"I don't see how she could have forgotten such a message," said the
widow, in the same vexed tone.  "Did you know what I was wanted for,
Kate?" she demanded, turning once more to her daughter.

But Miss Eldon answered for her: "Oh, no; she could not have known it,
and so I am the only one to blame in this business," she said.

Kate felt very grateful to her teacher for thus helping her out of the
difficulty, and vowed in her own mind that she would never act so
deceitfully again.  No, never again would she follow such a crooked
path, and deceive her mother, for it was deceit; now she saw it quite
plainly.  But still she was afraid to confess the whole truth about the
matter.

After Miss Eldon had gone, she had an opportunity of doing this, for
her mother said: "Now, Kate, tell me the whole truth about this affair."

"The truth, mother?" repeated Kate.  "Teacher told you the whole truth."

"But how could you forget such an important message as this, when you
knew it was just what I was wishing for you to get--a nice quiet place
near home?"

"But teacher did not say a word about the place that Sunday afternoon,"
said Kate, in an injured tone.

"But you might have known--might have guessed--what it was likely to be
about.  It is not as though Miss Eldon was in the habit of sending for
me.  She never did such a thing before."

"But still, how was I to know she had heard of a place at last?  I have
been waiting months and months, and nothing has come."

"I know that; but still how you could forget that Sunday afternoon,
when you came home and found me in such trouble about your going to
London, is more than I can understand."

[Illustration: Miss Eldon's visit.]

But the foolish girl persisted in declaring that she had forgotten all
about the message, in spite of her mother's frequently expressed
doubts, soothing her conscience by assuring herself that this should be
a warning to her never to do so again.  Kate felt quite sure about
this; let the temptation be what it might, she never would yield to it
again, as she had done in this instance, for it had made her miserable.

But I am not sure that Kate felt sorry enough for her fault yet to wish
it undone.  When she went up to bed that night, instead of kneeling
down and confessing her sin to God, and asking His forgiveness, and His
grace to keep her in the future, she peeped into the box that stood
ready packed, and thought with a feeling of triumph that she was going
to London after all, and her mother would forget all this fuss that had
been made about her teacher's message when she heard how well she was
getting on there; and so full was Kate's heart of these thoughts that
she jumped into bed without kneeling at her bedside, but still feeling
quite confident that she would never act again as she had done, now
that she had got her own way, and was sure of going to London.




CHAPTER III.

IN LONDON.

It was night when Kate reached London, but her uncle was waiting for
her at the railway station, and she and her luggage were soon stowed
away in a cab, and they were rattling through the brilliantly-lighted
streets.  To Kate's unaccustomed eyes it was like fairyland for a few
minutes, and she thought she had indeed been fortunate to obtain a
place in one of these grand shops.

But she soon found there were streets in London almost as dimly lighted
as their own village streets at home, and shops much less grand and
imposing than those she had first seen.

At last the cab stopped, and Kate saw, to her disappointment, that it
was not a broad, fashionable thoroughfare, and the shop, with its piles
of buns and loaves of bread, was by no means imposing, but rather
old-fashioned in its appearance, and the whole street was the same,
although there were a great number of people about, and everybody
seemed in such a hurry that Kate made up her mind there must be a fire
or some accident must have happened, near at hand.  All this passed
through her mind, as her box was being lifted from the roof of the cab,
as she stood on the pavement looking up and down the busy,
old-fashioned street, that was so unlike what she had fancied her new
home would be.

Her cousin Marion was behind the counter in the shop, and there seemed
to be a constant stream of customers coming and going.  "This is the
best bun house in London," whispered her uncle, as he took her hand and
led her in.

The old lady, who was likewise serving, left her post when she saw Kate
and her uncle, and led the way into the cosy parlour behind the shop.
She seemed pleased with Kate's appearance and manner, and asked her a
great many questions about her home and her mother.

"We are very quiet, old-fashioned people, ourselves," she said,
"although we live in London, and I am very particular about the young
people I have to help me in the shop, and never allow them to make
friends among the customers.  Be civil to all, but nothing more than
that to anyone, my dear; that is my rule, and you must remember to obey
it.  Marion knows I am more strict about this than anything else, and
so I hope you will remember it, too."

"Yes, ma'am, I will," said Kate; and then the old lady asked the
servant to bring up some supper, and went back to the shop, that Marion
might come in and speak to her father and cousin.

"I am to give you some supper, and then take you to bed," said Marion,
after their greetings were over.  "You will have some supper with us,
father?--Mrs. Maple told me to ask you."

"No, thank you, my dear, I want to get home, and you girls don't need
me now.  I have told Kate she is always to spend the Sunday with us,
the same as you do."

"Oh, yes, of course she will," said Marion.  "You see that is one
advantage of being in an old-fashioned shop like this; we have no
Sunday work," she said, turning to her cousin.

"Mother will be glad to know that," said Kate.

"Yes, you must tell her when you write," said her uncle, bidding her
good-bye.

When he was gone the girls sat down to supper, and Kate tried to eat,
but everything was so strange, and she had such an intense longing to
see her mother, that she said "yes" and "no" to her cousin's questions,
scarcely understanding what they were.

The next morning, however, she felt a good deal better, and by the end
of the week began to feel quite at home, for Mrs. Maple was not a hard
mistress, and so Kate was able to give a good account of her home, when
she wrote to her mother.

"What shall we do to-morrow--where shall we go?" said Marion, on
Saturday afternoon.

"Where do you generally go?" said Kate rather timidly.  "I have been
going to ask you two or three times how you spend Sunday."

"Oh!  I go home, and, if it's fine, Bella and I go for a walk, or a
little way into the country.  But you will want to see London, of
course."

"Yes," said Kate, rather slowly; "I should like to see some of the
grand places I have heard about, but--but don't you think we might
manage to see them another time?  Don't you go to Sunday school?" she
asked, in a still lower tone.

Her cousin stared at her in blank amazement, for a minute or two and
then burst into a merry laugh.  "Go to Sunday school--a young woman
like me?" she said.

"Well, not to Sunday school, exactly: I did not mean that, but to
church and Bible-class?" said Kate.

"Oh, yes, we go to church sometimes, for a change, when it's wet, and
it's a good place to see the fashions, too, but I never went to Sunday
school in my life; mother said it wasn't genteel!"

"Mother liked me to go to Sunday school, and I promised her I would
find out a Bible-class, as soon as I could," said Kate.

"Well, so you can, I daresay, after a little while, but you must look
round a bit first Now where shall we go on Sunday?  You see the fine
weather won't last long, and there's such lots of things for you to
see.  Of course, you would like to see Buckingham Palace, and the
Houses of Parliament, and the Albert Memorial, and Kensington Gardens.
But we can't see everything in one Sunday, so we had better make up our
mind to go and see the Parks and the Memorial next Sunday."

Kate did not answer, but Marion chose to consider the matter settled.
Later in the day, when they had time for a few minutes' chat to
themselves, Marion said, "You will soon forget your old-fashioned,
countrified notions about Sunday schools and Bible-classes.  They were
all very well, I daresay, for the country people could go out and get a
breath of fresh air any day in the week; but you can't here, and so we
are obliged to manage our Sundays the best way we can."

"Yes--but--but I should like to go to church next Sunday.  Mother asked
me in her letter this morning to tell her whether I had found a nice
Bible-class, and where I went to church."

"Oh! well, we'll go to church for once, just to satisfy your mother,
Kate, only she can't expect us to go every Sunday."

Kate thought she had better be content with the small victory she had
gained, and perhaps, by-and-by, she might be able to persuade Marion to
go to Bible-class with her, and thus put an end to these Sunday
excursions.  In the meantime, she must go with her cousins for a walk
or a pleasure trip on a Sunday afternoon, or else Marion would refuse
to accompany her to school.

It seemed strange to Kate, at first, to be walking about in the noisy
streets, or gazing at the fashionable, gaily-dressed people in the
Park, but she soon began to enjoy discussing this one's dress and that
one's bonnet almost as much as her cousins did, and her younger cousin
said, "You will soon wear off all your country rust, Kate.  How could
you have lived in that pokey place so long?"

"Oh, it wasn't pokey a bit," said Kate warmly; "I had lots of friends
there, and that is what we are not allowed to have here.  Don't you
find that rule of Mrs. Maple's rather hard to keep sometimes, Marion?"
she added.

"What rule?" said Marion.
