"Here is a new comrade," he said, as some of the men roused
themselves from the ground on his entrance. "He is a cousin of
Mutteh Ghar, and bears the same name. It seems that he has served
in another regiment, for a short time; but was discharged, owing to
sickness. He has now perfectly recovered health, and has come to
join his cousin; who, on his arrival, he finds to be dead. He is
very anxious to accompany the regiment and, as he understands his
work, the risaldar has consented to let him go, instead of
remaining behind at the depot.

"He is, of course, much affected by the loss of his cousin; and
hopes that he will not be worried by questions. He will be on
baggage guard tomorrow, and so will be left alone, until he
recovers somewhat from his disappointment and grief."

"I will see to it, subadar," one of the sergeants said. "Mutteh
Ghar was a nice young fellow, and we shall all welcome his cousin
among us, if he is at all like him."

"Thank you, sergeant! I am sure you will all like him, when you
come to know him; for he is a well-spoken young fellow, and I hope
that he will make as good a soldier. Good night!"

So saying, he turned and left the tent.

Half an hour later, Lisle was on parade. There were but eight
British officers; including the colonel, major, and adjutant, and
one company officer to each two companies. The inspection was a
brief one. The company officer walked along the line, paying but
little attention to the men; but carefully scrutinizing their arms,
to see that they were in perfect order. The regiment was put
through a few simple manoeuvres; and then dismissed, as work in
earnest would begin on the following morning.

Four men in each company were then told off to pack the baggage in
the carts. Lisle was one of those furnished by his company. There
was little talk while they were at work. In two hours the carts
were packed. Then, as they returned to the lines, his three
comrades entered into conversation with him.

"You are lucky to be taken," one said, "being only a recruit. I
suppose it was done so that you might fill the place of your
cousin?"

"Yes, that was it. They said that I had a claim; so that, if I
chose, I could send money home to his family."

"They are good men, the white officers," another said. "They are
like fathers to us, and we will follow them anywhere. We lately
lost one of them, and miss him sorely. However, they are all good.

"We are all glad to be going on service. It is dull work in
cantonments."

On arriving at the lines of the company, one of them said:

"The risaldar said that you will take your cousin's place. He slept
in the same hut as I. You will soon find yourself at home with us."

He introduced Lisle to the other occupants of the hut, eighteen in
number. Lisle then proceeded to follow the example of the others,
by taking off his uniform and stripping to the loincloth, and a
little calico jacket. He felt very strange at first, accustomed
though he was to see the soldiers return to their native costume.

"Your rations are there, and those of our new comrade," one of the
party said.

Several fires were burning, and Lisle followed the example of his
comrade, and took the lota which formed part of his equipment,
filled it with water, and put it in the ashes; adding, as soon as
it boiled, the handful of rice, some ghee, and a tiny portion of
meat. In an hour the meal was cooked and, taking it from the fire,
he sat down in a place apart; as is usual among the native troops,
who generally have an objection to eat before others.

"Those who have money," his comrade said, "can buy herbs and
condiments of the little traders, and greatly improve their mess."

This Lisle knew well.

"I have a few pice," he said, "but must be careful till I get my
pay."

As soon as night fell all turned in, as they were to start at
daylight.

"Here is room for you at my side, comrade," the sergeant said. "You
had better get to sleep, as soon as you can. Of course, you have
your blanket with you?"

"Yes, sergeant."

Lisle rolled himself in his blanket and lay down, covering his
face, as is the habit of all natives of India. It was some time
before he went to sleep. The events of the day had been exciting,
and he was overjoyed at finding that his plan had so far succeeded.
He was now one of the regiment and, unless something altogether
unexpected happened, he was certain to take part in a stirring
campaign.

While it was still dark, he was aroused by the sound of a bugle.

"The men told off to the baggage guard will at once proceed to pack
the waggons," the sergeant said.

Lisle at once got up and put on his uniform, as did three other men
in the tent. The kits and baggage had already been packed, the
night before; and the men of the guard, consisting of a half
company, proceeded to the waggons. Half an hour afterwards, another
bugle roused the remainder of the regiment, and they soon fell in.

It was broad daylight when they started, the baggage followed a
little later. The havildar who was in charge of them was,
fortunately, one of those of Lisle's company. There was but little
talk at the hurried start. Two men accompanied each of the twelve
company waggons. Half the remainder marched in front, and the
others behind. Lisle had been told off to the first waggon.

It was a long march, two ordinary stages being done in one. As the
animals were fresh, the transport arrived at the camping ground
within an hour of the main column. Accustomed though he was to
exercise, Lisle found the weight of his rifle, pouches, and
ammunition tell terribly upon him. He was not used to the boots
and, before half the journey was completed, began to limp. The
havildar, noticing this, ordered him to take his place on the top
of the baggage on his waggon.

"It is natural that you should feel it, at first, Mutteh Ghar," he
said. "You will find it easy enough to keep up with them, after a
few days' rest."

Lisle was thankful, indeed, for he had begun to feel that he should
never be able to hold on to the end of the march. He remained on
the baggage for a couple of hours, and then again took his place by
the side of the waggon; receiving an approving nod from the
havildar, as he did so.

When the halt was called, the men at once crowded round the
waggons. The kits were distributed and, in a few minutes, the
regiment had the appearance of a concourse of peaceable peasants.
No tents had been taken with them. Waterproof sheets had been
provided and, with these, little shelters had been erected, each
accommodating three men. The sergeant told Lisle off to share one
of these shelters with two other men. A party meanwhile had gone to
collect firewood and, in half an hour, the men were cooking their
rice.

"Well, how did you like the march?" one of them said to Lisle.

"I found it very hard work," Lisle said, "but the havildar let me
ride on the top of one of the waggons for a couple of hours and,
after that, I was able to march in with the rest."

"It was a rough march for a recruit," the other said, "but you will
soon get used to that. Grease your feet well before you put on your
bandages. You will find that that will ease them very much, and
that you will not get sore feet, as you would if you marched
without preparation."

Lisle took the advice, and devoted a portion of his rations for the
purpose, the last thing at night; and found that it abated the heat
in his feet, and he was able to get about in comfort.

Each soldier carried a little cooking pot. Although the regiment
was composed principally of Punjabis, many of the men were of
different nationalities and, although the Punjabis are much less
particular about caste than the people of Southern India, every man
prepared his meal separately. The rations consisted of rice, ghee,
a little curry powder, and a portion of mutton. From these Lisle
managed to concoct a savoury mess, as he had often watched the men
cooking their meals.

The sergeant had evidently chosen two good men to share the tent
with Lisle. They were both old soldiers, not given to much talking;
and were kind to their young comrade, giving him hints about
cooking and making himself comfortable, and abstaining from asking
many questions. They were easily satisfied with his answers and,
after the meal was eaten, sat down with him and talked of the
coming campaign. Neither of them had ever been to Chitral, but they
knew by hearsay the nature of the road, and discussed the
probability of the point at which serious opposition would begin;
both agreeing that the difficulties of crossing the passes, now
that these would be covered with snow, would be far greater than
any stand the tribesmen might make.

"They are tough fighters, no doubt," one of them said; "and we
shall have more difficulty, with them, than we have ever had
before; for they say that a great many of them are armed with good
rifles, and will therefore be able to annoy us at a distance, when
their old matchlocks would have been useless."

"And they are good shots, too."

"There is no doubt about that; quite as good as we are, I should
say. There will be a tremendous lot of flanking work to keep them
at a distance but, when it comes to anything like regular fighting,
we shall sweep them before us.

"From what I hear, however, we shall only have three or four guns
with us. That is a pity for, though the tribesmen can stand against
a heavy rifle fire, they have a profound respect for guns. I
expect, therefore, that we shall have some stiff fighting.

"How do you like the prospect, Mutteh Ghar?"

"I don't suppose I shall mind it when I get accustomed to it,"
Lisle said. "It was because I heard that the regiment was about to
advance that I hurried up to join. I don't think I should have
enlisted, had it been going to stay in the cantonment."

"That is the right spirit," the other said approvingly. "It is the
same with all of us. There is no difficulty in getting recruits,
when there is fighting to be done. It is the dull life in camp that
prevents men from joining. We have enlisted twice as many men, in
the past three months, as in three years before."

So they talked till night fell and then turned in; putting Lisle
between them, that being the warmest position.

In the morning the march was resumed in the same order, Lisle again
taking his place with the baggage guard. The march this time was
only a single one; but it was long, nevertheless. Lisle was able to
keep his place till the end, feeling great benefit from the ghee
which he had rubbed on his feet. The havildar, at starting, said a
few cheering words to him; and told him that, when he felt tired,
he could put his rifle and pouch in the waggon, as there was no
possibility of their being wanted.

His two comrades, when they heard that he had accomplished the
march without falling out, praised him highly.

"You have showed good courage in holding on," one of them said.
"The march was nothing to us seasoned men, but it must have been
trying to you, especially as your feet cannot have recovered from
yesterday. I see that you will make a good soldier, and one who
will not shirk his work. Another week, and you will march as well
as the best of us."

"I hope so," Lisle said. "I have always been considered a good
walker. As soon as I get accustomed to the weight of the rifle and
pouch, I have no doubt that I shall get on well enough."

"I am sure you will," the other said cordially, "and I think we are
as good marchers as any in India. We certainly have that reputation
and, no doubt, it was for that reason we were chosen for the
expedition, although there are several other regiments nearer to
the spot.

"From what I hear, Colonel Kelly will be the commanding officer of
the column, and we could not wish for a better. I hear that there
is another column, and a much stronger one, going from Peshawar.
That will put us all on our mettle, and I will warrant that we
shall be the first to arrive there; not only because we are good
marchers, but because the larger the column, the more trouble it
has with its baggage.

"Baggage is the curse of these expeditions. What has to be
considered is not how far the troops can go, but how far the
baggage animals can keep up with them. Some of the animals are no
doubt good, but many of them are altogether unfitted for the work.
When these break down they block a whole line; and often, even if
the march is a short one, it is very late at night before the last
of the baggage comes in; which means that we get neither kit,
blankets, nor food, and think ourselves lucky if we get them the
next morning.

"The government is, we all think, much to blame in these matters.
Instead of procuring strong animals, and paying a fair price for
them; they buy animals that are not fit to do one good day's march.
Of course, in the end this stinginess costs them more in money, and
lives, than if they had provided suitable animals at the outset."

Lisle had had a great deal of practice with the rifle, and had
carried away several prizes shot for by the officers; but he was
unaccustomed to carry one for so many hours, and he felt grateful,
indeed, when a halt was sounded. Fires were lighted, and food
cooked; and then all lay down, or sat in groups in the shade of a
grove. The sense of the strangeness of his condition had begun to
wear off, and he laughed and talked with the others, without
restraint.

Up to the time when he joined the regiment, Lisle had heard a good
deal of the state of affairs at Chitral; and his impression of the
natives was that they were as savage and treacherous a race as was
to be found in Afghanistan and Kashmir. Beyond that, he had not
interested himself in the matter; but now, from the talk of his
companions, he gained a pretty clear idea of the situation.

Illustration: Map illustrating the Chitral Campaign.

Old Aman-ul-mulk had died in August, 1892. He had reigned long; and
had, by various conquests and judicious marriages, raised Chitral
to a position of importance. The Chitralis are an Aryan race, and
not Pathans; and have a deep-rooted hatred of the Afghans.

In 1878 Aman placed Chitral under the nominal suzerainty of the
Maharajah of Kashmir and, Kashmir being one of the tributary states
of the Indian Empire, this brought them into direct communication
with the government of India; and Aman received with great
cordiality two missions sent to him. When he died, his eldest son
Nizam was away from Chitral; and the government was seized by his
second son, Afzul; who, however, was murdered by his uncle, Sher
Afzul. Nizam at once hurried to Chitral; and Sher Afzul fled to
Cabul, Nizam becoming the head of the state or, as it was called,
Mehtar. Being weak, he asked for a political officer to reside in
his territory; and Captain Younghusband, with an escort of Sikhs,
was accordingly sent to Mastuj, a fort in Upper Chitral.

However, in November Nizam was also murdered, by a younger brother,
Amir. Amir hurried to Chitral, and demanded recognition from
Lieutenant Gurdon; who was, at the time, acting as assistant
British agent. He replied that he had no power to grant
recognition, until he was instructed by the government in India.
Amir thereupon stopped his letters, and for a long time he was in
imminent danger, as he had only an escort of eight Sikhs.

On the 8th of January, fifty men of the 14th Sikhs marched down
from Mastuj and, on the 1st of February, Mr. Robertson, the British
agent, arrived from Gilgit. He had with him an escort of two
hundred and eighty men of the 4th Kashmir Rifles, and thirty-three
Sikhs; and was accompanied by three European officers. When he
arrived he heard that Umra Khan had, at the invitation of Amir,
marched into Chitral; but that his progress had been barred by the
strong fort of Drosh. As the Chitralis hate the Pathans, they were
not inclined to yield to the orders of Amir to surrender the fort,
and were consequently attacked. The place, however, was surrendered
by the treachery of the governor. Amir then advanced, and was
joined by Sher Afzul.

Mr. Robertson wrote to Amir Khan, saying that he must leave the
Chitral territory. Amir paid no attention to the order, and Mr.
Robertson reported this to the government of India. They issued, in
March, 1895, a proclamation warning the Chitralis to abstain from
giving assistance to Amir Khan, and intimating that a force
sufficient to overcome all resistance was being assembled; but that
as soon as it had attained its object, it would be withdrawn.

The Chitralis, who now preferred Sher Afzul to Amir, made common
cause with the former. Mr. Robertson learned that men were already
at work, breaking up the road between Chitral and Mastuj; and
accordingly moved from the house he had occupied to the fort, which
was large enough to receive the force with him.

On the 1st of March, all communications between Mr. Robertson and
Mastuj had ceased; and troops were at once ordered to assemble, to
march to his relief. It was clearly impossible for our agent to
retire as, in order to do so, he would have to negotiate several
terrible passes, where a mere handful of men could destroy a
regiment. Thus it was that the Pioneers had been ordered to break
up their cantonment, and advance with all speed to Gilgit.

Hostilities had already begun. A native officer had started, with
forty men and sixty boxes of ammunition, for Chitral; and had
reached Buni, when he received information that his advance was
likely to be opposed. He accordingly halted and wrote to Lieutenant
Moberley, special duty officer with the Kashmir troops in Mastuj.
The local men reported to Moberley that no hostile attack upon the
troops was at all likely but, as there was a spirit of unrest in
the air, he wrote to Captain Ross, who was with Lieutenant Jones,
and requested him to make a double march into Mastuj. This Captain
Ross did and, on the evening of the 4th of March, started to
reinforce the little body of men that was blocked at Buni.

On the same day a party of sappers and miners, under Lieutenants
Fowler and Edwards, also marched forward to Mastuj. When Captain
Ross arrived at Buni he found that all was quiet, and he therefore
returned to Mastuj, with news to that effect. The party of sappers
were to march, the next morning, with the ammunition escort.

On the evening of that day a note was received from Lieutenant
Edwards, dated from a small village two miles beyond Buni, saying
that he heard that he was to be attacked in a defile, a short
distance away. He started with a force of ninety-six men, in all.
They carried with them nine days' rations, and one hundred and
forty rounds of ammunition.

Captain Ross at once marched for Buni, and arrived there the same
evening. Here he left a young native officer and thirty-three rank
and file while, with Lieutenant Jones and the rest of his little
force, he marched for Reshun, where Lieutenant Edwards' party were
detained. They halted in the middle of the day; and arrived, at one
o'clock, at a hamlet halfway to Reshun.

Shortly after starting, they were attacked. Lieutenant Jones, one
of the few survivors of the party, handed in the following report
of this bad business.

"Half a mile after leaving Koragh the road enters a narrow defile.
The hills on the left bank consist of a succession of large stone
shoots, with precipitous spurs in between. The road at the entrance
to the defile, for about one hundred yards, runs quite close to the
river; after that it lies along a narrow maidan, some thirty or
forty yards in width, and is on the top of the river bank, which is
here a cliff. This continues for about half a mile, then it ascends
a steep spur.

"When the advanced party reached about halfway up this spur, it was
fired on from a sangar which had been built across the road and, at
the same time, men appeared on all the mountain tops and ridges,
and stones were rolled down all the shoots. Captain Ross, who was
with the advanced guard, fell back on the main body. All the
coolies dropped their loads and bolted, as soon as the first shot
was fired. Captain Ross, after looking at the enemy's position,
decided to fall back upon Koragh; as it would have been useless to
go on to Reshun, leaving an enemy in such a position behind us."

Captain Ross ordered Lieutenant Jones to fall back with ten men,
seize the lower end of the defile, and cover the retreat. No fewer
than eight of his men were wounded, as he fell back. Captain Ross,
on hearing this, ordered him to return, and the whole party took
refuge in two caves, it being the intention of their commander to
wait there until the moon rose, and then try to force his way out.

But when they started, they were assailed from above with such a
torrent of rocks that they again retired to the caves. They then
made an attempt to get to the top of the mountain, but their way
was barred by a precipice; and they once more went back to the
cave, where they remained all the next day.

It was then decided to make an attempt to cut their way out. They
started at two in the morning. The enemy at once opened fire, and
many were killed, among them Captain Ross himself. Lieutenant Jones
with seventeen men reached the little maidan, and there remained
for some minutes, keeping up a heavy fire on the enemy on both
banks of the river, in order to help more men to get through.

Twice the enemy attempted to charge, but each time retired with
heavy loss. Lieutenant Jones then again fell back, two of his party
having been killed and one mortally wounded, and the lieutenant and
nine sepoys wounded. When they reached Buni they prepared a house
for defence, and remained there for seven days until reinforcements
came up.

In the meantime the 20th Bengal Sappers and Miners, and the 42nd
Kashmir Infantry had gone on, beyond the point where Captain Ross's
detachment had been all but annihilated, and reached Reshun; and
Lieutenants Edwards and Fowler, with the Bengal Sappers and ten
Kashmir Infantry, went on to repair a break in the road, a few
miles beyond that place. They took every precaution to guard
against surprise. Lieutenant Fowler was sent to scale the heights
on the left bank, so as to be able to look down into some sangars
on the opposite side. With some difficulty, he found a way up the
hillside. When he was examining the opposite cliff a shot was
fired, and about two hundred men rushed out from the village and
entered the sangars.

As Fowler was well above them, he kept up a heavy fire, and did
great execution. The enemy, however, began to ascend the hills, and
some appeared above him and began rolling down stones and firing
into his party. Fowler himself was wounded in the back, a corporal
was killed, and two other men wounded. He managed, however, to
effect his retreat, and joined the main body.

