disregarding his outstretched hand and totally disorganizing his
ceremonious bow, threw her arms about his neck and kissed him with
unwonted warmth, much to his dismay and yet not altogether to his
displeasure.  Perhaps he suspected something from the bright and happy
faces of the two young people; but if so, he made no comment, merely
telling them that supper had been waiting this long time, and bidding
them hasten their preparation for the meal.

Katharine, followed by Chloe, her black maid, who had been waiting for
her, hastily ran up the stairs to her own apartments, upon this signal,
but turned upon the topmost stair and waved a kiss to the two gentlemen
who were watching her,--one with the dim eyes of an old father, the
other with the bright eyes of a young lover.

"Colonel Wilton," exclaimed Seymour, impulsively, "I have something to
say to you,--something I must say."

"Not now, my young friend," replied the colonel, genially.  "Supper
will be served, nay, is served already, and only awaits you and
Katharine; afterward we shall have the whole evening, and you may say
what you will."

"Oh, but, colonel--"

"Nay, sir, do not lay upon me the unpleasant duty of commanding a
guest, when it is my privilege as host to entreat.  Go, Mr. Seymour,
and make you ready.  Katharine will return in a moment, and it does not
beseem gentlemen, much less officers, to keep a lady waiting, you know.
Philip and Bentley have gone fishing, and I am informed they will not
return until late.  We will not wait for them."

"As you wish, sir, but I must have some private conversation with you
as soon as possible."

"After supper, my boy, after supper."




CHAPTER III

_Colonel Wilton._

Left to himself for a moment, the colonel heaved a deep sigh; he had a
premonition of what was coming, and then paced slowly up and down the
long hall.

He was attired, with all the splendor of an age in which the subject of
dress engrossed the attention of the wisest and best, in the height of
the prevailing mode, which his recent arrival from Paris, then as now
the mould of fashion, permitted him to determine.  The soft light from
the wax candles in their sconces in the hall fell upon his thickly
powdered wig, ran in little ripples up and down the length of his
polished dress-sword, and sparkled in the brilliants in the buckles of
his shoes.  His face was the grave face of a man accustomed from of old
not only to command, but to assume the responsibility of his orders;
when they were carried out, his manner was a happy mixture of the
haughty sternness of a soldier and the complacent suavity of the
courtier, tempered both by the spirit of frankness and geniality born
of the free life of a Virginia planter in colonial times.

In his early youth he had been a soldier under Admiral Vernon, with his
old and long-deceased friend Lawrence Washington at Cartagena; later
on, he had served under Wolfe at Quebec.  A visitor, and a welcome one
too, at half the courts of Europe, he looked the man of affairs he was;
in spite of his advanced age, he held himself as erect, and carried
himself as proudly as he had done on the Heights of Abraham or in the
court of St. Germain.

Too old to incur the hardships of the field, Colonel Wilton had yet
offered his services, with the ardor of the youngest patriot, to his
country, and pledged his fortune, by no means inconsiderable, in its
support.  The Congress, glad to avail themselves of the services of so
distinguished a man, had sent him, in company with Silas Deane and
Benjamin Franklin, as an embassy to the court of King Louis, bearing
proposals for an alliance and with a request for assistance during the
deadly struggle of the colonies with the hereditary foe of France.
They had been reasonably successful in a portion of their attempt, at
least; as the French government had agreed, though secretly, to furnish
arms and other munitions of war through a pseudo-mercantile firm which
was represented by M. de Beaumarchais, the gifted author of the comedy
"Le Mariage de Figaro."  The French had also agreed to furnish a
limited amount of money; but, more important than all these, there were
hints and indications that if the American army could win any decisive
battle or maintain the unequal conflict for any length of time, an open
and closer alliance would be made.  The envoys had despatched Colonel
Wilton, from their number, back to America to make a report of the
progress of their negotiations to Congress.  This had been done, and
General Washington had been informed of the situation.

The little ship, one of the gallant vessels of the nascent American
navy, in which Colonel Wilton had returned from France, had attacked
and captured a British brig of war during the return passage, and young
Seymour, who was the first lieutenant of the ship, was severely
wounded.  The wound had been received through his efforts to protect
Colonel Wilton, who had incautiously joined the boarding-party which
had captured the brig.  After the interview with Congress, Colonel
Wilton was requested to await further instructions before returning to
France, and, pending the result of the deliberations of Congress, after
a brief visit to the headquarters of his old friend and neighbor
General Washington, he had retired to his estate.  As a special favor,
he was permitted to bring with him the wounded lieutenant, in order
that he might recuperate and recover from his wound in the pleasant
valleys of Virginia.  That Seymour was willing to leave his own friends
in Philadelphia, with all their care and attention, was due entirely to
his desire to meet Miss Katharine Wilton, of whose beauty he had heard,
and whose portrait indeed, in her father's possession, which he had
seen before on the voyage, had borne out her reputation.  Seymour had
been informed since his stay at the Wiltons' that he had been detached
from the brig Argus, and notified that he was to receive orders shortly
to report to the ship Ranger, commanded by a certain Captain John Paul
Jones; and he knew that he might expect his sailing orders at any
moment.  He had improved, as has been seen, the days of his brief stay
to recover from one wound and receive another, and, as might have been
expected, he had fallen violently in love with Katharine Wilton.

There were also staying at the house, besides the servants and slaves,
young Philip Wilton, Katharine's brother, a lad of sixteen, who had
just received a midshipman's warrant, and was to accompany Seymour when
he joined the Ranger, then outfitting at Philadelphia; and Bentley, an
old and veteran sailor, a boatswain's mate, who had accompanied Seymour
from ship to ship ever since the lieutenant was a midshipman,--a man
who had but one home, the sea; one hate, the English; one love, his
country; and one attachment, Seymour.

Colonel Wilton was a widower.  As Katharine came down the stairway,
clad in all the finery her father had brought back for her from Paris,
her hair rolled high and powdered, the old family diamonds with their
quaint setting of silver sparkling upon her snowy neck, her fan
languidly waving in her hand, she looked strikingly like a pictured
woman smiling down at them from over the mantel; but to the sweetness
and archness of her mother's laughing face were added some of the
colonel's pride, determination, and courage.  He stepped to meet her,
and then bent and kissed the hand she extended toward him, with all the
grace of the old regime; and Seymour coming upon them was entranced
with the picture.

He too had changed his attire, and now was clad in the becoming dress
of a naval lieutenant of the period.  He wore a sword, of course, and a
dark blue uniform coat relieved with red facings, with a single epaulet
on his shoulder which denoted his official rank; his blond hair was
lightly touched with powder, and tied, after the fashion of active
service, in a queue with a black ribbon.

"Now, Seymour, since you two truants have come at last, will you do me
the honor to hand Miss Wilton to the dining-room?" remarked the
colonel, straightening up.

With a low bow, Seymour approached the object of his adoration, who,
after a sweeping courtesy, gave him her hand.  With much state and
ceremony, preceded by one of the servants, who had been waiting in
attention in the hall, and followed by the colonel, and lastly by the
colonel's man, a stiff old campaigner who had been with him many years,
they entered the dining-room, which opened from the rear of the hall.

The table was a mass of splendid plate, which sparkled under the soft
light of the wax candles in candelabra about the room or on the table,
and the simple meal was served with all the elegance and precision
which were habitual with the gentleman of as fine a school as Colonel
Wilton.

At the table, instead of the light and airy talk which might have been
expected in the situation, the conversation assumed that grave and
serious tone which denoted the imminence of the emergency.

The American troops had been severely defeated at Long Island in the
summer, and since that time had suffered a series of reverses, being
forced steadily back out of New York, after losing Fort Washington, and
down through the Jerseys, relentlessly pursued by Howe and Cornwallis.
Washington was now making his way slowly to the west bank of the
Delaware.  He was losing men at every step, some by desertion, more by
the expiration of the terms of their enlistment.  The news which
Colonel Wilton had brought threw a frail hope over the situation, but
ruin stared them in the face, and unless something decisive was soon
accomplished, the game would be lost.

"Did you have a pleasant ride up the river, Katharine?" asked her
father.

"Very, sir," she answered, blushing violently and looking involuntarily
at Seymour, who matched her blush with his own.

There was a painful pause, which Seymour broke, coming to the rescue
with a counter question.

"Did you notice that small sloop creeping up under the west bank of the
river, colonel, this evening?  I should think she must be opposite the
house now, if the wind has held."

"Why, when did you see her, Mr. Seymour?  I thought you were looking
at--at--"  She broke off in confusion, under her father's searching
gaze.  He smiled, and said,--

"Ah, Katharine, trained eyes see all things unusual about them,
although they are apparently bent persistently upon one spot.  Yes,
Seymour, I did notice it; if we were farther down the river, we might
suspect it of being an enemy, but up here I fancy even Dunmore's
malevolence would scarcely dare to follow."

Katharine looked up in alarm.  "Oh, father, do you think it is quite
safe?  Chloe told me that Phoebus told her that the raiders had visited
Major Lithcomb's plantation, and you know that is not more than fifty
miles down the river from us.  Would it not be well to take some
precaution?"

"Tut, tut, child! gossip of the negro servants!"  The colonel waved it
aside carelessly.  "I hardly think we have anything to fear at present;
though what his lordship may do in the end, unless he is checked, I
hardly like to imagine."

"But, father," persisted Katharine, "they said that Johnson was in
command of the party, and you know he hates you.  You remember he said
he would get even with you if it cost him his life, when you had him
turned out of the club at Williamsburg."

"Pshaw, Katharine, the wretch would not dare.  It is a cowardly
blackguard, Seymour, whom I saw cheating at cards at the Assembly Club
at the capital.  I had him expelled from the society of gentlemen,
where, indeed, he had no right of admittance, and I scarcely know how
he got there originally.  He made some threats against me, to which I
naturally paid no attention.  But what did you think of the vessel?"

"I confess I saw nothing suspicious about her, sir," replied Seymour.
"She seemed very much like the packets which ply on the river; I only
spoke idly of the subject."

"But, father, the packet went up last week, the day before you came
back, and is due coming down the river now, while this boat is coming
up," said Katharine.

"Oh, well, I think we are safe enough now; but, to relieve your unusual
anxiety, I will send Blodgett down to the wharf to examine and
report.--Blodgett, do you go down to the boat-landing and keep watch
for an hour or two.  Take your musket, man; there is no knowing what
you might need it for."

The old soldier, who had stationed himself behind the colonel's chair,
saluted with military precision, and left the room, saying, "Very good,
sir; I shall let nothing escape my notice, sir."

"Now, Katharine, I hope you are satisfied."

"Yes, father; but if it is the raiders, Blodgett won't be able to stop
them."

"The raiders," laughed the colonel; and pinching his daughter's ear, he
said, "I suspect the only raiders we shall see here will be those who
have designs upon your heart, my bonny Kate,--eh, Seymour?"

"They would never dare to wear a British uniform in that case, father,"
she retorted proudly.

"Well, Seymour, I hear, through an express from Congress to-day, that
Captain Jones has been ordered to command the Ranger, and that the new
flag--we will drink to it, if you please; yes, you too, Katharine; God
bless every star and stripe in it--will soon be seen on the ocean."

"It will be a rare sight there, sir," said Seymour; "but it will not be
long before the exploits of the Ranger will make it known on the high
seas, if rumor does not belie her captain."

"I trust so; but do you know this Captain Jones?"

"Not at all, sir, save by reputation; but I am told he has one
requisite for a successful officer."

"And what is that?"

"He will fight anything, at any time, or at any place, no matter what
the odds."

Colonel Wilton smiled.  "Ah, well, if it were not for men of that kind,
our little navy would never have a chance."

"No, father, nor the army, either; if we waited for equality before
fighting, I am afraid we should wait forever."

"True, Katharine.  By the way, have you seen Talbot to-day?"

"No, father."

"I wish that we might enlist his services in the cause.  I don't think
there is much doubt about Talbot himself, is there?"

"No.  It is his mother, you know; she is a loyalist to the core.  As
were her ancestors, so is she."

The colonel nodded gently; he had a soft spot in his heart for the
subject of their discussion.  "With her teaching and training, I can
well understand it, Katharine.  Proud, of high birth, descended from
the 'loyal Talbots,' and the widow of one of them, she cannot bear the
thought of rebellion against the king.  I don't think she cares much
for the people, or their liberties either."

"Yes, father; with her the creed is, the king can do no wrong."

"Ah, well," said the colonel, reflectively, "I thought so too once, and
many is the blow I have struck for this same king.  But liberty is
above royalty, independence not a dweller in the court; so, in my old
age, I find myself on a different side."  He sipped his wine
thoughtfully a moment, and continued,--

"Madam Talbot has certainly striven to restrain the boy, and
successfully so far.  He is a splendid fellow; I wish we had him.  He
would be of great service to the cause, with his name and influence,
and the money he would bring; and then the quality of the young man
himself would be of value to us.  You have met him, Seymour, I believe?"

"Yes, sir, several times; and I agree with you entirely.  It is his
mother who keeps him back.  I have had one or two conversations with
her.  She is a Tory through and through."

"Not a doubt of it, not a doubt of it," said the colonel.  "Katharine,
can't you do something with him?"

"Oh, father, you know that I have talked with him, pleaded with him,
and begged him to follow his inclination; but he remains by his mother."

"Nonsense, Katharine!  Don't speak of him in that way; give him time.
It is a hard thing: he is her only son; she is a widow.  Let us hope
that something will induce him to come over to us."  He said this in
gentle reproof of his spirited daughter; and then,--

"Permit me to offer you a glass of wine, Seymour,--you are not drinking
anything; and to whom shall we drink?"

Seymour, who had been quaffing deep draughts of Katharine's beauty,
replied promptly,--

"If I might suggest, sir, I should say Mistress Wilton."

"No, no," said Katharine.  "Drink, first of all, to the success of our
cause.  I will give you a toast, gentlemen: Before our sweethearts, our
sisters, our wives, our mothers, let us place--our country," she
exclaimed, lifting her own glass.

The colonel laughed as he drank his toast, saying, "Nothing comes
before country with Katharine."
