"No. We got a letter three days ago, telling us what to do. Our other
things'll be sent on by express."

The "joke" was out, and the two jokers were laughing as though it were a
remarkably good one in their estimation; but Ford nodded his head
approvingly.

"Uncle Joseph is a wise and careful man about his children," he said
slowly. "He didn't mean you should make the trip alone. I'm much obliged
to him for such an expression of his confidence in me."

The laugh somehow died away, as if a sudden fit of sickness had carried
it off, while a broad smile widened on the faces of the other boys,
notably including Dick Lee; but the baggage-checks were to be looked
after, and there were seats in the sleeping-car to be secured. The lost
joke could hide itself easily in all that hurry and excitement.

"The sleeper'll carry us the best part of the way," said Ford, when at
last they took their seats; "but we'll have a doleful little ride on a
small railway, early in the morning."

"But that'll take us right up north to Grantley," added Dab, with a
long-drawn breath of expectation. The remaining hours of that Friday
were largely spent by all six of them in looking out of the windows.
When they were not doing that, it was mostly because Joe or Fuz was
telling some yarn or other about Grantley and its academy.

They agreed perfectly in their somewhat extravagant praise of Mrs. Myers
and her daughter Almira. "She's such a good, kind-hearted, liberal,
motherly woman," said Joe.

"And Almira's a sweet young lady," added Fuz, "only she's a little timid
about boys."

"Needn't be afraid of us, I guess," said Ford Foster, with a benevolent
and protecting expression on his face; while Dab drew a mental picture
of the fair Almira as a sort of up-country copy of Annie Foster. After
the darkness came, and the "sleeper" was turned into a great
travelling-box full of little shaky bedrooms, there was no more talking
to be done, and all the boys were tired enough to go to sleep.

One consequence of their beginning their slumbers so early, however,
was, that they felt bright and fresh when the porter aroused them before
daylight next morning; and they hurriedly dressed themselves for their
ride on what Ford Foster called "the switch."

It was quite a respectable railway, however, and it carried them through
scenery so different from any that Dabney or Dick was accustomed to,
that they lost a good deal of what Joe and Fuz were saying about Dr.
Abiram Brandegee, the learned principal of Grantley Academy. It was of
less importance, perhaps, because they had heard it all before, and had
gathered a curious collection of ideas concerning the man under whose
direction they were to get their new stocks of learning.

"Dab," said Dick, "if it was any fellers but them said it, I'd want to
go home."

"Well, yes," said Dab quietly; "but then, that's just it. You can't
guess when they're telling the truth, and when they ain't."

"Is dar really any fun in lyin', do you s'pose, Dab?"

"Can't say, Dick. Guess there wouldn't be much for you or me."

"Dar's lots ob fun in Ford; an' he tells de truth mos' all de time,
stiddy. So does Frank, jes' a little bit stiddier."

"Ford never lies, Dick."

"No, sir, he don't. But w'en anoder feller's lyin', he kin make believe
he don't know it bes' of any feller I ebber seen."

"Dick," exclaimed Dabney, "what if Dr. Brandegee had heard you say
that!"

"I would tell him I was imitating somebody I had heard," solemnly
responded Dick, with fair correctness.

The ride began in the dark hour that comes before the dawn, and the
train ran fast. The sun was above the horizon, but had not yet peered
over the high hills around Grantley, when the excited schoolboys were
landed at the little station in the outskirts of the village. It was on
a hillside; and they could almost look down upon a large part of the
scene of their "good time coming,"--or their "bad time," a good deal as
they themselves might make it.

Dab and his friends saw that valley and village often enough afterwards;
but never again did it wear to them precisely the same look it put on
that morning, in the growing light of that noble September day. As for
Joe and Fuz, it was all an old story to them; and, what was more, they
had another first-rate joke on hand.

"There's the academy," said Joe: "that big white concern in the middle
of the green, and with so short a steeple."

"Steeple enough," said Ford. "Are the rest churches?"

"Yes; and, if you don't go to church reg'lar, Old By'll be sure to hear
of it."

"Old By" was the irreverent nickname they had selected for Dr. Abiram
Brandegee; and Fuz added,--

"Never mind him, boys. He's a raspy old fellow; but he's such a little,
old, withered wisp of a chap, you'll soon get used to him."

Dab was bewildered enough, just then, to wonder how such a weak-minded,
malicious old dwarf as had been painted to him, could have managed to
get and keep so high a position in so remarkably beautiful a place as
Grantley. He said something about the village being so pretty; but Dick
Lee had been staring eagerly in all directions, and replied with,--

"Jes' one little mite of a patch ob water! Is dar any fish to ketch?"

"Fish? In that pond?" said Fuz. "Why, it's alive with 'em. The people of
Grantley just live on fish."

"Guess I knows 'bout how many dey is now," said Dick soberly; and he was
not far from right, for there were no fish to speak of in that
willow-bordered mill-pond.

"Mrs. Myers will hardly be up so early as this," said Dab. "We can get
our trunks over by and by. Let's have a look at the village. Joe, it's
your turn to steer now. You and Fuz know how the land lies."

They were ready enough to tell all they knew, and a good deal more; but
the listeners they had that morning were not without eyes of their own,
and it was not a very fatiguing task to walk all over the village of
Grantley.

The first house to be studied with special care was the neat white
residence of Dr. Brandegee, with its shady trees and its garden; for Joe
said,--

"That's where you fellows'll have to come right after breakfast, to be
examined. Oh, but won't Old By put you through!"

Dick Lee's mouth came open as he stared at the knob on the doctor's
front door, and Dabney caught himself doubting if he knew the
multiplication-table. Even Ford Foster wondered if there was really any
thing he could teach Dr. Brandegee, and remarked to Frank Harley,--

"I s'pose you're about the only man among us that he can't corner."

"How's that?"

"Why, if he's too hard on you, you can answer him in Hindustanee. He's
never been a heathen in all his life: you'd have him"--

"Shuah!" chuckled Dick.

The "green" was large and well-kept, and looked like the best kind of a
ball-ground; but there was nothing wonderful about the academy building,
except that it evidently had in it room enough for a great many boys.

"You'll see enough of it before you get through," said Fuz. "But
there'll have to be lots of whittling done this fall."

"Whittling? what for?"

"Why, don't you see? They've gone and painted the old thing all over
new. Every boy cut his name somewhere before we left last term. They're
all painted over now: maybe they're puttied up level. They did that once
before, and we had to cut 'em all out again."

"Oh!" said Ford, "I see: you were afraid they'd forget you. I don't
believe they would."

"You haven't pointed out Mrs. Myers's," said Dabney. "It must be pretty
near breakfast-time. Where is it?"

The Hart boys broke out into a joint giggle of enjoyment as Joe
responded,--

"There it is,--right across there, beyond the harness-shop, opposite the
other end of the green. Handy in bad weather."

"It's a pretty decent-looking house too," said Ford. "Come on: let's go
over, and let her know we've arrived in port."

"Well, no," said Joe: "you fellows go over, soon as you please. Fuz and
I won't take our breakfast there this morning."

"Going somewhere else, eh? Well, we'll have an eye to your trunks when
they come."

The giggle grew rapidly into a laugh, as Fuz exclaimed,--

"Trunks! why, our baggage'll go to our boarding-house. We don't put up
with Mother Myers this time: got a new place. Oh, but won't you fellows
just love her and Almira!"

It was all out, that deep secret about their change of boarding-house;
and the Hart boys had something to enjoy this time, for Dab and his
friends looked at each other for a moment in blank amazement.

"All right, boys," shouted Ford, at the end of it: "here's for some
breakfast. Good-morning, Joe. Day-day, Fuz. See you again by and by."

They all followed him, but they could see that there was something more
hidden under the mirth of Joe and Fuz as they walked away; and they were
hardly out of hearing before Dab Kinzer remarked,--

"Look a' here, boys, I move we don't give those two any fun at our
expense."

"How?" asked Ford.

"If there's any thing at Mrs. Myers's that we don't like, we mustn't let
them know it."

"I's keep my mouf shet if I foun' de house was an ole eel-pot," said
Dick emphatically; and Frank and Ford came out even more strongly. They
all seemed to feel as if some kind of a trick had been played upon them,
to begin with.

However, it served to put them on their guard, and prevented any change
of countenance among them when their knock at the front door of that
house was answered, and the freckled face of Mrs. Myers beamed out upon
them from under its thin, smooth, glistening thatch of carroty hair. She
was not a handsome woman, and she had a thin nose, and a narrow mouth,
and very pale blue eyes; but she was all one smile of welcome as she
stood in that doorway.

"Mrs. Myers?" said Ford, with an extraordinary bow. "We arrived on the
morning train. I am Mr. Foster." And then, with a half turn to the
right, he continued, "Mrs. Myers--Mr. Richard Lee, Mr. Dabney Kinzer,
Mr. Francis Harley. Our baggage will come over pretty soon."

"Walk in, young gentlemen, walk in. I'm happy to see you.--Almira? Here
they are: put breakfast on the table right away."

"That isn't a bad beginning," thought Dab. "That sounds a good deal like
what Ham said of her. She knew we must be hungry."

"Walk into the parlor, please. Breakfast'll be ready in one minute. I'll
show you your rooms afterwards."

That, too, was considerate; and, when Almira herself came to the door
between the parlor and the dining-room, she, too, looked as if it were
quite her habit to smile, when she said,--

"Breakfast's ready."

Almira smiled, but she was too much like her mother. There was nothing
at all about her to put Dabney in mind of Annie Foster, or of either of
his own sisters. Samantha, or Keziah, or Pamela could have been "made
over" into two Almiras, in every thing but height; and Dab made up his
mind at once that either of them could beat her at smiling,--not so
much, perhaps, as to mere quantity, but as to quality.

That was a breakfast which would have fully justified Ham Morris's
report, for it was well cooked and plentiful. The "johnnycake," in
particular, was abundant; and all the boys took to it kindly.

"Glad you like it," said Mrs. Myers. "Almira, that's one thing we
mustn't forget. I was always proud of my johnny cake. There's very few
know what to do with their corn-meal, after they've got it."

She did evidently, and the boys all said so except Dick Lee. He could do
full justice to his breakfast, indeed; but he was saying to himself all
the while,--

"I won'er 'f I'll ebber git used to dis yer. It's jes' awful, dis goin'
to de 'cad'my."





CHAPTER XXVII.

A NEW KIND OF EXAMINATION.


Three large trunks and one small one were delivered at Mrs. Myers's
front door before that first breakfast was disposed of; and Miss Almira
remarked of the boys, a few minutes later,--

"How strong they are, especially Mr. Kinzer!"

"Don't make a mistake, Almira," said her mother in an undertone. "I'm
glad the trunks are up stairs, but we mustn't begin by saying 'mister'
to them. I've got all their first names. They mustn't get it into their
heads that they're any thing more'n just so many boys."

She hurried up stairs, however; and it did not take long to make her new
boarders "know their places," so far as their rooms were concerned. That
house was largely made up of its one "wing," on the first floor of which
was the dining-room and sitting-room, all in one. In the second story of
it were two bedrooms, opening into each other. The first and larger one
was assigned to Dab and Ford, and the inner one to Frank.

"Yours is a coop," said Ford to his friend from India; "but ours is big
enough. You can come in here to study, and we'll fix it up prime. The
stove's a queer one. Guess they burn wood up here mostly."

Of course, so long as there was a good "wood-lot" on the outlying farm
that belonged to Mr. Hart's speculation.

The stove was a little box of an affair, with two "griddles" on top, and
was quite capable of warming that floor.

"She's putting Dick away in back somewhere," said Frank. "We must look
and see what she's done for him."

The main building of that house was only big enough for a "hall," a
good-sized parlor opening into it on the right, a bedroom and large
closet back of that, and two rooms overhead; but the kitchen and
milk-room back, which must have been stuck on at a later day, had only
one wide, low garret of a room in the space under the roof. It was
lighted by a dormer window, and it did not contain any stove. The floor
was bare, except in the spot covered by an old rug before the little
narrow bed; but there was a table and a chair, by standing on either of
which Dick would be able to put his hand upon the unceiled rafters and
