was deemed possible enough for even a great elephant to have been all
the time dwelling within its boundaries, unseen by any of the party.
Indulging in these conjectures, all three remained awake for more than
an hour; but as the subject of their speculations appeared to have gone
altogether away, they gradually came to the conclusion that he was not
going to return at least for that night--and their confidence being thus
restored, they once more betook themselves to sleep--resolved in future
to keep a sharp lookout for the dangerous neighbour that had so
unexpectedly presented himself to their view.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

RE-STOCKING THE GUNS.

Next morning all three were astir betimes, and out of the hut by the
earliest light of day.  Karl and Caspar were anxious to obtain more
definite information about the elephant, whose existence Ossaroo was
still inclined to doubt.  Indeed, with the exception of the three or
four shrieking whistles to which the animal had given utterance, so
silently and mysteriously had he come and departed, that they might
almost have fancied the whole thing a dream.

But such an immense creature could not move about, without leaving some
traces of his presence; and as he had crossed the stream, or rather a
little embayment of the lake into which the stream emptied itself, no
doubt his tracks would be found on the sandy shore.

As soon, therefore, as the day broke, all three started for the spot
where the creature had been seen to cross.

On reaching it, they could no longer doubt that an elephant had paid
them a visit.  Huge footprints--nearly as big as the bottom of a bushel
measure--were deeply indented in the soft sand; and looking across the
"straits" (for so they were in the habit of calling the narrow mouth of
the bay), they could see other similar tracks on the opposite shore,
where the animal had waded out.

Ossaroo was no longer doubtful as to the character of the creature that
had made those tracks.  He had hunted elephants in the jungles of
Bengal, and knew all the peculiarities of the grand quadruped.  Such
footmarks as were now under his eyes could not have been made by a mere
visionary animal, but only by a real elephant in the flesh.

"And one of the biggest kind," asserted the shikaree, now speaking in
full confidence, and declaring, at the same time, that he could tell its
height to an inch.

"How can you do that?" asked Caspar, in some surprise.

"Me berra easy tell, young sahib," replied Ossaroo; "only need takee
size ob de rogue's foot.  Dis way, sahibs."

Saying this, the shikaree drew forth from one of his pockets a piece of
string; and, choosing one of the tracks which had made the clearest
impression, he carefully applied the string around its outer edge.  In
this way the circumference of the elephant's foot was obtained.

"Now, sahibs," said Ossaroo, holding the string between his fingers--
that portion of it which had been applied around the footprint--"_twice_
the length of dis reachee to the top of he shoulder; that how Ossaroo
know he biggee elephant."

The circumference of the foot thus measured being nearly six feet, it
would follow, from the rule laid down by the shikaree, that the elephant
in question was nearly twelve feet high; and this Karl knew to be one of
the largest.  Nor did Karl question the correctness of the deduction:
for he had often heard, from hunters whose word was not to be doubted,
that the height of an elephant is exactly twice the circumference of his
foot.

Ossaroo, having now yielded up his belief--that the elephant was one of
his gods in disguise--declared with full confidence that the animal was
a _rogue_.  Karl needed no explanation of what was meant by this.  He
knew that the rogue elephant is an old male, who, for some reason or
other--perhaps for bad behaviour--has had the cold shoulder given him by
the rest of the herd, and from whose association he has been driven
away.  Thus _cut_ by his former acquaintances, he is compelled to lead a
solitary life--the consequence of which is, that he becomes exceedingly
spiteful and morose in his disposition, and will not only attack any
other animal that may chance to cross his path, but will even seek them
out, as if for the mere purpose of indulging in a spirit of revenge!
There are many such in the jungles of India, as well as in Africa; and,
since man himself is not excepted from this universal hostility, a rogue
elephant is regarded as an exceedingly dangerous creature in the
neighbourhood where he takes up his abode.  There are many instances
recorded--and well authenticated too--where human beings have been
sacrificed to the fury of these gigantic monsters: and cases are known
where a rogue elephant has purposely placed himself in waiting by the
side of a frequented path, with the object of destroying the unwary
traveller!  In the valley of the Dheira Doon an elephant of this class--
one, too, that had once been tamed, but had escaped from his servitude--
is known to have taken the lives of nearly twenty unfortunate people
before his destruction could be effected.

Well knowing these proclivities on the part of the _rogue_, Ossaroo at
once counselled caution in the future movements of all--a counsel which
Karl was too prudent to reject; and even the bold, rash Caspar did not
think it proper to dissent from.

It was resolved, therefore, before continuing their projected
exploration of the cliffs, to set their weapons once more in proper
order--against any chance of an encounter with the elephant.

Their guns had to be re-stocked, and a new handle put into the axe--as
well as a shaft into the boar-spear of Ossaroo--for all the woodwork of
these weapons had been broken up and burnt into ashes in the manufacture
of the candles of bear's-grease that had lighted them out of the cave.

The search after the ledges must necessarily be postponed; until they
could go upon that errand properly armed and equipped, against any enemy
that might oppose their progress.

Having come to this wise determination, they returned to their hut;
kindled a fire; cooked breakfast; and having despatched the meal, at
once set about selecting pieces of wood for the various purposes for
which they were required.

They had no difficulty in procuring just what was wanted: for the valley
contained many valuable sorts of timber; and several kinds that had been
already cut for other purposes, now well seasoned and ready to hand,
were found lying about the hut.

Setting about their work in earnest, and labouring diligently from
morning to night--and even into the night hours--they knew they would
not be long in accomplishing a task so trifling as the stocking of a
gun, or putting the handle to a boar-spear.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

INSPECTING THE CLIFFS.

Working diligently with their knives two days sufficed to make guns,
axe, and spear as good as ever.  Ossaroo also made himself a new bow and
a full quiver of arrows.

On the third morning, after breakfasting, all three set out with the
determination not to leave any portion of the cliff unexamined.

The part which lay between their hut and the cave, Karl had already
scrutinised with great care; so they went direct to the point where he
had left off, and there commenced their new survey.

It is true they had already examined the cliffs all around; but this was
just after they arrived in the valley, and the purpose of that
exploration was very different from that of the present one.

Then they were only looking for a place by which they might climb out;
and the idea of making ladders had not occurred to them.

Now that this scheme had suggested itself, they entered upon their
second survey with the view of ascertaining whether it was practicable
or possible.  Consequently, they went in search of facts of a different
nature--viz., to see if there existed a series of ledges, one above
another, that could be spanned by an equal number of such ladders as
they might be able to construct.

That they could make ladders of a prodigious length--allowing sufficient
time for the execution of the work--all felt confident.  They knew that
the Thibet pine-trees--the same sort as they had used in making the
bridge for the glacier crevasse--grew in great numbers not far from
their hut; and by selecting some of the slenderest trunks of these, they
would have the sides of as many ladders as they might want, almost ready
made, and each forty or fifty feet in length.

If there should only be discovered a series of ledges, with not more
than forty feet space between each two, there would be a fair hope of
their being able to escalade the cliff, and escape from a place which,
although one of the pleasantest-looking spots in the world, had now
become to them loathsome as the interior of a dungeon.

Sure enough, and to the great joy of all, such a set of shelves was soon
after presented to their eyes--having, at least in appearance, all the
requirements of which they were in search.  The spaces between no two of
them appeared to be greater than thirty feet, some were much nearer to
each other.

The part of the cliff where these terraces were found was not quite so
low, as that where Karl had made his measurement.  It did not appear,
however, to be more than three hundred and fifty feet--a fearful height,
it is true--but nothing when compared with other sections of the same
precipice.  To reach to its top, more than a dozen ladders would be
required--each between twenty and thirty feet in length.  The labour of
making these ladders, with such tools as they had, might be looked upon
as something stupendous--sufficient, you might suppose, to deter them
from the task.  But you must endeavour to realise the situation in which
they were placed--with no other hope of being delivered from their
mountain prison--and with this idea in your mind, you will comprehend
why they should have been willing to undertake even a far greater
labour.  Of course, they did not expect to complete it in a day, neither
in a week, nor in a month: for they well knew that it would take several
months to make the number of ladders that would be required.  And then
there would be the additional labour of getting each into its place: as
all, after the first one, would have to be carried up the cliff to the
ledge for which it should be constructed.  Indeed, to raise ladders of
thirty feet in the manner contemplated, would seem an impossibility--
that is, for such strength or mechanism as they could command.

And so it might have proved, had they intended to make these ladders of
the ordinary weight.  But they foresaw this difficulty, and hoped to get
over it by making them of the very lightest kind--something that would
just carry the weight of a man.

Becoming more than half satisfied that at this point the precipice might
be scaled in the manner contemplated, they remained upon the ground in
order to give it a thorough examination.  That done, they intended to
make the complete circuit of the valley, and ascertain whether there
might not be some other place still easier of ascent.

The point where they had halted was behind the tract of heavily-timbered
forest--of which Caspar had spoken, and which up to this time none of
them had entered.  Between the trees and the cliff they were now
contemplating, there was a narrow strip of ground destitute of timber;
and covered with a shingle of loose stones which had fallen from the
mountain above.  Several boulders of large dimensions rested upon the
ground, at short distances apart; and there was one of a pillar-shape
that stood some twenty-feet high, while it was only about five or six in
diameter.  It bore a sort of rude resemblance to an obelisk; and one
might easily have fancied that the hand of man had accomplished its
erection.  For all that, it was a mere freak of Nature, and had probably
been set up by ancient glacier ice.  Up one of its sides there was a
series of projections, by which an active man might climb to the top;
and Ossaroo _did_ climb it, partly out of playfulness, and partly, as he
said, to get a better view of the cliff.  The shikaree stayed only a few
minutes on its top; and his curiosity having been satisfied, he had let
himself down again.



CHAPTER NINE.

A RECONNOISSANCE INTERRUPTED.

Though the three had set out that morning with a wholesome dread of the
elephant, and a determination to go about their reconnoissance with
caution, their joy at the discovery of the ledges, and the eagerness
with which they were scanning them, had for the moment banished from
their minds all thoughts of the great quadruped.  They were thinking
only of ledges and ladders, and talking loudly of how the latter might
best be made and placed upon the former.

Just then, and just at the moment Ossaroo descended from the obelisk
rock, Fritz, who had been prowling about among the trees, set up a
fearful baying--such another as that to which he had given utterance on
the night when the elephant had paid its visit to the hut.

There was a certain intonation of terror in the dog's voice--as if
whatever called it forth was something that inspired him with fear.  The
apprehension that it was the elephant occurred to all three at once; and
with a simultaneous impulse they faced towards the spot whence the
baying of the dog appeared to proceed.  Simultaneously, too, they
clutched more firmly their respective weapons--Karl his rifle, Caspar
his double-barrel, and Ossaroo his bow, with an arrow at the string.

It is superfluous to say, that there was a certain amount of
consternation visible in the countenances of all three; which was rather
increased than diminished by the sight of Fritz dashing suddenly out of
the underwood, and running towards them at full speed, with his tail
considerably below the horizontal.  Fritz, moreover, was giving
utterance to something that very closely resembled a howl.  The dog had
evidently been attacked by some animal that had put him to flight; and
his masters knew that it must be a formidable creature that was causing
the variant Fritz to behave in such an ignominious manner.

They were not kept long in doubt as to the character of Fritz's
conqueror and pursuer: for close behind his hips, almost touching them,
appeared a long, cylindrical, or trumpet-shaped object, of a bluish-grey
colour, protruding between two yellowish crescents, like a pair of huge
ivory horns.  Behind those appeared a pair of large ears, like flaps of
sole leather; and in the rear of these last appendages came the round,
massive form of an enormous elephant!

Crashing through the underwood, the monstrous creature soon cleared his
body from the timber, and rushed straight across the open ground--
winding his terrible trumpet as he went.  He was following Fritz as
straight as he could go, and evidently enraged at the dog.

The latter, on escaping from the tangle of the thicket, made direct for
the spot occupied by his masters--thus directing the elephant upon them.

It was no longer a question of protecting Fritz from his formidable
pursuer; for the elephant, on seeing three adversaries more worthy of
his tusks, seemed to forget all about the puny four-footed creature who
had provoked him; and at once directed his attack upon the upright
bipeds--as if resolved to punish them for the misbehaviour of their
subordinate.

The three, standing close together, saw at a glance that Fritz was no
longer the object of the elephant's animosity: for the massive monster
was now charging directly down upon them.

There was no time for concerted counsel--neither to take nor to give it.
Each had to act upon his own instinct; and following this each acted.
Karl sent the bullet from his rifle right between the tusks of the
advancing foe; while Caspar fired both barrels of his piece "bang" into
the forehead of the monster.  Ossaroo's arrow was seen sticking through
the elephant's trunk; and the moment after Ossaroo's heels were
presented to the enemy.

Karl and Caspar also ran: for it would have been sheer madness to have
remained a moment longer in that perilous proximity.  Indeed, it is but
justice to the shikaree to say, that Karl and Caspar ran first: for they
had been the first to deliver their fire; and as soon as they had done
so, each scampered as he best could.  They ran together; and fortunately
for both a large tree was near, with low horizontal limbs, which
favoured a rapid ascent towards its top.

There was only a second of time between the commencement of their flight
and that of Ossaroo; but short as it was, it decided the preference of
the pursuer, and Ossaroo became the sole object of pursuit.

The shikaree would fain have made for the tree, to which the others were
retreating; but the proboscis of the elephant was already so far
advanced in that direction, that there was every probability it might
get lapped upon him before he could climb beyond reach.  For a moment he
was in a dilemma, and his customary coolness seemed to have forsaken
him.

The elephant was advancing upon him, its little switch of a tail
oscillating rapidly in the air, and its trunk stretched horizontally
towards him, with Ossaroo's own arrow still sticking in it.  It seemed
to know that it was he who had sent that skewer through its gristly
snout--perhaps giving it far more pain than the leaden missiles that had
flattened against its thick skull; and for this reason it had chosen him
as the first victim of its vengeance.

In truth, Ossaroo's position was one of extreme peril--so much so that
Karl and Caspar--now perceiving themselves comparatively safe from the
pursuit--uttered a simultaneous cry: both believing that their faithful
guide and follower was on the point of "coming to grief."

Ossaroo seemed bewildered at the very imminence of the danger.  But it
was only for a moment--only while he hesitated as to whether he should
try to reach the tree.  On perceiving that he could not do this with a
fair chance of safety, he turned and ran in an opposite direction.

Whither?  To the obelisk.  Yes, by good fortune, the pillar from which
he had just descended was only ten paces distant; and Ossaroo, in
returning towards it, measured the ground with less than five.  Flinging
away his now useless weapons, he clutched hold of the prominent points
of the rock, and "swarmed" up it like a squirrel.

He had good occasion to employ all his powers of agility.  A second--
half a second more--and he would have been too late: for ere he had
reached the summit of the pillar, the digit point of the elephant's
trunk was inserted under the skirt of his tunic; and had the garment
been of tougher material; Ossaroo would have been jerked back to the
ground more rapidly than he had ascended.

As it was, the cotton fabric--frail from long wear and exposure--gave
way with a loud "screed;" and although the shikaree was stripped of his
coat-tail, and suffered a rather ignominious exposure, still he had the
satisfaction of knowing that to this circumstance he was indebted for
the safety of his skin.



CHAPTER TEN.

OSSAROO ON THE OBELISK.

The moment after, Ossaroo stood upon the summit of the obelisk.  But
even there he was far from being confident of security: for the pursuer
had not abandoned the hope of being able to reach him.  On the contrary,
the infuriated animal, on finding itself baulked by the worthlessness of
the fabric composing the skirt of the shikaree, spitefully tossed the
piece of cloth from its trunk; and, rearing itself on its hind-legs,
threw its body into an erect attitude, with its fore-feet resting high
up against the rock.

One might have fancied that it was about to climb the obelisk; and this
it would certainly have done had the thing been possible.  As it was,
however, Ossaroo was not out of danger: for as the elephant stood on its
hind-legs, with its prehensile proboscis extended to the full length,
the tip of the latter was not more than six inches from the soles of his
feet.

The shikaree stood upright like a statue on its pedestal--though unlike
to a statue in his features, which were anything but unmoved.  On the
contrary, his countenance exhibited the utmost consternation.  And no
wonder: for he could plainly perceive that should the elephant succeed
in lengthening its carcase only another twelve inches, he himself would
be brushed from the summit like a fly.

In fearful suspense, therefore, did he stand, contemplating the monster
which was making every effort to reach him.

These efforts were made with as much sagacity as energy.  Not only did
the quadruped erect itself to its greatest height--standing, as one
might say, upon its toes--but on finding that it was not tall enough, it
fell back upon all fours, and then reared up afresh in an endeavour to
stretch still higher.

Several times did it repeat the attempt--on each occasion trying a
different side of the rock--as if in hopes that a greater elevation of
the ground around the base might give it that advantage of twelve inches
which it required for seizing its victim.

Fortunately for Ossaroo, the elephant had reached its very highest on
first rearing up; and though it kept going round and round the rock,
from no side could it do more than just touch with the top of its trunk
the edge of the little flat space, upon which the feet of the shikaree
were resting.

Ossaroo was beginning to be satisfied with this fact; and probably might
have come to believe himself secure in his position, but for a
circumstance that was making him uneasy.  It was, that, standing upon
such a limited surface--a pedestal whose diameter was but little over
the length of his own feet--he found it exceedingly difficult to keep
his balance.  Had he been on the ground, there would have been no
difficulty about it; but, perched as he was full twenty-feet aloft, the
thing was quite different; and, with nerves unstrung by the fearful
danger that threatened him below, it was just as much as he could do to
keep his equilibrium.

Though only a "mild Hindoo," Ossaroo was possessed of a high degree of
courage; and, most of his life having been spent as a shikaree, he had
become well inured to the risk of losing it.  Had he been a coward, or
unused to such perils as at that moment surrounded him, he would in all
likelihood have succumbed through fear; and toppled helplessly over upon
the shoulders of the merciless monster that was threatening to destroy
him.  With all his bravery, however, it was just as much as he could do
to keep his balance.  Unfortunately, in climbing up the rock, he had
been compelled to abandon his boar-spear: else with that he might have
supported himself.  His long knife was still in his belt; and this he
drew forth--not with the design of using it upon his antagonist, but
