He knew not whence they came.  That was a point about which Swartboy had
never troubled himself.  The learned Hans offered an explanation of
their origin.

"They come from the desert," said he.  "The eggs from which they are
produced, are deposited in the sands or dust; where they lie until rain
falls, and causes the herbage to spring up.  Then the locusts are
hatched, and in their first stage are supported upon this herbage.  When
it becomes exhausted, they are compelled to go in search of food.  Hence
these `migrations,' as they are called."

This explanation seemed clear enough.

"Now I have heard," said Hendrik, "of farmers kindling fires around
their crops to keep off the locusts.  I can't see how fires would keep
them off--not even if a regular fence of fire were made all round a
field.  These creatures have wings, and could easily fly over the
fires."

"The fires," replied Hans, "are kindled, in order that the smoke may
prevent them from alighting; but the locusts to which these accounts
usually refer are without wings, called _voetgangers_ (foot-goers).
They are, in fact, the _larvae_ of these locusts, before they have
obtained their wings.  These have also their migrations, that are often
more destructive than those of the perfect insects, such as we see here.
They proceed over the ground by crawling and leaping like grasshoppers;
for, indeed, they are grasshoppers--a species of them.  They keep on in
one direction, as if they were guided by instinct to follow a particular
course.  Nothing can interrupt them in their onward march unless the sea
or some broad and rapid river.  Small streams they can swim across; and
large ones, too, where they run sluggishly; walls and houses they can
climb--even the chimneys--going straight over them; and the moment they
have reached the other side of any obstacle, they continue straight
onward in the old direction.

"In attempting to cross broad rapid rivers, they are drowned in
countless myriads, and swept off to the sea.  When it is only a small
migration, the farmers sometimes keep them off by means of fires, as you
have heard.  On the contrary, when large numbers appear, even the fires
are of no avail."

"But how is that, brother?" inquired Hendrik.  "I can understand how
fires would stop the kind you speak of, since you say they are without
wings.  But since they are so, how do they get through the fires?  Jump
them?"

"No, not so," replied Hans.  "The fires are built too wide and large for
that."

"How then, brother?" asked Hendrik.  "I'm puzzled."

"So am I," said little Jan.

"And I," added Truey.

"Well, then," continued Hans, "millions of the insects crawl into the
fires and put them out!"

"Ho!" cried all in astonishment.  "How?  Are they not burned?"

"Of course," replied Hans.  "They are scorched and killed--myriads of
them quite burned up.  But their bodies crowded thickly on the fires
choke them out.  The foremost ranks of the great host thus become
victims, and the others pass safely across upon the holocaust thus made.
So you see, even fires cannot stop the course of the locusts when they
are in great numbers.

"In many parts of Africa, where the natives cultivate the soil, as soon
as they discover a migration of these insects, and perceive that they
are heading in the direction of their fields and gardens, quite a panic
is produced among them.  They know that they will lose their crops to a
certainty, and hence dread a visitation of locusts as they would an
earthquake, or some other great calamity."

"We can well understand their feelings upon such an occasion," remarked
Hendrik, with a significant look.

"The flying locusts," continued Hans, "seem less to follow a particular
direction than their larvae.  The former seem to be guided by the wind.
Frequently this carries them all into the sea, where they perish in vast
numbers.  On some parts of the coast their dead bodies have been found
washed back to land in quantities incredible.  At one place the sea
threw them upon the beach, until they lay piled up in a ridge four feet
in height, and fifty miles in length!  It has been asserted by several
well-known travellers that the effluvium from this mass tainted the air
to such an extent that it was perceived one hundred and fifty miles
inland!"

"Heigh!" exclaimed little Jan.  "I didn't think anybody had so good a
nose."

At little Jan's remark there was a general laugh.  Von Bloom did not
join in their merriment.  He was in too serious a mood just then.

"Papa," inquired little Truey, perceiving that her father did not laugh,
and thinking to draw him into the conversation,--"Papa! were these the
kind of locusts eaten by John the Baptist when in the desert?  His food,
the Bible says, was `locusts and wild honey.'"

"I believe these are the same," replied the father.

"I think, papa," modestly rejoined Hans, "they are not exactly the same,
but a kindred species.  The locust of Scripture was the true _Gryllus
migratorius_, and different from those of South Africa, though very
similar in its habits.  But," continued he, "some writers dispute that
point altogether.  The Abyssinians say it was beans of the locust-tree,
and not insects, that were the food of Saint John."

"What is your own opinion, Hans?" inquired Hendrik, who had a great
belief in his brother's book-knowledge.

"Why, I think," replied Hans, "there need be no question about it.  It
is only torturing the meaning of a word to suppose that Saint John ate
the locust fruit, and not the insect.  I am decidedly of opinion that
the latter is meant in Scripture; and what makes me think so is, that
these two kinds of food, `locusts and wild honey,' are often coupled
together, as forming at the present time the subsistence of many tribes
who are denizens of the desert.  Besides, we have good evidence that
both were used as food by desert-dwelling people in the days of
Scripture.  It is, therefore, but natural to suppose that Saint John,
when in the desert, was forced to partake of this food; just as many a
traveller of modern times has eaten of it when crossing the deserts that
surround us here in South Africa.

"I have read a great many books about locusts," continued Hans; "and now
that the Bible has been mentioned, I must say for my part, I know no
account given of these insects so truthful and beautiful as that in the
Bible itself.  Shall I read it, papa?"

"By all means, my boy," said the field-cornet, rather pleased at the
request which his son had made, and at the tenor of the conversation.

Little Truey ran into the inner room and brought out an immense volume
bound in gemsbok skin, with a couple of strong brass clasps upon it to
keep it closed.  This was the family Bible; and here let me observe,
that a similar book may be found in the house of nearly every boor, for
these Dutch colonists are a Protestant and Bible-loving people--so much
so, that they think nothing of going a hundred miles, _four times in the
year_, to attend the _nacht-maal_, or sacramental supper!  What do you
think of that?

Hans opened the volume, and turned at once to the book of the prophet
Joel.  From the readiness with which he found the passage, it was
evident he was well acquainted with the book he held in his hands.

He read as follows:--

"A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains; a great people and a
strong: there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more
after it, even to the years of many generations.  A fire devoureth
before them, and behind them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden
of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and
nothing shall escape them.  The appearance of them is as the appearance
of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.  Like the noise of
chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a
flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in
battle array."

"The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble; the sun
and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining."

"How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because
they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate."

Even the rude Swartboy could perceive the poetic beauty of this
description.

But Swartboy had much to say about the locusts, as well as the inspired
Joel.

Thus spoke Swartboy:--

"Bushman no fear da springhaan.  Bushman hab no garden--no maize--no
buckwheat--no nothing for da springhaan to eat.  Bushman eat locust
himself--he grow fat on da locust.  Ebery thing eat dem dar springhaan.
Ebery thing grow fat in da locust season.  Ho! den for dem springhaan!"

These remarks of Swartboy were true enough.  The locusts are eaten by
almost every species of animal known in South Africa.  Not only do the
_carnivora_ greedily devour them, but also animals and birds of the game
kind--such as antelopes, partridges, guinea-fowls, bustards, and,
strange to say, the giant of all--the huge elephant--will travel for
miles to overtake a migration of locusts!  Domestic fowls, sheep,
horses, and dogs, devour them with equal greediness.  Still another
strange fact--the locusts eat one another!  If any one of them gets
hurt, so as to impede his progress, the others immediately turn upon him
and eat him up!

The Bushmen and other native races of Africa submit the locusts to a
process of cookery before eating them; and during the whole evening
Swartboy had been engaged in preparing the bagful which he had
collected.  He "cooked" them thus:--

He first boiled, or rather _steamed_ them, for only a small quantity of
water was put into the pot.  This process lasted two hours.  They were
then taken out, and allowed to dry; and after that shaken about in a
pan, until all the legs and wings were broken off from the bodies.  A
winnowing process--Swartboy's thick lips acting as a fan--was next gone
through; and the legs and wings were thus got rid of.  The locusts were
then ready for eating.

A little salt only was required to render them more palatable, when all
present made trial of, and some of the children even liked them.  By
many, locusts prepared in this way are considered quite equal to
shrimps!

Sometimes they are pounded when quite dry into a sort of meal, and with
water added to them, are made into a kind of stir-about.

When well dried, they will keep for a long time; and they frequently
form the only store of food, which the poorer natives have to depend
upon for a whole season.

Among many tribes--particularly among those who are not agricultural--
the coming of the locusts is a source of rejoicing.  These people turn
out with sacks, and often with pack-oxen to collect and bring them to
their villages; and on such occasions vast heaps of them are accumulated
and stored, in the same way as grain!

Conversing of these things the night passed on until it was time for
going to bed.  The field-cornet went out once again to observe the wind;
and then the door of the little kraal was closed and the family retired
to rest.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE LOCUST-FLIGHT.

The field-cornet slept but little.  Anxiety kept him awake.  He turned
and tossed, and thought of the locusts.  He napped at intervals, and
dreamt about locusts, and crickets, and grasshoppers, and all manner of
great long-legged, goggle-eyed insects.  He was glad when the first ray
of light penetrated through the little window of his chamber.

He sprang to his feet; and, scarce staying to dress himself, rushed out
into the open air.  It was still dark, but he did not require to see the
wind.  He did not need to toss a feather or hold up his hat.  The truth
was too plain.  A strong breeze was blowing--it was blowing _from the
west_!

Half distracted, he ran farther out to assure himself.  He ran until
clear of the walls that enclosed the kraals and garden.

He halted and felt the air.  Alas! his first impression was correct.
The breeze blew directly from the west--directly from the locusts.  He
could perceive the effluvium borne from the hateful insects: there was
no longer cause to doubt.

Groaning in spirit, Von Bloom returned to his house.  He had no longer
any hope of escaping the terrible visitation.

His first directions were to collect all the loose pieces of linen or
clothing in the house, and pack them within the family chests.  What!
would the locusts be likely to eat them?

Indeed, yes--for these voracious creatures are not fastidious.  No
particular vegetable seems to be chosen by them.  The leaves of the
bitter tobacco plant appear to be as much to their liking as the sweet
and succulent blades of maize!  Pieces of linen, cotton, and even
flannel, are devoured by them, as though they were the tender shoots of
plants.  Stones, iron, and hard wood, are about the only objects that
escape their fierce masticators.

Von Bloom had heard this.  Hans had read of it, and Swartboy confirmed
it from his own experience.

Consequently, everything that was at all destructible was carefully
stowed away; and then breakfast was cooked and eaten in silence.

There was a gloom over the faces of all, because he who was the head of
all was silent and dejected.  What a change within a few hours!  But the
evening before the field-cornet and his little family were in the full
enjoyment of happiness.

There was still one hope, though a slight one.  Might it yet rain?  Or
might the day turn out cold?

In either case Swartboy said the locusts could not take wing--for they
cannot fly in cold or rainy weather.  In the event of a cold or wet day
they would have to remain as they were, and perhaps the wind might
change round again before they resumed their flight.  Oh, for a torrent
of rain, or a cold cloudy day!

Vain wish! vain hope!  In half-an-hour after the sun rose up in African
splendour, and his hot rays, slanting down upon the sleeping host,
warmed them into life and activity.  They commenced to crawl, to hop
about, and then, as if by one impulse, myriads rose into the air.  The
breeze impelled them in the direction in which it was blowing,--in the
direction of the devoted maize-fields.

In less than five minutes, from the time they had taken wing, they were
over the kraal, and dropping in tens of thousands upon the surrounding
fields.  Slow was their flight, and gentle their descent, and to the
eyes of those beneath they presented the appearance of a shower of
_black_ snow, falling in large feathery flakes.  In a few moments the
ground was completely covered, until every stalk of maize, every plant
and bush, carried its hundreds.  On the outer plains too, as far as eye
could see, the pasture was strewed thickly; and as the great flight had
now passed to the eastward of the house, the sun's disk was again hidden
by them as if by an eclipse!

They seemed to move in a kind of _echellon_, the bands in the rear
constantly flying to the front, and then halting to feed, until in turn
these were headed by others that had advanced over them in a similar
manner.

The noise produced by their wings was not the least curious phenomenon;
and resembled a steady breeze playing among the leaves of the forest, or
the sound of a water-wheel.

For two hours this passage continued.  During most of that time, Von
Bloom and his people had remained within the house, with closed doors
and windows.  This they did to avoid the unpleasant shower, as the
creatures impelled by the breeze, often strike the cheek so forcibly as
to cause a feeling of pain.  Moreover, they did not like treading upon
the unwelcome intruders, and crushing them under their feet, which they
must have done, had they moved about outside where the ground was
thickly covered.

Many of the insects even crawled inside, through the chinks of the door
and windows, and greedily devoured any vegetable substance which
happened to be lying about the floor.

At the end of two hours Von Bloom looked forth.  The thickest of the
flight had passed.  The sun was again shining; but upon what was he
shining?  No longer upon green fields and a flowery garden.  No.  Around
the house, on every side, north, south, east, and west, the eye rested
only on black desolation.  Not a blade of grass, not a leaf could be
