music. I saw mankind in this weary old age of the world either
enduring a sluggish existence amid the smoke and dust of cities, or,
if they breathed a purer air, still lying down at night with no hope
but to wear out to-morrow, and all the to-morrows which make up life,
among the same dull scenes and in the same wretched toil that had
darkened the sunshine of today. But there were some full of the
primeval instinct who preserved the freshness of youth to their latest
years by the continual excitement of new objects, new pursuits and new
associates, and cared little, though their birthplace might have been
here in New England, if the grave should close over them in Central
Asia. Fate was summoning a parliament of these free spirits;
unconscious of the impulse which directed them to a common centre,
they had come hither from far and near, and last of all appeared the
representatives of those mighty vagrants who had chased the deer
during thousands of years, and were chasing it now in the spirit-land.
Wandering down through the waste of ages, the woods had vanished
around his path; his arm had lost somewhat of its strength, his foot
of its fleetness, his mien of its wild regality, his heart and mind of
their savage virtue and uncultured force, but here, untamable to the
routine of artificial life, roving now along the dusty road as of old
over the forest-leaves,--here was the Indian still.

"Well," said the old showman, in the midst of my meditations, "here is
an honest company of us--one, two, three, four, five, six--all going
to the camp-meeting at Stamford. Now, hoping no offence, I should like
to know where this young gentleman may be going?"

I started. How came I among these wanderers? The free mind that
preferred its own folly to another's wisdom, the open spirit that
found companions everywhere--above all, the restless impulse that had
so often made me wretched in the midst of enjoyments,--these were my
claims to be of their society.

"My friends," cried I, stepping into the centre of the wagon, "I am
going with you to the camp-meeting at Stamford."

"But in what capacity?" asked the old showman, after a moment's
silence. "All of us here can get our bread in some creditable way.
Every honest man should have his livelihood. You, sir, as I take it,
are a mere strolling gentleman."

I proceeded to inform the company that when Nature gave me a
propensity to their way of life she had not left me altogether
destitute of qualifications for it, though I could not deny that my
talent was less respectable, and might be less profitable, than the
meanest of theirs. My design, in short, was to imitate the
story-tellers of whom Oriental travellers have told us, and become an
itinerant novelist, reciting my own extemporaneous fictions to such
audiences as I could collect.

"Either this," said I, "is my vocation, or I have been born in vain."

The fortune-teller, with a sly wink to the company, proposed to take
me as an apprentice to one or other of his professions, either of
which undoubtedly would have given full scope to whatever inventive
talent I might possess. The bibliopolist spoke a few words in
opposition to my plan--influenced partly, I suspect, by the jealousy
of authorship, and partly by an apprehension that the _viva-voce_
practice would become general among novelists, to the infinite
detriment of the book trade.

Dreading a rejection, I solicited the interest of the merry damsel.

"'Mirth,'" cried I, most aptly appropriating the words of L'Allegro,
"'to thee I sue! Mirth, admit me of thy crew!'"

"Let us indulge the poor youth," said Mirth, with a kindness which
made me love her dearly, though I was no such coxcomb as to
misinterpret her motives. "I have espied much promise in him. True, a
shadow sometimes flits across his brow, but the sunshine is sure to
follow in a moment. He is never guilty of a sad thought but a merry
one is twin-born with it. We will take him with us, and you shall see
that he will set us all a-laughing before we reach the camp-meeting at
Stamford." Her voice silenced the scruples of the rest and gained me
admittance into the league; according to the terms of which, without a
community of goods or profits, we were to lend each other all the aid
and avert all the harm that might be in our power.

This affair settled, a marvellous jollity entered into the whole tribe
of us, manifesting itself characteristically in each individual. The
old showman, sitting down to his barrel-organ, stirred up the souls of
the pigmy people with one of the quickest tunes in the music-book;
tailors, blacksmiths, gentlemen and ladies all seemed to share in the
spirit of the occasion, and the Merry Andrew played his part more
facetiously than ever, nodding and winking particularly at me. The
young foreigner flourished his fiddle-bow with a master's hand, and
gave an inspiring echo to the showman's melody. The bookish man and
the merry damsel started up simultaneously to dance, the former
enacting the double shuffle in a style which everybody must have
witnessed ere election week was blotted out of time, while the girl,
setting her arms akimbo with both hands at her slim waist, displayed
such light rapidity of foot and harmony of varying attitude and motion
that I could not conceive how she ever was to stop, imagining at the
moment that Nature had made her, as the old showman had made his
puppets, for no earthly purpose but to dance jigs. The Indian bellowed
forth a succession of most hideous outcries, somewhat affrighting us
till we interpreted them as the war-song with which, in imitation of
his ancestors, he was prefacing the assault on Stamford. The conjurer,
meanwhile, sat demurely in a corner extracting a sly enjoyment from
the whole scene, and, like the facetious Merry Andrew, directing his
queer glance particularly at me. As for myself, with great
exhilaration of fancy, I began to arrange and color the incidents of a
tale wherewith I proposed to amuse an audience that very evening; for
I saw that my associates were a little ashamed of me, and that no time
was to be lost in obtaining a public acknowledgment of my abilities.

"Come, fellow-laborers," at last said the old showman, whom we had
elected president; "the shower is over, and we must be doing our duty
by these poor souls at Stamford."

"We'll come among them in procession, with music and dancing," cried
the merry damsel.

Accordingly--for it must be understood that our pilgrimage was to be
performed on foot--we sallied joyously out of the wagon, each of us,
even the old gentleman in his white top-boots, giving a great skip as
we came down the ladder. Above our heads there was such a glory of
sunshine and splendor of clouds, and such brightness of verdure below,
that, as I modestly remarked at the time, Nature seemed to have washed
her face and put on the best of her jewelry and a fresh green gown in
honor of our confederation. Casting our eyes northward, we beheld a
horseman approaching leisurely and splashing through the little puddle
on the Stamford road. Onward he came, sticking up in his saddle with
rigid perpendicularity, a tall, thin figure in rusty black, whom the
showman and the conjurer shortly recognized to be what his aspect
sufficiently indicated--a travelling preacher of great fame among the
Methodists. What puzzled us was the fact that his face appeared turned
from, instead of to, the camp-meeting at Stamford. However, as this
new votary of the wandering life drew near the little green space
where the guide-post and our wagon were situated, my six
fellow-vagabonds and myself rushed forward and surrounded him, crying
out with united voices, "What news? What news from the camp-meeting at
Stamford?"

The missionary looked down in surprise at as singular a knot of people
as could have been selected from all his heterogeneous auditors.
Indeed, considering that we might all be classified under the general
head of Vagabond, there was great diversity of character among the
grave old showman, the sly, prophetic beggar, the fiddling foreigner
and his merry damsel, the smart bibliopolist, the sombre Indian and
myself, the itinerant novelist, a slender youth of eighteen. I even
fancied that a smile was endeavoring to disturb the iron gravity of
the preacher's mouth.

"Good people," answered he, "the camp-meeting is broke up."

So saying, the Methodist minister switched his steed and rode
westward. Our union being thus nullified by the removal of its object,
we were sundered at once to the four winds of heaven. The
fortune-teller, giving a nod to all and a peculiar wink to me,
departed on his Northern tour, chuckling within himself as he took the
Stamford road. The old showman and his literary coadjutor were already
tackling their horses to the wagon with a design to peregrinate
south-west along the sea-coast. The foreigner and the merry damsel
took their laughing leave and pursued the eastern road, which I had
that day trodden; as they passed away the young man played a lively
strain and the girl's happy spirit broke into a dance, and, thus
dissolving, as it were, into sunbeams and gay music, that pleasant
pair departed from my view. Finally, with a pensive shadow thrown
across my mind, yet emulous of the light philosophy of my late
companions, I joined myself to the Penobscot Indian and set forth
toward the distant city.




THE WHITE OLD MAID.


The moonbeams came through two deep and narrow windows and showed a
spacious chamber richly furnished in an antique fashion. From one
lattice the shadow of the diamond panes was thrown upon the floor; the
ghostly light through the other slept upon a bed, falling between the
heavy silken curtains and illuminating the face of a young man. But
how quietly the slumberer lay! how pale his features! And how like a
shroud the sheet was wound about his frame! Yes, it was a corpse in
its burial-clothes.

Suddenly the fixed features seemed to move with dark emotion. Strange
fantasy! It was but the shadow of the fringed curtain waving betwixt
the dead face and the moonlight as the door of the chamber opened and
a girl stole softly to the bedside. Was there delusion in the
moonbeams, or did her gesture and her eye betray a gleam of triumph as
she bent over the pale corpse, pale as itself, and pressed her living
lips to the cold ones of the dead? As she drew back from that long
kiss her features writhed as if a proud heart were fighting with its
anguish. Again it seemed that the features of the corpse had moved
responsive to her own. Still an illusion. The silken curtains had
waved a second time betwixt the dead face and the moonlight as another
fair young girl unclosed the door and glided ghostlike to the bedside.
There the two maidens stood, both beautiful, with the pale beauty of
the dead between them. But she who had first entered was proud and
stately, and the other a soft and fragile thing.

"Away!" cried the lofty one. "Thou hadst him living; the dead is
mine."

"Thine!" returned the other, shuddering. "Well hast thou spoken; the
dead is thine."

The proud girl started and stared into her face with a ghastly look,
but a wild-and mournful expression passed across the features of the
gentle one, and, weak and helpless, she sank down on the bed, her head
pillowed beside that of the corpse and her hair mingling with his dark
locks. A creature of hope and joy, the first draught of sorrow had
bewildered her.

"Edith!" cried her rival.

Edith groaned as with a sudden compression of the heart, and, removing
her cheek from the dead youth's pillow, she stood upright, fearfully
encountering the eyes of the lofty girl.

"Wilt thou betray me?" said the latter, calmly.

"Till the dead bid me speak I will be silent," answered Edith. "Leave
us alone together. Go and live many years, and then return and tell me
of thy life. He too will be here. Then, if thou tellest of sufferings
more than death, we will both forgive thee."

"And what shall be the token?" asked the proud girl, as if her heart
acknowledged a meaning in these wild words.

"This lock of hair," said Edith, lifting one of the dark clustering
curls that lay heavily on the dead man's brow.

The two maidens joined their hands over the bosom of the corpse and
appointed a day and hour far, far in time to come for their next
meeting in that chamber. The statelier girl gave one deep look at the
motionless countenance and departed, yet turned again and trembled ere
she closed the door, almost believing that her dead lover frowned upon
her. And Edith, too! Was not her white form fading into the moonlight?
Scorning her own weakness, she went forth and perceived that a negro
slave was waiting in the passage with a waxlight, which he held
between her face and his own and regarded her, as she thought, with an
ugly expression of merriment. Lifting his torch on high, the slave
lighted her down the staircase and undid the portal of the mansion.
The young clergyman of the town had just ascended the steps, and,
bowing to the lady, passed in without a word.

Years--many years--rolled on. The world seemed new again, so much
older was it grown since the night when those pale girls had clasped
their hands across the bosom of the corpse. In the interval a lonely
woman had passed from youth to extreme age, and was known by all the
town as the "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet." A taint of insanity had
affected her whole life, but so quiet, sad and gentle, so utterly free
from violence, that she was suffered to pursue her harmless fantasies
unmolested by the world with whose business or pleasures she had
naught to do. She dwelt alone, and never came into the daylight except
to follow funerals. Whenever a corpse was borne along the street, in
sunshine, rain or snow, whether a pompous train of the rich and proud
thronged after it or few and humble were the mourners, behind them
came the lonely woman in a long white garment which the people called
her shroud. She took no place among the kindred or the friends, but
stood at the door to hear the funeral prayer, and walked in the rear
of the procession as one whose earthly charge it was to haunt the
house of mourning and be the shadow of affliction and see that the
dead were duly buried. So long had this been her custom that the
inhabitants of the town deemed her a part of every funeral, as much as
the coffin-pall or the very corpse itself, and augured ill of the
sinner's destiny unless the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet came gliding
like a ghost behind. Once, it is said, she affrighted a bridal-party
with her pale presence, appearing suddenly in the illuminated hall
just as the priest was uniting a false maid to a wealthy man before
her lover had been dead a year. Evil was the omen to that marriage.
Sometimes she stole forth by moonlight and visited the graves of
venerable integrity and wedded love and virgin innocence, and every
spot where the ashes of a kind and faithful heart were mouldering.
Over the hillocks of those favored dead would she stretch out her arms
with a gesture as if she were scattering seeds, and many believed that
she brought them from the garden of Paradise, for the graves which she
had visited were green beneath the snow and covered with sweet flowers
from April to November. Her blessing was better than a holy verse upon
the tombstone. Thus wore away her long, sad, peaceful and fantastic
life till few were so old as she, and the people of later generations
wondered how the dead had ever been buried or mourners had endured
their grief without the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet. Still years
went on, and still she followed funerals and was not yet summoned to
her own festival of death.

One afternoon the great street of the town was all alive with business
and bustle, though the sun now gilded only the upper half of the
church-spire, having left the housetops and loftiest trees in shadow.
The scene was cheerful and animated in spite of the sombre shade
between the high brick buildings. Here were pompous merchants in white
wigs and laced velvet, the bronzed faces of sea-captains, the foreign
garb and air of Spanish Creoles, and the disdainful port of natives of
Old England, all contrasted with the rough aspect of one or two
back-settlers negotiating sales of timber from forests where axe had
never sounded. Sometimes a lady passed, swelling roundly forth in an
embroidered petticoat, balancing her steps in high-heeled shoes and
courtesying with lofty grace to the punctilious obeisances of the
gentlemen. The life of the town seemed to have its very centre not far
from an old mansion that stood somewhat back from the pavement,
surrounded by neglected grass, with a strange air of loneliness rather
deepened than dispelled by the throng so near it. Its site would have
been suitably occupied by a magnificent Exchange or a brick block
lettered all over with various signs, or the large house itself might
have made a noble tavern with the "King's Arms" swinging before it and
guests in every chamber, instead of the present solitude. But, owing
to some dispute about the right of inheritance, the mansion had been
long without a tenant, decaying from year to year and throwing the
stately gloom of its shadow over the busiest part of the town.

Such was the scene, and such the time, when a figure unlike any that
have been described was observed at a distance down the street.

"I espy a strange sail yonder," remarked a Liverpool captain--"that
woman in the long white garment."

The sailor seemed much struck by the object, as were several others
who at the same moment caught a glimpse of the figure that had
attracted his notice. Almost immediately the various topics of
conversation gave place to speculations in an undertone on this
unwonted occurrence.

"Can there be a funeral so late this afternoon?" inquired some.

They looked for the signs of death at every door--the sexton, the
hearse, the assemblage of black-clad relatives, all that makes up the
woeful pomp of funerals. They raised their eyes, also, to the sun-gilt
spire of the church, and wondered that no clang proceeded from its
bell, which had always tolled till now when this figure appeared in
the light of day. But none had heard that a corpse was to be borne to
its home that afternoon, nor was there any token of a funeral except
the apparition of the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

"What may this portend?" asked each man of his neighbor.

All smiled as they put the question, yet with a certain trouble in
their eyes, as if pestilence, or some other wide calamity, were
prognosticated by the untimely intrusion among the living of one whose
presence had always been associated with death and woe. What a comet
is to the earth was that sad woman to the town. Still she moved on,
while the hum of surprise was hushed at her approach, and the proud
and the humble stood aside that her white garment might not wave
against them. It was a long, loose robe of spotless purity. Its wearer
appeared very old, pale, emaciated and feeble, yet glided onward
without the unsteady pace of extreme age. At one point of her course a
little rosy boy burst forth from a door and ran with open arms toward
the ghostly woman, seeming to expect a kiss from her bloodless lips.
She made a slight pause, fixing her eye upon him with an expression of
no earthly sweetness, so that the child shivered and stood awestruck
rather than affrighted while the Old Maid passed on. Perhaps her
garment might have been polluted even by an infant's touch; perhaps
her kiss would have been death to the sweet boy within the year.

"She is but a shadow," whispered the superstitious. "The child put
forth his arms and could not grasp her robe."

The wonder was increased when the Old Maid passed beneath the porch of
the deserted mansion, ascended the moss-covered steps, lifted the iron
knocker and gave three raps. The people could only conjecture that
some old remembrance, troubling her bewildered brain, had impelled the
poor woman hither to visit the friends of her youth--all gone from
their home long since and for ever unless their ghosts still haunted
it, fit company for the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

An elderly man approached the steps, and, reverently uncovering his
gray locks, essayed to explain the matter.

"None, madam," said he, "have dwelt in this house these fifteen years
agone--no, not since the death of old Colonel Fenwicke, whose funeral
you may remember to have followed. His heirs, being ill-agreed among
themselves, have let the mansion-house go to ruin."

The Old Maid looked slowly round with a slight gesture of one hand and
a finger of the other upon her lip, appearing more shadow-like than
ever in the obscurity of the porch. But again she lifted the hammer,
and gave, this time, a single rap. Could it be that a footstep was now
heard coming down the staircase of the old mansion which all conceived
to have been so long untenanted? Slowly, feebly, yet heavily, like the
pace of an aged and infirm person, the step approached, more distinct
on every downward stair, till it reached the portal. The bar fell on
the inside; the door was opened. One upward glance toward the
church-spire, whence the sunshine had just faded, was the last that
the people saw of the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

"Who undid the door?" asked many.

This question, owing to the depth of shadow beneath the porch, no one
could satisfactorily answer. Two or three aged men, while protesting
against an inference which might be drawn, affirmed that the person
within was a negro and bore a singular resemblance to old Caesar,
formerly a slave in the house, but freed by death some thirty years
before.

"Her summons has waked up a servant of the old family," said one, half
seriously.

"Let us wait here," replied another; "more guests will knock at the
door anon. But the gate of the graveyard should be thrown open."

Twilight had overspread the town before the crowd began to separate or
the comments on this incident were exhausted. One after another was
wending his way homeward, when a coach--no common spectacle in those
days--drove slowly into the street. It was an old-fashioned equipage,
hanging close to the ground, with arms on the panels, a footman behind
and a grave, corpulent coachman seated high in front, the whole giving
an idea of solemn state and dignity. There was something awful in the
heavy rumbling of the wheels.

The coach rolled down the street, till, coming to the gateway of the
deserted mansion, it drew up, and the footman sprang to the ground.

"Whose grand coach is this?" asked a very inquisitive body.

The footman made no reply, but ascended the steps of the old house,
gave three taps with the iron hammer, and returned to open the coach
door. An old man possessed of the heraldic lore so common in that day
examined the shield of arms on the panel.

"Azure, a lion's head erased, between three flowers de luce," said he,
then whispered the name of the family to whom these bearings belonged.
The last inheritor of its honors was recently dead, after a long
residence amid the splendor of the British court, where his birth and
wealth had given him no mean station. "He left no child," continued
the herald, "and these arms, being in a lozenge, betoken that the
coach appertains to his widow."

Further disclosures, perhaps, might have been made had not the speaker
been suddenly struck dumb by the stern eye of an ancient lady who
thrust forth her head from the coach, preparing to descend. As she
emerged the people saw that her dress was magnificent, and her figure
dignified in spite of age and infirmity--a stately ruin, but with a
look at once of pride and wretchedness. Her strong and rigid features
had an awe about them unlike that of the white Old Maid, but as of
something evil. She passed up the steps, leaning on a gold-headed
cane. The door swung open as she ascended, and the light of a torch
glittered on the embroidery of her dress and gleamed on the pillars of
the porch. After a momentary pause, a glance backward and then a
desperate effort, she went in.

The decipherer of the coat-of-arms had ventured up the lower step,
and, shrinking back immediately, pale and tremulous, affirmed that the
torch was held by the very image of old Caesar.

"But such a hideous grin," added he, "was never seen on the face of
mortal man, black or white. It will haunt me till my dying-day."

Meantime, the coach had wheeled round with a prodigious clatter on the
pavement and rumbled up the street, disappearing in the twilight,
while the ear still tracked its course. Scarcely was it gone when the
people began to question whether the coach and attendants, the ancient
lady, the spectre of old Caesar and the Old Maid herself were not all a
strangely-combined delusion with some dark purport in its mystery. The
whole town was astir, so that, instead of dispersing, the crowd
continually increased, and stood gazing up at the windows of the
mansion, now silvered by the brightening moon. The elders, glad to
indulge the narrative propensity of age, told of the long-faded
splendor of the family, the entertainments they had given and the
guests, the greatest of the land, and even titled and noble ones from
abroad, who had passed beneath that portal. These graphic
reminiscences seemed to call up the ghosts of those to whom they
referred. So strong was the impression on some of the more imaginative
hearers that two or three were seized with trembling fits at one and
the same moment, protesting that they had distinctly heard three other
raps of the iron knocker.

"Impossible!" exclaimed others. "See! The moon shines beneath the
porch, and shows every part of it except in the narrow shade of that
pillar. There is no one there."

"Did not the door open?" whispered one of these fanciful persons.

"Didst thou see it too?" said his companion, in a startled tone.

But the general sentiment was opposed to the idea that a third
visitant had made application at the door of the deserted house. A
few, however, adhered to this new marvel, and even declared that a red
gleam like that of a torch had shone through the great front window,
as if the negro were lighting a guest up the staircase. This too was
pronounced a mere fantasy.

But at once the whole multitude started, and each man beheld his own
terror painted in the faces of all the rest.

"What an awful thing is this!" cried they.

A shriek too fearfully distinct for doubt had been heard within the
mansion, breaking forth suddenly and succeeded by a deep stillness, as
if a heart had burst in giving it utterance. The people knew not
whether to fly from the very sight of the house or to rush trembling
in and search out the strange mystery. Amid their confusion and
affright they were somewhat reassured by the appearance of their
clergyman, a venerable patriarch, and equally a saint, who had taught
them and their fathers the way to heaven for more than the space of an
ordinary lifetime. He was a reverend figure with long white hair upon
his shoulders, a white beard upon his breast and a back so bent over
his staff that he seemed to be looking downward continually, as if to
choose a proper grave for his weary frame. It was some time before the
good old man, being deaf and of impaired intellect, could be made to
comprehend such portions of the affair as were comprehensible at all.
But when possessed of the facts, his energies assumed unexpected
vigor.

"Verily," said the old gentleman, "it will be fitting that I enter the
mansion-house of the worthy Colonel Fenwicke, lest any harm should
have befallen that true Christian woman whom ye call the 'Old Maid in
the Winding-Sheet.'"
