"Yes."

"You never told me that you had got them."

"No; the Colonel said that I was not to make a fuss about them nor show
them to people, but keep them locked up in the case.  Here they are,"
cried the boy; and, thrusting down one hand, he drew from beneath some
folded garments a small flat scarlet morocco case, which he opened by
pressing a spring, and drew out from where it lay neatly doubled, a
gold-embroidered waistbelt of some soft yellow leather, whose fastening
was formed of a gold clasp covered by a large flat emerald, two others
of similar shape being arranged so that when the belt was fastened round
the waist they lay on either side.  It was a magnificent piece of
ornamentation, but barbaric, and such as would be worn by an Indian
prince.

Apparently it was of great value, for the largest glittering green stone
was fully two inches in length and an inch and a half wide, the others
being about half the size, and all three engraved with lines of large
Arabic characters, so that either stone could have been utilised as a
gigantic seal.

"I don't see why one shouldn't wear a thing like this," said Singh.  "My
father always used to wear it out at home wherever he went, even when he
wore nothing else but a long white muslin robe.  On grand Court days he
would be covered with jewels, and his turban was full of diamonds."

"Yes," said Glyn drily and with a half-contemptuous smile upon his lips;
"but that was in India, where all the rajahs and princes wear such
things."

"Well," said the boy proudly, "I am still a maharajah, even if I have
come to England to be educated; so why shouldn't I put on a belt like
this on a grand day if I like?"

Glyn took the brilliant belt from his companion's hand and held it
towards the light, inspecting curiously the beautiful gems, which were
of a lustrous green marked with flaws.

"Ah," he said, "it looks nice, and is worth a lot of money I suppose."

"Of course," said the young Indian; and he added haughtily, "I shouldn't
wear it if it were not."

"Well, you can't wear it," said Glyn, passing the embroidered leather
through his hands and turning it over in the bright sunlight which came
through the window.

"But why?" cried Singh, frowning slightly at having his will challenged.

"Well," said Glyn, "first of all, as I told you, because the boys would
laugh at you."

"They dare not," cried the boy proudly.

"What!" cried Glyn laughing.  "Why, English boys dare do anything.  What
did Slegge say this morning?"

"Slegge is what you call a blackguard," cried Singh angrily.

"Well, he isn't nice certainly," said Glyn; "but he'd begin at you again
directly, and chaff, and say that you ought to ride on the elephant."

"Well," said the boy, "and that would be my place if there were a
howdah.  Of course I shouldn't ride on the great brute's neck."

"Yes, in India; but can't you recollect that you are still in England?"

"Of course I can," cried the boy, with flashing eyes; "but I can't
forget that I am a prince."

"Now, look here," said Glyn, "what did dad say to you when the Doctor
left us with him in the drawing-room?  I mean before father went away.
Have you forgotten?"

"Of course not.  He said, `Never mind about being a prince.  Be content
with the rank of an English gentleman till you go back to your own
country.'  And that's what I am going to do."

"Well done," cried Glyn merrily.  "Then, now, put this thing away; you
don't want it.  But stop a moment.  I never had a close look at it
before."

"No; the Colonel told me to keep it locked up and not to go showing it
about so as to tempt some _budmash_ to steal it."

"Well, we haven't got any _budmashes_ in England," said Glyn merrily, as
he began to inspect the emeralds again and took out his handkerchief to
rub off a finger-mark or two and make the gems send off scintillations
of sunlight which formed jack-o'-lanterns on the ceiling.  "But we have
plenty of blackguards who would like to get a chance to carry it off."

"What, among our schoolfellows?" cried Singh hastily.

"Bah!  No!  There, put it away.  But I should like to know what that
writing means."

"It's out of the Koran," said the boy as he took the jewelled belt back
reverently and held it up to the light in turn.  "It's very, very old,
and means greatness to my family.  It is a holy relic, and the
Maharajahs of Dour have worn that in turn for hundreds of years."

"Well, you put it away," said Glyn; "and I wouldn't show it to anybody
again, nor yet talk about it.  I wonder the dad let you have it."

"Why?" said Singh proudly.  "It is mine."

"Yes, of course; but it is not suited for a boy like you."

"A boy like me!" cried Singh half--angrily.  "Why, I am as old as you."

"Well, I know that; but my father doesn't give me emeralds and diamonds
to take with me to school.  He could, though, if he liked, for he's got
all those beautiful Indian jewels the Maharajah gave him."

"Yes," said Singh, "and that diamond--hilted tulwar."

"Yes, that's a grand sword," cried Glyn, with his eyes sparkling.  "I
should like to have that."

Singh laughed mockingly.

"Why, you are as bad as I am," he cried.

"That I am not!  Why, if I had it, do you think I should buckle it on to
go and see a country wild-beast show?"

"Well, no, I don't suppose you would," said Singh quietly, as he gravely
replaced the emeralds in their receptacle and curled the belt around
them before shutting down the velvet-lined and quilted cover with a loud
snap.  "But some day, when we have both grown older, and we are back in
India--I mean when I am at home in state and you are one of my
officers--you will have to get the Colonel to let you wear it then."

"Ah," said Glyn, slowly and thoughtfully, "some day; but that's a long
time off.  I suppose I shall be a soldier like the dad is, and in your
army."

"Why, of course," cried Singh.  "You will be my greatest general, just
the same as your father was when mine was alive.  He was always a great
general there, though he was only colonel in the Company's army.  There,
I suppose you are right.  I like to look at that belt, but I won't show
it about; but I say, Glyn, I shall be glad when we get older and have
both begun learning to be--no, what do you call it?--not learning--I
mean, being taught to be soldiers."

"Training," said Glyn.

"Yes, training--that's it; and we shall go together to that place where
your father was, not far from London.  You know--the place he used to
talk to us about, where he was trained before he came out to India."

"Addiscombe," said Glyn quietly, as he stood watching his companion
thrust the case back into the bottom of the portmanteau and rearrange
the garments he had moved, while his hand lingered for a few moments
about a soft white robe, which he covered over with a sigh before
closing the lid and turning the key of the great leather case.

"Yes," he said, "Addiscombe.  What stories he used to tell us about the
young officers there!  What did he call them?  I forget."

"Cadets," said Glyn thoughtfully.

"That's it.  I wish I didn't forget so many of those English words;
but," continued the boy, "I liked it best when he told us about the
battles out at home, when all the chiefs around were fighting against my
father the Maharajah, so as to slay him and divide his possessions.  You
know, my father has talked about it to me as well--how he was so nearly
beaten and weakened, and so many of his bravest officers killed, that it
made him apply to the great Company for help, and they sent your father.
Oh, what a brave man he was!"

"Who said that?" cried Glyn, flushing up.

"My father the Maharajah.  He said so to me many times, and that he was
his best and truest friend.  Oh yes, I used to like to hear about it
all, and he used to tell me that the Colonel would always be my truest
friend as well, and that I was to love him and obey him, and always
believe that what he told me to do was right.  And I always do."

"Of course you do," said Glyn flushing.  "Yes, Singh, he is some one to
be proud of, isn't he?  But I am like you; I don't much like coming to
this school, though the Doctor is very nice and kind to us both."

"Yes, I like him better than the masters," said Singh; "but I don't like
the boys, and I don't think they like me."

"Oh, wait a bit," said Glyn.  "It's because everything seems so
different to being in India; but, as father says, there is such a lot
one ought to learn, and we shall get used to it by-and-by; only, I say,
you know what the dad said?"

"You mean about trying to be an English gentle man and leaving the
maharajah till I get back home?"

"Yes, that's it," cried Glyn eagerly.

"Yes; but it's hard work, for everything is so different here, and the
boys are not like you."

"Oh yes, they are," cried Glyn merrily; "just the same.  Here, come on;
let's go down and see whether Wrench has put up those forms by the wall.
We want to see the show."

"Yes," cried Singh.  "It puts one in mind of Dour again, and I have been
thinking that we don't get on with the other boys through me."

"What do you mean with your `through me'?" said Glyn.

"Well, I don't quite know.  It's because I am an Indian, I suppose; and
when they talk to me as they do, and bully me, as you call it, it makes
my heart feel hot and as if I should like to do something strange.  But
I am going to try.  And look here, Glyn," said the lad very seriously,
"I shall begin at once."

"Begin what?"

"Trying to make them like me.  I shall make friends with that big fellow
Slegge, and bear it all, and if he goes on again like he did this
morning I have quite made up my mind I won't fight."

"Oh," said Glyn drily.  "Well, come on down the grounds now.  We shall
see."



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE ELEPHANT CRIES "PHOOMP!"

Plymborough was out in street and road excepting those who lived on the
line of route and had windows that looked down upon the coming
procession, which was to be timed to reach the town, after a long march
from Duncombe, at noon precisely.

Small things please country people, and there was not much work being
done that day.  It was an excuse for a holiday, as eagerly seized upon
by the townsfolk, old and young, as by the young gentlemen of Dr
Bewley's establishment.

But that was not all.  The villages near Plymborough were many, and the
people for miles round flocked into the place to see the procession and
stop afterwards about the market-place to visit the exhibition of beasts
and listen to the band.

The day was gloriously fine, and all promised a famous harvest of
sixpences for the great Ramball himself, a man as punctual in his
appointments as he was in the feeding of his beasts, this being carried
out regularly at certain times, but, unfortunately for the animals, in
uncertain quantities dependent upon the supplies.

Dr Bewley's boys took their places along the forms quite an hour before
noon, this punctuality having something to do with getting the best
places, as they put it, though--as the forms were in a line under the
brick wall, which was low enough with their help for the shortest boy to
see over, and the procession would pass close beneath--it was hard to
see any difference in the positions, or why the form reserved for the
masters was any better than that at the extreme end.

But certainly the masters' form was considered the best from the fact
that it stood first, while the nearest end of the next form was taken up
in spite of his declaration by Slegge, whose greatest admirers got as
close to him as they could or as he would allow.

"Let's go and stand with them," said Singh, as they crossed over to the
wall.

"Oh, I don't know," replied his companion.  "I vote we go right to the
other end along with the juniors."

"Very well," said Singh with a laugh; "but they'll say it's because
we're afraid."

"Yes," replied Glyn coolly; "but let them.  I don't think we are."  And
leading the way, he made for the last form, which they had all to
themselves, and stood there quietly looking down at the crowd below and
along the Duncombe road, which was pretty well lined with people
standing about or seated in cart or chaise waiting for the coming sight.

The masters were not in such a hurry, and they remained in the house
talking together, so that they were not present to see the skylarking
and listen to the banter going on, a good deal of which was set going by
Slegge, who was in a high state of glee, and scattered a great deal of
chaff, to the great delight of his parasites, who eagerly conveyed
insulting messages from their chief to the two new pupils at the other
end of the line--at least, they bore those that were not too offensive;
others that seemed likely to produce some form of resentment from the
lads they attacked were sent on by the youngest boys.

All this palled after a time, and a certain amount of whispering
beginning close at hand, Slegge asked sharply what the whisperers were
talking about, when silence ensued, no one present daring to repeat the
remark which Burney had made, which was to the effect that old Slegge
had said that he was not going to stoop to see the miserable procession,
but all the same he had taken the best place.

The consequence was that Slegge guessed pretty correctly that something
was being whispered dealing with him, and he was just growing fiercely
insistent and threatening what he would do if somebody did not confess,
when the masters came upon the scene and took their places; while
directly after there was a loud cheer, for from out of the distance came
the faintly heard throbbing of a drum.

Everything else was now forgotten.  Eyes and ears were strained, and
minutes elapsed before the pulsations caused by the beating of two balls
upon the tightly stretched skin began to grow nearer, and Mr Rampson
commenced a discussion to fill up the time by throwing quotations from
the old Roman authors at his fellow-tutors and the older boys.

It was a favourable moment for calling a drum a tympanum and giving
descriptions of the different forms, curves, and lengths of the various
trumpets used by the Roman soldiery in their warlike processions, all of
which Slegge voted bosh, and intimated his opinion to the next boy that
old Rampson had better go to the other end of the forms and pour it out
on the two new fellows.

At last, though, the pulsations of the well-belaboured drum came nearer
and were mingled with the mournfully plaintive notes of the wind
instruments being blown by the band, the performers seated in a tall
triumphal car decorated in scarlet and gold, and ornamented by a gilt
carving meant to represent the giant anaconda of South America embracing
and crushing the twenty bandsmen of Ramball's show, gentlemen who, by
the way, wore a richly worsted-embroidered uniform of scarlet baize, the
braid being yellow ochre of the deepest dye.

The carving round the car was either a two-headed anaconda or a
combination of two performing an evolution in twists about the
musicians, tying them up apparently, from the spectators' point of view,
in horrible knots and giving them a terrible aspect of suffering, the
apparent pressure of the serpents' folds causing their faces and cheeks
to swell out in an appalling way, and their eyes to start from their
sockets, while their sufferings seemed to produce wails, shrieks, and
cries for help or mercy, mingled with groans, as the men worked hard
with a perfect battery of old-fashioned key-bugles, supported by
ophicleide and bassoon.

Most painful were the shrieking, strident cries produced by a pair of
clarinets, and altogether there came from out of the knots of the
serpents a hideous chaos of sound, drawn onward by a team of six horses,
and received with wild cheers by the crowd, for it was really the new
triumphal march freshly down from town, but in which the bandsmen were
not perfect as regarded their parts.

"Is that music or the roarings and cries of some of the beasts?"
whispered Singh.

There was a burst of laughter from the boys who heard the native remark,
which made Singh turn round upon them angrily; but at a touch from Glyn
he smiled good-humouredly, and then laughed aloud.

"Well, it was a stupid thing to say," he cried.  "Of course it's the
music."

"I say, Singh," burst in Glyn, and he nodded towards the huge drum that
was suspended at the back in the highest part of the car, hung, as it
were, between the curling tails of the two gilt serpents.  "I say," he
cried, "wouldn't that astonish the people at Dour?  What would they say
to that for a tom-tom?"

"Ah!" cried Singh, "I'll buy one like that, and take it back with us
when we go home."

"No, I say, don't," cried Glyn.  "They make noise enough there as it
is."

"Noise!" echoed Singh.  "They don't call that noise."

As they were speaking the great six-horse car rumbled slowly by, with
the drummer beating hard and the buglers and trombonists blowing their
