course, I cannot speak with certainty concerning anything that will
happen to you beyond that point. Mr. Willet, I am sorry that a sword
such as yours is not French."

Willet bowed, and so did Robert. Then the three withdrew, receiving
their safe conducts as they went. At the inn they made hurried
preparations for departure, deciding that they would cross at once to
the south side of the St. Lawrence and travel on foot through the woods
until they reached the Richelieu, where in a secret cove a canoe
belonging to Willet lay hidden. The canoe would take them into Lake
Champlain and then they could proceed by water to the point they wished.

Robert wrote a note of thanks to the Intendant for his courtesy,
expressing their united regrets that the brevity of time would not
permit them to pay a formal call, and as it departed in the hands of a
messenger, de Galisonniere came to say farewell.

"It's likely," he said, "that if we meet again it will be on the
battlefield. I see nothing for it but a war, but if we do meet, Mr.
Willet, you must promise that you will not use that sword against me."

"I promise, Captain de Galisonniere," said Willet, smiling, "but if the
war does come, and I hope it may not, it will be fought chiefly in the
woods, and there will be little need for swords. And now we wish to
thank you for your great kindness and help."

He shook hands with them all, showing some emotion, and then left
hastily. The three deferred their departure, concluding to spend the
night at the inn, but before dawn the next morning they crossed the St.
Lawrence and began their journey.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BOWMEN


Robert looked back and saw the roofs and spires of Quebec sitting on its
mighty rock, and he remembered how much had happened during their short
stay there. He could recall the whole time, hour by hour, and he knew
that he would never forget any part of it. The town was intense,
glowing, vivid in the clear northern sunlight, and he had seen it, as he
so often had longed to do. A quality in his nature had responded to it,
but at the last his heart had turned against it. The splendor of that
city into which he had enjoyed such a remarkable introduction had in it
something hot and feverish.

"You're thinking a farewell to Quebec, Robert," said the hunter. "It
looks grand and strong up there, but I've an idea there'll be a day when
we'll come again."

"Americans and English have besieged it before," said Robert, "but
they've never taken it."

"Which proves nothing, but we'll turn our minds now to our journey into
the south. It's good to breathe this clean air again, and the sooner we
reach the deep woods the better I'll like it. What say you, Tayoga?"

The nostrils of the Onondaga expanded, as he inhaled the odors of leaf
and grass, borne on the gentle wind.

"I have lived in the white man's house in Albany," he said, "and in our
own log house in the vale of Onondaga, and I know the English and the
French have many things that the nations of the Hodenosaunee have not,
but we can do without most of them. If the great chiefs were to drink
and dance all night as Bigot and his friends do, then indeed would we
cease to be the mighty League of the Hodenosaunee."

They traveled all that day on foot, but at a great pace, showing their
safe conduct twice to French soldiers, and so thin was the line of
settlements along the St. Lawrence that when night came they were beyond
the cultivated fields and had entered the deep woods. The three, in
addition to their weapons, carried on their backs packs containing
blankets and food, and as Willet and Tayoga put them down they drew long
breaths of relief like those of prisoners escaped.

"Home, Tayoga! Home!" said the hunter, joyfully. "I've nothing against
cities in general, but I breathed some pretty foul air in Quebec, and
it's sweet and clean here. There comes a time when you are glad no house
crosses your view and you are with the world as it was made in the
beginning. Don't these trees look splendid! Did you ever see a finer lot
of tender young leaves? And the night sky you see up there has been
washed and scrubbed until it's nothing but clean blue!"

"Why, you're only a boy, Dave, the youngest of us three," laughed
Robert. "Here you are singing songs about leaves and trees just as if
you were not the most terrible swordsman in the world."

A shadow crossed Willet's face, but it was quick in passing.

"Let's not talk about Boucher, Robert," he said. "I don't regret what I
did, knowing that it saved the lives of others, but I won't recall it
any oftener than I can help. You're right when you term me a boy, and I
believe you're right, too, when you say I'm the youngest of the three.
I'm so glad to be here that just now I'm not more'n fifteen years old. I
could run, jump, laugh and sing. And I think the woods are a deal safer
and friendlier than Quebec. There's nobody, at least not here, lying
around seeking a chance to stick a rapier in your back."

He unbuckled his sword and laid it upon the grass. Robert put his beside
it.

"I don't think we'll need to use 'em again for a long time," said the
hunter, "but they're mighty fine as decorations, and sometimes a
decoration is worth while. It impresses. Now, Tayoga, you kindle the
fire, and Robert, you find a spring. It's pleasant to feel that you're
again on land that belongs to nobody, and can do as you please."

Robert found a spring less than a hundred yards away, and Tayoga soon
kindled a fire near it with his flint and steel, on which the hunter
warmed their food. Each had a small tin cup from which he drank clear
water as they ate, and Robert, elastic of temperament, rejoiced with the
hunter.

"You are right, Dave," he said. "These are splendid trees, and every
leaf on 'em is splendid, too, and the little spring I found is just
about as fine a spring as the forest holds. I slept in a good bed at the
Inn of the Eagle, but when I scrape up the dead leaves here, roll myself
in my blanket and lie on 'em I think I'll sleep better than I did
between four walls. What did you think of the Marquis Duquesne, Dave?"

"A man of parts, Robert. He has more military authority than any of our
Governors have, and if war comes he'll be a dangerous opponent."

"And it will come, Dave?"

"Looks like a certainty. You see, Robert, the King of France and the
King of England sitting on their golden thrones, only three or four
hundred miles apart, but three or four thousand miles from us, have a
dyspeptic fit, make faces at each other, and here in the woods we must
fall to fighting. Even Tayoga's people--and the King of France and the
King of England are nothing to them--must be drawn into it."

"Both Kings claim the Ohio country, which they will never see, and of
which they know nothing," said Tayoga, with a faint touch of sarcasm,
"but perhaps it belongs to the people who live in it."

"Maybe so, Tayoga! Maybe!" said Willet briskly, "but we'll not look for
trouble or unpleasant thoughts now. We three are too glad to be in the
woods again. Tayoga, suppose you scout about and see that no enemy's
near. Then we'll build up the fire, till it's burning bright, and
rejoice."

"It is well!" said Tayoga, as he slipped away among the trees, making
no sound as he went. Robert meanwhile gathered dead wood which lay
everywhere in abundance, and heaped it beside the fire ready for use.
But as Tayoga was gone some time he sat down again with his back to a
tree, taking long deep breaths of the cool fresh air, and feeling his
pulses leap. The hunter sat in a similar position, gazing meditatively
into the fire. Robert heard a rattling of bark over his head, but he
knew that it was a squirrel scuttling up the trunk of the tree, and
pausing now and then to examine the strange invaders of his forest.

"Do you see the squirrel, Dave?" he asked.

"Yes, he's about twenty feet above you now, sitting in a fork. He's a
fine big fellow with a bushy tail curved so far over his back that it
nearly touches his head. He has little red eyes and he's just burning up
with curiosity. The firelight falls on him in such a way that I can see.
Perhaps he has never seen a man before. Now he's looking at you, Robert,
trying to decide what kind of an animal you are, and forming an estimate
of your character and disposition."

"You're developing your imagination, Dave, but since I saw what you said
and did in Quebec I'm not surprised."

"Encouraged by your motionless state he's left the fork, and come a half
dozen feet down the trunk in order to get a better look at you. I think
he likes you, Robert. He lies flattened against the bark, and if I had
not seen him descending I would not notice him now, but the glow of the
coals still enables me to make out his blazing little red eyes like
sparks of fire. Now he is looking at me, and I don't think he has as
much confidence in my harmlessness as he has in yours. Perhaps it's
because he sees my eyes are upon him and he doesn't like to be watched.
He's a saucy little fellow. Sit still, Robert! I see a black shadow over
your head, and I think our little friend, the squirrel, should look out.
Ah, there he goes! Missed! And our handsome young friend, the gray
squirrel, is safe! He has scuttled into his hole higher up the tree!"

Robert had heard a rush of wings and he had seen a long black shadow
pass.

"What was it, Dave?" he asked.

"A great horned owl. His iron beak missed our little squirrel friend
just about three inches. Those three inches were enough, but I don't
think that squirrel will very soon again stay out at night so late. The
woods are beautiful, Robert, but you see they're not always safe even
for those who can't live anywhere else."

"I know, Dave, but I'm not going to think about it tonight, because I've
made up my mind to be happy. Here comes Tayoga. Is any enemy near,
Tayoga?"

"None," replied the Onondaga, sitting down by the fire. "But the forest
is full of its own people, and they are all very curious about us."

"That's true," said Willet, "a squirrel over Robert's head was so
inquisitive that he forgot his vigilance for a few moments and came near
losing his life as the price of his carelessness. I'm not surprised to
hear you say, Tayoga, they're all looking at us. I've felt for some time
that we're being watched, admired and perhaps a little feared. It's a
tribute to the enormously interesting qualities of us three."

"That is, Dave, because we're human beings we're kings in the forest
among the animals."

"You put it right, Robert. They look up to us. Is anything watching us
among the leaves near by, Tayoga?"

"A huge bald-headed eagle, Great Bear, is sitting on a bough in the
center of a mass of green leaves. He is looking at us, and while he is
full of curiosity and some admiration he fears and hates us more."

"What is he saying to himself, Tayoga?"

"You can read his words to himself by the look in his eyes. He is saying
that he does not like our appearance, that we are too large, that we
have created here something hot and flaming, that we behave with too
much assurance, going about just as if the forest was ours, and paying
no attention to its rightful owners."

"He has got a grievance, and perhaps it's a just one," laughed Robert.

"No, it is not," said Tayoga, "because there is plenty of room in the
forest for him and for us, too. I can read his eyes quite well. There is
much malice and anger in his heart, and I will give him some cause for
rage."

He picked up a live coal between the ends of two sticks, and holding it
firmly in that manner, walked a little distance among the trees. Then
swinging the sticks he hurled the coal far up among the boughs. There
was an angry screech and whirr and Robert saw a swift shadow passing
between his eyes and the sky.

"His heart can burn more than ever now," laughed Tayoga, as he returned
to the fire.

"You've hurt his dignity, Tayoga," said Robert.

"So I have, but why should he not suffer a loss of pride? He is ruthless
and cruel and when he has his way he makes desolation about him."

"What else is watching us, Tayoga?"

"A beast upon the ground, and his heart is much like that of the eagle
in the air. He is crouched in a thicket about twenty yards away, and his
lips are drawn back from his sharp fangs. His nostrils twitch with the
odor of our food, and his yellow eyes are staring at us. Oh, he hates us
because he hates everything except his own kind and very often he hates
that. He wants our food because he's hungry--he's always hungry--and he
would try to eat us too if he were not so much afraid of us."

"Tayoga, one needs only a single glance to tell that this animal you're
talking about is a wolf."

"It is so, Dagaeoga. A very hungry and a very angry wolf. He is cunning,
but he does not know everything. He thinks we do not see him, that we do
not know he is there and that maybe, after awhile, when we go to sleep,
he can slip up and steal our food, or perhaps he can bring many of his
brothers, and they can eat us before we awake. Now, I will tell him in a
language he can understand that it's time for him to go away."

He picked up a heavy stick and threw it with all his might into the
bushes on their right. It sped straighter to the target than he had
hoped, as there was a thud, a snarling yelp, and then the swift pad of
flying feet. Tayoga lay back and laughed.

"The Spirit of Jest guided my hand," he said, "and the stick struck him
upon the nose. He will run far and his wrath and fear will grow as he
runs. Then he will lie down again in some thicket, and he will not dare
to come back. Now, we will wait a little."

"Anything more looking at us?" asked Robert after awhile.

"Yes, we have a new visitor," replied Tayoga in a low tone. "Speak only
in a whisper and do not move, because the animal that is looking at us
has no malice in its heart, and does not wish us harm. It has come very
softly and, while its eyes are larger, they are mild and have only
curiosity."

"A deer, I should say, Tayoga."

"Yes, a deer, Lennox, a very beautiful deer. It has been drawn by the
fire, and having come as near as it dares it stands there, shivering a
little, but wondering and admiring."

"We won't trouble it, Tayoga. We'll need the meat of a deer before long,
but we'll spare our guest of tonight."

"He is staring very straight at us," said Tayoga, "but something has
stirred in the brushwood--perhaps it's another wolf--and now he has
gone."

"We seem to be an attraction," said Willet, "and so I suppose we'd
better give 'em as good a look as we can."

He cast a great quantity of the dry wood on the fire, and it blazed up
gayly, throwing the red glow in a wide circle, and lighting up the
pleasant glade. The figures of the three, as they leaned in luxurious
attitudes, were outlined clearly and sharply, a view they would not have
allowed had not Tayoga been sure no enemy was near.

"Now let the spectators come on," said Willet genially, "because we
won't be on display forever. After a while we'll get sleepy, and then it
will be best to put out the fire."

The flames leaped higher and the glowing circle widened. Robert, leaning
against a tree, with his blanket wrapped around him and the cushion of
dead leaves beneath him, felt the grateful warmth upon his face, and it
rejoiced body and mind alike. Tayoga and the hunter were in a similar
state of content, and they were silent for a while. Then Robert said:

"Who's looking at us now, Tayoga?"

"Two creatures, Dagaeoga, that belong upon the ground, but that are not
now upon it."

"Your answer sounds like a puzzle. If they're not now upon the ground
they're probably in the air, but they're not birds, because birds don't
belong on the ground. Then they're animals that have climbed trees."

"Dagaeoga's mind is becoming wondrous wise. In time he may be a sachem
among his adopted people."

"Don't you have sport with me, Tayoga, because bear in mind that if you
do I will pay you back some day. Have these creatures a mean, vicious
look?"

"I could not claim, Dagaeoga, that they are as beautiful as the deer
that came to look at us but lately."

"Then I make so bold as to say, Tayoga, that they have tufted ear tips,
spotted fur, and short tails, in brief a gentleman lynx and a lady lynx,
his wife. They are gazing at us with respect and fear as the wolf did,
and also with just as much malice and hate. They're wondering who and
what we are, and why we come into their woods, the pair of bloodthirsty
rabbit slayers."

"Did I not say you would be a sachem some day, Dagaeoga? You have read
aright. An Onondaga warrior could not have done better. The two lynxes
are on a bough ten feet from the ground, and perhaps in their foolish
hearts they think because they are so high above the earth that we
cannot reach them."

"You're not going to shoot at 'em, Tayoga? We don't want to waste good
bullets on a lynx."

"Not I, Dagaeoga, but I will make them acquainted with something they
will dread as much as bullets. It's right that those who come to look at
us should be made to pay the price of it."

"So you think that Monsieur and Madame Lynx have looked long enough at
the illustrious three?"

"Yes, Dagaeoga. It is time for them to go. And since they do not go of
