
Later in the day their door was opened, and Mr. Pollock came in bringing
with him a cheery breeze.

"I've come to tell you what news there may be," he said, "and also to ask
questions. Now, sit down and make yourselves comfortable. That's right.
The cunning and ambitious Don Francisco Alvarez is in a rage. He is also
somewhat frightened. He knows that Bernardo Galvez will be busy the next
few days trying to secure the proof of the charges that you make against
him. In my opinion, Galvez believes that they are true, but, as you will
agree, he cannot act without proof."

"But that is exactly what we lack at this time," said Henry, "and how can
we get it while we are locked up here?"

"Just so! Just so! That is a point to which I am coming. Now, about this
renegade, this Braxton Wyatt. You say he is the man who drew the maps and
who has been the intermediary in this whole nefarious scheme. Maps could
be drawn, of course, for a purpose not wicked, but if they could be
produced, and above all if Alvarez had made any notes upon them in his own
handwriting, they would go far to help. If not proof, they would at least
be a strong indication. Now, where do you think these maps are kept?"

"On the person of Braxton Wyatt," replied Henry promptly.

The merchant smiled with pleasure.

"Of course! Of course!" he said. "They belong to Wyatt and naturally he
would keep them. Naturally, also, Alvarez would want him to keep them. He
would take care that such things were not found on his own person. We must
get possession of those maps. But we must go further. This renegade has
lived among both the Shawnees and Miamis and is high in their confidence,
is it not so?"

"Yes, both the great head-chiefs, Yellow Panther and Red Eagle, trust
him."

"And to carry out this nefarious alliance some promise must have passed
between Alvarez and the two head chiefs. That promise had to take a
concrete form to be binding."

"War belts," suggested Henry.

"But a white man does not send war belts. He has another kind of token,
and he makes that token with paper, ink, and a goose quill. Yes, Alvarez
is cunning, I know, but the most cunning of all men when he enters a great
conspiracy must leave a loose end hanging about somewhere. Or, to change
my simile, there is no armor of deception so complete that there is not a
crack in it. We must find that loose end, we must find that crack, and
when we do, we can see victory just ahead of us."

"Do you mean," said Henry, "that Alvarez has probably sent a letter to the
Northern chiefs, promising that as Governor General of Louisiana he will
help them with soldiers and cannon against us in Kentucky?"

"I think it likely, quite likely," returned Oliver Pollock, nodding his
head to give emphasis to his words. "He had to give them something that
would bind. A conspirator must take a risk and in this case it seemed
small. The villages of those chiefs are beyond the Ohio, fifteen hundred
miles at least from here. The chance that such a letter would reappear in
New Orleans was most remote, and Alvarez, might have expected to provide
against that, too, by being Governor General within a few months. I feel
confident that there is such a letter and we must find it."

"It's a pretty problem," said Paul.

"I admit it," said Oliver Pollock, "but a new continent teaches one to
achieve the impossible. That is what are we to do; how, I do not yet know,
but we must do it."

"It's important," said Henry, "that it be done soon."

"It certainly is," said Mr. Pollock with great emphasis, "because I wish
to start North soon with a great fleet of canoes and other boats loaded
with rifles, powder, lead, blankets, medicines, and other absolutely
necessary things for our suffering brethren in the east. They are hard
pressed there, and it takes a long time to pull up the Mississippi and the
Ohio and then carry these things across four or five hundred miles of
country to our army."

"It's shorely a wonderful thing," said Shif'less Sol, "that you kin take
boats up a big river hundreds an' hundreds o' miles into the heart o' a
continent, then bend off into another river runnin' into it that takes
you nearly over to the Atlantic. An' mebbe ef you took one o' the rivers
that runs in it on the other side you might follow it up 'till you got
purty near to the western ocean. It says to me plain ez print that we must
hev this here Mississippi all the way to its mouth. We can't stay bottled
up."

"Sh-sh," said Mr. Pollock, warningly. "Leave that to the future. It will
adjust itself, and I think it will adjust itself in the way that we wish,
but we cannot talk of it now, while Bernardo Galvez is our good friend and
Spain inclines to our side. Of course Louisiana may be passed back to
France, but France is a better and more powerful friend than Spain can
be."

"Do you think you can get hold of Braxton Wyatt?" asked Henry of Mr.
Pollock.

"I shall try," replied the merchant. "Our association has agents here, and
in such times as these and in such a great emergency much may be excused.
If we can get hands upon him at a convenient moment and place we'll see
whether he has those maps about him."

"He'll surely have them," said Henry. "But he'll stick close to Alvarez."

"Yes, there lies the trouble," said Mr. Pollock, "but we'll do our best."

He took his departure, and they were left again to loneliness. Several
days passed thus and they chafed terribly. Food and drink they had in
plenty, and even some English books were sent to them. But the narrow
space and the four enclosing walls were always there. Outside the spring
was deepening. All the great forest throbbed with the life of bird and
beast, but they, the highest of creation, could not walk ten paces in any
direction.

"Jim," said Shif'less Sol to Long Jim, "there's a spring 'bout twenty
miles north o' Wareville that you an' me hev sat by many a time. Thar are
hundreds a' springs through that country, yes, thousands o' 'em, but this
one is the finest o' 'em all. It comes right out o' the side o' a rock
hill, a stream so pure that you kin see right through it same ez ef it
wuzn't thar, then it falls into a most bee-yu-ti-ful rock pool scooped out
by Natur, an' ez the pool overflows, it runs away through the grass an'
the woods in a stream 'bout two feet wide an' four inches deep. I think
that's 'bout the nicest, coldest, an' most life-givin' water in all
Kentucky. You an' me, Jim, hev gone thar many a time, hot an' tired from
the hunt, an' hev felt ez ef we had landed right on the steps o' Heaven
itself. An' the game, Jim! The game, big an' little, knowed 'bout that
spring, too. Remember that tre-men-je-ous big elk you an' me killed 'bout
two hundred yards north o' the spring. He stood most ez high ez a horse.
An' remember, Jim, when we climbed up on top o' the hill out o' which the
spring runs, we could see a long distance every way, north, south, east
an' west, over the most bee-yu-ti-ful country, an' we could go whar we
pleased. We could follow the buffaler clean to the western ocean ef we
felt like it."

Long Jim had been sitting on the floor. Now he rose and advanced in a
threatening manner upon Shif'less Sol.

"See here, Sol Hyde!" he exclaimed, "me an' you hev had words many a time,
but they hev always ended in smoke! They hev never gone ez fur ez this!
An' I want to tell you right here, Sol Hyde, that I kin stand a lot uv
things but I can't stand this! 'Ef you say another word about that
bee-yu-ti-ful spring, an' them bee-yu-ti-ful woods, an' that bee-yu-ti-ful
game, thar'll be a heap uv trouble, an' it'll all be fur you!"

"Hit him anyway, Jim," said Tom Ross. "He's done filled me clean up with
discontent, and he ought to be punished."

Shif'less Sol laughed.

"I won't do it again, Jim," he said. "It wuz 'cause I feel ez bad about it
ez you do, an' I jest had to let off some meanness."

Lieutenant Diego Bernal reappeared at last. He bestowed shrewd looks upon
the five and said:

"I have an impression, though my impressions are usually false and my
memory always weak, that you are pining. You wish the liberty and the open
air of Kaintock. Your legs are long and you would stretch them."

"You hev shore hit it, leftenant," said Tom Ross. "Sometimes I think uv
startin' off walkin' ez straight an' hard ez I kin, goin' right through
the wall thar, an' then through any house that might git in the way, an'
never to stop goin' 'till I got to Kentucky, whar a man may breathe free
an' easy."

Lieutenant Diego Bernal laughed and daintily stroked his little mustache.

"I understand you and you have my sympathy," he said. "We Catalans are at
heart republicans, and I am interested in this new place of yours that you
call Kaintock. But you will have to endure this fort a while longer. The
good Senor Pollock does not make progress. He cannot produce the proof of
what you charge. Yet Bernardo Galvez waits. He believes in you, and he
holds Alvarez and Wyatt in the city. He is strengthened in his opinion,
too, by gossip that has come down from Beaulieu, but that is not proof and
he cannot act upon it. But be patient. I have an impression, although my
impressions are usually false, that time is fighting for you."

He stayed with them an hour, precise and affected, but they believed him
to be brave and true. A few days later Oliver Pollock himself came again.

"I have not been able to get hold of Wyatt," he said. "He stays too
closely with Alvarez. I don't think that my agents are skillful enough.
Hence I decided to procure a new one and fortunately I have succeeded."

"Who is that?" asked Henry.

"Yourself."

"Myself!" exclaimed Henry in astonishment.

"No one but you," replied the merchant. "I have been able, by the use of
great influence, to secure from Bernardo Galvez your temporary release. It
is to his interest to have this plot exposed if it really exists, and
accordingly he has allowed me to borrow you. You can go forth with me if
you give your word of honor that you will not leave New Orleans or its
vicinity and will report again here."

"Why, of course I'll go! I'll"--exclaimed Henry joyfully, and then he
stopped suddenly, looking around at his comrades. Then he added: "I don't
feel right, Mr. Pollock, to go away and leave the boys in this place."

Up rose Tom Ross.

"Don't you fret about us, Henry," he said. "You're goin' on a good work
an' you'll do it, too. We need to hev one uv our gang outside. Remember up
at Boo-ly, when Alvarez had us, how much better we felt 'cause he didn't
hev Sol. 'Twas a comfort to think that Sol wuz out thar in the woods."

It was a long speech for Tom Ross, but it expressed the sentiments of them
all. Henry left with Mr. Pollock and they went to a handsome brick house
in the city. This house was store, office, and residence combined, and
several clerks were about. But these clerks did not have pale faces and
bent backs. They were mostly strong-limbed, broad-shouldered men with
tanned faces.

"They work out of doors," said Mr. Pollock briefly. "Some are to go with
the fleet up the rivers, others have been as far as the West Indies
accumulating supplies. It is necessary for them all to be able to write
and shoot."

Henry liked their looks, but he did not have a chance to speak to any of
them as Mr. Pollock quickly led the way Into a small inner office, where
he motioned Henry to a chair and took one himself. Henry was now within
narrower walls than those that confined him in the prison, but he felt a
huge sense of relief. He was free. If he wanted to open the door and walk
out he could do so. He expanded his great chest and took a mighty breath.
Mr. Pollock heard the suspiration, looked up, and laughed. He understood
perfectly.

"I'd feel that way, too, if I had been in your place," he said. "Now what
we want to do is to devise some plan of trapping your friend and enemy.
Mr. Wyatt. What do you think?"

"Once," replied Henry, "when, he was carrying war belts between the
Shawnees and Miamis we simply seized him and took them away from him. We
must do something of this kind. Where is he staying?"

"Alvarez, has a house near the river. He is there. I know that the two are
plotting all the while, but I cannot get the proof."

"Do Wyatt and Alvarez know that I'm out?"

"No, neither of them."

"That's good. I think I can surprise Braxton Wyatt. If I can get my hands
on him I'm sure that we'll find those maps. What kind of a house has
Alvarez?"

"You can see it from that window. A pretty place, standing among the
trees."

Henry looked, and the longer he looked the more pleased he felt. The trees
were thick around the house of Alvarez and the fact gave him an idea.

"I think I know how to do it," he said.

Oliver Pollock leaned forward, his shrewd face eager, and for a few
minutes the two talked low and earnestly.




CHAPTER XVII

THE FLAW IN THE ARMOR


Don Francisco Alvarez was in a fairly happy frame of mind. It is true that
he could have been happier, but a revulsion from a great state of suspense
had come to him. When he had been so boldly accused in the presence of the
Governor General, cold fear had struck at his heart, despite his courage
and cunning. He knew that the seeds of suspicion had been sowed deep in
the heart of Bernardo Galvez and that the plant would grow fast in the
warm, moist air of intrigue that overhung New Orleans.

But days had passed and nothing had happened. Moreover, the five whom he
feared so much were hard and fast in the military prison within the walls,
and no proof of their charges had been brought forth. Time, too, worked
steadily for him. It not only weakened the accusation against him, but it
also gave his powerful friends at the court of Madrid time to help him and
his ambition. That little strain of royal blood in his veins was well
worth having. He would certainly succeed to Bernardo Galvez, whether the
wait he long or short.

He kept Braxton Wyatt with him all the time. He had learned to appreciate
the value of the renegade's unscrupulous cunning, and he was necessary,
too, in order to carry out the great alliance with the tribes which
Alvarez meant should become an accomplished fact.

It was a pleasant house that Alvarez had within the walls, one story of
brick covered with red tiles, surrounded by piazzas, and standing in
grounds thick with magnolias, cypresses, and orange trees. In truth, the
foliage was so dense that by daylight the house was almost entirely hidden
from the city, and by night it was quite invisible unless lights chanced
to twinkle through the leaves.

The Spaniard and Braxton Wyatt were sitting now upon the piazza drinking a
cool decoction of West Indian origin, and Alvarez was commenting upon what
he called his good fortune.

"All things favor us, Wyatt," he said. "No proof reaches the ears of
Bernardo Galvez and the galleon, Dona Isabel, will certainly arrive next
week from Spain. If I mistake not, she will bring news welcome to me and
unwelcome to Bernardo Galvez."

"If you become Governor General what will you do with the Kentuckians in
the fort?" asked Wyatt.

Alvarez laughed, and it was a very unpleasant laugh to hear.

"I do not know what I shall do with them," he said, "but I am sure of one
fact. They will never see Kaintock again. The powers of a Governor General
are very great."

Braxton Wyatt was satisfied with the answer. His wicked heart throbbed at
the thought that the five would never more roam their beloved forests. He,
too, looked forward to the arrival of the galleon, Dona Isabel, with
welcome news. He saw how useful he was to Alvarez, and if the Spaniard
rose, he must rise with him.

The two, after these few words, sat in silence, each occupied with his own
thoughts, which, however, were largely the same. Alvarez rose presently
and went into the house. If all things went as he wished, there were
certain letters that he would send to powerful friends in Spain, and now
was a good time to make rough drafts of them.

Braxton Wyatt remained on the piazza. It was wonderfully cool and pleasant
there, after the heat of the day. The wind blew musically among the orange
trees, and the air was spiced with pleasant odors. Braxton Wyatt's
thoughts were pleasant, too. He liked this luxurious southern life. Though
born to the forest, and a good woodsman, he had sybaritic tastes, which
needed only opportunity to bud and bloom.

Now, like the Arab who had the glass for sale, he was building his great
future. Alvarez would be Governor General of Louisiana, and he, Braxton
Wyatt, would be his trusted and necessary lieutenant. The five whom he
hated would be removed under the new rule from the military prison to
dungeons, where they would gradually be lost to the sight of man, never to
be heard of again. The Indians and the Spaniards with their cannon would
destroy the settlements in Kentucky, and he would become, if not the
first, at least the second man in His Most Catholic Majesty's huge
province of Louisiana. And it was not absolutely necessary to be
Spanish-born to become in time a Governor General himself.

Time passed. It was very quiet within the belt of magnolias and cypresses
and orange trees and but little noise came from the town, the stray shout
of a reveler, a snatch of a song, and then nothing more.

Braxton Wyatt, still filled with his dreams, arose and stepped down from
the piazza. The happy future promoted in him a certain physical activity,
and he wanted to walk among the trees. He stepped into their shadow,
