com pact', _closely put together_.


       *       *       *       *       *




ANECDOTE OF WASHINGTON.

PART I


It was a calm, sunny day in the year 1750; the scene, a piece of forest
land in the north of Virginia, near a noble stream of water.

Implements of surveying were lying about, and several men reclining
under the trees, indicated by their dress and appearance, that they were
engaged in laying out the wild lands of the country.

These persons had just finished their dinner. Apart from the group
walked a young man of a tall and compact frame, who moved with the firm
and steady tread of one accustomed to constant exercise in the open air.

His face wore a look of decision and manliness not usually found in one
so young, for he was but little over eighteen years of age.

Suddenly there was a shriek, then another, and then several more in
rapid succession. The voice was that of a woman, and seemed to proceed
from the other side of a small piece of wooded land.

At the first scream, the youth turned his head in the direction of the
sound; but when it was repeated, he pushed aside the undergrowth and
soon dashed into an open space on the banks of the stream, where stood a
small log-cabin.

As the young man broke from the undergrowth, he saw his companions
crowded together on the banks of the river, while in their midst stood a
woman, from whom proceeded the shrieks he had heard. She was held by two
of the men, but was struggling to free herself.

The instant the woman saw the young man, she exclaimed, "O sir, you will
do something for me! Make them release me. My boy--my poor boy is
drowning, and they will not let me go!"

"It would be madness; she will jump into the river," said one of the
men, "and the rapids would dash her to pieces in a moment!"

The youth had scarcely waited for these words; for he remembered the
child, a bold little boy four years of age, whose beautiful blue eyes
and flaxen ringlets made him a favorite with every one.

He had been accustomed to play in the little inclosure before the cabin;
but the gate having been left open, he had stolen out, reached the edge
of the bank, and was in the act of looking over, when his mother saw
him.

The shriek she uttered only hastened the accident she feared; for the
child, frightened at the cry of his mother, lost his balance and fell
into the stream, which here went foaming and roaring along among rocks
and dangerous rapids.

Several of the men approached the edge of the river, and were on the
point of springing in after the boy. But the sight of the sharp rocks
crowding the channel, the rush and whirl of the waters, and the want of
any knowledge where to look for the child, deterred them, and they gave
up the enterprise.

Not so with the noble youth. His first act was to throw off his coat;
next to spring to the edge of the bank. Here he stood for a moment,
running his eyes rapidly over the scene below, taking in with a glance
the different currents and the most dangerous of the rocks, in order to
shape his course when in the stream.

He had scarcely formed his conclusion, when he saw in the water a white
object, which he knew was the boy's dress; and then he plunged into the
wild and roaring rapids.

"Thank God, he will save my child!" cried the mother; "there he is!--O
my boy, my darling boy! How could I leave you!"

Every one had rushed to the brink of the precipice and were now
following with eager eyes the progress of the youth, as the current bore
him onward, like a feather in the power of a hurricane.

Now it seemed as if he would be dashed against a projecting rock, over
which the water flew in foam, and a whirlpool would drag him in, from
whose grasp escape would appear impossible.

At times, the current bore him under, and he would be lost to sight;
then in a few seconds he would come to the surface again, though his
position would be far from where he had disappeared.

Thus struggling amid the rocks and angry waters, was the noble youth
borne onward, eager to succeed in his perilous undertaking. Those on
shore looked on with breathless interest.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Point out the _emphatic words_ and mark
_inflection_ in the third paragraph on page 295.[17]

What effect has very strong _emphasis_ upon _inflection_? (See
_Directions for Reading_, page 238.)[18]

Should this lesson be read more slowly, or somewhat faster than
conversation?


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils fill blanks in the sentences given below,
using in turn, each of the following sets of words:

    (1) _saw, knew, was, plunged;_

    (2) _sees, knows, is, plunges;_

    (3) _perceived, thought, was, jumped;_

    (4) _perceives, thinks, is, jumps;_

    (5) _noticed, concluded, was, dived;_

    (6) _notices, concludes, is, dives_.

He ---- in the water a white object, which he ---- -- the boy's dress.
Then he ---- into the roaring rapids.

When the first, third, and fifth sets of words are used, the action is
represented as something that is past; but when the second, fourth, and
sixth sets are used, the action is represented as going on at the
present time.

The forms of _verbs_ (_action-words_) which are given in the first,
third, and fifth sets are used to indicate past time, and are called
_past tenses_; and the forms given in the second, fourth, and sixth
sets are used to indicate present time, and are called _present
tenses_.


[17] See fifth paragraph from the end of the passage.

[18] See Lesson L.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXII.


e merge', _come out_.

vor'tex, _water in whirling motion; a whirlpool_.

con fid'ed, _given into the care of_.

vis'i ble, _in sight_.

spec ta'tors, _those who look on_.

vent'ured, _dared_.

re ward', _that which is received in return for one's acts_.

des'ti nies, _lives and fortunes_.

sup pressed', _kept back_.

re doub'led, _made twice as great_.


       *       *       *       *       *




ANECDOTE OF WASHINGTON.

PART II.


O, how that mother's straining eyes followed the struggling youth! How
her heart sunk when he went under, and with what joy she saw him emerge
again from the waters, and, flinging the waves aside with his strong
arms, struggle on in pursuit of her boy!

But it seemed as if his generous efforts were not to succeed; for,
though the current was bearing off the boy before his eyes, scarcely ten
feet distant, he could not overtake the drowning child.

Twice the boy went out of sight; and a suppressed shriek escaped the
mother's lips; but twice he reappeared, and then, with hands wrung
wildly together, and breathless anxiety, she followed his progress, as
his form was hurried onward.

The youth now appeared to redouble his exertions, for they were
approaching the most dangerous part of the river.

The rush of waters at this spot was tremendous, and no one ventured to
approach it, even in a canoe, lest he should be dashed to pieces.

What, then, would be the youth's fate, unless he soon overtook the
child? He seemed fully sensible of the increasing peril, and now urged
his way through the foaming current with a desperate strength. Three
times he was on the point of grasping the child, when the water's
whirled the prize from him.

The third effort was made just as they were entering within the
influence of the current above the falls; and when it failed, the
mother's heart sunk within her, and she groaned, fully expecting the
youth to give up his task.

But no; he only pressed forward the more eagerly; and, as they
breathlessly watched, amid the boiling waters, they saw the form of the
youth following close after that of the boy.

And now both pursuer and pursued shot to the brink of the falls. An
instant they hung there, distinctly visible amid the foaming waters.
Every brain grew dizzy at the sight.

But a shout burst from the spectators, when they saw the child held
aloft by the right arm of the youth--a shout that was suddenly changed
to a cry of horror, when they both vanished into the raging waters
below!

The mother ran forward, and then stood gazing with fixed eyes at the
foot of the falls. Suddenly she gave the glad cry, "There they are! See!
they are safe! Great God, I thank Thee!"

And, sure enough, there was the youth still unharmed. He had just
emerged from the boiling vortex below the falls. With, one hand he held
aloft the child, and with the other he was making for the shore.

They ran, they shouted, they scarcely knew what they did, until they
reached his side, just as he was struggling to the bank. They drew him
out almost exhausted.

The boy was senseless; but his mother declared that he still lived, as
she pressed him to her bosom. The youth could scarcely stand, so faint
was he from his exertions.

Who can describe the scene that followed--the mother's calmness while
striving to bring her boy to life, and her wild gratitude to his
preserver, when the child was out of danger, and sweetly sleeping in her
arms?

"God will give you a reward," said she. "He will do great things for you
in return for this day's work, and the blessings of thousands besides
mine will attend you."

And so it was: for, to the hero of that hour were afterward confided the
destinies of a mighty nation. Throughout his long career, what tended to
make him honored and respected beyond all men, was the spirit of
self-sacrifice which, in the rescue of that mother's child, as in the
more important events of his life, characterized George Washington.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Read the first two pages of the lesson
quietly, but not slowly. About the middle of page 299, the manner of
reading should be changed, when the feeling of anxiety is turned to
that of joy.[19]


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils rewrite the first paragraph of the lesson,
changing _past tenses_ to _present tenses_ throughout.

What effect will this change have upon the meaning?


[19] This lesson, seventh paragraph from the end.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXIII


ex ist'ing, _living_.

mas'sive _large and solid_.

hy e'na, _a beast of prey_.

cau'tion, _great care_.

strat'a gem, _a secret way; trick_.

de pends', _trusts to_.

mar'vel ous, _wonderful_.

jack'al, _a beast of prey_.

pro cure', _obtain_.

a dorn', _make beautiful_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE OSTRICH.


The ostrich is the largest of all birds now existing, and is found
chiefly in the sandy deserts of Africa and Arabia.

A full-grown African ostrich stands from seven to nine feet in height,
to the top of its head, and will weigh from two to three hundred pounds.

The body of the ostrich is large and massive; the legs are long,
measuring four feet or more, and the neck is of about the same length as
the legs.

The head is small for so large a bird; but its feet with their two great
toes are of good size, and possess astonishing strength.

An ostrich's beak is short and blunt; its neck slender and covered with
gray down. Its eyes are large and bright, and the sense of sight so keen
that it can readily see a distance of from four to six miles. It hears
and sees equally well, and can only be approached by stratagem.

The feathers of the male ostrich are of a glossy black, with the
exception of the large plumes of the wing-feathers, which in both the
male and female are snowy white.

To procure these beautiful white plumes is the chief object in hunting
the ostrich. Those plumes when plucked are sent to foreign countries,
and used to adorn ladies' hats, and for various other purposes.

The ostrich feeds on vegetable substances; but as an aid to digestion,
it sometimes swallows stones, glass, paper, nails, and pieces of wood.

An incident is related of an ostrich on exhibition in Paris, swallowing
a gold watch and chain. A gentleman approached within reach of the beak
of the bird, and, in the twinkling of an eye, the watch and chain were
snatched from his pocket and swallowed.

Although the ostrich has wings, it can not fly--it depends upon its
strong legs and feet for speed, and can run much faster than a horse.

The strength of the ostrich is marvelous. Its only weapon of defence is
its long and muscular leg.

[Illustration.]

It is accustomed to kick directly forward, and it is said by those who
have observed this habit, that a single blow from its gigantic two-toed
foot is sufficient to kill a panther, a jackal, or a hyena.

No better idea of its strength can be given than the fact of its being
employed for riding. A traveler, writing about two ostriches he saw in a
village in Africa, says:

"These gigantic birds were so tame that two boys mounted together the
larger one. The ostrich no sooner felt their weight, than it started
off at full speed and carried them several times around the village.

"This trial pleased me so much that I wished to have it repeated; and in
order to test their strength, I had a full-grown man mount the smaller
bird, and two men the larger bird.

"At first, they started with caution; but presently they spread their
wings and went off at such a speed that they seemed scarcely to touch
the ground."

The voice of the ostrich is deep and hollow, and is said to resemble at
times the roar of the lion. The bird frequently makes a kind of cackling
noise, and when enraged at an enemy, it hisses very loudly.

Ostriches make their nests in the sand. One female will, in a single
season, lay from twenty to thirty eggs, weighing about three pounds
each.

Most of these she places in the nest, standing them on one end; but some
of them are left outside of the nest as food for her young when they are
hatched.

The natives of Africa are very fond of ostrich eggs, using them for
food. In taking the eggs, they exercise great caution; for should the
birds discover them, they would break all the eggs and leave the nest.

Young ostriches are readily tamed. Some families in Africa keep them as
we do chickens. They play with children, sleep in the houses, and when a
family moves, the ostriches follow the camels, frequently carrying the
children on their backs.

Within the past few years, ostriches have been brought to this country;
and places called ostrich farms have been established in California and
other States, for the purpose of raising them for their feathers.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils point out any points that are omitted from
the following

Analysis.--1. Where the ostrich lives. 2. Its size and appearance--body,
head, neck, eyes, feathers, and plumes. 3. Its food. 4. An incident. 5.
Its speed. 6. Its strength,--leg and foot. 7. Riding ostriches. 8.
Voice of ostrich. 9. Nests and habits of the birds. 10. Ostriches in
this country.

Change such points as may be found necessary, and use the _analysis_ in
describing some well-known bird.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXIV.


plead, _urge as a reason_.
