

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE LAST.


Descending to the boat they rowed round to the face of the great cliff
which had been so suddenly laid bare when the Peak of Rakata was cleft
from its summit to its foundations in the sea. It was a wonderful
sight--a magnificent section, affording a marvellous view of the
internal mechanism of a volcano.

But there was no time to spend in contemplation of this extraordinary
sight, for evening approached and the hermit's purpose had to be
accomplished.

High up near the top of the mighty cliff could be seen a small hole in
the rock, which was all that remained of the observatory.

"It will be impossible, I fear, to reach that spot," said Nigel; "there
does not appear to be foothold for a goat."

"I will reach it," said the hermit in a low voice, as he scanned the
precipice carefully.

"So will I," said the negro.

"No, Moses, I go alone. You will remain in the boat and watch. If I
fall, you can pick me up."

"Pick you up!" echoed Moses. "If you tumbles a t'ousand feet into de
water how much t'ink you will be lef to pick up?"

It was useless to attempt to dissuade Van der Kemp. Being well aware of
this, they all held their peace while he landed on a spur of the riven
cliff.

The first part of the ascent was easy enough, the ground having been
irregularly broken, so that the climber disappeared behind masses of
rock at times, while he kept as much as possible to the western edge of
the mountain where the cleavage had occurred; but as he ascended he was
forced to come out upon narrow ledges that had been left here and there
on the face of the cliff, where he seemed, to those who were watching
far below, like a mere black spot on the face of a gigantic wall. Still
upward he went, slowly but steadily, till he reached a spot nearly level
with the observatory. Here he had to go out on the sheer precipice,
where his footholds were invisible from below.

Winnie sat in the boat with blanched face and tightly clasped hands,
panting with anxiety as she gazed upwards.

"It looks much more dangerous from here than it is in reality," said
Nigel to her in a reassuring tone.

"Das true, Massa Nadgel, das bery true," interposed Moses, endeavouring
to comfort himself as well as the others by the intense earnestness of
his manner. "De only danger, Miss Winnie, lies in your fadder losin' his
head at sitch a t'riffic height, an' dar's no fear at all ob dat, for
Massa neber loses his head--pooh! you might as well talk ob him losin'
his heart. Look! look! he git close to de hole now--he put his
foot--yes--next step--dar! he've done it!"

With the perspiration of anxiety streaming down his face the negro
relieved his feelings by a wild prolonged cheer. Nigel obtained the same
relief by means of a deep long-drawn sigh, but Winnie did not move; she
seemed to realise her father's danger better than her companions, and
remembered that the descent would be much more difficult than the
ascent. They were not kept long in suspense. In a few minutes the hermit
reappeared and began to retrace his steps--slowly but steadily--and the
watchers breathed more freely.

Moses was right; there was in reality little danger in the climb, for
the ledges which appeared to them like mere threads, and the footholds
that were almost invisible, were in reality from a foot to three feet
wide. The only danger lay in the hermit's head being unable to stand the
trial, but, as Moses had remarked, there was no fear of that.

The watchers were therefore beginning to feel somewhat relieved from
the tension of their anxiety, when a huge mass of rock was seen to slip
from the face of the cliff and descend with the thunderous roar of an
avalanche. The incident gave those in the boat a shock, for the landslip
occurred not far from the spot which Van der Kemp had reached, but as he
still stood there in apparent safety there seemed no cause for alarm
till it was observed that the climber remained quite still for a long
time and, seemed to have no intention of moving.

"God help him!" cried Nigel in sudden alarm, "the ledge has been carried
away and he cannot advance! Stay by the boat, Moses, I will run to help
him!"

"No, Massa Nadgel," returned the negro, "I go to die wid 'im. Boat kin
look arter itself."

He sprang on shore as he spoke, and dashed up the mountain-side like a
hunted hare.

Our hero looked at Winnie for an instant in hesitation.

"Go!" said the poor girl. "You know I can manage a boat--quick!"

Another moment and Nigel was following in the track of the negro. They
gained the broken ledge together, and then found that the space between
the point which they had reached and the spot on which the hermit stood
was a smooth face of perpendicular rock--an absolutely impassable gulf!

Van der Kemp was standing with his back flat against the precipice and
his feet resting on a little piece of projecting rock not more than
three inches wide. This was all that lay between him and the hideous
depth below, for Nigel found on carefully drawing nearer that the
avalanche had been more extensive than was apparent from below, and that
the ledge beyond the hermit had been also carried away--thus cutting
off his retreat as well as his advance.

"I can make no effort to help myself," said Van der Kemp in a low but
calm voice, when our hero's foot rested on the last projecting point
that he could gain, and found that with the utmost reach of his arm he
could not get within six inches of his friend's outstretched hand.
Besides, Nigel himself stood on so narrow a ledge, and against so steep
a cliff, that he could not have acted with his wonted power even if the
hand could have been grasped. Moses stood immediately behind Nigel,
where the ledge was broader and where a shallow recess in the rock
enabled him to stand with comparative ease. The poor fellow seemed to
realise the situation more fully than his companion, for despair was
written on every feature of his expressive face.

"What is to be done?" said Nigel, looking back.

"De boat-rope," suggested the negro.

"Useless," said Van der Kemp, in a voice as calm and steady as if he
were in perfect safety, though the unusual pallor of his grave
countenance showed that he was fully alive to the terrible situation. "I
am resting on little more than my heels, and the strain is almost too
much for me even now. I could not hold on till you went to the boat and
returned. No, it seems to be God's will--and," added he humbly, "His
will be done."

"O God, send us help!" cried Nigel in an agony of feeling that he could
not master.

"If I had better foothold I might spring towards you and catch hold of
you," said the hermit, "but I cannot spring off my heels. Besides, I
doubt if you could bear my weight."

"Try, try!" cried Nigel, eagerly extending his hand. "Don't fear for my
strength--I've got plenty of it, thank God! and see, I have my right arm
wedged into a crevice so firmly that nothing could haul it out."

But Van der Kemp shook his head. "I cannot even make the attempt," he
said. "The slightest move would plunge me down. Dear boy! I know that
you and your father and Moses will care for my Winnie, and--"

"Massa!" gasped Moses, who while the hermit was speaking had been
working his body with mysterious and violent energy; "massa! couldn't
you _fall_ dis way, an' Nadgel could kitch your hand, an' I's got my
leg shoved into a hole as nuffin' 'll haul it out ob. Dere's a holler
place here. If Nadgel swings you into dat, an' I only once grab you by
de hair--you're safe!"

"It might be done--tried at least," said the hermit, looking anxiously
at his young friend.

"Try it!" cried Nigel, "I won't fail you."

It is not possible for any except those who have gone through a somewhat
similar ordeal to understand fully the test of cool courage which Van
der Kemp had to undergo on that occasion.

Shutting his eyes for a moment in silent prayer, he deliberately worked
with his shoulders upon the cliff against which he leaned until he felt
himself to be on the point of falling towards his friend, and the two
outstretched hands almost touched.

"Now, are you ready?" he asked.

"Ready," replied Nigel, while Moses wound both his powerful arms round
his comrade's waist and held on.

Another moment and the hands clasped, Nigel uttered an irrepressible
shout as the hermit swung off, and, coming round with great violence to
the spot where the negro had fixed himself, just succeeded in catching
the edge of the cliff with his free hand.

"Let go, Nigel," he shouted;--"safe!"

The poor youth was only too glad to obey, for the tremendous pull had
wrenched his arm out of the crevice in which he had fixed it, and for a
moment he swayed helplessly over the awful abyss.

"Don't let me go, Moses!" he yelled, as he made a frantic but futile
effort to regain his hold,--for he felt that the negro had loosened one
of his arms though the other was still round him like a hoop of iron.

"No fear, Nadgel," said Moses, "I's got you tight--only don' wriggle.
Now, massa, up you come."

Moses had grasped his master's hair with a grip: that well-nigh scalped
him, and he held on until the hermit had got a secure hold of the ledge
with both hands. Then he let the hair go, for he knew that to an athlete
like his master the raising himself by his arms on to the ledge would be
the Work of a few seconds. Van der Kemp was thus able to assist in
rescuing Nigel from his position of danger.

But the expressions of heartfelt thankfulness for this deliverance which
naturally broke from them were abruptly checked when it was found that
Moses could by no means extract his leg out of the hole into which he
had thrust it, and that he was suffering great pain.

After some time, and a good deal of violent wrenching, during which our
sable hero mingled a few groans in strange fashion with his
congratulations, he was got free, and then it was found that the strain
had been too much for even his powerful bones and sinews, for the leg
was broken.

"My poor fellow!" murmured Van der Kemp, as he went down on his knees to
examine the limb.

"Don' care a buttin for dat, massa. You're safe, an' Nadgel's safe--an'
it only cost a broken leg! Pooh! das nuffin'!" said Moses, unable to
repress a few tears in the excess of his joy and pain!

With considerable difficulty they carried the poor negro down to the
boat, where they found Winnie, as might be supposed, in a half-fainting
condition from the strain of prolonged anxiety and terror to which she
had been subjected; but the necessity of attending to the case of the
injured Moses was an antidote which speedily restored her.

Do you think, good reader, that Nigel and Winnie had much difficulty in
coming to an understanding after that, or that the hermit was disposed
to throw any obstacles in the way of true love? If you do, let us assure
you that you are mistaken. Surely this is information enough for any
intelligent reader.

Still, it may be interesting to add, difficulties did not all at once
disappear. The perplexities that had already assailed Nigel more than
once assailed him again--perplexities about a negro man-servant, and a
household monkey, and a hermit father-in-law, and a small income--to
say nothing of a disconsolate mother-poetess in England and a father
roving on the high seas! How to overcome these difficulties gave him
much thought and trouble; but they were overcome at last. That which
seemed impossible to man proved to be child's-play in the hands of
woman. Winnie solved the difficulty by suggesting that they should all
return to the Cocos-Keeling Islands and dwell together there for
evermore!

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us drop in on them, good reader, at a later period, have a look at
them, and bid them all good-bye.

On a green knoll by the margin of the lagoon stands a beautiful cottage
with a garden around it, and a pleasure-boat resting on the white coral
sand in front. From the windows of that cottage there is a most
magnificent view of the lagoon with its numerous islets and its
picturesque palm-trees. Within that cottage dwell Nigel and Winnie, and
a brown-eyed, brown-haired, fair-skinned baby girl who is "the most
extraordinary angel that ever was born." It has a nurse of its own, but
is chiefly waited on and attended to by an antique poetess, who dwells
in another cottage, a stone's-cast off, on the same green knoll. There
she inspires an ancient mariner with poetical sentiments--not your
up-in-the-clouds, reef-point-pattering nonsense, observe; but the real
genuine article, superior to "that other fellow's," you know--when not
actively engaged with _the_ baby.

The first cottage is named Rakata, in honour of our hermit, who is one
of its inhabitants. The second is named Krakatoa by its eccentric owner,
Captain Roy.

It must not be imagined, however, that our friends have settled down
there to spend their lives in idleness. By no means. This probably would
not be permitted by the "King of the Cocos Islands" even if they wished
to do so. But they do not wish that. There is no such condition as
idleness in the lives of good men and women.

Nigel has taken to general superintendence of the flourishing community
in the midst of which he has cast his lot. He may be almost regarded as
the prime minister of the islands, in addition to which he has started
an extensive boat-building business and a considerable trade in
cocoa-nuts, etc., with the numerous islands of the Java Sea; also a
saw-mill, and a forge, and a Sunday-school--in which last the pretty,
humble-minded Winnie lends most efficient aid. Indeed it is said that
she is the chief manager as well as the life and soul of that business,
though Nigel gets all the credit.

Captain Roy sometimes sails his son's vessels, and sometimes looks
after the secular education of the Sunday-school children--the said
education being conducted on the principle of unlimited story-telling
with illimitable play of fancy. But his occupations are
irregular--undertaken by fits and starts, and never to be counted on.
His evenings he usually devotes to poetry and pipes--for the captain is
obstinate, and sticks--like most of us--to his failings as well as his
fancies.

There is a certain eccentric individual with an enthusiastic temperament
and blue binoculars who pays frequent and prolonged visits to the
Keeling Islands. It need scarcely be said that his name is Verkimier.
There is no accounting for the tastes of human beings. Notwithstanding
all his escapes and experiences, that indomitable man of science still
ranges, like a mad philosopher, far and wide over the archipelago in
pursuit of "booterflies ant ozer specimens of zee insect vorld." It is
observed, however, even by the most obtuse among his friends, that
whereas in former times the professor's nights were centrifugal they
have now become centripetal--the Keeling Islands being the great centre
towards which he flies. Verkimier is, and probably will always be, a
subject of wonder and of profound speculation to the youthful
inhabitants of the islands. They don't understand him and he does not
understand them. If they were insects he would take deep and
intelligent interest in them. As they are merely human beings, he
regards them with that peculiar kind of interest with which men regard
the unknown and unknowable. He is by no means indifferent to them. He is
too kindly for that. He studies them deeply, though hopelessly, and when
he enters the Sunday-school with his binoculars--which he often does, to
listen--a degree of awe settles down on the little ones which it is
impossible to evoke by the most solemn appeals to their spiritual
natures.

Nigel and Winnie have a gardener, and that gardener is black--as black
as the Ace of Spades or the King of Ashantee. He dwells in a corner of
the Rakata Cottage, but is addicted to spending much of his spare time
in the Krakatoa one. He is as strong and powerful as ever, but limps
slightly on his right leg--his "game" leg, as he styles it. He is, of
course, an _immense_ favourite with the young people--not less than with
the old. He has been known to say, with a solemnity that might tickle
the humorous and horrify the timid, that he wouldn't "hab dat game leg
made straight agin! no, not for a hundred t'ousand pounds. 'Cause why?
--it was an eber-present visible reminder dat once upon a time he had de
libes ob massa and Nadgel in his arms ahangin' on to his game leg, an'
dat, t'rough Gracious Goodness, he sabe dem bof!"

Ha! You may smile at Moses if you will, but he can return the smile
with kindly interest, for he is actuated by that grand principle which
will sooner or later transform even the scoffers of earth, and which is
embodied in the words--"Love is the fulfilling of the law."

Even the lower animals testify to this fact when the dog licks the hand
that smites it and accords instant forgiveness on the slightest
encouragement. Does not Spinkie prove it also, when, issuing at call,
from its own pagoda in the sunniest corner of the Rakata garden, it
forsakes cocoa-nuts, sugar-cane, fruits, and other delights, to lay its
little head in joyful consecration on the black bosom of its benignant
friend?

And what of Moses' opinion of the new home? It may be shortly expressed
in his own words-"It's heaben upon eart', an' de most happiest time as
eber occurred to me was dat time when Sunda Straits went into cumbusti'n
an' Krakatoa was Blown to Bits."

THE END

Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to Her Majesty, _at the
Edinburgh University Press_.

       *       *       *       *       *




+ADVERTISEMENTS+





BY MR. R.M. BALLANTYNE.

With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. each.

       *       *       *       *       *

'The fathers, mothers, guardians, uncles, and aunts who wish to find an
acceptable birthday present for a healthy-minded boy of normal tastes,
cannot possibly go wrong if they buy a book with Mr. Ballantyne's name
on the title-page.'--_Academy_.

       *       *       *       *       *

+The Hot Swamp+: A Romance of Old Albion.

+The Buffalo Runners+: A Tale of the Red River Plains.

+Charlie to the Rescue+: A Tale of the Sea and the Rockies.

+Blown to Bits+; or, The Lonely Man of Rakata: A Tale of the Malay
Archipelago.

+Blue Lights+; or, Hot Work in the Soudan. A Tale of Soldier Life.

+The Fugitives+; or, The Tyrant Queen of Madagascar.

+Red Rooney+; or, The Last of the Crew.

+The Rover of the Andes+: A Tale of Adventure in South America.

+The Young Trawler+: A Story of Life, Death, and Rescue in the North
Sea.

+Dusty Diamonds, Cut and Polished+: A Tale of City Arab Life.

+The Battery and the Boiler+; or, Adventures of a Telegraph-Cable Layer.

+The Giant of the North+; or, Pokings Round the Pole.

+The Lonely Island+; or, The Refuge of the Mutineers.

+Post Haste+: A Tale of Her Majesty's Mails.

+In the Track of the Troops+: A Tale of Modern War.

+The Settler and the Savage+: A Tale of Peace and War in South Africa.

+Under the Waves+; or, Diving in Deep Waters.

+The Lifeboat+: A Tale of our Coast Heroes.

+The Golden Dream+: A Tale of the Diggings.

+The Red Eric+; or, The Whaler's Last Cruise.

+Freaks on the Fells+, and +Why I+ did not Become a Sailor.

+The Wild Man of the West+.

+Gascoyne, the Sandalwood+ Trader: A Tale of the Pacific.

+Rivers of Ice+: A Tale Illustrative of Alpine Adventure and Glacier
Action.

+The Pirate City+: An Algerine Tale.

+Black Ivory+: A Tale of Adventure among the Slavers of East Africa.

+The Norsemen in the West+; or, America before Columbus.

+The Iron Horse+; or, Life on the Line. A Railway Tale.

+Erling the Bold+: A Tale of the Norse Sea Kings.

+Fighting the Flames+: A Tale of the London Fire Brigade.

+Deep Down+: A Tale of the Cornish Mines.

+The Floating Light of the Goodwin Sands+.

+Shifting Winds+: A Tough Yarn.

+The Lighthouse+: Being the Story of a Great Fight between Man and the
Sea.

+The Big Otter+: A Tale of the Far Nor'West.

Extra Crown 8vo, 5s.

+The Walrus Hunters+: A Romance of the Realms of Ice.




BY MR. R.M. BALLANTYNE.

With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d. each.

HUNTED AND HARRIED.

A COXSWAIN'S BRIDE;
Or, THE RISING TIDE. AND OTHER TALES.

THE GARRET AND THE GARDEN;
Or, Low LIFE HIGH UP. AND JEFF BENSON; or, THE YOUNG COASTGUARDSMAN.

THE CREW OF THE WATER-WAGTAIL.
A STORY OF NEWFOUNDLAND.

THE MIDDY AND THE MOORS:
AN ALGERINE TALE.

THE PRAIRIE CHIEF.

LIFE IN THE RED BRIGADE:
A FIERY TALE. AND FORT DESOLATION; or, SOLITUDE IN THE WILDERNESS.

THE ISLAND QUEEN;
Or, DETHRONED BY FIRE AND WATER. A TALE OF THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.

TWICE BOUGHT:
A TALE OF THE OREGON GOLD-FIELDS.

THE MADMAN AND THE PIRATE.

MY DOGGIE AND I.
