
The boy leaped up at once, and dashed out after his friend.

It was evening.  The gale, which had blown for two days was only
beginning to abate.  Dark clouds were split in the western sky by gleams
of fiery light as the sun declined towards its troubled ocean-bed.

Hurrying over the fields, and bending low to the furious blast, Aspel
and Philip made their way to the neighbouring cliffs.  But before we
follow them, reader, to the wave-lashed shore, it is necessary, for the
satisfactory elucidation of our tale, that we should go backward a short
way in time, and bound forward a long way into space.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE ROYAL MAIL STEAMER.

Out, far out on the mighty sea, a large vessel makes her way gallantly
over the billows--homeward bound.

She is a Royal Mail steamer from the southern hemisphere--the
_Trident_--and a right royal vessel she looks with her towering iron
hull, and her taper masts, and her two thick funnels, and her trim
rigging, and her clean decks--for she has an awning spread over them, to
guard from smoke as well as from sun.

There is a large family on board of the _Trident_, and, like all other
large families, its members display marked diversities of character.
They also exhibit, like not a few large families, remarkable diversities
of temper.  Among them there are several human magnets with positive and
negative poles, which naturally draw together.  There are also human
flints and steels which cannot come into contact without striking fire.

When the _Trident_ got up steam, and bade adieu to the Southern Cross,
there was no evidence whatever of the varied explosives and combustibles
which she carried in her after-cabin.  The fifty or sixty passengers who
waved kerchiefs, wiped their eyes, and blew their noses, at friends on
the receding shore, were unknown to each other; they were intent on
their own affairs.  When obliged to jostle each other they were all
politeness and urbanity.

After the land had sunk on the horizon the intro-circumvolutions of a
large family, or rather a little world, began.  There was a birth on
board, an engagement, ay, and a death; yet neither the interest of the
first, nor the romance of the second, nor the solemnity of the last,
could check for more than a few hours the steady development of the
family characteristics of love, modesty, hate, frivolity, wisdom, and
silliness.

A proportion of the passengers were, of course, nobodies, who aspired to
nothing greater than to live and let live, and who went on the even
tenor of their way, without much change, from first to last.  Some of
them were somebodies who, after a short time, began to expect the
recognition of that fact.  There were ambitious bodies who, in some
cases, aimed too high, and there were unpretending-bodies who frequently
aimed too low.  There were also selfish-bodies who, of course, thought
only of themselves--with, perhaps, a slight passing reference to those
among the after-cabin passengers who could give them pleasure, and there
were self-forgetting-bodies who turned their thoughts frequently on the
ship, the crew, the sea, the solar system, the Maker of the universe.
These also thought of their fellow-passengers in the fore-cabin, who of
course had a little family or world of their own, with its similar joys,
and sins, and sorrows, before the mast; and there were uproarious-bodies
who kept the little world lively--sometimes a little too lively.

As the Royal Mail steamer rushed out to sea and was tossed on the
ocean's breast, these human elements began to mix and effervesce and
amalgamate, or fizz, burst, and go off, like squibs and crackers.

There was a Mrs Pods with three little girls, and a Mrs Tods with two
little boys, whose first casual glance at each other was transmuted into
a glare of undying and unreasoning hate.  These ladies were exceptions
to the rule of general urbanity before mentioned.  Both had fiery faces,
and each read the other through and through at a glance.  There was a
Miss Bluestocking who charmed some people, irritated others, frightened
a few, and caused many to sneer.  Her chief friend among the males was a
young man named Mr Weakeyes, who had a small opinion of himself and a
very receptive mind.  Miss Troolove, among the ladies, was her chief
friend.  The strange misnomers which one meets with in society were also
found in the little world in that steamer--that Royal Mail steamer we
should say--for, while we turn aside for a brief period to condescend
upon these particulars, we would not have the reader forget that they
have an indirect bearing on the main thread of our tale.

One misnamed lady was a Miss Mist, who, instead of being light, airy,
and ethereal, as she ought to have been, weighed at least twelve stone
six.  But she sang divinely, was a great favourite with the young people
on board, and would have been very much missed indeed if she had not
been there.  There was also a Mr Stout, who was the tallest and
thinnest man in the ship.

On the other hand there were some whose names had been obviously the
result of a sense of propriety in some one.  Among the men who were
rabidly set on distinguishing themselves in one way or another was a
Major Beak.  Now, why was it that this Major's nose was an aquiline of
the most outrageous dimensions?  Surely no one would argue that the nose
grew to accommodate the name.  Is it not more probable--nay, certain--
that the name grew to accommodate the nose?  Of course when Major Beak
was born he was a minor, and his nose must have been no better than a
badly-shaped button or piece of putty; but the Major's father had owned
a tremendous aquiline nose, which at birth had also been a button, and
so on we can proceed backwards until we drive the Beaks into that remote
antiquity where historical fact begins and mythological theory
terminates--that period when men were wont, it is supposed, to name each
other intelligently with reference to personal characteristic or
occupation.

So, too, Mr Bright--a hearty good-natured fellow, who drew powerfully
to Major Beak and hated Miss Bluestocking--possessed the vigorous frame,
animated air, and intelligent look which must have originated his name.
But why go on?  Every reader must be well acquainted with the characters
of Mr Fiery and Mr Stiff, and Mrs Dashington, and her niece Miss
Squeaker, and Colonel Blare who played the cornet, and Lieutenant Limp
who sang tenor, and Dr Bassoon who roared bass, and Mrs Silky, who was
all things to all men, besides being everything by turns and nothing
long; and Lady Tower and Miss Gentle, and Mr Blurt and Miss Dumbbelle.

Suffice it to say that after a week or two the effervescing began to
systematise, and the family became a living and complex electrical
machine, whose sympathetic poles drew and stuck together, while the
antagonistic poles kept up a steady discharge of sparks.

Then there arose a gale which quieted the machine a little, and checked
the sparkling flow of wit and humour.  When, during the course of the
gale, a toppling billow overbalanced itself and fell inboard with a
crash that nearly split the deck open, sweeping two of the quarterboats
away, Mr Blurt, sitting in the saloon, was heard to exclaim:--

"'Pon my word, it's a terrible gale--enough almost to make a fellow
think of his sins."

To which Mrs Tods, who sat beside him, replied, with a serious shake of
her head, that it was indeed a very solemn occasion, and cast a look,
not of undying hate but of gentle appeal at Mrs Pods, who sat opposite
to her.  And that lady, so far from resenting the look as an affront,
met her in a liberal spirit; not only admitted that what Mrs Tods had
said was equally just and true, but even turned her eyes upward with a
look of resignation.

Well was it for Mrs Pods that she did so, for her resigned eyes beheld
the globe of the cabin lamp pitched off its perch by a violent lurch and
coming straight at her.  Thus she had time to bow to circumstances, and
allow the missile to pass over her head into the bosom of Lady Tower,
where it was broken to atoms.  The effect of mutual concession was so
strong on Mrs Pods and Mrs Tods, that the former secretly repented
having wished that one of Mrs Tods' little sons might fall down the
hatchway and get maimed for life, while the latter silently regretted
having hoped that one of Mrs Pods' little girls might fall overboard
and be half-drowned.

But the storm passed away and the effervescence returned--though not, it
is pleasing to add, with so much pungency as before.  Thus, night and
day, the steamer sped on over the southern seas, across the mystic line,
and into the northern hemisphere, with the written records, hopes,
commands, and wishes of a continent in the mail-bags in her hold, and
leaving a beautiful milky-way behind her.

But there were more than letters and papers in these mail-bags.  There
were diamonds!  Not indeed those polished and glittering gems whose
proper resting-place is the brow of beauty, but those uncut pebbles that
are turned up at the mines, which the ignorant would fling away or give
to their children as playthings, but for which merchants and experts
would give hundreds and thousands of pounds.  A splendid prize that
Royal Mail steamer would have been for the buccaneers of the olden time,
but happily there are no buccaneers in these days--at least not in
civilised waters.  A famous pirate had, however, set his heart on those
diamonds--even old Neptune himself.

This is how it happened.



CHAPTER FIVE.

WRECK AND RESCUE.

One evening Miss Gentle and rotund little Mr Blurt were seated on two
camp-stools near the stern, conversing occasionally and gazing in a
dreamy frame of mind at the milky-way over which they appeared to
travel.

"I wonder much, Miss Gentle," said Mr Blurt, "that you were not more
afraid during that gale we had just before crossing the line?"

"I was a good deal afraid, though perhaps I did not show it.  Your
remark," she added, with an arch glance at her companion, "induces me to
express some surprise that you seemed so much afraid."

"Afraid!" echoed Mr Blurt, with a smile; "why, I wasn't afraid--eh! was
I?"

"I beg pardon," hastily explained Miss Gentle, "I don't mean frightened,
of course; perhaps I should have said alarmed, or agitated--"

"Agitated!" cried Mr Blurt, pulling off his hat, and rubbing his bald
head--he was prematurely bald, being only forty, though he looked like
fifty--"agitated!  Well, Miss Gentle, if you had diamonds--"

He stopped short, and looked at his companion with a confused smile.

"Diamonds, Mr Blurt," said Miss Gentle, slightly surprised; "what do
you mean?"

"Well--ha! hem!" said the other, rubbing his forehead; "I see no reason
why I should make a mystery of it.  Since I have mentioned the thing, I
may as well say that a man who happens to have a packet of diamonds in
the mail-bags worth about twenty thousand pounds, may well be excused
showing some little agitation lest the ship containing them should go to
the bottom."

"I don't quite see that," returned Miss Gentle.  "If the owner is on
board, and goes to the bottom with his diamonds, it does not matter to
_him_, does it?"

"Ah!" said Mr Blurt, "it is the inconsiderateness of youth which
prompts that speech.  (Miss Gentle looked about twenty, though she was
in reality twenty-seven!)  Do you think I have no anxiety for any one
but myself?  Suppose I have a wife and family in England who are
dependent on these diamonds."

"Ah! that did not occur to me," returned the lady.

"Have you any objection to become a confidante?" asked Mr Blurt.

"None whatever," replied Miss Gentle, laughing.

"Well, then, to let you understand my feelings, I shall explain.  I have
a brother--a dear little fellow like mys--ah, excuse me; I did not mean
_dear_ like myself, but _little_.  Well, he is a naturalist.  He lives
in London, and is not a very successful naturalist; indeed, I may say
that he is an unfortunate and poor naturalist.  Last year he failed.  I
sent him a small sum of money.  He failed again.  I sent him more money.
Being a successful diamond-merchant, you see, I could afford to do so.
We are both bachelors; my brother being much older than I am.  At last I
resolved to send home my whole fortune, and return to live with him,
after winding up my affairs.  I did so: made up my diamonds into a
parcel, and sent it by mail as being the most secure method.  Just after
doing this, I got a letter informing me of my brother being dangerously
ill, and begging me to come to England without delay.  I packed up at
once, left my partner to wind up the business, and so, here I am, on
board the very steamer that carries my diamonds to England."

"How curious--and how interesting," said the sympathetic Miss Gentle.

Whatever more she intended to say was checked by a large parti-coloured
ball hitting her on the cheek, and falling into her lap.  It was
followed up and captured with a shriek by the two little Todses and the
three little Podses.  At the same moment the gong sounded for tea.  Thus
the conversation came to a close.

The voyage of the _Trident_--with the exception of the gale before
referred to--was prosperous until her arrival in the waters of the
northern hemisphere.  By that time the passengers had crystallised into
groups, the nobodies and self-forgetting-bodies fraternised, and became
more and more friendly as time went on.  The uproarious-bodies got up
concerts and charades.  The hatred of Pods for Tods intensified.  The
arrogance of Major Beak, and the good-natured modesty of Mr Bright,
increased.  The noise of Dr Bassoon made the manner of Mr Silky quite
agreeable by contrast, while the pride of Lady Tower and Mr Stiff
formed a fine, deep-shade to the neutral tint of Miss Gentle, and the
high-light of Miss Squeaker.

Gradually, however, feelings began to modify.  The squalls and breezes
that ruffled the human breasts on board the _Trident_ moderated in exact
proportion as that vessel penetrated and experienced the storms of what
should have been named the _in_-temperate zone.

At last they drew near to the shores of Old England, and then there
burst upon them a nor-wester, so violent that within the first hour the
close-reefed topsails were blown to ribbons, and the foretopmast, with
the jib-boom, was carried away.  Of course this was a comparatively
small matter in a steamer, but when it was afterwards discovered that
the vessel had sprung a leak, things began to look more serious.

"It's only a trifle, Miss Gentle; don't alarm yourself.  We can put that
to rights in a few minutes," said Major Beak, with the confident air of
a man whose nautical education had begun with Noah, and continued
uninterruptedly down to the present time.

"He's a hooked-nosed humbug, Miss Gentle, an' knows nothing about it,"
growled the captain.

"Water rising rapidly in the hold, sir," said the carpenter, coming aft
and touching his cap.

"Rig the pumps," said the captain, and the pumps were rigged.  What is
more to the purpose, they were wrought with a will by the crew; but in
spite of their efforts the water continued to rise.

It might have done a student of human nature good to have observed the
effect of this information on the passengers.  Regarded as a whole the
little world became perceptibly paler in the cheeks, and strikingly
moderate in tone of voice and manner.  Major Beak, in particular, began
to talk low, and made no reference whatever to nautical matters, while
Mrs Pods looked amiably--almost affectionately--at Mrs Tods.

Of course the passengers observed with breathless interest the action of
the captain at this crisis.  That important personage did his best to
stop the leak, but only succeeded in checking it, and it required the
constant exertions of the crew night and day at the pumps to reduce the
water in the hold even by an inch.  In these circumstances the young men
among the passengers readily volunteered their services to assist the
crew.

The gale continued and steadily increased.  At night the ladies, and
such of the passengers as were not employed at the pumps, retired to the
cabin.  Some of those who did not realise the danger of the situation
went to bed.  Others sat up in the saloon and consoled each other as
best they might.

Morning came, but with it came no abatement of the storm.  Water and sky
seemed mingled together, and were of one uniform tone.  It was obvious
that the men at the pumps were utterly exhausted, and worst of all the
water was beginning to gain slowly on them.  The elderly men were now
called on to help.  It became necessary that all should work for their
lives.  Miss Bluestocking, who was muscular as well as masculine, rose
to the occasion, and suggested that the ladies, so to speak, should man
the pumps.  Her suggestion was not acted on.

At this point Mr Bright, who had been toiling night and day like an
inexhaustible giant, suggested that music might be called in to aid
their flagging powers.  It was well known that fatigued soldiers on a
march are greatly re-invigorated by the band.  Major Beak, soaking from
head to foot with salt water, almost blind with fatigue and want of
sleep, and with the perspiration dropping from the point of his enormous
nose, plucked up heart to raise himself and assert that that was true.
He further suggested that Colonel Blare might play to them on the
cornet.  But Colonel Blare was incapable by that time of playing even on
a penny trumpet.  Dr Bassoon was reduced so low as to be obliged to
half whisper his incapacity to sing bass, and as for the great tenor,
Lieutenant Limp--a piece of tape was stiffer than his backbone.

"Let the ladies sing to us," sighed Mr Fiery, who was mere milk and
water by that time.  "I'm sure that Mrs Tods and Mrs Pods would be--"

A united shriek of protest from those ladies checked him.

"Or Miss Troolove," suggested Mr Blurt, on whose stout person the
labour told severely.

The lady appealed to, after a little hesitation, began a hymn, but the
time was found to be too slow, while the voice, although sweet and true,
was too weak.

"Come, let us have one of the `Christy Minstrels'," cried Mr Bright in
a lively tone.  "I'm certain Miss Mist can sing one."

Poor Miss Mist was almost hysterical with fear and prolonged anxiety,
but she was an obliging creature.  On being assured that the other
ladies would support her, she struck up the "Land of Dixey," and was
joined in the chorus with so much spirit that those who laboured at the
pumps felt like giants refreshed.  Explain it how we may, there can be
no question that lively music has a wonderful power of sustaining the
energies of mankind.  With the return of cheerful sensations there
revived in some of them the sense of the ludicrous, and it was all that
they could do to refrain from laughter as they looked at the forlorn
