
Our friends peered in every direction, as they rose and sunk on the
long, heaving swell of the sea. They saw pieces of charred wood and
fragments of the wreck, but caught sight of no human being until Mr.
Yard pointed, to a dark mass some distance away.

"That is a raft covered with people," said he.

"They seem to be standing still."

"Yes, they merely want to keep afloat until morning, when no doubt they
will be picked up and cared for. Keep quiet, for if we talk too loud
some one may start for us."

"And work hard," whispered Tim, struggling harder than ever. "Aich of
yees shove like a locomotive."

"Good advice," added Mr. Yard, in the same cautions undertone. "Let's
get away as fast as possible."

Hour after hour the men toiled, following the moon, that appeared to
recede from them as they advanced. They had passed safely the debris of
the wrecked steamer, and were again talking loudly and rather
cheerfully, when Tim O'Rooney interrupted them:

"Yonder is something flowting in the darkness."

"It is a boat full of people," said Mr. Yard. "I have noticed it for the
last few minutes."

All turned their eyes toward the spot indicated, and agreed that Mr.
Yard was correct in his supposition.

"I will hail it," he quietly added, and then called out: "Boat ahoy!"

"What do you want?" came back in a gruff voice.

"Can you take four drowning passengers on board?"

"Not much," was the unfeeling answer, "Paddle away and you'll reach
California one of these days."

"How far are we from it?"

"Double the distance, divide by two, and you'll have it."

Nothing further was extracted from the men, but they could be heard
laughing and talking boisterously with each other, and the odor of their
pipes was plainly detected, so close were the parties.

"Thank heaven, we are not dependent upon them!" said Mr. Yard. "If we
were, we should fare cruelly indeed."

"Who are they?"

"A part of the crew of the steamer, who seized the boat at the first
appearance of danger, and left the helpless to perish."

An hour later, long after the boat had disappeared, and when our friends
were toiling bravely forward, a low, dark object directly in front
attracted their notice.

"What is it?" whispered Elwood.

"_It is land!_" was the joyful reply. "I am walking upon the sand this
minute, and you can do the same!"




CHAPTER VI.

THE CALIFORNIA COAST.


They were safe at last! The four dropped their feet and found them
resting upon smooth packed sand, and wading a few rods they all stood
upon dry earth. Terror, as he shook his shaggy coat and rubbed his nose
against his young masters seemed not the least joyful of the party.

"Isn't this grand!" exclaimed Elwood. "When did the ground feel better
to your feet? Saved from fire and water!"

"Our first duty is to thank God!" said Mr. Yard reverently. "He has
chosen us out of the hundreds that have perished as special objects of
his mercy. Let us kneel upon the shore and testify our gratitude to
Him."

All sunk devoutly upon their knees and joined the merchant, as in a low,
impressive tone he returned thanks to his Creator for the signal mercy
he had displayed in bringing them safely through such imminent perils.

"Now, what is to be done next?" inquired Mr. Yard, as they arose to
their feet and looked around them. "The first thing I should like to do
is to procure a suit of clothes, and I hope I shall be able to do it
without stripping any of the dead bodies that will soon wash ashore."

"What is the naad?" asked Tim O'Rooney. "Baing that it's a warrum summer
night, and there saams to be few in the neighborhood that is likely to
take exsaptions to your costume."

"But day is breaking!" replied the merchant, pointing across the low,
rocky country to a range of mountains in the distance, whose high,
jagged tops were blackly defined against the sky that was growing light
and rosy behind them.

"Yes, it will soon be light," said Howard. "See! there are persons along
the shore that have come down to the wreck?"

"They are some of the passengers that have managed to reach land. I will
go among them and see whether any of them have any clothing to sell,"
laughed Mr. Yard as he moved away.

As the sun came up over the mountains it lit up a dreary and desolate
scene. Away in the distance, until sky and earth mingled into one,
stretched the blue Pacific, not ridged into foam and spray like the
boisterous Atlantic, but swelling and heaving as if the great deep was a
breathing monster. A few fragments of blackened splinters floating here
and there were all that remained to show where a few hours before the
magnificent steamer, surcharged with its living freight, so proudly cut
the waters on her swift course toward the Golden Gate.

Several ghastly, blue-lipped survivors in their clinging garments were
wandering aimlessly along the shore, the veriest pictures of utter
misery, as they mumbled a few words to each other, or stared absently
around. They seemed to be partially bereft of their senses, and were
probably somewhat dazed from the fearful scenes through which they had
so recently passed.

Several sails were visible, but they were so far away that it was vain
to hope to attract their attention. Three large boats could be seen away
to the northwest, skirting along shore and making their way toward San
Francisco as rapidly as muscle and oars could carry them. What recked
they whether the passengers were buried with the steamer, sunk in the
ocean, or left to perish on the desolate coast?

The Coast Range, which descends into California from Oregon, in some
places comes within twenty-five or thirty miles of the sea, while at
other times it recedes to over a hundred. The particular point where our
friends were suffered to land was rough, barren and rocky, and behind
them, with many peaks reaching the line of perpetual snow, rose the
noble Coast Range, between which and them stretched a smaller range of
mountains.

Around them the country appeared desolate and uninhabited. Howard and
Elwood were well acquainted with geography, and had a general idea of
California, although they could not be expected to know much of the
minor facts of the State. They were aware that at no great distance--but
whether north or south it was impossible to say--lay the missionary town
of San Luis Obispo, and between them and the Coast Range ran the Salinas
River, formerly known as the San Buenaventura, and a smaller chain of
mountains or highlands.

They knew, too, that after crossing the Coast Range, you descended into
the broad and beautiful Sacramento Valley, where abounded wild animals,
Indians, gold, silver, and the most exuberant vegetation. This was about
all they knew; and this, after all, was considerable. When persons
expect to make a journey to some distant country they are very apt to
learn all that they possibly can about it; and this was the way they
came to understand so much regarding the young State of California.

They had stood some little time conversing together when they saw Mr.
Yard approaching, clad in quite a respectable suit of black, albeit, as
a matter of course, it was thoroughly soaked with salt water.

"You are fortunate," remarked Howard.

"Yes," he laughed; "what strange beings we are! Do you see that elderly
gentleman yonder, with his hands in his pockets walking back and forth
as though he expected some arrival from the sea?"

The personage alluded to could be easily distinguished from the others.

"Well, his berth was next to mine. When the alarm of fire was first
heard he sprung from his bed, dressed himself and caught up his valise,
which contained an extra suit of clothing, and rushed on deck with the
other passengers."

"How was he saved?"

"It is hard to tell. He and several others hung fast to some such sort
of a raft as we had, and managed to get ashore. And all the time he
grasped that valise, even when besought by his companions to let it go,
find when it endangered his chances of life fully ten-fold."

"He must be very poor."

"Poor! He is worth half a million in gold this minute. That valise
contained all his property that he had entrusted to the steamer, and it
was his fear that he might lose the few dollars that it is worth that
made him cling so tenaciously to it."

"How was it that he gave them to you?"

"No fear that he gave them. I stated in the presence of two witnesses
that, I would give him a hundred dollars for the suit as soon as we
reached San Francisco. He racked his brains to see whether there was not
some means of my giving him my note for the amount; but as that couldn't
be done under the circumstances, he did the next best thing and
established my obligation in the mouth of several witnesses."

"Strange man! But, Mr. Yard, what is to be done?"

"I intend to wait here during the day, as I know of nothing better that
we can do. I think some friends will find us before nightfall."

"We have decided to go inland a short distance, dry our clothes and give
our bodies a good rubbing, to prevent our taking cold."

"A wise precaution, but useless in my case as I have already caught a
very severe one."

"Should we become separated, you will tell our parents that we reached
the land in safety and are in good spirits."

"Of course; but don't wander too far away, as you may lose your chance
of being taken off. You know this isn't the most hospitable country in
the world. There are treacherous and thieving Indians in these parts,
and they would have swooped down on us long ago if they had only known
we were here. As it is, I fear their approach before a friendly sail
comes to us."

"Never fear; we will take good care not to wander too far away."

And the parties separated for a much longer time than any of them
imagined.




CHAPTER VII.

THE RESCUE.


Our three friends--although it seems equally proper to speak of four, as
Terror was a most important member of the party--walked away from the
sea-shore and began making their way back into the country. As we have
hinted in another place, they found this section wild and desolate.
Little else than huge rocks, bowlders and stunted trees met the eye,
while there was no appearance of vegetation, nor was the slightest
vestige of a human habitation visible, let them look in whatever
direction they chose.

The air was clear, the sky decked by a few fleecy clouds over the
Pacific, and there was little doubt that the day would be a fine, warm
one. The climate of California is mild, except when the winds from the
Pacific bring chilling fogs along the coast. The view in the east was
particularly grand, the peaks of the gigantic Coast mountains and of the
smaller range rising and swelling in vast peaks, appearing as if the
Pacific when tossed and driven by some hurricane had suddenly congealed
with the foam upon the tops of its mountainous billows. Looking
northward, the last object that met the eye was these mountains
gradually blending with the brilliant sky, while to the southward the
prospect was repeated.

They wandered along, springing up the sides of rocks, jumping quite a
distance to the ground, again passing around those that were too high to
climb, Terror all the time frolicking at their sides, certainly as happy
as any of them, while they chatted and laughed, their hearts buoyant in
the beautiful summer and the pleasing retrospect of a thrilling
adventure already safely passed through and the prospect of a few others
close at hand.

In this wandering manner they at last found themselves fully a mile from
shore, and in a wild, rocky place where they felt secure from
observation. Here all removed their clothes, subjected their bodies to a
vigorous rubbing that made the surface glow with warmth and reaction,
and then spread their garments out to dry. Their extended walk before
reaching this place had partially done the latter for them, so that in
the course of an hour or so they found them free from all moisture, and
as they donned them they once more felt like themselves.

"Now," said Elwood, "I am very tired and sleepy; is not this a good
place to lie down and rest?"

"I was going to suggest the same thing," added Howard. "I do not see in
what better manner we can spend a few hours."

"And it's the same idaa that has been strhiking me ever since we sot
foot in this qua'r looking place. It's meself that is so sleapy that at
ivery wink I makes I has to lift the eyelids up with my fingers, and me
eyes feels as though the wind has been blowing sand in 'em all day."

The proposal thus being satisfactory to all, they proceeded to carry it
out at once. The day was so mild that the only precaution necessary was
to secure themselves against the rays of the sun. This was easily done,
and stretching out beneath the shelter of a projecting ledge of rocks
they had scarcely laid down when all were sound asleep.

And leaving them here for the time being, we give our attention for a
few moments to the survivors of the steamer.

Some thirty odd of the passengers succeeded in reaching the shore, while
about a dozen were saved with the crew, who, as is generally the case at
such times, acted upon the idea that it was their duty to take charge of
the boats and prevent the passengers from risking themselves in such
frail structures. After all, no doubt their lives were as valuable as
were those of the hundreds they carried, and their conduct, when viewed
in an unprejudiced manner, perhaps was not so criminal.

The destruction of so large a steamer along the California coast, in the
regular track of the vessels going to and coming from Panama, could not
occur without the knowledge of many upon the ocean. Indeed, the glare
upon the heavens was seen far up the coast, and in San Luis Obispo, to
the south, was pronounced by all to be caused by the burning of some
large vessel at sea.

It so came about that there were but two vessels near enough to go to
the relief of the unfortunate steamer; but these were controlled by
rival captains, each of whom hoped to enter the Golden Gate an hour or
so in advance of the other; and therefore they had not time to slacken
sail and lay to, but pressed forward with an expression of regret that
the necessities of the case compelled them thus to refuse all succor to
the needy ones.

But there were others at a greater distance who bore down upon the fiery
scene at once; but they were miles away when the last vestige of the
steamer disappeared, and it was only a matter of conjecture as to where
a few of the survivors might be struggling with the waves. Not until the
sun had been up over an hour did the man at the mast-head of the nearest
vessel call out that he saw several boats pulling up the coast, while a
few persons could be seen on the shore making signals to attract their
attention.

Some time after, the Relief--happily named--cast anchor a half-mile from
land and two boats put off from her side. The survivors were quickly
within them, and they were about putting off again when the mate of the
Relief said:

"Are you all here?"

"Yes, yes," was the impatient reply of Mr. Tiflings, the man who had
sold the suit of clothes to Mr. Yard, "don't wait any longer. I shall
lose $500 by not being in San Francisco to-day."

"But they are not all here," interrupted Mr. Yard, in some excitement.
"There are two boys in charge of an Irishman that are missing."

"Where are they?" asked the mate.

"They went back from the shore some time ago. I do not think they can be
at any great distance."

"Perhaps if you called to them they might hear you."

Mr. Yard sprung out upon the beach, ran to and mounted a goodly-sized
rock, and shouted at the top of his voice. He called again and again,
and listened intently, but there was no response.

All this time Mr. Tiflings sat leaning his head forward and nervously
beating a tattoo upon the side of the boat with his long, thin fingers.
Occasionally he glanced at the "foolish" Mr. Yard, and muttered:

"What nonsense! What valuable time we are losing by his childishness!
Time is too precious to fritter away in this manner!"

While the kind-hearted merchant was shouting himself hoarse, our friends
were heavily and sweetly slumbering, totally oblivious to external
things, as indeed they would have been were he within a few rods of
them, instead of over a mile away. Finally he was compelled to give up
the task and reluctantly return to the boat.

"This is too bad," said he, "to leave them in this manner. What will
become of them?"

"They will be picked up by some of the passing vessels."

"Certainly, certainly," assented Mr. Tiflings, "don't wait any longer;
it will be a week before we get into San Francisco."

"We will row away," said the mate, "and if we see anything of them
before we reach the vessel we will put back and take them aboard."

This was reasonable, and Mr. Yard could not object to it. The sailors
plied their oars, and the passengers were borne swiftly toward the
friendly Relief. Mr. Yard kept his eyes fixed upon the bleak coast which
they were so rapidly leaving behind them. He saw nothing of his friends;
but, after reaching the ship's deck, he took the spy-glass from the
captain and discovered a party of a dozen Indians wandering up and down
the beach as if in quest of plunder. Finally, sail was hoisted, the
Relief bore away to the northward, and the scene of the rescue dwindled
away and vanished in the distance.




CHAPTER VIII.

INDIANS.


The sleep of perfect health is dreamless, and is not easily aroused by
external disturbance. Tim O'Rooney, Elwood Brandon and Howard Lawrence,
sweetly forgetful of the need of their being within sight and hearing of
the shore, slept through the entire day without once awaking. The sun
was just dipping beneath the Pacific when Howard opened his eyes with
that confused, indistinct recollection which often takes possession of
our faculties when first aroused from a deep slumber. He stared around
and the sight of the unconscious forms of his two companions, and the
mute Newfoundland dog with his nose between his paws, but blinking as if
to show he "slept with one eye open," quickly recalled his situation. In
considerable alarm, he sprung up, and began rousing the others. As they
rubbed their eyes and rose to the sitting position, he said in
excitement:

"Do you know we have slept ever since morning?"

"It can't be possible!" exclaimed Elwood.

"I should say we had slept a waak be the token of the hunger I feels,"
said Tim, with a most woeful countenance.

"I don't see any likelihood of our getting anything to digest in these
parts," replied Howard.

"And where else shall we look for the same?"

"Nowhere that I know of."

"Suppose some ship has stopped here while we have been asleep!" suddenly
interrupted Elwood.

"Wouldn't they have looked for us? But then they couldn't have known
where we were," said Howard, asking and answering his own question in
the same breath.
