them are not unlike some of the berries that grow wild on our own native
hills.  Besides, I saw one or two strange birds eating them just a few
minutes ago, and what won't kill the birds won't kill us.  But look up
there, Peterkin," continued Jack, pointing to the branched head of a
cocoa-nut palm.  "There are nuts for us in all stages."

"So there are!" cried Peterkin, who, being of a very unobservant nature,
had been too much taken up with other things to notice anything so high
above his head as the fruit of a palm-tree.  But whatever faults my
young comrade had, he could not be blamed for want of activity or animal
spirits.  Indeed, the nuts had scarcely been pointed out to him when he
bounded up the tall stem of the tree like a squirrel, and in a few
minutes returned with three nuts, each as large as a man's fist.

"You had better keep them till we return," said Jack.  "Let us finish
our work before eating."

"So be it, captain; go ahead!" cried Peterkin, thrusting the nuts into
his trousers pocket.  "In fact, I don't want to eat just now; but I
would give a good deal for a drink.  Oh, that I could find a spring! but
I don't see the smallest sign of one hereabouts.  I say, Jack, how does
it happen that you seem to be up to everything?  You have told us the
names of half-a-dozen trees already, and yet you say that you were never
in the South Seas before."

"I'm not up to everything, Peterkin, as you'll find out ere long,"
replied Jack with a smile; "but I have been a great reader of books of
travel and adventure all my life, and that has put me up to a good many
things that you are, perhaps, not acquainted with."

"Oh, Jack, that's all humbug!  If you begin to lay everything to the
credit of books, I'll quite lose my opinion of you," cried Peterkin with
a look of contempt.  "I've seen a lot o' fellows that were _always_
poring over books, and when they came to try to _do_ anything, they were
no better than baboons!"

"You are quite right," retorted Jack; "and I have seen a lot of fellows,
who never looked into books at all, who knew nothing about anything
except the things they had actually seen, and very little they knew even
about these.  Indeed, some were so ignorant that they did not know that
cocoa-nuts grew on cocoa-nut trees!"

I could not refrain from laughing at this rebuke, for there was much
truth in it as to Peterkin's ignorance.

"Humph! maybe you're right," answered Peterkin; "but I would not give
_tuppence_ for a man of books if he had nothing else in him."

"Neither would I," said Jack; "but that's no reason why you should run
books down, or think less of me for having read them.  Suppose, now,
Peterkin, that you wanted to build a ship, and I were to give you a long
and particular account of the way to do it, would not that be very
useful?"

"No doubt of it," said Peterkin, laughing.

"And suppose I were to write the account in a letter instead of telling
you in words, would that be less useful?"

"Well--no, perhaps not."

"Well, suppose I were to print it and send it to you in the form of a
book, would it not be as good and useful as ever?"

"Oh, bother!  Jack, you're a philosopher, and that's worse than
anything!" cried Peterkin with a look of pretended horror.

"Very well, Peterkin, we shall see," returned Jack, halting under the
shade of a cocoa-nut tree.  "You said you were thirsty just a minute
ago.  Now jump up that tree and bring down a nut--not a ripe one; bring
a green, unripe one."

Peterkin looked surprised, but seeing that Jack was in earnest, he
obeyed.

"Now cut a hole in it with your penknife and clap it to your mouth, old
fellow," said Jack.

Peterkin did as he was directed, and we both burst into uncontrollable
laughter at the changes that instantly passed over his expressive
countenance.  No sooner had he put the nut to his mouth, and thrown back
his head in order to catch what came out of it, than his eyes opened to
twice their ordinary size with astonishment, while his throat moved
vigorously in the act of swallowing.  Then a smile and a look of intense
delight overspread his face, except, indeed, the mouth, which, being
firmly fixed to the hole in the nut, could not take part in the
expression; but he endeavoured to make up for this by winking at us
excessively with his right eye.  At length he stopped, and drawing a
long breath, exclaimed:

"Nectar! perfect nectar!--I say, Jack, you're a Briton--the best fellow
I ever met in my life--Only taste that!" said he, turning to me and
holding the nut to my mouth.  I immediately drank, and certainly I was
much surprised at the delightful liquid that flowed copiously down my
throat.  It was extremely cool, and had a sweet taste, mingled with
acid; in fact, it was the likest thing to lemonade I ever tasted, and
was most grateful and refreshing.  I handed the nut to Jack, who, after
tasting it, said, "Now, Peterkin, you unbeliever!  I never saw or tasted
a cocoa-nut in my life before, except those sold in shops at home; but I
once read that the green nuts contain that stuff; and you see it is
true."

"And, pray," asked Peterkin, "what sort of `stuff' does the ripe nut
contain?"

"A hollow kernel," answered Jack, "with a liquid like milk in it; but it
does not satisfy thirst so well as hunger.  It is very wholesome food, I
believe."

"Meat and drink on the same tree!" cried Peterkin; "washing in the sea,
lodging on the ground--and all for nothing!  My dear boys, we're set up
for life!  It must be the ancient Paradise--hurrah!" and Peterkin tossed
his straw hat in the air and ran along the beach, hallooing like a
madman with delight.

We afterwards found, however, that these lovely islands were very unlike
Paradise in many things.  But more of this in its proper place.

We had now come to the point of rocks on which the ship had struck, but
did not find a single article, although we searched carefully among the
coral rocks, which at this place jutted out so far as nearly to join the
reef that encircled the island.  Just as we were about to return,
however, we saw something black floating in a little cove that had
escaped our observation.  Running forward, we drew it from the water,
and found it to be a long, thick, leather boot, such as fishermen at
home wear; and a few paces farther on, we picked up its fellow.  We at
once recognised these as having belonged to our captain, for he had worn
them during the whole of the storm in order to guard his legs from the
waves and spray that constantly washed over our decks.  My first thought
on seeing them was that our dear captain had been drowned; but Jack soon
put my mind more at rest on that point by saying that if the captain had
been drowned with the boots on, he would certainly have been washed
ashore along with them, and that he had no doubt whatever he had kicked
them off while in the sea that he might swim more easily.

Peterkin immediately put them on; but they were so large that, as Jack
said, they would have done for boots, trousers, and vest too.  I also
tried them; but although I was long enough in the legs for them, they
were much too large in the feet for me.  So we handed them to Jack, who
was anxious to make me keep them; but as they fitted his large limbs and
feet as if they had been made for him, I would not hear of it, so he
consented at last to use them.  I may remark, however, that Jack did not
use them often, as they were extremely heavy.

It was beginning to grow dark when we returned to our encampment; so we
put off our visit to the top of a hill till next day, and employed the
light that yet remained to us in cutting down a quantity of boughs and
the broad leaves of a tree of which none of us knew the name.  With
these we erected a sort of rustic bower, in which we meant to pass the
night.  There was no absolute necessity for this, because the air of our
island was so genial and balmy that we could have slept quite well
without any shelter; but we were so little used to sleeping in the open
air that we did not quite relish the idea of lying down without any
covering over us.  Besides, our bower would shelter us from the
night-dews or rain, if any should happen to fall.  Having strewed the
floor with leaves and dry grass, we bethought ourselves of supper.

But it now occurred to us, for the first time, that we had no means of
making a fire.

"Now, there's a fix!  What shall we do?" said Peterkin, while we both
turned our eyes to Jack, to whom we always looked in our difficulties.
Jack seemed not a little perplexed.

"There are flints enough, no doubt, on the beach," said he; "but they
are of no use at all without a steel.  However, we must try."  So
saying, he went to the beach, and soon returned with two flints.  On one
of these he placed the tinder, and endeavoured to ignite it; but it was
with great difficulty that a very small spark was struck out of the
flints, and the tinder, being a bad, hard piece, would not catch.  He
then tried the bit of hoop-iron, which would not strike fire at all; and
after that the back of the axe, with no better success.  During all
these trials Peterkin sat with his hands in his pockets, gazing with a
most melancholy visage at our comrade, his face growing longer and more
miserable at each successive failure.

"Oh dear!" he sighed; "I would not care a button for the cooking of our
victuals--perhaps they don't need it--but it's so dismal to eat one's
supper in the dark, and we have had such a capital day that it's a pity
to finish off in this glum style.  Oh, I have it!" he cried, starting
up: "the spy-glass--the big glass at the end is a burning-glass!"

"You forget that we have no sun," said I.

Peterkin was silent.  In his sudden recollection of the telescope he had
quite overlooked the absence of the sun.

"Ah, boys, I've got it now!" exclaimed Jack, rising and cutting a branch
from a neighbouring bush, which he stripped of its leaves.  "I recollect
seeing this done once at home.  Hand me the bit of whip-cord."  With the
cord and branch Jack soon formed a bow.  Then he cut a piece about three
inches long off the end of a dead branch, which he pointed at the two
ends.  Round this he passed the cord of the bow, and placed one end
against his chest, which was protected from its point by a chip of wood;
the other point he placed against the bit of tinder, and then began to
saw vigorously with the bow, just as a blacksmith does with his drill
while boring a hole in a piece of iron.  In a few seconds the tinder
began to smoke; in less than a minute it caught fire; and in less than a
quarter of an hour we were drinking our lemonade and eating cocoa-nuts
round a fire that would have roasted an entire sheep, while the smoke,
flames, and sparks flew up among the broad leaves of the overhanging
palm-trees, and cast a warm glow upon our leafy bower.

That night the starry sky looked down through the gently rustling trees
upon our slumbers, and the distant roaring of the surf upon the coral
reef was our lullaby.



CHAPTER FIVE.

MORNING, AND COGITATIONS CONNECTED THEREWITH--WE LUXURIATE IN THE SEA,
TRY OUR DIVING POWERS, AND MAKE ENCHANTING EXCURSIONS AMONG THE CORAL
GROVES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE OCEAN--THE WONDERS OF THE DEEP ENLARGED
UPON.

What a joyful thing it is to awaken on a fresh, glorious morning, and
find the rising sun staring into your face with dazzling brilliancy! to
hear the birds twittering in the bushes, and to hear the murmuring of a
rill, or the soft, hissing ripples as they fall upon the seashore!  At
any time, and in any place, such sights and sounds are most charming;
but more especially are they so when one awakens to them, for the first
time, in a novel and romantic situation, with the soft, sweet air of a
tropical climate mingling with the fresh smell of the sea, and stirring
the strange leaves that flutter overhead and around one, or ruffling the
plumage of the stranger birds that fly inquiringly around as if to
demand what business we have to intrude uninvited on their domains.
When I awoke on the morning after the shipwreck, I found myself in this
most delightful condition; and as I lay on my back upon my bed of
leaves, gazing up through the branches of the cocoa-nut trees into the
clear blue sky, and watched the few fleecy clouds that passed slowly
across it, my heart expanded more and more with an exulting gladness,
the like of which I had never felt before.  While I meditated, my
thoughts again turned to the great and kind Creator of this beautiful
world, as they had done on the previous day when I first beheld the sea
and the coral reef, with the mighty waves dashing over it into the calm
waters of the lagoon.

While thus meditating, I naturally bethought me of my Bible, for I had
faithfully kept the promise which I gave at parting to my beloved
mother--that I would read it every morning; and it was with a feeling of
dismay that I remembered I had left it in the ship.  I was much troubled
about this.  However, I consoled myself with reflecting that I could
keep the second part of my promise to her--namely, that I should never
omit to say my prayers.  So I rose quietly lest I should disturb my
companions, who were still asleep, and stepped aside into the bushes for
this purpose.

On my return I found them still slumbering, so I again lay down to think
over our situation.  Just at that moment I was attracted by the sight of
a very small parrot, which Jack afterwards told me was called a
paroquet.  It was seated on a twig that overhung Peterkin's head, and I
was speedily lost in admiration of its bright-green plumage, which was
mingled with other gay colours.  While I looked I observed that the bird
turned its head slowly from side to side and looked downwards, first
with the one eye and then with the other.  On glancing downwards I
observed that Peterkin's mouth was wide open, and that this remarkable
bird was looking into it.  Peterkin used to say that I had not an atom
of fun in my composition, and that I never could understand a joke.  In
regard to the latter, perhaps he was right; yet I think that, when they
were explained to me, I understood jokes as well as most people.  But in
regard to the former, he must certainly have been wrong, for this bird
seemed to me to be extremely funny; and I could not help thinking that
if it should happen to faint, or slip its foot, and fall off the twig
into Peterkin's mouth, he would perhaps think it funny too!  Suddenly
the paroquet bent down its head and uttered a loud scream in his face.
This awoke him, and with a cry of surprise, he started up, while the
foolish bird flew precipitately away.

"Oh, you monster!" cried Peterkin, shaking his fist at the bird.  Then
he yawned, and rubbed his eyes, and asked what o'clock it was.

I smiled at this question, and answered that, as our watches were at the
bottom of the sea, I could not tell, but it was a little past sunrise.

Peterkin now began to remember where we were.  As he looked up into the
bright sky, and snuffed the scented air, his eyes glistened with
delight, and he uttered a faint "Hurrah!" and yawned again.  Then he
gazed slowly round, till, observing the calm sea through an opening in
the bushes, he started suddenly up as if he had received an electric
shock, uttered a vehement shout, flung off his garments, and rushing
over the white sands, plunged into the water.  The cry awoke Jack, who
rose on his elbow with a look of grave surprise; but this was followed
by a quiet smile of intelligence on seeing Peterkin in the water.  With
an energy that he only gave way to in moments of excitement, Jack
bounded to his feet, threw off his clothes, shook back his hair, and
with a lion-like spring, dashed over the sands and plunged into the sea
with such force as quite to envelop Peterkin in a shower of spray.  Jack
was a remarkably good swimmer and diver, so that after his plunge we saw
no sign of him for nearly a minute, after which he suddenly emerged,
with a cry of joy, a good many yards out from the shore.  My spirits
were so much raised by seeing all this that I, too, hastily threw off my
garments and endeavoured to imitate Jack's vigorous bound; but I was so
awkward that my foot caught on a stump, and I fell to the ground.  Then
I slipped on a stone while running over the sand and nearly fell again,
much to the amusement of Peterkin, who laughed heartily and called me a
"slow coach;" while Jack cried out, "Come along, Ralph, and I'll help
you!"  However, when I got into the water I managed very well; for I was
really a good swimmer and diver too.  I could not, indeed, equal Jack,
who was superior to any Englishman I ever saw; but I infinitely
surpassed Peterkin, who could only swim a little, and could not dive at
all.

While Peterkin enjoyed himself in the shallow water and in running along
the beach, Jack and I swam out into the deep water and occasionally
dived for stones.  I shall never forget my surprise and delight on first
beholding the bottom of the sea.  As I have before stated, the water
within the reef was as calm as a pond; and as there was no wind, it was
quite clear from the surface to the bottom, so that we could see down
easily even at a depth of twenty or thirty yards.  When Jack and I dived
into shallower water we expected to have found sand and stones, instead
of which we found ourselves in what appeared really to be an enchanted
garden.  The whole of the bottom of the lagoon, as we called the calm
water within the reef, was covered with coral of every shape, size, and
hue.  Some portions were formed like large mushrooms; others appeared
like the brain of a man, having stalks or necks attached to them; but
the most common kind was a species of branching coral, and some portions
were of a lovely pale-pink colour, others were pure white.  Among this
there grew large quantities of seaweed of the richest hues imaginable,
and of the most graceful forms; while innumerable fishes--blue, red,
yellow, green, and striped--sported in and out amongst the flower-beds
of this submarine garden, and did not appear to be at all afraid of our
approaching them.

On darting to the surface for breath after our first dive, Jack and I
rose close to each other.

"Did you ever in your life, Ralph, see anything so lovely?" said Jack as
he flung the spray from his hair.

"Never," I replied.  "It appears to me like fairy realms.  I can
scarcely believe that we are not dreaming."

"Dreaming!" cried Jack.  "Do you know, Ralph, I'm half-tempted to think
that we really are dreaming!  But if so, I am resolved to make the most
of it and dream another dive; so here goes--down again, my boy!"

