When the proposal just referred to was made the following day, after
landing at Otaheite, it was at once agreed to.  Peter Heywood, Stewart,
Morrison, and others who had taken no active part in the mutiny, were
glad to have the prospect of being enabled, sooner or later, to make a
voluntary surrender of themselves, while the thoughtless and reckless
among the men were well pleased to have done with uncertain wanderings,
and to be allowed to settle among their amiable native friends.

Preparations for instant departure were made by Christian and those who
chose to follow his lead.  The contents of the _Bounty_ were landed and
fairly divided; then the vessel was got ready for her final voyage.
Those who resolved to sail in her were as follows:--

  Fletcher Christian, formerly acting lieutenant--age 24.
  Edward Young, midshipman--age 22.
  John Adams, seaman--age 22.
  William McCoy, seaman--age 25.
  Matthew Quintal, seaman--age 21.
  John Williams, seaman--age 25.
  Isaac Martin, seaman--age 30.
  John Mills, gunner's mate--age 40.
  William Brown, botanist's assistant--age 27.

All these had married native women of Otaheite, who agreed to forsake
home and kindred and follow the fortunes of their white husbands.  There
were also six native men who consented to accompany them.  Their names
were Talaloo, Ohoo, Timoa, Nehow, Tetaheite, and Menalee.  Three of
these had wives, and one of the wives had a baby girl by a former
husband.  The European sailors named the infant Sally.  She was a round
light-brown embodiment of gleeful impudence, and had barely reached the
staggering age of infancy when taken on board the _Bounty_ to begin her
strange career.

Thus the party consisted of twenty-eight souls--namely, nine mutineers,
six native men, twelve native women, and the light-brown baby.

It was a pleasant bright morning in September 1790 when Fletcher
Christian and his followers bade farewell to Otaheite.  For some time
the breeze was light, and the _Bounty_ hovered round the Island as if
loath to leave it.  In the dusk of evening a boat put off from her,
pulled to the shore, and Christian landed, alone, near the house of a
chief who had become the special friend of Peter Heywood and Stewart.
With the two midshipmen he spent some time in earnest conversation.

"I could not leave you," he said in conclusion, "without relieving my
mind of all that I have just said about the mutiny, because you are sure
to be sent for and taken to England as soon as the intelligence of this
sad affair reaches.  I advise you to go off at once to the first ship
that may appear, and give yourselves up to the commander."

"Such is our intention," said Heywood.

"Right," rejoined Christian; "you are both innocent.  No harm can come
to you, for you took no part in the mutiny.  For me, my fate is fixed.
I go to search for some remote and uninhabited island, where I hope to
spend the remainder of my days without seeing the face of any Europeans
except those who accompany me.  It is a dreary thought, lads, to lose
country and kindred and friends for _ever_ by the act of one dark hour.
Now, remember, Heywood, what I have told you to tell my friends.  God
knows I do not plead guiltless; I am alone responsible for the mutiny,
and I exonerate all, even my adherents, from so much as suggesting it to
me; nevertheless, there are some who love me in England, to whom I would
beg of you to relate the circumstances that I have told you.  These may
extenuate though they cannot justify the crime I have committed.  I
assure you, most solemnly, that almost up to the last I had no intention
of doing more than making my own escape from the ship which the
injustice and brutality of Bligh had made a place of torment to me.
When you called me, Stewart, to relieve the watch, my brain seemed on
fire, and it was when I found the two officers both asleep, who should
have been on duty, that I suddenly made up my mind to take the ship.
Now," concluded Christian, grasping the hands of the youths, "I must say
farewell.  I have done you grievous wrong.  God forgive me, and bless
you.  Good-bye, Peter; good-bye, Stewart, good-bye."

He turned abruptly, stepped into his boat, and was rowed out to sea.

The young midshipmen, with moistened eyes, stood silently watching the
boat until it reached the ship.  Then they saw the _Bounty_ steering
away to the northward.  Before daylight was quite gone she had
disappeared on the distant horizon.

Thus did Fletcher Christian and his comrades pass from the sight and ken
of man, and they were not heard of after that for more than twenty
years!

But you and I, reader, have a special privilege to follow up these
mutineers.  Before doing so, however, let us note briefly what became of
their comrades left on Otaheite.

These, to the number of sixteen, soon distributed themselves among the
houses of their various friends, and proceeded to make themselves quite
at home.  Some of them, however, were not disposed to take up a
permanent abode there.  Among these was the boatswain's mate, James
Morrison, a man of superior mental power and energy, who kept an
interesting and graphic journal of events.  [See note.] He, with the
armourer, cooper, carpenter's mate, and others, set to work to construct
a small vessel, in which they meant to sail to Batavia, whence they
hoped to procure a passage to England.  The natives opposed this at
first, but on being told that the vessel was only meant for pleasure
trips round the island, they ceased their opposition, and watched with
great wonder at the process of ship-building, which was carried on
industriously from day to day.

During the progress of the work there was witnessed an interesting
ceremony, which, according to custom, was annually performed by the
chief of the district and a vast concourse of natives.  It shows how
deeply the celebrated Captain Cook had gained the reverence and love of
the people of Otaheite.  A picture of the circumnavigator, which had
been presented to the islanders by the captain of a merchant vessel, was
brought out with great ceremony and held up before the people, who,
including their queen, Eddea, paid homage to it.  A ceremonial dance was
also performed in its honour, and a long oration was pronounced by a
leading chief, after which the portrait was returned to the care of an
old man, who was its appointed custodian.

Long and earnestly did the white men labour at their little ship, and
with equal, if not superior, earnestness did the natives flock from all
parts of the island to see the wonderful work advance, bringing supplies
of provisions to the whites as a sort of payment for admission to the
show.  The vessel was completed and launched after months of toil, but
its sails of matting were found to be so untrustworthy that the plan of
proceeding in it to Batavia had to be given up.

Meanwhile, two of the worst of the mutineers, named Thompson and
Churchill, came to a tragical end.  The former insulted a member of the
family with whom he resided, and was knocked down.  He left them in high
dudgeon, and went to that part of the island where the vessel above
referred to was being built.  One day a canoe from a distant district
touched there, and the owner landed with his wife and family, carrying
his youngest child in his arms.  Thompson angrily ordered him to go
away, but the man did not obey the order, whereupon Thompson seized his
musket and shot father and child with the same bullet.  For this murder
he was shunned with abhorrence by his comrades, and obliged to go off to
another part of the island, accompanied by Churchill.  These two took up
their abode with a chief who was a _tayo_, or sworn friend, of the
latter.  This chief died shortly afterwards, leaving no children behind
him; and Churchill, being his _tayo_, succeeded to his possessions and
dignity, according to the custom of the country.  He did not, however,
enjoy his new position long, for Thompson, from jealousy or some other
cause, shot him.  The natives were so incensed at this that they arose
_en masse_ and stoned Thompson to death.

While these events were occurring, a messenger of retribution was
speeding over the sea to Otaheite.  On the morning of 23rd March 1791,
exactly sixteen months after the landing of the mutineers, H.M.S.
_Pandora_, Captain Edwards, sailed into Matavai Bay.  Before she had
anchored, Coleman the armourer swam off to her, and Peter Heywood and
Stewart immediately followed and surrendered themselves.  These, and all
the mutineers, were immediately put in irons, and thrown into a
specially prepared prison on the quarter-deck, named the "Pandora's
Box," in which they were conveyed to England.

We have not space to recount the stirring incidents of this remarkable
and disastrous voyage, and the subsequent trial of the mutineers.  Let
it suffice to say, that the _Pandora_, after spending three months in a
fruitless search for the _Bounty_, was wrecked on the homeward voyage,
and a large number of the crew and some of the prisoners were drowned,
among whom was poor Stewart the midshipman.  The remainder of the crew
were saved in the ship's boats, after performing a voyage which, as to
its length and the sufferings endured, rivals that previously made by
Bligh.  Thereafter, on reaching England, the mutineers were tried by
court-martial; some were honourably acquitted, others were condemned to
death but afterwards pardoned, and ultimately only three were executed.

Among those who were condemned, but afterwards pardoned as being
unquestionably innocent, was Peter Heywood, whose admirable defence and
correspondence with his family, especially that between himself and his
charming sister Nessy, form a most interesting feature in the records of
the trial; but all this must be passed over in silence, while we resume
the thread of our story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  Part of this journal is quoted in an excellent account of the
_Mutineers of the Bounty_, by Lady Belcher.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE LONELY ISLAND SIGHTED.

It is pleasant to turn for a time from the dark doings of evil men to
the contemplation of innocent infancy.

We return to the _Bounty_, and solicit the reader's attention to a plump
brown ball which rolls about that vessel's deck, exhibiting a marked
tendency to gravitate towards the lee scuppers.  This brown ball is
Sally, the Otaheitan infant.

Although brown, Sally's face is extremely pretty, by reason of the
regularity of her little features, the beauty of her little white teeth,
and the brilliancy of her large black eyes, to say nothing of her
luxuriant hair and the gleeful insolence of her sweet expression.

We cannot say how many, or rather how few, months old the child is, but,
as we have already remarked, she is a staggerer.  That is to say, she
has begun to assert the independence of her little brown legs, and
progresses, even when on shore, with all the uncertainty of a drunken
woman.  Of course, the ship's motion does not tend to remedy this
defect.  Sally's chief delight is wallowing.  No matter what part of the
ship's deck she may select for her operations--whether the scuppers, the
quarter-deck, or the forecastle--she lays her down straightway for a
luxurious wallow.  If the spot be dirty, she wallows it clean; if it be
clean, she wallows it dirty.  This might seem an awkward habit to an
English mother; but it is a matter of supreme indifference to Sally's
mother, who sits on a gun-carriage plaiting a mat of cocoa-nut fibre,
for Sally, being naked, requires little washing.  A shower of rain or a
dash of spray suffices to cleanse her when at sea.  On shore she lives,
if we may say so, more in the water than on the land.

The day is fine, and the breeze so light that it scarce ruffles the face
of the great ocean, though it manages to fill the topsails of the
_Bounty_, causing her to glide quietly on.  Some of the mutineers are
seated on the deck or bulwarks, patching a canvas jacket or plaiting a
grass hat.  Others are smoking contemplatively.  John Adams is winding
up the log-line with McCoy.  Edward Young stands gazing through a
telescope at something which he fancies is visible on the horizon, and
Fletcher Christian is down in the cabin poring over Carteret's account
of his voyage in the Pacific.

There were goats on board.  One of these, having become a pet with the
crew, was allowed to walk at liberty, and became a grand playmate for
Sally.  Besides the goats, Christian had taken care to procure a number
of hogs and poultry from Otaheite; also a supply of young
breadfruit-trees and other vegetable products of the island, wherewith
to enrich his new home when he should find it.  All the animals were
confined in cribs and pens with the exception of Sally's playmate.

"Take care!" exclaimed John Adams as he left the quarter-deck with his
hands in his pockets; "your mate'll butt you overboard, Sal, if you
don't look-out."

There was, indeed, some fear of such a catastrophe, for the precocious
infant had a tendency to scramble on any object which enabled her to
look over the low bulwarks, and the goat had a propensity to advance on
its hind legs with a playful toss of its head and take its playmate by
surprise, in truth, what between the fore-hatch, the companion-hatch,
and the low bulwarks, it may be said that Sally led a life of constant
and imminent danger.  She was frequently plucked by the men out of the
very jaws of death, and seemed to enjoy the fun.

While attempting to avoid one of the goat's playful assaults, Sally
stumbled up against Matthew Quintal, deranged the work on which he was
engaged, and caused him to prick his hand with a sail-needle, at which
William McCoy, who was beside him, laughed.

"Get out o' that, you little nigger!" exclaimed Quintal, angrily, giving
the child a push with his foot which sent her rolling to the side of the
ship, where her head came in contact with an iron bolt.  Sally opened
her mouth, shut her eyes, and howled.

Quintal had probably not intended to hurt the child, but he expressed no
regret.  On the contrary, seeing that she was not much injured, he
laughed in concert with McCoy.

These two, Quintal and McCoy, were emphatically the bad men of the
party.  They did not sympathise much, if at all, with human suffering--
certainly not with those whom they styled "niggers;" but there was one
witness of the act whose heart was as tender towards the natives as
Quintal's was hard.

"If you ever dare to touch her so again," said Young, striding up to
Quintal, "I'll kick you into the pig-sty."

The midshipman seemed to be the last man on board whose natural
disposition would lead him to utter such a threat, and Quintal was quite
taken aback; but as Young was a powerful fellow, perfectly capable of
carrying his threat into execution, and seemed, moreover, thoroughly
roused, the former thought it best to hold his tongue, even though
lugubrious Isaac Martin chuckled audibly, and Ohoo, one of the natives,
who stood near, displayed his fine teeth from ear to ear.

Lifting up Sally with much tenderness, Young carried her to her mother,
who, after a not very careful examination of the bruised head, set her
down on the deck, where she immediately began to wallow as before.
Rising on her brown little feet, she staggered forward a few paces, and
then seated herself without bending her knees.  From this position she
rolled towards the starboard side of the ship and squeezed herself
between a gun-carriage and the bulwarks, until she got into the
porthole.  Thrusting her head over the edge of this, she gazed at the
ripples that rolled pleasantly from the side.  This was paradise!  The
sun glittered on these ripples, and Sally's eyes glittered in sympathy.
A very gentle lurch of the ship soon after sent Sally head foremost into
the midst of the ripples.

This event was nothing new to Sally.  In her Otaheitan home her mother
had been wont to take her out for a swim as British mothers take their
offspring for a walk.  Frequently had that mother pitched Sally off her
shoulders and left her to wabble in the water, as eagles are said to
toss their eaglets into the air, and leave them to flutter until failing
strength renders aid advisable.

No doubt when Sally, falling from such a height, and turning so as to
come flat on her back, experienced a tingling slap upon her skin, she
felt disposed to shed a salt tear or two into the mighty ocean; but when
the smart passed away, she took to wallowing in the water, by way of
making the most of her opportunities.  Both Christian and Young heard
the plunge.  The former leaped up the companion ladder, the latter ran
to the stern of the ship, but before either could gain the side one of
the Otaheitan men, who had witnessed the accident, plunged into the sea
and was soon close to Sally.  The playful creature, after giving him a
kick in the face, consented to be placed on his shoulders.

The ship of course was brought up to the wind and her topsails backed as
quickly as possible, but the swimmers were left a considerable distance
astern before this was accomplished.

"No need to lower a boat," remarked Christian, as he drew out the tubes
of his telescope; "that fellow swims like a fish."

"So do all his countrymen," said Young.

"And the women and children too," added John Adams, who was at the helm.

"She's tugging at the man's woolly head as if it were a door mat," said
Christian, laughing; "and I do believe--yes--the little thing is now
reaching round--and pulling his nose.  Look at them, Young."

Handing the glass to the midshipman, he turned to inquire for the
child's mother, and to his astonishment found that brown lady sitting on
the deck busy with her mat-making, as unconcerned as if nothing unusual
were going on.

The fact was, that Sally's mother thought no more of Sally falling into
the sea than a white mother might of her child falling on its nose--not
so much, perhaps.  She knew that the ship would wait to pick her up.
She also knew that Sally was an expert swimmer for her age, and that the
man who had gone to her rescue was thoroughly able for the duty, having,
like all the South Sea Islanders, been accustomed from infancy to spend
hours at a time in the water.

In a few minutes he came alongside, with Sally sitting astride his neck,
holding on to both sides of his head, and lifting her large eyes with a
gaze of ecstasy to those who looked over the vessel's side.  She
evidently regarded the adventure as one of the most charming that had up
to that time gladdened her brief career.  Not only so, but, no sooner
had she been hauled on board with her deliverer, than she made straight
for the porthole from which she had fallen, and attempted to repeat the
manoeuvre, amid shouts of laughter from all who saw her.  After that the
various portholes had to be closed up, and the precocious baby to be
more carefully watched.

"I have come to the conclusion," said Christian to Young, as they paced
the deck by moonlight that same night, "that it is better to settle on
Pitcairn's Island than on any of the Marquesas group.  It is farther out
of the track of ships than any known island of the Pacific, and if
Carteret's account of it be correct, its precipitous sides will induce
passers-by to continue their voyage without stopping."

"If we find it, and it should turn out to be suitable, what then!" asked
Young.
