"I will," replied the boy, with decision; "but I say, all fair an'
above-board?  No school-boardin' nor nuffin' o' that sort--hey? honour
bright?"

"Honour bright!"  I replied, holding out my hand, which he grasped and
shook quite heartily.

We had both taken two or three steps in opposite directions, when, as if
under the same impulse, we looked back at each other, and in so doing
became aware of the fact that Dumps stood between us on the pavement in
a state of extreme indecision or mental confusion.

"Hallo!  I say! we've bin an' forgot Punch!" exclaimed the boy.

"Dumps," said I, "come along!"

"Punch," said he, "come here, good dog!"

My doggie looked first at one, then at the other.  The two indicators in
front rose and fell, while the one behind wagged and drooped in a state
of obvious uncertainty.

"Won't you sell 'im back?" said Slidder, returning.  "I'll work it out
in messages or anythink else."

"But what of the bobbies?"  I asked.

"Ah! true, I forgot the bobbies.  I'd on'y be able to keep 'im for a
week, p'r'aps not so long, afore they'd nab him.--Go, Punch, go, you
don't know ven you're vell off."

The tone in which this was uttered settled the point, and turned the
wavering balance of the creature's affections in my favour.  With all
the indicators extremely pendulous, and its hairy coat hanging in a
species of limp humility, my doggie followed me home; but I observed
that, as we went along, he ever and anon turned a wistful glance in the
direction in which the ragged waif had disappeared.



CHAPTER FOUR.

IN WHICH DUMPS FINDS ANOTHER OLD FRIEND.

One morning, a considerable time after the events narrated in the last
chapter, I sat on the sofa waiting for breakfast, and engaged in an
interesting conversation with Dumps.  The only difference in our mode of
communication was that Dumps talked with his eyes, I with my tongue.

From what I have already said about my doggie, it will be understood
that his eyes--which were brown and speaking eyes--lay behind such a
forest of hair that it was only by clearing the dense masses away that I
could obtain a full view of his liquid orbs.  I am not sure that his
ears were much less expressive than his eyes.  Their variety of motion,
coupled with their rate of action, served greatly to develop the full
meaning of what his eyes said.

"Mrs Miff seems to have forgotten us this morning, Dumps," I remarked,
pulling out my watch.

One ear cocked forward, the other turned back towards the door, and a
white gleam under the hair, indicating that the eyes turned in the same
direction, said as plainly as there was any occasion for--

"No; not quite forgotten us.  I hear her coming now."

"Ha! so she is.  Now you shall have a feed."  Both ears elevated to the
full extent obviously meant "Hurrah!" while a certain motion of his body
appeared to imply that, in consequence of his sedentary position, he was
vainly attempting to wag the sofa.

"If you please, sir," said my landlady, laying the breakfast tray on the
table, "there's a shoe-black in the kitchen says he wants to see you."

"Ah! young Slidder, I fancy.  Well, send him up."

"He says he's 'ad his breakfast an' will wait till you have done, sir."

"Very considerate.  Send him up nevertheless."

In a few minutes my _protege_ stood before me, hat in hand, looking, in
the trim costume of the brigade, quite a different being from the ragged
creature I had met with in Whitechapel.  Dumps instantly assaulted him
with loving demonstrations.

"How spruce you look, my boy!"

"Thanks to _you_, sir," replied Slidder, with a familiar nod; "they do
say I'm lookin' up."

"I hope you like the work.  Have you had breakfast?  Would a roll do you
any good?"

"Thankee, I'm primed for the day.  I came over, sir, to say that granny
seems to me to be out o' sorts.  Since I've been allowed to sleep on the
rug inside her door, I've noticed that she ain't so lively as she used
to was.  Shivers a deal w'en it ain't cold, groans now an' then, an
whimpers a good deal.  It strikes me, now--though I ain't a reg'lar
sawbones--that there's suthin' wrong with her in'ards."

"I'll finish breakfast quickly and go over with you to see her," said I.

"Don't need to 'urry, sir," returned Slidder; "she ain't wery bad--not
much wuss than or'nary--on'y I've bin too anxious about her--poor old
thing.  I'll vait below till you're ready.--Come along, Punch, an' jine
yer old pal in the kitchen till the noo 'un's ready."

After breakfast we three hurried out and wended our way eastward.  As
the morning was unusually fine I diverged towards one of the more
fashionable localities to deliver a note with which I had been charged.
Young Slidder's spirits were high, and for a considerable time he
entertained me with a good deal of the East-end gossip.  Among other
things, he told me of the great work that was being done there by Dr
Barnardo and others of similar spirit, in rescuing waifs like himself
from their wretched condition.

"Though some on us don't think it so wretched arter all," he continued.
"There's the Slogger, now, he won't go into the 'ome on no
consideration; says he wouldn't give a empty sugar-barrel for all the
'omes in London.  But then the Slogger's a lazy muff.  He don't want to
work--that's about it.  He'd sooner starve than work.  By consikence he
steals, more or less, an finds a 'ome in the `stone jug' pretty
frequent.  As to his taste for a sugar-barrel, I ain't so sure that I
don't agree with 'im.  It's big, you know--plenty of room to move, w'ich
it ain't so with a flour-barrel.  An' then the smell!  Oh! you've no
notion!  W'y, that's wuth the price of a night's lodgin' itself, to say
nothin' o' the chance of a knot-hole or a crack full o' sugar, that the
former tenants has failed to diskiver."

While the waif was commenting thus enthusiastically on the bliss of
lodging in a sugar-barrel, we were surprised to see Dumps, who chanced
to be trotting on in front come to a sudden pause and gaze at a lady who
was in the act of ringing the door-bell of an adjoining house.

The door was opened by a footman, and the lady was in the act of
entering when Dumps gave vent to a series of sounds, made up of a whine,
a bark, and a yelp.  At the same moment his tail all but twirled him off
his legs as he rushed wildly up the stairs and began to dance round the
lady in mad excitement.

The lady backed against the door in alarm.  The footman, anxious
apparently about his calves, seized an umbrella and made a wild assault
on the dog, and I was confusedly conscious of Slidder exclaiming, "Why,
if that ain't _my_ young lady!" as I sprang up the steps to the rescue.

"Down, Dumps, you rascal; down!"  I exclaimed, seizing him by the brass
collar with which I had invested him.--"Pardon the rudeness of my dog,
madam," I said, looking up; "I never saw him act in this way before.  It
is quite unaccountable--"

"Not quite so unaccountable as you think," interrupted Slidder, who
stood looking calmly on, with his hands in his pockets and a grin on his
face.--"It's your own dog, miss."

"What do you mean, boy?" said the lady, a gaze of surprise chasing away
the look of alarm which had covered her pretty face.

"I mean 'xactly what I says, miss.  The dog's your own: I sold it to you
long ago for five bob!"

The girl--for she was little more than sixteen--turned with a startled,
doubting look to the dog.

"If you don't b'lieve it, miss, look at the vite spot on the bridge of
'is nose," said Slidder, with a self-satisfied nod to the lady and a
supremely insolent wink to the footman.

"Pompey!" exclaimed the girl, holding out a pair of the prettiest little
gloved hands imaginable.

My doggie broke from my grasp with a shriek of joy, and sprang into her
arms.  She buried her face in his shaggy neck and absolutely hugged him.

I stood aghast.  The footman smiled in an imbecile manner.

"You'd better not squeeze quite so hard, miss, or he'll bust!" remarked
the waif.

Recovering herself, and dropping the dog somewhat hurriedly, she turned
to me with a flushed face and said--

"Excuse me, sir; this unexpected meeting with my dog--"

"_Your_ dog!"  I involuntarily exclaimed, while a sense of unmerited
loss began to creep over me.

"Well, the dog was mine once, at all events--though I doubt not it is
rightfully yours now," said the young lady, with a smile that at once
disarmed me.  "It was stolen from me a few months after I had bought it
from this boy, who seems strangely altered since then.  I'm glad,
however, to see that the short time I had the dog was sufficient to
prevent its forgetting me.  But perhaps," she added, in a sad tone, "it
would have been better if it _had_ forgotten me."

My mind was made up.

"No, madam," said I, with decision; "it is well that the dog has not
forgotten you.  I would have been surprised, indeed, if it had.  It is
yours.  I could not think of robbing you of it.  I--I--am going to visit
a sick woman and cannot delay; forgive me if I ask permission to leave
the dog with you until I return in the afternoon to hand it formally
over and bid it farewell."

This was said half in jest yet I felt very much in earnest, for the
thought of parting from my doggie, even to such a fair mistress, cost me
no small amount of pain--much to my surprise, for I had not imagined it
possible that I could have formed so strong an attachment to a dumb
animal in so short a time.  But, you see, being a bachelor of an
unsocial spirit, my doggie and I had been thrown much together in the
evenings, and had made the most of our time.

The young lady half laughed, and hesitatingly thanked me as she went
into the house, followed by Dumps, _alias_ Punch, _alias_ Pompey, who
never so much as cast one parting glance on me as I turned to leave.  A
shout caused me to turn again and look back.  I beheld an infant rolling
down the drawing-room stairs like a small Alpine boulder.  A little girl
was vainly attempting to arrest the infant, and three boys, of various
sizes, came bounding towards the young lady with shouts of welcome.  In
the midst of the din my doggie uttered a cry of pain, the Babel of
children's voices was hushed by a bass growl, and the street door closed
with a bang!

"Yell, that _is_ a rum go!" exclaimed my little companion, as we walked
slowly away.  "Don't it seem to you, now, as if it wor all a dream?"

"It does, indeed," I replied, half inclined to laugh, yet with a feeling
of sadness at my heart, for I knew that my doggie and I were parted for
ever!  Even if the young lady should insist on my keeping the dog, I
felt that I could not agree to do so.  No!  I had committed myself, and
the thing was done; for it was clear that, with the mutual affection
existing between the lady and the dog, they would not willingly consent
to be parted--it would be cruelty even to suggest a separation.

"Pshaw!" thought I, "why should the loss of a miserable dog--a mere mass
of shapeless hair--affect me so much?  Pooh!  I will brush the subject
away."

So I brushed it away, but back it came again in spite of all my
brushing, and insisted on remaining to trouble me.

Short though our friendship had been, it had, I found, become very warm
and strong.  I recalled a good many pleasant evenings when, seated alone
in my room with a favourite author, I had read and tickled Dumps under
the chin and behind the ears to such an extent that I had thoroughly
gained his heart; and as "love begets love," I had been drawn insensibly
yet powerfully towards him.  In short, Dumps and I understood each
other.

While I was meditating on these things my companion, who had walked
along in silence, suddenly said--

"You needn't take on so, sir, about Punch."

"How d'you know I'm taking on so?"

"'Cause you look so awful solemncholy.  An' there's no occasion to do
so.  You can get the critter back again."

"I fear not Slidder, for I have already given it to the young lady, and
you have seen how fond she is of it; and the dog evidently likes her
better than it likes me."

"Yell, I ain't surprised at _that_.  It on'y proves it to be a dog of
good taste; but you can get it back for all that."

"How so?"  I asked, much amused by the decision and self-sufficiency of
the boy's manner.

"Vy, you've on'y got to go and marry the young lady, w'en, of course,
all her property becomes yours, Punch included, don't you see?"

"True, Slidder; it had not occurred to me in that light," said I,
laughing heartily, as much at the cool and quiet insolence of the waif's
manner as at his suggestion.  "But then, you see, there are difficulties
in the way.  Young ladies who dwell in fine mansions are not fond of
marrying penniless doctors."

"Pooh!" replied the urchin; "that 'as nuffin' to do with it.  You've
on'y got to set up in a 'ouse close alongside, with a big gold mortar
over the door an' a one-'oss broom, an' you'll 'ave 'er in six months--
or eight if she's got contrairy parents.  Then you'll want a tiger, of
course, to 'old the 'oss; an' I knows a smart young feller whose name
begins with a S, as would just suit.  So, you see, you've nothing to do
but to go in an win."

The precocious waif looked up in my face with such an expression of
satisfaction as he finished this audacious speech, that I could not help
gazing at him in blank amazement.  What I should have replied I know
not, for we arrived just then at the abode of old Mrs Willis.

The poor old lady was suffering from a severe attack of influenza,
which, coupled with age and the depression caused by her heavy sorrow,
had reduced her physical powers in an alarming degree.  It was obvious
that she urgently required good food and careful nursing.  I never
before felt so keenly my lack of money.  My means barely sufficed to
keep myself, educational expenses being heavy.  I was a shy man, too,
and had never made friends--at least among the rich--to whom I could
apply on occasions like this.

"Dear granny," I said, "you would get along nicely if you would consent
to go to a hospital."

"Never!" said the old lady, in a tone of decision that surprised me.

"I assure you, granny, that you would be much better cared for and fed
there than you can be here, and it would not be necessary to give up
your room.  I would look after it until you are better."

Still the old lady shook her head, which was shaking badly enough from
age as it was.

Going to the corner cupboard, in which Mrs Willis kept her little store
of food and physic, I stood there pondering what I should do.

"Please, sir," said Slidder, sidling up to me, "if you wants
mutton-chops, or steaks, or port wine, or anythink o' that sort, just
say the word and I'll get 'em."

"You, boy--how?"

"Vy, ain't the shops full of 'em?  I'd go an help myself, spite of all
the bobbies that valks in blue."

"Oh, Slidder," said I, really grieved, for I saw by his earnest face
that he meant it, "would you go and steal after all I have said to you
about that sin?"

"Vell, sir, I wouldn't prig for myself--indeed I wouldn't--but I'd do it
to make the old 'ooman better."

"That would not change stealing into a virtue.  No, my boy, we must try
to hit on some other way of providing for her wants."

"The Lord will provide," said Mrs Willis, from the bed.

She had overheard us.  I hastened to her side.

"Yes, granny, He _will_ provide.  Meanwhile He has given me enough money
to spare a little for your immediate wants.  I will send some things,
which your kind neighbour, Mrs Jones, will cook for you.  I'll give her
directions as I pass her door.  Slidder will go home with me and fetch
you the medicines you require.  Now, try to sleep till Mrs Jones comes
with the food.  You must not speak to me.  It will make you worse."

"I only want to ask, John, have you any--any news about--"

"No, not yet, granny; but don't be cast down.  If you can trust God for
food, surely you can trust Him for protection, not only to yourself, but
to Edie.  Remember the words, `Commit thy way unto the Lord, and He will
bring it to pass.'"

"Thank you, John," replied the old woman, as she sank back on her pillow
with a little sigh.

After leaving Mrs Willis I was detained so long with some of my
patients that it was late before I could turn my steps westward.  The
night was very cold, with a keen December wind blowing, and heavy black
clouds driving across the dark sky.  It was after midnight as I drew
near the neighbourhood of the house in which I had left Dumps so
hurriedly that morning.  In my haste I had neglected to ask the name of
the young lady with whom I had left him, or to note the number of the
house; but I recollected its position, and resolved to go round by it
for the purpose of ascertaining the name on the door.



CHAPTER FIVE.

CONSPIRACY AND VILLAINY, INNOCENCE AND TRAGEDY.

In one of the dirtiest of the dirty and disreputable dens of London, a
man and a boy sat on that same dark December night engaged in earnest
conversation.

Their seats were stools, their table was an empty flour-barrel, their
apartment a cellar.  A farthing candle stood awry in the neck of a pint
bottle.  A broken-lipped jug of gin-and-water hot, and two cracked
tea-cups stood between them.  The damp of the place was drawn out,
rather than abated, by a small fire, which burned in a rusty grate, over
which they sought to warm their hands as they conversed.  The man was
palpably a scoundrel.  Not less so was the boy.

"Slogger," said the man, in a growling voice, "we must do it this wery
night."

"Vell, Brassey, I'm game," replied the Slogger, draining his cup with a
defiant air.

"If it hadn't bin for that old 'ooman as was care-taker all last
summer," continued the man, as he pricked a refractory tobacco-pipe,
"we'd 'ave found the job more difficult; but, you see, she went and lost
the key o' the back door, and the doctor he 'ad to get another.  So I
goes an' gets round the old 'ooman, an' pumps her about the lost key,
an' at last I finds it--d'ye see?"

"But," returned the Slogger, with a knowing frown, "seems to me as how
you'd never get two keys into one lock--eh?  The noo 'un wouldn't let
the old 'un in, would it?"

"Ah, that's where it is," replied Mr Brassey, with a leer, as he raised
his cup to his large ugly mouth and chuckled.  "You see, the doctor's
wife she's summat timmersome, an' looks arter the lockin' up every night
herself--wery partikler.  Then she 'as all the keys up into her own
bedroom o' nights--so, you see, in consikence of her uncommon care, she
keeps all the locks clear for you and me to work upon!"

The Slogger was so overcome by this instance of the result of excessive
caution, that he laughed heartily for some minutes, and had to apply for
relief to the hot gin-and-water.

"'Ow ever did you come for to find that hout?" asked the boy.

"Servants," replied the man.

"Ha!" exclaimed the boy, with a wink, which would have been knowing if
the spirits had not by that time rendered it ridiculous.

"Yes, you see," continued the elder ruffian, blowing a heavy cloud of
smoke like a cannon shot from his lips, "servants is wariable in
character.  Some is good, an' some is bad.  I mostly take up wi' the bad
'uns.  There's one in the doctor's 'ouse as is a prime favourite with
me, an' knows all about the locks, she does.  But there's a noo an'
unexpected difficulty sprung up in the way this wery mornin'."

"Wot's that?" demanded the Slogger, with the air of a man prepared to
defy all difficulties.

"They've bin an' got a dog--a little dog, too; the very wust kind for
kickin' up a row.  'Owever, it ain't the fust time you an' I 'ave met an
conkered such a difficulty.  You'll take a bit of cat's meat in your
pocket, you know."

"Hall right!" exclaimed the young housebreaker, with a reckless toss of
his shaggy head, as he laid his hand on the jug: but the elder scoundrel
laid his stronger hand upon it.

"Come, Slogger; no more o' that.  You've 'ad too much already.  You
won't be fit for dooty if you take more."

"It's wery 'ard on a cove," growled the lad, sulkily.

Brassey looked narrowly into his face, then took up the forbidden jug,
and himself drained it, after which he rose, grasped the boy by his
collar, and forced him, struggling, towards a sink full of dirty water,
into which he thrust his head, and shook it about roughly for a second
or two.

"There, that'll sober you," said the man, releasing the boy, and sending
him into the middle of the room with a kick.  "Now, don't let your
monkey rise, Slogger.  It's all for your good.  I'll be back in 'alf an
hour.  See that you have the tools ready."

So saying the man left the cellar, and the boy, who was much
exasperated, though decidedly sobered, by his treatment, proceeded to
dry himself with a jack-towel, and make preparations for the intended
burglary.

The house in regard to which such interesting preparations were being
made was buried, at the hour I write of, in profound repose.  As its
fate and its family have something to do with my tale, I shall describe
it somewhat particularly.  In the basement there was an offshoot, or
scullery, which communicated with the kitchen.  This scullery had been
set apart that day as the bedroom of my little dog.  (Of course I knew
nothing of this, and what I am about to relate, at that time.  I learned
it all afterwards.)  Dumps lay sound asleep on a flannel bed, made by
loving hands, in the bottom of a soap-box.  It lay under the shadow of a
beer-cask--the servants' beer--a fresh cask--which, having arrived late
that evening, had not been relegated to the cellar.  The only other
individual who slept on the basement was the footman.

That worthy, being elderly and feeble, though bold as a lion, had been
doomed to the lower regions by his mistress, as a sure protection
against burglars.  He went to bed nightly with a poker and a pistol so
disposed that he could clutch them both while in the act of springing
from bed.  This arrangement was made not to relieve his own fears, but
by order of his mistress, with whom he could hold communication at night
without rising, by means of a speaking-tube.

John--he chanced to bear my own name--had been so long subject to night
alarms, partly from cats careering in the back yard, and his mistress
demanding to know, through the tube, if he heard them; partly, also,
from frequent ringing of the night-bell, by persons who urgently wanted
"Dr McTougall," that he had become callous in his nervous system, and
did much of his night-work as a semi-somnambulist.

The rooms on the first floor above, consisting of the dining-room,
library, and consulting-room, etcetera, were left, as usual, tenantless
and dark at night.  On the drawing-room floor Mrs McTougall lay in her
comfortable bed, sound asleep and dreamless.  The poor lady had spent
the first part of that night in considerable fear because of the
restlessness of Dumps in his new and strange bedroom--her husband being
absent because of a sudden call to a country patient.  The speaking-tube
had been pretty well worked, and John had been lively in consequence--
though patient--but at last the drowsy god had calmed the good lady into
a state of oblivion.

On the floor above, besides various bedrooms, there were the night
nursery and the schoolroom.  In one of the bedrooms slumbered the young
lady who had robbed me of my doggie!

In the nursery were four cribs and a cradle.  Dr McTougall's family had
come in what I may style annual progression.  Six years had he been
married, and each year had contributed another annual to the army.

The children were now ranged round the walls with mathematical
precision--one, two, three, four, and five.  The doctor liked them all
to be together, and the nursery, being unusually large, permitted of
this arrangement.  A tall, powerful, sunny-tempered woman of uncertain
