man lettin' himself or his girl down by a rope, so up I went hand over
hand.  Many a time had I done the sort o' thing for a lark when I was a
youngster; but bein' out o' practice, and a good deal heavier than in
old days, I found it hard work, I can tell you.  Hows'ever, I managed it
and got in at the window, an' didn't my heart give a jump when I saw
that the old chap had only made the rope fast to a light bedroom chair.
If I'd bin a stone heavier, I'd have pulled that chair right over the
window!

"`God bless you!' cried the tremblin' old man; `save my Clara!'

"There was no time for pretty speeches.  I made fast the end of the rope
to the leg of a table, made a loop on the other end, threw it over the
girl, caught her round the waist an' swung her over the window.  I was
in such a hurry that the rope nearly took the skin off my hands; but I
landed her safe on the straw below.  The old man was heavier, and not so
easy to manage; but I got him lowered safe, and then, slipping over
myself, began to descend.  The flames had by that time got headway, and
were dartin' like fiery serpents' tongues out o' the windows below.  One
o' them gave me a wipe in passin', an' cleared eyelashes, eyebrows, and
half the hair o' my head away.  Another twined round the rope and singed
it; so that when I was half-way down, it snapped, and I came to the
ground with a thud that damaged my canvas ducks, though they were by no
means delicate.  Hows'ever, the pile of straw broke the fall, and I was
none the worse.

"The gratitude o' that poor old man and his daughter knew no bounds,
specially when he found I was the father of his Clara's favourite
schoolmate.

"`Now, Captain Millet,' says he at partin', `nothin' in this world can
repay what we owe you.  I know it would be insultin' to offer you money
for such service, but sometimes men like you like to help a good cause.
Will you accept of five hundred pounds for such a purpose?'

"`No sir,' says I, `I won't!  But I've a sister at home who spends all
her time in tryin' to do good.  If you'll be kind enough to send it to
her, she'll consider it a blessed windfall, and will lay it out to the
best possible advantage.'

"`Good,' said he, seizin' his pen an' writin' out the cheque.  `Is your
sister well off?'

"`She might be better off,' said I.

"`Then pray beg her in my name to accept of a few shares in an
Australian tin-mine which came to me a few days ago.  They are not worth
much, but I don't want to be troubled with them; indeed, will consider
it a favour if she will take them off my hands.'

"The old fellow said this with a laugh--so there you are, Molly, 500
pounds to the credit of your charity account an' I don't know how much
tin transferred to your own."

"O brother, how good--how kind!"  Miss Millet paused here, and gazed in
silence at the cheque, for she had already begun to calculate how far
that sum would go towards the library, and the church, and the
town-hall, and the model-houses, and the gymnasium, and the
swimming-bath.

"And now, young man," said the captain, turning to our coastguardsman,
"the missin' of that steamer, at which I growled so much that day,
turned out to be a great blessin' after all, although it seemed such a
misfortune.  For it caused me to arrive just in the nick of time to save
two human lives--besides givin' the old girl here somethin' to think
about and work upon for the next twelvemonth to come--whereas, if I had
arrived the day before, I would have bin sleepin' in the house, and
mayhap have bin burnt alive wi' old Nibsworth and his daughter.  Seems
to me as if that little story had some sort o' bearin' on the subject
you was discussin' wi' Molly.  But I'm not good at drawin' morals, so
I'll leave you to draw it for yourself."



CHAPTER THREE.

OUR COASTGUARDSMAN MEETS WITH A SERIOUS BUT VERY COMMON FALL.

Whether Jeff Benson drew the moral of Captain Millet's story for himself
or not, we cannot tell; but it is certain that his mates found him after
that date a man who was prone to solitary meditations, with occasional
fits of absence of mind.  They also found him a pleasant companion and a
most active comrade in all the duties of his station.

Sometimes these duties involved great hardship, and frequent risk to
life and limb; for, as is well known, our coastguardsmen not only
perambulate our shores in all weathers, but often work the rocket
apparatus for saving life from shipwreck, and are frequently called upon
to assist the lifeboat-men by putting off to the rescue in their own
boats when others are not available.  In all these duties Jeffrey Benson
did his work with tremendous energy, as might have been expected of one
so strong, and with reckless disregard to personal safety, which was
appropriate in a hero.

One evening, about a year after the period of which we have been
writing, Jeff was returning along shore with a party in charge of the
rocket-cart, after having rescued the crew of a small coasting vessel--
four men and a boy, with the skipper's wife.  The service had been
prolonged and pretty severe, but feelings of exhaustion were, for the
time at least, banished from the coastguardsmen's breasts by the joy
resulting from success in their heroic work.  On the way, the party had
to pass close to Miss Millet's cottage--her "cottage by the sea," as the
romantic old lady was fond of calling it.

Jeff--although fatigued and hungry, besides being drenched, dishevelled
about the hair, bespattered with mud, and bruised, as well as lacerated
somewhat about the hands--determined to pay a short visit to the
cottage, being anxious to "have it out" with his confidante about that
matter of good being made to come out of evil.

"O Jeff!" exclaimed the horrified old lady when he entered, "wounded?
perhaps fatally!"

"Not quite so bad as that, auntie," replied Jeff, with a hearty laugh,
for Miss Millet's power to express alarm was wonderful.  "I'll soon put
myself to rights when I get back to the station.  I ought to apologise
for calling in such a plight, but I've been thinking much since I last
saw you, and I want to have a talk."

"Not till I have bound up all your wounds," said Miss Millet firmly.

Knowing that he would gain his end more quickly by giving in, Jeff
submitted to have several fingers of both hands done up with pieces of
white rag, and a slight cut across the bridge of his handsome nose
ornamented with black sticking-plaster.  He not only enjoyed the
operation with a sort of reckless joviality, but sought to gratify his
friend by encouraging her to use her appliances to the utmost, intending
to remove them all when he quitted the cottage.  The earnest little
woman availed herself fully of the encouragement, but could scarcely
refrain from laughing when she surveyed him after the operation was
completed.

"Now, auntie, have you finished?"

"Yes."

"Well then, tell me, do you really think that at all times, and in all
circumstances, God causes events that are disastrous to work out good?"

"Indeed I do," returned Miss Millet, becoming very serious and earnest
as she sat down opposite her young friend.  "No doubt there is much of
mystery connected with the subject but I can't help that any more than I
can help my beliefs.  Of course we know, because it is written, that
`_all_ things work together for good to them that love God;' but even in
the case of those who do _not_ love Him, I think He often sends sorrow
and trouble for the very purpose of driving them out of trust in
themselves, and so clearing the way to bring them to the Saviour.  And
is it not written, `Surely the wrath of man shall praise Thee?'"

The young man remained silent for a few moments.

"Well, now," he said, "what think you of this case?  The skipper whom we
rescued this afternoon, along with his wife, told me that he has been
reduced to beggary.  He owned the vessel which now lies out on the rocks
there, a total wreck.  It was his last venture.  He had put all that he
possessed into it, and not a scrap of the cargo will be saved.  Having
been a lucky man all his life previously, he said he had determined to
`chance his luck' this time, and did not insure vessel or cargo: so that
all is gone.  His wife and several children are dependent on him.  He
has no relatives rich enough, or willing enough, to help him; and, poor
fellow, he has received injuries while being rescued, which will
probably render him helpless for the rest of his life.  Now, do you
think that good will come out of all that?"

"I am _sure_ it will," returned Miss Millet confidently, "and good to
_him_ too if he seeks it; though of course I know not how or when."

"But why are you so sure?"

"Because, Jeff, it is written that God does not `afflict the children of
men willingly.'  He does it for their good, and that good cannot fail of
accomplishment, unless they refuse the good and choose the evil."

Again Jeff became silent and thoughtful.  "I have meditated much of
late," he said, "about Captain Millet's adventure in China--"

"By the way," interrupted Miss Millet, "that reminds me that the
captain's little girl Rose--Rosebud, as he calls her--is to come here
this very evening to stay with me for a week."

"Indeed? that will be pleasant, auntie.  I must come and see her as an
old acquaintance."

"Oh yes, you must, Jeff.  You've no idea what a sweet girl she has
become.  I am quite charmed with her--so modest, and unselfish, and
clever, and good, and--and, in short, I call her the four F's, for she
is fair, fragile, fervent, and funny."

"What a catalogue!" exclaimed the youth, laughing; "you may well be
charmed with her.  But what do you mean by funny?  Does she try to make
people laugh?"

"Oh dear, no!  In company she can scarce be made to speak at all, but
she _is_ so fond of fun--has such a lively appreciation of humour, and
laughs _so_ heartily.  She has grown quite into a woman since I last saw
her when her father went to sea.  There she is!"

Miss Millet sprang from her chair with the agility almost of a young
woman, and ran to open the door, for a cab was heard pulling up in front
of the cottage.

There was a delighted little shriek from "Auntie!" and the warmest
salutations of welcome; and the next moment Miss Millet, with the
captain's daughter, arm in arm, embracing one another, entered the
parlour.

The coastguardsman was transfixed, for there, before him, flushed and
panting, stood--

  "A maid with eyes of heavenly blue,
  And rippling hair of golden hue;
  With parted lips of Coral too,
  Disclosing pearls--and--"

All the rest of it!  Yes, no wonder that Jeffrey Benson was transfixed.
Still less wonder that Rosebud stood in much the same condition; for, a
young giant in pilot-cloth, damp and dirty, dishevelled, bespattered
with mud, tied up about the fingers and plastered over the nose, was not
precisely what she had expected to find in Aunt Millet's parlour.

They were soon introduced, however, and on the best of terms; for the
shrinking from Jeff's filthy appearance changed in a moment to
hero-worship in the romantic heart of Rose, when she was told the cause
of the youth's condition, and heard all the details of the rescue from
his own manly lips.

It was love at first sight with both of them; more than that, it was
first love at first sight!  We have profound sympathy with young people
thus circumstanced, especially when they are reticent, and don't give
way to sentimental silliness.  A good manly and womanly case of this
sort of love, in which the parties concerned take a serious header and
go deep down, without the smallest intention of ever coming up again, is
pleasant to contemplate and agreeable to record.

Of course it must not be supposed that Rose Millet understood what had
happened.  She was fully aware, indeed, that something unusual had
occurred within her inexperienced breast, but she quietly set it down to
hero-worship.  She had read Carlyle on that subject.  She had seen
occasional reference in newspapers and magazines to lifeboat work, and
she had been thrilled by the record of noble deeds done by heroic seamen
and coastguardsmen.  At last it was her lot to come athwart one of those
heroes.  He quite came up to her conception--nay, more than came up to
it!  She regarded Jeff with feelings approaching to awe.  The idea of
love in connection with a damp, dirty, wounded, nose-plastered,
hair-ravelled giant, with beard enough to make an average hearth-broom,
never entered her fair head.  If suggested to her she would have laughed
it to scorn--had it been possible for one so bright and "funny" to
become scornful.

As for Jeff--he more than suspected what had happened in regard to
himself.  His experience of life had been varied and extensive for his
years--at least in a nautical direction--and that is saying a great
deal.

"Done for!" he remarked to himself that evening, as he left the
residence of Miss Millet and sauntered slowly homeward, divesting his
fingers of the wrappings in an absent manner as he went along; but he
forgot the plastered nose, and was taken to task about it by his
comrades.

"Why, wherever did you get the stickin'-plaster?" asked David Bowers, an
Anglo-Saxon much like himself in form and size, only that his locks and
beard were yellow instead of dark brown.

