props were knocked away from the ship, she would slide by her own weight
into the sea.  Ships are always built on sloping stocks near to the
water's edge; for you can fancy how difficult it would be to drag such a
great thing into the water by main force.  In order to make her slip
more easily, the "ways," down which she slides, are covered with grease.

Very soon the crowds of people stood in silence, expecting the great
event of the day; and, as the moment drew nigh, the band, which had been
playing all morning, suddenly stopped.  Davy became very anxious,
because he was so little that he could not see in the crowd; but,
observing a post near at hand, he struggled towards it and climbed to
the top of it.  Here he saw famously.  The workmen had begun to knock
away the props; there was just one remaining.  At this moment a lady
stepped forward with a bottle of wine in her hand to christen the ship.
This she did by breaking the bottle against the cutwater; just at that
instant she began to move.  Another second and the _Fair Nancy_ rushed
down the incline, plunged heavily into the water like some awful
sea-monster, and floated out upon her ocean home amid the deafening
cheers of the people, especially of little Davy, who sat on the top of
the post waving his red cap and shouting with delight.

After the launch Davy and all the people returned home, and the _Fair
Nancy_ was towed to the "shear-hulk" to have her masts put in.  The
shear-hulk is a large ship in which is placed machinery for lifting
masts into other ships.  Every one who has looked at the thick masts of
a large vessel, must see at a glance that they could never be put there
by any number of men.  Machinery is used to do it, and the shear-hulk
contains that machinery; so that when a ship has to get her masts put up
she is dragged alongside of this vessel.  In the meantime Davy renewed
his prayer to his father to let him go to sea, and at last the old man
consented.  His mother cried a good deal at first, and hoped that Davy
would not think of it; but his father said that it would do him good,
and if he became tired of it after the first voyage he could give it up.
Davy was overjoyed at this, and went immediately to his friend the
fisherman, Ben Block, who was very much delighted too, and took him to a
shop to buy clothes and a sea-chest for the voyage.

"You see, lad," said Ben, "the ship is bound for Quebec with a mixed
cargo, and is to come back loaded with timber; and as the season is
coming on, you'll need to get ready quick."

"That I shall," replied Davy, as they entered a shop.  "Ho! shopman,
give me a straw hat, and a blue jacket, and a pair o' duck trousers,
and--"

"Stop! stop!" cried Ben, "you're sailing too fast.  Take in a reef, my
lad."  Ben meant by this that he was to proceed a little slower.
"You'll want a `sou'-wester,'" (an oilskin hat), "and a `dread-nought,'"
(a thick, heavy coat), "and things o' that sort."

After Davy had bought all he wanted, and ordered a sea-chest, he went
home to his mother, who was very sad at the thought of parting with him.
When the day of departure came she gave him a great deal of good
advice, which Davy promised, with tears in his eyes, to remember.  Then
she gave him a little Bible and a kiss, and sent him away.  His father
took him to the beach, where the ship's boat was waiting for him; and,
as the old man took off his cap, and raising his eyes to heaven, prayed
for a blessing on his little son, Davy, with watery eyes, looked around
at the big ships floating on the water, and, for the first time, wished
that he was not going to sea.

In a few minutes he was on board the "outward-bound" ship.  This is what
we say of ships when they are going out to sea; when they return from a
voyage we say that they are "homeward-bound."  The _Fair Nancy_ was a
noble ship, and as she hoisted her snow-white sails to a strong wind, (a
stiff breeze, as Ben Block called it), she looked like a white cloud.
The cloud seemed to grow smaller and smaller as Davy's father and mother
watched it from the shore; then it became like a little white spot on
the faraway sea; then it passed over the line where the water meets the
sky, and they saw it no more!

After Davy had cried a great deal, and wished very often that he had not
been so determined to leave home, he dried his eyes and began to take
great interest in the curious things he saw around him.  What surprised
him most of all was, that although he actually was at sea, he could not
see the sea at all!  This was because the sides of the ship, which are
called "bulwarks," were so high that they quite prevented the little boy
from seeing overboard.  Davy soon found an opening in the bulwarks,
however, which his friend Ben called the "gang-way," through which he
could see the water and the ships and boats that were sailing there.
And when he mounted the high part of the deck in front of the ship,
which is called the "forecastle," or when he went upon the high deck at
the stern of the ship, which is called the "poop," then he could see all
round.  And what a wonderful and new sight it was to Davy!  His cottage
was gone!  The beach, and the pier where the nets used to hang, were
gone.  The trees and fields were all gone, and there was nothing but
sea, sea, sea, all round, so that the _Fair Nancy_ seemed the only solid
thing in the whole wide world!  But poor Davy did not look or wonder
long at this, for the breeze freshened, and the waves rose, and the ship
plunged, and Davy felt very queer about the stomach!  There is a man in
every ship called the "steward," and everybody loves that man, because
he goes about from morning till night trying to do people good and to
make them happy.  He looks after breakfasts, dinners, teas, and suppers.
He answers every one who calls, and gets for everybody anything that
they want.  He is never ill, never in a hurry, never in a bad temper; in
fact, he is a very charming man.

Now, when the steward saw Davy with a pale face, and red eyes, and
awfully seasick, he went up to him with a smile, and said, "Sick, my
lad? you'll soon get used to it.  Always sick when you first go to sea.
Come below and I'll give you summat to do you good, and tumble you into
your hammock."  By going below the good steward meant going below the
