Pushing past these sad evidences of former suffering, and feeling that
the same fate might await themselves, they came to a sight which tended
slightly to restore their spirits.  It was a pool of water of
considerable size, whether a spring or a rain-pool they could not tell.
Neither did they care at that time, for the sudden feeling of relieved
anxiety was so great, that they ran forward, as if under one impulse,
and, lying down on their breasts, took a long refreshing draught.  So
powerful was the influence of this refreshment and discovery on their
spirits that they became totally regardless and forgetful for the moment
about food--all the more that, having so recently had a good meal, they
were not hungry.

"I was sure we would find water," said Otto, as they continued to
explore the thicket, "and I've no doubt that we shall find yams and
plantains and breadfruits, and--aren't these the sort of things that
grow wild on coral islands, Dom?"

"Yes, but I fear not on such a little scrap of reef as this.  However,
we shall not be quite destitute, for there are cocoa-nuts, you see--
though not many of them.  Come, our prospects are brightening, and as
the sun is beginning to sink, we will look out for a suitable
camping-ground."

"As far away from the skeleton, please, as possible," said Otto.

"Surely you don't suppose it can hurt you?" said Pauline.

"N-no, of course not, but it would be unpleasant to have it for a
bedfellow, you know; so, the further away from it the better."

As he spoke they emerged from the thicket, at the end opposite to the
spot where they had entered, and had their spirits again powerfully
cheered by coming suddenly into a blaze of sunshine, for the bright orb
of day was descending at that side of the islet, and his red,
resplendent rays were glowing on the reef and on the palm-trees.

They also came in full view of the islet beyond, which, they now
perceived, was of considerable size, and covered with vegetation, but,
as Dominick had suspected, separated completely from the reef or outer
isle on which they stood by a deep lagoon.

"Splendid!" exclaimed Pauline.

"As I feared," muttered Dominick, "and no means of reaching it."

"Pooh!  Didn't Robinson Crusoe make rafts?" said Otto; "at least if he
didn't, somebody else did, and anyhow _we_ can."

"Come, let us continue our walk," said Dominick.  "You don't fully
appreciate the loss of our boat Otto.  Don't you see that, even if we do
build a raft, it will at best be a clumsy thing to manage, and heavy to
pull, slow to sail, and bad to steer, and if we should chance to be on
it when a stiff breeze springs up from the land, we should probably be
driven out to sea and lost--or separated, if Pina should chance to have
been left on shore at the time."

"What a fellow you are, Dom, for supposing chances and difficulties, and
fancying they cannot be overcome," returned Otto, with the pert
self-sufficiency that characterised him.  "For my part I rather enjoy
difficulties, because of the fun of overcoming them.  Don't you see, we
three can make quite sure of never being separated by never going out on
our raft except together, so that we shall always enjoy ourselves
unitedly, or perish in company.  Then we can easily get over the
difficulty of being blown out to sea, by never going on the sea at all,
but confining ourselves entirely to the lagoon, which is large enough
for any reasonable man, and may be larger than we think, for we can't
see the whole of it from where we stand.  Then, as to sailing and rowing
slowly, we can overcome these difficulties by not being in a hurry,--
taking things easy, you know."

To this Dominick replied that there was one difficulty which his little
brother, with all his wisdom and capacity, would never overcome.

"And what may that be?" demanded Otto.

"The difficulty of being unable to talk common-sense."

"True, Dom, true, that is a great difficulty," retorted the boy, with
deep humility of aspect, "for a man's conversation is greatly affected
by the company he keeps, and with _you_ as my only male companion, I
have not much to hope for in the way of example.  But even that may be
got the better of by holding intercourse chiefly with Pina."

"But what if I refuse to talk?" said Pauline, with a laugh.

"Then will you be all the more able to listen, sister mine, which is the
most common-sense thing that you can do, except when brother Dom
speaks," said the incorrigible boy.

They had seated themselves on a bank while thus conversing, and from
their position could see over a considerable portion of the lagoon.
Suddenly Dominick pointed to an object a long way off, which was half
concealed by the shadow of an island.

"Does it not look like a canoe?" he asked eagerly.

"Can't make it out at all," said Otto, shading his eyes with his hand.

"The sun on the water dazzles one so," observed Pauline, "that it is
difficult to look steadily."

In a few moments the object which had drawn their attention sailed out
from under the shade of the island, and, breaking up into fragments,
rose into the air, proving itself to be a flock of large aquatic birds
which had been swimming in a line.

"Things are not what they seem," observed Pauline, rising and following
her brothers through a little thicket.

"What a pity!" exclaimed Otto; "I was in hopes it was a canoeful of
savages.  It would be such fun to have a real Friday to be our servant."

"More likely that our Friday would kill, cook, and eat us if he could,"
said Dominick, to the surprise of Otto, who gave it as his opinion that
savages never ate men, and asked if his brother really believed that
they did.

"Indeed I do.  We have it recorded by all the best authorities that
South Sea islanders are given to this horrible practice.  There can be
no doubt about it whatever, and the less we see of these fellows in our
present defenceless state the better."

"How little," said Pauline, "our dear father thought when he wrote for
us to go out to him in his ship, that we should be cast on an unknown
island, and the ship itself go to the bottom!"

"Little indeed, and as little did poor mother dream of such a fate,"
returned Dominick, "when she let us all go so readily, on the
understanding that we should give father no rest until we had got him to
give up business, quit Java for ever, and return home."

"Dear old mother!" said Pauline, "I wish--oh!  I wish so much that we
had not left her, even though it was to be for only a few months.  She
must be _so_ lonely, with no one to talk to--"

"You forget Pina."

"Forget--what?"

"The cat," returned Otto, unable to repress a smile, which rose in spite
of the ready tear that dimmed his eye at the mere mention of his mother.
"You know the cat is her great resource--a sort of safety-valve.
Sometimes, when I've been listening to her, lying on the rug at her feet
half asleep, I've heard her talk to that cat as if it really was a human
being, and tell it all about her little affairs and daily troubles and
worries in quite a confidential tone.  I've taken it into my head that
that's mother's way of thinking aloud--she thinks at the cat, for
company: and to do the brute justice, it does its best to accommodate
her.  I've seen it sit and stare at her by the half-hour at a time, and
give a little purr or a meaiow now and then as if it wanted to speak.
I'm quite sure it thinks, and wonders no doubt what idle, useless work
it is to click knitting-needles together by the hour."

"Dear me, Otto," said Pauline, with a laugh, "I had no idea that you
could think so much about anything."

"Think!" exclaimed the boy, indignantly; "d'you suppose that it's only
stern-browed, long-legged fellows like Dom there who can think?  Why, I
think, and think, sometimes, to such an extent that I nearly think
myself inside out!  But, Pina, you don't know half as much about
motherkin as I do, for when _you_ are with her she usually forgets
_herself_, I can see, and talks only about the things that interest
_you_; whereas, when there's nobody present but _me_, she counts me for
nothing, and lets me do pretty much what I like--because no doubt she
thinks I'll do that whether she lets me or not--but she's wrong, for I
love her far more than she thinks; and then it's when I'm quiet and she
forgets me, I fancy, or thinks I'm asleep, that she comes out strong at
the cat."

"Darling mother!" said Pauline, musingly.  "I can see her now, in my
mind, with her neat black cap and smooth braided hair, and gold
spectacles, as plain as if she were sitting before me."

"I'm sorry to destroy the vision, Pina, on my own account as well as
yours," observed Dominick, "but it behoves us now to look for a night's
lodging, for the sun is sinking fast, and it would not be pleasant to
lie down on the bare ground shelterless, fine though the climate is.
Come, we will return to the place where we landed, and search for a cave
or a bit of overhanging rock."

The best sleeping-place that they had up to that time discovered was
undoubtedly the grove in which they had found the graves of the
shipwrecked crew, but, as Otto truly remarked, it would probably result
in uncomfortable dreams if they were to go to sleep in a burying-ground,
alongside of a skeleton.

Accordingly they returned to the beach, and sought for some time among
the _debris_ of the boat for anything useful that might have been washed
up, but found nothing.  Then they went along-shore in the direction of
the wreck which had raised their hopes so high that day when first seen,
but nothing suitable was discovered until they rounded a low point of
rocks, when Pauline came to a sudden pause.

"Look! a golden cave!" she exclaimed, pointing eagerly to a grassy spot
which was canopied by feathery palms, and half enclosed by coral rocks,
where was a cavern into which the sinking sun streamed at the moment
with wonderful intensity.

Their home for that night obviously lay before them, but when they
entered it and sat down, their destitution became sadly apparent.  No
beds to spread, no food to prepare, nothing whatever to do but lie down
and sleep.

"No matter, we're neither hungry nor thirsty," said Dominick, with an
air of somewhat forced gaiety, "and our clothes are getting dry.  Come,
sister, you must be weary.  Lie down at the inner side of the cave, and
Otto and I, like faithful knights, will guard the entrance.  I--I wish,"
he added, in a graver tone, and with some hesitation, "that we had a
Bible, that we might read a verse or two before lying down."

"I can help you in that," said his sister, eagerly.  "I have a fair
memory, you know, and can repeat a good many verses."

Pauline repeated the twenty-third Psalm in a low, sweet voice.  When she
had finished, a sudden impulse induced Dominick, who had never prayed
aloud before, to utter a brief but fervent prayer and thanksgiving.
Then the three lay down in the cave, and in five minutes were sound
asleep.

Thus appropriately did these castaways begin their sojourn on a spot
which was destined to be their home for a long time to come.



CHAPTER THREE.

EXPLORATIONS AND DISCOVERIES.

As the sun had bathed the golden cave when our castaways went to sleep,
so it flooded their simple dwelling when they awoke.

"Then," exclaims the intelligent reader, "the sun must have risen in the
west!"

By no means, good reader.  Whatever man in his wisdom, or weakness, may
do or say, the great luminaries of day and night hold on the even tenor
of their way unchanged.  But youth is a wonderful compound of strength,
hope, vitality, carelessness, and free-and-easy oblivion, and, in the
unconscious exercise of the last capacity, Pauline and her brothers had
slept as they lay down, without the slightest motion, all through that
night, all through the gorgeous sunrise of the following morning, all
through the fervid noontide and the declining day, until the setting sun
again turned their resting-place into a cave of gold.

The effect upon their eyelids was such that they winked, and awoke with
a mighty yawn.  We speak advisedly.  There were not three separate
awakenings and three distinct yawns; no, the rousing of one caused the
rousing of the others in succession so rapidly that the yawns,
commencing with Pauline's treble, were prolonged, through Otto's tenor
down to Dominick's bass, in one stupendous monotone or slide, which the
last yawner terminated in a groan of contentment.  Nature, during the
past few days, had been doubly defrauded, and she, having now partially
repaid herself, allowed her captives to go free with restored vigour.
There was, however, enough of the debt still unpaid to induce a desire
in the captives to return of their own accord to the prison-house of
Oblivion, but the desire was frustrated by Otto, who, sitting up
suddenly and blinking at the sun with owlish gravity, exclaimed--

"Well, I never!  We've only slept five minutes!"

"The sun hasn't set _yet_!"

Dominick, replying with a powerful stretch and another yawn, also raised
himself on one elbow and gazed solemnly in front of him.  A gleam of
intelligence suddenly crossed his countenance.

"Why, boy, when we went to sleep the sun was what you may call six feet
above the horizon; now it is twelve feet if it is an inch, so that if it
be still setting, it must be setting upwards--a phenomenon of which the
records of astronomical research make no mention."

"But it _is_ setting?" retorted Otto, with a puzzled look, "for I never
heard of your astronomical searchers saying that they'd ever seen the
sun rise in the same place where it sets."

"True, Otto, and the conclusion I am forced to is that we have slept
right on from sunset to sunset."

"So, then, we've lost a day," murmured Pauline, who in an attitude of
helpless repose, had been winking with a languid expression at the
luminous subject of discussion.

"Good morning, Pina," said Dominick.

"Good evening, you mean," interrupted his brother.  "Well, good evening.
It matters little which; how have you slept?"

"Soundly--oh, so soundly that I don't want to move."

"Well, then, don't move; I'll rise and get you some breakfast."

"Supper," interposed Otto.

"Supper be it; it matters not.--But don't say we've lost a day, sister
mine.  As regards time, indeed, we have; but in strength I feel that I
have gained a week or more."

"Does any one know," said Otto, gazing with a perplexed expression at
the sky--for he had lain back again with his hands under his head--"does
any one know what day it was when we landed?"

"Thursday, I think," said Dominick.

"Oh no," exclaimed Pauline; "surely it was Wednesday or Tuesday; but the
anxiety and confusion during the wreck, and our terrible sufferings
afterwards in the little boat, have quite confused my mind on that
point."

"Well, now, here's a pretty state of things," continued Otto, sleepily;
"we've lost one day, an' we don't agree about three others, and Dom says
he's gained a week! how are we ever to find out when Sunday comes, I
should like to know?  There's a puzzler--a reg'lar--puzzl'--puz--"

A soft snore told that "tired Nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep," had
again taken the little fellow captive, and prolonged silence on the part
of the other two proved them to have gone into similar captivity.
Nature had not recovered her debt in full.  She was in an exacting mood,
and held them fast during the whole of another night.  Then she set them
finally free at sunrise on the following day, when the soft yellow light
streamed on surrounding land and sea, converting their sleeping-place
into a silver cave by contrast.

There was no languid or yawny awakening on this occasion.  Dominick sat
up the instant his eyes opened, then sprang to his feet, and ran out of
the cave.  He was followed immediately by Otto and Pauline, the former
declaring with emphasis that he felt himself to be a "new man."

"Yes, Richard's himself again," said Dominick, as he stretched himself
with the energy of one who rejoices in his strength.  "Now, Pina, we've
got a busy day before us.  We must find out what our islet contains in
the way of food first, for I am ravenously hungry, and then examine its
other resources.  It is very beautiful.  One glance suffices to tell us
that.  And isn't it pleasant to think that it is all our own?"

"`The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof,'" said his sister,
softly.

The youth's gaiety changed into a deeper and nobler feeling.  He looked
earnestly at Pauline for a few seconds.

"Right, Pina, right," he said.  "To tell you the truth, I was
half-ashamed of my feelings that time when I broke into involuntary
prayer and thanksgiving.  I'm ashamed now of having been ashamed.  Come,
sister, you shall read the Word of God from memory, and I will pray
every morning and evening as long as we shall dwell here together."
