plunged into a seething caldron, whence it issued in a troubled stream
to the plain that opened out below.  It here found rest in the level
fields of Ulfstede, that lay at the head of the fiord.  The open
amphitheatre above this pass, with its circlet of grand glacier-capped
mountains, was the abode of a considerable number of small farmers, in
the midst of whose dwellings stood the residence of Haldor, where the
meeting in the smithy just described took place.

It was in this narrow defile that the landslip happened, a catastrophe
which always has been and still is of frequent occurrence in the
mountain regions of Norway.

Hilda and the old man (whom we shall henceforth call Christian) cast
their eyes hastily upwards on hearing the sound that had arrested
Erling's steps so suddenly.  The enormous mass of rock was detached from
the hill on the other side of the river, but the defile was so narrow
that falling rocks often rebounded quite across it.  The slip occurred
just opposite the spot on which Hilda and the old man stood, and as the
terrible shower came on, tearing down trees and rocks, the heavier
masses being dashed and spurned from the hillside in innumerable
fragments, it became evident that to escape beyond the range of the
chaotic deluge was impossible.

Hilda understood the danger so well that she was panic stricken and
rooted to the spot.  Erling understood it also, and, with a sudden cry,
dashed at full speed to the rescue.  His cry was one almost of despair,
for the distance between them was so great that he had no chance, he
knew, of reaching her in time.

In this extremity the hermit looked round for a crevice or a rock which
might afford protection, but no such place of safety was at hand.  The
side of the pass rose behind them like a wall to a height of several
hundred feet.  Seeing this at a glance the old man planted himself
firmly in front of Hilda.  His lips moved, and the single word "Jesus"
dropped from them as he looked with a calm steady gaze at the avalanche.

Scarcely had he taken his stand when the first stones leaped across the
gorge, and, striking on the wall of rock behind, burst into fragments
and fell in a shower around them.  Some of the smaller _debris_ struck
the old man's breast, and the hands which he had raised to protect his
face; but he neither blanched nor flinched.  In another instant the
greater part of the hurling rubbish fell with a terrible crash and tore
up the earth in all directions round them.  Still they stood unhurt!
The height from which the ruin had descended was so great that the
masses were scattered, and although they flew around over, and close to
them, the great shock passed by and left them unscathed.

But the danger was not yet past.  Several of the smaller masses, which
had been partially arrested in their progress by bushes, still came
thundering down the steep.  The quick eye of the hermit observed one of
these flying straight towards his head.  Its force had been broken by a
tree on the opposite hill, but it still retained tremendous impetus.  He
knew that there was no escape for him.  To have moved aside would have
exposed Hilda to almost certain destruction.  Once again he murmured the
Saviour's name, as he stretched out both hands straight before his face.
The rock struck full against them, beat them down on his forehead, and
next instant old man and maid were hurled to the ground.

Well was it for Erling that all this occurred so quickly that the danger
was past before he reached the spot.  Part of the road he had to
traverse was strewn so thickly with the rocky ruin that his destruction,
had he been a few seconds sooner on the ground, would have been
inevitable.  He reached Hilda just in time to assist her to rise.  She
was slightly stunned by the shock, but otherwise unhurt.

Not so the hermit.  He lay extended where he had fallen; his grey beard
and thin scattered locks dabbled with blood that flowed from a gash in
his forehead.  Hilda kneeled at his side, and, raising his head, she
laid it in her lap.

"Now the gods be praised," said Erling, as he knelt beside her, and
endeavoured to stanch the flow of blood from the wound; "I had thought
thy last hour was come, Hilda; but the poor old man, I fear much he will
die."

"Not so; he recovers," said the girl; "fetch me some water from the
spring."

Erling ran to a rill that trickled down the face of the rock at his
side, dipped his leathern bonnet into it, and, quickly returning,
sprinkled a little on the old man's face, and washed the wound.

"It is not deep," he remarked, after having examined the cut.  "His
hands are indeed badly bruised, but he will live."

"Get thee to the stede, Erling, and fetch aid," said Hilda quickly; "the
old man is heavy."

The youth smiled.  "Heavy he is, no doubt, but he wears no armour;
methinks I can lift him."

So saying Erling raised him in his strong arms and bore him away to
Ulfstede, where, under the tender care of Hilda and her foster-sister
Ada, he speedily revived.

Erling went out meanwhile to assist in the hayfield.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The great assembly, or parliament, which was considered the
only "Thing" which could confer the sovereignty of the whole of Norway,
the other Things having no right or powers beyond their circles.  It was
convened only for the special purpose of examining and proclaiming the
right of the aspirant to the crown, but the King had still to repair to
each Law Thing or Small Thing to obtain its acknowledgement of his right
and the power of a sovereign within its jurisdiction.



CHAPTER THREE.

SHOWS HOW CHIEF FRIENDS MAY BECOME FOES, AND CROSS-PURPOSES MAY PRODUCE
CROSS CONSEQUENCES, INVOLVING WORRY AND CONFUSION.

When Christian had been properly cared for, Hilda sent Ada to the
hayfield, saying that she would follow her in a short time.  Now it so
happened, by one of those curious coincidences which are generally
considered unaccountable, that as Ada ascended the track which led to
the high field above the foss, Glumm the Gruff descended towards the
same point from an opposite direction, so that a meeting between the
two, in the secluded dell, where the tracks joined, became inevitable.

Whether or not this meeting was anticipated we cannot tell.  If it was,
the young man and maiden were inimitable actors by nature, for they
appeared to be wholly unconscious of aught save the peculiar formation
of the respective footpaths along which they slowly moved.  There was,
indeed, a twinkle in Ada's eyes; but then Ada's eyes were noted
twinklers; besides, a refractory eyelash might account for such an
expression.

As for Glumm, he frowned on the path most unamiably while he sauntered
along with both hands thrust into the breast of his tunic, and the point
of his sword rasping harshly against rocks and bushes.  Glumm was
peculiar in his weapons.  He wore a double-handed and double-edged
sword, which was so long that he was obliged to sling it across his back
in order to keep it off the ground.  The handle projected above his left
shoulder, and the blade, lying diagonally across his person, extended
beyond his right calf.  The young man was remarkably expert in the use
of this immense weapon, and was not only a terror to his foes, but,
owing to the enormous sweep of its long blade, an object of some anxiety
to his friends when they chanced to be fighting alongside of him.  He
wore a knife or dagger at his girdle on the right side, which was also
of unusual size; in all probability it would have been deemed a pretty
good sword by the Romans.  There were only two men in the dale who could
wield Glumm's weapons.  These were Erling and his father, Haldor.  The
latter was as strong a man as Glumm, Erling was even stronger; though,
being an amiable man he could not be easily persuaded to prove his
strength upon his friends.  Glumm wore his hair very short.  It was
curly, and lay close to his head.

As he sauntered along he kicked the stones out of his way savagely, and
appeared to find relief to his feelings in so doing, as well as by
allowing his sword to rasp across the rocks and shrubs at his side.  It
might have been observed, however, that Glumm only kicked the little
stones out of his way; he never kicked the big ones.  It is interesting
to observe how trifling a matter will bring out a trait of human nature!
Men will sometimes relieve their angry feelings by storming violently
at those of their fellows who cannot hurt them, but, strangely enough,
they manage to obtain relief to these same feelings without storming,
when they chance to be in the company of stronger men than themselves,
thereby proving that they have powers of self-restraint which prudence--
not to say fear--can call into exercise! commend this moral reflection
particularly to the study of boys.

After Glumm had kicked all the _little_ stones out of his way, carefully
letting the big ones alone, he came suddenly face to face with Ada, who
saluted him with a look of startled surprise, a slight blush, and a
burst of hearty laughter.

"Why, Glumm," exclaimed the maiden, with an arch smile, "thou must have
risen off thy wrong side this morning.  Methinks, now, were I a man, I
should have to look to my weapons, for that long blade of thine seems
inclined to fight with the rocks and shrubs of its own accord."

Poor Glumm blushed as red as if he had been a young girl, at being thus
unexpectedly caught giving vent to his ill-humour; he stammered
something about bad dreams and evil spirits, and then, breaking into a
good-humoured smile, said:

"Well, Ada, I know not what it is that ails me, but I do feel somewhat
cross-grained.  Perchance a walk with thee may cure me, I see thou art
bound for the hayfield.  But hast thou not heard the news?  The Danish
vikings are off the coast, burning and murdering wherever they go.  It
is rumoured, too, that their fleet is under that king of scoundrels,
Skarpedin the Red.  Surely there is reason for my being angry."

"Nay, then, if thou wert a bold man thou wouldst find reason in this for
being glad," replied Ada.  "Is not the chance of a fight the joy of a
true Norseman's heart?  Surely a spell must have been laid on thee, if
thy brow darkens and thy heart grows heavy on hearing of a stout enemy.
It is not thus with Erling the Bold.  His brow clears and his eye
sparkles when a foe worthy of--But what seest thou, Glumm?  Has the Dane
appeared in the forest that thy brow becomes so suddenly clouded?  I
pray thee do not run away and leave me unprotected."

"Doubtless if I did, Erling the Bold would come to thine aid," replied
the young man with some asperity.

"Nay, do not be angry with me, Glumm," said the girl, laughing, as they
reached the field where Haldor and his stout son were busily at work
assisting Ulf, who, with all his thralls and freemen, was engaged in
cutting and gathering in his hay.

"Hey! here come cloud and sunshine hand in hand," cried Erling, pausing
in his work, as Glumm and his pretty companion approached the scene of
labour.

"Get on with thy work, then, and make the hay while I am shining,"
retorted Ada, bestowing on the youth a bright smile, which he returned
cheerfully and with interest.

This was the wicked Ada's finishing touch.  Glumm saw the exchange of
smiles, and a pang of fierce jealousy shot through his breast.

"The cloud sometimes darts out lightning," he muttered angrily, and,
turning on his heel, began to toss the hay with all his might in order
to relieve his feelings.

Just then Hilda entered the field, and Glumm, putting strong constraint
on himself, accosted her with extreme cheerfulness and respect--resolved
in his heart to show Ada that there were other girls in Horlingdal worth
courting besides herself.  In this game he was by no means successful as
regarded Ada, who at once discerned his intention, but the shaft which
flew harmlessly past her fixed itself deep in the breast of another
victim.  Glumm's unusual urbanity took the kind-hearted Hilda so much by
surprise, that she was interested, and encouraged him, in what she
conceived to be a tendency towards improvement of disposition, by
bestowing on him her sweetest smiles during the course of the day,
insomuch that Erling the Bold became much surprised, and at last
unaccountably cross.

Thus did these two men, who had for many years been fast and loving
friends, become desperately jealous, though each sought to conceal the
fact from the other.  But the green-eyed monster having obtained a
lodgment in their bosoms, could not be easily cast out.  Yet the good
sense of each enabled him to struggle with some success against the
passion, for Glumm, although gruff, was by no means a bad man.

The presence of those conflicting feelings did not, however, interrupt
or retard the work of the field.  It was a truly busy scene.  Masters,
unfreemen, and thralls, mistresses and maidens, were there, cutting and
turning and piling up the precious crop with might and main; for they
knew that the weather could not be trusted to, and the very lives of
their cattle depended on the successful ingathering of the hay.

As we have here mentioned the three different classes that existed in
Norway, it may be well to explain that the masters were peasants or
"bonders", but not by any means similar to peasants in other lands; on
the contrary, they were the udal-born proprietors of the soil--the
peasant-nobility, so to speak, the Udallers, or freeholders, without any
superior lord, and were entitled to attend and have a voice in the
"Things" or assemblies where the laws were enacted and public affairs
regulated.  The next class was that of the "unfreemen".  These were
freed slaves who had wrought out or purchased their freedom, but who,
although personally free, and at liberty to go where and serve whom they
pleased, were not free to attend the legislative assemblies.  They were
unfree of the Things, and hence their apparently contradictory
designation.  They, however, enjoyed the protection and civil rights
imparted by the laws, and to their class belonged all the cottars on the
land paying a rent in work on the farm of the bonder or udaller, also
the house-carles or freeborn indoormen, and the tradesmen, labourers,
fishermen, etcetera, about villages and farms.  Thralls were slaves
taken in war, over whom the owners had absolute control.  They might
sell them, kill them, or do with them as they pleased.  Thralls were
permitted to purchase their freedom--and all the descendants of those
freed thralls, or unfreemen, were free.

The clothing of the unfreemen was finer than that of the thralls.  The
legs and arms of nearly all were bare from the knees and elbows
downward, though a few had swathed their limbs in bands of rough woollen
cloth, while others used straw for this purpose.  Nearly all the men
wore shoes of untanned leather, and caps of the same material, or of
rough homespun cloth, resembling in form the cap of modern fishermen.
The udallers, such as Haldor, Ulf, and their children, were clad in
finer garments, which were looped and buttoned with brooches and
pendants of gold and silver, the booty gathered on those viking cruises,
against which Hilda inveighed so earnestly.

The work went on vigorously until the sun began to sink behind the
mountain range that lay to the north-westward of the dale.  By this time
the hay was all cut, and that portion which was sufficiently dry piled
up, so Ulf and Haldor left the work to be finished by the younger hands,
and stood together in the centre of the field chatting and looking on.

Little change had taken place in the personal appearance of Ulf of
Romsdal since the occasion of that memorable duel related in the first
chapter of our story.  Some of his elasticity, but none of his strength,
was gone.  There was perhaps a little more thought in his face, and a
few more wrinkles on his swarthy brow, but his hair was still black and
his figure straight as the blade of his good sword.  His old enemy but
now fast friend, Haldor the Fierce, had changed still less.  True, his
formerly smooth chin and cheeks were now thickly covered with luxuriant
fair hair, but his broad forehead was still unwrinkled, and his clear
blue eye was as bright as when, twenty years before, it gleamed in
youthful fire at Ulf.  Many a battle had Haldor fought since then, at
home and abroad, and several scars on his countenance and shoulders gave
evidence that he had not come out of these altogether scathless; but war
had not soured him.  His smile was as free, open, and honest, and his
laugh as loud and hearty, as in days of yore.  Erling was the
counterpart of his father, only a trifle taller and stouter.  At a short
distance they might have been taken for twin brothers, and those who did
not know them could scarcely have believed that they were father and
son.

Close to the spot where the two friends stood, a sturdy thrall was
engaged in piling up hay with an uncommon degree of energy.  This man
had been taken prisoner on the coast of Ireland by Ulf, during one of
his sea-roving expeditions.  He had a huge massive frame, with a
profusion of red hair on his head and face, and a peculiarly humorous
twinkle in his eye.  His name was Kettle Flatnose.  We have reason to
believe that the first part of this name had no connection with that
domestic utensil which is intimately associated with tea!  It was a mere
accidental resemblance of sound no doubt.  As to the latter part, that
is easily explained.  In those days there were no surnames.  In order to
distinguish men of the same name from each other, it was usual to
designate them by their complexions, or by some peculiarity of person or
trait of character.  A blow from a club in early life had destroyed the
shape of Kettle's nose, and had disfigured an otherwise handsome and
manly countenance.  Hence his name.  He was about thirty-five years of
age, large-boned, broad-shouldered, and tall, but lean in flesh, and
rather ungainly in his motions.  Few men cared to grapple with the huge
Irish slave, for he possessed a superabundant share of that fire and
love of fight which are said to characterise his countrymen even at the
present time.  He was also gifted with a large share of their
characteristic good humour and joviality; which qualities endeared him
to many of his companions, especially to the boys of the neighbourhood.
In short, there was not a better fellow in the dale than Kettle
Flatnose.

"Thy labour is not light, Kettle," observed Ulf to the thrall as he
paused for a few moments in the midst of his work to wipe his heated
brow.

"Ill would it become me, master," replied the man, "to take my work easy
when my freedom is so nearly gained."

"Right, quite right," replied Ulf with an approving nod, as the thrall
set to work again with redoubled energy.

"That man," he added, turning to Haldor, "will work himself free in a
few weeks hence.  He is one of my best thralls.  I give my slaves, as
thou knowest, leave to work after hours to purchase their freedom, and
Kettle labours so hard that he is almost a free man already, though he
has been with me little more than two years and a half.  I fear the
fellow will not remain with me after he is free, for he is an unsettled
spirit.  He was a chief in his own land, it seems, and left a bride
behind him, I am told.  If he goes, I lose a man equal to two, he is so
strong and willing.--Ho!  Kettle," continued Ulf, turning to the man,
who had just finished the job on which he had been engaged, "toss me
yonder stone and let my friend Haldor see what thou art made of."

Kettle obeyed with alacrity.  He seized a round stone as large as his
own head, and, with an unwieldy action of his great frame, cast it
violently through the air about a dozen yards in advance of him.

"Well cast, well cast!" cried Haldor, while a murmur of applause rose
from the throng of labourers who had been instantly attracted to the
spot.  "Come, I will try my own hand against thee."

Haldor advanced, and, lifting the stone, balanced it for a few moments
in his right hand, then, with a graceful motion and an apparently slight
effort, hurled it forward.  It fell a foot beyond Kettle's mark.

Seeing this the thrall leaped forward, seized the stone, ran back to the
