"Had I not," said Saladin, "seen this brand flaming in the front of
battle, like that of Azrael, I had scarce believed that human arm could
wield it. Might I request to see the Melech Ric strike one blow with it
in peace and in pure trial of strength?"

"Willingly, noble Saladin," answered Richard; and looking around for
something whereon to exercise his strength, he saw a steel mace, held by
one of the attendants, the handle being of the same metal, and about an
inch and a half in diameter. This he placed on a block of wood.

The glittering broadsword, wielded by both his hands, rose aloft to the
king's left shoulder, circled round his head, descended with the sway of
some terrific engine, and the bar of iron rolled on the ground in two
pieces, as a woodman would sever a sapling with a hedging-bill.

"By the head of the Prophet, a most wonderful blow!" said the Soldan,
critically and accurately examining the iron bar which had been cut
asunder; and the blade of the sword was so well tempered as to exhibit
not the least token of having suffered by the feat it had performed. He
then took the king's hand, and looking on the size and muscular strength
which it exhibited, laughed as he placed it beside his own, so lank and
thin, so inferior in brawn and sinew.

"Ay, look well," said De Vaux in English, "it will be long ere your long
jackanape's fingers do such a feat with your fine gilded reaping-hook
there."

"Silence, De Vaux," said Richard; "by Our Lady, he understands or
guesses thy meaning--be not so broad, I pray thee."

The Soldan, indeed, presently said: "Something I would fain attempt,
though wherefore should the weak show their inferiority in presence of
the strong? Yet, each land hath its own exercises, and this may be new
to the Melech Ric." So saying, he took from the floor a cushion of silk
and down, and placed it upright on one end. "Can thy weapon, my brother,
sever that cushion?" he said to King Richard.

"No, surely," replied the king; "no sword on earth, were it the
Excalibur of King Arthur, can cut that which opposes no steady
resistance to the blow."

"Mark, then," said Saladin; and tucking up the sleeve of his gown,
showed his arm, thin indeed and spare, but which constant exercise had
hardened into a mass consisting of nought but bone, brawn, and sinew. He
unsheathed his scimitar, a curved and narrow blade, which glittered not
like the swords of the Franks, but was, on the contrary, of a dull blue
colour, marked with ten millions of meandering lines, which showed how
anxiously the metal had been welded by the armourer. Wielding this
weapon, apparently so inefficient when compared to that of Richard, the
Soldan stood resting his weight upon his left foot, which was slightly
advanced; he balanced himself a little as if to steady his aim, then,
stepping at once forward, drew the scimitar across the cushion, applying
the edge so dexterously and with so little apparent effort, that the
cushion seemed rather to fall asunder than to be divided by violence.

"It is a juggler's trick," said De Vaux, darting forward and snatching
up the portion of the cushion which had been cut off, as if to assure
himself of the reality of the feat; "there is gramarye in this."

The Soldan seemed to comprehend him, for he undid the sort of veil which
he had hitherto worn, laid it double along the edge of his sabre,
extended the weapon edgeways in the air, and drawing it suddenly through
the veil, although it hung on the blade entirely loose, severed that
also into two parts, which floated to different sides of the tent,
equally displaying the extreme temper and sharpness of the weapon and
the exquisite dexterity of him who used it.

"Now, in good faith, my brother," said Richard, "thou art even matchless
at the trick of the sword, and right perilous were it to meet thee.
Still, however, I put some faith in a downright English blow, and what
we cannot do by sleight we eke out by strength. Nevertheless, in truth
thou art as expert in inflicting wounds as my sage Hakim in curing them.
I trust I shall see the learned leech; I have much to thank him for, and
had brought some small present."

As he spoke, Saladin exchanged his turban for a Tartar cap. He had no
sooner done so, than De Vaux opened at once his extended mouth and his
large round eyes, and Richard gazed with scarce less astonishment, while
the Soldan spoke in a grave and altered voice: "The sick man, sayeth the
poet, while he is yet infirm, knoweth the physician by his step; but
when he is recovered, he knoweth not even his face when he looks upon
him."

"A miracle!--a miracle!" exclaimed Richard.

"Of Mahound's working, doubtless," said Thomas de Vaux.

"That I should lose my learned Hakim," said Richard, "merely by absence
of his cap and robe, and that I should find him again in my royal
brother Saladin!"

"Such is oft the fashion of the world," answered the Soldan: "the
tattered robe makes not always the dervish."

SCOTT: "The Talisman."




ENGLAND'S DEAD


      Son of the Ocean Isle!
      Where sleep your mighty dead?
    Show me what high and stately pile
      Is reared o'er Glory's bed.

      Go, stranger! track the deep--
      Free, free, the white sail spread!
    Wave may not foam, nor wild wind sweep,
      Where rest not England's dead.

      On Egypt's burning plains,
      By the pyramid o'erswayed,
    With fearful power the noonday reigns,
      And the palm trees yield no shade;--

      But let the angry sun
      From heaven look fiercely red,
    Unfelt by those whose task is done!--
      There slumber England's dead.

      The hurricane hath might
      Along the Indian shore,
    And far by Ganges' banks at night,
      Is heard the tiger's roar;--

      But let the sound roll on!
      It hath no tone of dread
    For those that from their toils are gone,--
      There slumber England's dead.

      Loud rush the torrent-floods
      The Western wilds among,
    And free, in green Columbia's woods,
      The hunter's bow is strung;--

      But let the floods rush on!
      Let the arrow's flight be sped!
    Why should they reck whose task is done?--
      There slumber England's dead.

      The mountain-storms rise high
      In the snowy Pyrenees,
    And toss the pine-boughs through the sky
      Like rose-leaves on the breeze;--

      But let the storm rage on!
      Let the fresh wreaths be shed!
    For the Roncesvalles' field is won,--
      There slumber England's dead.

      On the frozen deep's repose
      'Tis a dark and dreadful hour,
    When round the ship the ice-fields close,
      And the northern night-clouds lower;--

      But let the ice drift on!
      Let the cold-blue desert spread!
    Their course with mast and flag is done,
      Even there sleep England's dead.

      The warlike of the isles,
      The men of field and wave!
    Are not the rocks their funeral piles,
      The seas and shores their grave?

      Go, stranger! track the deep--
      Free, free the white sail spread!
    Wave may not foam, nor wild wind sweep,
      Where rest not England's dead.

FELICIA HEMANS




HOHENLINDEN


    On Linden, when the sun was low,
    All bloodless lay th' untrodden snow,
    And dark as winter was the flow
      Of Iser, rolling rapidly.

    But Linden saw another sight,
    When the drum beat, at dead of night,
    Commanding fires of death to light
      The darkness of her scenery.

    By torch and trumpet fast arrayed
    Each horseman drew his battle-blade,
    And furious every charger neighed,
      To join the dreadful revelry.

    Then shook the hills with thunder riven,
    Then rushed the steed to battle driven,
    And louder than the bolts of heaven,
      Far flashed the red artillery.

    But redder yet that light shall glow
    On Linden's hills of stained snow,
    And bloodier yet the torrent flow
      Of Iser, rolling rapidly.

    'Tis morn, but scarce yon level sun
    Can pierce the war-clouds, rolling dun,
    Where furious Frank, and fiery Hun,
      Shout in their sulph'rous canopy.

    The combat deepens. On, ye brave,
    Who rush to glory, or the grave!
    Wave, Munich! all thy banners wave,
      And charge with all thy chivalry!

    Few, few, shall part where many meet!
    The snow shall be their winding-sheet,
    And every turf beneath their feet
      Shall be a soldier's sepulchre.

THOMAS CAMPBELL




THE DREAM OF THE OAK TREE


There stood in a wood, high on the bank near the open sea-shore, such a
grand old oak tree! It was three hundred and sixty-five years old; but
all this length of years had seemed to the tree scarcely more than so
many days appear to us men and women, boys and girls.

A tree's life is not quite the same as a man's: we wake during the day,
and sleep and dream during the night; but a tree wakes throughout three
seasons of the year, and has no sleep till winter comes. The winter is
its sleeping time--its night after the long day which we call spring,
summer, and autumn.

It was just at the holy Christmas-tide that the oak tree dreamed his
most beautiful dream. He seemed to hear the church-bells ringing all
around, and to feel as if it were a mild, warm summer day. Fresh and
green he reared his mighty crown on high, and the sunbeams played among
his leaves. As in a festive procession, all that the tree had beheld in
his life now passed by.

Knights and ladies, with feathers in their caps and hawks perching on
their wrists, rode gaily through the wood; dogs barked, and the huntsman
sounded his bugle.

Then came foreign soldiers in bright armour and gay vestments, bearing
spurs and halberds, setting up their tents, and presently taking them
down again. Then watch-fires blazed up and bands of wild outlaws sang,
revelled, and slept under the tree's outstretched boughs; or happy
lovers met in quiet moonlight and carved their initials on the grayish
bark.

At one time a guitar and an AEolian harp had been hung among the old
oak's boughs by merry travelling apprentices; now they hung there again,
and the wind played sweetly with their strings.

And now the dream changed. A new and stronger current of life flowed
through him, down to his lowest roots, up to his highest twigs, even to
the very leaves. The tree felt in his roots that a warm life stirred in
the earth, and that he was growing taller and taller; his trunk shot up
more and more, his crown grew fuller; and still he soared and spread.
He felt that his power grew, too, and he longed to advance higher and
higher to the warm, bright sun.

Already he towered above the clouds, which drifted below him, now like a
troop of dark-plumaged birds of passage, now like flocks of large, white
swans. The stars became visible by daylight, so large and bright, each
one sparkling like a mild, clear eye.

It was a blessed moment! and yet, in the height of his joy, the oak tree
felt a desire and longing that all the other trees, bushes, herbs, and
flowers of the wood might be lifted up with him to share in his glory
and gladness. He could not be fully blessed unless he might have all,
small and great, blessed with him.

The tree's crown bowed itself as though it had missed something, and
looked backward. Then he felt the fragrance of honeysuckle and violets,
and fancied he could hear the birds. And so it was! for now peeped forth
through the clouds the green summits of the wood; the other trees below
had grown and lifted themselves up likewise; bushes and herbs shot high
into the air, some tearing themselves loose from their roots to mount
the faster.

Like a flash of white lightning the birch, moving fastest of all, shot
upward its slender stem. Even the feathery brown reeds had pierced their
way through the clouds, and the birds sang and sang, and on the grass
that fluttered to and fro like a streaming ribbon perched the
grasshopper, while cockchafers hummed and bees buzzed. All was music and
gladness.

"But the little blue flower near the water--I want that, too," said the
oak; "and the bellflower, and the dear little daisy." "We are here! we
are here!" chanted sweet low voices on all sides.

"But the pretty anemones, and the bed of lilies of the valley, and all
the flowers that bloomed so long ago,--would that they were here!" "We
are here! we are here!" was the answer, and it seemed to come from the
air above, as if they had fled upward first.

"Oh, this is too great happiness!" exclaimed the oak tree; and now he
felt that his own roots were loosening themselves from the earth. "This
is best of all," he said. "Now no bounds shall detain me. I can soar to
the heights of light and glory, and I have all my dear ones with me."

Such was the oak tree's Christmas dream. And all the while a mighty
storm swept the sea and land; the ocean rolled his heavy billows on the
shore, the tree cracked, and was rent and torn up by the roots at the
very moment when he dreamed that he was soaring to the skies.

Next day the sea was calm again, and a large vessel that had weathered
the storm hoisted all its flags for Merry Christmas. "The tree is
gone--the old oak tree, our beacon! How can its place ever be supplied?"
said the crew. This was the tree's funeral eulogium, while the Christmas
hymn re-echoed from the wood.

HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN
(Adapted)




