their hands. The most important thing is that they should know, at
Limerick, exactly what has been arranged. If you remain here, you would
almost certainly be caught also, for, as the man who has followed us will
be aware that we are together, a search will at once be made for you. So
mind, my orders are, that if you see I am in trouble you are at once to
set out for Limerick. If you think that I may manage to get away, you are
also to leave at once, but are to wait for me, for twelve hours, at the
village three miles out. If I do not come by the end of that time, it
will be that I have been taken, and you are to go straight on."

It was on the evening when all the arrangements were finally settled,
that a loud knocking was heard at the door of the house where eight of
the principal persons in the affair were assembled. One of them looked
out of the window, and announced that the street was full of soldiers.
All leaped to their feet, and drew their swords.

"It is of no use to resist, gentlemen," Walter said. "Do you put bottles
and glasses on the table, and sit down quietly. I will try to escape. If
they find you alone, they can prove nothing against you, and if I get
safe off, you also are safe. Is there any way out on to the roof? No
doubt the house is watched behind."

"There is a trapdoor," the gentleman, in whose house they were, said, and
led the way upstairs at full speed. As he was unbolting the trap, Walter
ran into a bedroom and seized an armful of blankets, then ran up the
ladder to the trapdoor, and stepped out on to the roof. The door was
closed behind him, and he heard the bolts drawn, and then his host ran
downstairs and told the frightened servants to open the doors, which had
so far resisted the attack from without. Headed by an officer, the
soldiers rushed in.

"What means this violence?" the gentleman asked. "Why is my house broken
into in this way?"

"I arrest you, and all who are in this house," the officer said, "on the
charge of treason."

"Treason!" the gentleman said, coolly. "You will find no treason here. I
have a few friends upstairs, who are cracking a bottle of port; but that
is not, so far as I am aware, against the law."

The officer ran upstairs to the room where the others were standing, as
if surprised at the tumult, round the table, on which were bottles and
half-filled glasses.

"Take the names of all these persons," the officer said to the sergeant
who followed him, "and then convey them in custody to the castle."

"There is no trouble about their names," the host said. "All are well
known and peaceful citizens, as can be testified by any magistrate."

"Where is the man who was with you?" the officer said, looking round.

"There is, so far as I am aware, no one in the house, sir, beyond these
gentlemen and my domestics."

"It is a lie!" the officer exclaimed, furiously. "A man was seen to enter
this house, an hour and a half ago, and no one has left since."

"A young man! Oh, I suppose you mean the young fellow who brought me a
message from my cousin, at Waterford, and who called to ask if I had yet
found him any employment. Oh yes, he has been here, but left some time
ago, unless he is chatting with the maids in the kitchen."

The officer directed a rigorous search to be made of the house. The
soldiers soon reported that every nook and corner had been examined, but
that no one was to be found. At this moment, a shot was fired in the
street, and a sergeant ran in.

"Captain Peters bid me say, sir, that they have just caught sight of a
man on the roof of a house, some distance along the street."

"Take the prisoners to the castle, under a strong guard, sergeant. You
will be answerable for their safety," the officer exclaimed, as he ran
downstairs.

Directly the trap closed behind him, Walter--sure that some minutes would
pass before the method of his escape was known--tore the blankets he had
brought with him into wide strips, tied the ends together, and twisted
them up into the form of a rope; then, coiling this over his arm, he made
his way along the roofs. The street below was now a mass of people. The
report that a Popish plot had been discovered, and that a number of
important arrests had been made, spread quickly, as the soldiers were
seen gathered round the house. The news was sufficient to stir up party
feelings, and the mob which collected soon set up the shout which had, of
late, been so often raised in the streets of Dublin--"Down with the
Papists!"

Soon the crashing of glass was heard, as stones were hurled at the
dwellings of known Catholics. Walter, anxious for the safety of Larry,
who was, he knew, somewhere without, tried to look down into the street
to see what was going on, believing that in the darkness he could not be
seen. The flash of a musket, and the whistle of a ball close to him,
showed him that his figure had been seen against the skyline.

Drawing back, he paused a moment in thought. The trapdoor would be
discovered at once, and a search on the roof commenced, and the soldiers
would be placed behind the houses. There was no time to be lost in
continuing his search for a house with a building projecting behind, onto
which he could lower himself with his rope, which was not nearly long
enough to reach the ground.

Looking over at the back, between two of the sharp ridges of the roofs,
he hung his rope so that it would fall across a window, fastened the end
round a stack of chimneys, and then, taking hold of it, swung himself
over. He had been very careful in tying the knots, and had tested them by
pulling at them with all his strength; but he did not feel at all certain
that they might not draw with his weight, in which case he must have been
dashed to pieces on the ground far below him; but there was no time to
hesitate, and, as fast as he could, he began to slide down the rope, the
frequent knots affording good hold for his hands.

At last he reached the window. It was made of the small diamond-shaped
panes at that time in general use. Holding the rope with one hand and his
legs, he dashed the other hand through a pane, just where he judged the
fastening inside would be. Three panes were beaten in before he felt the
latch. This was easily turned. The frame opened outward, and he had some
difficulty in pulling it past him; then, grasping the woodwork, he drew
himself in, and with a great effort succeeded in gaining a sufficient
holding to enable him to leave go of the rope, and make good his footing
inside.

He had little fear of the inmates of the house taking notice of the fall
of glass; for, had they noticed the sound above the din in the street,
they would have supposed that the breakage was caused by one of the
flying stones. He ran lightly downstairs, and opened a door at the back
of the house, and found himself in the yard. The wall was not very high,
and a spring enabled him to get his fingers on the top. He was soon
sitting there, and then dropped into the road behind.

The sound of his fall caught the ears of the soldiers, who were stationed
at the back of the house from whence he had started, some fifty yards
away. There was a sharp challenge, and then, as no answer was given, four
or five shots were fired, and there was a rush of feet along the road.

As it was only in the principal thoroughfares that a few lights were
exhibited, the road would have been in complete darkness had not the
clouds, just at that moment, blown away from the face of the moon, which
was half full.

The shots, however, had been fired hastily, and Walter dashed off at full
speed, unhurt. He heard shouts from the roofs of the houses, and one or
two shots were fired, but the chance of his being hit was but small. The
sound, however, told the soldiers and crowd in the front street that the
fugitive was escaping at the rear, and there was a general rush down the
street to the next turning. Walter was a hundred yards ahead, before the
mob reached the turning, and was rapidly distancing the soldiers who were
pursuing him. Unfortunately, however, there were many people hurrying
from all sides, attracted by the shouting and firing. Several of these,
in response to the shouts of the soldiers, tried to stop him as he dashed
past, and failing to do so, at once joined in the pursuit.

Walter saw that he must be captured, if he kept straight on, for a group
of men approaching, warned by the shouts of his pursuers, prepared to
seize him. He therefore turned sharp down a narrow lane to his left.
Another fifty yards he was through this, and found himself on the road,
running by the side of the Liffey. Without a moment's hesitation he
sprang across it, and plunged into the river.

Even in the moment of his spring, he perceived that the tide was running
up. Had it been ebbing, he would have made down and tried to gain the
shore, under shelter of the shipping moored below. But it was useless to
think of swimming against the tide. His pursuers were but a few yards
behind him, and the second time he rose to the surface for air, two or
three shots were fired. He dived again, and when he next came up, took a
deliberate look round in order to judge of his chances.

He was now about a third of the way across. The shore he had left was
already lined with people, and several were gathering on the opposite
bank. Two or three shots struck the water close to him, and he knew that
he was visible to his pursuers. Taking a long breath, he again went under
water. He was a first-rate swimmer and diver, having bathed regularly,
summer and winter, in the bay below the castle.

He had, this time, turned his face towards the shore he had quitted. The
tide, he knew, was sweeping him up. He kept under water as long as he
possibly could, swimming his hardest. When he could keep under no longer,
he turned on his back, and permitted himself to rise slowly to the
surface.

The moment his mouth and nostrils were above water, he got rid of the
pent-up air, took another breath, and sank again. He swam on until he
felt, by the ground rising rapidly in front of him, that he was close to
the edge. He then cautiously came to the surface, and looked round.

He was close under the bank from which he had started, but two or three
hundred yards higher up. The bank rose straight up, some twelve feet
above him, and he could hear persons talking close to its edge.

"There he is."

"No, he isn't."

"Pretty nearly over the other side."

"I don't see him."

"They will catch him as he gets out."

"I believe he has sunk."

"He never could keep under all this time."

"One of the bullets must have hit him."

Then a voice in the crowd shouted, "There's his head, just in the middle
of the river," and a stone splashed in the stream. It was followed by a
volley of other stones, and several musket shots in the same direction.

Walter, having now got his breath, sank his head quietly below the water
and swam on again, keeping close under the bank. Whenever he came up for
air, he listened for a moment. Shots were still being fired below him,
and he knew that the attention of all upon the shores was still directed
towards the centre of the stream, and that there was but small chance of
anyone leaning over to gaze down into the water close to their feet.

His hopes rose, as every minute placed him further from his pursuers. He
could no longer hear voices above him when he rose, but he swam on, for
upwards of a mile, and struggled up the bank well beyond the walls of the
town. He lay down a few minutes to rest himself, walked half a mile along
the bank, and then, entering the river again, swam across, for the road
he was to follow was on the south side of it.

He made his way across the country until he saw a small shed. He entered
this, and finding some hay in the loft, stripped off his wet clothes, and
crept deep into the hay to warm himself, for the water was cold, and he
was shivering from head to foot.

As soon as it was light, he again put on his clothes and started at a
run, which he maintained until he was in a thorough glow, in spite of his
wet clothing. He did not approach the village, at which he had arranged
to meet Larry, until the sun was high, and his clothes had dried so far
that they would not attract the attention of anyone who might be passing.
Then he went into the deserted village and took up his place in one of
the ruined cottages, from which he could obtain a view of the road from
Dublin.

Half an hour later, he saw Larry coming along it. Although there was no
one else in sight, someone might be going the other way, and Walter
therefore remained in his hiding place till Larry was abreast of him,
when he showed his head in the doorway, and called him by name.

Larry gave a cry of joy and, rushing in, threw his arms round him and
burst into tears.

"It's a terrible fright you have given me!" he exclaimed, when he could
find words. "I have been breaking my heart all night. Sure I thought you
were at the bottom of the river."

"Not this time, Larry, though it was a pretty close thing. Did you see it
all?"

"Sure and I did," Larry said. "I was sitting on a doorstep, watching the
house, when I saw the sodgers coming along. They turned up from a side
street, and were so close that I saw I could not get across and get the
door opened in time to give you the alarm. Then they began to knock at
the door, and for a bit I felt so wake that I could not move. Then the
crowd began to gather, and then I said to myself, The master will try to
shlip out at the back of the house. So I went round, but I found the
thieves of the world waiting for ye there. But I was sure ye weren't the
one to let them take ye widout a struggle for it. So I moved a bit away,
and jist waited.

"The time seemed long, when on a suddint I heard the sodgers sing out,
and then fire, and set out to run. I never doubted it was you, and so off
I went behindt them, as hard as I could tare. I wasn't long in coming up
to them, and at first I thought ye would get clean away. Then my heart
fell, when I saw those villains attempt to seize ye, but, when I thought
it was all over, ye turned sharp off and made for the river. I was with
the first of them to get there, and I ran, accidental, against the first
sodger who got his musket to his shoulder, and there was no saying where
the ball went to. He cursed me for a clumsy baste, and would have knocked
me down, but he was in too great a hurry to load again.

"I saw the bullets strike the water, close to you, when you came up
again. I saw you look round, and guessed ye was thinking what was the
best thing to do. Then we saw no more of ye. I didn't think you had been
hit, for I saw you go down regular, as if you were diving in the sea for
pleasure; and not sharp, as you would have done if a bullet had hit you.
I guessed as you were meaning to swim up the stream, and I did the only
thing I could to stop them from following up, by shouting that I saw ye,
and throwing a big stone into the water close to where I had seen your
head before, knowing that, by that time, ye must be nigh a hundred yards
up.

"The fools didn't stop to think, but they took to throwing stones, and
firing as hard as they could, and by the time they had done I knew, if ye
were alive, ye must be nigh a quarter of a mile up the river. Some of
them did run up, and I kept with them, but sorrah a glimpse of ye did we
get. At last, everyone made sure that you were kilt entirely, and went
their ways.

"I went off to our lodgings, but took good care not to go in. And it was
well I didn't, for, half an hour later, a troop of sodgers came up, and
some of them went in.

"They were led by that black villain who used to come wid messages from
Mr. O'Brian, and I have no doubt it was he who set the sodgers upon you.
Anyhow, they didn't find much there, but four of them waited till morning
inside, the others all going away, so that, if you had got out of the
river, they might catch ye in a trap.

"I waited till they had left this morning, thinking, I suppose, that it
was no use to stay longer, and then started to see if your honour were
here.

"Sometimes I thought I should find you, then again, I tould myself that
if you had been alive I must have seen you come up agin; for, knowing the
strength of the stream, and how fast you could swim, I could tell pretty
nigh about where you would come up, if you were keeping straight up the
river. How did you manage it at all, Master Walter?"

"I turned, and swam back again to the bank, Larry. I knew everyone would
be watching the middle of the river, and would not be looking at the
water in front of them. Of course, the stream took me up a long way. I
only came up once, on my back, took a breath, and went down again, and
the second time I was right under the bank and well out of sight, though
I could hear them talking above me. It was just when I looked round,
then, that I saw them throwing stones and firing into the middle of the
river, two hundred yards lower down, and after that I had only to keep on
swimming under water, close to the bank."

"And that is how ye managed it! It was a grand thought, entirely, to swim
back to us. I never thought of that. I was most afraid you would go for
the opposite shore, and there were plenty had gathered there, ready to
seize you. I didn't think I could have missed you, if you'd kept on in
the middle, and I have been puzzled altogether as to what could have
become of you, if ye were really alive.

"I have got some bread in my bundle here, and a bottle of spirits, and
you had better have a bite and a sup before we go on, for it's pretty
nigh as white as a ghost ye are."

The meal seemed to put new life and strength into Walter, and, after its
conclusion, he was ready to step out again with fresh energy. They
thought it better at once to leave the road, and tramp across the
