but they replied that they could only answer that to the officer
commanding, and were taken before him.

"Whence come you, friends?" the latter said. "Surely you must be
English, by your height; but what you are doing here, in times like the
present, I know not. Come you from the king's army, or from the north?"

"We left Welshpool before daybreak," Oswald said, "and have travelled
through the forest."

"Then you must be as bold as you are tall, sirs, for the woods are full
of these wild Welsh."

"Of that we are aware, sir, and we had some difficulty in making our
way through them, unobserved. I would not answer the guard, when we
entered; for we are going farther, and had it been mentioned, in the
hearing of a Welshman, news might have been sent on ahead."

"I think not that you can reach the king. When we last heard, his
foremost divisions were marching forward, and devastating the country
on both sides of their line of march. We have heard reports that some
of the parties have been attacked, and well-nigh destroyed; and certain
it is that Glendower's men are scattered all over the country.

"We were three days without news, but this morning a strong party came,
in escorting sick and wounded. They had to fight hard, but beat off
their opponents, and got in with the loss of a third of their number.
They had started at night, and fortunately arrived within five miles of
here, before they were attacked."

"And where is the king now, sir?"

"The king himself is at Capel Bangor, and the army lies between that
place and Yspetty Cynfyn."

"Then 'tis but a day's march from here!"

"It would be but a short day's march, could you follow the road; but it
would be impossible to do so, for 'tis beset everywhere, and 'tis so
rough and hilly that, in places, the men-at-arms had to dismount. You
will have to wait here till a large force sets out, with provisions;
for those who came in declare that they will not attempt to return, so
great is the number of Welshmen along there, and so fierce and reckless
are they.

"But you have not yet told me who you are, and why you would push on to
the army thus rashly."

Oswald opened his jerkin, and showed the handsome attire beneath it,
embroidered with the Percy cognizance.

"I am an esquire of Sir Henry Percy," he said, "and have been staying
for a while with Sir Edmund Mortimer, whose sister is my lord's wife. A
royal messenger arrived at Ludlow, with a letter for the king; and as
there was no other way of bringing it forward, I volunteered to carry
it, with my man-at-arms, here."

"It was a brave offer, young sir, but I fear that you will scarce be
able to carry it into effect. The men who came here report that it is
unsafe to stir a yard from the camp; for those who wander away, for
however short a distance, are sure to be slain by the lurking Welshmen.
No resistance is offered when strong parties go out, but less than two
hundred men-at-arms cannot hope to move, unattacked."

"'Tis for that reason that I have come on foot," Oswald said. "I saw
that it would be hopeless for two horsemen to get through, but on foot
we may travel through the woods without being discovered; while if we
are seen, methinks it would need speedy feet to catch us."

"Well, since you bear a royal letter I cannot stop you; but it seems to
me that your chance of getting through is small, indeed."



Chapter 17: Knighted.


Rain was coming down in torrents, when Oswald and Roger started the
next morning. On leaving the town they turned to the left, with the
intention of making a considerable detour; keeping well away from the
road, as it was near this that the Welsh would be most likely watching.
They chose this side because, to the right of the road, the country was
more broken, rising swell after swell towards Plinlimmon; and it was
likely that the largest portion of the Welsh would be on that side, so
that they could, at any time, retire to their fastnesses.

They were soon in the woods. The streams they met with were turbid, and
full to the brim.

"We shall have trouble with this water, Roger," Oswald said, as they
waded across one, waist deep. "This is but a little stream, but if
there are larger ones, as is like enough, we shall have to swim before
we are done. There is one advantage; in such weather as this, even the
Welsh will scarce be active."

"They have not got much clothing to wet," Roger said. "Their dress is
better suited than ours for such weather."

The way was a rough one. Hills, although of no great height, had to be
crossed, and many streams to be waded. Fortunately, they met with few
larger than that they had first crossed; for the water from that side
of the hills made its way, for the most part, direct into the Severn;
while that which came down from the slopes of Plinlimmon, towards the
road, fell into a stream; dry in fine weather, but now a raging
torrent, which ran past Llandulas and into the Severn, at Llanidloes.

"Do you think that we are going right, Roger?" Oswald said, after they
had been walking for six or seven hours; "for, what with these ups and
downs, and turnings and windings, there is no saying which is east and
which is west. If the sun were shining we should be sure of our
direction, but with these dull leaden clouds there is no saying."

"I have no idea, master. If we were out on a moor we should be able to
judge, and to make a fairly straight course, keeping the wind and rain
on one side of us; but in this thick forest, though most of the leaves
have fallen, those that remain on the branches break up the rain, and
it seems to come straight down upon us."

Presently they came to another watercourse.

"Why, Roger, the water is going in the other direction!"

"So it is, master. How can that be?"

"It is just possible that we have crossed some dividing point, and the
water is making its way towards the south, and will fall into some
other river; but I am very much afraid that the real explanation is,
that we have entirely lost our way, and are going in the opposite
direction to that in which we started. The question is, shall we cross
it or shall we follow it down?"

"Just as you like," Roger said. "For myself, I think that the best way
would be to find some place where we could shelter. Tomorrow the sun
may be out again, and that will tell us which way to go. If we start at
daybreak, and keep it to our back, we can't go far wrong."

"Except that we may pass the army altogether, Roger. They told us that
the rearmost division was not more than ten miles ahead."

"We must have walked double that already, I should say, master."

"Not so much as that. We have been a long time over it, but it is slow
travelling over this broken ground, and thick wood. I am sure I hope
that we have not gone twenty miles, or anything like it; for in that
case, if we have been keeping fairly in the right direction, we must
have passed the army. If we have been going in the wrong direction,
there is no saying where we may be.

"Still, I think that your suggestion is a good one. It is of no use our
going on, when we may be getting farther away at every step. It is
lucky that we bought these thick cloaks, at Welshpool; for without them
we should have been soaked to the skin, hours ago."

"Well, as we have been wetted to the waist a score of times, in the
streams, I don't see that it would have mattered much, if the rest of
us had been wet through."

"Well, now let us look for a shelter."

After searching for half an hour, they found a spot where a wall of
shaly rock barred their way. At one spot some of this had fallen in,
forming a sort of shallow cave, some three feet deep.

"This is not a bad beginning, Roger, but we must try and make it a
great deal more snug."

They first cut down some young fir poles, and placed them so as to form
a sort of penthouse against the wall. On these they piled a number of
branches, of the same trees, until it was over a foot in thickness.

"So far, so good," Oswald said. "Now, Roger, look about for a fallen
tree. We have passed scores on our way. You must get a thoroughly
rotten one, and cut away a portion of the under side; it will be dry
enough, there."

"You might get a little of that to start with," Roger said; "but the
ground is covered everywhere with fir cones, and there is no better
stuff for fires."

Taking off his cloak he laid it down, and they both piled the fir cones
on this, until a great heap was collected. This they carried into their
shelter, through an opening they had left in the penthouse.

"We must have something dry to start it with. These cones are a great
deal too wet to burn, without a good heat to start them. There is
nothing better than the fir needles, master, if we can find some dry
ones."

After some searching, a considerable number of these needles were
collected; some lying under fallen trees, and others swept by the wind
into rocky corners, where the rain had not reached them.

"Now I think that we shall do, Roger."

As soon as they were inside, Roger produced a large lump of dry fungus
he had found, on the other side of the Severn; and, by the aid of his
flint and steel, soon succeeded in striking sparks upon it. As soon as
these began to spread, he put a little pile of fir needles on it; and,
blowing gently, bright flames soon darted up. A few more handfuls of
fuel were added, and fir cones placed at the top; and in a quarter of
an hour, a clear, bright fire was burning.

The dripping cloaks were hung up to the fir poles, to dry; and the
jerkins, which were also damp, although the water had not penetrated
through them, were spread near the fire.

"It was well that I bought this little skin of wine, last night," Roger
said. "You thought it was better to be without such a burden, but the
weight of a gallon of wine doesn't count for much, and it makes all the
difference in our comfort, here."

The rain had soaked through their provision bags, but the bread and
meat in the centre were dry; and of these they made a hearty meal and,
laying the wetted food round the fire to dry, they wound up the repast
with a long draught of wine.

"Now, as soon as our breeches are dry, Master Oswald, we shall be
thoroughly comfortable."

"Yes, one can wish for nothing better. But we must not forget that some
Welshmen may come along, and if so, will be sure to want to know what
is inside."

"Then, unless there happen to be more than a dozen of them, their
curiosity may cost them dear," Roger said grimly. "I don't think there
is much fear of it. We have neither seen nor heard of any, since we
started; and it would be evil fortune, indeed, if a party happened to
come along just at this spot."

"The fact that we have heard no one is a bad sign, Roger; for it would
seem to show that we must have gone a long way out of our course."

The rain continued to fall heavily, all that afternoon and throughout
the night, and no change of the weather was discernible the next
morning.

"We had best stop here for another day, Roger, unless the sky clears;
we are not likely to find so good a place for shelter, and it is of no
use to wander about, when every step may be taking us farther away.
However, we can climb up to the top of this hill, at whose foot we are,
and endeavour to get a view over the country."

Roger shook his head.

"In this heavy mist we should not see a quarter of a mile away. We have
got all our clothes dry, now, and it would be a pity to get them wet
again, without need or profit. Anyhow, we will find some more of those
fir cones. Our supply is nearly gone."

In half an hour they had got sufficient to last them all day. There was
nothing for them then to do but sleep, one or other keeping watch, so
as to prevent the chance of their being surprised.

Before lying down for the night, Roger looked out.

"Methinks that the rain has stopped, though it would be difficult to
say, for the drops keep pattering down from the trees. Well, I mightily
hope that it will be a fine morning."

Oswald was first upon his feet and, on going out, uttered an
exclamation of satisfaction. The morning was breaking and, though light
clouds were moving across the sky, glimpses of the blue were visible,
here and there. Already the light showed where the sun would presently
rise.

Food was hastily eaten, and they then started on their way again. There
could be no mistake, now, as to the general direction; and, keeping the
sun on their right hand, they made their way north. From the top of a
hill, somewhat higher than the others, they caught a view of
Plinlimmon.

"If we make straight for it," Oswald said, "we ought to come down on
the road near the camp. We can go on fearlessly for some time, for the
Welsh were hardly likely to be moving about, yesterday or the day
before; and I have no doubt they sheltered themselves, as best they
could, in arbours like ours."

After walking for another two hours, they heard the distant sound of a
trumpet.

"That cannot be more than two or three miles away, Roger. Now, we shall
have to be careful."

They had walked a mile when, as they descended into a glen, they came
suddenly on a party of twenty Welshmen, sitting round a fire. These had
been concealed from them by the thick undergrowth, and were not twenty
yards away, when they first saw them. The Welsh had evidently heard
them coming, by the rustle of leaves and the breaking of twigs; and two
or three were standing up, looking in their direction, when they caught
sight of them. These gave a loud yell, which brought the rest to their
feet.

"Run, Roger, run. It is a question of legs, now;" and, turning, they
darted up the hill they had just descended.

Looking back for a moment as, after running for about a mile, they
reached the crest of a swell; Oswald saw that five of their pursuers
had distanced their comrades, but were no nearer than when they
started.

"I think we can hold them, Roger. Take it a little more easily now. We
are all right as far as speed goes. It is simply a question of bottom."

Their pursuers, however, still stuck to them and, after running for
another half-mile, the five men were still but some thirty yards
behind; while their comrades' shouts could be heard through the forests
and, from time to time, the men close behind them joined in a loud
quavering cry.

"We must stand and rid ourselves of these fellows, Roger; or we shall
have half the Welsh nation down on us."

"So I have been thinking, for some time."

"Don't stop suddenly. We will slacken our pace, and they will think
that our strength is failing, and will redouble their efforts. Then,
when they are close to us, we will turn suddenly."

They heard a yell of exultation, as their pursuers found that they were
gaining upon them.

"Choose a clear space, Roger, with room to swing our weapons."

The Welsh were running in a close body, but ten yards behind them, when
they arrived at a spot clear of trees.

"Now, Roger!"

As he spoke, Oswald drew his sword and swung round, facing his
pursuers, while Roger did the same. The Welsh, taken by surprise,
endeavoured to check themselves; but before they could do so, Roger's
staff fell upon the head of one of them, while Oswald cleft another to
the chin. With the quickness of an adroit player with the quarterstaff,
Roger followed up his blow by almost instantaneously driving the other
end of the staff, with all his force, against the chest of another, who
was at the point of leaping upon him; and the man fell, as if struck
with a thunderbolt. So swift had been the movements that the remaining
two men were paralysed, by the sudden fall of their companions; but
before they could turn to fly, the weapons descended again, with as
fatal result as before.

"To the right!" Oswald exclaimed, and he dashed off into the forest
again, at a right angle to the line that they had before taken. A
minute later they heard an outburst of yells of fury, from the spot
they had quitted.

"I don't think they will be quite so ready to follow, now," Roger said.
"They are like to be some time, before they take up our track again."

"We will break into a walk, in a few minutes, Roger; and then go along
quietly, and keep our ears open. Their yells will be bringing others
down, from all directions, and we might run right into the middle of
another party, if we kept on at this rate."

In another five minutes they dashed down a steep descent, at whose foot
a streamlet, swelled now into a rushing stream, five or six feet wide,
was running.

"We will follow this down," Oswald said, as he stepped into it.

It was a little over two feet deep, and they waded along it for a
couple of hundred yards, and then stepped out, where some rock cropped
out by the side of the stream. It had not yet dried after the rain, and
their feet therefore left no marks on it.

"That was a sharp run, Roger," Oswald said as, with rapid but stealthy
steps, they strode along.

"Ay, it was. My breath was coming short, when you gave the word to
stop. Another half mile would have finished me. Those Welshmen run
well."

"I have no doubt we should have beaten them, easily enough, on the open
ground, Roger; but they are more accustomed to this forest work than we
are.

"Mind where you tread, and don't put your foot on fallen sticks. There
must be scores of them in the forest behind, yet, though I don't think
that they have struck our track. The nearest must be a quarter of a
mile away. I am not afraid of their overtaking us. It is the risk of
falling in with other parties that I am afraid of."

They now bore away to the right again. More than once they heard
parties moving near them, and stood quiet until their voices died away;
which they quickly did, as all were hurrying towards the spot whence
the shouting still continued.

For an hour they kept straight onward, and then the trees thinned; and
as they stepped out from the edge of the forest they saw, to their
delight, a few tents in front of them, and a large number of soldiers
scattered about. As they were seen, some of the soldiers caught up
their arms; but when they saw that but two men were approaching, they
laid them down again, and proceeded with the work on which most of them
were engaged; in polishing up their arms and armour, whose brightness
had been grievously dimmed by the rain. A sub-officer with four men
came up to them, as they reached the line.

"Who are you, sirs?" he asked.

"I am an esquire of Sir Henry Percy, and have brought hither a letter
for the king."

The man looked doubtfully at him, and Oswald continued, "I know not
whether the Earl of Talbot is in the camp, but if so he will, I think,
recognize me."

"The earl arrived, with five hundred of his men, yesterday," the
officer said, with a tone of more respect than he had before used. "I
will take you to his tent;" and he led the way to a tent, pitched a
short distance away from that before which the royal standard waved.

Oswald took off his cloak, which was rolled up over his shoulder, and
handed it to Roger, and then opened his jerkin. As they came up to the
tent the front opened, and the earl himself came out.

"Whom have we here?" he asked the officer.

"They have just come out of the forest, my lord, and this gentleman
asked to be taken to you, saying that you would recognize him."

The earl looked scrutinizingly at Oswald.

"I seem to know your face, sir," he said, "but I cannot recall where I
have seen it."

"My name is Oswald Forster, an esquire of Sir Henry Percy. I joined you
at Chester, my Lord Talbot, with a band of his men; and some of Sir
Edmund Mortimer's, led by one of his knights."

"I remember now," the earl said. "Yes, I see you wear the Percy badge;
but how have you got here, and why have you come?"

"I come as a simple messenger, my lord. A royal courier arrived at
Ludlow, with a letter from London for the king. His majesty had laid
his commands on Sir Edmund Mortimer, that he was not to weaken his
force by a single lance; and as, for aught Sir Edmund knew, the letter
might be of great importance, I volunteered to endeavour to carry it
through; taking with me only this man-at-arms, on whom I could wholly
rely, whatever might happen, he having accompanied me on more than one
dangerous expedition.

"Sir Edmund consented. We rode first to Shrewsbury, to obtain
information as to the course the king had taken. At Welshpool we left
our horses behind us, thinking it easier to make our way through the
woods on foot, seeing that the roads were said to be beset by the
Welsh. So we reached Llanidloes; and then, hearing where the king was
then posted, from a convoy of wounded that had been brought in that
day, and who had been attacked and very hardly treated as they came
along, we thought to make a detour through the woods, so as to get
behind any Welshmen who might be watching the road.

"Unfortunately, in the storm of rain, having no guide, we lost our way;
and were so detained, near two days, in the forest. This morning, the
weather having changed and the sun come out, we learned the direction
that we must take. On the way we fell in with a party of some twenty
Welshmen, who pursued us hotly. We outran all but five. As their shouts
would have brought large numbers upon us, we stopped and slew them; and
though search was hot for us, we succeeded in making our way through,
without adventure, until we came out from the forest, close by."

"Truly it was an adventure of great peril," the earl said, "for the
Welsh are swarming round us; though we see nought of them, when we are
once in the saddle. Assuredly you would never have got through, even as
far as Llanidloes, if you had followed the road on horseback; for the
last party that came along brought word that the Welsh had felled trees
