measure!  "A fellow who can't teach himself to read," said the king, "is
not worth teaching."

For all these reasons, and because they were so fond of the queen, his
subjects were ready to do anything in reason for King Prigio.

Only one tradesman, bowing very deep and blushing very much, said:

"Your Majesty, will you hear me for one moment?"

"For an hour, with pleasure, Herr Schmidt," said the monarch.

"It is an untradesman-like and an unusual thing to decline an order; and
if your Majesty asked for my heart's blood, I am ready to shed it, not to
speak of anything in the line of my business--namely, boot and shoe
making.  But keep a secret from my wife, I fairly own to your Majesty
that I can _not_."

Herr Schmidt went down on his knees and wept.

{Herr Schmidt went down on his knees: p52.jpg}

"Rise, Herr Schmidt," said the king, taking him by the hand.  "A more
honourable and chivalrous confession of an amiable weakness, if it is to
be called a weakness, I never heard.  Sir, you have been true to your
honour and your prince, in face of what few men can bear, the chance of
ridicule.  There is no one here, I hope, but respects and will keep the
secret of Herr Schmidt's confession?"

The assembled shopkeepers could scarcely refrain from tears.

"Long live King Prigio the Good!" they exclaimed, and vowed that
everything should be kept dark.

"Indeed, sire," said the swordmaker, "all the rest of us are bachelors."

"That is none the worse for my purpose gentlemen," said his Majesty; "but
I trust that you will not long deprive me of sons and subjects worthy to
succeed to such fathers.  And now, if Herr Schmidt will kindly find his
way to the buttery, where refreshments are ready, I shall have the
pleasure of conducting you to the scene of your labours."

Thus speaking, the king, with another magnificent bow, led the way
upstairs to a little turret-room, in a deserted part of the palace.
Bidding the tradesmen enter, he showed them a large collection of
miscellaneous things: an old cap or two, a pair of boots of a sort long
out of fashion, an old broadsword, a shabby old Persian rug, an ivory spy-
glass, and other articles.  These were, in fact, the fairy presents,
which had been given to the king at his christening, and by aid of which
(and his natural acuteness) he had, in his youth, succeeded in many
remarkable adventures.

The caps were the Wishing Cap and the Cap of Darkness.  The rug was the
famous carpet which carried its owner through the air wherever he wished
to go.  The sword was the Sword of Sharpness.  The ivory glass showed you
anyone you wanted to see, however far off.  The boots were the
Seven-league Boots, which Hop-o'-my-Thumb stole from the Ogre about 1697.
There were other valuable objects, but these were the most useful and
celebrated.  Of course the king did not tell the tradesmen what they
were.

"Now, gentlemen," said his Majesty, "you see these old things.  For
reasons which I must ask you to excuse me for keeping to myself, I wish
you to provide me with objects exactly and precisely similar to these,
with all the look of age."

The tradesmen examined the objects, each choosing that in his own line of
business.

"As to the sword, sire," said the cutler, "it is an Andrea Ferrara, a
fine old blade.  By a lucky accident, I happen to have one at home in a
small collection of ancient weapons, exactly like it.  This evening it
shall be at your Majesty's disposal."

"Perhaps, Herr Schnitzler, you will kindly write an order for it, as I
wish no one of you to leave the palace, if you can conveniently stay,
till your business is finished."

"With pleasure, your Majesty," says the cutler.

"As to the old rug," said the upholsterer, "I have a Persian one quite
identical with it at home, at your Majesty's service."

"Then you can do like Herr Schnitzler," who was the cutler.

"And I," said the hatter, "have two old caps just like these, part of a
bankrupt theatrical stock."

"We are most fortunate," said the king.

"The boots, now I come to think of it, are unimportant, at least for the
present.  Perhaps we can borrow a pair from the theatre."

"As for the glass," said the optician, "if your Majesty will allow me to
take it home with me--"

"I am afraid I cannot part with it," said the king; "but that, too, is
unimportant, or not very pressing."

Then he called for a servant, to order luncheon for the shopkeepers, and
paper for them to write their orders on.  But no one was within hearing,
and in that very old part of the palace there were no bells.

"Just pardon me for an instant, while I run downstairs," said his
Majesty; "and, it seems a strange thing to ask, but may I advise you not
to sit down on that carpet?  I have a reason for it."

In fact, he was afraid that someone might sit down on it, and wish he was
somewhere else, and be carried away, as was the nature of the carpet.

King Prigio was not absent a minute, for he met William on the stairs;
but when he came back, there was not one single person in the
turret-room!

"Where on earth are they?" cried the king, rushing through all the rooms
in that part of the castle.  He shouted for them, and looked everywhere;
but there was not a trace of tailor, hatter, optician, swordmaker,
upholsterer.

The king hastened to a window over the gate, and saw the sentinels on
duty.

"Hi!" he called.

And the sentinels turned round, looked up, and saluted.

"Have you seen anyone go out?" he cried.

"No one, sire," answered the soldiers.

The king, who began to guess what had happened, hurried back to the
turret-room.

There were all the tradesmen with parcels under their arms.

"What means this, gentlemen?" said his Majesty, severely.  "For what
reason did you leave the room without my permission?"

They all knelt down, humbly imploring his compassion.

"Get up, you donkeys!" said the king, forgetting his politeness.  "Get
up, and tell me where you have been hiding yourselves."

The hatter came forward, and said:

"Sire, you will not believe me; indeed, I can scarcely believe it
myself!"

"Nor none of us can't," said the swordmaker.  "We have been home, and
brought the articles.  All orders executed with punctuality and
dispatch," he added, quoting his own advertisement without thinking of
it.

On this the swordmaker took out and exhibited the Andrea Ferrara blade,
which was exactly like the Sword of Sharpness.

The upholsterer undid his parcel, and there was a Persian rug, which no
one could tell from the magical carpet.

The hatter was fumbling with the string of his parcel, when he suddenly
remembered, what the king in his astonishment had not noticed, that he
had a cap on himself.  He pulled it off in a hurry, and the king at once
saw that it was his Wishing Cap, and understood all about the affair.  The
hatter, in his absence, had tried on the Wishing Cap, and had wished that
he himself and his friends were all at home and back again with their
wares at the palace.  And what he wished happened, of course, as was
natural.  In a moment the king saw how much talk this business would
produce in the country, and he decided on the best way to stop it.

Seizing the Wishing Cap, he put it on, wished all the tradesmen,
including the shoemaker, back in the town at their shops, and also wished
that none of them should remember anything about the whole affair.

In a moment he was alone in the turret-room.  As for the shopkeepers,
they had a kind of idea that they had dreamed something odd; but, as it
went no further, of course they did not talk about it, and nobody was any
the wiser.

"Owl that I am!" said King Prigio to himself.  "I might have better
wished for a complete set of sham fairy things which would not work.  It
would have saved a great deal of trouble; but I am so much out of the
habit of using the cap, that I never thought of it.  However, what I have
got will do very well."

Then, putting on the Cap of Darkness, that nobody might see him, he
carried all the _real_ fairy articles away, except the Seven-league
Boots, to his own room, where he locked them up, leaving in their place
the sham Wishing Cap, the sham Cap of Darkness, the sham Sword of
Sharpness, and the carpet which was not a magic carpet at all.

His idea was, of course, that Ricardo would start on an expedition
confiding in his fairy things, and he would find that they did not act.
Then he would be left to his own cleverness and courage to get him out of
the scrape.  That would teach him, thought the king, to depend on
himself, and to set a proper value on cleverness and learning, and
minding his book.

Of course he might have locked the things up, and forbidden Ricardo to
touch them, but that might have seemed harsh.  And, as you may easily
imagine, with all the powers at his command, the king fancied he could
easily rescue Ricardo from any very serious danger at the hands of giants
or magicians or monsters.  He only wanted to give him a fright or two,
and make him respect the judgment of older and wiser people than himself.




CHAPTER IV.
Two Lectures.


{The Prince with the telescope: p64.jpg}

For several days Prince Ricardo minded his books, and, according to his
tutors, made considerable progress in polite learning.  Perhaps he ought
not to be praised too highly for this, because, in fact, he saw no means
of distinguishing himself by adventures just at that time.  Every morning
he would climb the turret and sweep the horizon, and even _much_ beyond
the horizon, with the ivory spy-glass.  But look as he would, he saw no
monsters preying on human-kind anywhere, nor princesses in distress.  To
be sure he saw plenty of poor people in distress, and, being a
good-hearted, though careless, lad, Dick would occasionally fly off with
the Purse of Fortunatus in his pocket, and give them as much money as
they needed--it cost him nothing.  But this was not the kind of adventure
which he enjoyed.  Dragons for his money!

One day the Princess Jaqueline took a curious plan of showing Ricardo how
little interest, after all, there is in performing the most wonderful
exploits without any real difficulty or danger.  They were drifting
before a light breeze on a hill lake; Ricardo was fishing, and Jaqueline
was sculling a stroke now and then, just to keep the boat right with the
wind.  Ricardo had very bad sport, when suddenly the trout began to rise
all over the lake.  Dick got excited, and stumbled about the boat from
stern to bow, tripping over Jaqueline's feet, and nearly upsetting the
vessel in his hurry to throw his flies over every trout he saw feeding.

{Drifting in a light breeze: p66.jpg}

But, as too often occurs, they were taking one particular fly which was
on the water, and would look at nothing else.

"Oh, bother them!" cried Ricardo.  "I can't find a fly in my book in the
least like that little black one they are feeding on!"

He tried half-a-dozen different fly-hooks, but all to no purpose; he lost
his temper, got his tackle entangled in Jaqueline's hair and then in the
landing-net; and, though such a big boy, he was nearly crying with
vexation.

The Princess Jaqueline, with great pains and patience, disentangled the
casting line, first from her hair, which Ricardo was anxious to cut (the
great stupid oaf,--her pretty hair!) then from the landing-net; but Dick
had grown sulky.

"It's no use," he said; "I have not a fly that will suit.  Let's go
home," and he threw a tin can at a rising trout.

"Now, Dick," said Jaqueline, "you know I can help you.  I did not learn
magic for nothing.  Just you look the other way for a minute or two, and
you will find the right fly at the end of your line."

Dick turned his head away (it is not proper to look on at magical arts),
and then in a moment, saw the right hook on his cast; but Jaqueline was
not in the boat.  She had turned herself into an artificial fly (a small
black gnat), and Dick might set to his sport again.

"What a trump that girl is," he said aloud.  "Clever, too!" and he began
casting.  He got a trout every cast, great big ones, over a pound, and
soon he had a basketful.  But he began to feel rather bored.

"There's not much fun taking them," he said, "when they are so silly."

At that very moment he noticed that the fly was off his cast, and
Jaqueline was sitting at the oars.

"You see, Ricardo," she said, "I was right after all.  There is not much
pleasure in sport that is easy and certain.  Now, apply this moral to
dragon-killing with magic instruments.  It may be useful when one is
obliged to defend oneself, but surely a prince ought not to give his
whole time to nothing else!"

Dick had no answer ready, so he only grumbled:

"You're always preaching at me, Jack; everybody always is.  I seem to
have been born just to be preached at."

Some people are; and it does grow rather tedious in the long run.  But
perhaps what Jaqueline said may have made some impression on Ricardo, for
he stuck to his books for weeks, and was got into decimal fractions and
Euclid.

All this, of course, pleased the king very much, and he began to
entertain hopes of Ricardo's becoming a wise and learned prince, and a
credit to his illustrious family.

Things were not always to go smoothly, far from it; and it was poor
Jaqueline who fell into trouble next.  She had been very ready to lecture
Dick, as we saw, and took a good deal of credit to herself for his
steadiness.  But one day King Prigio happened to meet Jaqueline's maid,
Rosina, on the stairs; and as Rosina was a pretty girl, and the king was
always kind to his dependents, he stopped to have a chat with her.

"Why, Rosina, what a pretty little silver cross you are wearing," he
said, and he lifted a curious ornament which hung from a chain on
Rosina's neck.  It consisted of seven drops of silver, set like this:

{The drops: p72.jpg}

 "May I look at it?" his Majesty asked, and Rosina, all in a flutter,
took it off and gave if to him.  "H'm!" said the king.  "Very curious and
pretty!  May I ask you where you got this, Rosina?"

{"H'm!" said the king.  "Very curious and pretty!": p73.jpg}

Now Rosina generally had her answer ready, and I am very sorry to say
that she did not always speak the truth when she could think of anything
better.  On this occasion she was anxious to think of something better,
for fear of getting Jaqueline into a scrape about the chemical experiment
in her bedroom.  But Rosina was fluttered, as we said, by the royal
kindness, and she could think of nothing but to curtsy, and say:

"Please, your Majesty, the princess gave me the drops."

"Very interesting," said the king.  "There is a little white moon shining
in each of them!  I wonder if they shine in the dark?"

He opened the door of a cupboard which had no windows, where the
housemaid kept her mops and brooms, and shut himself in.  Yes, there was
no mistake; the darkness was quite lighted up with the sheen of the seven
little moons in the silver.  The king looked rather grave.
