moment between two important engagements to see her sister.

May looked with imploring, fascinated eyes at Annie in her nurse's gown
and cap. The younger girl had some faint inkling of Annie's earlier
experience in the life of an hospital; yet there she was as fresh and
fair and bright as ever--a thousand times cooler and happier-looking
than her visitor.

"Here you are, May," Annie was saying in glad greeting, as she held her
sister by the two shoulders, after she had kissed her; "and I declare
you have grown since you went to St. Ambrose's. Oh, you incorrigible
girl, when you were so much the tallest of us before you went there."

May could only make one answer with parched lips, faltering tongue, and
eyes dry under their heavy cloud of grief, "Annie, I have failed in my
examination!"

Annie started in surprise, while her face fell for a second. "What a
pity!" she could not help exclaiming. "Father will be----" She broke off
in the middle of the sentence. "Don't fret about it," she added, quickly
taking another look into May's face; "that will do no good, and it is
not very much after all. I cannot stay another minute now, May," she
went on to tell the bewildered girl in the most matter-of-fact tone, so
that May was in danger of feeling half-offended at finding her
tribulation taken so cavalierly--"just like Annie!"

"You must wait for me," Annie was saying further. "There is a poor
fellow--a patient of mine--who is to have his arm amputated this
morning, and I must be with him when it is done."

"Oh dear!" cried May, completely taken aback, "that is dreadful. Will he
die, Annie? Will he die?" forgetting all her own high-strung woes, the
product of an advanced stage of civilization, in heart-felt, human
sympathy with the most primitive of all trials--bodily suffering and
loss.

"Not if we can help it, please God," said Annie emphatically. Then an
inspiration came to her as she gazed on the girl's white quivering face.
"You have been working too hard, 'little May'; you shake your head like
a tragedy queen. Then you've been worrying too much, which is a great
deal worse. I shall take you in hand, but I can't stay to talk about it.
Just you think how little my poor fellow would mind not passing an
examination, in comparison with the loss of an arm--fortunately it is
the left one. He is a printer who got his arm crushed under one of the
great rollers, and he has a wife and five little children dependent on
their bread-winner."

Annie was gone, leaving May suddenly transported out of herself, and
plunged into the trials of her neighbours, the awfully near, common
life-and-death trials, of which she had known so little. Her own seemed
to sink into insignificance beside them. St. Ambrose's and its
intellectual lists and wordy contests, even its lofty abstruse
thoughts--excellent things in their way, without which the unlettered
world would become rude, sordid and narrow--faded into the background.
She forgot everything but the poor man passing through a mortal crisis,
with Annie able to succour him in his need, and his wife and children
waiting to hear whether the end were life or death.

May held her breath, and watched, prayed, and waited in her turn, with
no thought left for the news she had brought to town, and was to carry
to Redcross. What did it signify if only the poor man lived when May
herself was well and strong, and all her dear friends were in health,
and likely to be spared to her.

When Annie came in again with a cheerful face, and said, "He has stood
it wonderfully; there is every prospect of his making a speedy
recovery," May's face too cleared till for the moment it was almost
radiant. She acquiesced, with responsive animation, in Annie's
arrangement that since she, Annie, had got leave of absence for the
rest of the day she would put on her walking-dress, and she and May
too would go and pick up Rose at Mr. St. Foy's class-rooms; and what
was to hinder all the three from having an expedition together in the
fine summer weather to Hampton Court, or Kew, or the Crystal Palace,
thus celebrating May's visit to town, and making the most of Annie's
holiday? It would be like dear old times of primrose hunting, blue-bell
gathering, maying, and nutting down at Redcross before the cares and
troubles of the world had taken hold of the girls. Annie had already
sent on May's luggage to Welby Square, to which May would return with
Rose. Annie excluded herself carefully from this part of the programme,
with a kind of unapproachable haughtiness which had three strains of
stubbornness and one strain of fiery youthful anger in its composition,
while it was a complete enigma to May. But all she cared to know was
that she was going with her own two sisters for an entire afternoon's
delightful excursion. In the morning she had felt that she could never
have the heart to be happy again. Even yet she would not be quite happy;
she would be very much affronted when she was telling Annie and Rose the
particulars of her, May's, silliness and selfishness; how she had given
herself up to moping, and then how she had played herself--first with
the St. Ambrose gaieties, and later with the Greek play, instead of
setting about her work methodically and diligently. Annie would,
perhaps, tell her a few home-truths, and Rose would crumple up her
nose, shake her head, and look superhumanly wise--Rose who in the
old days had been more thoughtless than May.

Still she deserved it all a thousand times over, and it would be a
relief to have disburdened herself of the sorry tale.

Her own sisters would defend her from every other assailant. They would
feel for her, seek to reassure her, even make much of her, as they were
doing by taking her away with them this afternoon. May was very sensible
that a burden was lifted off her back.




CHAPTER XVIII.

DORA IS THE NEXT MESSENGER WITH BAD TIDINGS.


There is a curious feeling abroad in the world, that no two things
happen alike on two days, or in two weeks, or months, running. If there
has been a railway accident on Monday, there will certainly not be
another of the same kind at the same place on Tuesday. Apart from the
fresh precautions sure to be taken, it is not at all likely, in the
chapter of accidents, that a facsimile will occur where the original has
preceded it so recently. On a similar principle, if a man has been
killed or badly injured by a fall from a horse, it goes against public
opinion that his son or his brother should also be thus injured. If the
singular repetition does take place, people will speak of it with bated
breath, as of a fate or doom hanging over the family, and therefore
bound to repeat itself again and again on the old lines. All this is in
spite of the fact that there is such a word as "coincidence" in the
language, and that there is hardly one of us who cannot remember
several startling coincidences in the course of his or her history.

Annie Millar had an experience of the kind at this time. It was on the
20th of June that May arrived unannounced at St. Ebbe's to recount her
lost battle. On the 21st Dora appeared, in a like unlooked-for manner,
to divulge her sorrowful news.

Annie was much more troubled by the spectacle of Dora standing alone in
the middle of the hospital drawing-room, pale and agitated, than she had
been by the discovery of May in that very condition the day before.
Annie's own colour died away while she ran forward and caught Dora's
hand. "What is it, Dora? Has anything happened to father or mother?--yet
if there had, you would not have left them and come up to town by
yourself. Why are you here? Tell me quickly, for it is killing me to
keep me in suspense."

"Don't be alarmed," entreated Dora's soft voice. "Father sent me up for
the express purpose that you might not be alarmed when you heard. I must
have managed badly to frighten you. I assure you nothing has happened,
at least nothing very particular, only,--well, father is very rheumatic,
and the warm weather has done him no good. He has not been out of the
house for a month, though we did not mention it in our letters, always
hoping that by the next time we wrote he would be better. But he has not
left his room till he contrived to go in the cab yesterday. Oh! Annie,
he has sold his business to Dr. Capes. He--father--said it was no use to
protract the struggle, it was only doing more mischief; he would never
be able, at his age, to go about again so as to act fairly by his
patients. He has given up everything to the bank's creditors, and will
pass through the bankruptcy court. He bade me tell you that he could see
no other way, and he was afraid Rose or you might read his name in the
_Gazette_ without being prepared for it."

"Father ill, old, and a bankrupt!" Annie's cry was bitter. "It is hard
after his long life of honourable industry. I can never forgive Mr.
Carey."

"Hush! hush! Annie, you must not say that. Nothing would grieve father
more. Nobody has suffered like the Careys. Besides, father always says
that he alone was to blame for buying the bank shares. He did it of his
own free-will, just that he might grow richer in the idlest manner
possible for him to do so. Dr. Capes has taken our house, the Old
Doctor's House too, and father and mother went into apartments--those
over Robarts the book-seller's--yesterday, till they could look about
them." Dora was crying quietly all the time she was speaking, and at the
same time she was breaking off to say with pathetic resigned trust like
her mother's, "But only think, Annie dear, how much worse it might have
been! What a great deal we have to be thankful for. Look at poor Mr.
Carey sitting paralyzed, and quite childish; and do you know the sad
news arrived last night that poor poor Colonel Russell is dead? He had a
sun-stroke, and died within twelve hours; he has not been three months
at his new post. Dear father has all his senses, and he says himself he
may live for years and years."

"I hope so," said Annie fervently; but it is doubtful whether she fully
appreciated the blessings of her lot at that moment. She busied herself
for a few minutes with Dora, her nurse's instinct as well as her
affection telling her that Dora must be seen to first. Annie took off
Dora's hat and jacket, seated her in the easiest chair, would hear
nothing more till she--Annie--had learnt when Dora had breakfasted, and
then rung for a basin of soup and made her swallow it. "Now, Dora," she
said, sitting down by her sister, "tell me all there is to tell. What
have father and mother to live upon? We must think and act for them
now."

Dora explained as well as she was able, since, like her mother, she had
no great head for business. In addition to the sum given for the
good-will of Dr. Millar's practice, and for his house and furniture,
which was to be paid over to the liquidators of the bank's debts, (in
return for which the debtor would get a discharge from farther
obligations,) a small percentage was to be allowed to him from his
successor's fees.

"I am afraid it will be very small," Dora made the despondent remark,
"because, though all his former patients are fond of father, they got to
see he was breaking up, and did not like to send for him during the
night, or at odd hours. Mother and I did what we could, going round for
him and inquiring after his patients; but, as he said, such a make-shift
could not last. We were always hearing of more families calling in Dr.
Capes or Mr. Newton. Father declared he could not blame them; he would
have done the same in their place, and that every dog must have his
day."

"That was like father," said Annie, looking up with a fleeting sparkle
in her eyes.

"Then we thought," went on Dora, "father and mother might have part of
mother's money, since you have always said you did not need it, while
Rose is getting paid for her work, and there is hardly any doubt"
(brightening up,) "but that 'little May' will take the scholarship.
She was working so hard to pass her examination when she wrote last,
that she was quite out of spirits about her chances, which father says
is always the way with the best men when they are going in for an
examination that they are safe to win. He supposes it will be still
more so with women. He tells mother that he will not mind taking help
from her, where her money is concerned, when he can no longer stir from
his chair--not to say to earn a fee, but to save his life. He has taken
so much more help from her in other ways during all their married life,
that this in addition will not count."




CHAPTER XIX.

THE UNEMPLOYED--A FAMILIAR FACE.


A lodging was found near the Hospital for Dora, who was to stay in town
and look out for a situation; and for the next week, a week of hot
summer weather, Annie, relieved from her hospital work, because it was
her first holiday time, went to and fro, spending as little as possible
on omnibus fares, with Dora and May in her train, in search of
employment for them. People were beginning to leave town, and the time
did not seem propitious. When was it ever propitious for such a pursuit
where women are concerned? Even under Annie's able guidance, with the
spirit which she could summon to her aid in all difficulties, the
intentional and unintentional rebuffs which the two girl candidates,
particularly Dora, got from agents and principals in connection with
ladies in want of useful companions and nursery-governesses were
innumerable. The swarms of needy, greedy applicants for similar
situations whom the Millars were perpetually encountering in their
rounds, were enough to cause the stoutest heart to quail, and to sink
the most sanguine nature into the depths of despondency.

Dora Millar was not constitutionally sanguine, and she grew more and
more nervous and dispirited as the fruitless efforts went on. Her little
figure drooped, her eyes had a dejected expression, her lips quivered
pathetically without any provocation. Annie was compelled to use strong
language. "The idiots!" she exclaimed, _apropos_ of the last persons who
had found Dora too young or too old, not strong enough looking, or not
lively enough looking ("not as if she could stand a large amount of
bullying and worrying," Annie read between the lines). "What a chance
they are letting slip through their fingers of getting the most
unexacting, contented creature in the world to minister to their
tiresome wants. They will never see her like again; serve them right for
their blindness."

One particularly glaring, airless afternoon, the three sisters were
toiling back to Dora's lodging, with the London pavement like heated
iron under the feet of the crowds that trod it, and the cloudless sky,
in which the sun blazed a ball of fire, like glowing brass over their
heads. Then as the Millars turned a corner and looked longingly at the
trees in a square with their leaves already yellowing and shrivelling,
May uttered a little shriek of delight and darted forward to greet a
familiar figure and face in the stream of strangers. What did it signify
that the figure was insignificant by comparison, and the face with
nothing distinguished in its pallor, under its red beard and
moustache?--"a little foxy-headed fellow," any sharp-tongued bystander
might have called him. It was a well-known face where all the others
were drearily unknown, a Redcross face in London, the face of a man who
might have shown himself an enemy, yet had proved a friend in need; and
though there had been presented to the girls the bearing of a Jupiter
and the lineaments of an Adonis, they could not have hailed him with
greater gladness. If anybody hung back in the general acclamation it was
Dora, for Annie did not say a word to rebuke May; she was too anxious to
hear the last news of her father.

More than one man among the passers-by, glancing at Tom Robinson
surrounded by a group of pretty girls, the two prettiest evidently
making much of him and hanging on his words, called him in their minds
"lucky dog," and speculated on the nature of the attraction.

"'_Prope'ty, prope'ty, prope'ty_,'" no doubt. It was disgraceful to see
how mercenary even quite young women were getting.

Tom received the ovation, at which, by the bye, he was a little taken
aback and puzzled, quietly and in a matter-of-fact way, as he received
most things. He had had the pleasure of seeing Dr. and Mrs. Millar
lately; indeed, he had availed himself of the privileges of an old
friend to call on them at once in their new quarters, he told Annie, and
he had found them, by their own account, fairly well and comfortable,
though the Doctor was still dead lame.

Tom did not tell either Annie, or any one else interested in the
information, that he had spent the last few days pushing the circulation
of a subscription list, which he had headed with the promise of a
handsome sum. It was to provide a testimonial not altogether inadequate
to mark the esteem in which the townspeople held their old Doctor for
his many virtues, and their sympathy with him in his misfortunes. A
liberal offering on the town's part might do something to relieve the
adversity which had befallen a fellow-townsman. The talk a little time
ago had been of presenting Dr. Millar with a new brougham and horse,
which, as they would have had to be maintained at the charge of a man
who had just put down his old brougham as beyond his diminished income,
was rather an illogical method of serving him. However, his complete
breakdown, with the sale of his practice, had at once knocked that idea
on the head, and had given its motive a much wider application. If the
little Doctor were to submit to accept help, it must be commensurate
with the dignity of Redcross and the county, and with his own
professional status and merit.

Tom Robinson looked at the girls as two of them looked at him. "It is
