be a certain Patrick Michael Philip O'Neal Drummond, Lord Desborough,
son and heir to the Earl of Desmond!  He congratulated himself most
heartily upon his good fortune.

Providence had, then, thrown a lover again at Katharine's feet.  Not
that there was anything unusual in that.  She might not regard it in a
providential light, however; but he, at least did so, and he had
intended to improve the shining hours of what would be a long cruise,
in the close association permitted by the confined limits of the ship,
to make a final desperate effort to win the heart which had hitherto so
entirely eluded him that he could not flatter himself that he had made
the least impression upon it.  His success during the first three or
four days of the cruise had not been brilliant.  She had been
unaffectedly glad to see him apparently, and gentle and kind in her
reception,--too kind, he thought, with the circumspection of a
lover,--but that was all.  To add to his trials, he soon found himself
not without rivals nearer at home than Seymour.  Judging by present
results, Washington, if he had a few regiments of Katharines, could
carry consternation to the whole British army!  For the captors had,
apparently, taken the oath of allegiance to the captured, and the whole
ship's company, from that gruff old sailor Captain Vincent down through
all the other officers to the impudent and important little midshipman,
were her devoted slaves.  Even Jack forward, usually entirely
unresponsive to the doings aft on the quarterdeck, put on an extra
flourish or so, and damning his eyes, after the manner of the
unsophisticated sailorman, gazed appreciatively upon her beauty,
envying those fortunate mortals privileged to radiate about her person.
Vincent might be the captain, but Katharine was certainly the queen of
the ship.  Colonel Wilton, too, shone, not altogether by reflected
lustre either; and the considerate officers had done everything
possible to make him forget that he was a prisoner.


Early one afternoon in the beginning of February, the Yarmouth, being
under all plain sail with the wind two or three points abaft the beam,
was bowling along under a fresh breeze about a day's sail east of
Martinique.  The weather was perfect, and because of the low latitude,
in spite of the winter season, there was no touch of sharpness in the
air, which was warm and delightful.  All the necessary drills and
exercises having been concluded earlier in the day, the whole ship's
company was enjoying a period of unusual relaxation and idleness.  The
men at the wheel, the lookouts kept constantly at the mastheads, the
marines doing sentry duty, with the midshipmen of the watch and the
officer of the deck busily pacing to and fro, were the only people, out
of the six hundred and odd men who made up the ship's complement, who
presented any appearance of activity whatever.  The men of the watch on
and the watch off, dinner being over, were sitting or lounging about in
all sorts of easy attitudes,--some of them busy with their needles;
others overhauling their clothes-bags, to which they had been given
access that afternoon; others grouped about some more brilliant
story-teller than the rest, eagerly drinking in the multifarious
details of some exciting personal experience, or romantic adventure, or
never-ending story of shipwreck or battle, or mystery--technically,
yarns!  Colonel Wilton was standing aft with Captain Vincent in the
shadow of the spanker.  Miss Wilton, with Chloe, her black maid, behind
her chair, was sitting near the break of the poop-deck, looking
forward, surrounded by several lieutenants; Desborough being at her
right hand, of course, feeling and looking unusually gloomy and morose.
One or two of the oldest and boldest midshipmen were also lingering on
the outskirts of the group, as near to their divinity as they dared
come in the presence of their superior officers.  The conversation
happening to turn, as it frequently did, upon the subject of the
present war between England and the colonies engaged in rebellion
against the paternal power, was unusually animated.




CHAPTER XXXIII

_Two Proposals_

"Oh, you know, Miss Wilton, if the colonies--" began one of the
officers, vehemently.

"Pardon me, Mr. Hollins, that is hardly the correct term.  The _late_
colonies would be better," interrupted Katharine, with much spirit.

"Oh, well, you know, I am merely anticipating, of course; we 'll have
them back fast enough, after while.  Now, if they--"

"Pardon me again, sir, but that is another contention I can hardly
admit.  You 'll never have them back,--never, never!"

"Oh, come, Miss Wilton," said another, "you surely do not think the
colonies--oh, well, the late colonies, if you will insist upon it--can
maintain a fight with the power of Great Britain, for any length of
time!  Why, madam, the English spirit--"

"Well, sir, what else have we but the English spirit?  What other blood
runs in our veins, pray?  Just as you love and prize your liberty, so
too do we, and we will not be dominated and ruled over, even by our
brothers.  No, no, Mr. Beauchamp, or you, either, Mr. Hollins; it is no
use.  We are just as determined as you are; and there is but one way to
win back the colonies, as you call them, to their allegiance."

"And how is that, pray?"

"Why, by depopulating them, overwhelming them, killing the people, and
wasting the land.  Only a war of extermination will serve your purpose."

"Well," said Hollins, doggedly, "if they must have it, they must--let
it be extermination!  The authority of the king and the power of
Parliament must be upheld at all hazards."

"Ah, that is easy enough to say," replied Katharine, "but three
millions of English-speaking liberty-loving people are not to be
blotted out by a wave of the hand; they are not so easily exterminated,
as you will find.  Besides, it is easy to speak in general terms; but
thousands and thousands are young and helpless, or old and
feeble,--grandsires or women or children,--how about them?  As long as
there is a woman left or a child, your task is yet unfulfilled.  Make a
personal application of it; I am one of them.  Do you wish to
exterminate me, sir?" she said, looking up at him brilliantly, with her
glorious brown eyes.

"Oh, you--you are different, of course," said the lieutenant,
hesitatingly, not liking to face this intensely personal application of
his intemperate remark.

"Not I!  I am just like the rest--"

"Treason!  I won't hear it," said Desborough, softly.  "There are no
others like you on earth."

"Just like the rest," she continued emphatically, unheeding the
interruption, which the others had hardly caught, "and I will tell you
that never again will that flag at the gaff there be the flag of
America.  You have lost us for good."

"Oh, don't say that.  Make a personal exception of yourself at least,
Miss Wilton, and give us room to hope a little."

"No, no," she laughed.  "You have lost us all--me included."

There was a chorus of expostulation and argument immediately, but Miss
Wilton was not to be overborne.

"Father!" she called quickly to the colonel, who, followed by the
captain, at once joined the little group of officers.  "These gentlemen
seem to doubt me when I say their sometime colonies are gone for good.
Won't you help me to state the point so they will understand it?"

"Gentlemen," said the old colonel, slowly and impressively, "the
colonies were the most loyal and devoted portion of the king's dominion
at one time.  I have been up and down the length and breadth of them, I
know the feeling.  I was for years a soldier of the king myself,--with
your fathers, young sirs,--and I can bear witness that no part of the
kingdom responded with such alacrity to every legitimate demand upon it
by the home government.  Never did men so readily and willingly offer
themselves and their goods for the service of the king.  But it is all
changed now.  The change came slowly, but it came inevitably and
surely, and you could no more change the present conditions than you
could turn back the sun in its course.  England has lost her colonies--"

"Her late colonies," corrected Katharine, softly.

"Yes, yes, of course, her late colonies, that is, beyond possibility of
recovery.  We will not be taxed without representation."

"But suppose that we gave you the representation for which you asked,
colonel.  How then?  Would not there be a general return to allegiance
in that event?" queried the captain.

"Sir," replied the colonel, proudly, "the child who has once learned to
walk alone does not afterward go back to creeping and crawling, or
stumbling along by the aid of his mother's hand.  We have tasted our
independence, enjoyed it, and now we mean to keep it."

"Splendid, sir! splendid, father!" cried the delighted Katharine.
"There speaks the spirit of Runnymede, and Naseby, too, gentlemen!"

"Hush, hush, my child!" chided the colonel, half amusedly; "it is only
the spirit of a plain man who has learned to love liberty by studying
the history of his ancestry and his people."

"Ah, but, colonel, how are you going to get that liberty without
fighting for it?" asked Beauchamp, with rash temerity.  "Howe and
Cornwallis, for instance, have been pursuing Washington for six months,
and could never get near enough to fire a shot at him, so they say."

"Fight, sir, fight!" exclaimed the colonel, in astonished wrath; "why,
God bless me, sir, I am willing to stand out now and show you how they
can fight!"

But Miss Katharine sprang to her feet: "And Bunker Hill, Mr. Beauchamp,
and Long Island!" she cried impetuously.

Beauchamp backed away precipitately from before her in great confusion,
which invoked much mocking comment from the laughing officers round
about him.

"Here is one time the English forces are routed by a rebel!" said
Hollins.

"Yes," added Desborough, "but then Beauchamp is no worse off than the
rest of us would be, if Miss Wilton were opposed to us."

"Well," continued another, coming to the rescue, "we won both of those
engagements, you know, Miss Wilton, after all."

"Won!  Who said anything about winning, sir?  Anybody can win, if they
have men enough or strength enough and money enough--we were talking
about fighting, sir."

"But really, you know," went on Beauchamp, recovering, and returning to
the charge, "Washington's army haven't fought since those days you
speak of, and they must be wiped out of existence by now, I should
suppose."

"Not if George Washington is still alive," interrupted the colonel, his
anger at the inconsiderate officer having somewhat abated.  "I know him
well.  I have known him from a boy,--met him first when I used to go
shooting with Lord Fairfax out at Greenway Court.  I knew his family;
his brother Lawrence too, I was with him at Cartagena,--where I met
your father, Lord Desborough, by the way,--and the world does not yet
know the quality of that man.  If he retreats, it is because he
absolutely has to; and you will see, he will turn and strike Howe and
Cornwallis some day such a blow as will make them reel.  I should not
wonder if he had done so already.  'T is six long weeks since we have
heard any news from home.  Trust me, gentlemen, the Americans will
fight; and if there is a God of justice, they will win too."

"I would fight myself, had I but the opportunity," said Katharine,
resolutely.  "And there are hundreds of other women with the same
feeling."

"Oh, Miss Wilton, you would find no enemies here to fight.  We are all
captives of your bow and spear now, and crave your mercy," said
Desborough, meaningly.

"True, Mistress Katharine.  I hardly know now who commands this ship,
you or I!" said the captain, smiling at her.

"Alas, you do, Captain Vincent; were I the commander, we would be going
that way," she replied, pointing off over the quarter, and gazing
wistfully over the cool, sparkling water, the white-capped waves
breaking beautifully away in every direction.  "Oh, my poor, poor
country, when shall I see you again?" she murmured; "when--"

"Sail ho!" floated down from the foremast head at this moment, and the
idle ship awoke again.

"Where away?"

"Right ahead, sir."

Holmes and Beauchamp walked forward to get a look at the stranger, and
the captain and the colonel stepped across to the weather side of the
deck.  Chloe was sent below to procure a wrap for her mistress, and
Katharine was left alone for a few moments with Desborough.  It was his
first opportunity.

"Have you no curiosity as to the sail reported, Lieutenant Desborough?"

"No, Mistress Katharine, none whatever.  I take no interest in anything
but you.  No, please don't go now," he went on in humble entreaty.  "I
wish to speak to you a moment.  When you came aboard I hoped to see you
often, to be with you alone--to win you--"  His voice sank to a
passionate whisper.

"My lord, my lord! it were best to go no further," she interrupted
gravely.  "'T is no use; you remember."

"Yes, yes, I remember everything,--everything about you, that is.  I
shut my eyes and feel the soft touch of your cool hand on my fevered
head again, as when I had that bullet in my breast.  Oh, it thrills me,
maddens me!  I 'd be wounded so again, could I but feel those hands
once more--  Listen to me, you must listen!  It cannot hurt you to hear
me, and I am sure one of the others will be back in a moment; you are
never alone," he said, detaining her almost forcibly.  "I love you; you
must know that I do.  What is that land, or any land, beside my love?
You are my country!  I can give you lands, title, rank, luxury--  Be
pitiful to me, Mistress Katharine.  What can I do or say or promise?
You shall grace the court of the king, and be at the same time queen of
my heart," he went on impetuously, his soul in his eager whisper.  She
turned and walked over to the lee rail, whither he followed her.

"I 'd rather be in that land off yonder than be the king himself.  I
hate the king, and I could not love the enemy of my country!  No, no,"
she replied, "it cannot be--it can never be!"

"Pshaw!  Your country,--that's not the reason; you love him still," he
went on jealously, "that sailor."

"Yes, 't is true; I love a sailor--you are not he."

"But he is dead!  You left him lying there on the floor in the hall,
you remember, and since then have heard nothing.  He is surely dead."

"It is cruel of you to say it," she went on relentlessly, "but I shall
love his memory then.  No, 't is useless--I respect you, admire you, am
grateful to you, but my heart is there!" and she pointed away again.

"Won't you let me try to win you?" he persisted.  "Don't say me nay
altogether, give me some hope.  If he be dead, let me have a chance.
Oh, Katharine Wilton, I would give up anything for--"

A midshipman touched him on the arm.  "Captain wants to see first
lieutenant, sir!" he said with a wooden, impassive face, saluting the
while.

With a smothered expression of rage, Desborough sprang across the
deck,--for such a summons is not to be disregarded for an instant; even
love gives way to the captain, on shipboard at least.  The little
midshipman was a great favorite with Katharine, and, grateful for the
interruption, she accordingly laid her hand lightly and affectionately
on the shoulder of the Honorable Giles Montagu, aged thirteen, one of
the youngest and smallest middies in the ship; but he stood very
straight and rigid, the personification of dignity, and endeavored to
look very manly indeed.

"Thank you, Mr. Montagu," she said, somewhat to his surprise.

"Don't mention it, nothing at all, madam--orders!  Got to obey orders,
you know."

Katharine laughed.  "You dear sweet child!" she said, and suddenly
stooped and kissed him.  The Honorable Giles turned pale, then flushed
violently and burst into unmanly tears.

"Why, what is it?  Don't you like to have me kiss you?" she said,
amazed.

"It is n't that, Miss Wilton.  I 'd rather kiss you than--than
anything; but you call me a boy, and treat me like a child, and--and I
can't stand it.  I--I 've challenged all the men in the steerage about
you already," alluding to the other little fellows of like rank; "they
call me a baby there, too, because I 'm so little and so young.  But I
'll grow.  And--I love you," he went on abruptly and determinedly,
choking down his sobs and swallowing his tears, while fingering the
handle of his dirk, and furtively rubbing his eyes with his other hand.
"Oh, madam, if you would only wait until I got a frigate!  Won't you?
But no!  You don't treat me like a man," he exclaimed bitterly,
stamping his foot and turning away.

"Well, I never!" cried the astonished and abashed Katharine, completely
overawed for the moment by this novel declaration.  "What next?"
