and wisdom lay in a little strange thing which he called `buk.'  How it
made him strong or wise no one can tell, but so it was.  His name was
Makitok.  When he died he gave _buk_ to his eldest son.  It was wrapped
up in a piece of sealskin.  The eldest son had much talk with his father
about this mystery-thing, and was heard to speak much about the
Kablunets, but the son would never tell what he said.  Neither would he
unwrap the mystery-thing, for fear that its power might escape.  So he
wrapped it up in another piece of sealskin, and gave it to his eldest
son, telling him to hand it down from son to son, along with the name
Makitok.  So _buk_ has grown to be a large bundle now, and no one
understands it, but every one has great reverence for it, and the
Makitok now in possession is a great mystery-man, very wise; we always
consult him on important matters."

Here was food for reflection to Leo during the remainder of that night,
and for many hours did his sleepless mind puzzle over the mystery of
Makitok, the Man of the Valley.

This sleepless condition was, not unpleasantly, prolonged by the sounds
of animal life that entered his oven-like dwelling during great part of
the night.  Evidently great numbers of the feathered tribes were moving
about, either because they meant to retire at dissipatedly late, or had
risen at unreasonably early, hours.  Among them he clearly distinguished
the musical note of the long-tailed duck and the harsh scream of the
great northern diver, while the profound calmness of the weather enabled
him to hear at intervals the soft blow and the lazy plash of a white
whale, turning, it might be, on his other side in his water-bed on the
Arctic Sea.

Following the whale's example, Leo turned round at last, buried his face
in a reindeer pillow, and took refuge in oblivion.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A GLORIOUS REGION CONTEMPLATED, AND A GLORIOUS CHASE PLANNED.

Leo did not slumber long.  Very early in the morning he awoke with that
sensation about him which told that at that time further repose was not
attainable.  He therefore rose, donned the few garments which he had put
off on lying down, crept through his tunnel, and emerged into the open
air.

And what a vision of glorious beauty met his enraptured eyes, while the
fresh sea-breeze entered, like life, into his heaving chest!  It was
still a profound calm.  Earth, air, water, sky, seemed to be uniting in
a silent act of adoration to their great Creator, while the myriad
creatures therein contained were comparatively quiet in the enjoyment of
His rich and varied bounties.  It seemed as if the hour were too early
for the strife of violent passions--too calm for the stirrings of hatred
or revenge.  Everything around spoke only of peace.  Sitting down with
his back to a sun-bathed rock, and his face to the silver sea, Leo drew
out his Bible and proceeded to read the records of the Prince of Peace.

As he lifted his eyes from the words, "marvellous are thy works, and
that my soul knoweth right well," to the vision of beauty and life that
lay before him, Leo made the words and the thought, for the first time,
_his own_.

The prospect embraced innumerable islands of all sizes, studding like
gems the gently-heaving sea.  Over these, countless millions of
sea-birds flew or sailed to and fro; some with the busy fluttering of
activity, as if they had something to do and a mind to do it; others
loitering idly on the wing, or dipping lightly on the wave, as if to bid
their images good-morning.  Burgomaster, yellow-legged, and pink-beaked
gulls, large and small, wheeled in widening circles round him.
Occasional flocks of ptarmigan, in the mixed brown and white plumage of
summer, whirred swiftly over him and took refuge among the rocky heights
of the interior, none of which heights rose above three hundred feet.
Eider-ducks, chattering kittiwakes, and graceful tern, auks, guillemots,
puffins, geese, and even swans, swarmed on the islands, far and near,
while seals, whales, narwhals, dolphins, and grampuses, revelled in the
sea, so that the Arctic world appeared almost overcharged with animal
life.

Of course the noise of their cries and evolutions would have been great
had not distance lent enchantment to sound as well as view.  To Leo
there seemed even a sort of restfulness in the voices of the innumerable
wild-fowl.  They were so far off, most of them, that the sounds fell on
his ear like a gentle plaint, and even the thunderous plash of the great
Greenland whale was reduced by distance to a ripple like that which fell
on the shore at his feet.

While he was meditating, Anders joined him and responded heartily to his
salutation, but Anders was not in a poetical frame of mind that morning.
His thoughts had been already turned to an eminently practical subject.

"I'm tole," said he, seating himself beside our hero, "dat Grabantak
holds a talk 'bout fighting."

"And a council of war," said Leo.  "I know what the result of that will
be.  When leaders like Grabantak and Amalatok decide for war, most of
the people follow them like a flock of sheep.  Although most of the
people never saw this miserable island--this Puiroe--and know, and care,
nothing about it, you'll see that the Flatlanders will be quite
enthusiastic after the council, and ready to fight for it to the bitter
end.  A very bitter end it is, indeed, to see men and women make fools
of themselves about nothing, and be ready to die for the same!  Will
Grabantak allow us to be present at the council, think you?"

"Ho yis.  He send me to say you muss come."

Leo was right.  Nothing could surpass the impetuosity of Grabantak,
except the anxiety of many of the Flatlanders to be led by the nose.
Was not the point in question one of vital importance to the wellbeing
of the community--indeed of the whole Arctic world?  Teyma mildly asked
them what _was_ the point in question, but not a soul could tell, until
Grabantak, starting up with furious energy, manufactured a "point," and
then explained it in language so intricate, yet so clear, that the whole
council stood amazed at their never having seen it before in that light,
and then said, more or less emphatically, "There, that's what we thought
exactly, only we could not state it so well as the great Grabantak!"

After this there was no chance for Teyma and his party--and he had a
party, even among northern savages,--who believed in men working hard at
their own affairs and letting other people alone, as far as that was
possible.  But the peace-party in Arctic land was in a minority at that
time, and the council broke up with shouts for Grabantak, and
denunciations of death and destruction to the men of Poloeland.

But things do not always turn out as men--even wise men--arrange them.
From that day, during the brief period of preparation for the setting
out of an expedition to visit Makitok of Great Isle, Leo received daily
visits from the Prime Minister, who was deeply interested and
inquisitive about the strange "_thing_," as he styled the Bible, which
told the Kablunets about God and the Prince of Peace.  Of course Leo was
willing and happy to give him all the information he desired, and, in
doing so, found a new and deep source of pleasure.

Teyma was not the man to hide his light under a bushel.  He was a
fearless outspoken counsellor, and not only sought to advance the
pacific views he held, by talking to the men of his own party in
private, but even propounded them in public to Grabantak himself, who,
however, could not be moved, though many of his men quietly changed
sides.

With all this Teyma was loyal to his chief.  Whatever he did was in the
way of fair and open argument.  He was too loyal to help Leo when he
made a certain proposal to him one day.

"Teyma," said Leo, on that occasion, "you have been very friendly to me.
Will you do me a great favour?  Will you send a young man in a kayak to
Poloeland with a message from me to my people?  They must think I am
dead.  I wish them to know that I am here, and well."

"No," replied Teyma promptly; "that would let the men of Poloe know that
we talk of going to attack them.  I do not love war.  I wish to let our
enemies alone, but if my chief decides for war, it is my duty to help,
not to frustrate him.  If we go to war with Poloeland, we must take the
men of Poloe by surprise.  That could not be if a young man went with
your message."

Leo saw the force of this, and respected Teyma's disinterested loyalty
to his chief; but felt inclined to argue that, fidelity to the best
interests of his country stood higher than loyalty to a chief.  He
refrained, however, from pressing the matter at that time.

Not so Anders.  When that worthy saw that Teyma would not act, and that
Leo from some inexplicable reason hesitated, he quietly took the matter
into his own hands, and so wrought on the feelings of a weak but amiable
youth of the tribe, that he prevailed on him to carry a message to the
enemy, explaining to him earnestly that no evil, but the reverse, would
result from his mission; that the Kablunets were men of peace, who would
immediately come over to Flatland and put everything right in a
peaceable and satisfactory manner.

"Tell the white men," said Anders, "that we are prisoners in Flatland--
alive and well--but they must come to help us quickly."

No difficulty was experienced in sending the messenger away.  There was
unlimited personal freedom in Flatland.  Young men frequently went off
to hunt for days together at a time, without saying anything about their
intentions, unless they chose; so the secret messenger set out.  Thus
the interpreter lighted the fuse of a mine which was eminently
calculated to blow up the plans of Grabantak.

But another fuse had been lighted which, in a still more effectual
manner, overturned the plans of that warlike chief.

It chanced at this time that the Flatlanders ran short of meat.  Their
habit was to go off on a grand hunt, gather as much meat as they could,
and then come home to feast and rejoice with their families until
scarcity again obliged them to hunt.  Of course there were many among
them whose natural activity rebelled against this lazy style of life,
but the exertions of these did not suffice to keep the whole tribe
supplied.  Hence it came to pass, that they often began to be in want
while in the midst of plenty.  A grand hunt was therefore organised.

They were tired, they said, of ducks and geese and swans.  They wanted a
change from seals and bears, walruses and such small fry.  Nothing short
of a whale would serve them!

Once stirred up to the point of action, there was no lack of energy
among these northern Eskimos.  Kayaks, lines, and spears were got ready,
and oomiaks were launched; for women and children loved to see the
sport, though they did not join in it.  Everywhere bustle and excitement
reigned, and the hubbub was not a little increased by the agitated dogs,
which knew well what was a-foot, and licked their lips in anticipation.

Of course Leo and Anders prepared to go and see the fun.  So did
Oblooria.  It was arranged that Leo and the latter were to go in the
india-rubber boat.

That vessel had been the source of deep, absorbing interest and
curiosity to the natives.  When our travellers landed, it had been
conveyed to the side of the hut assigned them, and laid gently on the
turf, where it was stared at by successive groups all day.  They would
have stayed staring at it all night, if they had not been forbidden by
Grabantak to approach the Kablunets during the hours of repose.  Leo
explained its parts to them, but made no reference to its expansive and
contractile properties.  He also launched it and paddled about to
gratify the curiosity of his new friends, but did not show them the
kite, which, folded and in its cover, he had stowed away in the hut.

One night, fearing that the sun might injure the boat, Leo had squeezed
the air out of it, folded it, and stowed it away in the hut beside the
kite.  The astonishment of the natives, when they came out next morning
to stare and wonder, according to custom, was very great.  Leo resolved
to make a mystery of it, looked solemn when spoken to on the point, and
gave evasive replies.

When, however, the time came for setting off on this grand hunt, he
carried his boat, still bundled up in skins, down to the water's edge,
where kayaks and oomiaks in hundreds lay ready to be launched.

The news spread like wild-fire that the Kablunet was going to "act
wonderfully!"

Every man, woman, and child in the place hurried to the spot.

"It is destroyed!" exclaimed Grabantak, sadly, when he saw the boat
unrolled, flat and empty, on the sand.

We shall not describe the scene in detail.  It is sufficient to say that
Leo did not disappoint the general expectation.  He did indeed "act
wonderfully," filling the unsophisticated savages with unbounded
surprise and admiration, while he filled the boat with air and launched
it.  He then stepped into it with Anders, gallantly lifted Oblooria on
board, and, seizing the oars, rowed gently out to sea.

With shouts of delight the Eskimos jumped into their kayaks and
followed.  Their admiration was, however, a little calmed by the
discovery that the kayaks could beat the Kablunet boat in speed, though
the women in their oomiaks could not keep up with it.  There was no
emulation, however; Leo carefully refrained from racing.

He had been supplied with a long lance and a couple of spears, to which
latter were attached, by thongs of walrus hide, two inflated sealskins
to act as buoys.  These Leo had been previously instructed how to use.

He took the kite with him on this occasion, without, however, having
much expectation of being able to use it, as the calm still prevailed.
It was folded of course, and fixed in its place in the bow.  The natives
thought it must be a spear or harpoon of strange form.

It was not long before a whale was sighted.  There were plenty of these
monsters about, some coming lazily to the surface to blow, others lying
quite still, with their backs out of the water as if sunning themselves,
or asleep.

Soon the spirit of the hunter filled each Eskimo bosom.  What appeared
to be an unusually large whale was observed on the horizon.  Kablunets,
india-rubber boats, and all less important things, were forgotten for
the moment; paddles were plied with energy, and the chase began.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

IN WHICH A GREAT HUNT IS DESCRIBED, A WAR EXPEDITION FRUSTRATED, AND A
HERO ENNOBLED.

Now, in a fit of unwise ambition, Anders the interpreter resolved to
signalise himself, and display his valour on the occasion of this hunt.
He borrowed a kayak of one of the natives, and went as an independent
hunter.  Leo, being quite able to row his boat alone, with Oblooria to
steer, did not object.

The whale which had been selected was a thorough-going Arctic monster of
the largest size, nearly a hundred feet long, which, while on his
passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific through Behring Straits, had
paused for a nap off the isles of Flatland.

The fleet of kayaks converged towards the fish like a flock of locusts.
Despite his utmost efforts, Leo could not do more than keep up in rear
of the hunters, for the sharp shuttle-like kayaks shot like arrows over
the smooth sea, while his clumsier boat required greater force to propel
it.

In a few minutes those Eskimos who were best paddlers crept ahead of the
rest.  Grabantak and his son took the lead, whether because of right or
because of superior strength it was hard to say.  Anders, who was a
powerful fellow, and an expert canoeman, kept close alongside of them.
Not content with this, he attempted to pass them; but they saw his
intention, put on what sporting men call a "spurt," and in a few seconds
left him several yards behind.

On nearing their victim, Grabantak and Koyatuk checked their speed and
got their spears ready.  A few minutes later and a dozen of the
followers were up and prepared to act, but they all held back--all
except the excitable Anders--while the chief and his son glided
cautiously towards the fish, one on either side.  Suddenly each grasped
a spear and drove it with all the force of both arms deep into the
whale's flesh.  It was a rude awaking!  Of course the fish dived
instantly.  In doing so it flung its tail on high with a superb sweep,
sending tons of water, and the impatient Anders, into the air.

The interpreter came down in a cataract of spray, with his kayak doubled
up but himself uninjured, while the Eskimos greeted the event with a
shout of alarm.  This changed into laughter when it was found that the
ambitious man was none the worse for his toss; and the women in one of
the oomiak; paddling quickly up, hauled the drenched and crestfallen man
out of the sea.  They also picked up his spear with the sealskin buoy
attached.  Giving him the place of honour in the bow, they put the spear
in his hand, and bade him keep up heart and do better next time.

Meanwhile the whale, having got over its first surprise, and feeling the
two large sealskin-floats a somewhat heavy as well as unusual drag, soon
came again to the surface, not far from the spot where Leo lay on his
oars, an amused as well as interested spectator of the scene.

"Ho!" shrieked Oblooria, whose eager little heart was easily excited.
She pointed to the fish, and gazed at Leo with blazing eyes.

You may be sure our hero did not lose time.  The india-rubber boat
leaped over the water as if it had suddenly been endowed with life.  The
smart little woman carefully arranged the spear and buoy ready to hand.
Several of the kayaks which chanced to be nearest to the whale rushed
towards it like sword-fish; but they had no chance, Leo being so near.
He did not check his speed on reaching the fish, but allowed the boat to
run tilt on its back.  The smooth india-rubber glided up on the slippery
surface till more than half its length was on the creature's back.  It
was thus checked without a shock--probably unfelt by the whale.

Leo seized the spear, leaped up, and, with both hands, drove it deep
into the flesh, just as the chief and his son had done.  The force with
which he drove it was so great that it thrust the boat back into the
water.  This was fortunate, for it enabled them narrowly to escape the
vortex that was instantly made by the diving of the now enraged monster;
a few back-strokes of the oars took them out of the sea of foam left
behind.

The masterly manner in which this was done called forth shouts of
admiration from the entire fleet, and it greatly surprised Leo himself,
for it was the first time he had attempted to use the harpoon.

"It _must_ have been chance," he muttered to himself as he again lay on
his oars awaiting the whale's reappearance, "a sort of happy accident.
I feel convinced I could not do it so well a second time."

The fish took a longer dive on this occasion, and when he retained to
the surface for another breath of air, was at a considerable distance
from all parts of the fleet.  The instant he was seen, however, every
paddle flashed into the sea, and the kayaks darted away in pursuit.
They soon came up with their victim, and another spear, with its
accompanying sealskin buoy, was fixed in its side.  Down it went a third
time, and reappeared in quite an opposite direction from that in which
it had been looked for.

This uncertainty in the movements of the whale was a matter of small
moment to the occupiers of the light kayaks, but it told rather heavily
on Leo in his clumsier boat.  He therefore resolved to paddle gently
about, take things easy, watch the progress of the chase, and trust to
the chapter of accidents giving him another chance.

"You see, Oblooria," he said in the Eskimo tongue, which he was picking
up rapidly, "it's of no use my pulling wildly about in all directions,
blowing myself for nothing; so we'll just hang off-and-on here and watch
them."

As this remark called for no direct reply, Oblooria merely smiled--
indeed she more than smiled--but said nothing.  It is just possible that
Leo's rendering of the phrase "off-and-on" into Eskimo may have sounded
ridiculous.

However this may be, the two sat there for some time, absorbed and
