back door, and found Sam still sitting on the door-step.

"What's the matter with ye, youngster?" he said, going up to him.
"You've made a pretty mess of it to-night."

"I couldn't help it--indeed I couldn't.  Perhaps I'll do better next
time."

"Better! ha! ha!  You couldn't ha' done better--if you'd on'y gone on.
But why do ye sit there?"

"Because I've nowhere to go to."

"There's plenty o' common lodgin'-'ouses, ain't there?"

"Yes, but I haven't got a single rap."

"Well, then, ain't there the casual ward?  Why don't you go there?
You'll git bed and board for nothin' there."

Having put this question, and received no answer, Ned turned away
without further remark.

Hardened though Ned was to suffering, there was something in the fallen
boy's face that had touched this fallen man.  He turned back with a sort
of remonstrative growl, and re-entered the back lane, but Signor
Twittorini was gone.  He had heard the manager's voice, and fled.

A policeman directed him to the nearest casual ward, where the lowest
stratum of abject poverty finds its nightly level.

Here he knocked with trembling hand.  He was received; he was put in a
lukewarm bath and washed; he was fed on gruel and a bit of bread--quite
sufficient to allay the cravings of hunger; he was shown to a room in
which appeared to be a row of corpses--so dead was the silence--each
rolled in a covering of some dark brown substance, and stretched out
stiff on a trestle with a canvas bottom.  One of the trestles was empty.
He was told he might appropriate it.

"Are they dead?" he asked, looking round with a shudder.

"Not quite," replied his jailer, with a short laugh, "but dead-beat most
of 'em--tired out, I should say, and disinclined to move."

Sam Twitter fell on the couch, drew the coverlet over him, and became a
brown corpse like the rest, while the guardian retired and locked the
door to prevent the egress of any who might chance to come to life
again.

In the morning Sam had a breakfast similar to the supper; was made to
pick oakum for a few hours by way of payment for hospitality, and left
with a feeling that he had at last reached the lowest possible depth of
degradation.

So he had in that direction, but there are other and varied depths in
London--depths of crime and of sickness, as well as of suffering and
sorrow!

Aimlessly he wandered about for another day, almost fainting with
hunger, but still so ashamed to face his father and mother that he would
rather have died than done so.

Some touch of pathos, or gruff tenderness mayhap, in Ned Frog's voice,
induced him to return at night to the scene of his discreditable
failure, and await the pugilist's coming out.  He followed him a short
way, and then running forward, said--

"Oh, sir!  I'm very low!"

"Hallo!  Signor Twittorini again!" said Ned, wheeling round, sternly.
"What have I to do with your being low?  I've been low enough myself at
times, an' nobody helped--"

Ned checked himself, for he knew that what he said was false.

"I think I'm dying," said Sam, leaning against a house for support.

"Well, if you do die, you'll be well out of it all," replied Ned,
bitterly.  "What's your name?"

"Twitter," replied Sam, forgetting in his woe that he had not intended
to reveal his real name.

"Twitter--Twitter.  I've heard that name before.  Why, yes.  Father's
name Samuel--eh?  Mother alive--got cards with Mrs Samuel Twitter on
'em, an' no address?"

"Yes--yes.  How do you come to know?" asked Sam in surprise.

"Never you mind that, youngster, but you come along wi' me.  I've got a
sort o' right to feed you.  Ha! ha! come along."

Sam became frightened at this sudden burst of hilarity, and shrank away,
but Ned grasped him by the arm, and led him along with such decision,
that resistance he felt would be useless.

In a few minutes he was in Ned's garret eating bread and cheese with
ravenous satisfaction.

"Have some beer!" said Ned, filling a pewter pot.

"No--no--no--no!" said Sam, shuddering as he turned his head away.

"Well, youngster," returned Ned, with a slight look of surprise, "please
yourself, and here's your health."

He drained the pot to the bottom, after which, dividing his straw into
two heaps, and throwing them into two corners, he bade Sam lie down and
rest.

The miserable boy was only too glad to do so.  He flung himself on the
little heap pointed out, and the last thing he remembered seeing before
the "sweet restorer" embraced him was the huge form of Ned Frog sitting
in his own corner with his back to the wall, the pewter pot at his
elbow, and a long clay pipe in his mouth.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

HOPES REVIVE.

Mr Thomas Balls, butler to Sir Richard Brandon, standing with his legs
wide apart and his hands under his coat tails in the servants' hall,
delivered himself of the opinion that "things was comin' to a wonderful
pass when Sir Richard Brandon would condescend to go visitin' of a low
family in Whitechapel."

"But the family is no more low than you are, Mr Balls," objected Jessie
Summers, who, being not very high herself, felt that the remark was
slightly personal.

"Of course not, my dear," replied Balls, with a paternal smile.  "I did
not for a moment mean that Mr Samuel Twitter was low in an offensive
sense, but in a social sense.  Sir Richard, you know, belongs to the
hupper ten, an' he 'as not been used to associate with people so much
further down in the scale.  Whether he's right or whether he's wrong
ain't for me to say.  I merely remark that, things being as they are,
the master 'as come to a wonderful pass."

"It's all along of Miss Diana," said Mrs Screwbury.  "That dear child
'as taken the firm belief into her pretty 'ead that all people are equal
in the sight of their Maker, and that we should look on each other as
brothers and sisters, and you know she can twist Sir Richard round her
little finger, and she's taken a great fancy to that Twitter family ever
since she's been introduced to them at that 'Ome of Industry by Mr
Welland, who used to be a great friend of their poor boy that ran away.
And Mrs Twitter goes about the 'Ome, and among the poor so much, and
can tell her so many stories about poor people, that she's grown quite
fond of her."

"But we _ain't_ all equal, Mrs Screwbury," said the cook, recurring,
with some asperity, to a former remark, "an' nothink you or anybody else
can ever say will bring me to believe it."

"Quite right, cook," said Balls.  "For instance, no one would ever admit
that I was as good a cook as you are, or that you was equal to Mrs
Screwbury as a nurse, or that any of us could compare with Jessie
Summers as a 'ouse-maid, or that I was equal to Sir Richard in the
matters of edication, or station, or wealth.  No, it is in the more
serious matters that concern our souls that we are equal, and I fear
that when Death comes, he's not very particular as to who it is he's
cuttin' down when he's got the order."

A ring at the bell cut short this learned discourse.  "That's for the
cab," remarked Mr Balls as he went out.

Now, while these things were taking place at the "West-End," in the
"East-End" the Twitters were assembled round the social board enjoying
themselves--that is to say, enjoying themselves as much as in the
circumstances was possible.  For the cloud that Sammy's disappearance
had thrown over them was not to be easily or soon removed.

Since the terrible day on which he was lost, a settled expression of
melancholy had descended on the once cheery couple, which extended in
varying degree down to their youngest.  Allusion was never made to the
erring one; yet it must not be supposed he was forgotten.  On the
contrary, Sammy was never out of his parents' thoughts.  They prayed for
him night and morning aloud, and at all times silently.  They also took
every possible step to discover their boy's retreat, by means of the
ordinary police, as well as detectives whom they employed for the
purpose of hunting Sammy up: but all in vain.

It must not be supposed, however, that this private sorrow induced Mrs
Twitter selfishly to forget the poor, or intermit her labours among
them.  She did not for an hour relax her efforts in their behalf at
George Yard and at Commercial Street.

At the Twitter social board--which, by the way, was spread in another
house not far from that which had been burned--sat not only Mr and Mrs
Twitter and all the little Twitters, but also Mrs Loper, who had
dropped in just to make inquiries, and Mrs Larrabel, who was anxious to
hear what news they had to tell, and Mr Crackaby, who was very
sympathetic, and Mr Stickler, who was oracular.  Thus the small table
was full.

"Mariar, my dear," said Mr Twitter, referring to some remarkable truism
which his wife had just uttered, "we must just take things as we find
'em.  The world is not goin' to change its course on purpose to please
_us_.  Things might be worse, you know, and when the spoke in your wheel
is at its lowest there must of necessity be a rise unless it stands
still altogether."

"You're right, Mr Twitter.  I always said so," remarked Mrs Loper,
adopting all these sentiments with a sigh of resignation.  "If we did
not submit to fortune when it is adverse, why then we'd have to--have
to--"

"Succumb to it," suggested Mrs Larrabel, with one of her sweetest
smiles.

"No, Mrs Larrabel, I never succumb--from principle I never do so.  The
last thing that any woman of good feeling ought to do is to succumb.  I
would bow to it."

"Quite right, ma'am, quite right," said Stickler, who now found time to
speak, having finished his first cup of tea and second muffin; "to bow
is, to say the least of it, polite and simple, and is always safe, for
it commits one to nothing; but then, suppose that Fortune is impolite
and refuses to return the bow, what, I ask you, would be the result?"

As Mrs Loper could not form the slightest conception what the result
would be, she replied with a weak smile and a request for more sausage.

These remarks, although calculated to enlist the sympathies of Crackaby
and excite the mental energies of Twitter, had no effect whatever on
those gentlemen, for the latter was deeply depressed, and his friend
Crackaby felt for him sincerely.  Thus the black sheep remained
victorious in argument--which was not always the case.

Poor Twitter!  He was indeed at that time utterly crestfallen, for not
only had he lost considerably by the fire--his house having been
uninsured--but business in the city had gone wrong somehow.  A few heavy
failures had occurred among speculators, and as these had always a row
of minor speculators at their backs, like a row of child's bricks, which
only needs the fall of one to insure the downcome of all behind it,
there had been a general tumble of speculative bricks, tailing off with
a number of unspeculative ones, such as tailors, grocers, butchers, and
shopkeepers generally.  Mr Twitter was one of the unspeculative
unfortunates, but he had not come quite down.  He had only been twisted
uncomfortably to one side, just as a toy brick is sometimes seen
standing up here and there in the midst of surrounding wreck.  Mr
Twitter was not absolutely ruined.  He had only "got into difficulties."

But this was a small matter in his and his good wife's eyes compared
with the terrible fall and disappearance of their beloved Sammy.  He had
always been such a good, obedient boy; and, as his mother said, "_so_
sensitive."  It never occurred to Mrs Twitter that this sensitiveness
was very much the cause of his fall and disappearance, for the same
weakness, or cowardice, that rendered him unable to resist the playful
banter of his drinking comrades, prevented him from returning to his
family in disgrace.

"You have not yet advertised, I think?" said Crackaby.

"No, not yet," answered Twitter; "we cannot bear to publish it.  But we
have set several detectives on his track.  In fact we expect one of them
this very evening; and I shouldn't wonder if that was him," he added, as
a loud knock was heard at the door.

"Please, ma'am," said the domestic, "Mr Welland's at the door with
another gentleman.  'E says 'e won't come in--'e merely wishes to speak
to you for a moment."

"Oh! bid 'em come in, bid 'em come in," said Mrs Twitter in the
exuberance of a hospitality which never turned any one away, and utterly
regardless of the fact that her parlour was extremely small.

Another moment, and Stephen Welland entered, apologising for the
intrusion, and saying that he merely called with Sir Richard Brandon, on
their way to the Beehive meeting, to ask if anything had been heard of
Sam.

"Come in, and welcome, _do_," said Mrs Twitter to Sir Richard, whose
face had become a not unfamiliar one at the Beehive meetings by that
time.  "And Miss Diana, too!  I'm _so_ glad you've brought her.  Sit
down, dear.  Not so near the door.  To be sure there ain't much room
anywhere else, but--get out of the way, Stickler."

The black sheep hopped to one side instantly, and Di was accommodated
with his chair.  Stickler was one of those toadies who worship rank for
its own sake.  If a lamp-post had been knighted Stickler would have
bowed down to it.  If an ass had been what he styled "barrow-knighted,"
he would have lain down and let it walk over him--perhaps would even
have solicited a passing kick--certainly would not have resented one.

"Allow me, Sir Richard," he said, with some reference to the knight's
hat.

"Hush, Stickler!" said Mrs Twitter.

The black sheep hushed, while the bustling lady took the hat and placed
it on the sideboard.

"Your stick, Sir Richard," said Stickler, "permit--"

"Hold your tongue, Stickler," said Mrs Twitter.

The black sheep held his tongue--between his teeth,--and wished that
some day he might have the opportunity of punching Mrs Twitter's head,
without, if possible, her knowing who did it.  Though thus reduced to
silence, he cleared his throat in a demonstratively subservient manner
and awaited his opportunity.

Sir Richard was about to apologise for the intrusion when another knock
was heard at the outer door, and immediately after, the City Missionary,
John Seaward, came in.  He evidently did not expect to see company, but,
after a cordial salutation to every one, said that he had called on his
way to the meeting.

"You are heartily welcome.  Come in," said Mrs Twitter, looking about
for a chair, "come, sit beside me, Mr Seaward, on the stool.  You'll
not object to a humble seat, I know."

"I am afraid," said Sir Richard, "that the meeting has much to answer
for in the way of flooding you with unexpected guests."

"Oh! dear, no, sir, I love unexpected guests--the more unexpected the
more I--Molly, dear," (to her eldest girl), "take all the children
up-stairs."

Mrs Twitter was beginning to get confused in her excitement, but the
last stroke of generalship relieved the threatened block and her
anxieties at the same time.

"But what of Sam?" asked young Welland in a low tone; "any news yet?"

"None," said the poor mother, suddenly losing all her vivacity, and
looking so pitifully miserable that the sympathetic Di incontinently
jumped off her chair, ran up to her, and threw her arms round her neck.

"Dear, darling child," said Mrs Twitter, returning the embrace with
interest.

"But I have brought you news," said the missionary, in a quiet voice
which produced a general hush.

"News!" echoed Twitter with sudden vehemence.  "Oh!  Mr Seaward,"
exclaimed the poor mother, clasping her hands and turning pale.

"Yes," continued Seaward; "as all here seem to be friends, I may tell
you that Sam has been heard of at last.  He has not, indeed, yet been
found, but he has been seen in the company of a man well-known as a
rough disorderly character, but who it seems has lately put on the blue
ribbon, so we may hope that his influence over Sam will be for good
instead of evil."

An expression of intense thankfulness escaped from the poor mother on
hearing this, but the father became suddenly much excited, and plied the
missionary with innumerable questions, which, however, resulted in
nothing, for the good reason that nothing more was known.

At this point the company were startled by another knock, and so
persuaded was Mrs Twitter that it must be Sammy himself, that she
rushed out of the room, opened the door, and almost flung herself into
the arms of Number 666.

"I--I--beg your pardon, Mr Scott, I thought that--"

"No harm done, ma'am," said Giles.  "May I come in?"

"Certainly, and most welcome."

When the tall constable bowed his head to pass under the ridiculously
small doorway, and stood erect in the still more ridiculously small
parlour, it seemed as though the last point of capacity had been
touched, and the walls of the room must infallibly burst out.  But they
did not!  Probably the house had been built before domiciles warranted
to last twenty years had come into fashion.

"You have found him!" exclaimed Mrs Twitter, clasping her hands and
looking up in Giles's calm countenance with tearful eyes.

"Yes, ma'am, I am happy to tell you that we have at last traced him.  I
have just left him."

