He took a piece of charcoal, as he spoke, and brought it into contact
with two of the knobs.  The result was to convert the coal instantly
into an intense electric light of dazzling beauty.  The point of an
ordinary lead pencil applied in the same way became equally brilliant.

"That must be a powerful battery," remarked the detective.

The Inspector smilingly took two handles from a neighbouring shelf and
held them out to his visitor.

"Lay hold of these," he said, "and you will feel its powers."

The detective did as directed, and received a shock which caused him to
fling down the handles with great promptitude and violence.  He was too
self-possessed a man, however, to seem put out.

"Strong!" he said, with a short laugh; "remarkably strong and
effective."

"Yes," assented the Inspector, "it _is_ pretty powerful, and it requires
to be so, for it does heavy work and travels a considerable distance.
The greater the distance, you know, the greater the power required to do
the work and transmit the messages.  This is the battery that fires two
signal-guns every day at one o'clock--one at Newcastle, the other at
South Shields, and supplies Greenwich time to all our principal stations
over a radius of three hundred miles.--I sent the contents of one
hundred and twenty jars through you just now!"

"That's curious and interesting; I may even say it is suggestive,"
returned the detective, in a meditative tone.  "Double that number of
jars, now, applied to the locks of street doors at night and the
fastenings of windows would give a powerful surprise to burglars."

"Ah, no doubt, and also to belated friends," said the Inspector, "not to
mention the effect on servant-maids in the morning when people forgot to
disconnect the wires."

The man in grey admitted the truth of the observation, and, thanking the
Battery Inspector for his kind attentions, bade him a cordial adieu.
Continuing his investigation of the basement, he came to the three huge
fifty-horse-power engines, whose duty it is to suck the air from the
pneumatic telegraph tubes in the great hall above.  Here the detective
became quite an engineer, asked with much interest and intelligence
about governors, pistons, escape-valves, actions, etcetera, and wound up
with a proposition.

"Suppose, now," he said, "that a little dog were to come suddenly into
this room and dash about in a miscellaneous sort of way, could it by any
means manage to become entangled in your machinery and get so demolished
as never more to be seen or heard of?"

The engineer looked at his questioner with a somewhat amused expression.
"No, sir, I don't think it could.  No doubt it might kill itself with
much facility in various ways, for fifty horsepower, properly applied,
would do for an elephant, much more a dog.  But I don't believe that
power to be sufficient to produce annihilation.  There would have been
remains of some sort."

From the engine-room our detective proceeded to the boiler-room and the
various kitchens, and thence to the basement of the old building on the
opposite side of the street, where he found a similarly perplexing
labyrinth.  He was taken in hand here by Mr Bright, who chanced to be
on duty, and led him first to the Stamp Department.  There was much to
draw him off his "canine" mania here.  First he was introduced to the
chief of the department, who gave him much interesting information about
stamps in general.

Then he was conducted to another room, and shown the tables at which men
were busy counting sheets of postage-stamps and putting them up in
envelopes for all parts of the United Kingdom.  The officer in charge
told him that the weight of stamps sent out from that room averaged a
little over three tons daily, and that the average value of the weekly
issue was 150,000 pounds.  Then he was led into a fireproof safe--a
solid stone apartment--which was piled from floor to ceiling with sheets
of postage-stamps of different values.  Those for letters ranged from
one halfpenny to one pound, but those used for telegrams ran up to as
much as five pounds sterling for a single stamp.  Taking down from a
shelf a packet of these high-priced stamps, which was about the size of
a thick octavo book, the official stated that it was worth 35,000
pounds.

"Yes, sir," he added, "this strong box of ours holds a deal of money.
You are at this moment in the presence of nearly two millions sterling!"

"A tidy little sum to retire upon.  Would build two thousand Board
Schools at a thousand pounds each," said the detective, who was an adept
at figures,--as at everything else.

Feeling that it would be ridiculous to inquire about mad dogs in the
presence of two millions sterling, the man in grey suffered himself to
be led through long passages and vaulted chambers, some of which latter
were kitchens, where the men on duty had splendid fires, oceans of hot
water, benches and tables, and liberty to cook the food either brought
by themselves for the day or procured from a caterer on the premises--
for Post-Office officials when on duty may not leave the premises for
any purpose whatever, _except_ duty, and must sign books specifying to
the minute when, where, and why, they come and go.  In this basement
also, as in the other, were long rows of numbered cupboards or large
pigeon-holes with lockable doors, one of which was appropriated to each
man for the safe depositing of his victuals and other private property.

Here, too, were whitewashed lavatories conveniently and plentifully
distributed, with every appliance for cleanliness and comfort, including
a large supply of fresh and good water.  Of this, 49,000 gallons a day
is supplied by an artesian well, and 39,000 gallons a day by the New
River Company, in the new building.  In the old building the 27,000
gallons consumed daily is supplied by the New River Company.  It is,
however, due to the 5900 human beings who labour in both buildings to
state that at least 55,000 of these gallons are swallowed by
steam-engines on the premises.

To all these things Mr Bright directed attention with professional
zeal, and the man in grey observed with much interest all that he saw
and heard, until he came to the letter-carriers' kitchen, where several
of the men were cooking food at the fire, while others were eating or
chatting at the tables.

Happening to mention the dog here, he found that Mr Bright was
partially acquainted with the incident.

"It was down these stairs it ran," he said, "and was knocked on the head
in this very room by the policeman.  No one knows where he took the body
to, but he went out at that door, in the direction, it is supposed, of
the boiler-house."

The detective had at last got hold of a clew.  He was what is styled, in
a well-known game, "getting warm."

"Let us visit the boiler-house," he said.

Again, for the nonce, he became an engineer.  Like Paul, he was all
things to all men.  He was very affable to the genial stoker, who was
quite communicative about the boilers.  After a time the detective
referred to the dog, and the peculiar glance of the stoker at once
showed him that his object was gained.

"A policeman brought it?" he asked quietly.

"Yes, a policeman brought it," said the stoker suspiciously.

The man in grey soon, however, removed his suspicions and induced him to
become confidential.  When he had obtained all the information that the
stoker could give--in addition to poor Floppart's collar, which had no
name on it, but was stamped with three stars on its inside--the
detective ceased to make any further inquiries after mad dogs, and, with
a disengaged mind, accompanied Mr Bright through the remainder of the
basement, where he commented on the wise arrangement of having the
mail-bags made by convicts, and on the free library, which he pronounced
a magnificent institution, and which contained about 2000 volumes, that
were said by the courteous librarian to be largely used by the
officials, as well as the various newspapers and magazines, furnished
gratuitously by their proprietors.  He was also shown the "lifts," which
raised people--to say nothing of mails, etcetera--from the bottom to the
top of the building, or _vice versa_; the small steam-engine which
worked the same, and the engineer of which--an old servant--was
particularly impressive on the peculiar "governor" by which his engine
was regulated; the array of letter stampers, which were kept by their
special guardian in immaculate order and readiness; the fire-hose, which
was also ready for instant service, and the firemen, who were in
constant attendance with a telegraphic instrument at their special
disposal, connecting them with other parts of the building.  All this,
and a great deal more which we have not space to mention, the man in
grey saw, admired, and commented on, as well as on the general evidence
of order, method, regularity, neatness, and system which pervaded the
whole place.

"You manage things well here," he said to his conductor at parting.

"We do," responded Mr Bright, with an approving nod; "and we had need
to, for the daily despatch of Her Majesty's mails to all parts of the
world is no child's play.  Our motto is--or ought to be--`Security,
Celerity, Punctuality, and Regularity.'  We couldn't carry that out,
sir, without good management.--Good-bye."

"Good-bye, and thank you," said the detective, leaving St.
Martin's-le-Grand with his busy brain ruminating on a variety of
subjects in a manner that no one but a detective could by any
possibility understand.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE TURNING-POINT.

As time advanced Philip Maylands' circumstances improved, for Phil
belonged to that class of which it is sometimes said "they are sure to
get on."  He was thorough-going and trustworthy--two qualities these
which the world cannot do without, and which, being always in demand,
are never found begging.

Phil did not "set up" for anything.  He assumed no airs of superior
sanctity.  He did not even aim at being better than others, though he
did aim, daily, at being better than he was.  In short, the lad, having
been trained in ways of righteousness, and having the Word of God as his
guide, advanced steadily and naturally along the narrow way that leads
to life.  Hence it came to pass in the course of time that he passed
from the ranks of Out-door Boy Telegraph Messenger to that of
Boy-Sorter, with a wage of twelve shillings a week, which was raised to
eighteen shillings.  His hours of attendance at the Circulation
Department were from 4:30 in the morning till 9; and from 4:30 in the
evening till 8.  These suited him well, for he had ever been fond of
rising with the lark while at home, and had no objection to rise before
the lark in London.  The evening being free he devoted to study--for
Phil was one of that by no means small class of youths who, in default
of a College education, do their best to train themselves, by the aid of
books and the occasional help of clergymen, philanthropists, and evening
classes.

In all this Phil was greatly assisted by his sister May, who, although
not much more highly educated than himself, was quick of perception, of
an inquiring mind, and a sympathetic soul.  He was also somewhat
assisted, and, at times, not a little retarded, by his ardent admirer
Peter Pax, who joined him enthusiastically in his studies, but, being of
a discursive and enterprising spirit, was prone to tempt him off the
beaten paths of learning into the thickets of speculative philosophy.

One evening Pax was poring over a problem in Euclid with his friend in
Pegaway Hall.

"Phil," he said uneasily, "drop your triangles a bit and listen.  Would
you think it dishonest to keep a thing secret that ought to be known?"

"That depends a good deal on what the secret is, and what I have got to
do with it," replied Phil.  "But why do you ask?"

"Because I've been keeping a secret a long time--much against my will--
an' I can stand it no longer.  If I don't let it out, it'll bu'st me--
besides, I've got leave to tell it."

"Out with it, then, Pax; for it's of no use trying to keep down things
that don't agree with you."

"Well, then," said Pax.  "I know where George Aspel is!"

Phil, who had somewhat unwillingly withdrawn his mind from Euclid,
turned instantly with an eager look towards his little friend.

"Ah, I thought that would rouse you," said the latter, with a look of
unwonted earnestness on his face.  "You must know, Phil, that a long
while ago--just about the time of the burglary at Miss Stivergill's
cottage--I made the amazin' discovery that little Tottie Bones is
Mariar--alias Merry,--the little baby-cousin I was nuss to in the
country long ago, whom I've often spoke to you about, and from whom I
was torn when she had reached the tender age of two or thereby.  It
follows, of course, that Tottie's father--old Bones--is my uncle,
_alias_ Blackadder, _alias_ the Brute, of whom I have also made mention,
and who, it seems, came to London to try his fortune in knavery after
havin' failed in the country.  I saw him once, I believe, at old Blurt's
bird-shop, but did not recognise 'im at the time, owin' to his hat bein'
pulled well over his eyes, though I rather think he must have recognised
me.  The second time I saw him was when Tottie came to me for help and
set me on his tracks, when he was goin' to commit the burglary on
Rosebud Cottage.  I've told you all about that, but did not tell you
that the burglar was Tottie's father, as Tottie had made me promise not
to mention it to any one.  I knew the rascal at once on seeing him in
the railway carriage, and could hardly help explodin' in his face at the
fun of the affair.  Of course he didn't know me on account of my bein'
as black in the face as the King of Dahomey.--Well," continued Pax,
warming with his subject, "it also follows, as a matter of course, that
Mrs Bones is my blessed old aunt Georgie--now changed into Molly, on
account, no doubt, of the Brute's desire to avoid the attentions of the
police.  Now, as I've a great regard for aunt Georgie, and have lost a
good deal of my hatred of the Brute, and find myself fonder than ever of
Tottie--I beg her pardon, of Merry--I've been rather intimate--indeed, I
may say, pretty thick--with the Boneses ever since; and as I am no
longer a burden to the Brute--can even help 'im a little--he don't
abominate me as much as he used to.  They're wery poor--awful poor--are
the Boneses.  The Brute still keeps up a fiction of a market-garden and
a dairy--the latter bein' supplied by a cow and a pump--but it don't
pay, and the business in the city, whatever it may be, seems equally
unprofitable, for their town house is not a desirable residence."

"This is all very interesting and strange, Pax, but what has it to do
with George Aspel?" asked Phil.  "You know I'm very anxious about him,
and have long been hunting after him.  Indeed, I wonder that you did not
tell me about him before."

"How could I," said Pax, "when Tot--I mean Merry--no, I'll stick to
Tottie it comes more natural than the old name--told me not for worlds
to mention it.  Only now, after pressin' her and aunt Georgie wery hard,
have I bin allowed to let it out, for poor Aspel himself don't want his
whereabouts to be known."

"Surely!" exclaimed Phil, with a troubled, anxious air, "he has not
become a criminal."

"No.  Auntie assures me he has not, but he is sunk very low, drinks hard
to drown his sorrow, and is ashamed to be seen.  No wonder.  You'd
scarce know 'im, Phil, workin' like a coal-heaver, in a suit of dirty
fustian, about the wharves--tryin' to keep out of sight.  I've come
across 'im once or twice, but pretended not to recognise 'im.  Now,
Phil," added little Pax, with deep earnestness in his face, as he laid
his hand impressively on his friend's arm, "we must save these two men
somehow--you and I."

"Yes, God helping us, we must," said Phil.

From that moment Philip Maylands and Peter Pax passed, as it were, into
a more earnest sphere of life, a higher stage of manhood.  The influence
of a powerful motive, a settled purpose, and a great end, told on their
characters to such an extent that they both seemed to have passed over
the period of hobbledehoyhood at a bound, and become young men.

With the ardour of youth, they set out on their mission at once.  That
very night they went together to the wretched abode of Abel Bones,
having previously, however, opened their hearts and minds to May
Maylands, from whom, as they had expected, they received warm
encouragement.

Little did these unsophisticated youths know what a torrent of anxiety,
grief, fear, and hope their communication sent through the heart of poor
May.  The eager interest she manifested in their plans they regarded as
the natural outcome of a kind heart towards an old friend and
playfellow.  So it was, but it was more than that!

The same evening George Aspel and Abel Bones were seated alone in their
dismal abode in Archangel Court.  There were tumblers and a pot of beer
before them, but no food.  Aspel sat with his elbows on the table,
grasping the hair on his temples with both hands.  The other sat with
arms crossed, and his chin sunk on his chest, gazing gloomily but
intently at his companion.

Remorse--that most awful of the ministers of vengeance--had begun to
torment Abel Bones.  When he saved Tottie from the fire, Aspel had
himself unwittingly unlocked the door in the burglar's soul which let
the vengeful minister in.  Thereafter Miss Stivergill's illustration of
mercy, _for the sake of another_, had set the unlocked door ajar, and
the discovery that his ill-treated little nephew had nearly lost his
life in the same cause, had pulled the door well back on its rusty
hinges.

Having thus obtained free entrance, Remorse sat down and did its work
with terrible power.  Bones was a man of tremendous passions and
powerful will.  His soul revolted violently from the mean part he had
been playing.  Although he had not succeeded in drawing Aspel into the
vortex of crime as regards human law, he had dragged him very low, and,
especially, had fanned the flame of thirst for strong drink, which was
the youth's chief--at least his most dangerous--enemy.  His thirst was
an inheritance from his forefathers, but the sin of giving way to it--of
encouraging it at first when it had no power, and then of gratifying it
as it gained strength, until it became a tyrant--was all his own.  Aspel
knew this, and the thought filled him with despair as he sat there with
his now scarred and roughened fingers almost tearing out his hair, while
his bloodshot eyes stared stonily at the blank wall opposite.

Bones continued to gaze at his companion, and to wish with all his heart
that he had never met him.  He had, some time before that, made up his
mind to put no more temptation in the youth's way.  He now went a step
further--he resolved to attempt the task of getting him out of the
scrapes into which he had dragged him.  But he soon found that the will
which had always been so powerful in the carrying out of evil was
woefully weak in the unfamiliar effort to do good!

Still, Bones had made up his mind to try.  With this end in view he
proposed a walk in the street, the night being fine.  Aspel sullenly
consented.  The better to talk the matter over, Bones proposed to retire
to a quiet though not savoury nook by the river-side.  Aspel objected,
