back of the other, and others mounted above them; then Ernest, seeing a
good ladder formed, climbed up it to the top, though he was nearly
knocked over by the shower of snowballs which assailed him; the top of
the castle, also, was so slippery that he had the greatest difficulty in
getting hold of it, and his position was anything but pleasant.
Meantime, Tom Bouldon, one of the besieged, who was burning to
distinguish himself, seeing all the rest of the party engaged, telling
Lemon that he had a dodge, and to look out for him, slipped over the
parapet amid a shower of snow, so that he was unseen, and then, climbing
up the side of the ditch, scampered off to get hold of one of the
standards of the enemy, the sentinel left to guard it having deserted
his post that he might join in the attack.  He seized it, and was
hurrying back, scarcely restraining a shout of triumph, when Ernest saw
him.

"Tom, you traitor, let go that!" he sung out; but as he was mounted on
the backs of four other boys, and fighting away at the top of the wall,
he could not enforce his commands.

Tom, hearing him, scuttled away to the other side, where Buttar was
endeavouring to effect a breach.  Two boys made chase after him, but he
got up to the wall before them, and throwing the flag into it, he sprang
up on the backs of some of the besiegers, who did not find out in time
that he did not belong to their party; and Lemon being on the watch for
him, lent him a helping hand, and got him safe into the castle.  Then he
seized the flag he had brought so gallantly off, and went round the
castle walls, waving it in the faces of the besiegers, and crowing as
lustily as any young cock.  Frank, when he discovered what had been
done, felt like a general who has unwarily allowed his camp to be
attacked; and now, seeing that the other two standards were unprotected,
sent back a guard to each.

It may appear strange that Bouldon should have so easily got into the
castle; but in his case he had a friend to help him, while in the case
of the besiegers everybody was opposed to them.  So strong was the
castle, and so manfully was it defended, that it appeared as if it would
effectually hold out to the end of the day.

Time after time Frank returned to the assault, and as often he and his
troops were tumbled over into the ditch.  This, also, was Ernest's fate;
indeed he at last gave up all hopes of taking the castle in the way
proposed.  Telling the rest of his followers to continue pelting away
with all their might, he called Ellis to his councils.  Ellis at once
advised an attempt to undermine the walls.  He had run his head into a
soft place, and he thought he might get through.  The idea was a bright
one.  Ernest immediately went round and got some men from Frank and
Buttar, to assist by the warmth of their snowballing to cover their
proceedings, and then he and Ellis set to work to bore their way
through.  The other two commanders were all the time to keep up a series
of incessant assaults, which might fully occupy the attention of the
enemy.  No one within the walls suspected what was taking place.  They
went on firing away with their snowballs as furiously as ever.  No one
seemed wearied.  There was something very inspiriting in the work.  It
was far pleasanter than real fighting, because all the combatants might
hope to live to fight again, for whichever side fortune might declare
itself.

Lemon seemed to think, at last, that things were growing rather tame, so
he seized his horn and began "too-tooing" away with all his might.  It
was answered more loudly than before by the horns of the besiegers,
followed by a hotter shower of snowballs than ever sent by them into the
castle.  While Lemon and his followers were busily engaged replying to
it, they found their legs seized by Ernest and Ellis, and several other
boys, while Frank, mounting on the backs of some of his troops, leaped
over the parapet on the opposite side.  Lemon was so astonished that he
knew not what order to issue.  Buttar--a messenger being sent to summon
him--came round with some followers to the same side, and forced his way
with them through the hole.  An attempt was made to throw the daring
besiegers over the walls; but they kicked and shoved against them so
furiously that a large breach was effected, up which the rest of the
assailants poured; while Ernest and Ellis, overcoming all opposition,
forced their way up to the standard, and seizing the flag-staff, hauled
it down at the moment that one side of the castle fell with a tremendous
crash, leaving it utterly defenceless.  Lemon's horn sent forth a long
wail of despair, while the other horns sounded notes of triumph, and the
castle was declared to be truly and gloriously won.

"It is not your first military triumph, and I hope will not be your
last," said Ellis to Ernest, as they were marching homeward.

"Nor yours either, and I hope will not be your last.  If I go into the
army, my great delight will be to find that you are going also."

When the boys reached the house, all the visitors from the neighbourhood
found that they were expected to dine and spend the evening.  The
combatants did ample justice to the fare set before them, and it was
announced that a conjuror would make his appearance in the evening, to
astonish them with his wonderful performances.  Ernest and Bouldon
disappeared directly after dinner.  Ernest said he had to go and make
preparations for the conjuror, and Tom, putting his hand to his heart,
said that he felt it his duty to go and help him.  When the boys came up
from dinner they found one end of the large drawing-room, in which there
was a deep recess, fitted up as a theatre, and in the centre a table, at
which sat a man with a huge pair of spectacles, a long white beard and
moustache, a high conical cap, covered over with all sorts of strange
hieroglyphics, and many other curious devices.  Round his head was a
turban.  He wore a tight green waistcoat, a red silk flowing robe over
it, while a handsome sash bound his waist, in which was stuck an
ink-horn, a wand, a huge knife or dagger, a pistol, and several other
articles.  Altogether, he was a somewhat formidable-looking character.
By his side appeared, when the curtain drew up, a curious-looking clown,
with a huge face, with all sorts of twists and curls in it, great big
ears, a cock-up nose, and a short stumpy beard.  This extraordinary
physiognomy was covered with a high cap, which had a tassel and bells.
He wore also a party-coloured waistcoat, huge full breeches of all the
colours of the rainbow, hose of yellow, and long shoes with rosettes of
vast size.  He stood forth a veritable clown or jester of bygone days.

The magician rose.  He seemed to be a very tall man, and contrasted
strongly with his attendant, who was one of the roundest, shortest, most
punchy-looking little men ever seen.  A symphony was played on a piano
behind the curtains, during which the magician waved his wand, and then
in a deep voice he explained that he was about to perform a series of
wonderful and unaccountable tricks, which no one had ever equalled, or
was ever likely to equal while the world lasted; on which the clown
clapped his hands and nodded his head in approval, exclaiming, in the
oddest squeaking voice imaginable, "Certainly, certainly; my master
speaks the truth; who can doubt him?  If anybody does doubt him, let him
take care of me."

The conjuror hemmed, and, waving his wand, took up a pile of halfpence.
"Now, ladies and gentlemen, you see these halfpence, and you see this
cap.  The cap I will place on the table, and taking the halfpence in my
left hand, as you see, I will pass them from under the table into the
cap.  Heigh, presto, fly!"  Sure enough, he lifted up the cap, and there
were the halfpence.  "Now I will pass them back again into my hand--
listen."  One after the other they were heard dropping into his hand,
and when the cap was lifted they were gone.  Then he put a die on the
table, and covering it with his cap, sent the halfpence back to take its
place.  There they were.  He covered them up; they had disappeared, and
the die took their place.

He next produced a round tea-caddy.  He asked a lady for a cambric
handkerchief.  Several were tendered.  He took one, and put it into the
caddy.  Drawing out one end, while examining it by a candle to observe
its texture, it caught fire.  It had burnt a good deal before he could
find the cover to put it out.  No sooner had he done so than,
pronouncing a few magic words, he opened the canister, and presented the
handkerchief uninjured.  Loud applause followed.  "Now, ladies and
gentlemen," he said, holding up a large silk pocket-handkerchief,
"examine this handkerchief.  It has no double lining.  It is a plain
simple handkerchief.  Watch me narrowly.  I throw it over the table.  I
hold it up.  See what comes forth."  A whole stream of filberts fell
from the handkerchief.  "Here, Placolett, take them to the company,"
said the magician, and the round-faced dwarf, with many odd twists and
bounds, handed them round.  Again the magician spread the handkerchief,
and this time produced a still larger quantity of sugar-plums,
sufficient, it seemed, to fill a hat.  They also were handed round.
Once more the handkerchief was spread, and produced a number of bouquets
of beautiful flowers, some real and some artificial.  These in like
manner were distributed among the young ladies present.

"Will any lady lend me a plain gold ring?" asked the magician.  One was
handed to him by Placolett.  He held it up between his finger and thumb.
"Presto, fly!" he exclaimed, and threw it into the centre of the room.
Everybody tried to catch it, but could not.  It had vanished.  Placolett
hunted about, and at last found it under a cushion at the furthest
corner of the room.  Again he handed it to his master, who invited a
little girl to take it; but before it reached her fingers it had
disappeared, and Placolett, as before, hunting about, found it in
the heel of a boy's shoe.  Now Placolett collected a dozen
pocket-handkerchiefs from the company, and the magician tied them up in
a handkerchief, which he placed on the table.  He ordered Placolett to
bring him a basin and a jug, meaning, of course, that the jug should
contain water, but there was none, so he sent Placolett again to fetch
it, and ordered him to bring some soap.  Meantime he threw some black
balls up to the ceiling, which never came down again; and then he
swallowed a mustard-pot, a salt-cellar, and a pepper-box; and then he
took three cups and three balls, and made the balls pass under the cups,
so that each cup had a ball under it, and then he brought them all
together under one cup merely by waving his wand over them; and finally
some twenty cups in succession appeared out of one of them.  At last
Placolett came back, bringing some water, but it was cold instead of
hot, and there was no soap, and then an iron was wanted.  Before he went
for them, his master made him borrow two hats.  One the magician placed
above the other on the table.  Then he took one of his magic cups, and
showing that there was nothing in it, turned it upside down.  He lifted
it, and, lo and behold, there was a walnut inside!  This he put into the
hat, and as often as he lifted the cup there was a walnut, which, like
the first, he transferred to the hat.  At last Placolett came back.
"Now," observed the magician, "the hat is half-full of walnuts.  Heigh,
presto! pass through the upper into the lower hat," he cried, and
lifting the upper hat, that was found to be empty, while the lower one
was half-full of indubitable walnuts, for the guests cracked several
which were handed to them by Placolett.

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, you gave me some handkerchiefs," observed
the magician.  "I shall have much pleasure in washing them for you."
Saying this, he took the bundle on the table, and emptied its contents
into the basin, and then began washing in a very unartistic, rough way,
evidently tearing them; and one, before wetting it, he held up to the
candle, and carelessly set it on fire.  Then he spread a blanket, and
took them out, and began ironing them; but the iron was too hot, and he
was evidently singeing them horribly.  "Never mind," he exclaimed, "I
have a magic ironing machine, which will do the work in a moment."  He
produced a box, with a handle like a churn, put the wet half-singed
bundle in, and giving one turn of the handle, produced the handkerchiefs
all washed, neatly folded and scented, and sent them round by Placolett
to their owners.

It would be difficult to describe all the clever tricks he performed.
He put a ring into a handkerchief, and it disappeared.  He passed an awl
through a piece of wood and Placolett's nose, and then put a piece of
whipcord through the hole, working it backwards and forwards, to the
dwarfs evident agony; and then he produced a funnel, which he held at a
boy's elbow, and by pumping away with the other arm, at last a stream of
wine flowed out.  Then he put a large die on the table, and covered it
with a box and then with a hat.  He lifted up the hat and then the box,
and the die was gone.  He produced it, however, from under the table,
through which it had evidently gone.

I will not speak of many other minor tricks which he performed with
cards and other things, which elicited a fair share of applause.  He
next borrowed a sovereign, and produced an apple, which he sent round to
the company.  He begged some one to mark the sovereign, which was given
back to him.  He put it on the table, and covered it with a red cup.
Then he took a knife, and holding up the apple, cut it in two, when the
sovereign was found to be in the middle of it.

"Ah, I forgot; I have still a trick or two more," he remarked.  "Here is
a bottle.  Will any lady like port, or sherry, or claret, or whisky, or
brandy, or liqueur?"  Some said one thing, some said another, and
Placolett handing a tray of small glasses, he filled one after the other
with whatever was asked for.  Once he let the bottle drop, but it was
not broken, as he was able to prove by handing it round to the company.
Then, after considering a moment, he showed a large glass bowl full of
ink.  He took some of the ink out with a ladle, and put it into a plate,
which he showed to the company.  Then he covered up the bowl with his
silk handkerchief, and on lifting it the ink had disappeared, and the
bowl was seen to be full of clear water, with gold and silver fish
swimming about in it.

"One exhibition more," he remarked; "and, ladies, wind up your nerves
for a dreadful catastrophe.  Here is a pistol, powder, and bullets.
Examine them.  Will any one load the pistol?  See that the powder is
genuine."  It was done.  The magician took the pistol, and put in some
wadding.  Then Placolett took it back, and some gentleman having marked
three bullets, put them in one after the other.  More wadding was then
put in, and rammed down.  "Who will fire?" asked the magician, holding
up a plate at arm's length.  Scarcely had the smoke cleared away when
the magician handed the plate with the three marked bullets rolling
about in it.

Everybody was expressing surprise at the interesting performance they
had witnessed, and wondering where the magician had come from, when he
and Placolett, with many bows, retired behind the curtain.  Directly
afterwards it was opened, and who should appear but Ernest and Tom
Bouldon, while the magician and his attendant had disappeared.

Even Christmas holidays must have an end.  The guests went back to their
respective homes, all declaring that they had never enjoyed themselves
so much as they had on this occasion since they first went to school.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

RETURN TO SCHOOL--A GRAND GAME AT FOOTBALL.

"Here we all are again," exclaimed Tom Bouldon, as he shook Ernest, and
Buttar, and Ellis, and his other friends by the hand, as they first met
at school after those memorable Christmas holidays.  Of course they had
a great deal to talk about; the fun they had had at Oaklands, and what
they had all done afterwards; then they had to discuss the changes in
the school; the qualities of the new boys who had arrived, and what had
become of the old ones who had gone away.

Barber had got back, and was as conceited as ever, and as supercilious
towards his old school-fellow Ellis, who still seemed always strangely
cowed in his presence.  In many respects Barber, unhappily, bade fair to
rival Blackall.  He was not so great a bully, but then he had not the
power of being so, as he was not so strong, and not so high up in the
school.  However, he seemed fully inclined to exercise his bullying
propensities towards poor Ellis, and though he did not strike him, he
never lost an opportunity of attacking him with the words which wound
far more than sharp knives.

"This must never be," exclaimed Ernest, one day, when he had
accidentally heard Barber abusing Ellis, and the latter had walked away
without retorting or attempting a defence.

"Your friends, my dear Ellis, must for their own sakes, as well as for
yours, insist on your taking notice of what that fellow says, both of
you and to you.  We must bring him to an explanation, and clear up the
mystery.  We are certain, as I have often assured you, that his
treatment of you is undeserved; and why should he go on insinuating all
sorts of things against you, and not dare to speak out?"

"Oh, do not push things to extremities," answered Ellis, and the tears
almost came into his eyes.  "That can do me no good.  Barber does not
act generously towards me, but I think that he believes that he has the
right to abuse me; and if he really thought me guilty of the crime of
which I am accused, he would certainly be right in not associating with
me."

Ernest was not satisfied with this reply, and Ellis's behaviour
afterwards was so strange, he thought, towards him, that when he and
Buttar talked the matter over together, they could not help allowing a
shade of suspicion to creep over their own minds that all was not right.
They tried not to let Ellis discover it, but he was too keen-sighted
and sensitive not at once to perceive that their feelings towards him
were changed, and that made him, in spite of all they could do, retire
more than ever away from them and into himself.

The weather continued so cold that the ordinary games could not be
played with any satisfaction, and none but those requiring a good deal
of bodily exercise were in vogue.  Lemon, and some of the more actively
disposed fellows, determined to get up a game of football, though it was
generally played at our school late in the autumn.  There were plenty of
boys ready to join in it, but the chief question was to decide who
should form the sides.  A number of the older boys were thought of, but
they were not popular, or not active enough, or did not care enough
about the game.  At last it was decided to offer the command of one side
to Ernest Bracebridge.  It was a high honour, considering the time he
had been at school.  He could not, nor did he wish to refuse it.  He
consulted Buttar, who of course agreed to be on his side, whom they
should select.  They asked Bouldon, and Gregson, and several others
among their immediate friends, and then began to pick out others on whom
they could depend, and who generally played with them.  Neither of them
mentioned Ellis.  It was the first time they had neglected to ask him to
join any game that was to be played since he had become what they called
one of them.  He happened to pass by, and heard them calling out the
