shadow of reason for so doing, save that some other young curates
asserted themselves in the same way; and he asserted himself then and
there in a tone of voice called "sermonising," to which foolish young
men are sometimes addicted, and which, by the way, being a false, and
therefore irreligious tone, is another great stumbling-block in the way
of Christianity.  And, curiously enough, this young curate was really an
earnest, though mistaken and intensely bigoted young man.  We call him
bigoted, not because he held his own opinions, but because he held by
his little formalities with as much apparent fervour as he held by the
grand doctrines of his religion, although for the latter he had the
authority of the Word, while for the former he had merely the authority
of man.  His discourse was a good one, and if delivered in a natural
voice and at a suitable time, might have made a good impression.  As it
was, it produced pity and regret in his elder brother, exasperation in
Captain Lee, profound melancholy in Joseph Tipps, great admiration in
Miss Stocks and the baby, and unutterable _ennui_ in the children.
Fortunately for the success of the day, in the middle of it, he took
occasion to make some reference, with allegorical intentions, to the
lower animals, and pointed to a pig which lay basking in the sunshine at
no great distance, an unconcerned spectator of the scene.  A rather
obtuse, fat-faced boy, was suddenly smitten with the belief that this
was intended as a joke, and dutifully clapped his hands.  The effect was
electrical--an irresistible cheer and clapping of hands ensued.  It was
of no use to attempt to check it.  The more this was tried the more did
the children seem to think they were invited to a continuance of their
ovation to the young curate, who finally retired amid the hearty though
unexpressed congratulations of the company.

By good fortune, the arrival of several more friends diverted attention
from this incident; and, immediately after, Captain Lee set the children
to engage in various games, among which the favourite was
blindman's-buff.

One of the new arrivals was Edwin Gurwood, who had come, he said, to
introduce a gentleman--Dr Noble--to Mrs Tipps.

"Oh, the hypocrite!" thought Mrs Tipps; "he has come to see Emma Lee,
and he knows it."

Of course he knew it, and he knew that Mrs Tipps knew it, and he knew
that Mrs Tipps knew that he knew it, yet neither he nor Mrs Tipps
showed the slightest symptom of all that knowledge.  The latter bowed to
Dr Noble, and was expressing her happiness in making his acquaintance,
when a rush of laughing children almost overturned her, and hurled Dr
Noble aside.  They were immediately separated in the crowd, and, strange
to say, Edwin at once found himself standing beside Emma Lee, who, by
some curious coincidence, had just parted from Netta, so that they found
themselves comparatively alone.  What they said to each other in these
circumstances it does not become us to divulge.

While all parties were enjoying themselves to the full, including the
young curate, whose discomfiture was softened by the kind attentions of
Mrs Tipps and her daughter, an incident occurred which filled them with
surprise and consternation.  Dr Noble was standing at the time near the
large tent looking at the games, and Nanny Stocks was not far from him
choking the baby with alternate sweetmeats and kisses, to the horror of
Joseph Tipps, who fully expected to witness a case of croup or some such
infantine disease in a few minutes, when suddenly a tall man with torn
clothes, dishevelled hair and bloodshot eyes, sprang forward and
confronted Dr Noble.

"Ha!" he exclaimed with a wild laugh, "have I found you at last, mine
enemy?"

Dr Noble looked at him with much surprise, but did not reply.  He
appeared to be paralysed.

"I have sought you," continued the man, trembling with ill-suppressed
passion, "over land and sea, and now I've found you.  You've got the
casket--you know you have; you took it from my wife the night she died;
you shall give it up now, or you die!"

He spluttered rather than spoke the last words between his teeth, as he
made a spring at the doctor.

Edwin Gurwood had seen the man approach, and at once to his amazement
recognising the features of Thomson, his old opponent in the train, he
ran towards him, but was not near enough to prevent his first wild
attack.  Fortunately for Dr Noble this was thwarted by no less a
personage than Joseph Tipps, who, seeing what was intended, sprang
promptly forward, and, seizing the man by the legs adroitly threw him
down.  With a yell that sent a chill of horror to all the young hearts
round, the madman, for such he plainly was, leaped up, but before he
could renew his attack he was in the powerful grasp of his old enemy,
Edwin Gurwood.  A terrific struggle ensued, for both men, as we have
said before, were unusually powerful; but on this occasion madness more
than counterbalanced Edwin's superior strength.  For some time they
wrestled so fiercely that none of the other gentlemen could interfere
with effect.  They dashed down the large tent and went crashing through
the _debris_ of the feast until at length Thomson made a sudden twist
freed himself from Edwin's grasp, leaving a shred of his coat in his
hands, and, flying across the field, leaped at a single bound the wall
that encompassed it.  He was closely followed by Edwin and by a
constable of the district, who happened to arrive upon the scene, but
the fugitive left them far behind, and was soon out of sight.

This incident put an end to the evening's enjoyment but as the greater
part of it had already passed delightfully before Thomson came on the
ground to mar the sport, the children returned home much pleased with
themselves and everybody else, despite the concluding scene.

Meanwhile Mrs Tipps invited her friends who had assembled there to take
tea in Eden Villa, and here Dr Noble was eagerly questioned as to his
knowledge of his late assailant, but he either could not or would not
throw light on the subject.  Some of the guests left early and some
late, but to Mrs Tipps's surprise the doctor remained till the last of
them had said good-night, after which, to her still greater surprise, he
drew his chair close to the table, and, looking at her and Netta with
much earnestness, said--

"Probably you are surprised, ladies, that I, a stranger, have remained
so long to-night.  The truth is, I had come here to have some
conversation on private and very important matters, but finding you so
lively, and, I must add, so pleasantly engaged, I deemed it expedient to
defer my conversation until you should be more at leisure."

He paused as if to collect his thoughts, and the ladies glanced at each
other uneasily, and in some surprise, but made no reply.  In truth,
remembering the scene they had just witnessed, they began to suspect
that another style of madman had thought fit to pay them a visit.

He resumed, however, with every appearance of sanity--

"How the madman who assaulted me this evening found me out I know not.
I was not aware until this day that he had been tracking me, but,
judging from what he said, and from what I know about him, I now see
that he must have been doing so for some years.  Here is the
explanation, and, let me add, it intimately concerns yourselves."

Mrs Tipps and Netta became more interested as Dr Noble proceeded.

"You must know," he said, "that when in India some years ago I made
several coasting voyages with a certain sea-captain as surgeon of his
ship, at periods when my health required recruiting.  I received from
that gentleman every attention and kindness that the heart of a good man
could suggest.  On one of these voyages we had a native prince on board.
He was voyaging, like myself, for the benefit of his health, but his
case was a bad one.  He grew rapidly worse, and before the end of the
voyage he died.  During his illness the captain nursed him as if he had
been his own child; all the more tenderly that he thought him to be one
of those unfortunate princes who, owing to political changes, had been
ruined, and had lost all his wealth along with his station.  It was
quite touching, I assure you, madam, to listen to the earnest tones of
that captain's voice as he read passages from the Word of God to the
dying prince, and sought to convince him that Jesus Christ, who became
poor for our sakes, could bestow spiritual wealth that neither the
world, nor life, nor death could take away.  The prince spoke very
little, but he listened most intently.  Just before he died he sent a
sailor lad who attended on him, for the captain, and, taking a small box
from beneath his pillow, gave it to him, saying briefly,--`Here, take
it, you have been my best friend, I shall need it no more.'

"After he was dead the box was opened, and found to contain a most
superb set of diamonds--a necklace, brooch, ear-rings, bracelets, and a
ring, besides a quantity of gold pieces, the whole being worth several
thousands of pounds.

"As the prince had often said that all his kindred were dead, the
captain had no conscientious scruples in retaining the gift.  He locked
it away in his cabin.  When the voyage was finished--at Calcutta--the
men were paid off.  The captain then be-thought him of placing his
treasure in some place of security in the city.  He went to his chest
and took out the box--it was light--he opened it hastily--the contents
were gone!  Nothing was left to him of that splendid gift save the ring,
which he had placed on his finger soon after receiving it, and had worn
ever since.

"From some circumstances that recurred to our memories, we both
suspected the young man who had been in attendance on the prince, but,
although we caused the most diligent search to be made, we failed to
find him.  My friend and I parted soon after.  I was sent up to the
hills, and never saw or heard of him again.

"Several years after that I happened to be residing in Calcutta, and was
called one night to see the wife of an Englishman who was thought to be
dying.  I found her very ill--near her end.  She seemed to be anxious to
communicate something to me, but appeared to be afraid of her husband.
I thought, on looking at him attentively, that I had seen him before,
and said so.  He seemed to be annoyed, and denied ever having met with
me.  I treated the matter lightly, but took occasion to send him out for
some physic, and, while he was away, encouraged the woman to unburden
her mind.  She was not slow to do so.  `Oh, sir,' she said, `I want to
communicate a secret, but dared not while my husband was by.  Long ago,
before I knew him, my husband stole a box of diamonds from a Captain
Tipps--'"

"My husband!" exclaimed the widow.

"You shall hear," said Dr Noble.  "`I often heard him tell the story,
and boast of it,' continued the sick woman, quietly, `and I resolved to
obtain possession of the box, and have it returned, if possible, to the
rightful owner.  So I carried out my purpose--no matter how--and led him
to suppose that the treasure had been stolen; but I have often fancied
he did not believe me.  This Captain Tipps was a friend of yours, sir.
I know it, because my husband has told me.  He remembers you, although
you don't remember him.  I wish you to return the box to Captain Tipps,
sir, if he is yet alive.  It lies--' here she drew me close to her, and
whispered in my ear the exact spot, under a tree, where the jewels were
hid.

"`You'll be sure to remember the place?' she asked, anxiously.

"`Remember what place?' demanded her husband, sternly, as he returned
with the medicine.

"No answer was given.  The woman fell back on hearing his voice, but,
although she lived for nearly an hour, never spoke again.

"The man turned on me, and asked again what place she had been speaking
of.  I said that it was idle to repeat what might prove to be only the
ravings of a dying woman.  He seized a bludgeon, and, raising it in a
threatening manner, said, `I know you, Dr Noble; you shall tell me what
I want to know, else you shall not quit this room alive.'

"`I know you, too, Thomson,' said I, drawing a small sword from a stick
which I always carried.  `If you proceed to violence, it remains to be
seen who shall quit this room alive.'

"I opened the door and walked quietly out, leaving him glaring like a
tiger after me.

"Going to the place described, I found the diamonds; and from that day
to this I have not ceased to try to discover my old friend, but have not
yet succeeded.  Knowing that he might be dead, I have made inquiry of
every one possessing your name, Mrs Tipps, in the hope of discovering
his widow or children; and, although your name _is_ an uncommon one,
madam, you would be surprised if you knew how many I have ferreted out
in the course of years.  Unfortunately, my friend never mentioned his
family, or the place of his residence in England, so I have had no clue
to guide me save one.  I have even found two widows of the name of Tipps
besides yourself, and one of these said that her husband was a sailor
captain, but her description of him was not that of my friend.  The
other said her husband had been a lawyer, so of course _he_ could not be
the man of whom I was in search."

"But, sir," said Mrs Tipps, in some perplexity, "if you are to depend
on description, I fear that you will never attain your end, for every
one knows that descriptions given of the same person by different people
never quite agree."

"That is true, madam; and the description given to me this evening of
your late husband is a case in point; for, although it agrees in many
things--in most things--there is some discrepancy.  Did your husband
never give you the slightest hint about a set of diamonds that he had
once lost?"

"Never; but I can account for that by the fact, that he never alluded to
anything that had at any time given him pain or displeasure, if he could
avoid it."

"There is but the one clue, then, that I spoke of, namely, the ring that
belonged to the set of diamonds.  Did your husband ever possess--"

"The ring!" exclaimed Mrs Tipps and Netta in the same breath.  "Yes, he
had a diamond ring--"

They stopped abruptly, and looked at each other in distress, for they
remembered that the ring had been lost.

"Pray, what sort of ring is it?  Describe it to me," said Dr Noble.

Netta carefully described it and, as she did so, the visitor's
countenance brightened.

"That's it; that's it exactly; that _must_ be it for I remember it well,
and it corresponds in all respects with--my dear ladies, let me see the
ring without delay."

"Alas! sir," said Mrs Tipps, sadly, "the ring is lost!"

A look of blank dismay clouded poor Dr Noble's visage as he heard these
words, but he quickly questioned the ladies as to the loss, and became
more hopeful on bearing the details.

"Come," he said at last, as he rose to take leave, "things don't look
quite so bad as they did at first.  From all I have heard I am convinced
that my friend's widow and daughter are before me--a sight of the ring
would put the question beyond all doubt.  We must therefore set to work
at once and bend all our energies to the one great point of recovering
the lost ring."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A RUN-AWAY LOCOMOTIVE.

Being, as we have had occasion to remark before, a communicative and
confiding little woman, Netta Tipps told the secret of the ring in
strict confidence to her old nurse.  Mrs Durby, in a weak moment as on
a former occasion, related the history of it to Gertie, who of course
told Loo.  She naturally mentioned it to her lover, Will Garvie, and he
conveyed the information to John Marrot.  Thus far, but no further, the
thing went, for John felt that there might be danger in spreading the
matter, and laid a strict injunction on all who knew of it to keep
silence for a time.

While at the station the day following, just after having brought in the
"Flying Dutchman," he was accosted by the superintendent of police, who
chanced to be lounging there with, apparently, nothing to do.  Never was
there a man who was more frequently called on to belie his true
character.  It was a part of Mr Sharp's duty to look lazy at times, and
even stupid, so as to throw suspicious men off their guard.

"A fine day, John," he said, lounging up to the engine where John was
leaning on the rail, contemplating the departure of the passengers whose
lives had been in his hands for the last hour and a half, while Will
Garvie was oiling some of the joints of the iron horse.

John admitted that it was a fine day, and asked what was the noos.

"Nothing particular doing just now," said Mr Sharp.  "You've heard, I
suppose, of the mad fellow who caused such a confusion among Miss
Tipps's Sunday-school children last night?"

"Oh yes, I heard o' that."

"And did you hear that he turns out to be the man who jumped out of your
train on the day of the attempted robbery?"

"Yes, I've heard o' that too.  They haven't got him yet, I believe?"

"No, not yet; but I think we shall have him soon," said Mr Sharp with a
knowing glance; "I've heard rumours that lead me to think it would not
be very surprising if we were to see him hanging about this station
to-day or to-morrow.  I've got a sort of decoy-duck to attract him,"
continued Mr Sharp, chuckling, "in the shape of a retired East India
doctor, who agrees to hang about on the condition that we keep a sharp
eye on him and guard him well from any sudden attack."

