looking down at Sir John, who was lounging on the grass. Antonia was
sitting with her back straight up against an oak tree, her eyes were
half shut, and a very full cup of tea was on her lap--the tea was in
extreme danger of being spilt, but Antonia cared nothing for any of
these things.

As soon as ever Annie and Hester appeared in view Miss Bernard Temple
sprang suddenly to her feet. Of course the cup of tea came to instant
grief. Sir John uttered an exclamation of decided annoyance; Nora
exclaimed, "Oh, Miss Bernard Temple, what a mess you have made of your
dress!" and Susy roused herself sufficiently to shake a playful finger
at Antonia.

"Oh, Tony, Tony, how killing you are," she said; Mrs. Bernard Temple
looked aggrieved but said nothing, she knew Antonia too well.

"How am I killing?" exclaimed Antonia; "this will shake off: that is the
good of a shabby black dress--it stands anything. Miss Forest, I
particularly want to speak to you; I am glad you have come home."

She went straight up to Annie and tucked one bony hand through her arm.
"Come," she said, "let us retire somewhere--I am anxious to talk to
you."

"But I want my tea first," said Annie. "I am really very thirsty."

"How material," exclaimed Antonia; "well, I'll wait--be quick."

She marched a step or two away, and leant against the wide trunk of the
oak tree.

Annie felt provoked. Antonia's queer glance returned uncomfortably to
her memory.

She took her tea, therefore, in greater haste than usual and then, going
up to Miss Bernard Temple, told her she was ready to listen to anything
she had to say.

"Come, then," said Antonia; "we must have solitude. Where is the most
solitary spot?"

"We can walk up this rise," said Annie--"here, where the path is. There
is a summer-house at the top of this hill, where we can sit. But I
cannot imagine what you have to say to me."

"It's simple enough," said Antonia; "I wish just to inform you that I
know something."

"I expect you do," said Annie, with a light laugh; "several things, most
probably."

"Something about you," pursued Antonia, in a firm, hard voice.

"Indeed? How interesting!" Annie's tone was not quite so comfortable
now.

"I'll tell you what it is," continued Antonia, standing still, facing
round and turning her melancholy gaze full on Annie: "you have not got
the ring."

"What ring? What do you mean?"

"The ring Mrs. Willis asked you to return to her. You did not return it,
because you had not got it You would have returned it if you had it--you
are not the girl to care enough about rings just to keep it for the sake
of wearing it. I know what has happened--you have sold or pawned the
ring."

"How can you know?" exclaimed Annie, in a voice almost of fear; "how is
it possible for you to tell? You don't know anything whatever about
me--how can you tell?"

"Intuition," replied Antonia, in a light voice. "I can see farther than
most people when I choose to see. Intuition and experience. Do you
imagine that I, in my chequered career, have never had to part with a
jewel. Once, when in Paris, I sold my hair. I had no money to buy canvas
and colours, so I went to a barber, and he cut it quite short and gave
me a napoleon for it. Ah! that nap, that darling nap, how I loved it!"

"You are a very queer girl," said Annie.

"That's neither here nor there," replied Antonia. "I didn't take you
away from the others to speak of myself. I have watched you since I came
here, and I can see that you are a very bright, clever girl; also, that
you are pretty, according to modern ideas. You are not true art, by any
means; but what of that? I know that you are in trouble about that ring,
so you may as well confide in me."

"But will you tell?" asked Annie.

"Tell!" said Antonia, with scorn. "I don't ask for confidences to repeat
them again--that is not Antonia Bernard Temple. Art is my mistress--art
exacts both truth and fidelity from her disciples. You need not fear
that I will tell."

"You are a queer girl," replied Annie. "I'm sure you will not tell. Yes,
I am in trouble about the ring, and I don't mind confiding the trouble
to you."

"Sit down here, then, on the bank," said Antonia, flinging herself on
the grass as she spoke, "and state the case as briefly as possible.
Where and when did you pawn the ring?"

"Oh, I didn't pawn it--it wasn't done by me; and, as things have turned
out, it wasn't really pawned at all. This is the story."

Annie told it in a few forcible words; Antonia listened attentively,
taking in all the facts.

"And thirty-two shillings would get you out of this scrape?" she said,
in conclusion, looking fixedly at Annie.

"Oh, yes, indeed. If I had thirty-two shillings, I would pay Mrs. Martin
and get the ring back, and when I return to Lavender House I would tell
everything to Mrs. Willis. I would tell her what I have done, and how
badly I have acted. At present there is a cloud between us; and she is
my best, my kindest, my most valued friend. What I cannot bear to
do--what I cannot stand--is to have to tell her that I pawned what was
not my own, and at the same time not to be able to give her back the
ring."

"I partly understand," said Antonia in a slow voice; "I partly grasp
your meaning. The pawning of the jewel is to me a mere nothing. I have
had chequered times when the tea-pot and even the coffee-pot have been
sold for the sake of a quarter of a cake of cobalt or of rose-madder,
but then the tea-pot and the coffee-pot and the hair which grew on my
head were undoubtedly my own. I cannot understand your taking another's
property, nor your being deceitful about it. The paths of deceit are
shut doors to me, naturally, who am a disciple of the great and divine
Art. I mention this as an incident, but whether I understand you or not
scarcely affects the case. I am willing to help you if you will help me.
I can manage to get you thirty-two shillings, perhaps not to-day and
perhaps not to-morrow, but certainly before you return to your school."

"Oh, you are good!" exclaimed Annie, whose pretty cheeks were like
peonies, for Antonia had managed to make her feel terribly small and
contemptible.

"No, I am not good," replied Miss Bernard Temple, "and I am not doing
this in any sense for you. I do it because I wish to be in your
confidence, as I think you can be a useful ally. I have a delicate
mission before me, and I see that you may be very useful."

"A mission?" said Annie, looking up in surprise.

"Yes; there is a great deal at stake, but I believe that, difficult as
the undertaking is, I may be permitted to succeed. I want to wrest the
Towers from the hand of the Philistines."

"What _do_ you mean?" exclaimed Annie.

"In other words," continued Miss Bernard Temple, "I want to keep the
Lorrimers in the home of their ancestors and to make those shallow
Drummonds stay in their own place."

"I suppose we all want that," said Annie; "but how can you possibly do
it? You have no power."

"So you think, but you are mistaken; I have a great deal of power. Now,
will you help me?"

"To do this? Yes. With all my heart and soul."

"That is good. I don't wish to say anything to Hester Thornton nor to
Nora Lorrimer, nor to any of the Lorrimers, nor least of all to Susan
Drummond. I think I can manage Susy, for I am up to some of her pretty
little vagaries. I can also manage mother, and mother has a good deal of
influence in a certain quarter just now. You are a sort of outsider, and
yet you are very friendly with everybody, so you can render me very
important help; but, of course, you clearly understand that fidelity is
my motto, and you know also that your mission will be one of extreme
delicacy."

"I have plenty of tact," said Annie. "I most faithfully promise to
reveal nothing, and I will do everything in my power for you. I begin to
believe in you. I think you are a wonderful girl."

"Don't say that," said Antonia, with solemn impressiveness; "if there is
one thing more than another that gives me intense pain, it is praise. I
am but the meanest disciple of great Art. I am doing this in the cause
of Art. Now, I am not going to tell you what my plan of campaign is, at
least, not to-day, but I want you to make certain inquiries for me. I
want you to try and discover all you can from Hester with regard to her
father's wealth, and all you can from Molly with regard to the
Lorrimers' difficulties; and you are somehow or other to get the address
in London where Squire Lorrimer is now staying. Have all this
information ready for me by to-morrow morning. Now you can return to the
others; I am going back to the house."




CHAPTER XXIV.

A WET SPONGE.


Antonia walked slowly in the direction of the house, trailing her long
skirt behind her. She entered by a side door, and went straight up to
her own room. The bedroom set apart for Miss Bernard Temple opened into
the large and stately bedroom occupied by the future mistress of the
Grange. Both rooms were dainty and fresh in the extreme. Mrs. Bernard
Temple's maid was now sitting in Antonia's room mending a long rent in
that young lady's brown Liberty velveteen evening dress.

"You have made an awfully jagged rent, Miss Antonia," said the girl.

"Have I?" said Antonia; "why mend it, then? I never expect to have my
clothes mended. Of course, if you are good enough to occupy your time
over me, Pinkerton, I am much obliged to you, but I don't expect your
services, so clearly understand the position."

"Lor'!" answered Pinkerton, who had a round, country face and a somewhat
brusque manner, "what a show you'd be, Miss Antonia, if someone didn't
make you and mend you."

Antonia went over to the open window, and, flopping herself down on her
knees, leant her two elbows on the window-sill and looked out.

"I wish you'd let me know if Miss Drummond is having forty winks in her
room," she said suddenly. "She generally does go to her own room about
this hour, does she not?"

"I believe so, miss. I'll inquire if she's there now."

Pinkerton soon returned with the information that Miss Drummond's door
was locked, that she could not see her maid anywhere, but that she heard
sounds proceeding from within the room which led her to infer that the
forty winks were being enjoyed.

"But there's no use in your going to her, Miss Antonia," said Pinkerton,
"for she won't hear you however hard you knock."

"I'll see about that," said Antonia. "Do you happen to know, Pinkerton,
if Miss Drummond's window is open?"

"Sure to be, miss; every window in the house is kept open during this
sultry weather."

"There's no time to be lost," murmured Antonia; "I must scale the wall."

She left her own bedroom in a hurry, and ran downstairs.

"Nan," she shouted, catching sight of Nan's white frock in the distance,
"come here."

Nan ran up to her rather unwillingly. Antonia was detestable in her eyes
as belonging to the dreadful new stepmother.

"Why do you frown at me like that, child?" said Antonia; "it isn't
pretty."

"Tell-tale tit," answered Nan rudely; "you'll be making up stories of me
in the future, won't you?"

"I?" said Antonia, with a careless rise of her brows. "No; I shan't have
time. Now, can you tell me if there's a ladder about?"

"No, I can't," answered Nan.

"Are there no ladders to be found in this benighted and over-cultivated
region?"

"Plenty; but I can't tell you where they are."

Antonia knitted her brows. Nan gazed at her curiously. It was really
interesting to have something to do with a person who wanted a ladder.
What was she going to do with it?

"I must climb without," said Antonia. "I wonder are there creepers."

"What do you want with it?" said Nan in quite a friendly tone.

"I want to get into Susan Drummond's room by her window."

"Oh, dear, what fun!" Nan's eyes danced.

"She is sound asleep," pursued Antonia, "and I propose to use the wet
sponge with effect."

"They did that at school," replied Nan. "How lovely! Oh, how perfectly
lovely! I'm sure I can help you to find a ladder. Come round with me to
the farmyard."

Nan held out her hand, which Antonia grasped. They rushed across the
lawn helter-skelter, and in an incredibly short space of time a ladder
was leaning up against Susy's window. Nan held it from below while
Antonia climbed. The next moment she had entered the room.

"Thank you heartily, Nan," she called to the little girl.

She made a good deal of noise, but Susy, lying on her back in the centre
of the big bed, was impervious to sound. Antonia filled the sponge with
cold water, and, standing at the foot of the bed, dashed it at Susy. The
first application only made the sleeper groan and snore heavily, but at
the second she opened her eyes, and at the third she sat up.

"Now, what is the matter?" she exclaimed. "Am I back at that detestable
school with the she-dragon once more? Oh, Antonia, what in the world are
you doing here?"

"Sponging you," said Antonia. "I have something to say, so wake up."

"Wake up?" replied Susy. "I should think I am awake. Who could stand
such barbarous treatment? I was so comfortable, and I had locked the
door to make all things perfectly safe. How in the world did you get
into the room?"

"By a ladder, through the open window. Now pray don't waste any more
time over trivial details. I have come here to have a serious talk with
you."

"Why serious, Tony? You know how I hate grave subjects."

"I have come to have a quiet talk with you about the Towers; you can sit
there, just where you are. Don't dry your hair, or you'll get sleepy
again. I'll keep a basin of cold water near me and sponge you whenever
you wink an eyelid. Now then, what do you think of the Towers?"

"I have scarcely seen it yet."

"You must have a first impression; what is it?"

"Really, Tony, you needn't have awakened me and gone to the trouble of a
ladder, and an open window, and a sponge, for the sake of hearing my
first impressions."

"That's neither here nor there," answered Antonia. "What do you think of
the Towers?"
