"Your late comrades have escaped me," said the first lieutenant, "but
you may depend upon it I will catch the villains in the long run."

"It'll be a pretty long run before you do," remarked the man, sulkily.

Mulroy looked sternly at him.  "You forget," said he, "that you are a
prisoner.  Let me advise you to be at least _civil_ in your manner and
tone.  Whether the run shall be a long or a short one remains to be
seen.  One thing is pretty certain, namely, that your own run of life
will be a _very_ short one.  You know the usual doom of a pirate when he
is caught."

Surly Dick moved uneasily.  "I was made a pirate against my will," said
he, in a still more sulky tone and disrespectful manner.

"You will find it difficult to prove that," returned Mulroy.  "Meanwhile
I shall put you in irons and treat you as you deserve until I can place
you in the hands of the civil authorities."

Surly Dick stood first on one leg and then on the other; moved his
fingers about nervously, and glanced in the lieutenant's face furtively.
It was evident that he was ill at ease.

"I never committed murder, sir," said he in an improved tone.  "It
wasn't allowed on board of the _Avenger_, sir.  It's a hard case that a
fellow should be made a pirate by force, and then be scragged for it,
though he's done none o' the bloody work."

"This may be true," rejoined the lieutenant, "but as I have said, you
will find it difficult to convince your judges of it.  But you will
receive a fair trial.  There is one thing, however, that will stand in
your favour, and that is a full and free confession.  If you make this,
and give me all the information you can in order to bring your late
comrades to justice, your judges will perhaps be disposed to view your
case leniently."

"Wot more _can_ I confess, sir," said Dick, beginning to look a little
more interested.  "I've already confessed that I wos made a pirate
against my will, and that I've never done no murder--though I _have_
plundered a little, just like the rest.  As for helpin' to bring my
comrades to justice, I only wish as I know'd how, and I'd do it right
off, I would."

Surly Dick's expression of countenance when he said this, was a
sufficient guarantee that he was in earnest.

"There is an island somewhere hereabouts," said the lieutenant, "where
the pirates are in the habit of hiding sometimes, is there not?"

Surly Dick looked at his questioner slyly as he replied--"There is,
sir."

"Do you not think it very likely that they may have run there now--that
they may be there at this moment?"

"It's _oncommom_ likely," replied Dick with a grin.  "Can you direct me
how to steer, in order to reach that island?"

Surly Dick's aspect changed.  He became morose again, and looked
silently at his feet for a few moments, as if he were debating something
in his own mind.  He was in truth perplexed; for, while he was extremely
anxious to bring his hated comrades to justice, he was by no means so
anxious to let the lieutenant into the secret of the treasures contained
in the caverns of the Isle of Palms, all of which he knew would be at
once swept hopelessly beyond his grasp if they should be discovered.  He
also reflected that if he could only manage to get his late companions
comfortably hanged, and himself set free for having turned King's
evidence against them, he could return to the island and abstract the
wealth it contained by degrees.  The brilliant prospect thus opened up
to him was somewhat marred, however, by the consideration that some of
the pirates might make a confession and let this secret be known, in
which case his golden dreams would vanish.  The difficulty of making up
his mind was so great that he continued for some time to twist his
fingers and move his feet uneasily in silence.

Mulroy observed the pirate's indecision, and although he knew not its
cause to the full extent, he was sufficiently acquainted with human
nature to know that now was the moment to overcome the man, if he was to
be overcome at all.

"Well, well," he said, carelessly, "I'm sorry to see you throw away your
only chance.  As for the information you refuse to give, I can do
without it.  Perhaps I may find some of your late comrades when we make
the island, who will stand witness against _you_.  That will do, my man,
you may go.  Mr Geoffrey," (turning to a midshipman,) "will you
accompany that pirate forward and see that he is put in irons."

"But you don't know where the island is," said Surly Dick, anxiously, as
the lieutenant was turning away.

Mulroy turned back--"No," said he, "but you ought to know that when a
seaman is aware of the existence of an island, and knows that he is near
it, a short time will suffice to enable him to find it."

Again he was about to turn away when Dick cried out--"Stay, sir, will
you stand by me if I shew you the way?"

"I will not deceive you," said Mulroy, bluntly.  "If you shew me how to
steer for this island, and assist me in every way that you can to catch
these villains, I will report what you have done, and the judges at your
trial will give what weight they please to the facts; but if you suppose
that I will plead for such a rascal as you are, you very much mistake
me."

A look of deep hatred settled on the pirate's countenance as he said
briefly--"Well, I'll shew you how to steer."

Accordingly Surly Dick, after being shewn a chart, and being made aware
of the exact position of the ship, ordered the course to be altered to
"north-half-east."  As this was almost dead in the eye of the light
breeze that was blowing, the _Talisman_ had to proceed on her course by
the slow process of tacking.

While she was in the act of putting about on one of these tacks, the
look-out reported "a boat on the lee bow."

"Boat on the lee bow!" was passed from mouth to mouth, and the order was
immediately given to let the frigate fall off.  In another minute,
instead of ploughing her way slowly and doggedly to windward, the
_Talisman_ ran swiftly before the breeze towards a dark object which at
a distance resembled a boat with a mast and a small flag flying from it.

"It is a raft, I think," observed the second lieutenant, as he adjusted
the telescope more perfectly.

"You are right, and I think there is someone on it," said Mulroy.  "I
see something like a man lying on it, but whether he is dead or alive I
cannot say.  There is a flag, undoubtedly--but no one waves a
handkerchief or a rag of any kind.  Surely, if a _living_ being occupied
the raft he would have seen the ship by this time.  Stay, he moves!  No;
it must have been imagination.  I fear that he is dead, poor fellow.
Stand by to lower a boat."

The lieutenant spoke in a sad voice, for he felt convinced that he had
come too late to the aid of some unfortunate who had died in perhaps the
most miserable manner in which man can perish.

Henry Stuart did indeed lie on the raft a dead man to all appearance.
Towards the evening of his third day, he had suffered very severely from
the pangs of hunger.  Long and earnestly had he gazed round the horizon,
but no sail appeared.  He felt that his end was approaching, and in a
fit of despair and increasing weakness, he fell on his face in a state
of half consciousness.  Then he began to pray, and, gradually, he fell
into a troubled slumber.

It was while he was in this condition, that the _Talisman_ hove in
sight.  Henry had frequently fallen into this species of sleep during
the last few hours, but he never continued in it long, for the pains of
thirst as well as hunger now racked his frame.  Nevertheless, he was not
much reduced in strength or vigour.  A long slow process of dying would
have still lain before the poor youth, had it been his lot to perish on
that raft.

A delightful dream came over him as he lay.  A rich banquet was spread
before him.  With wolfish desire he grasped the food, and ate as he
never ate before.  Oh! it was a rare feast that!  Each morsel was
delicious; each draught was nectar.  But he could not devour enough.
There was a strange feeling in him that he could by no means eat to
satisfaction.

While he was thus feasting in dreams the _Talisman_ drew near.  Her
bulwarks were crowded with faces gazing earnestly at the bit of red rag
that fluttered in the breeze and the pile of loose spars on the man's
form lay extended and motionless.

Suddenly Henry awoke with a start, to find that his rich banquet was a
terrible delusion! that he was starving to death--and that a large ship
was hove-to within a few yards of him!

Starting up on his knees, he uttered a wild shriek.  Then, as the truth
entered his soul, he raised his hand and gave a faint cheer.

The revulsion of feeling in the crew of the _Talisman_ was
overpowering--a long, loud, tremendous cheer burst from every heart!

"Lower away!" was shouted to the men who stood at the fall-tackles of
the boat!

As the familiar sounds broke on Henry's ear, he leaped to his feet, and
waving his hand above his head, again attempted to cheer; but his voice
failed him.  Staggering backwards, he fell fainting into the sea.

Almost at the same instant, a man leaped from the bulwark of the
frigate, and swam vigorously towards the raft.  It was Richard Price,
the boatswain of the frigate.  He reached Henry before the boat did,
and, grasping his inanimate form, supported him until it came up and
rescued them both.  A few minutes later Henry Stuart was restored to
consciousness, and the surgeon of the frigate was ministering to him
such restoratives as his condition seemed to require.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE CAPTURE AND THE FIRE.

Eight days after the rescue of Henry Stuart from a horrible death, as
related in the last chapter, the _Talisman_ found herself, late in the
afternoon, within about forty hours' sail of Sandy Cove.

Mulroy had visited the Isle of Palms, and found that the pirates had
flown.  The mate of the _Avenger_ and his companions had taken advantage
of the opportunity of escape afforded them by Gascoyne, and had hastily
quitted their rendezvous with as much of the most valuable portion of
their booty as the boat could carry.  As this is their last appearance
in these pages, it may be as well to say that they were never again
heard of.  Whether they perished in a storm, or gained some distant
land, and followed their former leader's advice--to repent of their
sins,--or again took to piracy, and continued the practice of their
terrible trade under a more bloody minded captain, we cannot tell.  They
disappeared as many a band of wicked men has disappeared before, and
never turned up again.  With these remarks we dismiss them from our
tale.

Surly Dick now began to entertain sanguine hopes that he would be
pardoned, and that he would yet live to enjoy the undivided booty which
he alone knew lay concealed in the Isle of Palms--for, now that he had
heard Henry's account of the landing of Gascoyne on the island, he never
doubted that the pirates would fly in haste from a spot that was no
longer unknown to others, and that they would be too much afraid of
being captured to venture to return to it.

It was, then, with a feeling of no small concern that the pirate heard
the look-out shout on the afternoon referred to, "Sail ho!"

"Where away?"

"On the lee beam."

The course of the frigate was at once changed, and she ran down towards
the strange sail.

"A schooner, sir," observed the second lieutenant to Mr Mulroy.

"It looks marvellously like the _Foam_, alias the _Avenger_," observed
the latter.  "Beat to quarters.  If this rascally pirate has indeed been
thrown in our way again, we will give him a warm reception.  Why, the
villain has actually altered his course, and is standing towards us."

"Don't you think it is just possible," suggested Henry Stuart, "that
Gascoyne may have captured the vessel from his mate, and now comes to
meet us as a friend?"

"I don't know that," said Mulroy, in an excited tone, for he could not
easily forget the rough usage his vessel had received at the hands of
the bold pirate.  "I don't know that.  No doubt Gascoyne's mate was
against him; but the greater part of the crew were evidently in his
favour, else why the secret manner in which he was deprived of his
command?  No, no.  Depend upon it the villain has got hold of his
schooner and will keep it.  By a fortunate chance we have again met; I
will see to it that we do not part without a close acquaintance.  Yet
why he should throw himself into my very arms in this way, puzzles me.
Ha!  I see his big gun amidships.  It is uncovered.  No doubt he counts
on his superior sailing powers, and means to give us a shot and shew us
his heels.  Well, we shall see."

"There goes his flag," observed the second lieutenant.

"What! eh!  It's the _Union Jack_!" exclaimed Mulroy.

"I doubt not that your own captain commands the schooner," said Henry,
who had of course, long before this time, made the first lieutenant of
the _Talisman_ acquainted with Montague's capture by the pirate, along
with Alice and her companions.  "You naturally mistrust Gascoyne, but I
have reason to believe that, on this occasion at least, he is a true
man."

Mulroy returned no answer, for the two vessels were now almost near
enough to enable those on board to distinguish faces with the telescope.
A very few minutes sufficed to remove all doubts; and, a quarter of an
hour later, Montague stood on his own quarterdeck, receiving the
congratulations of his officers, while Henry Stuart was seized upon and
surrounded by his friends Corrie, Alice, Poopy, the missionary, and Ole
Thorwald.

In the midst of a volley of excited conversation Henry suddenly
exclaimed, "But what of Gascoyne?  Where is the pirate captain?"

"Why, we've forgotten him," exclaimed Thorwald, whose pipe was doing
duty like a factory chimney.  "I shouldn't wonder if he took advantage
of us just now to give us the slip!"

"No fear of that," said Mr Mason.  "Poor fellow, he has felt your loss
terribly, Henry, for we all believed that you were lost; but I am bound
to confess that none of us have shewn a depth of sorrow equal to that of
Gascoyne.  It seems unaccountable to me.  He has not shewn his face on
deck since the day he gave up all hope of rescuing you, and has eaten
nothing but a biscuit now and then, which he would suffer no one but
Corrie to take to him."

"Poor Gascoyne, I will go and relieve his mind," said Henry, turning to
quit the quarterdeck.

Now, the noise created by the meeting of the two vessels had aroused
Gascoyne from the lethargic state of mind and body to which he had given
way.  Coming on deck, he was amazed to find himself close to the
_Talisman_.  A boat lay alongside the _Foam_, into which he jumped, and,
sculling towards the frigate, he stepped over the bulwarks just as Henry
turned to go in search of him.

The pirate captain's face wore a haggard, careworn, humbled look, that
was very different from its usual bold, lion-like expression.  No one
can tell what a storm had passed through the strong man's breast while
he lay alone on the floor of his cabin.  The deep, deep sorrow--the
remorse for sin--the bitterness of soul when he reflected that his
present misery was chargeable only to himself.  A few nights had given
him the aspect of a much older man.

For a few seconds he stood glancing round the quarterdeck of the
_Talisman_ with a look of mingled curiosity and sadness.  But when his
eye fell on the form of Henry he turned deadly pale, and trembled like
an aspen leaf.

"Well, Gascoyne, my--my--_friend_," said the youth with some hesitation
as he advanced.

The shout that Gascoyne uttered on hearing the young man's voice was
almost superhuman.  It was something like a mingled cheer and cry of
agony.  In another moment he sprang forward, and seizing Henry in his
arms, pressed him to his breast with a grasp that rendered the youth
utterly powerless.

Almost instantly he released him from his embrace, and seizing his hand,
said, in a wild, gay, almost fierce manner--

"Come, Henry, lad, I have somewhat to say to you.  Come with me."

He forced rather than led the amazed youth into the boat, sculled to the
schooner, hurried him into the cabin, and shut and locked the door.

We need scarcely say that all this was a matter of the deepest curiosity
and interest to those who witnessed it; but they were destined to remain
with their curiosity unsatisfied for some time after that.

When Henry Stuart issued from the cabin of the _Avenger_ after that
mysterious interview, his countenance wore a surprised and troubled
expression.  Gascoyne's, on the contrary, was grave and calm, yet
cheerful.  He was more like his former self.

The young man was, of course, eagerly questioned as to what had been
said to him, and why the pirate had shewn such fondness for him; but the
only reply that could be got from him was, "I must not tell.  It is a
private matter.  You shall know time enough."

With this answer they were fain to be content--even Corrie failed to
extract anything more definite from his friend.

A prize crew was put on board the _Foam_, and the two vessels proceeded
towards the harbour of Sandy Cove in company.

Henry and his friends went in the _Foam_, but Gascoyne was detained a
prisoner on board the _Talisman_.  Montague felt that it was his duty to
put him in irons, but he could not prevail on himself to heap
unnecessary indignity on the head of one who had rendered him such good
service, so he left him at large, intending to put him in irons only
when duty compelled him to do so.

During the night a stiff breeze amounting almost to a gale of fair wind
sprang up, and the two vessels flew towards their destination, but the
_Foam_ left her bulky companion far behind.

That night a dark and savage mind was engaged on board the _Talisman_ in
working out a black and desperate plot.  Surly Dick saw, in the capture
of Gascoyne and the _Foam_, the end of all his cherished hopes, and in a
fit of despair and rage he resolved to be avenged.

This man, when he first came on board the frigate, had not been known as
a pirate, and afterwards, as we have seen, he had been treated with
leniency on account of his offer to turn informant against his former
associates.  In the stirring events that followed he had been
overlooked, and, on the night of which we are writing he found himself
free to retire to his hammock with the rest of the watch.

In the night, when the wind was howling mournfully through the rigging,
and the greater part of the crew were buried in repose, this man rose
stealthily from his hammock, and with noiseless tread found his way to a
dark corner of the ship where the eyes of the sentries were not likely
to observe him.  Here he had made preparations for his diabolical
purpose.  Drawing a flint and steel from his pocket, he proceeded to
strike a light.  This was procured in a few seconds, and as the match
flared up in his face it revealed the workings of a countenance in which
all the strongest and worst passions of human nature had stamped deep
