"Little Bill," said Jenkins, laying a large hand on his small knee, "in
course you can't be expected to understand what I wants to talk about,
but there's nobody else I'd like to speak to, and you're such a knowin'
little shaver that somehow I felt a kind of--of notion that I'd like to
ask your advice--d'ee see?"

"I see--all right," returned Billie; "though I wonder at such a man as
you wanting advice from the like of me.  But I'll do what I can for you,
Jenkins, and perhaps I know more about the thing that troubles you than
you think."

"I'm afraid not," returned the seaman, with a humorous twinkle in his
eye.  "You see, Billie, you never wanted to get spliced, did you?"

"Spliced!  What's that?"

"Well, I should have said married."

"O no!  I don't think the thought of that ever did occur to me.  I'm
sorry, Jenkins, but I really cannot give you advice on that subject."

"H'm!  I'm not so sure o' that, Little Bill.  You're such a practical
little chap that I do believe if you was put to it you'd be able to--
see, now.  If you happened to want to marry a nice little gal, what
would you do?"

"I would ask her," said Little Bill, promptly.

"Jus' so; but that is what I have not got courage to do."

Jenkins laughed at the expression of blazing surprise with which the boy
received this statement.

"Have not got courage!" he repeated; and then, after a pause--"Have all
the stories you have told me, then, been nothing but lies!"

"What stories, Billie?"

"Why, such as that one about the pirates in the Java seas, when ten of
them attacked you and you were obliged to kill four, and all the rest
ran away?"

"No, Billie--that was no lie: it was quite true.  But, then, these
blackguards were cowards at bottom, and they saw that I'd got a brace o'
double-barrelled pistols in my belt, and was pretty well up in the
cutlass exercise."

"And that time when you led a storming party against the fort in South
America, and was the only one left o' the party, and fought your way all
alone in through the breach till the troops came up and carried you on
with a rush, and--and--was all about that untrue?"

"Not a bit of it, Billie, though I wouldn't have you think I was
boastin' about it.  I only gave you the bare facts, which, like bare
poles, is as much as a ship can stand sometimes."

"An' that time you jumped overboard in Port Royal among the sharks to
save the little girl?"

"That's a fact, if ever there was one," said the seaman quickly, "for
the dear child is alive this good day to swear to it if need be."

"Yet you tell me," continued Little Bill, "that you have not the courage
to ask a nice little girl to marry you?"

"That's exactly how the matter stands, Billie."

It was now Billie's turn to look perplexed.

"Who is this nice little girl?" he asked abruptly, as if the answer to
that question might help to explain the enigma.

"Well--it's Elise Morel; an', mind, not a soul knows about that but you
an' me, Little Bill."

"But--but Elise is _not_ a little girl.  She's a big woman!"

Jenkins laughed as he explained that seamen sometimes had a habit--
mistaken, it might be--of calling even big women "nice little gals" when
they chanced to be fond of them.

"And are you _really_ afraid to ask Elise to marry you?" asked the boy,
earnestly.

"I suspect that's what's the matter wi' me," replied the sailor, with a
modest look.

"I always thought that nothing could frighten you," said Billie, in a
somewhat disappointed tone, for it seemed to him as if one of his idols
were shaking on its pedestal.  "I can't understand it, for _I_ would not
be afraid to ask her--if I wanted her."

At this Jenkins again laughed, and said that he believed him, and that
Billie would understand these things better when he was older.

"In the meantime, Little Bill," he continued, "I haven't got the heart
of a Mother Carey's chicken.  I could stand afore a broadside without
winkin', I believe; I think I could blow up a magazine, or fight the
French, as easy as I could eat my breakfast a'most, but to ask a pure,
beautiful angel like Elise to marry _me_, a common seaman--why, I hasn't
got it in me.  Yet I'm so fond o' that little gal that I'd strike my
colours to _her_ without firin' a single shot--"

"Does Elise want to marry _you_?" asked Billie.

"Oh, that's the very pint!" said the seaman with decision.  "If I could
only make sure o' that pint, I'd maybe manage to come up to the scratch.
Now, that's what I wants you to find out for me, Little Bill, an' I
know you're a good little shaver, as'll do a friend a good turn when you
can.  But you must on no account mention--"

He was going to have said, "You must on no account mention that I was
blabbing to you about this, or that I wanted to find out such a thing,"
when the sudden appearance of Elise's lap-dog announced the fact that
its mistress was approaching.

With a flushed face the bold seaman sprang up and darted out, as if to
attack one of those pirates of the Java seas who had made so powerful an
impression on Little Bill's mind.  But his object was escape--not
attack.  Lightly vaulting the garden fence, he disappeared into the same
thicket which, on another occasion, had afforded opportune refuge to
Kateegoose.  A few moments later Elise turned into the walk, and stood
before the summer-house.

"You here, Little Bill!" she exclaimed on entering, "I am very glad to
find you, for I have been alone all the morning.  Everybody is away--in
the fields, I suppose--and I don't like being alone."

"Was you ever in love, Elise?" asked the boy with a solemn countenance.

The girl laughed heartily, and blushed a little.

"What a strange question, Billie," she said; "why do you ask?"

"Well, it's not easy to explain all at once; but--but I want to know if
you want to be married?"

Elise laughed again, and, then, becoming suddenly grave, asked seriously
why Billie put such foolish questions.

"Because," said Little Bill, slowly, and with an earnest look, "Jenkins
is _very_ anxious to know if you are fond of him, and he actually says
that he's afraid to ask you to marry him!  Isn't that funny?  I said
that even _I_ would not be afraid to ask you, if I wanted you--How red
you are, Elise!  Have you been running?"

"O no," replied the girl, sheltering herself under another laugh; "and
what did he say to that?"

"He said a great many things.  I will try to remember them.  Let me
see--he said: `I haven't got the heart of a Mother Carey's
chicken,'--(he didn't tell me who Mother Carey is, but that's no matter,
for it was only one of her chickens he was speaking of);--`I could stand
afore a broadside without winkin','--(I give you his very words, Elise,
for I don't quite understand them myself);--`I could blow up a
magazine,' he went on, `or fight the French, as easy as I could eat my
breakfast, a'most, but to ask a pure an' beautiful angel like Elise'--
yes, indeed, you needn't shake your head; he said these very words
exactly--`a pure an' beautiful angel like Elise to marry _me_, a common
seaman, why, I hasn't got it in me.  Yet I'm so fond o' that little gal
that I'd strike my colours to her without firin' a single shot.'  Now,
do you understand all that, Elise? for I don't understand the half of
it."

"O yes, I understand a good deal of it, though some of it is indeed
puzzling, as you say.  But how did you come to recollect it all so well,
Little Bill?"

"Because he said he wanted me to help him, and to find out if you wanted
to marry him, so I paid particular attention to what he said, and--"

"Did he tell you to tell me all this?" asked Elise abruptly, and with
sudden gravity.

"O dear, no; but as he wanted me to find it out for him, and said that
not a soul knew about the matter but me, I thought the simplest way
would be to tell you all he said, and then ask you straight.  He was
going to tell me something more, very particularly, for he was just
saying, in a very solemn tone, `You must on no account mention--' when
your little dog bounced in and Jenkins bounced out, leaving the rest of
it unsaid."

"Then he has just left you?" said Elise.

"Just a moment or two before you came up.  I think he must have seen
some sort of beast in the wood, and gone in chase of it, he bolted in
such a hurry, so I don't know yet what I was not to mention."

"Now, Little Bill," said Elise with great seriousness of tone and
manner, "you must not tell Mr Jenkins one word of the conversation that
you and I have had just now."

"What! not a single word?"

"Not one.  You understand?"

"Yes, but, if he asks me, I must answer something, you know, and I must
not tell lies."

"Quite true, Billie.  You must not tell lies on any account whatever.
Now, listen.  If he asks you about our conversation this morning, you
must say that I told you you were never to open your lips about the
subject again either to me or to him or to anybody.  Mr Jenkins is an
honourable man, and will not ask you a single question after that."

"Then I'm not to tell him whether you want to marry him?"

"How can you tell him what you don't know?"

"Well, but, I mean that you're not going to tell me, so that I might
tell him?"

"Certainly not."

"Not a word to him and not a word to you--nor to anybody!  Not even to
Archie!"

"Yes.  That is exactly what you must promise me."

"This is a very unpleasant state of things," said Little Bill, with a
sad and puzzled countenance, "but of course I promise, for it is your
affair, you know."

It was a notable fact, which Little Bill did not fail to note--but did
not dare to mention--that after that date there was a distinct change of
demeanour in Elise Morel towards the handsome sailor--whether in his
favour or otherwise it was impossible to tell.

Meanwhile, events were pending which were destined to exercise a very
powerful influence over the fortunes of the Red River Colony, and,
indeed, over the condition of the whole of Rupert's Land.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

THE FISHERY DISASTERS.

One fine day, when summer had merged into autumn, and things in Red
River appeared to be advancing favourably, and Dan Davidson had
recovered his strength, and Little Bill was fairly well, it occurred to
Okematan that he would like to go to Lake Winnipeg, and see how the
settlers who had gone to the fishery there, were getting on.

You see, the Cree chief was an observant savage, and, before returning
to his tribe, had made up his mind to see all the phases in the life of
the new Palefaces who had thus come to take possession of the land.

He was a remarkably independent fellow, and as he served the Davidsons
for nothing except his food--which he did not count, as he could easily
have supplied himself with victuals by means of his line, bow, and gun--
he did not deem it necessary to ask leave of absence.  He merely went to
the house one morning, and announced his intention of going to Lake
Winnipeg to fish.

"I will go with you," said Dan, to whom the announcement was made.

"An' so will I," said Fred Jenkins, who chanced to be conversing with
Dan at the time--"that is, if they can spare me just now."

"The canoe of Okematan," said the chief, "holds no more than three.  He
wishes to take with him Arch-ee and Leetil Bill."

"Very well," returned Dan, "there's no objection to that, for there is
not much doing on the farm at this moment, and Archie has worked hard
all the summer, so he deserves a holiday.  We will just make up the same
party that started last time, only that Fergus and I will take a
somewhat bigger canoe so as to accommodate you, Jenkins."

"Thankee.  Though I am big--unfort'nitly--I can stow myself away in
small compass, an' I've larned how, when there ain't overmuch grub, to
git along fairly well on short allowance.  When d'ee trip your anchor?--
I mean, when do ye start?"

"When to-morrow's sun touches the tree-tops in the east," said the
Indian chief.

"All right, Okematan, I'm your man--after layin' in a breakfast-cargo."

According to this arrangement the two canoes pushed off at daybreak the
following morning, from the wharf at the foot of the garden of Prairie
Cottage, and began the descent of the Red River, which, after flowing
between twenty and thirty miles northward, enters the mighty bosom of
Lake Winnipeg.  Okematan and Archie occupied their old places in the
stern and bow of the chief's canoe, with Little Bill in the middle--this
time using a paddle, for his strength had greatly increased.  The other
canoe was steered by Dan; Fergus acted bowman, and Jenkins sat between
them, also wielding a paddle.

That night they encamped on the banks of the river, for their progress
had been slow, owing to sundry visits which had to be paid to settlers
on the way down.

"Well, now," observed the sailor, as he stood by the camp-fire smoking
his pipe contemplatively, "I find that as circumstances change about in
this world men's minds are apt to go 'bout-ship along wi' them."

"That sounds a terribly profound speech, Fred," said Archie, who was
busy at his very usual occupation of whittling an arrow for his brother.
"Did your father teach it you, or did you crib it from a copy-book?"

"No, I raither think," retorted the seaman quietly, "that I got it from
your grandmother by the father's side."

"What may be the circumstance that has caused your mind to go about-ship
just now?" asked Dan, stirring the fire under the robbiboo-kettle.

"Well, it's in regard to them there canoe-paddles.  Although they do
seem small, compared with oars, I find they're quite big enough to do
the work, and although I've bin trained from a youngster to handle the
oar, an' go like a crab with my back the way I'm pullin', it do seem
more sensible-like to sit wi' one's face to the front and drive ahead;--
anyhow, it's more comfortable and satisfactory."

"Look out, Jenkins!" exclaimed Little Bill, "else your duck won't be
satisfactory--it's burnin' now."

"O, never mind," remarked Fergus, lighting his pipe.  "It iss havin' it
well done he would be fond of."

"Ay, but not over-done," cried the seaman, snatching the duck in
question from before the blaze and turning its other side--for they used
no spits in the Nor'-West in those days, but cooked one side at a time--
nay, even carved off and ate part of the cooked side while the other
side was roasting.

Next day they came out on the ocean-like expanse of the great lake, and
steered along its western shores until they reached the fishery, where
numbers of rudely-constructed wigwams and a few tents sheltered the
fishing community.

They had just returned from a successful visit to the nets when the
visitors arrived, and all was animation and rejoicing at the successful
take.  Jacques Bourassin was the first man they met on landing, and he
was enthusiastic about the prospects before them.  Slowfoot was the
first woman, and she was quite satisfied--in that amiable state of
mental and physical felicity in which it is so easy to believe that "all
is for the best."  Her husband soon after appeared.  He, of course, was
also greatly pleased.  He had joined the fishers because he believed
that plenty of food, tea, and tobacco would be going amongst them.  He
was not mistaken.

"You will come to my tent," he said, in the wealth of his hospitality;
"we have plenty of good fish, a very little meat, some tobacco, and
oceans of tea!"

The six visitors accepted the invitation, and were soon made acquainted
with all the gossip of the community.

"Does it always smoke?" whispered Little Bill to his brother.

The "it" referred to was Baby La Certe, which had, as usual, possessed
itself of its father's pipe when the mother was not watching.

"I'm not sure, Little Bill, but I think that it does its best."

It was observed, especially by Fred Jenkins, that the tea-drinking which
went on at this place was something marvellous.

"There's that squaw sittin' there," he said, "she's bin an' swigged
three pannikins o' tea while I've bin looking at her--an' it's as black
as ink.  What's that brown stuff they put into it, does any one know?"

"That?  Why, it is maple sugar," answered Archie, "an' capital stuff it
is to eat too."

"Ah, I know that, for I've ate it in lump, but it can't be so good in
tea, I fancy, as or'nary brown or white sugar; but it's better than fat,
anyhow."

"Fat!" exclaimed Little Bill, "surely you never heard of any one taking
fat in tea, did you?"
