[Illustration]




CARRIER PIGEONS.


The carrier pigeon is remarkable for the degree in which it possesses
the instinct and power of returning from a distance to its accustomed
home. In Eastern countries it is the practice to bathe the pigeon's feet
in vinegar to keep them cool, and to prevent it from alighting in quest
of water, by which the letter might sustain injury. Pigeons intended for
this use must be brought from the place to which they are to return,
within a short period, and must be kept in the dark and without food for
at least eight hours before being let loose. The carrier pigeon was of
great service during the siege of Paris in 1871, and conveyed many
important messages. It goes through the air at the rate of thirty miles
an hour, but has been known to fly even faster.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE GOLDEN EAGLE.

THE STORK.

THE VIRGINIAN HORNED OWL.

THE CRANE.]

[Illustration: THE WHALE.

THE ELEPHANT.

THE WHITE RHINOCEROS.

THE HIPPOPOTAMUS, OR BEHEMOTH.]




THE SIASIN, OR ANTELOPE OF INDIA.


The Siasin, or Antelope of India, roams over the open and rocky plains
of that immense country. It is distinguished from the rest of its family
by the beauty and singular shape of its horns, which are annulated or
ringed, and spirally convoluted or curved together, making two or more
turns, according to the age of the animal. The fakirs and dervishes of
India, who are enjoined by their religion from carrying swords,
frequently wear at their girdles the polished horns of the siasin
instead of the usual military arm. This antelope is one of the
fleetest-footed of its family, and its leap is something wonderful. It
is not uncommon for it to vault to the height of twelve or thirteen
feet, passing over ten or twelve yards at a single bound. In color it is
almost black on the upper part of the body, and light-colored beneath.
When full grown, it is about the size of our common deer.

[Illustration]




THE COMMON SNIPE.


These birds frequent swampy woods, marshes, morasses, and the borders of
rivers. Their usual time for seeking their food is early in the morning
and during the twilight of the evening. They subsist principally upon
insects and worms; for these they search among the decayed leaves, and
probe the mud and ooze with their lengthened bills. When alarmed, they
generally lie close to the ground, or among the grass, or, suddenly
starting on the wing, escape by flight, which is short but elevated,
rapid, and irregular. The eggs, which are four in number, are deposited
on the ground. In the snipe, and all its immediate allies, the bill is
thickened, soft, and very tender at its extremity; so that this part,
which is richly supplied with nerves, serves as a delicate organ of
touch, and is used for searching in the soft ground for the insects and
worms that constitute the food of these birds.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: A VISIT TO THE MONKEYS.]




D--THE DOE.


Graceful and gentle is the Doe;
  Its tawny coat how sleek!
How bright yet tender are its eyes!
  Its glance how softly meek!


E--THE EAGLE.


Upon the lonely mountain peak
  The eagle builds her nest,
And there, when weary of the chase,
  In silence takes her rest.


F--THE FOX.


The Fox will skulk in ferny brake,
  Yet loves the haunts of men;
And prowls around the farm, to pounce
  On capon, goose, or hen.




MRS. BUNNY AND FAMILY.


This wild Rabbit has been startled by some noise, and the next moment
she may be scampering away to her burrow, with the little bunnies, at
the top of their speed, and crouch there until all is quiet again.
Rabbits usually select, if possible, a sandy soil overgrown with furze,
in which to make their burrows, as such a soil is easily removed, and
the dense prickly furze hides their retreat, whilst it affords them a
wholesome and never-failing food. These furze bushes are constantly
eaten down, as far as the rabbits can reach standing on their hind legs,
and consequently present the appearance of a solid mass with the surface
even and rounded. These animals retire into their burrows by day to
rest, and come out only in the twilight to obtain food.

[Illustration]




THE LYNX.


The body of the lynx, beautifully spotted with black and brown rings, is
more solid and hardy than that of the wild cat. His ears are longer, his
tail is shorter, his great eyes light up like bright flames; and since
he prowls about chiefly at night, he is thought to have very keen sight.
For this reason, when we wish to say that a person can see very clearly
or can look beyond the outward appearance of things, we call him
_lynx-eyed_. Like all cats, the lynx possesses in his mustache a very
correct power of feeling. This, with the sense of hearing and sight,
guides him in all his expeditions.

The lynx in the picture is in the act of springing upon a timid hare.
Although he can measure twenty paces in a jump, I think for once he has
made a misstep, and the dear little creature with one more bound will be
safe. One very remarkable fact about these animals is this: if there are
several together, and one starts over the snow in pursuit of booty, all
the others will follow in exactly the same tracks, so that it will look
as if but one lynx had passed over the snow-covered earth.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: GOOD MORNING, BIRDIE!]




THE SWAN AND THE DRAKE.


Slowly, in majestic silence,
  Sailed a Swan upon a lake;
Round about him, never quiet,
  Swam a noisy quacking Drake.

"Swan," exclaimed the latter, halting,
  "I can scarcely comprehend
Why I never hear you talking:
  Are you really dumb, my friend?"

Said the Swan, by way of answer:
  "I have wondered, when you make
Such a shocking, senseless clatter,
  Whether you are deaf, Sir Drake!"

Better, like the Swan, remain in
  Silence grave and dignified,
Than keep, drake-like, ever prating,
  While your listeners deride.

W. R. E.

[Illustration]




THE BEAVER.


This industrious animal is generally found in Canada and the northern
portions of the United States, where it makes its home on the banks of
the rivers and lakes. Here they assemble in hundreds to assist each
other in the construction of their dams, and in the building of their
houses, which are put together with a considerable amount of engineering
skill. The materials used in building the dams are wood, stones, and
mud, which they collect themselves for that purpose, and after finishing
the dam, or winter storehouse, they collect their stores for the
winter's use, and then make a connection with their houses in the banks.
Their skins are valuable in making fine hats, and their flesh is much
relished by the hunters. The beaver is an interesting animal in many
respects, and the expression "busy as a beaver" is borne out by its
habits.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE TURTLE-DOVE.]

[Illustration: THE CUCKOO.]

[Illustration: THE PEACOCK.]

[Illustration: THE TAME, OR MUTE SWAN.]

[Illustration: THE LIONESS AND CUBS.]

[Illustration: THE LEOPARD.]

[Illustration: THE SYRIAN BEAR.]

[Illustration: THE JACKAL.]




LIONESS AND CUBS.


The lioness is much smaller than the lion, and her form is more slender
and graceful. She is devoid of the mane of her lord and master, and has
four or five cubs at a birth, which are all born blind. The young lions
are at first obscurely striped and spotted. They mew like cats, and are
as playful as kittens. As they get older, the uniform color is gradually
assumed. The mane appears in the males at the end of ten or twelve
months, and at the age of eighteen months it is very considerably
developed, and they begin to roar. Both in nature and in a state of
captivity the lioness is very savage as soon as she becomes a mother,
and the lion himself is then most to be dreaded, as he will then brave
almost any risk for the sake of his lioness and family.

[Illustration]




A PET JACK.


The first fish I ever saw in an aquarium, twenty years ago, was a
"Jack," as he is called when young, or a "Pike," when he grows older;
and ever since then I have contrived to have a pet one, and this, drawn
from life by Mr. Harrison Weir, is an accurate portrait of the one I now
possess in the Crystal Palace Aquarium. There he is, just as he steals
round the corner of a bit of rock. He is glaring at a minnow, at which
he is taking most accurate aim; he hardly seems to move, but yet he does
by a very trifling motion of the edge of his back fin--sometimes resting
a little on the tips of his two foremost fins, as they touch the ground,
carefully calculating his distance; and then, at the very moment when
the minnow has got into a position which leaves a space of clear water
in front, so that Mr. Jack shall not hurt his nose against any hard
substance when he gets carried on by the violence of his rush, he darts
at the minnow with the speed of Shakspeare's Puck:--

"I go, I go! look, how I go!
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow."
[Illustration]


