"He takes it hard," muttered Stephen Watson, eyeing the retreating form
of his nephew thoughtfully. "I wonder if he will suspect that there is
anything wrong. Even if he does, he is only a boy, and can prove
nothing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What makes you so glum, Kit?" asked Dan Clark, when they met at seven
o'clock, as agreed, to go together to the show.

"Not much, Dan, only I have learned that I am a pauper."

"But the estate--the house and the grounds?" said Dan, bewildered.

"Belong to my uncle."

"Who says so?"

"He says so. But I don't want to say any more about it now. Let us start
for the circus, and I will try to forget my pauper position, for one
evening at least."

Before they reached the lot, they heard the circus band discoursing
lively music. They were in a crowd, for all Smyrna, men, women and
children, were bound for the show. It was a grand gala night. In the
city, where there are many amusements, the circus draws well, but in the
country everybody goes.

Outside the great tent were the side shows. In one of them Kit found his
friends of the morning, the giant, the dwarf, and the fat lady, with
other curiosities hereafter to be mentioned. Just inside the tent, in
what might be called the ante chamber, was the collection of animals.
The elephants were accorded more freedom than the rest, but the lion,
tiger, and leopard were shut up in cages. The lion seemed particularly
restless. He was pacing his narrow quarters, lashing his tail, and from
time to time emitting deep growls, betokening irritation and anger.

"How would you like to go into the cage?" asked Dan.

"I don't care for an interview with his majesty," responded Kit.

A stranger was standing near the cage.

"Don't go too near, boys!" he said. "That lion is particularly fierce.
He nearly killed a man last season in Pennsylvania."

"How was that?"

"The man ventured too near the cage. The lion stretched out his claws,
and fastened them in the man's shoulder, lacerating it fearfully before
he could be released. He came near dying of blood poisoning."

Kit and Dan sheered off. The lion looked wicked enough to kill a dozen
men.

At eight o'clock the performance commenced. First there was a procession
of elephants and horses, the latter carrying the bareback riders and
other members of the circus, with the curiosities and freaks. Then came
two bareback riders, who jumped through hoops, and over banners, and
performed somersaults, to the wondering delight of the boys. Then came
tumblers, and in preparation for another scene a gaudily dressed clown
entered the ring. Suddenly there was heard a deep baying sound, which
struck terror into every heart. It was the lion; but seemed close at
hand. In an instant a dark, cat-like form, rushing down the aisle,
sprang into the ring.

The great Numidian lion had broken from his cage, and the life of every
one in the audience was in peril. Ladies shrieked, strong men grew pale,
and all wildly looked about for some way of escape.

Striking down the clown, and standing with one foot on the prostrate
form, the lion's cruel eyes wandered slowly over the vast assemblage.

Only ten feet from him, in front seats, sat Kit and Dan.

Kit rose in his seat pale and excited, but with a resolute fire in his
eyes. He had thought of a way to vanquish the lion.




CHAPTER V.

HOW KIT VANQUISHED THE LION.


The danger was imminent. Under the canvas there were at least two
thousand spectators. Smyrna had less than five thousand inhabitants, but
from towns around there were numerous excursion parties, which helped to
swell the number present. Had these people foreseen the terrible scene
not down on the bills, they would have remained at home and locked the
doors of their houses. But danger is seldom anticipated and peril
generally finds us unprepared.

Dan Clark saw Kit about to leave his seat.

"Where are you going?" he cried.

"I am going into the arena."

"What? Are you out of your head?" asked Dan, and he took hold of Kit to
detain him. But the boy tore himself from the grasp of his friend, and
with blanched brow, for he knew full well the risk he ran, he sprang
over the parapet, and in an instant he stood in the sawdust circle
facing the angry monarch of the wilds, whose presence had struck terror
into the hearts of two thousand members of a superior race.

The sudden movement of Kit created a sensation only less than the
appearance of the lion.

The residents of Smyrna all knew him, but they could not understand the
cause of his apparent fool-hardiness.

"Come back! Come away, for your life!" exclaimed dozens of Kit's friends
and acquaintances.

"Who is that boy? Is he one of the circus men?" asked strangers who were
present.

"You will be killed, Kit! Come back!" implored Dan Clark, appalled at
the danger of his friend.

Kit heard, but did not heed, the various calls. He knew what he was
about, and he did not mean to be killed. But there seemed the greatest
danger of it. He was six feet from the angry beast, who lashed his tail
with renewed wrath, when he saw his new and puny foe. Kit knew, however,
that the lion's method of attack is to spring upon his victims, and that
he needs a space of from twelve to fifteen feet to do it. He himself,
being but six feet distant, was within the necessary space. The lion
must increase the distance between them in order to accomplish its
purpose.

Now it happened that Mr. Watson had in his kitchen an elderly woman, who
had for years been addicted to the obnoxious habit of snuff taking--a
habit, I am glad to be able to say, which is far less prevalent now than
in former days. Just before Kit had started for the circus, Ellen, who
was a Scotch woman, said: "Master Kit, if you are going near the store,
will you buy me a quarter of a pound of snuff?"

"Certainly, Ellen," answered Kit, who was always obliging.

The snuff he had in his pocket at the time of the lion's appearance in
the ring, and it was the thought of this unusual but formidable weapon
that gave him courage. If he had merely had a pistol or revolver in his
pocket, he would not have ventured, for he knew that a wound would only
make the lion fiercer and more dangerous.

The lion stood stock still for a moment. Apparently he was amazed at the
daring of the boy who had rushed into his presence. His fierce eyes
began to roll wickedly and he uttered one of those deep, hoarse growls,
such as are wont to strike fear alike into animals and men. He glared at
Kit very much as a cat surveys a puny mouse whom she purposes to make
her victim.

It was a few brief seconds, but to the audience, who were spellbound,
and scarcely dared to breathe, it seemed as many minutes that the boy
and lion stood confronting each other without moving. Indeed, Kit stood
as if fascinated before the mighty beast, and a thrill passed through
his frame as he realized the terrible danger into which he had
impulsively rushed. But he knew full well that his peril was each
instant growing greater. He could not retreat now, for the furious beast
would improve the chance to spring upon him and rend him to pieces.

With curious deliberation he drew from his pocket a paper parcel, while
the lion, as if stirred by curiosity, eyed him attentively. He opened it
carefully, and then, without an instant's delay, he flung a handful of
the snuff which it contained full in the eyes of the terrible animal.

No sooner had he done so than he gave a spring, and in a flash was over
the parapet and back in his seat.

It was not a moment too soon!

The lion was blinded by the snuff, which caused him intense pain. He
released the terrified clown, who lost no time in escaping from the
arena, while the vanquished beast rolled around on the sawdust in his
agony, sending forth meanwhile the most terrible roars.

By this time the circus management had recovered from its momentary
panic. The trainer and half a dozen animal men (those whose duty it was
to take care of the animals) rushed into the circle, and soon obtained
the mastery of the lion, whose pain had subdued his fury, and who was
now moaning piteously.

Then through the crowded tent there ran a thrill of admiration for the
boy who had delivered them all from a terrible danger.

One man, an enthusiastic Western visitor, sprang to his feet, and,
waving his hat, exclaimed: "Three cheers for the brave boy, who has
shown more courage than all the rest of us put together! Hip, hip,
hurrah!"

The call was responded to with enthusiasm. Men and even women rose in
their seats, and joined in the cheering. But some of the friends of Kit
amended the suggestion by crying, "Hurrah for Kit Watson!"

"Hurrah for Kit Watson!" cried the Western man. "He's the pluckiest kid
I ever saw yet."

Kit had not been frightened before, but he felt undeniably nervous when
he saw the eyes of two thousand people fixed upon him. He blushed and
seemed disposed to screen himself from observation. But at this moment a
tall, portly man advanced from the front of the tent, and came up to
where Kit was sitting.

"My boy," he said, "do me the favor to follow me. I am Mr. Barlow."

It was indeed the proprietor of the circus. He had come in person to
greet the boy who had averted such a tragedy.

Mechanically Kit followed Mr. Barlow, who led him again into the arena.
Then the manager cleared his throat, and said:

"Ladies and gentlemen, I have nothing to show you here to-night that is
better worth your attention than the young man whose heroic act you
have just witnessed and profited by. I introduce to you the boy hero,
Kit Watson!"

"Speech! speech!" exclaimed the spectators, after a liberal meed of
applause.

Kit stood erect, and spoke modestly.

"I don't pretend to be a hero," he said. "I was as much frightened as
anybody, but I thought of the snuff in my pocket, and I recalled to mind
a story of a man who subdued a lunatic by means of it. So, on the
impulse of the moment, I jumped into the ring. I am very much obliged to
you for your cheers, and I wish I was as brave as you seem to think. I
won't take up any more of your time, for I know you want the show to go
on."

Kit retired amid a burst of applause, and resumed his seat.

The entertainment of the evening now proceeded, greatly to the
satisfaction of the crowded ranks of spectators. But from time to time
glances were cast towards the seat which Kit occupied.

"Kit," whispered Dan, "I am proud of you! I didn't think you had it in
you."

"Don't say any more, Dan, or I shall become so vain you can't endure me.
Look! there are our friends, the acrobats."




CHAPTER VI.

KIT'S POOR PROSPECTS.


There was one of the spectators who did not admire Kit's heroic conduct,
nor join in the applause which was so liberally showered upon him. This
was Ralph Watson, who sat on the opposite side of the tent, with his
chum, James Schuyler, a boy who had recently come to Smyrna from the
city of New York. Ralph had been very pale when the lion first made his
appearance in the arena, and trembled with fear, and no one had felt
greater relief when the danger was past. But, being naturally of a
jealous disposition, he was very much annoyed by the sudden popularity
won by Kit.

"Isn't that your cousin?" asked James Schuyler.

"Yes," answered Ralph shortly.

"What a brave boy he is!"

Ralph shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't see much bravery about it," he said. "It isn't as if the lion
was a wild one in his native forest. This one was tame."

"He didn't look very tame to me," rejoined James, who, though rather
snobbish, was willing to admit the danger they had all incurred. "The
people didn't think so either. Hear them cheer your cousin."

"It will make him terribly conceited. He will actually think he's a
hero."

"I wouldn't have given much for any of our lives if he hadn't jumped
into the ring, and blinded the lion."

Meanwhile Kit was enjoying the performance, and thinking very little of
how his action would be regarded by Ralph, for whom he had no very
cordial feeling, though they had been, from the necessity of the case,
close companions for many years.

On their return home, Kit and Ralph reached the gate together.

"It seems you're a great hero all at once," said Ralph, with a sneer.

Kit understood the sneer, but did not choose to notice it.

"Thank you for the compliment," he responded quietly.

"O, I didn't mean to flatter you! You are puffed up enough."

"Are you sorry I jumped into the ring, Ralph?" asked Kit good-naturedly.

"I don't believe there was any real danger."

"Then I must congratulate you upon your courage. All the rest of us were
frightened, and even Mr. Barlow admitted that there was danger."

"The lion was half tame. It isn't as if he were wild."

"He looked wild enough to me when I faced him in the ring. I confess
that my knees began to tremble, and I wished myself at home."

"You'd better set up as a lion tamer," said Ralph.

"Thank you; I think I should prefer some other business, where my life
would be safer."

"You are likely to have your wish, then."

"What do you mean?" asked Kit quickly, detecting a significance in
Ralph's tone.

"I mean that father intends to have you learn a trade."

"Has he told you so?"

"Yes."

"Doesn't he propose to consult me?"

"Why should he? You are only a boy, and can't judge what is best for
yourself."

"Still I am likely to be more interested than any one else in the way I
am to earn my living. What trade are _you_ going to learn?"

"What trade am I going to learn?" repeated Ralph, with the assumption of
insulted dignity. "None at all. I shall be a merchant or a professional
man."

"And why should not I be the same?" asked Kit.

"Because you're a poor boy. Didn't my father tell you this afternoon
that you had no money coming to you?"

"Yes; but that needn't prevent me from becoming a merchant, or studying
a profession."

"So _you_ think. You can't expect my father to pay for sending you to
college, or support you while you are qualifying yourself to be a
merchant."

"I don't know yet what I am entitled to expect."

"You will soon know."

"How soon?"

"To-morrow. There's a blacksmith in the next town, Aaron Bickford, who
has agreed to take you as an apprentice."

"So it's all settled, is it?" Kit asked, full of indignation.

"Yes, if Mr. Bickford likes your appearance. He's coming to Smyrna on
business to-morrow, and will call here. You're to live at his house."

"Indeed! I am very much obliged for the information."

"Oh, you needn't get grouty about it. I've no doubt you'll have enough
to eat."

"So I am to be a blacksmith, and you a merchant or----"

"Lawyer. I think I shall decide to be a lawyer," said Ralph,
complacently.

"That will make quite a difference in our social positions."

"Of course; but I will help you all I can. If you have a shop of your
own, I will have my horses shod at your place."

"Does your father think I am particularly well fitted to be a
blacksmith?"

"He thinks you will get along very well in the business, if you are
industrious. A poor boy can't choose. He must take the best he can get."

Kit did not sleep very much that night. He was full of anger and
indignation with his uncle. Why should his future be so different from
his cousin's? At school he had distinguished himself more in his
studies, and he did not see why he was not as well fitted to become a
merchant or a lawyer as Ralph.

"They can't make me a blacksmith without my consent," was his final
thought, as he closed his eyes and went to sleep.

Kit was up early the next morning. As breakfast was not ready, he
strolled over to the hotel, which was only five minutes' walk from his
uncle's house.

The circus tent had vanished. Late at night, after the evening
performance was over, the canvas men had busied themselves in taking
them down, and packing them for transportation to a town ten miles
distant on the railroad, where they were to give two exhibitions the
next day. The showy chariots, the lions, tigers, elephants and camels,
with all the performers, were gone. But Mr. Barlow, the owner of the
circus, had remained at the Smyrna Hotel all night, preferring to
journey comfortably the next morning.

He was sitting on the piazza when Kit passed. Though he had never seen
Kit but once, his business made him observant of faces, and he
recognized him immediately.

"Aha!" he said, "this is the young hero of last evening, is it not?"

