basis you can accomplish nothing ethical, now or at any future time.
But when the recipient stage is past, and boys begin to assert
themselves, they have a tendency to resist, if not to resent,
professedly moral and religious teaching; and this chiefly because it
then comes to them or is presented to them in the shape of abstract
precept and authoritative dogma. Now, the growing mind of youth is
keen after realities, and has no native antagonism to realities merely
because they happen to be moral or religious realities. It is the
abstract, preceptive, and barren form, and the presumptuous manner in
which these are presented that they detest. How, then, at this
critical age to present the most vital of all the elements of
education, is a supremely important problem. It is my conviction that
you can only do so through literature; and the New Testament itself
might well be read simply as literature. The words, the phrases, the
ideals which literature offers so lavishly, unconsciously stir the
mind to lofty motives and the true perception of the meaning of life.
We must not, of course, commit the fatal blunder of making a didactic
lesson out of what is read. We take care that it is understood and
illustrated, and then leave it to have its own effect."

Children behave better when their minds are occupied; an interest in
literature has proved in numerous instances to be an aid to discipline
in the schoolroom. It is sad to think how little that is refining and
elevating comes into the lives of many children. The attitude of the
average school boy toward life is shown by the fact that he refers to
any stranger as a "guy". The rough horse play of the movies fills such
a boy with exquisite delight. To see on the screen a man have a lot of
dough slapped in his face is the highest form of humor. His mind is
active but it has no suitable nourishment. What is needed is to direct
it. President Angell has told us how boys were inspired by that great
teacher Alice Freeman Palmer:

"I attended a class in English Literature which she was teaching. The
class was composed of boys from fifteen to eighteen years of age, in
whom one would perhaps hardly expect much enthusiasm for the great
masters of English Literature. But it was soon apparent that she had
those boys completely under her control and largely filled with her
own enthusiasm. They showed that at their homes they had been
carefully and lovingly reading some of the great masterpieces and were
ready to discuss them with intelligence and zest."

"Mind grows," says Carlyle, "like a spirit--thought kindling itself at
the fire of living thought."

To keep the heart open to elevating influences, to enjoy really
beautiful things, to take a dignified and noble view of life, these
are the results that must follow association with the best thoughts of
the best minds, which is literature. And it is one of the wonders of
literature that some of the best of it is adapted to every order of
intelligence. When one gets older his mental field widens, he cannot
then read all the best, he must choose; but the classic books for
children are not so numerous that the child may not read and reread
them.

Cultivation of the literary taste of the child may begin as soon as he
can talk. He will early take an interest in simple stories and poems
and sooner than many suppose, he may be taught to read those which he
has already learned by heart. From the beginning reading should be
easy and interesting. The child should look forward to it with
pleasure. He loves stories, let him see that the best of them are in
books told by better story tellers than he can find elsewhere. Help
the child to appreciate the book, to take an intelligent interest in
it, and gradually lead him up to that love of the best which is the
foundation of culture. Do not think that he can see all there is to
enjoy at the first reading; a book is classic because it may be read
over and over and always show something that was not seen before.
There is a distinction which teachers and parents do not always
recognize between books, which are beyond the child merely because of
the hard words in which the idea is clothed and those in which the
thought itself is above his comprehension. "Children possess an
unestimated sensibility to whatever is deep or high in imagination or
feeling so long as it is simple likewise. It is only the artificial
and the complex that bewilder them," said Hawthorne, and because of
his knowledge of this fact he wrote his exquisite classics for
children. The phraseology of books is frequently different from that
to which the child is accustomed. He must be taught to understand
thought as expressed in printed words, his vocabulary is limited; in
reading aloud he will often pronounce words correctly without any idea
of what they mean and far more frequently than you imagine he will
receive a wrong impression by confusing words like _zeal_ and _seal_
of similar sound and totally different meaning. A teacher accidentally
found out that her class supposed that the "kid" which railed at the
wolf in Aesop's fable was a little boy, and I have had a child tell me
that he saw at Rouen the place, where Noah's ark was burned, of course
he meant Jeanne d'Arc. "The mastery of words," says Miss Arnold, "is an
essential element in learning to read. Our common mistake is, not that
we do such work too well, but that we make it the final aim of the
reading lesson, and lead the children to feel that they can read when
they are merely able to pronounce the words." "Observation has
convinced me," wrote Melvill Dewey, "that the reason why so many people
are not habitual readers is, in most cases, that they have never
really learned to read; and, startling as this may seem, tests will
show that many a man who would resent the charge of illiteracy is
wholly unable to reproduce the author's thoughts by looking at the
printed page."

Children make their first acquaintance with books from the pictures.
They like plenty of them with bright colors and broad simple treatment
and prefer a rude sketch with action to the finest work of Walter
