Note the lightness with which the unimportant details of conversation
are skimmed over.


=Inflection.= If we listen to the speech of the people around us, we
can easily detect an upward slide of the voice on some words, a
downward slide on others, and on others again a combination of the
two. This slide of the voice on words--generally on the accented
syllable of an emphatic word--is called =inflection=, and the various
inflections are known as _rising_ (/), _falling_ (\), _rising
circumflex_ (\/), and _falling_ circumflex (/\).

Each inflection has a definite and fixed meaning recognized by every
one, and it is because of the laws of inflection that we can tell what
meaning a speaker intends to convey when he uses certain words; for
often the same words may carry two or three different meanings
according to the inflection. The simple word "Yes," with an abrupt
downward slide, expresses decided affirmation. When spoken with an
upward slide, it expresses interrogation and is equivalent to "Is that
really so?" When it has a combination of the downward and upward slide
or a rising circumflex inflection, the meaning is no longer simple but
complex. There is an assertion combined with doubt. It is equivalent
to saying: "I think so but I am not really sure." In such a sentence
as: "Do not say 'yes,'" where the idea "but say 'no,'" is merely
implied, but not formally expressed, the word "yes" has a combination
of the upward and downward slide or a falling circumflex inflection.

If we take an idea for its own sake, if it is independent and complete
in itself, the voice has the downward slide or falling inflection on
the words which stand for the central idea:

  My good blade carves the casques of men,
    My tough lance thrusteth sure,
  My strength is as the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure.
  The shattering trumpet shrilleth high,
    The hard brands shiver on the steel,
  The splinter'd spear-shafts crack and fly,
    The horse and rider reel.

Each statement is complete in itself and has the falling inflection.

Sometimes there is a slight downward slide before the statement is
completed, because the mind feels that the ideas already expressed
are of sufficient force to give them the value of completeness:

  My strength is as the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure.

  And the sick men down in the hold were most of them stark and cold,
  And the pikes were all broken or bent, and the powder was all of it
    spent;
  And the masts and the rigging were lying over the side.

Note the momentary completeness on "ten," "cold," "bent," and "spent,"
requiring the falling inflection.

If on the other hand an idea is incomplete, either pointing forward to
some other idea or being subordinate, the voice has the upward slide
or rising inflection. The rising inflection, like the falling, may be
long or short, more or less abrupt, according to the importance of the
thought:

  She, with all a monarch's pride,
  Felt them in her bosom glow.

"She" points forward to the predicate "felt" and because of the
importance of the idea it takes a long rising inflection; "with all a
monarch's pride" being subordinate and incomplete also requires the
voice to be kept up, but takes a shorter rising inflection.

It is of the greatest importance to know the exact purpose of the
thought, so that the voice may, of itself, give the corresponding
inflection:

  And you may gather garlands there
  Would grace a summer queen.

The sense is evidently not complete in the first line, the intention
being to emphasize the beauty of the garlands to be gathered, and not
merely to state that they may be gathered there. When the reader
understands the exact meaning he will convey it by keeping the rising
inflection on "garlands."

Similar to the foregoing is the following:

  There is not a wife in the west country
  But has heard of the Well of St. Keyne.

The sense is not complete until we read the second line. The rising
inflection on "country" indicates this and connects the first line
with the second, bringing out the meaning, that every wife in the west
country has heard of the Well of St. Keyne.

Sometimes we have a series of rising inflections, all pointing forward
to the leading statement which is to follow and which is necessary to
complete the sense, for example:

  Of man's first disobedience and the fruit
  Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
  Brought death into the world, and all our woe,
  With loss of Eden, till one greater man
  Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
  Sing, heavenly Muse.

Incompleteness may be suggested by a negative statement or its
equivalent:

  Not from the grand old masters,
    Not from the bards sublime,
  Whose distant footsteps echo
    Through the corridors of Time.

  I do not know what I was playing,
    Or what I was dreaming then,
  But I struck one chord of music
    Like the sound of a great Amen.

Note the rising inflection on these negative clauses.

On the same principle the rising inflection is used on the negative
statements of persuasive argument as in the _Apology of Socrates_ (p.
145).

  But I thought that I ought not to do anything
  common or mean, in the hour of danger: nor do I
  now repent of the manner of my defence.

  For neither in war nor yet at law ought any man
  to use every way of escaping death.

  Not so; the deficiency which led to my conviction
  was not of words--certainly not.

Doubt and hesitation also imply incompleteness:

  He surely would do desperate things to show his love of me!
  King, ladies, lovers, all look on; the chance is wondrous fine;
  I'll drop my glove to prove his love; great glory will be mine!

Note the rising inflection on the first two lines where the lady is
still in doubt as to what shall be the test of De Lorge's love, and
the falling inflection on the last one when she has reached a
decision.

Pleading and entreaty also convey a sense of incompleteness and take
the rising inflection:

  Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
  To such a sudden flood of mutiny.

  Good Sir Richard, tell us now,
  For to fight is but to die!

A direct interrogation, that is, one that can be answered by "Yes" or
"No", implies incompleteness in the mind of the questioner and
requires a decided rising inflection:

  Is your name Shylock?

  May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer?

Questions that require an explanatory answer and cannot be answered by
"Yes" or "No," do not convey an idea of incompleteness, being merely
equivalent to the statement of a desire for certain information.
Consequently they take the falling inflection:

  _Flav._ Speak, what trade art thou?
  _1st Cit._ Why, sir, a carpenter.
  _Mar._ Where is thy leather apron, and thy rule?
  What dost thou with thy best apparel on?--
  You, sir, what trade are you?

The purpose or motive of a question must be considered. We must know
whether the question is asked for information, or whether its purpose
is to give information; that is, whether it is only another way of
making an assertion--what is sometimes called a question of appeal.
When Shylock asks Portia: "Shall I not have barely my principal?" he
does so with the direct purpose of learning his sentence. His question
can be answered by "Yes" or "No" and the rising inflection is used.
But when he asks: "On what compulsion must I?" he means simply to give
the information that there is no power on earth to compel him. This is
a complete thought, hence the falling inflection. Other examples are:

  Have you e'er heard of gallant like young Lochinvar?

  God of battles, was ever a battle like this in the world before?

  What conquest brings he home?
  What tributaries follow him to Rome,
  To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?

The opposite inflections on antithetical words or phrases are also due
to this law of completeness and incompleteness. The first part of the
antithesis usually has the rising inflection marking incompleteness,
and the second, the falling, marking completeness.

  His blast is heard at merry morn,
  And mine at dead of night.

  For this thy brother was dead, and is alive again;
  and was lost, and is found.

Similarly, in a series of words or phrases parallel in construction,
all have the rising inflection but the last:

  As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was
  fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour
  him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him! There is
  tears for his love; joy for his fortune; honour for
  his valour; and death for his ambition.

  Crafty men contemn studies; simple men admire
  them; and wise men use them.

If one part of the antithesis is a negation, it takes the rising
inflection, whether it comes first or second. This is owing
to the fact that, as illustrated above, a negation implies
incompleteness. The other part then takes the falling inflection:

  Fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of Spain.

  I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.

  I said an elder soldier, not a better.

Often only one part of the antithesis is expressed, the contrast being
implied. In such a case, the voice brings out the contrast by placing
a combination of the two inflections of the regularly expressed
antithesis on the one word which does duty for both parts: Cassius
says: "I said an elder soldier, not a better" in reply to Brutus'
speech--"You say you are a better soldier." The antithesis is fully
expressed, and the voice places the falling inflection on "elder" and
the rising inflection on "better." If Cassius had omitted the words
"not a better," the very same meaning could have been conveyed by
placing a combination of the rising and the falling inflection or a
falling circumflex on the word "elder," thus--"I said an elder
soldier." In the next line he goes on to say "Did I say b[)e]tter?"
Here, there is an implied contrast with "elder," which is expressed by
a combination of the falling and the rising inflection or a rising
circumflex. From these two examples, we can see that the law of
completeness and incompleteness holds good with the compound or
circumflex inflection, just as it does with the simple inflection, and
determines whether the circumflex shall be rising or falling.

A very common mistake in reading is to use the circumflex inflection
in emphasizing a word, thus making a contrast where none is intended.
"Ramped and roared the lions" with a falling circumflex inflection on
"lions," instead of a simple falling inflection, suggests that the
tigers or some other animals did not ramp and roar. For similar
reasons, avoid the circumflex when emphasizing "hand" and "feet" in
"put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet."

As has already been stated, it is necessary to know the motive behind
the words. When Shylock says: "O wise and upright judge," his
intention is evidently to bestow sincere praise. The reader, knowing
this, instinctively gives a straight slide. Later, when Gratiano says:
"O upright judge, O learned judge!" his intention is to taunt and hold
up to ridicule; there is a double meaning conveyed, which finds its
natural expression in a curved inflection.

Compare the curved inflections in the cobbler's speeches in Act I.
Scene I, of _Julius Caesar_ (p. 133) when he is fencing with Marullus,
with the straight inflections of his final speech when he has thrown
aside his raillery and speaks with sincerity:

    ~     ~       ~               ~
  Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself
      ~    ~
  in more work. But, indeed, sir, we make holiday to

  see C`aesar, and to rejoice in his triumph.

One writer has said: "Where there is simple and genuine thought, deep
and sincere feeling, wherever the eye is single, the inflections of
the voice are straight; a crook in the mind however is indicated by a
crook in the voice."

=Pitch= is the key of the voice. A change of pitch is a leap from one
key to another during silence. Inflection, as we have seen, is a
gradual change in the key while the voice is speaking. The pitch or
key depends upon the muscular tension of the vocal chords, which act
like the strings of a musical instrument: the greater the tension, the
higher the key. Muscular tension implies nervous tension and this is
dependent upon the mental state. If the mind is calm, the nervous and
muscular tension is normal, and the speaker uses the key habitual to
him in his ordinary speech. If the mental state is one of excitement,
the key is higher because of greater nervous and muscular tension. If,
on the other hand, the mental state is one of depression, the key is
lower because of relaxed muscular tension.

In _The Defence of the Bridge_ (p. 206) the Romans, seeing the danger
of the heroes, are wrought up to a high state of nervous tension which
finds its natural expression in the high-pitched voice:

  "Come back, come back Horatius!"
    Loud cried the Fathers all.
  "Back, Lartius! back Herminius!
    Back, ere the ruin fall!"

Contrast with this the lower key of Horatius, who is calm and
self-controlled:

  "O Tiber! Father Tiber!
    To whom the Romans pray,
  A Roman's life, a Roman's arms,
    Take thou in charge this day!"

Observe the gradual rise in pitch with the increase of tension or
excitement in the following:

  And now he feels the bottom;
    Now on dry earth he stands;
  Now round him throng the Fathers
    To press his gory hands;
  And now, with shouts and clapping,
    And noise of weeping loud,
  He enters through the River-Gate,
    Borne by the joyous crowd.

In the following lines, where the Douglas holds communion with
himself, the tension is low chiefly because of his great mental
depression, and, consequently, he speaks in a low key:

  Yes! all is true my fears could frame;
  A prisoner lies the noble Graeme,
  And fiery Roderick soon will feel
  The vengeance of the royal steel.
  I, only I, can ward their fate,--
  God grant the ransom come not late.
  The abbess hath her promise given.
  My child shall be the bride of Heaven:--
  Be pardoned one repining tear!
  For he, who gave her, knows how dear,
  How excellent! but that is by,
  And now my business is--to die.

The low pitch is also partly due to the fact that the Douglas is
speaking to himself, and has no desire to communicate his thoughts to
another; for the effort to communicate thought causes increased
tension.

Again, it requires greater effort to address a person who is at a
distance than one close at hand, or to address a large audience than
a small one. Observe the comparatively high pitch in which Antony (p.
225) begins his oration:

  Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
  I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.

If the reader wishes to give prominence to a thought, the effort put
forth causes muscular tension, resulting in a higher pitch. On the
other hand, a thought, which the reader regards as not of special
importance to the listener, finds expression in lower pitch, more as
if he were addressing himself:

  Bold words!--but, though the beast of game
  The privilege of chase may claim,
  Though space and law the stag we lend,
  Ere hound we slip, or bow we bend,
  Who ever recked, where, how, or when,
  The prowling fox was trapped or slain?

Observe the lower pitch of the subordinate clauses in the first four
lines, and the higher pitch in the last two lines which project the
leading thought.

  "I think, boys," said the schoolmaster, when the
  clock struck twelve, "that I shall give an extra half-holiday
  this afternoon."

Similarly, the narrative clause "said the schoolmaster" which
interrupts the direct speech is read in lower pitch and is separated
by a marked pause before and after.

Parenthetical expressions, also for the same reason, are read in lower
pitch.

  She had not perceived--how could she until she
  had lived longer?--the inmost truth of the old
  monk's outpourings, that renunciation remains sorrow,
  though a sorrow borne willingly.

  He (Mr. Pickwick) would not deny that he was
  influenced by human passions, and human feelings,
  (cheers)--possibly by human weaknesses--(loud
  cries of "No"); but this he would say, that if ever
  the fire of self-importance broke out in his bosom,
  the desire to benefit the human race in preference,
  effectually quenched it.

Passages which are collateral or co-ordinate in construction, and
equally balanced, will find their natural vocal expression in the same
pitch and, of course, the pitch varies as the attitude of the mind
changes:

  Forty flags with their silver stars,
  Forty flags with their crimson bars,
  Flapped in the morning wind: the sun
  Of noon looked down and saw not one.

The first two lines have the same pitch, because there is no
difference in intensity of feeling or in the mental conception. There
is, however, an entire change of thought beginning with "the sun."
This is accompanied by a change of pitch.
