remark, he said quietly, watching her face keenly all the while; "I
thought so; well, I'm going out of town on business for several weeks,
so you can enjoy your'little bit of country' without being annoyed by
me."

"Annoyed? Oh, no!" cried Polly earnestly; then stopped short, not
knowing what to say for herself. She thought she had a good deal of
the coquette in her, and I've no doubt that with time and training she
would have become a very dangerous little person, but now she was far
too transparent and straightforward by nature even to tell a white lie
cleverly. Sydney knew this, and liked her for it, but he took advantage
of it, nevertheless by asking suddenly; "Honestly, now, would n't you go
the old way and enjoy it as much as ever, if I was n't anywhere about to
set the busybodies gossiping?"

"Yes," said Polly, before she could stop herself, and then could have
bitten her tongue out for being so rude. Another awful pause seemed
impending, but just at that moment a horseman clattered by with a smile
and a salute, which caused Polly to exclaim, "Oh, there's Tom!" with a
tone and a look that silenced the words hovering on Sydney's lips, and
caused him to hold out his hand with a look which made Polly's heart
flutter then and ache with pity for a good while afterward, though he
only said, "Good by, Polly."

He was gone before she could do anything but look up at him with a
remorseful face, and she walked on, feeling that the first and perhaps
the only lover she would ever have, had read his answer and accepted
it in silence. She did not know what else he had read, and comforted
herself with the thought that he did not care for her very much, since
he took the first rebuff so quickly.

Polly did not return to her favorite walk till she learned from Minnie
that "Uncle" had really left town, and then she found that his friendly
company and conversation was what had made the way so pleasant after
all. She sighed over the perversity of things in general, and croaked a
little over her trials in particular, but on the whole got over her loss
better than she expected, for soon she had other sorrows beside her own
to comfort, and such work does a body more good than floods of regretful
tears, or hours of sentimental lamentation.

She shunned Fanny for a day or two, but gained nothing by it, for that
young lady, hearing of Sydney's sudden departure, could not rest till
she discovered the cause of it, and walked in upon Polly one afternoon
just when the dusk made it a propitious hour for tender confidences.

"What have you been doing with yourself lately?" asked Fanny, composing
herself, with her back toward the rapidly waning light.

"Wagging to and fro as usual. What's the news with you?" answered Polly,
feeling that something was coming and rather glad to have it over and
done with.

"Nothing particular. Trix treats Tom shamefully, and he bears it like a
lamb. I tell him to break his engagement, and not be worried so; but he
won't, because she has been jilted once and he thinks it's such a mean
thing to do."

"Perhaps she'll jilt him."

"I've no doubt she will, if anything better comes along. But Trix is
getting passe, and I should n't wonder if she kept him to his word, just
out of perversity, if nothing else."

"Poor Tom, what a fate!" said Polly with what was meant to be a comical
groan; but it sounded so tragical that she saw it would n't pass, and
hastened to hide the failure by saying, with a laugh, "If you call Trix
passe at twenty-three, what shall we all be at twenty-five?" "Utterly
done with, and laid upon the shelf. I feel so already, for I don't get
half the attention I used to have, and the other night I heard Maud and
Grace wondering why those old girls'did n't stay at home, and give them
a chance.'"

"How is Maudie?"

"Pretty well, but she worries me by her queer tastes and notions. She
loves to go into the kitchen and mess, she hates to study, and said
right before the Vincents that she should think it would be great fun to
be a beggar-girl, to go round with a basket, it must be so interesting
to see what you'd get."

"Minnie said the other day she wished she was a pigeon so she could
paddle in the puddles and not fuss about rubbers."

"By the way, when is her uncle coming back?" asked Fanny, who could n't
wait any longer and joyfully seized the opening Polly made for her.

"I'm sure I don't know."

"Nor care, I suppose, you hard-hearted thing."

"Why, Fan, what do you mean?"

"I'm not blind, my dear, neither is Tom, and when a young gentleman
cuts a call abruptly short, and races after a young lady, and is seen
holding her hand at the quietest corner of the park, and then goes
travelling all of a sudden, we know what it means if you don't."

"Who got up that nice idea, I should like to know?" demanded Polly, as
Fanny stopped for breath.

"Now don't be affected, Polly, but just tell me, like a dear, has n't he
proposed?"

"No, he has n't."

"Don't you think he means to?"

"I don't think he'll ever say a word to me."

"Well, I am surprised!" And Fanny drew a long breath, as if a load was
off her mind. Then she added in a changed tone: "But don't you love him,
Polly?"

"No."

"Truly?"

"Truly, Fan."

Neither spoke for a minute, but the heart of one of them beat joyfully
and the dusk hid a very happy face.

"Don't you think he cared for you, dear?" asked Fanny, presently. "I
don't mean to be prying, but I really thought he did."

"That's not for me to say, but if it is so, it's only a passing fancy
and he'll soon get over it."

"Do tell me all about it; I'm so interested, and I know something has
happened, I hear it in your voice, for I can't see your face."

"Do you remember the talk we once had after reading one of Miss
Edgeworth's stories about not letting one's lovers come to a declaration
if one did n't love them?"

"Yes."

"And you girls said it was n't proper, and I said it was honest, anyway.
Well, I always meant to try it if I got a chance, and I have. Mind you,
I don't say Mr. Sydney loved me, for he never said so, and never will,
now, but I did fancy he rather liked me and might do more if I did n't
show him that it was of no use."

"And you did?" cried Fanny, much excited.

"I just gave him a hint and he took it. He meant to go away before that,
so don't think his heart is broken, or mind what silly tattlers say.
I did n't like his meeting me so much and told him so by going another
way. He understood, and being a gentleman, made no fuss. I dare say
he thought I was a vain goose, and laughed at me for my pains, like
Churchill in 'Helen.'"

"No, he would n't; He'd like it and respect you for doing it. But,
Polly, it would have been a grand thing for you."

"I can't sell myself for an establishment."

"Mercy! What an idea!"

"Well, that's the plain English of half your fashionable matches. I
'm'odd,' you know, and prefer to be an independent spinster and teach
music all my days."

"Ah, but you won't. You were made for a nice, happy home of your own,
and I hope you'll get it, Polly, dear," said Fanny warmly, feeling so
grateful to Polly, that she found it hard not to pour out all her secret
at once.

"I hope I may; but I doubt it," answered Polly in a tone that made Fanny
wonder if she, too, knew what heartache meant.

"Something troubles you, Polly, what is it? Confide in me, as I do in
you," said Fanny tenderly, for all the coldness she had tried to hide
from Polly, had melted in the sudden sunshine that had come to her.

"Do you always?" asked her friend, leaning forward with an irresistible
desire to win back the old-time love and confidence, too precious to be
exchanged for a little brief excitement or the barren honor of "bagging
a bird," to use Trix's elegant expression. Fanny understood it then,
and threw herself into Polly's arms, crying, with a shower of grateful
tears; "Oh, my dear! my dear! did you do it for my sake?"

And Polly held her close, saying in that tender voice of hers, "I did
n't mean to let a lover part this pair of friends if I could help it."




CHAPTER XV. BREAKERS AHEAD


GOING into the Shaws' one evening, Polly found Maud sitting on the
stairs, with a troubled face.

"Oh, Polly, I'm so glad you've come!" cried the little girl, running
to hug her.

"What's the matter, deary?"

"I don't know; something dreadful must have happened, for mamma and Fan
are crying together upstairs, papa is shut up in the library, and Tom is
raging round like a bear, in the dining-room."

"I guess it is n't anything very bad. Perhaps mamma is sicker than
usual, or papa worried about business, or Tom in some new scrape. Don't
look so frightened, Maudie, but come into the parlor and see what I've
got for you," said Polly, feeling that there was trouble of some sort in
the air, but trying to cheer the child, for her little face was full of
a sorrowful anxiety, that went to Polly's heart.

"I don't think I can like anything till I know what the matter is,"
answered Maud. "It's something horrid, I'm sure, for when papa came
home, he went up to mamma's room, and talked ever so long, and mamma
cried very loud, and when I tried to go in, Fan would n't let me, and
she looked scared and strange. I wanted to go to papa when he came down,
but the door was locked, and he said, 'Not now, my little girl,' and
then I sat here waiting to see what would happen, and Tom came home. But
when I ran to tell him, he said, 'Go away, and don't bother,' and just
took me by the shoulders and put me out. Oh, dear! everything is so
queer and horrid, I don't know what to do."

Maud began to cry, and Polly sat down on the stairs beside her, trying
to comfort her, while her own thoughts were full of a vague fear. All
at once the dining-room door opened, and Tom's head appeared. A single
glance showed Polly that something was the matter, for the care and
elegance which usually marked his appearance were entirely wanting. His
tie was under one ear, his hair in a toss, the cherished moustache had
a neglected air, and his face an expression both excited, ashamed, and
distressed; even his voice betrayed disturbance, for instead of the
affable greeting he usually bestowed upon the young lady, he seemed to
have fallen back into the bluff tone of his boyish days, and all he said
was, "Hullo, Polly."

"How do you do?" answered Polly.

"I'm in a devil of a mess, thank you; send that chicken up stairs, and
come in and hear about it," he said, as if he had been longing to tell
some one, and welcomed prudent Polly as a special providence.

"Go up, deary, and amuse yourself with this book, and these ginger snaps
that I made for you, there's a good child," whispered Polly, as Maud
rubbed away her tears, and stared at Tom with round, inquisitive eyes.

"You'll tell me all about it, by and by, won't you?" she whispered,
preparing to obey.

"If I may," answered Polly.

Maud departed with unexpected docility, and Polly went into the
dining-room, where Tom was wandering about in a restless way. If he
had been "raging like a bear," Polly would n't have cared, she was so
pleased that he wanted her, and so glad to be a confidante, as she used
to be in the happy old days, that she would joyfully have faced a much
more formidable person than reckless Tom.

"Now, then, what is it?" she said, coming straight to the point.

"Guess."

"You've killed your horse racing."

"Worse than that."

"You are suspended again."

"Worse than that."

"Trix has run away with somebody," cried Polly, with a gasp.

"Worse still."

"Oh, Tom, you have n't horse whipped or shot any one?"

"Came pretty near blowing my own brains out but you see I did n't."

"I can't guess; tell me, quick."

"Well, I'm expelled."

Tom paused on the rug as he gave the answer, and looked at Polly to see
how she took it. To his surprise she seemed almost relieved, and after a
minute silence, said, soberly, "That's bad, very bad; but it might have
been worse."

"It is worse;" and Tom walked away again with a despairing sort of
groan.

"Don't knock the chairs about, but come and sit down, and tell me
quietly."

"Can't do it."

"Well, go on, then. Are you truly expelled? Can't it be made up? What
did you do?"

"It's a true bill this time. I just had a row with the Chapel watchman,
and knocked him down. If it was a first offence, I might have got off;
but you see I've had no end of narrow escapes, and this was my last
chance; I've lost it, and now there'll be the dickens to pay. I knew
it was all up with me, so I did n't wait to be turned out, but just took
myself off."

"What will your father say?"

"It will come hard on the governor, but the worst of it is" there Tom
stopped, and stood a minute in the middle of the room with his head
down, as if he did n't find it easy to tell even kind little Polly.
Then out came the truth all in a breath, just as he used to bolt out his
boyish misdemeanors, and then back up against the wall ready to take the
consequences.

"I owe an awful lot of money that the governor don't know about."

"Oh, Tom, how could you?"

"I've been an extravagant rascal, I know it, and I'm thundering sorry,
but that don't help a fellow, I've got to tell the dear old buffer, and
there's where it cuts."

At another time Polly would have laughed at the contrast between Tom's
face and his language, but there was a sincere remorse, which made even
the dreadful word "buffer" rather touching than otherwise.

"He will be very angry, I dare say; but he'll help you, won't he? He
always does, Fan says."

"That's the worst of it, you see. He's paid up so often, that the last
time he said his patience could n't stand it, nor his pocket either, and
if I got into any more scrapes of that sort, I must get out as I could.
I meant to be as steady as Bunker Hill Monument; but here I am again,
worse than ever, for last quarter I did n't say anything to father, he
was so bothered by the loss of those ships just then, so things have
mounted up confoundedly."

"What have you done with all your money?"

"Hanged if I know."

"Can't you pay it anyway?"

"Don't see how, as I have n't a cent of my own, and no way of getting
it, unless I try gambling."

"Oh, mercy, no! Sell your horse," cried Polly, after a minute of deep
meditation.

"I have; but he did n't bring half I gave for him. I lamed him last
winter, and the beggar won't get over it."

"And that did n't pay up the debts?"

"Only about a half of'em."

"Why, Tom, how much do you owe?"

"I have dodged figuring it up till yesterday; then things were so
desperate, I thought I might as well face the truth, so I overhauled my
accounts, and there's the result."

Tom threw a blotted, crumpled paper into Polly's lap, and tramped up
and down again, faster than ever. Polly took one look at the total and
clasped her hands, for to her inexperienced eyes it looked appalling.

"Tidy little sum, is n't it?" asked Tom, who could n't bear the silence,
or the startled, grieved look in Polly's eyes.

"It's awful! I don't wonder you dread telling your father."

"I'd rather be shot. I say, Polly, suppose we break it to him easy!"
added Tom, after another turn.

"How do you mean?"

"Why, suppose Fan, or, better still, you go and sort of pave the way. I
can't bear to come down on him with the whole truth at once."

"So you'd like to have me go and tell him for you?" Polly's lip curled
a little as she said that, and she gave Tom a look that would have
shown him how blue eyes can flash, if he had seen it. But he was at the
window, and did n't turn, as he said slowly, "Well, you see, he's
so fond of you; we all confide in you; and you are so like one of the
family, that it seems quite natural. Just tell him I'm expelled, you
know, and as much more as you like; then I'll come in, and we'll have
it out."

Polly rose and went to the door without a word. In doing so, Tom caught
