high in a gilded cage, on velvet cushions, with four policemen for
guards, her fur bright black and pale gray, her bluish eyes slightly
closed, was his Slum Kitty, looking the picture of a Cat bored to death
with a lot of fuss that she likes as little as she understands it.


VII

Jap Malee lingered around that cage, taking in the remarks, for
hours--drinking a draught of glory such as he had never known in life
before and rarely glimpsed in his dreams. But he saw that it would be
wise for him to remain unknown; his "butler" must do all the business.

It was Slum Kitty who made that show a success. Each day her value went
up in her owner's eyes. He did not know what prices had been given for
Cats, and thought that he was touching a record pitch when his "butler"
gave the director authority to sell the Analostan for one hundred
dollars.

This is how it came about that the Slum Cat found herself transferred
from the show to a Fifth Avenue mansion. She evinced a most
unaccountable wildness at first. Her objection to petting, however, was
explained on the ground of her aristocratic dislike of familiarity. Her
retreat from the Lap-dog onto the centre of the dinner-table was
understood to express a deep-rooted though mistaken idea of avoiding a
defiling touch. Her assaults on a pet Canary were condoned for the
reason that in her native Orient she had been used to despotic example.
The patrician way in which she would get the cover off a milk-can was
especially applauded. Her dislike of her silk-lined basket, and her
frequent dashes against the plate-glass windows, were easily
understood: the basket was too plain, and plate-glass was not used in
her royal home. Her spotting of the carpet evidenced her Eastern modes
of thought. The failure of her several attempts to catch Sparrows in
the high-walled back yard was new proof of the royal impotency of her
bringing up; while her frequent wallowings in the garbage-can were
understood to be the manifestation of a little pardonable high-born
eccentricity. She was fed and pampered, shown and praised; but she was
not happy. Kitty was homesick! She clawed at that blue ribbon round her
neck till she got it off; she jumped against the plate-glass because
that seemed the road to outside; she avoided people and Dogs because
they had always proved hostile and cruel; and she would sit and gaze on
the roofs and back yards at the other side of the window, wishing she
could be among them for a change.

But she was strictly watched, was never allowed outside--so that all
the happy garbage-can moments occurred while these receptacles of joy
were indoors. One night in March, however, as they were set out a-row
for the early scavenger, the Royal Analostan saw her chance, slipped
out of the door, and was lost to view.

Of course there was a grand stir; but Pussy neither knew nor cared
anything about that--her one thought was to go home. It may have been
chance that took her back in the direction of Gramercy Grange Hill, but
she did arrive there after sundry small adventures. And now what? She
was not at home, and she had cut off her living. She was beginning to
be hungry, and yet she had a peculiar sense of happiness. She cowered
in a front garden for some time. A raw east wind had been rising, and
now it came to her with a particularly friendly message; man would have
called it an unpleasant smell of the docks, but to Pussy it was welcome
tidings from home. She trotted down the long Street due east, threading
the rails of front gardens, stopping like a statue for an instant, or
crossing the street in search of the darkest side, and came at length
to the docks and to the water. But the place was strange. She could go
north or south. Something turned her southward; and, dodging among
docks and Dogs, carts and Cats, crooked arms of the bay and straight
board fences, she got, in an hour or two, among familiar scenes and
smells; and, before the sun came up, she had crawled back--weary and
foot-sore through the same old hole in the same old fence and over a
wall to her junk-yard back of the bird-cellar--yes, back into the very
cracker-box where she was born.

Oh, if the Fifth Avenue family could only have seen her in her native
Orient!

After a long rest she came quietly down from the cracker-box toward the
steps leading to the cellar, engaged in her old-time pursuit of seeking
for eatables. The door opened, and there stood the negro. He shouted to
the bird-man inside:

"Say, boss, come hyar. Ef dere ain't dat dar Royal Ankalostan am comed
back!"

Jap came in time to see the Cat jumping the wall. They called loudly
and in the most seductive, wheedling tones: "Pussy, Pussy, poor Pussy!
Come, Pussy!" But Pussy was not prepossessed in their favor, and
disappeared to forage in her old-time haunts.

The Royal Analostan had been a windfall for Jap--had been the means of
adding many comforts to the cellar and several prisoners to the cages.
It was now of the utmost importance to recapture her majesty. Stale
meat-offal and other infallible lures were put out till Pussy, urged by
the reestablished hunger-pinch, crept up to a large fish-head in a
box-trap; the negro, in watching, pulled the string that dropped the
lid, and, a minute later, the Analostan was once more among the
prisoners in the cellar. Meanwhile Jap had been watching the 'Lost and
Found' column. There it was, "$25 reward," etc. That night Mr. Malee's
butler called at the Fifth Avenue mansion with the missing cat. "Mr.
Malee's compliments, sah. De Royal Analostan had recurred in her recent
proprietor's vicinity and residence, sah. Mr. Malee had pleasure in
recuperating the Royal Analostan, sah." Of course Mr. Malee could not
be rewarded, but the butler was open to any offer, and plainly showed
that he expected the promised reward and something more.

Kitty was guarded very carefully after that; but so far from being
disgusted with the old life of starving, and glad of her ease, she
became wilder and more dissatisfied.


VIII

The spring was doing its New York best. The dirty little English
Sparrows were tumbling over each other in their gutter brawls, Cats
yowled all night in the areas, and the Fifth Avenue family were
thinking of their country residence. They packed up, closed house and
moved off to their summer home, some fifty miles away, and Pussy, in a
basket, went with them.

"Just what she needed: a change of air and scene to wean her away from
her former owners and make her happy."

The basket was lifted into a Rumble-shaker. New sounds and passing
smells were entered and left. A turn in the course was made. Then a
roaring of many feet, more swinging of the basket; a short pause,
another change of direction, then some clicks, some bangs, a long
shrill whistle, and door-bells of a very big front door; a rumbling, a
whizzing, an unpleasant smell, a hideous smell, a growing horrible,
hateful choking smell, a deadly, griping, poisonous stench, with
roaring that drowned poor Kitty's yowls, and just as it neared the
point where endurance ceased, there was relief. She heard clicks and
clacks. There was light; there was air. Then a man's voice called, "All
out for 125th Street," though of course to Kitty it was a mere human
bellow. The roaring almost ceased--did cease. Later the rackety-bang
was renewed with plenty of sounds and shakes, though not the poisonous
gas; a long, hollow, booming roar with a pleasant dock smell was
quickly passed, and then there was a succession of jolts, roars, jars,
stops, clicks, clacks, smells, jumps, shakes, more smells, more
shakes,--big shakes, little shakes,--gases, smokes, screeches,
door-bells, tremblings, roars, thunders, and some new smells, raps,
taps, heavings, rumblings, and more smells, but all without any of the
feel that the direction is changed. When at last it stopped, the sun
came twinkling through the basket-lid. The Royal Cat was lifted into a
Rumble-shaker of the old familiar style, and, swerving aside from their
past course, very soon the noises of its wheels were grittings and
rattlings; a new and horrible sound was added--the barking of Dogs, big
and little and dreadfully close. The basket was lifted, and Slum Kitty
had reached her country home.

Every one was officiously kind. They wanted to please the Royal Cat,
but somehow none of them did, except, possibly, the big, fat cook that
Kitty discovered on wandering into the kitchen. This unctuous person
smelt more like a slum than anything she had met for months, and the
Royal Analostan was proportionately attracted. The cook, when she
learned that fears were entertained about the Cat staying, said:
"Shure, she'd 'tind to thot; wanst a Cat licks her futs, shure she's at
home." So she deftly caught the unapproachable royalty in her apron,
and committed the horrible sacrilege of greasing the soles of her feet
with pot-grease. Of course Kitty resented it--she resented everything
in the place; but on being set down she began to dress her paws and
found evident satisfaction in that grease. She licked all four feet for
an hour, and the cook triumphantly announced that now "shure she'd be
apt to shtay." And stay she did, but she showed a most surprising and
disgusting preference for the kitchen, the cook, and the garbage-pail.

The family, though distressed by these distinguished peculiarities,
were glad to see the Royal Analostan more contented and approachable.
They gave her more liberty after a week or two. They guarded her from
every menace. The Dogs were taught to respect her. No man or boy about
the place would have dreamed of throwing a stone at the famous
pedigreed Cat. She had all the food she wanted, but still she was not
happy. She was hankering for many things, she scarcely knew what. She
had everything--yes, but she wanted something else. Plenty to eat and
drink--yes, but milk does not taste the same when you can go and drink
all you want from a saucer; it has to be stolen out of a tin pail when
you are belly-pinched with hunger and thirst, or it does not have the
tang--it isn't milk.

Yes, there was a junk-yard back of the house and beside it and around
it too, a big one, but it was everywhere poisoned and polluted with
roses. The very Horses and Dogs had the wrong smells; the whole country
round was a repellent desert of lifeless, disgusting gardens and
hay-fields, without a single tenement or smoke-stack in sight. How she
did hate it all! There was only one sweet-smelling shrub in the whole
horrible place, and that was in a neglected corner. She did enjoy
nipping that and rolling in the leaves; it was a bright spot in the
grounds; but the only one, for she had not found a rotten fish-head nor
seen a genuine garbage-can since she came, and altogether it was the
most unlovely, unattractive, unsmellable spot she had ever known. She
would surely have gone that first night had she had the liberty. The
liberty was weeks in coming, and, meanwhile, her affinity with the cook
had developed as a bond to keep her; but one day after a summer of
discontent a succession of things happened to stir anew the slum
instinct of the royal prisoner.

A great bundle of stuff from the docks had reached the country mansion.
What it contained was of little moment, but it was rich with a score of
the most piquant and winsome of dock and slum smells. The chords of
memory surely dwell in the nose, and Pussy's past was conjured up with
dangerous force. Next day the cook 'left' through some trouble over
this very bundle. It was the cutting of cables, and that evening the
youngest boy of the house, a horrid little American with no proper
appreciation of royalty, was tying a tin to the blue-blooded one's
tail, doubtless in furtherance of some altruistic project, when Pussy
resented the liberty with a paw that wore five big fish-hooks for the
occasion. The howl of downtrodden America roused America's mother. The
deft and womanly blow that she aimed with her book was miraculously
avoided, and Pussy took flight, up-stairs, of course. A hunted Rat runs
down-stairs, a hunted Dog goes on the level, a hunted Cat runs up. She
hid in the garret, baffled discovery, and waited till night came. Then,
gliding down-stairs, she tried each screen-door in turn, till she found
one unlatched, and escaped into the black August night. Pitch-black to
man's eyes, it was simply gray to her, and she glided through the
disgusting shrubbery and flower-beds, took a final nip at that one
little bush that had been an attractive spot in the garden, and boldly
took her back track of the spring.

How could she take a back track that she never saw? There is in all
animals some sense of direction. It is very low in man and very high in
Horses, but Cats have a large gift, and this mysterious guide took her
westward, not clearly and definitely, but with a general impulse that
was made definite simply because the road was easy to travel. In an
hour she had covered two miles and reached the Hudson River. Her nose
had told her many times that the course was true. Smell after smell
came back, just as a man after walking a mile in a strange street may
not recall a single feature, but will remember, on seeing it again,
"Why, yes, I saw that before." So Kitty's main guide was the sense of
direction, but it was her nose that kept reassuring her, "Yes, now you
are right--we passed this place last spring."

At the river was the railroad. She could not go on the water; she must
go north or south. This was a case where her sense of direction was
clear; it said, "Go south," and Kitty trotted down the foot-path
between the iron rails and the fence.




LIFE III

IX

Cats can go very fast up a tree or over a wall, but when it comes to
the long steady trot that reels off mile after mile, hour after hour,
it is not the cat-hop, but the dog-trot, that counts. Although the
travelling was good and the path direct, an hour had gone before two
more miles were put between her and the Hades of roses. She was tired
and a little foot-sore. She was thinking of rest when a Dog came
running to the fence near by, and broke out into such a horrible
barking close to her ear that Pussy leaped in terror. She ran as hard
as she could down the path, at the same time watching to see if the Dog
should succeed in passing the fence. No, not yet! but he ran close by
it, growling horribly, while Pussy skipped along on the safe side. The
barking of the Dog grew into a low rumble--a louder rumble and
roaring--a terrifying thunder. A light shone. Kitty glanced back to
see, not the Dog, but a huge Black Thing with a blazing red eye coming
on, yowling and spitting like a yard full of Cats. She put forth all
her powers to run, made such time as she had never made before, but
dared not leap the fence. She was running like a Dog, was flying, but
all in vain; the monstrous pursuer overtook her, but missed her in the
darkness, and hurried past to be lost in the night, while Kitty
crouched gasping for breath, half a mile nearer home since that Dog
began to bark.

This was her first encounter with the strange monster, strange to her
eyes only; her nose seemed to know him and told her this was another
landmark on the home trail. But Pussy lost much of her fear of his
kind. She learned that they were very stupid and could not find her if
she slipped quietly under a fence and lay still. Before morning she had
encountered several of them, but escaped unharmed from all.

About sunrise she reached a nice little slum on her home trail, and was
lucky enough to find several unsterilized eatables in an ash-heap. She
spent the day around a stable where were two Dogs and a number of small
boys, that between them came near ending her career. It was so very
like home; but she had no idea of staying there. She was driven by the
old craving, and next evening set out as before. She had seen the
one-eyed Thunder-rollers all day going by, and was getting used to
them, so travelled steadily all that night. The next day was spent in a
barn where she caught a Mouse, and the next night was like the last,
except that a Dog she encountered drove her backward on her trail for a
long way. Several times she was misled by angling roads, and wandered
far astray, but in time she wandered back again to her general
southward course. The days were passed in skulking under barns and
hiding from Dogs and small boys, and the nights in limping along the
track, for she was getting foot-sore; but on she went, mile after mile,
southward, ever southward--Dogs, boys, Roarers, hunger--Dogs, boys,
Roarers, hunger--yet on and onward still she went, and her nose from
time to time cheered her by confidently reporting, "There surely is a
smell we passed last spring."


X

So a week went by, and Pussy, dirty, ribbon-less, foot-sore, and weary,
arrived at the Harlem Bridge. Though it was enveloped in delicious
smells, she did not like the look of that bridge. For half the night
she wandered up and down the shore without discovering any other means
of going south, excepting some other bridges, or anything of interest
except that here the men were as dangerous as the boys. Somehow she had
to come back to it; not only its smells were familiar, but from time to
time, when a One-eye ran over it, there was that peculiar rumbling roar
that was a sensation in the springtime trip. The calm of the late night
was abroad when she leaped to the timber stringer and glided out over
