love Captain Boyns!" cried Annie, and here again she kissed her father
and held him so tight that he felt quite angry with Mrs Niven, who
entered at the moment, and said, apologetically--

"Oh! la, sir, I didn't know as Miss Annie was with you.  I only came to
say that everythink is ready, sir, for going 'ome."

"We don't intend to go home," said Mr Webster; "at least not for a day
or two.  I find that Captain Boyns can let us stay here while I look
after the wreck, so you can go and arrange with Mrs Boyns."

During the few days that Mr Webster remained at Coral Cottage (Captain
Boyns's residence), Mrs Niven found, in the quiet, sympathetic Mrs
Boyns, if not a congenial friend, at least a kind and sociable hostess,
and Annie found, in Harry Boyns, a delightful companion, who never
wearied of taking her to the cliffs, the shore, and all the romantic
places of the neighbourhood, while Mr Webster found the captain to be
most serviceable in connection with the wreck.  One result of all this
was that Mr Webster offered Captain Boyns the command of one of his
largest vessels, an offer which was gladly accepted, for the captain
had, at that time, been thrown out of employment by the failure of a
firm, in the service of which he had spent the greater part of his
nautical career.

Another result was, that Mr Webster, at Annie's earnest solicitation,
agreed to make Covelly his summer quarters next year, instead of
Ramsgate, and Mrs Boyns agreed to lodge the family in Coral Cottage.

This having been all settled, Mr Webster asked Captain Boyns, on the
morning of his departure for Liverpool, if he could do anything more for
him, for he felt that to him his daughter owed her life, and he was
anxious to serve him.

"If you could give my son Harry something to do, sir," said Boyns, "you
would oblige me very much.  Harry is a smart fellow and a good seaman.
He has been a short time in the coasting trade; perhaps--"

"Well, yes, I'll see to that," interrupted Mr Webster.  "You shall hear
from me again as to it."

Now the fact is that Mr Webster did not feel attracted by young Boyns,
and he would willingly have had nothing to do with him, but being unable
to refuse the request after having invited it, he ultimately gave him a
situation in one of his coasting vessels which plied between London and
Aberdeen.

About a year after that, Captain Boyns sailed in the _Warrior_, a large
new ship, for the Sandwich Islands and the Chinese seas.

True to his promise, Mr Webster spent the following summer with Annie
and Mrs Boyns at Covelly, and young Boyns so managed matters that he
got his captain to send him down to Covelly to talk with his employer on
business.  Of course, being there, it was natural that he should ask and
obtain leave to spend a few days with his mother; and, of course, it was
quite as natural that, without either asking or obtaining leave, he
should spend the whole of these days in roaming about the shore and
among the cliffs with Annie Webster.

It would be absurd to say that these two fell in love, seeing that one
was only seven and the other fifteen; but there can be no doubt they
entertained some sort of regard for each other, of a very powerful
nature.  The young sailor was wildly enthusiastic, well educated, manly,
and good-looking--little wonder that Annie liked him.  The child was
winning in her ways, simple, yet laughter-loving, and very earnest--less
wonderful that Harry liked _her_!

Another year fled, and again the Websters visited Covelly, and again
Harry spent a few days with his mother; and although Mr Webster did not
get the length of liking the youth, he at last came to the condition of
not disliking him.

Year followed year, and still, each summer, Annie pressed her father to
return to the old place, and he agreed, chiefly because it mattered
little to him where he went.  He regarded the summer trip in the light
of a penance to be paid for the sin of being a member of society and the
head of a household, and placed every minute so wasted to the debit of
the profit and loss account in the mental ledger of his life's affairs,
for it must not be supposed that Mr Webster's character was changed by
the events which followed the rescue of his child from the sea.  True,
he had been surprised out of his habitual hardness for a short time, but
he soon relapsed, if not quite back to the old position, at least so
near to it that the difference was not appreciable.

As time ran on, men begun to look for the return of the _Warrior_, but
that vessel did not make her appearance.  Then they began to shake their
heads and to grow prophetic, while those who were most deeply interested
in the human beings who manned her became uneasy.

"Don't fret over it," said Harry one day to his mother, in a kind,
earnest tone; "you may depend upon it father will turn up yet and
surprise us.  He never lost a ship in his life, and he has sailed in
worse ones than the _Warrior_ by a long way."

"It may be so," replied Mrs Boyns, sadly; "but it is a long, long time
since he went away.  God's will be done.  Whether He gives or takes
away, I shall try to bless His name."

At last Harry gave over attempting to comfort his mother, for he began
to fear that his father's ship was destined to be placed on the dark,
dreary list of those of which it is sometimes said, with terrible
brevity, in the newspapers, "She sailed from port on such and such a
day, and has not since been heard of."

In course of time Harry made one or two trips to the East Indies as
first mate of one of Mr Webster's vessels, and ultimately obtained the
command of one.

At last a day came when there appeared in a Welsh newspaper a paragraph,
which ran thus:--"A Message from the Sea--A bottle, corked and sealed,
was found by a woman on the beach, above Conway, North Wales.  Inside
was a letter containing the following:--

  "`Latitude 44, longitude 15, off Tierra del Fuego.  If this should
  ever reach the shores of England, it will announce to friends at home
  the sad fate of the ship _Warrior_, which sailed from Liverpool on
  13th February 18 hundred and something, bound for China.  We have been
  boarded by pirates: we have been all locked into the cabin, with the
  assurance that we shall be made to walk the plank in half an hour.
  Our last act is to put this in a bottle and drop it overboard.
  Farewell, for this world, my beloved wife and son.'

  "`DANIEL BOYNS, Captain.'"

This letter was forwarded to the owner, and by him was sent to poor Mrs
Boyns.

Alas! how many sailors' wives, in our sea-girt isle, have received
similar "messages from the sea," and lived under the dark cloud of
never-ending suspense--hoping against hope that the dear lost ones might
yet return!



CHAPTER THREE.

SHOWS WHAT SOME MEN WILL DO AND DARE FOR MONEY, AND WHAT SOMETIMES COMES
OF IT.

We must now beg the reader's permission to allow a few more years to
elapse.  Eight have come and gone since the dark day when poor Mrs
Boyns received that message from the sea, which cast a permanent cloud
over her life.  Annie Webster has become a beautiful woman, and Harry
Boyns a bronzed stalwart man.

But things have changed with time.  These two seldom meet now, in
consequence of the frequent absence of the latter on long voyages, and
when they do meet, there is not the free, frank intercourse that there
used to be.  In fact, Mr Webster had long ago begun to suspect that his
daughter's regard for the handsome young sailor was of a nature that
bade fair to interfere with his purposed mercantile transactions in
reference to her, so he wisely sent him off on voyages of considerable
length, hoping that he might chance to meet with the same fate as his
father, and wound up by placing him in command of one of his largest and
most unseaworthy East Indiamen, in the full expectation that both
captain and vessel would go to the bottom together, and thus enable him,
at one stroke, to make a good round sum out of the insurance offices,
and get rid of a troublesome servant!

Gloating over these and kindred subjects, Mr Webster sat one morning in
his office mending a pen, and smiling in a sardonic fashion to the
portrait of his deceased wife's father, when a tap came to the door, and
Harry Boyns entered.

"I have come, sir," he said, "to tell you that the repairs done to the
_Swordfish_ are not by any means sufficient.  There are at least--"

"Please do not waste time, Captain Boyns, by entering upon details,"
said Mr Webster, interrupting him with a bland smile: "I am really
quite ignorant of the technicalities of shipbuilding.  If you will state
the matter to Mr Cooper, whom I employ expressly for--"

"But, sir," interrupted Harry, with some warmth, "I _have_ spoken to Mr
Cooper, and he says the repairs are quite sufficient."

"Well, then, I suppose they are so."

"I assure you, sir," rejoined Harry, "they are not; and as the lives of
passengers as well as men depend upon the vessel being in a seaworthy
condition, I do trust that you will have her examined by some one more
competent to judge than Mr Cooper."

"I have no doubt of Mr Cooper's competence," returned Mr Webster; "but
I will order a further examination, as you seem so anxious about it.
Meanwhile I hope that the ship is being got ready for sea as quickly as
possible."

"There shall be no delay on my part, sir," said Harry, rising; "the ship
has been removed from the Birkenhead Docks, in which you are aware she
has lain for the last eight months, and is now lying in the Brunswick
Dock, taking in cargo.  But I think it a very serious matter, which
demands looking into, the fact that she had no sooner grounded in the
dock, than she sprang a leak which instantly let twenty-eight inches of
water into her, and twice, subsequently, as much as forty inches have
been sounded.  Yet no repairs worthy of the name have been made.  All
that has been done is the pumping of her out daily by the stevedore's
men when their stowing work is finished."

"Has the agent for the underwriters visited her?" inquired Mr Webster.

"He has, sir, but he seems to be of opinion that his responsibility is
at an end because a surveyor from the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board had
previously visited her, and directed that she should not be loaded
deeper than twenty-one feet--chalking on the side amidships the six feet
six inches clear beneath which she is not to be allowed to sink."

"Well, well," said Mr Webster, somewhat impatiently, "I will have the
matter looked into.  Good morning, Captain Boyns."

The captain bowed and left the office, and Mr Webster leant back in his
chair, clasped his hands, twirled his thumbs, and smiled grimly at the
old gentleman over the fireplace.

True to his word, however, he had an inspection made of the _Swordfish_.
The inspector was of a kindred spirit with Mr Webster, so that his
report was naturally similar to that of Mr Cooper.  Nothing, therefore,
was done to the vessel--"nothing being needed"--and the loading went on
in spite of the remonstrances of Captain Harry Boyns, who, with all the
energy and persistency of his character, continued to annoy, worry, and
torment every one who possessed the faintest right or power to interfere
in the matter--but all to no purpose; for there are times when neither
facts nor fancies, fair words nor foul, fire, fury, folly, nor
philosophy, will avail to move some "powers that be!"

In a towering fit of indignation Harry Boyns resolved to throw up his
situation; but it occurred to him that this would perhaps be deemed
cowardice, so he thought better of it.  Then he madly thought of going
direct to the President of the Board of Trade and making a solemn
protest, backed by a heart-stirring appeal; but gave up that idea on
recalling to memory a certain occasion on which a deputation of grave,
learned, white-haired gentlemen had gone to London expressly to visit
that august functionary of the State, and beseech him, with all the
earnestness that the occasion demanded, that he would introduce into
Parliament a bill for the better regulation and supervision of ships,
and for preventing the possibility of seamen and passengers being
seduced on board unseaworthy vessels, carried off to sea, and there
murderously drowned in cold blood, as well as in cold water; which
deputation received for answer, that "it was not the intention of
Government, as at present advised, to introduce a measure for providing
more stringent enactments as to the equipments, cargoes, and crews of
passenger vessels!"--a reply which was tantamount to saying that if the
existing arrangements were inadequate to the ends desired, Government
saw no way out of the difficulty, and people must just be left
unprotected, and go to sea to be drowned or spared according as chance
or the cupidity of shipowners might direct!

This was pretty resolute on the part of Government, considering that
above a thousand lives were then, and above two thousand still are, lost
annually on the shores of the United Kingdom; a very large number of
which--if we may believe the argument of facts and the pretty unanimous
voice of the press--are sacrificed because Government refuses to
interfere effectively with the murderous tendencies of a certain class
of the community!

When Harry Boyns thought of all this he sighed deeply, and made up his
mind to remain by the _Swordfish_, and sink or swim with her.  Had he
been more of a man of business, perhaps he might have been more
successful in finding out how to have prevented the evil he foresaw; but
it was the interest of the owner to keep him in the dark as much as
possible, for which end Mr Webster kept him out of the ship's way as
much as he could, and when that was impossible, he kept him so busily
employed that he remained ignorant of a great deal that was said and
done in regard to his vessel.

At length the _Swordfish_ left the Brunswick Dock, _six inches deeper_
than the surveyor had directed, and was towed to the Wellington Dock,
where she took in 120 tons of coke, and sank still deeper.  Harry also
discovered that the equipment of the ship was miserably insufficient for
the long voyage she was intended to make.  This was too much for him to
bear.  He went at once to Mr Webster's office and said that if a deaf
ear was to be turned any longer to his remonstrances he would throw up
his appointment.

Poor Harry could scarcely have taken a more effective step to insure the
turning of the deaf ear to him.

"Oh!" replied Mr Webster, coolly, "if you refuse to take charge of my
vessel, Captain Boyns, I will soon find another to do it."

"I certainly do refuse," said Harry, preparing to leave the office, "and
I think you will find some difficulty in getting any other man to go to
sea in such a ship."

"I differ from you, Captain Boyns.  Good afternoon."

"And if you do, and lives should be lost in consequence," added Harry,
grasping the handle of the door, "I warn you solemnly, that murder will
have been committed by you, whatever the law may say on the subject."

"Good afternoon, Captain Boyns."

"You've got a hard master," said Harry to Grinder as he passed through
the outer office.

The confidential clerk shook his head in a deprecatory way, and smiled.

Next moment Harry Boyns found himself in the street--with nothing to do,
and the wide world before him!

Meanwhile, the loading of the _Swordfish_ went on--also the pumping of
