some stream or in a shaded nook to eat their scanty meal, and then
again marched on, feeling more keenly each day the distance lying
between them and the land of their dreams, for the great trials of the
young Crusaders had begun. Every day the march grew harder and more
tiresome to the weary travellers, each meal the supply of food was more
scanty, and even those children who had any money were robbed or
cheated of it by hangers-on and thieves. Disorder and lawlessness
increased rapidly in the ranks of the army, until at last they moved on
without any rank or discipline, and under various leaders, who now
openly defied the authority of Nicholas. At last they reached the
territory now called Switzerland, which was then a number of small
districts, mostly belonging to the Emperor; and the army winding
through its beautiful valleys and passing along the banks of its
turbulent rivers, came at last to the shores of Lake Leman and camped
by the walls of Geneva. From thence their task was to cross the
trackless heights of the Alps.

Weary and worn, but singing as they went, they journeyed bravely on
over Mt. Cenis, which in the Middle Ages was the most frequented of all
the mountain passes to Italy, and on that journey many children gave
way to exhaustion. The rocks cut their unprotected feet, the air of
dark chasms chilled them, they saw no prospect of rest or food until
the pass was traversed, and go any farther in such misery they could
not. Many turned back, and sadder and wiser, sought again the
protection and comfort of their homes.

But the majority of the army still feverishly excited and inflamed with
hope, pressed on and on, then suddenly in a moment of unexpected
vision, before them in the distance they saw winding rivers, tapestried
hills, and vine-yards and valleys of such luxuriant beauty as they had
never seen in their Northern lands.

With new courage and strength they hurried on now, and soon they were
in Italy, where, alas, poor children, they met with all sorts of
oppression and cruelty as they journeyed, for the Italians were
embittered against the Germans because of the constant wars carried on
by their emperors, and visited the sins of their fathers upon these
innocent children who were in their power, refusing them entrance to
many towns, and subjecting them to all sorts of cruelties. But still
such of the army as remained pressed on and on, and then one day, oh,
joyous sight, not far beyond they saw the sea, blue and boundless, and
on its shore, bathed in sunlight, lay "Genoa, the proud," a vision of
fairyland to their dazzled eyes.

Discords were forgotten, songs not sung before for many a tearful day,
rose again on the clear air. Crosses and banners were again uplifted as
of old, and Nicholas was once more prophet and leader, as, forgetful of
the past and its miseries, the army of children stood on the 25th day
of August, at the gates of the city of Genoa, waiting to be admitted.

Bright were the floating banners, proud were the waiting youths, as
Nicholas made his plea:--

"In the name of Christ and his Holy Cross, admit us, his soldiers to
your city! Grant us rest on our journey, to rescue the Holy Sepulchre
from the hands of the enemy! Men of Genoa, we ask not for
transportation across the sea rolling between us and our goal. On the
morrow God will part that sea that we may go over as on dry land, to
achieve a victory denied to the wise and powerful of the land. Yea, he
has said, 'Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy
and the avenger.' Men of Genoa, open thy gates to us, in the name of
Christ!"

A large number of dignified Senators, or rulers of the city, heard the
petition of Nicholas, heard it with pity mingled with amusement, and
offered the protection of the city for a week to the deluded youths,
for by that time--so thought the Senators--the youths would discover
their deception and return homeward.

Eagerly did Nicholas and his army accept permission to enter the city
whose streets and palaces were in such sharp contrast to those of their
own homelands, Genoa being at that time at the height of her prosperity
and greatness, but their joyful wonder found its match in that of the
inhabitants, whose astonished eyes saw so many fair-haired children
marching through their city, with banners and crosses carried high,
singing their splendid songs, and full of such grim determination to
rescue the Holy Land, a feat which experienced warriors had failed to
accomplish.

As the children marched through Genoa, changed indeed was the
appearance of their army; of the twenty thousand who had left the banks
of the Rhine under the leadership of Nicholas, there were only seven
thousand remaining now. Of the rest some were on their homeward
journey, some in new homes which they had found by the way, others were
lying in undiscovered graves in forest or on hillsides. Only the
strongest and most resolute of that great army remained, and in
consequence it was the flower of the youth of the Rhinelands, who
entered Genoa, rugged and healthy, though their clothes were worn and
faded, their feet bruised and bleeding, their faces burned by sun and
wind, and their expressions aged and saddened by experience.

The merchants left their desks, the children stopped their play, and
stared in wonderment, the grave nobles were moved to surprise, and the
mothers wiped their eyes as the army of blue-eyed youths marched by.

No sooner had the Senators extended the hospitality of the city to the
youths than they decided to retract it, for three reasons: They were
afraid of the effect on the morals of the city, which might be produced
by the entrance of seven thousand unrestrained boys--also they feared
that such a sudden addition to the population might produce a famine,
for situated as Genoa was, there was never any too great a quantity of
food. Also, most weighty reason of all, the German Emperor was at war
with the Pope and in the contest, Genoa was on the Guelph, or papal
side. To shelter German children then, even though on a Crusade, would
be to harbour foes and to care for a hated race which the Pope had
declared outlawed.

In consequence of these reasons the children were told that they could
stay only one night in the city, after all, except those who desired to
make it their permanent home, and abandoning their wild scheme, promise
to become good citizens.

But the youths laughed scornfully in answer--saying:

"We only _ask_ to rest one night. To-morrow you shall see how God
cares for his army! Who would remain here, when there lies a path in
the sea, between emerald walls, to the land where glory waits us?"

So saying they slept that night, in proud and peaceful hope of the
morning's glory, and in the morning rushed early to the shore, that
they might see the path across which they were to journey to the
promised land. Alas for hopes and promises and visions! The blue waves
rippled--the sea rolled on. Hours wore away and yet no path was cleared
through the depths, night all too soon came on, and there was no
alternative for the army but to leave the city, and then decide upon
their next step. Some of the children awoke to the deception of that
undivided sea and resolved to stay in Genoa under the conditions
imposed by the Senators, for the comforts of the city appealed strongly
to them after such hardships as they had experienced.

But on that day, Sunday, August 26th, the remainder of the army which
had so proudly and happily entered the city on the day before, went
from its gates with hanging heads and sad hearts--a crestfallen band.
Outside the city walls they gathered in a field near by, to discuss
their plans for the future. Was it wiser to stay and perhaps die in
sunny Italy, than to lose their lives on the weary journey separating
them from their homes?

One cheery lad made answer, "Are there no other cities which will give
us shelter? Why think that Genoa was meant to be the place at which the
way through the sea was to be made? Let us push on to the southward
until we find the passage which God has promised!"

His courage was contagious, as courage always is, and the diminished
band decided to press on still further, until God should show his sign.
This resolve made, all turned to Nicholas for his approval of their
decision, and so intense had been their excitement during the
discussion of their plans that no one had noticed that their leader was
no longer one of the group. Alas, for his consecration to a sacred
calling, Nicholas was not to be found, either then or later! Their
leader, who had led them on to glory, where was he? No one ever knew.
Never again was Nicholas seen by any one of those comrades who had
followed him so far and so faithfully, trusted him so fully, and barest
surmise fills in the mystery of his disappearance.

Nicholas was no high-strung, emotional boy, carried away, as was
Stephen, by the glory of his holy calling, he was a calm quiet lad,
who, once impressed with the fact that there was work for him to do,
always did it to the best of his ability, but always with a keen
businesslike instinct of serving his own interests to the best
advantage. His father had impressed upon him the glory and rewards
which would come to him as leader of a victorious Crusade, and Nicholas
had responded to the call.

Now defeat had come instead, and he, the leader of the army, must bear
the brunt of the disgrace which would weigh heavily upon his shoulders
as long as his life lasted,--of that he felt sure. His comrades were as
competent to press on, or to journey homeward without him as under his
leadership. So he argued with himself and even as he argued, yielded to
a great temptation, and like Esau, sold his honour for a mess of
pottage.

A nobleman of Genoa, who was rich and powerful, and who saw in the lad
a resemblance to his long lost son sought Nicholas secretly, and
offered tempting prospects of a home and such advantages as the lad had
never dreamed of having in all his simple life, if he would abandon his
leadership and forsake his army, and Nicholas yielded to temptation.
With careful strategy he slid away from that little group of
disheartened followers, feverishly discussing what was best to do, and
all that flock who had trusted him so fully, mourned for him, and
mourning, trusted still, accounting him as one whom the Lord God of
Hosts had for some wise reason taken from them.

And even while they were mourning for him as for one dead, Nicholas in
new garments, more rich and showy than any he had ever worn before, was
being shown the wonders of his new home, where servants stood ready to
do his bidding, where every article of furnishing was a miracle of
fairy fashioning, where cultured voices spoke in gentle tones, and
where, oh, rapture far beyond all else, in the near-by stable there
stood a prancing steed that was to be his own. Truly a worthy Crusade
leader, he--Nicholas, the German lad!

Without a leader now, and without discipline or regulations, the
discouraged, disorganised band whom he had deserted, bravely started on
again, and reached Pisa, where they had far kinder treatment than in
Genoa, and from which place two shiploads of them sailed for the Holy
Land, but which we have no record that they ever reached. Those who did
not embark, broke up into various small bands and straggling groups,
travelling still southward, and at last reached Rome where they told
their piteous tale to the authorities, who granted them an audience
with the Pope.

Kneeling before him, they told in graphic words the story of their
wanderings and sufferings and discouragements, to which unmoved the
Pope listened, then, praising their zeal, he commanded them to make no
further attempt to reach Palestine, telling them of the hopelessness of
the undertaking. But he added, that the cross of a Crusader once
assumed, bound one for ever to the Holy Cause, and that when they were
older they must fight again for the rescue of the Holy Sepulchre,
whenever he should call them to do so.

This bound the children to a repetition of their hardships and
adventures, which, considering the courage and suffering of that little
band of youths who knelt before him, was little less than cruelty.

Despairing now, and worn out with what they had endured, they were
forced to obey the Pope's decree, and so with shattered hopes and
dreams of glory for ever abandoned, they retraced their steps, and
found their pathway homeward far more trying than the rest of their
journey had been.

Many of them died on the way, and of those who lived, it was said in
towns and cities through which they passed, that where in departing
they passed in parties and troops, happy and never without the song of
cheer, they now returned in silence, barefoot and hungry, and with no
band of followers.

Day by day they straggled into Cologne--victims of a sad delusion.
Alas, how bitterly they had paid for their wilful disobedience!

When asked where they had been, they said they did not know, and had
only wild confused tales to tell of strange lands and countries,
costumes and customs, and many a mother's heart was broken with sorrow
that her boy had not survived the journeying.

Winter had passed and Spring had come and gone before all the wanderers
had returned, all the lost been given up, and for many a year to come,
peasants and nobles, with tear-dimmed eyes told the story of the German
children's march to the sea, and of the supposed martyrdom of their
lost leader, Nicholas--whose father, the afflicted parents whose homes
had been desolated by the Crusade, turned on in such a frenzy of
bitterness and anger, feeling that he had strongly influenced his son
to leadership that they laid violent hands on him and hanged him in
revenge.

Meanwhile, during all the weeks while Nicholas and his army were
marching southward on their way to Italy, Stephen was still preaching
at St. Denys, and his young lieutenants were still gathering recruits
for his army from all parts of France--but at length in late June, all
was ready except the last preparations for departure, and Stephen then
sent out a command to his forces to gather at Vendome, a city near
Cloyes, which was not only one of considerable importance, but from
which roads lay in many directions from which bands could arrive.

From that moment every day some new band came into Vendome with a young
leader in command, and was loudly welcomed by the other waiting bands;
while coming across the plains, other groups could be seen marching
towards the city, with their flags and oriflammes waving high, and
their crosses held higher yet. As they drew near the city their songs
could be heard louder and louder until when they reached the city
gates, the words were so distinct that their dialect disclosed the
province from which they had come.

From every province in France they came, bringing with them their
different languages, costumes and peculiarities, and consequently,
there was great confusion and variety in the ranks of Stephen's army,
but though their dialects and costumes varied greatly, the youths were
bound together by a single hope, led by a common aim, as they marched
into Vendome ready to start on their perilous journey.

Like the German youths, they were assured that no vessels would be
needed to take them across the Mediterranean, for had not Stephen said:

"Between waters which are to be to us as a wall on the right hand and
the left, are we to cross the untrodden bed of the sea and with dry
feet will we stand on the distant beach by the walls of Acre or of
Tripoli. We bear no weapons and we wear no armour! The pathway of other
Crusaders may be marked by the stain of blood and the glitter of steel,
but our pilgrims' robes are our armour, our crosses are our swords and
our hymns shall time our march!"

Not all wore the Crusader's grey coat, but all wore the Cross which was
made of muslin cloth and sewed on the right shoulder of the coat. To
place the cross there was the duty of the prophets--as the young
leaders of each band were called. Receiving the cross was the formal
act of enlistment, and proud indeed were the lads who wore them.

At last the latest band had come to Vendome, and fully thirty thousand
children were gathered together there, eagerly awaiting the command to
start on their journey. What a sight that was, the army of children as
they stood waiting for the command to march!

Pleading parents and weeping friends begged the youths to repent and
stay at home where their duty lay, but pleas and cries were all
counteracted by applause and encouragement from thoughtless
enthusiasts, and after religious exercises in which God's blessing was
asked, and the oriflammes and crosses raised triumphantly, the army
formed in line of march, and then with a volume of cheers which drowned
the sound of sobs and protests, moved on, out of Vendome under the
protection and leadership of Stephen.

It was only a few weeks since the young prophet had been the humble
shepherd lad of Cloyes, but that was forgotten now, and as he led his
army from Vendome he had assumed a pomp and dignity quite out of
harmony with the appearance of his army. A leader of such a mighty host
must not walk, so Stephen rode. The Lord's own general and prophet must
assume the style which became his rank. He therefore rode in a chariot
as splendid as could be procured, covered with rare carpets of
brilliant colours. Over his head to protect him from the heat of the
