points that might be calculated to give their athletes renewed
confidence, took back tales of the spirit that had swept over the other
town on the Mohunk.

And they even said that Paulding was striving with might and main to get
in line with the other two places. Her boys expressed a hope that when
the favors were handed around, steady old Paulding might not be left
entirely out of the running. There were even broad hints that some
people were going to get the surprise of their lives when the great day
arrived. Paulding always had been a difficult crowd to beat, and would
never confess to defeat until the last word had been said.

It was the day just preceding that on which the athletic meet was slated
to be held. As before, luck seemed to dwell with Riverport, since the
drawing of lots decided that the tournament must be held on her grounds,
outside of town. And it seemed about right that this should be the case,
since Riverport lay between her two rivals on the Mohunk, one being
three, the other seven miles away.

Nothing else was talked of those days, after school, but the proposed
meet. On the field itself there gathered crowds of boys and girls who
hovered in groups while the various candidates went through their work;
and either praised, or criticised; for it is always easy to do the
latter.

So on this morning of the day preceding the great event, whenever boys
ran across each other on the street, it was always with questions
concerning the condition of those upon whom Riverport depended to win
the most points in the tournament. At no time in the past had the state
of health of these lads interested more than a very small portion of the
community. Now everybody heaved a sigh of satisfaction upon learning
that Colon was said to be in better trim than ever before in all his
life, or that Sid Wells, Fred Fenton and Bristles Carpenter were just
feeling "fine."

Whenever one of those who were expected to take part made his appearance
on the street he had a regular following, all hanging on every word he
spoke, "just as if he might be an oracle," as Bristles humorously
remarked.

"Wait till Sunday morning, and then see if some balloons haven't
busted," he went on to remark, as several fellows gathered around him
that bright autumn morning, when there had been a sharp tang of frost in
the air; "a lot of us will fail to score a beat, and then see how quick
they drop us. Some will even be cruel enough to say they always knew
that Bristles Carpenter was a big fake; and that when it came right down
to business he never was able to hold up his end; and they never could
see why the committee put him on the roll of would-be heroes."

"Sure! and the next day it rained!" called back little Semi-Colon, whose
size debarred him from taking any part in the athletic contests, a fact
he deplored many times, for he had the spirit of a warrior in his small
body.

"Anyhow, Sunday will be a good day to rest, and stay indoors, to avoid
all the cruel things that will be fired at a fellow Monday," grinned
Bristles.

"Say, don't talk like that, old man," remarked another of the group;
"seems like you might be getting all ready for a funeral. I don't like
it. Better do some boasting, and give us a chance to feel we're going to
carry Mechanicsburg right off her feet."

"Oh! I'm only taking out a little extra insurance, that's all," remarked
Bristles. "They all do it, you know. Never knew a feller to get licked
but he began to explain how it happened; and tell how if his foot had
been all right, or that stitch in his side hadn't caught him, he'd have
swept up the ground with all his rivals. I'm wondering what I'd better
mention right now as troubling me."

"But you just said you felt as fit as a fiddle?" protested Semi-Colon.

"So I do," answered Bristles; "but that don't matter. A feller may feel
fit, and yet have a sore toe; can't he? But, boys, if I get beaten
you're not going to hear me put up a whine. It'll only be because the
other feller is the better man."

"Bully for you, Bristles;" remarked a tall student, vigorously; "I
always knew you'd stand up and be counted. And just you make up your
mind you're going to bring home the bacon. We want every point we can
get, to beat Mechanicsburg out."

"Nobody seems to take poor old Paulding seriously," remarked Fred, who
was one of the noisy, enthusiastic group on the way to the recreation
field for a spell of warming up exercise; for school had been dismissed
on Thursday afternoon, giving this Friday preceding the meet as a
holiday for the scholars, owing to the great interest taken in the
affair, the trustees said, and also the fact that the other towns had
decided upon the same thing.

"Well, you never can tell," declared Dick Hendricks, who had come up
just in time to catch the last remark. "I've got private information
from below, and let me warn every fellow not to be cocksure about
Paulding. That fellow they've got coaching them is no slouch. He was a
college grad. just the same as our Mr. Shays; and they say he coached
Princeton for several years, away back."

"Oh! he's an old man, and a back number," observed Bristles,
contemptuously. "I heard he hasn't kept up with the procession, and that
his methods are altogether slow compared with the more modern ones."

"Well, I believe in never underestimating an enemy," Fred went on; "and
if all of us feel that we've got to do our level best in order to win,
even against Paulding, that ends the matter."

"Who's seen Colon this morning?" asked Dick Hendricks.

"Not me," replied Bristles, "and it's kind of queer too, because he said
he'd drop in for me at eight this morning, and now it's half-past.
Reckon he forgot, and went on with another bunch. There's always a lot
of boys trailing after Colon nowadays, you know. They just hang around
his door, his mother told mine only yesterday, like a pack of hounds,
calling for him to show himself."

"Well, I guess Colon is the best card in our pack," declared Fred,
stoutly. "You see, he's slated to run in all the shorter sprints, and we
expect him to leave the other fellows at the post, for he's as fleet as
a deer--Bristles says kangaroo, because of that queer jump he has. They
haven't got a ghost of a show in any race Colon takes part in; and I
guess they know it up at Mechanicsburg."

"I was talking with a boy from there the other day," spoke up the tall
student. "I think he was sent down here as a sort of spy, to see just
what we were doing, and get tabs on our men. He owned up to me that if
Colon could do that well in a regular race it would be a procession,
because nobody could head him. They'd just run on in the hope he might
be taken with cramps, or something."

"Who's that hollering back there; looks like Corney Shays?" remarked
Semi-Colon just then, so sharply that the entire group paused to look
back.

"It is Corney, late as usual, and with his nerve along; because he wants
us all to stop and wait for him," declared Dick Hendricks. "Come along
boys, and let him catch up if he can."

"But he acts mighty queer," said Fred.

"You're right he does," added Bristles, taking the alarm at once. "Look
at him waving his arms. Say, fellers, something's gone wrong, bet you a
cooky. I just feel it in my bones. Oh! what if Colon's been taken sick
right now the day before?"

They stood there, silent and expectant, until the running Corney had
drawn near.

"What ails you, Corney?" demanded Dick.

"It's Colon!" gasped the other, almost out of breath, and much excited
in the bargain, they could see, for his eyes seemed ready to pop out of
his head.

"Don't tell us he's sick!" cried Bristles, in real horror.

"Disappeared--never slept in his bed last night, his ma says! Gone in
the queerest way ever, and just when Riverport depended on him to win
the prize to-morrow!" was what the almost breathless Corney gasped.




CHAPTER VII

WHERE IS COLON?


"Oh! what d'ye think of that, now?" cried Bristles.

"How could Colon ever do it; and all Riverport depending on him so?"
exclaimed the tall student, Henry Clifford by name, who was always
deeply interested in the field sports of his mates, though too delicate
himself to take any part in them.

"Why, what d'ye think he's done?" demanded Bristles, aggressively,
turning on him.

"Perhaps he just got so nervous over this business that he couldn't
stand the push, and thought he'd better skip out," replied the other,
weakly.

"Rats! tell that to your grandmother, will you, Clifford!" burst out
Semi-Colon, quick to rally to the defense of his cousin. "Nobody ever
knew him to flinch when it came to the test; ain't that so, fellers?"

"Sure it is," cried Bristles, sturdily; "and when I saw him last night
he was just feeling as if he had a walkover ahead. No, if Colon has
disappeared there's some other reason besides a sudden fear of being
beaten. He never went of his own account."

"Tell us some more about it, Corney," said Fred, himself considerably
shaken by the stunning news brought by the runner.

Corney had by now succeeded in regaining his breath.

"Well, he's gone, that's a dead sure thing," he began. "I went around to
his house to get him to come. Found several other fellows sitting there
on the bank outside the fence. They didn't have the nerve to go in and
ask for Colon, you see. But I walked up to the door, and knocked. Mrs.
Colon came out, and smiled to see the mob there, like she might be
feeling proud that her boy was so well thought of."

"Oh! cut it short!" growled Dick Hendricks. "Get down to facts. What did
she say?"

"That she was letting Chris sleep longer this morning, because he was
working so hard these days; but would go and wake him up. A minute later
I heard her call out, and then I ran in, fearing that something had
happened to our chum. She was there in his room, wringing her hands, and
carryin' on like everything. Then I saw that the bed hadn't been slept
in. Fellers, it gave me a cold creep, because you see, I just _knew_
something terrible must have happened to poor old Colon."

Fred tried to keep his head about him in this trying moment. He knew
that this peculiar disappearance of Colon could not be an accident; nor
had the long-legged sprinter gone away of his own accord. There must be
more about the matter than appeared on the surface.

"One thing I think we can be sure of, right at the start," he remarked,
seriously; and it was wonderful how eagerly the others listened to what
he was about to say, as if they had more than ordinary confidence in
Fred Fenton's judgment.

"What is that, Fred?" asked Dick Hendricks.

"Colon never went off willingly," the other declared.

"Sure he didn't; but who could have done it, Fred?" demanded Bristles,
clenching his fists aggressively, and looking ready for a fight, if only
he knew on whom to vent his anger.

"That's where we're all up a tree, and we'd better turn back right now,"
Fred declared. "No use practicing this morning, with Colon lost to us.
Who'd have any heart to do his best?"

"Just what I was going to say, boys," spoke up Corney. "Come along back
to his home with me. There's getting to be the biggest excitement in old
Riverport that you ever heard tell of. Even when I chased after you
they were running about in the streets, talkin' about the latest
sensation. Women was gatherin' in knots on the corners, and discussin'
it from all sides. They had sent for the chief of our police force, and
I saw him headin' that way as I came along, with a whole mob of the
fellers at his heels."

"Whew! ain't this a stunner, though?" gasped the tall student, hurrying
to keep up with the excited little bunch of schoolboys as they headed
back toward the town.

Just as Corney had declared, they found the place buzzing with
excitement. All thought of business seemed to have been utterly
abandoned for the time being; and merchants, as well as clerks, gathered
outside the stores, engaged in discussing the news that had burst upon
them.

Fred, Bristles and the rest were soon at Colon's home.

"Gee! look at the crowd; would you?" ejaculated Corney, as they came in
sight of some scores of men, women and the younger element, who jostled
each other in front of the house. "Ain't it funny how a thing like this
spreads? Talk to me about wildfire--excitin' news has got it beat a
mile. Why, they're still comin' in flocks and droves. The whole town
will be around here before long."

"Can you blame them?" remarked Dick Hendricks; "look at us right now,
heading for the hub of the wheel for all we're worth. But there's one of
the constables keeping 'em out of the gate. Wonder if he'll let us in?"

"He's just got to," said Corney. "I'll tell him Mrs. Colon sent me out
to get the whole bunch, and he'll pass us all right."

Several did get in with the bold Corney, among them Fred and Bristles;
but the main part of the group had to content themselves with kicking
their heels against the fence, and waiting to get any additional news
when their comrades came out.

Inside they found Judge Colon, looking very much flushed. The missing
boy was his nephew, and he was taking more than usual interest in the
matter.

Just now he seemed to be trying to comfort the alarmed mother, who,
being a widow, with her only boy taken away in this mysterious manner,
was much in need of sympathy and advice.

"Depend upon it, Matilda," the judge was saying; "it will prove to be
only some wild prank on the part of his mates; Christopher will turn up
presently, safe and sound. You say he went out last night; do you happen
to know where?"

"He was over to my house, Judge," spoke up Bristles, boldly, wishing to
give all the information in his power.

"Ah! yes, it's you, Andrew, is it?" the gentleman remarked, looking
around. "And about what time did he start away for home, may I ask?"

"It couldn't have been much after ten, sir," replied the other. "We were
playing cribbage, and he got the odd game. Yes, I remember, now, he said
his mother would be in bed anyway when he got home."

"And I did retire about nine, as I usually do," remarked Mrs. Colon,
upon whose face the marks of tears could be plainly seen. "I didn't hear
Christopher come in, because I slept unusually well the early part of
the night. Then came that cruel shock this morning, when I saw his bed
all made up, and knew he hadn't come home at all."

"You went to the door with him; didn't you, Andrew?" the judge went on,
with the persistence a lawyer might be expected to show when he had a
willing witness on the stand, and was bent on getting every fact,
however slight, from him.

"Yes, sir, I even went out to our gate; and we stood there for nearly
five minutes, I guess, talkin' about athletic matters. Then he said
good-night, and walked down the road. There was a moon in the west, and
I could see Colon swinging along in that sturdy way he has. Then I
turned around and went up to bed."

"When you stood there at the gate did anybody pass by?" asked the judge.

"No sir, not a living soul," responded Bristles, after a few seconds of
thought.

"And you didn't hear any suspicious sounds, like boys laughing partly
under their breath; did you, Andrew?"

"Not a chuckle, sir," replied the other. "It was just a fine night, I
noticed, and looked like we'd have good weather right along for the
meet. But if you think there are any fellers in this town mean enough to
kidnap Colon, just to give us a black eye to-morrow, I must say I can't
understand it, sir."

"Well, I believe I have known of a certain lot of young fellows who
happen to hold forth around Riverport, and who would not be above doing
a thing like that, given just half a cause," the judge replied,
meaningly; and every one knew whom he had in mind, for their thoughts
immediately flew to Buck Lemington and his cronies.

"But perhaps it wasn't any prank of boys at all," Bristles went on,
eagerly; "Colon said the night was so bright he had half a notion to
take a two mile dash out over the Grafton road, just to wind up his big
day. I advised him not to think of it, but he only laughed. But he's
awful set in his ways, sir, once he makes up his mind."

"He said that; did he?" asked the judge, apparently thinking that there
might be something worth while taking note of in this latest assertion.

"Yes, sir, he certainly did," the boy answered. "Colon's a queer fish
anyhow, and does heaps of things nobody else'd ever think of. Now, what
if he did start on that run; why, something might have happened to
him--perhaps he tripped, and fell, and broke a leg, so he couldn't even
crawl home."

The mother started to cry again as she pictured her boy suffering all
through the night as Bristles described so recklessly. And so the judge
moved aside with several of the boys, the better to talk unheard by
Colon's mother.

"Things are beginning to take on shape, I see," he remarked, grimly.
"Possibly the boy did foolishly start on that late run by moonlight, and
met with trouble. Some people with whom I talked on the way here were of
the opinion he had been kidnapped by tramps, and was being held for a
ransom, just as if this might be Sicily or Greece."

"I don't think that way, Judge Colon," said Fred, speaking for the first
time.

"I'm pleased to hear that you have another idea, my boy; let us know its
nature," said the lawyer, who had always been favorably impressed with
the sterling worth of Mr. Fenton's son, and now hoped he had struck on a
plausible explanation of the odd mystery.

"My idea is," Fred began, modestly, yet firmly, "that Colon has been
abducted by some of those Mechanicsburg fellows, who know they haven't a
ghost of a chance to win the three shorter running events on the
schedule, with him in line. They've got a college man for a coach, you
see, sir, and like as not he's been telling them of the tricks that are
played among all the big universities; so they've just thought to spoil
our game for us by holding our best man a prisoner till after the
meet."




CHAPTER VIII

A CLUE IN THE DITCH


Judge Colon looked keenly at Fred as he made this suggestion.

"I don't suppose now, my boy," the gentleman remarked, "you have any
reason to suppose that what you say is the actual fact; that is, proof
positive?"

"No sir, I haven't," replied Fred. "It is only an idea that came into my
mind."

"Based upon what, might I ask?" the judge continued.

"Well, I've known that a good many Mechanicsburg boys have been down
here lately, curious to see what sort of a showing Riverport would make
in the meet."

"Yes, quite natural that they should want to know; because these must be
anxious and trying times for the young people of the three towns," the
judge remarked.

"And," Fred went on, "of course they've heard a lot about our sprinter;
for Riverport boys are like all other boys, and like to brag,
especially when they've really got a phenomenon of a runner, like our
Colon, to boast about."

The judge smiled at that; for was not that same wonder a member of his
family--a Colon?

"And you think then, Fred, some of those up-river boys, convinced that
if Christopher ran in the meet he would easily capture all the prizes in
his class, made up their minds that something must be done to prevent
such a wholesale delivery? You suspect, Fred, that they got up a bold
little scheme to actually abduct the boy on one of the two nights
preceding the tournament?"

"Do you believe it impossible, Judge?" asked the boy, quickly.

"Well, to be frank with you, I don't," answered the gentleman, gravely.
"Indeed, while my knowledge of boy nature is not so extensive as that of
some persons, I've got one myself who can think up more schemes in a
minute than I could solve in an hour. And, Fred, I should be pleased if
your supposition turned out to be true. It would at least relieve my
mind with regard to graver things; however unpleasant the absence of
Christopher might prove to the school that believes in him."

"But he may be found in time!" declared Corney Shays, who had listened
to all this talk with bated breath, and wide open eyes.

"He will, if a pack of hounds like the boys of Riverport school are
worth their salt!" avowed Bristles.

"That has the right sort of ring to it," remarked the judge, with
kindling eyes. "And in order to induce men, as well as boys, to take
part in the hunt for your missing comrade, I'm going to offer a reward
of one hundred dollars for his return inside of twenty-four hours,
uninjured. I'll have half a dozen cards posted in the public places of
the town, so that every person will know of my offer."

"Hurrah for the judge!" burst out the impetuous Corney.

"Then the sooner we get to work, fellows," said Fred, impressively, "the
better."

"Yes, spread the news as fast as you can," observed the judge; "tell it
to that crowd of boys outside the fence, and get them to scatter with it
all over town. Scour the whole territory, looking in every barn and
woodshed to see whether they may have kept him a prisoner there. Boys
sometimes can be more or less thoughtless, and even cruel when engaged
in what they term sport. As the old saying has it, 'this is often fun
for the boy, but death to the frog.' Be off, boys; and success to you!"

Apparently the judge was not quite so much concerned as before Fred had
made his suggestion. The unpleasant idea of lawless tramps having
caught Colon, to hold him for ransom, had begun to lose plausibility in
the mind of the reasoning lawyer.

"Come along, fellows!" cried Bristles, who scented the pleasures of
action, with something of the delight that an old war-horse does the
smoke of battle.

They hurried out of the house, leaving to the judge the task of
explaining to Mrs. Colon how the situation had improved.

There was an immediate scattering of the clans. Boys ran this way and
that, telling the astonishing news to every one they met. Housewives
stood in doorways and anxiously inquired as to the very latest theory to
account for the mysterious disappearance of a Riverport lad. Such a
thing had never happened before, save when little Rupert Whiting
wandered off in search of butterflies, and was found two days later,
living on the blueberries that grew so abundantly in the woods.

And when the latest suggestion, connected with the boys of
Mechanicsburg, began to be current it created no end of unfavorable
comment.

Meanwhile Fred and several of his chums had started in to see what they
could do toward finding Colon. As usual they looked to Fred to do pretty
much all the planning. Somehow, in times like this, when boys are
called upon to meet a sudden emergency, they naturally turn toward the
strongest spirit. In this case it happened to be Fred.

"Now, in the beginning, fellows," he remarked, when he found that only
Corney, Sid Wells, Bristles, and Semi-Colon were gathered around him;
"we've got to go into this thing with some show of system."

"That's right," admitted Corney.

"Too many already just prancing around," observed Bristles, scornfully;
"up one road, and down another, peekin' into barns, and asking questions
of every farmer around. All that's what we call 'wasted endeavor,' at
school. Fred, system is the thing. But just where do we make a proper
start, so as to cover the field, and not go over the same ground twice?"

"That's just it," replied the other; "we want to map out our course
beforehand, and then stick to it. Now, to begin with, Bristles, let's
decide which way Colon would have gone from your house, if he had really
made up his mind that he must have a last two mile practice spin before
he went home, and to bed."

"Say, I can tell you that right off the reel," declared Bristles,
officiously.

"Then get busy," remarked Corney.

"Why, you see," said Bristles, "when he talked of doing that little
stunt, he said he'd a good notion to run up to the graveyard and back,
which would make an even two miles."

"But you didn't say anything about that before?" Fred objected.

"Clean slipped my mind," his chum admitted, frankly; "fact is, I never
thought it made the least difference what Colon _said_. The main thing
seemed to be he was gone, like the ground had opened and swallowed him.
But if he took that run, Fred, make up your mind it was up there."

Corney gave a little whistle.

"Gee! the loneliest old road inside of ten miles around Riverport, too.
I guess old Colon must have been wanting to give them fellers the best
chance ever. If he'd been offered a prize to accommodate 'em, he
couldn't have hit the bulls-eye better."

"Then that's the road we want to take," said Fred, decisively. "Don't
mention it to anybody, but come along. Somebody who knows all the quirks
of that road better than I do, lead off. And every fellow keep on the
lookout, right and left, for signs."

So they hurried away toward the house where the Carpenters lived.

Bristles showed them just where he stood when, in the moonlight, he saw
the last of his tall chum, turning to wave a hand at him.

With that they started off. Little talking was indulged in, for all of
them understood that they had a serious matter on their hands. With
Colon gone, their hopes of landing a majority of the prizes offered for
the various events of the athletic meet would begin to grow dim indeed.
It would take the heart out of other contestants on the part of
Riverport, and in all probability accomplish just the end those who had
abducted Colon had in view.

After they had passed along for some little distance, eagerly scanning
every object in sight, their hopes fell a trifle. Boylike, they had
imagined that as soon as they started out upon this promising theory
they would find plenty of evidence calculated to prove its truth.

"Ain't seen a sign of him yet!" grumbled Corney; "and we're nigh
half-way to the old graveyard, too."

"Wait!" said Fred, as he suddenly drew up, and the others followed suit;
though none of them could imagine what had caused their leader to stop
his quick walk.

"Seen something; have you, Fred?" asked Bristles, eagerly.

"Why, I was wondering," Fred remarked, quietly, and with a twinkle in
his eye, "if they grew things like that around here on bushes, instead
of blueberries!"

He pointed down as he spoke. Alongside the road at this point lay a
ditch that was a couple of feet lower than the surface of the pike.
Straggly bushes partly over-ran the watercourse; and caught on the twigs
of these was some sort of object that had attracted the attention of the
observant boy.

"Say, it's a cap!" ejaculated Corney.

"And a good cap, too; not an old cast-off thing!" Sid declared.

"Hold on, let me take it up out of there with this stick," said Fred.
"No use getting our feet wet; and besides, it's easier this way."

So saying, while the others clustered around, he reached down, and
deftly thrusting the end of the stick under the cap, drew it to him.

Immediately Bristles uttered a loud cry of astonishment, not unmixed
with joy.

"You recognize the cap, then; do you?" asked Fred.

"Sure thing," answered Bristles, promptly. "It's Colon's cap."




CHAPTER IX
