Canadian boys in khaki--the living and the dead--were in possession of
Vimy Ridge.

Vimy Ridge is a name written in crimson and gold on the Canadian annals
of the Great War. "The British couldn't take it and the French couldn't
take it," said a German prisoner to his captors, "but you Canadians are
such fools that you don't know when a place can't be taken!"

So the "fools" took it--and paid the price.

Jerry Meredith was seriously wounded at Vimy Ridge--shot in the back,
the telegram said.

"Poor Nan," said Mrs. Blythe, when the news came. She thought of her
own happy girlhood at old Green Gables. There had been no tragedy like
this in it. How the girls of to-day had to suffer! When Nan came home
from Redmond two weeks later her face showed what those weeks had meant
to her. John Meredith, too, seemed to have grown old suddenly in them.
Faith did not come home; she was on her way across the Atlantic as a
V.A.D. Di had tried to wring from her father consent to her going also,
but had been told that for her mother's sake it could not be given. So
Di, after a flying visit home, went back to her Red Cross work in
Kingsport.

The mayflowers bloomed in the secret nooks of Rainbow Valley. Rilla was
watching for them. Jem had once taken his mother the earliest
mayflowers; Walter brought them to her when Jem was gone; last spring
Shirley had sought them out for her; now, Rilla thought she must take
the boys' place in this. But before she had discovered any, Bruce
Meredith came to Ingleside one twilight with his hands full of delicate
pink sprays. He stalked up the steps of the veranda and laid them on
Mrs. Blythe's lap.

"Because Shirley isn't here to bring them," he said in his funny, shy,
blunt way.

"And you thought of this, you darling," said Anne, her lips quivering,
as she looked at the stocky, black-browed little chap, standing before
her, with his hands thrust into his pockets.

"I wrote Jem to-day and told him not to worry 'bout you not getting
your mayflowers," said Bruce seriously, "'cause I'd see to that. And I
told him I would be ten pretty soon now, so it won't be very long
before I'll be eighteen, and then I'll go to help him fight, and maybe
let him come home for a rest while I took his place. I wrote Jerry,
too. Jerry's getting better, you know."

"Is he? Have you had any good news about him?"

"Yes. Mother had a letter to-day, and it said he was out of danger."

"Oh, thank God," murmured Mrs. Blythe, in a half-whisper.

Bruce looked at her curiously.

"That is what father said when mother told him. But when l said it the
other day when I found out Mr. Mead's dog hadn't hurt my kitten--I
thought he had shooken it to death, you know--father looked awful
solemn and said I must never say that again about a kitten. But I
couldn't understand why, Mrs. Blythe. I felt awful thankful, and it
must have been God that saved Stripey, because that Mead dog had
'normous jaws, and oh, how it shook poor Stripey. And so why couldn't I
thank Him? 'Course," added Bruce reminiscently, "maybe I said it too
loud--'cause I was awful glad and excited when I found Stripey was all
right. I 'most shouted it, Mrs. Blythe. Maybe if I'd said it sort of
whispery like you and father it would have been all right. Do you know,
Mrs. Blythe"--Bruce dropped to a "whispery" tone, edging a little
nearer to Anne--"what I would like to do to the Kaiser if I could?"

"What would you like to do, laddie?"

"Norman Reese said in school to-day that he would like to tie the
Kaiser to a tree and set cross dogs to worrying him," said Bruce
gravely. "And Emily Flagg said she would like to put him in a cage and
poke sharp things into him. And they all said things like that. But
Mrs. Blythe"--Bruce took a little square paw out of his pocket and put
it earnestly on Anne's knee--"I would like to turn the Kaiser into a
good man--a very good man--all at once if I could. That is what I would
do. Don't you think, Mrs. Blythe, that would be the very worstest
punishment of all?"

"Bless the child," said Susan, "how do you make out that would be any
kind of a punishment for that wicked fiend?"

"Don't you see," said Bruce, looking levelly at Susan, out of his
blackly blue eyes, "if he was turned into a good man he would
understand how dreadful the things he has done are, and he would feel
so terrible about it that he would be more unhappy and miserable than
he could ever be in any other way. He would feel just awful--and he
would go on feeling like that forever. Yes"--Bruce clenched his hands
and nodded his head emphatically, "yes, I would make the Kaiser a good
man--that is what I would do--it would serve him 'zackly right."



CHAPTER XXVI

SUSAN HAS A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE

An aeroplane was flying over Glen St. Mary, like a great bird poised
against the western sky--a sky so clear and of such a pale, silvery
yellow, that it gave an impression of a vast, wind-freshened space of
freedom. The little group on the Ingleside lawn looked up at it with
fascinated eyes, although it was by no means an unusual thing to see an
occasional hovering plane that summer. Susan was always intensely
excited. Who knew but that it might be Shirley away up there in the
clouds, flying over to the Island from Kingsport? But Shirley had gone
overseas now, so Susan was not so keenly interested in this particular
aeroplane and its pilot. Nevertheless, she looked at it with awe.

"I wonder, Mrs. Dr. dear," she said solemnly, "what the old folks down
there in the graveyard would think if they could rise out of their
graves for one moment and behold that sight. I am sure my father would
disapprove of it, for he was a man who did not believe in new-fangled
ideas of any sort. He always cut his grain with a reaping hook to the
day of his death. A mower he would not have. What was good enough for
his father was good enough for him, he used to say. I hope it is not
unfilial to say that I think he was wrong in that point of view, but I
am not sure I go so far as to approve of aeroplanes, though they may be
a military necessity. If the Almighty had meant us to fly he would have
provided us with wings. Since He did not it is plain He meant us to
stick to the solid earth. At any rate, you will never see me, Mrs. Dr.
dear, cavorting through the sky in an aeroplane."

"But you won't refuse to cavort a bit in father's new automobile when
it comes, will you, Susan?" teased Rilla.

"I do not expect to trust my old bones in automobiles, either,"
retorted Susan. "But I do not look upon them as some narrow-minded
people do. Whiskers-on-the-moon says the Government should be turned
out of office for permitting them to run on the Island at all. He foams
at the mouth, they tell me, when he sees one. The other day he saw one
coming along that narrow side-road by his wheatfield, and Whiskers
bounded over the fence and stood right in the middle of the road, with
his pitchfork. The man in the machine was an agent of some kind, and
Whiskers hates agents as much as he hates automobiles. He made the car
come to a halt, because there was not room to pass him on either side,
and the agent could not actually run over him. Then he raised his
pitchfork and shouted, 'Get out of this with your devil-machine or I
will run this pitchfork clean through you.' And Mrs. Dr. dear, if you
will believe me, that poor agent had to back his car clean out to the
Lowbridge road, nearly a mile, Whiskers following him every step,
shaking his pitchfork and bellowing insults. Now, Mrs. Dr. dear, I call
such conduct unreasonable; but all the same," added Susan, with a sigh,
"what with aeroplanes and automobiles and all the rest of it, this
Island is not what it used to be."

The aeroplane soared and dipped and circled, and soared again, until it
became a mere speck far over the sunset hills.

"'With the majesty of pinion Which the Theban eagles bear Sailing with
supreme dominion Through the azure fields of air.'"

quoted Anne Blythe dreamily.

"I wonder," said Miss Oliver, "if humanity will be any happier because
of aeroplanes. It seems to me that the sum of human happiness remains
much the same from age to age, no matter how it may vary in
distribution, and that all the 'many inventions' neither lessen nor
increase it."

"After all, the 'kingdom of heaven is within you,'" said Mr. Meredith,
gazing after the vanishing speck which symbolized man's latest victory
in a world-old struggle. "It does not depend on material achievements
and triumphs."

"Nevertheless, an aeroplane is a fascinating thing," said the doctor.
"It has always been one of humanity's favourite dreams--the dream of
flying. Dream after dream comes true--or rather is made true by
persevering effort. I should like to have a flight in an aeroplane
myself."

"Shirley wrote me that he was dreadfully disappointed in his first
flight," said Rilla. "He had expected to experience the sensation of
soaring up from the earth like a bird--and instead he just had the
feeling that he wasn't moving at all, but that the earth was dropping
away under him. And the first time he went up alone he suddenly felt
terribly homesick. He had never felt like that before; but all at once,
he said, he felt as if he were adrift in space--and he had a wild
desire to get back home to the old planet and the companionship of
fellow creatures. He soon got over that feeling, but he says his first
flight alone was a nightmare to him because of that dreadful sensation
of ghastly loneliness."

The aeroplane disappeared. The doctor threw back his head with a sigh.

"When I have watched one of those bird-men out of sight I come back to
earth with an odd feeling of being merely a crawling insect. Anne," he
said, turning to his wife, "do you remember the first time I took you
for a buggy ride in Avonlea--that night we went to the Carmody concert,
the first fall you taught in Avonlea? I had out little black mare with
the white star on her forehead, and a shining brand-new buggy--and I
was the proudest fellow in the world, barring none. I suppose our
grandson will be taking his sweetheart out quite casually for an
evening 'fly' in his aeroplane."

"An aeroplane won't be as nice as little Silverspot was," said Anne. "A
machine is simply a machine--but Silverspot, why she was a personality,
Gilbert. A drive behind her had something in it that not even a flight
among sunset clouds could have. No, I don't envy my grandson's
sweetheart, after all. Mr. Meredith is right. 'The kingdom of
Heaven'--and of love--and of happiness--doesn't depend on externals."

"Besides," said the doctor gravely, "our said grandson will have to
give most of his attention to the aeroplane--he won't be able to let
the reins lie on its back while he gazes into his lady's eyes. And I
have an awful suspicion that you can't run an aeroplane with one arm.
No"--the doctor shook his head--"I believe I'd still prefer Silverspot
after all."

The Russian line broke again that summer and Susan said bitterly that
she had expected it ever since Kerensky had gone and got married.

"Far be it from me to decry the holy state of matrimony, Mrs. Dr. dear,
but I felt that when a man was running a revolution he had his hands
full and should have postponed marriage until a more fitting season.
The Russians are done for this time and there would be no sense in
shutting our eyes to the fact. But have you seen Woodrow Wilson's reply
to the Pope's peace proposals? It is magnificent. I really could not
have expressed the rights of the matter better myself. I feel that I
can forgive Wilson everything for it. He knows the meaning of words and
that you may tie to. Speaking of meanings, have you heard the latest
story about Whiskers-on-the-moon, Mrs. Dr. dear? It seems he was over
at the Lowbridge Road school the other day and took a notion to examine
the fourth class in spelling. They have the summer term there yet, you
know, with the spring and fall vacations, being rather backward people
on that road. My niece, Ella Baker, goes to that school and she it was
who told me the story. The teacher was not feeling well, having a
dreadful headache, and she went out to get a little fresh air while Mr.
Pryor was examining the class. The children got along all right with
the spelling but when Whiskers began to question them about the
meanings of the words they were all at sea, because they had not
learned them. Ella and the other big scholars felt terrible over it.
They love their teacher so, and it seems Mr. Pryor's brother, Abel
Pryor, who is trustee of that school, is against her and has been
trying to turn the other trustees over to his way of thinking. And Ella
and the rest were afraid that if the fourth class couldn't tell
Whiskers the meanings of the words he would think the teacher was no
good and tell Abel so, and Abel would have a fine handle. But little
Sandy Logan saved the situation. He is a Home boy, but he is as smart
as a steel trap, and he sized up Whiskers-on-the-moon right off. 'What
does "anatomy" mean?' Whiskers demanded. 'A pain in your stomach,'
Sandy replied, quick as a flash and never batting an eyelid.
Whiskers-on-the-moon is a very ignorant man, Mrs. Dr. dear; he didn't
know the meaning of the words himself, and he said 'Very good--very
good.' The class caught right on--at least three or four of the
brighter ones did--and they kept up the fun. Jean Blane said that
'acoustic' meant 'a religious squabble,' and Muriel Baker said that an
'agnostic' was 'a man who had indigestion,' and Jim Carter said that
'acerbity' meant that 'you ate nothing but vegetable food,' and so on
all down the list. Whiskers swallowed it all, and kept saying 'Very
good--very good' until Ella thought that die she would trying to keep a
straight face. When the teacher came in, Whiskers complimented her on
the splendid understanding the children had of their lesson and said he
meant to tell the trustees what a jewel they had. It was 'very
unusual,' he said, to find a fourth class who could answer up so prompt
when it came to explaining what words meant. He went off beaming. But
Ella told me this as a great secret, Mrs. Dr. dear, and we must keep it
as such, for the sake of the Lowbridge Road teacher. It would likely be
the ruin of her chances of keeping the school if Whiskers should ever
find out how he had been bamboozled."

Mary Vance came up to Ingleside that same afternoon to tell them that
Miller Douglas, who had been wounded when the Canadians took Hill 70,
had had to have his leg amputated. The Ingleside folk sympathized with
Mary, whose zeal and patriotism had taken some time to kindle but now
burned with a glow as steady and bright as any one's.

"Some folks have been twitting me about having a husband with only one
leg. But," said Mary, rising to a lofty height, "I would rather Miller
with only one leg than any other man in the world with a
dozen--unless," she added as an after-thought, "unless it was Lloyd
George. Well, I must be going. I thought you'd be interested in hearing
about Miller so I ran up from the store, but I must hustle home for I
promised Luke MacAllister I'd help him build his grain stack this
evening. It's up to us girls to see that the harvest is got in, since
the boys are so scarce. I've got overalls and I can tell you they're
real becoming. Mrs. Alec Douglas says they're indecent and shouldn't be
allowed, and even Mrs. Elliott kinder looks askance at them. But bless
you, the world moves, and anyhow there's no fun for me like shocking
Kitty Alec."

"By the way, father," said Rilla, "I'm going to take Jack Flagg's place
in his father's store for a month. I promised him today that I would,
if you didn't object. Then he can help the farmers get the harvest in.
I don't think I'd be much use in a harvest myself--though lots of the
girls are--but I can set Jack free while I do his work. Jims isn't much
bother in the daytime now, and I'll always be home at night."

"Do you think you'll like weighing out sugar and beans, and trafficking
in butter and eggs?" said the doctor, twinkling.

"Probably not. That isn't the question. It's just one way of doing my
bit." So Rilla went behind Mr. Flagg's counter for a month; and Susan
went into Albert Crawford's oat-fields.

"I am as good as any of them yet," she said proudly. "Not a man of them
can beat me when it comes to building a stack. When I offered to help
Albert looked doubtful. 'I am afraid the work will be too hard for
you,' he said. 'Try me for a day and see,' said I. 'I will do my
darnedest.'"

None of the Ingleside folks spoke for just a moment. Their silence
meant that they thought Susan's pluck in "working out" quite wonderful.
But Susan mistook their meaning and her sun-burned face grew red.

"This habit of swearing seems to be growing on me, Mrs. Dr. dear," she
said apologetically. "To think that I should be acquiring it at my age!
It is such a dreadful example to the young girls. I am of the opinion
it comes of reading the newspapers so much. They are so full of
profanity and they do not spell it with stars either, as used to be
done in my young days. This war is demoralizing everybody."

Susan, standing on a load of grain, her grey hair whipping in the
breeze and her skirt kilted up to her knees for safety and
convenience--no overalls for Susan, if you please--neither a beautiful
nor a romantic figure; but the spirit that animated her gaunt arms was
the self-same one that captured Vimy Ridge and held the German legions
back from Verdun.

It is not the least likely, however, that this consideration was the
one which appealed most strongly to Mr. Pryor when he drove past one
afternoon and saw Susan pitching sheaves gamely.

"Smart woman that," he reflected. "Worth two of many a younger one yet.
I might do worse--I might do worse. If Milgrave comes home alive I'll
lose Miranda and hired housekeepers cost more than a wife and are
liable to leave a man in the lurch any time. I'll think it over."

A week later Mrs. Blythe, coming up from the village late in the
afternoon, paused at the gate of Ingleside in an amazement which
temporarily bereft her of the power of motion. An extraordinary sight
met her eyes. Round the end of the kitchen burst Mr. Pryor, running as
stout, pompous Mr. Pryor had not run in years, with terror imprinted on
every lineament--a terror quite justifiable, for behind him, like an
avenging fate, came Susan, with a huge, smoking iron pot grasped in her
hands, and an expression in her eye that boded ill to the object of her
indignation, if she should overtake him. Pursuer and pursued tore
across the lawn. Mr. Pryor reached the gate a few feet ahead of Susan,
wrenched it open, and fled down the road, without a glance at the
transfixed lady of Ingleside.

"Susan," gasped Anne.

Susan halted in her mad career, set down her pot, and shook her fist
after Mr. Pryor, who had not ceased to run, evidently believing that
Susan was still full cry after him.

"Susan, what does this mean?" demanded Anne, a little severely.

"You may well ask that, Mrs. Dr. dear," Susan replied wrathfully. "I
have not been so upset in years. That--that--that pacifist has actually
had the audacity to come up here and, in my own kitchen, to ask me to
marry him. HIM!"

Anne choked back a laugh.

"But--Susan! Couldn't you have found a--well, a less spectacular method
of refusing him? Think what a gossip this would have made if anyone had
been going past and had seen such a performance."

"Indeed, Mrs. Dr. dear, you are quite right. I did not think of it
because I was quite past thinking rationally. I was just clean mad.
Come in the house and I will tell you all about it."

Susan picked up her pot and marched into the kitchen, still trembling
with wrathful excitement. She set her pot on the stove with a vicious
thud. "Wait a moment until I open all the windows to air this kitchen
well, Mrs. Dr. dear. There, that is better. And I must wash my hands,
too, because I shook hands with Whiskers-on-the-moon when he came
in--not that I wanted to, but when he stuck out his fat, oily hand I
did not know just what else to do at the moment. I had just finished my
afternoon cleaning and thanks be, everything was shining and spotless;
and thought I 'now that dye is boiling and I will get my rug rags and
have them nicely out of the way before supper.'

