And first they would avenge themselves on King Tarquin. This they did
after this fashion. They chose them two shepherds, the fiercest of their
company, and caused them to come, carrying crooks of iron, after their
custom, within the King's palace; who, so soon as they were come within
the porch, made as if they had a grievous quarrel the one against the
other, and cried out that the King should be the judge between them; for
in those days kings were wont to perform the office of a judge. So they
that kept order in the palace brought them before the King. At the first
they made both of them a great uproar, crying out against each other;
but afterwards, when the beadle bade them be quiet if they would be
heard of the King, bare themselves in more orderly fashion. Then the
first began to tell his story; but when the King turned to him, and was
wholly given up to hearing what the man might say, the other dealt him a
great blow upon the head with the iron which he carried. And when he
had done this he left the iron where it was, and hasted, he and his
companion with him, to escape by the door. Then some of the ministers of
the court caught the King as he fell ready to die upon the ground, and
others laid hold on the murderers and hindered them from escaping. At
the same time much people ran together to the place, wondering what new
thing had happened. But Queen Tanaquil gave command that they should
shut the doors of the palace, and would have none remain within but her
own folk. And first she prepared with all diligence such things as might
be serviceable in the dressing of the wound, making as if there were
some hope that the King might yet live; and next she devised how, this
hope failing her, things might nevertheless be ordered according to her
wish. Sending, therefore, for Servius in all haste, she pointed to the
King, as he lay now ready to die, and spake, saying, "Servius, my son,
this kingdom is thine if thou wilt only show thyself a man. Neither
shall it go to them who have done this wicked deed, albeit not by their
own hands. Rouse thyself, therefore, and follow the leading of the Gods,
who, in days past, showed that thy head should bear great honour by the
fire from heaven which they caused to shine round about it. Let that
fire stir thee this day. Nor do thou take account of thy birth. For
we also were strangers to this city and yet have borne rule therein.
Bethink thee, therefore, what manner of man thou art, rather than of
whom thou wast born. And if perchance thine own counsels are troubled at
so grievous a chance, be thou obedient unto mine."

After this, as the people without the palace cried aloud and would have
thrust in the doors, the Queen went to an upper chamber and spake to
the multitude through a window that looked upon the New Street (for the
palace of the King stood hard by the temple of Jupiter the Stayer).
"Be of good courage and hope," she said; "the King was stunned by the
suddenness of the blow, but the iron entered not deep into the flesh,
and he came speedily to himself. Now we have washed off the blood and
looked into the wound. All is well. Be of good cheer, therefore, and
believe that before many days be past ye shall see the King. Meanwhile,
render due obedience to Servius, who will do justice between man and
man in the room of the King and order all else that shall be needed." So
Servius came forth to the people, wearing the royal robe, with the men
that bare the axes after him; and sitting down on the throne of the
King, heard the causes of them that sought for justice, giving judgment
in some things, and in others making mention that he would consult King
Tarquin. This he did for many days, none knowing that the King was
dead, and established himself in power, while he made as if he were
administering the power of another. And when Queen Tanaquil thought
that the due time was come, she gave out that King Tarquin was dead, and
commanded that mourning should be made for him according to custom. And
Servius, coming forth with his guards about him, was proclaimed King;
only at the first the Senate alone, and not the people, consented. As
for the sons of An eus, when they heard that the murderers had been
taken, and that the King was yet alive, and that Servius also was so
well established in his power, they fled to the town of Suessa Pometia.




CHAPTER IV. ~~ THE STORY OF SERVIUS.

And now Servius thought to establish himself in his kingdom. And first
of all, lest the sons of King Tarquin should so regard him as the son
of Ancus had regarded King Tarquin, he gave his daughters in marriage to
the two young men (for King Tarquin had left two sons, Lucius and Aruns
by name). Nor yet did the counsels of man avail to change the decree of
fate, that there should rise up against the King foes from out of his
own household, as, indeed, will be shown hereafter. Yet for a while all
things went peaceably. First the King got himself great renown in a war
with the men of Veii, with whom the truce had expired by lapse of time.
These he put to flight with great slaughter, and so returning to Rome
was manifestly acknowledged not by the Senators only, but was also by
the people.

And now he set about the work of ordering the state, dividing the
citizens according to their birth and to that which they possessed.
First of all he put the Senators, and after them such as served in the
wars on horseback, and these he called knights. And the rest of the
people he divided into classes according to the armour with which they
were able to furnish themselves for war. The first class were they that
had one hundred thousand pounds of brass or more; and these had for
armour a helmet, a long shield, a cuirass, and greaves upon their legs,
of brass all of them, and for warfare a spear and a sword. In this
class there were eighty companies of a hundred, forty of the elders
that should defend the city, and of the younger that should go and fight
abroad forty also. The next class to these had a short shield for a
long, and lacked the cuirass; and after these another that had the same
arms, only wanting the greaves. The fourth class had nothing of armour,
and for weapons a spear and a javelin; and the fifth slings and stones.
These last were such as had eleven thousand pounds of brass; as for such
as had less they were free from service in war. When this ordering was
finished, he commanded that the people should assemble themselves on the
field of Mars; and when their number was counted, it was found that they
were eighty thousand in all. King Servius also was minded to enlarge his
kingdom by including within it the nations round about, seeking to do
this not by arms so much as by counsel. And first he joined the Latins
to the Romans, contriving the matter in this fashion. There was in those
days a famous temple of Diana at Ephesus which the cities of Asia had
joined together in building. Now King Servius would often speak of this
thing to the Princes of Latium, to whom, indeed, he was careful to use
much hospitality, declaring how noble and excellent a thing it was that
they who dwelt in the same land should have their gods also and worship
in common. And when he had ofttimes used much argument to this purpose,
at the last he persuaded them that the cities of Latium should join
together with men of Rome and build a temple to Diana, and that this
temple should be at Rome, whereby it was confessed that Rome was the
chief city.

As for the Sabines this same end was brought about in a different
fashion. There was a certain householder of this nation that had born
upon his farm a heifer of marvellous greatness and beauty. How great it
was might be seen from the horns of the beast which hung in the front
of Diana's temple for many generations. Now the birth of this great
creature was counted for a portent; and the prophets prophesied that
the rule should belong to that nation whose citizens should offer it
in sacrifice to Diana; and this prophecy came to the ears of Diana's
priest. The Sabine therefore, so soon as a fitting day for sacrifice was
come, brought the great heifer to the temple at Rome and set it before
the altar. And when the priest saw it he perceived from its greatness
that it was the beast of which the prophets had spoken. Therefore
knowing what they had said he spake to the man, saying, "Friend, what
is this that thou art minded to do? Wilt thou do sacrifice to Diana
profanely, not having first cleansed thyself? See now where the Tiber
flows in the valley beneath. Do thou therefore bathe thyself therein and
so offer thy sacrifice." And when the man, being very scrupulous to do
all things in order that the thing might have its due fulfilment, went
down to this river, the priest took the heifer and offered it up to the
goddess. This thing was marvellously pleasing to King Servius and to all
the people.

The King, having now enlarged his borders, divided the land which had
been taken from the enemy man by man among the people; and feared not,
having gained their hearts by this bounty, to ask them, being gathered
together in assembly, "Is it your pleasure that I should reign over
you?" To which question there was given such assent as no king before
him had received. Nevertheless the son of King Tarquin ceased not to
cherish in his heart the hope of the kingdom; to which hope, indeed, he
was the more stirred up by Tullia his wife. For now there sprang up in
the palace of the kings of Rome a monstrous growth of wickedness, to
the end, it may well be believed, that the people might, for hatred of
kingship and its way, come the earlier to love liberty.

Now King Tarquin had two sons, this Lucius, of whom mention has been
made, a haughty and violent man, and another, Aruns by name, that was of
a quiet and gentle temper. And as they differed the one from the other,
so also did their wives, the daughters of King Servius; and it so fell
out that she that had the fiercer temper of the two, a certain Tullia,
was married to Aruns, and she that was gentle to Lucius. Now it vexed
Tullia to the heart that her husband was of so peaceable a spirit, so
that in the end she despised him, and looked to his brother as being the
more worthy to be her husband. And the end of the matter was this, that
Lucius and Tullia plotted together this great wickedness, that he should
rid himself of his wife and she should rid herself of her husband. And
this they did; and then the two being thus in evil fashion made one,
Lucius took Tullia to wife, the King not hindering the thing, though
indeed he approved it not. And now did this wicked woman increase day by
day her rage and fury against the King her father. For having done one
evil deed she began to compass others; nor would she suffer her husband
to rest, stirring him up to all wickedness, and speaking to him in such
fashion as this: "Truly I had a husband that pleased me well had I been
content to serve together with him. But the husband that I looked for
was one that should think himself worthy to be a king, that should
remember that he was a son of King Tarquin, that should choose rather to
have the crown in possession than to hope for it hereafter. Such an one
I thought to find in thee; and if I thought right, then truly I call
thee true husband and King, but if not, then I count myself to have
suffered loss, seeing that thou art not a coward only, but also
bloodguilty. Be up and doing, therefore. Thou hast not, as had thy
father, to pome from Corinth, or even from Tarquinii, to win for himself
a kingdom among strangers. All things that are about thee mark thee out
for kingship, to which, if thou judge thyself unequal, then depart from
this place where thou seemest to be that which thou art not."

With such words did Tullia daily stir up her husband; thinking shame to
herself, if so be Tanaquil, who was a foreigner, had been able to make
two kings, first her husband and then her son-in-law, she, being the
daughter of a king, could not accomplish as much. Then did Lucius begin
to seek favour among the nobles, especially such as were of the lesser
houses, and so ambitious of higher place in the State. Some he would
remind of kindnesses that his father had done them in past time, and
would ask for a like return; and to some he would promise gifts; and all
he sought to turn against the King. And at the last, when it now seemed
time to make his venture, he burst into the market-place, having with
him a company of armed men; and all that stood near being so stricken
with dismay that they hindered him not, commanded the herald that he
should call the Senators to meet King Tarquin. Nor did the Senators,
being thus summoned, refuse to come, for some had been won over to the
young man beforehand, and others feared that they should suffer harm if
they came not, for the matter was altogether beyond their expectation;
also they thought that King Servius had already perished. And when they
were were assembled, Tarquin sat down upon the throne and spake in
some such fashion as this: "The slave that was the son of a slave-woman
seized the kingdom when the King my father had been shamefully slain.
Neither was there any assembly held for election; nor did the people
give their votes for him, nor did the Senate confirm the matter. By none
of these things doth he possess this great dignity, but by the bounty of
a woman. And now he, being such an one as he is, favours the lowest
of the people, to whom he divideth this land, which is of right the
possession of the nobles; in like manner the burdens which at one time
were borne in common by all, he putteth upon you; and this ordering of
the citizens that he hath lately established, for what purpose is it but
that he may know who hath aught, that he may make distribution to the
needy?"

While he thus spake there came in King Servius, having been fetched by
a messenger in hot haste, and cried with a loud voice from the porch of
the senate-house, "What doest thou here, Tarquin? How darest thou,
while I am yet alive, to call the Senators together and to sit upon my
throne?"

To this Tarquin made answer, "This throne is the throne of the King my
father, of which I, being the son of a king, am worthier than thou that
art the son of a slave. Surely now thou hast long enough triumphed over
them that are by right thy masters."

After this there was a great shouting and tumult, some favouring Servius
and some Tarquin; and the people ran together into the senate-house;
and it was manifest that he that should prevail in that conflict would
possess the kingdom. Then Tarquin, thinking that having ventured so much
he must dare all things, laid hands on King Servius and cast him down
the steps of the senate-house into the market-place. Then they that
accompanied the King, that, is to say his ministers and guards, were
stricken with fear and fled, and Servius himself, seeking to return to
the palace, and having now reached the end of the street of Cyprus, was
overtaken by them that Tarquin had sent to pursue him, and there slain.
And men say that this was done at the bidding of Tullia; and indeed it
agrees with the other wickedness of this woman. That she rode in her
carriage into the market-place, and, fearing not to come into the
assembly of men, called forth her husband from the senate-house, and
before all others saluted him as King--all this is known for certain.
And when he bade her depart to her home, and she had come to the top
of the street of Cyprus, and would turn aside to the Esquiline Hill,
he that drave the horses drew back the rein and tarried, showing to his
mistress the body of Servius where it lay in the street Then did she a
wicked deed, whereof there remains a memorial to this day, in that men
call the street the Wicked Street, for she drave her carriage over the
body of her father, and so went on to her house, having the blood of her
father upon her wheels, aye, and upon her own garments. And as the reign
of King Tarquin began with blood, even so also did it end.

[Illustration: Tullia driving over the body of her Father 098]




CHAPTER V. ~~ THE STORY OF BRUTUS.

Lucius Tarquin, having thus seized the kingdom (for he had not the
consent either of the Senators or of the Commons to his deed), bare
himself very haughtily, so that men called him Tarquin the Proud. First,
lest some other, taking example by him, should deal with him as he had
dealt with Tullius, he had about him a company of armed men for guards.
And because he knew that none loved him, he would have them fear him. To
this end he caused men to be accused before him. And when they were so
accused, he judged them by himself, none sitting with him to see that
right was done. Some he slew unjustly, and some he banished, and some he
spoiled of their goods. And when the number of the Senators was greatly
diminished by these means (for he laid his plots mostly against the
Senators, as being rich men and the chief of the State), he would not
choose any into their place, thinking that the people would lightly
esteem them if there were but a few of them. Nor did he call them
together to ask their counsel, but ruled according to his own pleasure,
making peace and war, and binding treaties or unbinding, with none to
gainsay him.

Nevertheless, for a while he increased greatly in power and glory. He
made alliance with Octavius Mamilius, prince of Tusculum, giving him his
daughter in marriage; nor was there any man greater than Mamilius in
all the cities of the Latins; and Suessa Pometia, that was a city of the
Volsci, he took by force, and finding that the spoil was very rich (for
there were in it forty talents of gold and silver), he built with the
money a temple to Jupiter on the Capitol, very great and splendid, and
worthy not only of his present kingdom but also of that great Empire
that should be thereafter. Also he took the city of Gabii by fraud, as
shall now be told.

The manner of his fraud was this. He made as if he had changed his
purpose about the city, leading away his army from before it, and
busying himself with laying the foundations of the Temple of Jupiter and
other like things. But while he did this, Sextus, that was the youngest
of his three sons, fled to Gabii, as if he were a deserter from the army
of his father, and complained grievously to the men of the city of the
cruelty which the King had used towards him. "Surely now," he said, "my
father has turned away his fury from others upon them that are of his
own household; and that same solitude which he has made in the Senate he
would have also in his own home, being so jealous of his kingdom that he
will not have any near him that shall inherit it. As for myself I barely
escaped with my life from them that would have slain me by his command;
nor do I count myself safe except among such as are enemies to the King.
As for you, think not that he has given up his purpose concerning you.
He only waits an occasion when he may take you unawares." The men of
Gabii, when they heard these words, received the young man kindly and
bade him be of good cheer, for that they would defend him from his
father. They said also that they counted themselves fortunate to
gain such help, knowing him to be brave and skilful in war, and that
doubtless, with his aid, they should soon carry the war from their own
city even to the walls of Rome. After this, when the young man had gone,
not once only but many times, with the young men of Gabii, making war
against the Romans and plundering their country, and had always fared
well, putting the enemy to flight and' bringing back much spoil (and,
indeed, things were so ordered by the King that it should be so), the
people of Gabii were persuaded that he was dealing honestly with them,
and chose him to be the captain of their host. After this, when he found
that he could now do all things at his pleasure in Gabii, he sent a
messenger to the King his father, desiring to know what he would
have him do. To this messenger the King, doubting whether the man was
faithful, gave no answer by word of mouth, but rose up from his place
and walked in the garden that was by the palace, having the look of one
that took deep counsel with himself. And as he walked he smote off the
heads of the tallest poppies that were in the garden with a staff that
he had in his hand, but spake never a word. At the last, the messenger
being wearied out with the asking of a question to no purpose, departed,
thinking that he had now fulfilled his errand. And when he came to Gabii
he told to Sextus what he had seen; "only," he said, "the King your
father, whether for anger or for haughtiness, spake not one word." But
Sextus knew right well what his father would have him do. For he set
himself to overthrow the chief men of the city. Some he accused to
the people; and against some he took occasion of offence given to the
Commons. Some were put to death publicly, and others, to whose charge
nothing could be laid, were slain by secret violence. Others again were
suffered to go of their own accord into banishment; and the goods of
all, whether they were slain or banished, were divided amongst the
Commons; nor did these, being blinded by the desire of gain, perceive
what damage the State suffered, till Gabii, having lost all its rulers
and counsellors, fell into the hands of the Romans without so much as a
battle. By such means did King Tarquin increase his power.

Now there was at Rome in the days of Tarquin a noble youth, by name
Lucius Junius, who was akin to the house of Tarquin, seeing that his
mother was sister to the King. This man, seeing how the King sought
to destroy all the chief men in the State (and, indeed, the brother of
Lucius had been so slain), judged it well so to bear himself that there
should be nothing in him which the King should either covet or desire.
 a prey; for which reason men gave him the name of Brutus, or the
Foolish. Then he bided his time, waiting till the occasion should come
when he might win freedom for the people.

Now it chanced that King Tarquin, being disturbed by the marvel of a
great snake, which had been seen of a sudden to glide from the altar
in his house, sent messengers to Delphi to inquire of the god what this
thing might mean. And because he cared not that any strangers should
hear the answer of the oracle, he sent his own sons, Titus and Aruns,
and with them, to bear them company, or rather as one of whom they might
make sport, this same Lucius Brutus. And when the young men offered
gifts to the god, Brutus offered gold hidden away in a stick that had
been hollowed to receive it; meaning thereby a parable of himself, as of
a light hidden beneath that which seemed dull and of little worth. Now
when the sons of the King had fulfilled the commands of their father,
there came upon them a desire to enquire of the god which of them should
be king in time to come. Whereupon there came forth from the depths of
the cave this voice: "Know, O young men, that he of you who shall first
give a kiss to his mother, shall bear the chief rule hereafter at
Rome." When the sons of the King heard these words they would have their
brother Sextus, who had been left behind at Rome, know nothing of the
matter, lest he also should have a hope of the kingdom, Wherefore they
agreed among themselves that the matter should be kept secret, and that
they should leave to the casting of lots which of the two should first
give a kiss to his mother. But Brutus judged that the answer of the god
had another signification than this. Therefore, so soon as they were
come out of the temple, he made as if he stumbled, and falling on his
face, he kissed the earth, holding that the earth was his mother, being
indeed the common mother of us all.

Not many days after these things there came to Brutus an occasion
of showing what manner of man he was. Sextus, the King's son, did so
grievous a wrong to Lucretia, that was the wife of Collatinus, that the
woman could not endure to live, but slew herself with her own hand. But
before she died she called to her her husband and her father and Brutus,
and bade them avenge her upon the evil house of Tarquin. And when her
father and her' husband sat silent for grief and fear, Brutus drew the
knife wherewith she slew herself from the wound, and held it before him
dripping with blood, and cried aloud, "By this blood I swear, calling
the Gods to witness, that I will pursue with fire and sword and with all
other means of destruction Tarquin the Proud, with his accursed wife and
all his race; and that I will suffer no man hereafter to be king in this
city of Rome." And when he had ended he bade the others swear after the
same form of words. This they did and, forgetting their grief, thought
only how they might best avenge this great wrong that had been done.

First they carried the body of Lucretia, all covered with blood, into
the market-place of Collatia (for these things happened at Collatia),
and roused all the people that saw a thing so shameful and pitiful, till
all that were of an age for war assembled themselves carrying arms. Some
of them stayed behind to keep the gates of Collatia, that no one should
carry tidings of the matter to the King, and the rest Brutus took with
him with all the speed that he might to Rome. There also was stirred up
a like commotion, Brutus calling the people together and telling them
what a shameful wrong the young Tarquin had done. Also he spake to them
of the labours with which the King wore them out in the building of
temples and palaces and the like, so that they who had been in time past
the conquerors of all the nations round about were now come to be but
as hewers of wood and drawers of water. Also he set before them in what
shameful sort King Tullius had been slain, and how his daughter had
driven her chariot over the dead body of her father. With suchlike words
he stirred up the people to great wrath, so that they passed a decree
that there should be no more kings in Rome, and that Lucius Tarquin with
his wife and his children should be banished. After this Brutus made
haste to the camp and stirred up the army against the King. And in the
meanwhile Queen Tullia fled from her palace, all that saw her cursing
her as she went As for King Tarquin, when he came to the city he found
the gates shut against him; thereupon he returned and dwelt at Caere
that is in the land of Etruria, and two of his sons with him; but Sextus
going to Gabii, as to a city which he had made his own, was slain by the
inhabitants.

The King and his house being thus driven out, Brutus was made consul
with one Collatinus for his colleague. First he bound the people by an
oath that they would never thereafter suffer any man to be king at
Rome; and afterwards, because Collatinus was of the name and lineage of
Tarquin, he wrought with them that he also should be banished from the
city. "These Tarquins," he said, "are overmuch accustomed to kingship.
For Tarquin the elder reigned in Rome, and though after him another,
even Servius, was king, yet did not his son forget the kingdom of his
father, but took it for his own. And now this Collatinus Tarquin bears
rule in the city, whose very name, seeing that they of his house know
not how to be subject unto others, has in it great danger to liberty."
When he had wrought on the minds of the people with these words, he
called the people to an assembly, and spake to them thus: "Ye have sworn
that ye will suffer no man to be king at Rome, nor endure aught which
may bring liberty into peril. Now this that I am about to say, I say
against my will, speaking against a man that is dear to me, nor indeed
had I said it but that my love for my country prevailed over all other
things. The Roman people are not assured in their heart that they have
won liberty in very deed and truth, knowing that they who are of the
house and lineage of the King not only dwell in this State, but even
bear rule in it. Do thou, therefore, Collatinus, remove this fear from
the heart of thy countrymen. We deny not that thou didst drive away the
kings. Complete therefore this thy good deed, even by taking away from
this city a name which is the name of kings. All that thou hast we will
duly render thee; nay more, if thou lackest anything, we will supply it
bountifully. Depart therefore as a friend might depart; for though this
fear be idle, yet it troubles thy countrymen who think that they shall
not be quit of kingship till they be quit of all that bear a king's
name." To these words Collatinus at the first could answer nothing,
so astonished was he at the matter; and afterwards, when he would have
spoken, the chief men of the State came round, entreating that he would
hearken to Brutus. So when he had considered the thing for a space, he
consented, fearing lest, when he should be no longer Consul, the same
might happen to him, together also with loss of his goods and much wrong
to himself. Wherefore he abdicated his office and departed with all that
he had to Lanuvium. After this Brutus caused that the people passed a
law that all of the house of Tarquin should be banished for ever.

That the King would seek to come back by force of arms none doubted. But
while he delayed, as indeed he did delay beyond the expectation of all,
liberty was well nigh lost by treachery and treason. There were among
the youth of Rome certain young nobles that had been wont to live as
companions with the King's son with much license and luxury, after the
fashion of courts. These men, now that all citizens had equal rights,
loudly complained among themselves that other men's freedom had turned
to their own bondage. "It pleaseth us well," said they, "to have a king,
for he is a man even as we are, from whom we may ask and obtain what we
will, be it right or wrong, who can have a favour and do kindness, can
be angry or have compassion, whereas laws are deaf and not to be turned
by prayers, being better forsooth for the poor than for the rich."

While they thought these things in their hearts there chanced to come
ambassadors from King Tarquin. These made no mention of the matter
whether the King should return, but asked only that his goods should be
restored to him. To these the Senate gave audience; and when they had
heard them were not a few days in debating the matter, for they said,
"If we give not back these goods, there is open cause for war; and if
we give them back, we minister means by which war may be carried on."
In the meanwhile the ambassadors, making pretence to concern themselves
only about the goods of the King, plotted in secret how they might bring
him back. Going about therefore among the young nobles as if they would
bespeak their favour on behalf of their errand, they made trial of what
temper they were as to the bringing back of the King, and when they
found that their words were not ill taken, they gave them certain tokens
that they had brought from Tarquin, and had converse how the gates might
be opened to him by night. And the matter was put in charge of certain
noblemen, brothers, whose sister Brutus had to wife, and of this
marriage there had been born to Brutus two sons that were now grown to
manhood; and these young men had knowledge of the plot from the brethren
of their mother. After a while the Senate passed a decree that the goods
of the King should be given back to him; and the ambassadors made excuse
to tarry yet longer, asking time of the Consul that they find waggons
sufficient, to carry the goods. This time they spent wholly in
consulting with them that were privy to the plot, being urgent with them
that; they should give them a letter to carry to the King, "for," said
they, "who will believe us if we bring not some written testimony in
a matter so grave?" So the conspirators gave them a letter and thereby
made manifest proof of their guilt. For a certain slave had conceived
some suspicion of the matter, but waited for some more certain
knowledge. Now it fell out that on the night before the day when the
ambassador should depart there was a banquet at the house of them that
had chief charge of the matter in Rome, at which banquet there was much
talk, none being present but such as were privy to the plot. But the
slave of whom mention has been made, having hidden himself, overheard
that which was said; and when he knew that the letter had been given, he
carried the matter straightway to the Consuls, who going laid hands on
the ambassadors and on them that were privy to the plot, and so without
