up out dar in de woods by he own-alone se'f wuz scan'lous--dey wuz dat;
dey wuz scan'lous.

"Brer Rabbit see dis wa'nt gwine ter do, en he 'low ter hisse'f dat he
better be gittin' on todes home, en off he put. I 'speck you done year
talk er deze yer booggers w'at gits atter bad chilluns," continued Uncle
Remus, in a tone so seriously confidential as to be altogether
depressing; "well, den, des 'zactly dat a-way Brer Rabbit look, en ef
you'd er seed 'im you'd er made sho' he de gran'-daddy er all de
booggers. Brer Rabbit pace 'long, he did, en ev'y motion he make, de
leafs dey'd go _swishy-swushy_, _splushy-splishy_, en, fum de fuss he
make en de way he look, you'd er tuck 'im ter be de mos' suvvigus
varment w'at disappear fum de face er de yeth sence ole man Noah let
down de draw-bars er de ark en tu'n de creeturs loose; en I boun' ef
you'd er struck up long wid 'im, you'd er been mighty good en glad ef
you'd er got off wid dat.

"De fus' man w'at Brer Rabbit come up wid wuz ole Sis Cow, en no sooner
is she lay eyes on 'im dan she h'ist up 'er tail in de elements, en put
out like a pack er dogs wuz atter 'er. Dis make Brer Rabbit laff, kaze
he know dat w'en a ole settle' 'oman like Sis Cow run 'stracted in de
broad open day-time, dat dey mus' be sump'n' mighty kuse 'bout dem leafs
en dat honey, en he keep on a-rackin' down de road. De nex' man w'at he
meet wuz a black gal tollin' a whole passel er plantation shotes, en
w'en de gal see Brer Rabbit come prancin' 'long, she fling down 'er
basket er corn en des fa'rly fly, en de shotes, dey tuck thoo de woods,
en sech n'er racket ez dey kick up wid der runnin', en der snortin', en
der squealin' ain't never bin year in dat settlement needer befo' ner
since. Hit keep on dis a-way long ez Brer Rabbit meet anybody--dey des
broke en run like de Ole Boy wuz atter um.

    [Illustration: "HE TO' DOWN A WHOLE PANEL ER FENCE GITTEN
    'WAY FUM DAR"]

"Co'se, dis make Brer Rabbit feel monst'us biggity, en he 'low ter
hisse'f dat he 'speck he better drap 'roun' en skummish in de
neighborhoods er Brer Fox house. En w'iles he wuz stannin' dar runnin'
dis 'roun' in he min', yer come old Brer B'ar en all er he fambly. Brer
Rabbit, he git crossways de road, he did, en he sorter sidle todes um.
Ole Brer B'ar, he stop en look, but Brer Rabbit, he keep on sidlin'
todes um. Ole Miss B'ar, she stan' it long ez she kin, en den she fling
down 'er parrysol en tuck a tree. Brer B'ar look lak he gwine ter stan'
his groun', but Brer Rabbit he jump straight up in de a'r en gin hisse'f
a shake, en, bless yo' soul, honey! ole Brer B'ar make a break, en dey
tells me he to' down a whole panel er fence gittin' 'way fum dar. En
ez ter Kubs en Klibs, dey tuck der hats in der han's, en dey went
skaddlin' thoo de bushes des same ez a drove er hosses."

"And then what?" the little boy asked.

"Brer Rabbit p'raded on down de road," continued Uncle Remus, "en bimeby
yer come Brer Fox en Brer Wolf, fixin' up a plan fer ter nab Brer
Rabbit, en dey wuz so intents on der confab dat dey got right on Brer
Rabbit 'fo' dey seed 'im; but, gentermens! w'en dey is ketch a glimpse
un 'im, dey gun 'im all de room he want. Brer Wolf, he try ter show off,
he did, kase he wanter play big 'fo' Brer Fox, en he stop en ax Brer
Rabbit who is he. Brer Rabbit, he jump up en down in de middle er de
road, en holler out:--

"'I'm de Wull-er-de-Wust.[5] I'm de Wull-er-de-Wust, en youer de man I'm
atter!'

"Den Brer Rabbit jump up en down en make lak he gwine atter Brer Fox en
Brer Wolf, en de way dem creeturs lit out fum dar wuz a caution.

"Long time atter dat," continued Uncle Remus, folding his hands placidly
in his lap, with the air of one who has performed a pleasant
duty,--"long time atter dat, Brer Rabbit come up wid Brer Fox en Brer
Wolf, en he git behime a stump, Brer Rabbit did, en holler out:--

"'I'm de Wull-er-de-Wust, en youer de mens I'm atter!'

"Brer Fox en Brer Wolf, dey broke, but 'fo' dey got outer sight en outer
yar'n', Brer Rabbit show hisse'f, he did, en laugh fit ter kill hisse'f.
Atterwuds, Miss Meadows she year 'bout it, en de nex' time Brer Fox
call, de gals dey up en giggle, en ax 'im ef he ain't feard de
Wull-er-de-Wust mought drap in."


FOOTNOTE:

[5] Or Wull-er-de-Wuts. Probably a fantastic corruption of
"will-o'-the-wisp," though this is not by any means certain.




VI

BRER RABBIT SECURES A MANSION


The rain continued to fall the next day, but the little boy made
arrangements to go with 'Tildy when she carried Uncle Remus his supper.
This happened to be a waiter full of things left over from dinner. There
was so much that the old man was moved to remark:--

"I cl'ar ter gracious, hit look lak Miss Sally done got my name in de
pot dis time, sho'. I des wish you look at dat pone er co'n-bread,
honey, en dem ar greens, en see ef dey ain't got Remus writ some'rs on
um. Dat ar chick'n fixin's, dey look lak deyer good, yet 'taint
familious wid me lak dat ar bile ham. Dem ar sweet-taters, dey stan's
fa'r fer dividjun, but dem ar puzzuv,[6] I lay dey fit yo' palate mo'
samer dan dey does mine. Dish yer hunk er beef, we kin talk 'bout dat
w'en de time come, en dem ar biscuits, I des nat'ally knows Miss Sally
put um in dar fer some little chap w'ich his name I ain't gwine ter call
in comp'ny."

It was easy to perceive that the sight of the supper had put Uncle Remus
in rare good-humor. He moved around briskly, taking the plates from the
waiter and distributing them with exaggerated carefulness around upon
his little pine table. Meanwhile he kept up a running fire of
conversation.

"Folks w'at kin set down en have der vittles brung en put down right
spang und' der nose--dem kinder folks ain't got no needs er no umbrell.
Night 'fo' las', w'iles I wuz settin' dar in de do', I year dem
Willis-whistlers, en den I des knowed we 'uz gwine ter git a season."[7]

"The Willis-whistlers, Uncle Remus," exclaimed the little boy. "What are
they?"

"Youer too hard fer me now, honey. Dat w'at I knows I don't min'
tellin', but w'en you axes me 'bout dat w'at I dunno, den youer too hard
fer me, sho'. Deze yer Willis-whistlers, dey bangs my time, en I bin
knockin' 'roun' in dish yer low-groun' now gwine on eighty year. Some
folks wanter make out deyer frogs, yit I wish dey p'int out unter me how
frogs kin holler so dat de nigher you come t'um, de furder you is off; I
be mighty glad ef some un 'ud come 'long en tell me dat. Many en many's
de time is I gone atter deze yer Willis-whistlers, en, no diffunce whar
I goes, deyer allers off yander. You kin put de shovel in de fier en
make de squinch-owl hush he fuss, en you kin go out en put yo' han' on
de trees en make deze yere locus'-bugs quit der racket, but dem ar
Willis-whistlers deyer allers 'way off yander."[8]

Suddenly Uncle Remus paused over one of the dishes, and exclaimed:--

"Gracious en de goodness! W'at kinder doin's is dis Miss Sally done gone
sont us?"

"That," said the little boy, after making an investigation, "is what
mamma calls a floating island."

"Well, den," Uncle Remus remarked, in a relieved tone, "dat's diffunt. I
wuz mos' fear'd it 'uz some er dat ar sillerbug, w'ich a whole jugful
ain't ska'cely 'nuff fer ter make you seem like you dremp 'bout smellin'
dram. Ef I'm gwine ter be fed on foam," continued the old man, by way of
explaining his position on the subject of syllabub, "let it be foam, en
ef I'm gwine ter git dram, lemme git in reach un it w'ile she got some
strenk lef'. Dat's me up an down. W'en it come ter yo' floatin' ilun,
des gimme a hunk er ginger-cake en a mug er 'simmon-beer, en dey won't
fine no nigger w'ats got no slicker feelin's dan w'at I is.

"Miss Sally mighty kuse w'ite 'oman," Uncle Remus went on. "She sendin'
all deze doin's en fixin's down yer, en I 'speck deyer monst'us nice,
but no longer'n las' Chuseday she had all de niggers on de place, big en
little, gwine squallin' 'roun' fer Remus. Hit 'uz Remus yer en Remus
dar, en, lo en beholes, w'en I come ter fine out, Miss Sally want Remus
fer ter whirl in en cook 'er one er deze yer ole-time ash-cakes. She
bleedzd ter have it den en dar; en w'en I git it done, Miss Sally, she
got a glass er buttermilk, en tuck'n sot right flat down on de flo', des
like she useter w'en she wuz little gal." The old man paused,
straightened up, looked at the child over his spectacles, and continued,
with emphasis: "En I be bless ef she ain't eat a hunk er dat ash-cake
mighty nigh ez big ez yo' head, en den she tuck'n make out 't wa'n't
cook right.

"Now, den, honey, all deze done fix. You set over dar, and I'll set over
yer, en 'twix' en 'tween us we'll sample dish yer truck en see w'at is
it Miss Sally done gone en sont us; en w'iles we er makin' 'way wid it,
I'll sorter rustle 'roun' wid my 'membunce, en see ef I kin call ter
min' de tale 'bout how ole Brer Rabbit got 'im a two-story house widout
layin' out much cash."

Uncle Remus stopped talking a little while and pretended to be trying to
remember something,--an effort that was accompanied by a curious humming
sound in his throat. Finally, he brightened up and began:--

"Hit tu'n out one time dat a whole lot er de creeturs tuck a notion dat
dey'd go in coboots wid buil'n' un um a house. Ole Brer B'ar, he was
'mongs' um, en Brer Fox, en Brer Wolf, en Brer 'Coon, en Brer 'Possum. I
won't make sho', but it seem like ter me dat plum down ter ole Brer Mink
'uz 'mongs' um. Leas'ways, dey wuz a whole passel un um, en dey whirl
in, dey did, en dey buil' de house in less'n no time. Brer Rabbit, he
make lak it make he head swim fer ter climb up on de scaffle, en
likewise he say it make 'im ketch de palsy fer ter wuk in de sun, but he
got 'im a squar', en he stuck a pencil behime he year, en he went
'roun' medjun[9] en markin'--medjun en markin'--en he wuz dat busy dat
de yuther creeturs say ter deyse'f he doin' monst'us sight er wuk, en
folks gwine 'long de big road say Brer Rabbit doin' mo' hard wuk dan de
whole kit en bilin' un um. Yit all de time Brer Rabbit ain't doin'
nothin', en he des well bin layin' off in de shade scratchin' de fleas
off'n 'im. De yuther creeturs, dey buil' de house, en, gentermens! she
'uz a fine un, too, mon. She'd 'a' bin a fine un deze days, let 'lone
dem days. She had er upsta'rs en downsta'rs, en chimbleys all 'roun', en
she had rooms fer all de creeturs w'at went inter cahoots en hope make
it.

"Brer Rabbit, he pick out one er de upsta'rs rooms, en he tuck'n' got
'im a gun, en one er deze yer brass cannons, en he tuck'n' put um in dar
w'en de yuther creeturs ain't lookin', en den he tuck'n' got 'im a tub
er nasty slop-water, w'ich likewise he put in dar w'en dey ain't
lookin'. So den, w'en dey git de house all fix, en w'iles dey wuz all
a-settin' in de parlor atter supper, Brer Rabbit, he sorter gap en
stretch hisse'f, en make his 'skuses en say he b'leeve he'll go ter he
room. W'en he git dar, en w'iles all de yuther creeturs wuz a-laughin'
en a-chattin' des ez sociable ez you please, Brer Rabbit, he stick he
head out er de do' er he room en sing out:--

"'Wen a big man like me wanter set down, wharbouts he gwine ter set?'
sezee.

"Den de yuther creeturs dey laugh, en holler back:--

"'Ef big man like you can't set in a cheer, he better set down on de
flo'.'

"'Watch out down dar, den,' sez ole Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'Kaze I'm a
gwine ter set down,' sezee.

"Wid dat, _bang!_ went Brer Rabbit gun. Co'se, dis sorter 'stonish de
creeturs, en dey look 'roun' at one er n'er much ez ter say, W'at in de
name er gracious is dat? Dey lissen en lissen, but dey don't year no mo'
fuss, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' dey got ter chattin' en jabberin' some
mo'. Bimeby, Brer Rabbit stick he head outer he room do', en sing out:--

"'Wen a big man like me wanter sneeze, wharbouts he gwine ter sneeze
at?'

"Den de yuther creeturs, dey tuck'n holler back:--

"'Ef big man like you ain't a-gone gump, he kin sneeze anywhar he
please.'

"'Watch out down dar, den,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'Kaze I'm gwine ter
tu'n loose en sneeze right yer,' sezee.

"Wid dat, Brer Rabbit let off his cannon--_bulderum-m-m!_ De
winder-glass dey shuck en rattle, en de house shuck like she gwine ter
come down, en ole Brer B'ar, he fell out de rockin'-cheer--_kerblump!_
W'en de creeturs git sorter settle, Brer 'Possum en Brer Mink, dey up'n
'low dat Brer Rabbit got sech a monst'us bad cole, dey b'leeve dey'll
step out and git some fresh a'r, but dem yuther creeturs, dey say dey
gwine ter stick it out; en atter w'ile, w'en dey git der h'ar smoove
down, dey 'gun ter jower 'mongs' deyse'f. 'Bout dat time, w'en dey get
in a good way, Brer Rabbit, he sing out:--

"'W'en a big man like me take a chaw terbacker, wharbouts he gwine ter
spit?'

"Den de yuther creeturs, dey holler back, dey did, sorter like deyer
mad:--

"'Big man er little man, spit whar you please.'

"Den Brer Rabbit, he squall out:--

"'Dis de way a big man spit!' en wid dat he tilt over de tub er
slop-water, en w'en de yuther creeturs year it come a-sloshin' down de
sta'r-steps, gentermens! dey des histed deyse'f outer dar. Some un um
went out de back do', en some un um went out de front do', en some un um
fell out de winders; some went one way en some went n'er way; but dey
all went sailin' out."

"But what became of Brother Rabbit?" the little boy asked.

"Brer Rabbit, he des tuck'n shot up de house en fassen de winders, en
den he got ter bed, he did, en pull de coverled up 'roun' he years, en
he sleep like a man w'at ain't owe nobody nuthin'; en needer do he owe
um, kaze ef dem yuther creeturs gwine git skeer'd en run off fum der own
house, w'at bizness is dat er Brer Rabbit? Dat w'at I like ter know."


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Preserves.

[7] In the South, a rain is called a "season," not only by the negroes,
but by many white farmers.

[8] It is a far-away sound that might be identified with one of the
various undertones of silence, but it is palpable enough (if the word
may be used) to have attracted the attention of the humble philosophers
of the old plantation.

[9] Measuring.




VII

MR. LION HUNTS FOR MR. MAN


Uncle Remus sighed heavily as he lifted the trivet on the head of his
walking-cane, and hung it carefully by the side of the griddle in the
cavernous fireplace.

"Folks kin come 'long wid der watchermaycollums," he said presently,
turning to the little boy, who was supplementing his supper by biting
off a chew of shoemaker's-wax, "en likewise dey kin fetch 'roun' der
watziznames. Dey kin walk biggity, en dey kin talk biggity, en mo'n dat,
dey kin feel biggity, but yit all de same deyer gwine ter git kotch up
wid. Dey go 'long en dey go 'long, en den bimeby yer come trouble en
snatch um slonchways, en de mo' bigger w'at dey is, de wusser does dey
git snatched."

The little boy did n't understand this harangue at all, but he
appreciated it because he recognized it as the prelude to a story.

"Dar wuz Mr. Lion," Uncle Remus went on; "he tuck'n sot hisse'f up fer
ter be de boss er all de yuther creeturs, en he feel so biggity dat he
go ro'in' en rampin' 'roun' de neighborhoods wuss'n dat ar speckle bull
w'at you see down at yo' Unk' Jeems Abercrombie place las' year. He went
ro'in' 'roun', he did, en eve'ywhar he go he year talk er Mr. Man. Right
in de middle er he braggin', some un 'ud up'n tell 'im 'bout w'at Mr.
Man done done. Mr. Lion, he say he done dis, en den he year 'bout how
Mr. Man done dat. Hit went on dis a-way twel bimeby Mr. Lion shake he
mane, he did, en he up'n say dat he gwine ter s'arch 'roun' en 'roun',
en high en low, fer ter see ef he can't fine Mr. Man, en he 'low, Mr.
Lion did, dat w'en he do fine 'im, he gwine ter tu'n in en gin Mr. Man
sech n'er larrupin' w'at nobody ain't never had yit. Dem yuther
creeturs, dey tuck'n tell Mr. Lion dat he better let Mr. Man 'lone, but
Mr. Lion say he gwine ter hunt 'im down spite er all dey kin do.

"Sho' nuff, atter he done tuck some res', Mr. Lion, he put out down de
big road. Sun, she rise up en shine hot, but Mr. Lion, he keep on; win',
hit come up en blow, en fill de elements full er dust; rain, hit drif'
up en drizzle down; but Mr. Lion, he keep on. Bimeby, w'iles he gwine on
dis a-way, wid he tongue hangin' out, he come up wid Mr. Steer, grazin'
'long on de side er de road. Mr. Lion, he up'n ax 'im howdy, he did,
monst'us perlite, en Mr. Steer likewise he bow en scrape en show his
manners. Den Mr. Lion, he do lak he wanter have some confab wid 'im, en
he up'n say, sezee:--

"'Is dey anybody 'roun' in deze parts name Mr. Man?' sezee.

"'Tooby sho' dey is,' sez Mr. Steer, sezee; 'anybody kin tell you dat. I
knows 'im mighty well,' sezee.

"'Well, den, he de ve'y chap I'm atter,' sezee.

"'W'at mought be yo' bizness wid Mr. Man?' sez Mr. Steer, sezee.

"'I done come dis long ways fer ter gin 'im a larrupin',' sez Mr. Lion,
sezee. 'I'm gwine ter show 'im who de boss er deze neighborhoods,'
sezee, en wid dat Mr. Lion, he shake he mane, en switch he tail, en
strut up en down wuss'n one er deze yer town niggers.

"'Well, den, ef dat w'at you come atter,' sez Mr. Steer, sezee, 'you des
better slew yo'se'f 'roun' en p'int yo' nose todes home, kaze you fixin'
fer ter git in sho' 'nuff trouble,' sezee.

"'I'm gwine ter larrup dat same Mr. Man,' sez Mr. Lion, sezee; 'I done
come fer dat, en dat w'at I'm gwine ter do,' sezee.

"Mr. Steer, he draw long breff, he did, en chaw he cud slow, en atter
w'ile he say, sezee:--

"'You see me stannin' yer front er yo' eyes, en you see how big I is, en
w'at long, sharp hawns I got. Well, big ez my heft is, en sharp dough my
hawns be, yit Mr. Man, he come out yer en he ketch me, en he put me und'
a yoke, en he hitch me up in a kyart, en he make me haul he wood, en he
drive me anywhar he min' ter. He do dat. Better let Mr. Man 'lone,'
sezee. 'If you fool 'long wid 'im, watch out dat he don't hitch you up
en have you prancin' 'roun' yer pullin' he kyart,' sezee.

"Mr. Lion, he fotch a roar, en put out down de road, en 't wa'n't so
mighty long 'fo' he come up wid Mr. Hoss, w'ich he wuz a-nibblin' en
a-croppin' de grass. Mr. Lion make hisse'f know'd, en den he tuck'n ax
Mr. Hoss do he know Mr. Man.

"'Mighty well,' sez Mr. Hoss, sezee, 'en mo'n dat, I bin a-knowin' 'im a
long time. W'at you want wid Mr. Man?' sezee.

"'I'm a-huntin' 'im up fer ter larrup 'im,' sez Mr. Lion, sezee. 'Dey
tells me he mighty stuck up,' sezee, 'en I gwine take 'im down a peg,'
sezee.

"Mr. Hoss look at Mr. Lion like he sorry, en bimeby he up'n say:--

"'I 'speck you better let Mr. Man 'lone,' sezee. 'You see how big I is,
en how much strenk w'at I got, en how tough my foots is,' sezee; 'well
dish yer Mr. Man, he kin take'n take me en hitch me up in he buggy, en
make me haul 'im all 'roun', en den he kin take'n fassen me ter de plow
en make me break up all his new groun',' sezee. 'You better go 'long
back home. Fus' news you know, Mr. Man'll have you breakin' up his new
groun',' sezee.

"Spite er all dis, Mr. Lion, he shake he mane en say he gwine ter larrup
Mr. Man anyhow. He went on down de big road, he did, en bimeby he come
up wid Mr. Jack Sparrer, settin' up in de top er de tree. Mr. Jack
Sparrer, he whirl 'roun' en chirp, en flutter 'bout up dar, en
'pariently make a great 'miration.

"'Heyo yer!' sezee; 'who'd er 'speckted fer ter see Mr. Lion 'way down
yer in dis neighborhoods?' sezee. 'Whar you gwine, Mr. Lion?' sezee.

"Den Mr. Lion ax ef Mr. Jack Sparrer know Mr. Man, en Mr. Jack Sparrer
say he know Mr. Man mighty well. Den Mr. Lion, he ax ef Mr. Jack Sparrer
know whar he stay, w'ich Mr. Jack Sparrer say dat he do. Mr. Lion ax
wharbouts is Mr. Man, en Mr. Jack Sparrer say he right 'cross dar in de
new groun', en he up'n ax Mr. Lion w'at he want wid 'im, w'ich Mr. Lion
'spon' dat he gwine larrup Mr. Man, en wid dat, Mr. Jack Sparrer, he
up'n say, sezee:--

"'You better let Mr. Man 'lone. You see how little I is, en likewise how
high I kin fly; yit, 'spite er dat, Mr. Man, he kin fetch me down w'en
he git good en ready,' sezee. 'You better tuck yo' tail en put out
home,' sez Mr. Jack Sparrer, sezee, 'kaze bimeby Mr. Man 'll fetch you
down,' sezee.

"But Mr. Lion des vow he gwine atter Mr. Man, en go he would, en go he
did. He ain't never see Mr. Man, Mr. Lion ain't, en he dunner w'at he
look lak, but he go on todes de new groun'. Sho' 'nuff, dar wuz Mr. Man,
out dar maulin' rails fer ter make 'im a fence. He 'uz rippin' up de
butt cut, Mr. Man wuz, en he druv in his wedge en den he stuck in de
glut. He 'uz splittin' 'way, w'en bimeby he year rustlin' out dar in de
bushes, en he look up, en dar wuz Mr. Lion. Mr. Lion ax 'im do he know
Mr. Man, en Mr. Man 'low dat he know 'im mo' samer dan ef he wer' his
twin brer. Den Mr. Lion 'low dat he wanter see' im, en den Mr. Man say,
sezee, dat ef Mr. Lion will come stick his paw in de split fer ter hol'
de log open twel he git back, he go fetch Mr. Man. Mr. Lion he march up
en slap his paw in de place, en den Mr. Man, he tuck'n' knock de glut
out, en de split close up, en dar Mr. Lion wuz. Mr. Man, he stan' off en
say, sezee:--

"'Ef you'd 'a' bin a steer er hoss, you mought er run'd, en ef you'd
'a' bin a sparrer, you mought er flew'd, but yer you is, en you kotch
yo'se'f,' sezee.

"Wid dat, Mr. Man sa'nter out in de bushes en cut 'im a hick'ry, en he
let in on Mr. Lion, en he frail en frail 'im twel frailin' un 'im wuz a
sin. En down ter dis day," continued Uncle Remus, in a tone calculated
to destroy all doubt, "you can't git no Lion ter come up whar dey 's a
Man a-maulin' rails en put he paw in de split. Dat you can't!"




VIII

THE STORY OF THE PIGS


Uncle Remus relapsed into silence again, and the little boy, with
