
THERE were once upon a time a King and a Queen who lived happily
together, and they had twelve children, all of whom were boys. One day
the King said to his wife:

'If our thirteenth child is a girl, all her twelve brothers must die, so
that she may be very rich and the kingdom hers alone.'

Then he ordered twelve coffins to be made, and filled them with
shavings, and placed a little pillow in each. These he put away in an
empty room, and, giving the key to his wife, he bade her tell no one of
it.

The Queen grieved over the sad fate of her sons and refused to be
comforted, so much so that the youngest boy, who was always with her,
and whom she had christened Benjamin, said to her one day:

'Dear mother, why are you so sad?'

'My child,' she answered, 'I may not tell you the reason.'

But he left her no peace, till she went and unlocked the room and showed
him the twelve coffins filled with shavings, and with the little pillow
laid in each.

Then she said: 'My dearest Benjamin, your father has had these coffins
made for you and your eleven brothers, because if I bring a girl into
the world you are all to be killed and buried in them.'

She wept bitterly as she spoke, but her son comforted her and said:

'Don't cry, dear mother; we'll manage to escape somehow, and will fly
for our lives.'

'Yes,' replied his mother, 'that is what you must do--go with your
eleven brothers out into the wood, and let one of you always sit on the
highest tree you can find, keeping watch on the tower of the castle. If
I give birth to a little son I will wave a white flag, and then you may
safely return; but if I give birth to a little daughter I will wave a
red flag, which will warn you to fly away as quickly as you can, and may
the kind Heaven have pity on you. Every night I will get up and pray for
you, in winter that you may always have a fire to warm yourselves by,
and in summer that you may not languish in the heat.'

Then she blessed her sons and they set out into the wood. They found a
very high oak tree, and there they sat, turn about, keeping their eyes
always fixed on the castle tower. On the twelfth day, when the turn came
to Benjamin, he noticed a flag waving in the air, but alas! it was not
white, but blood red, the sign which told them they must all die. When
the brothers heard this they were very angry, and said:

'Shall we forsooth suffer death for the sake of a wretched girl? Let us
swear vengeance, and vow that wherever and whenever we shall meet one of
her sex, she shall die at our hands.'

Then they went their way deeper into the wood, and in the middle of it,
where it was thickest and darkest, they came upon a little enchanted
house which stood empty.

'Here,' they said, 'let us take up our abode, and you, Benjamin, you are
the youngest and weakest, you shall stay at home and keep house for us;
we others will go out and fetch food.' So they went forth into the wood,
and shot hares and roe-deer, birds and wood-pigeons, and any other game
they came across. They always brought their spoils home to Benjamin, who
soon learnt to make them into dainty dishes. So they lived for ten years
in this little house, and the time slipped merrily away.

In the meantime their little sister at home was growing up quickly.
She was kind-hearted and of a fair countenance, and she had a gold star
right in the middle of her forehead. One day a big washing was going
on at the palace, and the girl looking down from her window saw twelve
men's shirts hanging up to dry, and asked her mother:

'Who in the world do these shirts belong to? Surely they are far too
small for my father?'

And the Queen answered sadly: 'Dear child, they belong to your twelve
brothers.'

'But where are my twelve brothers?' said the girl. 'I have never even
heard of them.'

'Heaven alone knows in what part of the wide world they are wandering,'
replied her mother.

Then she took the girl and opened the locked-up room; she showed her the
twelve coffins filled with shavings, and with the little pillow laid in
each.

'These coffins,' she said, 'were intended for your brothers, but they
stole secretly away before you were born.'

Then she to tell her all that had happened, and when she had finished
her daughter said:

'Do not cry, dearest mother; I will go and seek my brothers till I find
them.'

So she took the twelve shirts and went on straight into the middle of
the big wood. She walked all day long, and came in the evening to the
little enchanted house. She stepped in and found a youth who, marvelling
at her beauty, at the royal robes she wore, and at the golden star on
her forehead, asked her where she came from and whither she was going.

'I am a Princess,' she answered, 'and am seeking for my twelve brothers.
I mean to wander as far as the blue sky stretches over the earth till I
find them.'

Then she showed him the twelve shirts which she had taken with her, and
Benjamin saw that it must be his sister, and said:

'I am Benjamin, your youngest brother.'

So they wept for joy, and kissed and hugged each other again and again.
After a time Benjamin said:

'Dear sister, there is still a little difficulty, for we had all agreed
that any girl we met should die at our hands, because it was for the
sake of a girl that we had to leave our kingdom.'

'But,' she replied, 'I will gladly die if by that means I can restore my
twelve brothers to their own.'

'No,' he answered, 'there is no need for that; only go and hide under
that tub till our eleven brothers come in, and I'll soon make matters
right with them.'

She did as she was bid, and soon the others came home from the chase and
sat down to supper.

'Well, Benjamin, what's the news?' they asked. But he replied, 'I like
that; have you nothing to tell me?'

'No,' they answered.

Then he said: 'Well, now, you've been out in the wood all the day and
I've stayed quietly at home, and all the same I know more than you do.'

'Then tell us,' they cried.

But he answered: 'Only on condition that you promise faithfully that the
first girl we meet shall not be killed.'

'She shall be spared,' they promised, 'only tell us the news.'

Then Benjamin said: 'Our sister is here!' and he lifted up the tub and
the Princess stepped forward, with her royal robes and with the golden
star on her forehead, looking so lovely and sweet and charming that they
all fell in love with her on the spot.

They arranged that she should stay at home with Benjamin and help him
in the house work, while the rest of the brothers went out into the wood
and shot hares and roe-deer, birds and wood-pigeons. And Benjamin and
his sister cooked their meals for them. She gathered herbs to cook the
vegetables in, fetched the wood, and watched the pots on the fire, and
always when her eleven brothers returned she had their supper ready for
them. Besides this, she kept the house in order, tidied all the rooms,
and made herself so generally useful that her brothers were delighted,
and they all lived happily together.

One day the two at home prepared a fine feast, and when they were all
assembled they sat down and ate and drank and made merry.

Now there was a little garden round the enchanted house, in which grew
twelve tall lilies. The girl, wishing to please her brothers, plucked
the twelve flowers, meaning to present one to each of them as they sat
at supper. But hardly had she plucked the flowers when her brothers
were turned into twelve ravens, who flew croaking over the wood, and the
house and garden vanished also.

So the poor girl found herself left all alone in the wood, and as she
looked round her she noticed an old woman standing close beside her, who
said:

'My child, what have you done? Why didn't you leave the flowers alone?
They were your twelve brothers. Now they are changed for ever into
ravens.'

The girl asked, sobbing: 'Is there no means of setting them free?'

'No,' said the old woman, 'there is only one way in the whole world, and
that is so difficult that you won't free them by it, for you would have
to be dumb and not laugh for seven years, and if you spoke a single
word, though but an hour were wanting to the time, your silence would
all have been in vain, and that one word would slay your brothers.'

Then the girl said to herself: 'If that is all I am quite sure I can
free my brothers.' So she searched for a high tree, and when she had
found one she climbed up it and spun all day long, never laughing or
speaking one word.

Now it happened one day that a King who was hunting in the wood had a
large greyhound, who ran sniffing to the tree on which the girl sat, and
jumped round it, yelping and barking furiously. The King's attention was
attracted, and when he looked up and beheld the beautiful Princess with
the golden star on her forehead, he was so enchanted by her beauty that
he asked her on the spot to be his wife. She gave no answer, but nodded
slightly with her head. Then he climbed up the tree himself, lifted her
down, put her on his horse and bore her home to his palace.

The marriage was celebrated with much pomp and ceremony, but the bride
neither spoke nor laughed.

When they had lived a few years happily together, the King's mother, who
was a wicked old woman, began to slander the young Queen, and said to
the King:

'She is only a low-born beggar maid that you have married; who knows
what mischief she is up to? If she is deaf and can't speak, she might
at least laugh; depend upon it, those who don't laugh have a bad
conscience.' At first the King paid no heed to her words, but the old
woman harped so long on the subject, and accused the young Queen of
so many bad things, that at last he let himself be talked over, and
condemned his beautiful wife to death.

So a great fire was lit in the courtyard of the palace, where she was
to be burnt, and the King watched the proceedings from an upper window,
crying bitterly the while, for he still loved his wife dearly. But just
as she had been bound to the stake, and the flames were licking her
garments with their red tongues, the very last moment of the seven years
had come. Then a sudden rushing sound was heard in the air, and twelve
ravens were seen flying overhead. They swooped downwards, and as soon
as they touched the ground they turned into her twelve brothers, and she
knew that she had freed them.

They quenched the flames and put out the fire, and, unbinding their dear
sister from the stake, they kissed and hugged her again and again. And
now that she was able to open her mouth and speak, she told the King why
she had been dumb and not able to laugh.

The King rejoiced greatly when he heard she was innocent, and they all
lived happily ever afterwards.(22)

(22) Grimm.




RAPUNZEL

ONCE upon a time there lived a man and his wife who were very unhappy
because they had no children. These good people had a little window at
the back of their house, which looked into the most lovely garden, full
of all manner of beautiful flowers and vegetables; but the garden was
surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to enter it, for it belonged
to a witch of great power, who was feared by the whole world. One day
the woman stood at the window overlooking the garden, and saw there a
bed full of the finest rampion: the leaves looked so fresh and green
that she longed to eat them. The desire grew day by day, and just
because she knew she couldn't possibly get any, she pined away and
became quite pale and wretched. Then her husband grew alarmed and said:

'What ails you, dear wife?'

'Oh,' she answered, 'if I don't get some rampion to eat out of the
garden behind the house, I know I shall die.'

The man, who loved her dearly, thought to himself, 'Come! rather than
let your wife die you shall fetch her some rampion, no matter the
cost.' So at dusk he climbed over the wall into the witch's garden, and,
hastily gathering a handful of rampion leaves, he returned with them
to his wife. She made them into a salad, which tasted so good that her
longing for the forbidden food was greater than ever. If she were to
know any peace of mind, there was nothing for it but that her husband
should climb over the garden wall again, and fetch her some more. So
at dusk over he got, but when he reached the other side he drew back in
terror, for there, standing before him, was the old witch.

'How dare you,' she said, with a wrathful glance, 'climb into my garden
and steal my rampion like a common thief? You shall suffer for your
foolhardiness.'

'Oh!' he implored, 'pardon my presumption; necessity alone drove me to
the deed. My wife saw your rampion from her window, and conceived such
a desire for it that she would certainly have died if her wish had not
been gratified.' Then the Witch's anger was a little appeased, and she
said:

'If it's as you say, you may take as much rampion away with you as you
like, but on one condition only--that you give me the child your wife
will shortly bring into the world. All shall go well with it, and I will
look after it like a mother.'

The man in his terror agreed to everything she asked, and as soon as
the child was born the Witch appeared, and having given it the name of
Rapunzel, which is the same as rampion, she carried it off with her.

Rapunzel was the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was twelve
years old the Witch shut her up in a tower, in the middle of a great
wood, and the tower had neither stairs nor doors, only high up at the
very top a small window. When the old Witch wanted to get in she stood
underneath and called out:


     'Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
     Let down your golden hair,'


for Rapunzel had wonderful long hair, and it was as fine as spun gold.
Whenever she heard the Witch's voice she unloosed her plaits, and let
her hair fall down out of the window about twenty yards below, and the
old Witch climbed up by it.

After they had lived like this for a few years, it happened one day that
a Prince was riding through the wood and passed by the tower. As he
drew near it he heard someone singing so sweetly that he stood still
spell-bound, and listened. It was Rapunzel in her loneliness trying to
while away the time by letting her sweet voice ring out into the wood.
The Prince longed to see the owner of the voice, but he sought in vain
for a door in the tower. He rode home, but he was so haunted by the song
he had heard that he returned every day to the wood and listened. One
day, when he was standing thus behind a tree, he saw the old Witch
approach and heard her call out:


     'Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
     Let down your golden hair.'


Then Rapunzel let down her plaits, and the Witch climbed up by them.

'So that's the staircase, is it?' said the Prince. 'Then I too will
climb it and try my luck.'

So on the following day, at dusk, he went to the foot of the tower and
cried:

     'Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
     Let down your golden hair,'

and as soon as she had let it down the Prince climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man came in, for she
had never seen one before; but the Prince spoke to her so kindly, and
told her at once that his heart had been so touched by her singing, that
he felt he should know no peace of mind till he had seen her. Very
soon Rapunzel forgot her fear, and when he asked her to marry him she
consented at once. 'For,' she thought, 'he is young and handsome, and
I'll certainly be happier with him than with the old Witch.' So she put
her hand in his and said:

'Yes, I will gladly go with you, only how am I to get down out of the
tower? Every time you come to see me you must bring a skein of silk with
you, and I will make a ladder of them, and when it is finished I will
climb down by it, and you will take me away on your horse.'

They arranged that till the ladder was ready, he was to come to her
every evening, because the old woman was with her during the day. The
old Witch, of course, knew nothing of what was going on, till one day
Rapunzel, not thinking of what she was about, turned to the Witch and
said:

'How is it, good mother, that you are so much harder to pull up than the
young Prince? He is always with me in a moment.'

'Oh! you wicked child,' cried the Witch. 'What is this I hear? I thought
I had hidden you safely from the whole world, and in spite of it you
have managed to deceive me.'

In her wrath she seized Rapunzel's beautiful hair, wound it round and
round her left hand, and then grasping a pair of scissors in her right,
snip snap, off it came, and the beautiful plaits lay on the ground. And,
worse than this, she was so hard-hearted that she took Rapunzel to
a lonely desert place, and there left her to live in loneliness and
misery.

But on the evening of the day in which she had driven poor Rapunzel
away, the Witch fastened the plaits on to a hook in the window, and when
the Prince came and called out:

     'Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
     Let down your golden hair,'

she let them down, and the Prince climbed up as usual, but instead
of his beloved Rapunzel he found the old Witch, who fixed her evil,
glittering eyes on him, and cried mockingly:

'Ah, ah! you thought to find your lady love, but the pretty bird has
flown and its song is dumb; the cat caught it, and will scratch out
your eyes too. Rapunzel is lost to you for ever--you will never see her
more.'

The Prince was beside himself with grief, and in his despair he jumped
right down from the tower, and, though he escaped with his life, the
thorns among which he fell pierced his eyes out. Then he wandered, blind
and miserable, through the wood, eating nothing but roots and berries,
and weeping and lamenting the loss of his lovely bride. So he wandered
about for some years, as wretched and unhappy as he could well be, and
at last he came to the desert place where Rapunzel was living. Of a
sudden he heard a voice which seemed strangely familiar to him. He
walked eagerly in the direction of the sound, and when he was quite
close, Rapunzel recognised him and fell on his neck and wept. But two
of her tears touched his eyes, and in a moment they became quite clear
again, and he saw as well as he had ever done. Then he led her to his
kingdom, where they were received and welcomed with great joy, and they
lived happily ever after.(23)

(23) Grimm.




THE NETTLE SPINNER

I

ONCE upon a time there lived at Quesnoy, in Flanders, a great lord whose
name was Burchard, but whom the country people called Burchard the Wolf.
Now Burchard had such a wicked, cruel heart, that it was whispered how
he used to harness his peasants to the plough, and force them by blows
from his whip to till his land with naked feet.

His wife, on the other hand, was always tender and pitiful to the poor
and miserable.

Every time that she heard of another misdeed of her husband's she
secretly went to repair the evil, which caused her name to be blessed
throughout the whole country-side. This Countess was adored as much as
the Count was hated.


II


One day when he was out hunting the Count passed through a forest, and
at the door of a lonely cottage he saw a beautiful girl spinning hemp.

'What is your name?' he asked her.

'Renelde, my lord.'

'You must get tired of staying in such a lonely place?'

'I am accustomed to it, my lord, and I never get tired of it.'

'That may be so; but come to the castle, and I will make you lady's maid
to the Countess.'

'I cannot do that, my lord. I have to look after my grandmother, who is
very helpless.'

'Come to the castle, I tell you. I shall expect you this evening,' and
he went on his way.

But Renelde, who was betrothed to a young wood-cutter called Guilbert,
had no intention of obeying the Count, and she had, besides, to take
care of her grandmother.

Three days later the Count again passed by.

'Why didn't you come?' he asked the pretty spinner.

'I told you, my lord, that I have to look after my grandmother.' 'Come
to-morrow, and I will make you lady-in-waiting to the Countess,' and he
went on his way.

This offer produced no more effect than the other, and Renelde did not
go to the castle.

'If you will only come,' said the Count to her when next he rode by, 'I
will send away the Countess, and will marry you.'

But two years before, when Renelde's mother was dying of a long illness,
the Countess had not forgotten them, but had given help when they sorely
needed it. So even if the Count had really wished to marry Renelde, she
would always have refused.


III


Some weeks passed before Burchard appeared again.

Renelde hoped she had got rid of him, when one day he stopped at the
door, his duck-gun under his arm and his game-bag on his shoulder. This
time Renelde was spinning not hemp, but flax.

'What are you spinning?' he asked in a rough voice.

'My wedding shift, my lord.'

'You are going to be married, then?'

'Yes, my lord, by your leave.'

For at that time no peasant could marry without the leave of his master.

'I will give you leave on one condition. Do you see those tall nettles
