knowledge of the arrangements of the different rooms helped them to
identify the various articles. Here was a bed, there a box of
closely-packed linen, of which only the outer part was burned, the
interior bursting into flames as they turned it over; here was the
storeroom, with its heaps of half-burned flour where the sacks had
stood.

In half an hour they were able to say with tolerable certainty that
no human beings had been burned, for the bodies could not have been
wholly consumed in such a speedy conflagration.

"Perhaps they have all been taken prisoners," Hubert suggested, as
with a sigh of relief they concluded their search, and turned from
the spot.

Mr. Hardy shook his head. He was too well acquainted with the
habits of the Indians to think such a thing possible. Just at this
moment Dash, who had followed them unnoticed during their ride, and
who had been ranging about uneasily while they had been occupied by
the search, set up a piteous howling. All started and looked round.
The dog was standing by the edge of the ditch which had been dug
outside the fence. His head was raised high in air, and he was
giving vent to prolonged and mournful howls.

All felt that the terrible secret was there. The boys turned
ghastly pale, and they felt that not for worlds could they approach
to examine the dreadful mystery.

Mr. Hardy was almost as much affected.

Mr. Herries looked at his friend, and then said gravely to Mr.
Hardy, "Do you wait here, Mr. Hardy; we will go on."

As the friends left them the boys turned away, and leaning against
their horses, covered their eyes with their hands. They dared not
look round. Mr. Hardy stood still for a minute, but the agony of
suspense was too great for him. He started off at a run, came up to
his friends, and with them hurried on to the fence.

Not as yet could they see into the ditch. At ordinary times the
fence would have been an awkward place to climb over; now they
hardly knew how they scrambled over, and stood by the side of the
ditch. They looked down, and Mr. Hardy gave a short, gasping cry,
and caught at the fence for support.

Huddled together in the ditch was a pile of dead bodies, and among
them peeped out a piece of a female dress. Anxious to relieve their
friend's agonizing suspense, the young men leaped down into the
ditch, and began removing the upper bodies from the ghastly pile.

First were the two men employed in the house; then came Mr. Mercer;
then the two children and an old woman-servant; below them were the
bodies of Mrs. Mercer and her brother. There were no more. Ethel
was not among them.

When first he had heard of the massacre Mr. Hardy had said, "Better
dead than carried off," but the relief to his feelings was so great
as the last body was turned over, and that it was evident that the
child was not there, that he would have fallen had not Mr. Herries
hastened to climb up and support him, at the same time crying out
to the boys, "She is not here."

Charley and Hubert turned toward each other, and burst into tears
of thankfulness and joy. The suspense had been almost too much for
them, and Hubert felt so sick and faint that he was forced to lie
down for awhile, while Charley went forward to the others. He was
terribly shocked at the discovery of the murder of the entire
party, as they had cherished the hope that Mrs. Mercer at least
would have been carried off. As, however, she had been murdered,
while it was pretty evident that Ethel had been spared, or her body
would have been found with the others, it was supposed that poor
Mrs. Mercer had been shot accidentally, perhaps in the endeavor to
save her children.

The bodies were now taken from the ditch, and laid side by side
until the other settlers should arrive. It was not long before they
began to assemble, riding up in little groups of twos and threes.
Rage and indignation were upon all their faces at the sight of the
devastated house, and their feelings were redoubled when they found
that the whole of the family, who were so justly liked and
esteemed, were dead. The Edwards and the Jamiesons were among the
earliest arrivals, bringing the Gaucho Martinez with them. Perez,
too, shortly after arrived from Canterbury, he having been out on
the farm when his master left.

Although all these events have taken some time to relate, it was
still early in the day. The news had arrived at six, and the
messengers were sent off half an hour later. The Hardys had set out
before eight, and had reached the scene of the catastrophe in half
an hour. It was nine o'clock when the bodies were found, and half
an hour after this friends began to assemble. By ten o'clock a
dozen more had arrived, and several more could be seen in the
distance coming along at full gallop to the spot.

"I think," Mr. Hardy said, "that we had better employ ourselves,
until the others arrive, in burying the remains of our poor
friends."

There was a general murmur of assent, and all separated to look for
tools. Two or three spades were found thrown down in the garden,
where a party had been at work the other day. And then all looked
to Mr. Hardy.

"I think," he said, "we cannot do better than lay them where their
house stood. The place will never be the site of another
habitation. Any one who may buy the property would choose another
place for his house than the scene of this awful tragedy. The gate
once locked, the fence will keep out animals for very many years."

A grave was accordingly dug in the center of the space once
occupied by the house. In this the bodies of Mr. Mercer and his
family were laid. And Mr. Hardy having solemnly pronounced such
parts of the burial service as he remembered over them, all
standing by bareheaded, and stern with suppressed sorrow, the earth
was filled in over the spot where a father, mother, brother, and
two children lay together. Another grave was at the same time dug
near, and in this the bodies of the three servants whose remains
had been found with the others were laid.

By this time it was eleven o'clock, and the number of those present
had reached twenty. The greater portion of them were English, but
there were also three Germans, a Frenchman, and four Gauchos, all
accustomed to Indian warfare.

"How long do you think it will be before all who intend to come can
join us?" Mr. Hardy asked.

There was a pause; then one of the Jamiesons said:

"Judging by the time your message reached us, you must have set off
before seven. Most of us, on the receipt of the message, forwarded
it by fresh messengers on further; but of course some delay
occurred in so doing, especially as many of us may probably have
been out on the plains when the message arrived. The persons to
whom we sent might also have been out. Our friends who would be
likely to obey the summons at once all live within fifteen miles or
so. That makes thirty miles, going and returning. Allowing for the
loss of time I have mentioned, we should allow five hours. That
would bring it on to twelve o'clock."

There was a general murmur of assent.

"In that case," Mr. Hardy said, "I propose that we eat a meal as
hearty as we can before starting. Charley, tell Terence to bring
the horses with the provisions here."

The animals were now brought up, and Mr. Hardy found that, in
addition to the charqui and biscuit, Mrs. Hardy had sent a large
supply of cold meat which happened to be in the larder, some bread,
a large stock of tea and sugar, a kettle, and some tin mugs.

The cold meat and bread afforded an ample meal, which was much
needed by those who had come away without breakfast.

By twelve o'clock six more had arrived, the last comer being Mr.
Percy. Each newcomer was filled with rage and horror upon hearing
of the awful tragedy which had been enacted.

At twelve o'clock exactly Mr. Hardy rose to his feet. "My friends,"
he said, "I thank you all for so promptly answering to my summons.
I need say no words to excite your indignation at the massacre that
has taken place here. You know, too, that my child has been carried
away. I intend, with my sons and my friends from Canterbury, going
in search of her into the Indian country. My first object is to
secure her, my second to avenge my murdered friends. A heavy
lesson, too, given the Indians in their own country, will teach
them that they cannot with impunity commit their depredations upon
us. Unless such a lesson is given, a life on the plains will become
so dangerous that we must give up our settlements. At the same
time, I do not conceal from you that the expedition is a most
dangerous one. We are entering a country of which we know nothing.
The Indians are extremely numerous, and are daily becoming better
armed. The time we may be away is altogether vague; for if it is a
year I do not return until I have found my child. I know that there
is not a man here who would not gladly help to rescue Ethel--not
one who does not long to avenge our murdered friends. At the same
time, some of you have ties, wives and children, whom you may not
consider yourselves justified in leaving, even upon an occasion
like this. Some of you, I know, will accompany me; but if any one
feels any doubts, from the reasons I have stated--if any one
considers that he has no right to run this tremendous risk--let him
say so at once, and I shall respect his feelings, and my friendship
and good-will will in no way be diminished."

As Mr. Hardy ceased, his eye wandered round the circle of
stalwart-looking figures around him, and rested upon the Jamiesons.
No one answered for a moment, and then the elder of the brothers
spoke:

"Mr. Hardy, it was right and kind of you to say that any who might
elect to stay behind would not forfeit your respect and esteem, but
I for one say that he would deservedly forfeit his own. We have all
known and esteemed the Mercers. We have all known, and I may say,
loved you and your family. From you we have one and all received
very great kindness and the warmest hospitality. We all know and
love the dear child who has been carried away; and I say that he
who stays behind is unworthy of the name of a man. For myself and
brother, I say that if we fall in this expedition--if we never set
eyes upon our wives again--we shall die satisfied that we have only
done our duty. We are with you to the death."

A loud and general cheer broke from the whole party as the usually
quiet Scotchman thus energetically expressed himself. And each man
in turn came up to Mr. Hardy and grasped his hand, saying, "Yours
till death."

Mr. Hardy was too much affected to reply for a short time; then he
briefly but heartily expressed his thanks. After which he went on:
"Now to business. I have here about three hundred pounds of
charqui. Let every man take ten pounds, as nearly as he can guess.
There are also two pounds of biscuit a man. The tea, sugar, and
tobacco, the kettle, and eighty pounds of meat, I will put on to a
spare horse, which Terence will lead. If it is well packed, the
animal will be able to travel as quickly as we can."

There was a general muster round the provisions. Each man took his
allotted share. The remainder was packed in two bundles, and
secured firmly upon either side of the spare horse; the tobacco,
sugar, and tea being enveloped in a hide, and placed securely
between them, and the kettle placed at the top of all. Then,
mounting their horses, the troop sallied out; and, as Mr. Hardy
watched them start, he felt that in fair fight by day they could
hold their own against ten times their number of Indians.

Each man, with the exception of the young Hardys, who had their
Colt's carbines, had a long rifle; in addition to which all had
pistols--most of them having revolvers, the use of which, since the
Hardys had first tried them with such deadly effect upon the
pampas, had become very general among the English settlers. Nearly
all were young, with the deep sunburned hue gained by exposure on
the plains. Every man had his poncho--a sort of native blanket,
used either as a cloak or for sleeping in at will--rolled up before
him on his saddle. It would have been difficult to find a more
serviceable-looking set of men; and the expression of their faces,
as they took their last look at the grave of the Mercers, boded
very ill for any Indian who might fall into their clutches.




CHAPTER XV.

THE PAMPAS ON FIRE.


The party started at a canter--the pace which they knew their
horses would be able to keep up for the longest time--breaking
every half-hour or so into a walk for ten minutes, to give them
breathing time. All were well mounted on strong, serviceable
animals; but these had not in all cases been bought specially for
speed, as had those of the Hardys. It was evident that the chase
would be a long one. The Indians had twelve hours' start; they were
much lighter men than the whites, and carried less additional
weight. Their horses, therefore, could travel as fast and as far as
those of their pursuers. The sheep would, it is true, be an
encumbrance; the cattle could scarcely be termed so; and it was
probable that the first day they would make a journey of fifty or
sixty miles, traveling at a moderate pace only, as they would know
that no instant pursuit could take place. Indeed their strength,
which the peon had estimated at five hundred men, would render them
to a certain extent careless, as upon an open plain the charge of
this number of men would sweep away any force which could be
collected short of obtaining a strong body of troops from Rosario.

For the next two days it was probable that they would make as long
and speedy journeys as the animals could accomplish. After that,
being well in their own country, they would cease to travel
rapidly, as no pursuit had ever been attempted in former instances.

There was no difficulty in following the track. Mr. Mercer had
possessed nearly a thousand cattle and five thousand sheep, and the
ground was trampled, in a broad, unmistakable line. Once or twice
Mr. Hardy consulted his compass. The trail ran southwest by west.

There was not much talking. The whole party were too impressed with
the terrible scene they had witnessed, and the tremendously
hazardous nature of the enterprise they had undertaken, to indulge
in general conversation. Gradually, however, the steady, rapid
motion, the sense of strength and reliance in themselves and each
other, lessened the somber expression, and a general talk began,
mostly upon Indian fights, in which most of the older settlers had
at one time or other taken a part.

Mr. Hardy took a part in and encouraged this conversation. He knew
how necessary, in an expedition of this sort, it was to keep up the
spirits of all engaged; and he endeavored, therefore, to shake off
his own heavy weight of care, and to give animation and life to
them all.

The spirits of the younger men rose rapidly, and insensibly the
pace was increased, until Mr. Hardy, as leader of the party, was
compelled to recall to them the necessity of saving their animals,
many of which had already come from ten to fifteen miles before
arriving at the rendezvous at the Mercers'.

After three hours' steady riding they arrived at the banks of a
small stream. There Mr. Hardy called a halt, for the purpose of
resting the animals.

"I think," he said, "that we must have done twenty-five miles. We
will give them an hour's rest, and then do another fifteen. Some of
them have already done forty, and it will not do to knock them up
the first day."

Girths were loosened, and the horses were at work cropping the
sweet grass near the water's edge. The whole party threw themselves
down on a sloping bank, pipes were taken out and lit, and the
probable direction of the chase discussed.

In a short time Charley rose, and saying, "I will see if I can get
anything better than dried meat for supper," exchanged his rifle
for Mr. Hardy's double-barreled gun, which was carried by Terence,
and whistling for the retriever, strolled off up the stream. In ten
minutes the double-barrels were heard at a short distance, and a
quarter of an hour afterward again, but this time faintly. Ten
minutes before the hour was up he appeared, wiping the perspiration
from his face, with seven and a half brace of plump duck.

"They were all killed in four shots," he said, as he threw them
down. "They were asleep in the pools, and I let fly right into the
middle of them before they heard me."

There was a general feeling of satisfaction at the sight of the
birds, which were tied in couples, and fastened on the horses.

