brownish-yellow smoke rendering them easily distinguishable from the
sudden puffs of white vapour caused by the explosion of the shrapnel
shells of the artillery. How the battle was going was only known from
the wounded men brought down from the front. The reports at first were
encouraging, but it became evident on the following days that no
progress was being made.

Each evening when the sun set both the colonial and regular cavalry
returned to their camp, for it was certain that they could not act at
night. When it became known on Wednesday evening that a retreat was
ordered, the news came almost as a relief, for the suspense had been
very trying.

After dinner Chris went into the tent where the officers of the troop
were gathered. As usual, the talk was of the battle, but in a short
time Captain Brookfield said:

"Let us try and get away from the subject. We have talked of nothing
else for the past three days, and I defy anyone to say anything new
about it; it is not a pleasant subject either. Richards, you were in
the last war, I know, and took part in the defence of Standerton.
Suppose you tell us about that; it is one of the few pleasant memories
of that time."

"I don't know that there is much to tell you about it, but I will let
you know how I came to take share in it. That was an exciting time for
me, for I was never so near rubbed out in all my life. Just before the
last business broke out I happened to be returning from Pretoria,
intending to sell for anything that I could get a large farm that I
owned in the Leydenburg district. Of late the Boers had been getting so
offensive in their manner that I thought something would come of it,
and made up my mind to sell out at any price and return to Natal. When
I rode into Leydenburg I found that two hundred and fifty men of the
94th Regiment were starting next day with a large train of waggons for
Pretoria. As I was frequently in the town, and had made the
acquaintance of several of the officers, I thought it would be pleasant
to ride down with them, as it made no difference whether I got into
Pretoria a day or two earlier or later. The general idea was that war
would come of it, but no one thought it would begin without the usual
notice and warning.

"I told the officers that I would not trust the Boers further than I
could see them, for that a more treacherous set of fellows are not to
be found on the surface of the earth. Still, I must own that I had no
more idea that an attack would be made upon us than they had. Well, you
all know what came of it. We were going along a hollow with rising
ground on either side when, without the slightest warning, a tremendous
fire was opened from both flanks. It can hardly be said that there was
any resistance. The troops were strung out along the line of waggons;
numbers were shot down before a single musket was fired in defence. The
main body, such as it was, fought stoutly, but as they could only catch
an occasional glimpse of the heads of the enemy, while they were
themselves altogether exposed, there could be but one end to it. A
hundred and twenty men were killed or wounded in a few minutes, and to
save the rest from a similar massacre the officer who commanded
surrendered.

"I fired a few shots at first, but as soon as I saw how it would end I
rode for it. I was with the rear-guard when the firing began, and so
took the back track. As soon as the firing ceased I saw half a dozen
Boers galloping after me. My blood was up, as you may imagine, and on
getting to a dip I jumped off my horse, left it in shelter, and threw
myself down on the crest of the hollow, and as they came within range I
picked off the one who was nearest to me. That brought the others up
with a round turn. They retired a little way, then dismounted and
separated, and proceeded to stalk me. We exchanged shots for an hour or
two. I killed another, and got, as you see by this scar on my cheek, a
graze. However, I think they would have tired of the game first. But
suddenly I saw a dozen Boers galloping across the country in our
direction. They were doubtless a party who had arrived too late to take
part in the fight, if you can call such a treacherous massacre a fight,
and hearing the sound of shots were riding to see what was going on.

"I saw that things were getting too hot, and ran down to my horse again
and rode along in the hollow, which fortunately hid me from the sight
of either the men I had been fighting or those riding up. I had
therefore about a quarter of a mile start when I heard a shout, and
knew that they were after me. After what had happened I did not dare
ride for Middleburg, as there was no saying whether that place might
not have already risen; so there was nothing to depend upon but the
speed and bottom of my horse. It was a fairly good animal, but nothing
particular. It had had an easy time of it while on the march, for we
had only done some fourteen or fifteen miles a day. I might have had
hopes that I should outride the men in pursuit of me, but they would be
joined by more men on fresh horses from any Boer farmhouse or village
we came near. Besides, the news of this intended attack on the convoy
must have been known far and wide. Occasionally a shot was fired, but
as I was riding at a gallop, and the Boers were doing the same, I had
no great fear of being hit. I gained a little at first, but after two
hours' riding they were about the same distance behind as when they had
first started on the chase.

"I felt that my horse was beginning to fag a bit, but the sun was
setting, for the attack had taken place in the afternoon. I kept on
till it was too dark for me to make out my pursuers, some of whom were
not more than three hundred yards behind me; then, while my horse was
going at full gallop I leapt of? without checking him, a trick that
most hunters can do. I chose the spot because I could make out that
there was some low scrub close to the road. Stooping among this I ran
forward. I was glad to hear that my horse was still galloping at the
top of his speed, and, deprived of my weight, would probably get a good
bit farther before he was taken, if he did but keep on. This I hoped he
would do, for he had evidently entered into the spirit of the chase,
and had laid back his ears whenever the Boers raised their voices in a
yell or a rifle was fired. They were yelling pretty hard when they
passed me, urging their horses on in the belief that the chase was
almost at an end. I heard no more of the Boers that time, for as soon
as they had gone on I ran at the top of my speed for some distance, and
then broke into a trot, and by the morning must have been thirty miles
away.

"I decided to make for Standerton, for there I felt sure I should be
safe, for at that place was a considerable English population, and they
would certainly hold out. I had a Colt's rifle with me and a brace of
revolvers, for even when I went down to Leydenburg I heard that several
Englishmen had been maltreated, and one or two shot by Boers they met.
I tramped for four days, and as the attack on our troops had been made
on the 20th of December, it was now Christmas-eve. I had not ventured
to go near a Boer farm, for fortunately I had shot a springbok, and was
therefore under no trouble as to food; but on the previous day I had
not come across water, and the heat was terrible, so I felt that
whatever came of it I must go and ask for a drink. I saw a farmhouse
about nine in the morning and made for it. As I approached, a woman
came out of the door and, seeing me, re-entered, and two Boers with
their guns in their hands ran out.

"Who are you?" they shouted. Of course I speak Dutch as well as
English, and shouted back that I only wanted some water.

"'Are you an Englishman?' they shouted again.

"'Yes, I am,' I said; 'but what difference does that make?' I saw their
guns go up to their shoulders, and flung myself down, and their shots
went over my head. It was my turn now, and I fired twice, and the two
Boers rolled over. I walked forward now ready to fire on an instant, as
there might be more of them. Some women ran out but no man, and I went
straight up. They were screaming over the bodies of the men, and heaped
curses on me as I came up. I slung my rifle behind me, and taking out
my pistols I said, 'Your men brought it on themselves. I only asked for
water, and they fired at me. I don't want to hurt any of you, but if
you attack me I must protect myself.' Several times I thought they
would have done so, but the sight of my pistols cowed them, I walked
straight into the house, dipped a pannikin into a pail of water, took a
long drink, then I filled my water-bottle, and went out. Though they
cursed me again, they did not attempt to stop me, as I rather feared
they would; but I understood it when, before I had gone fifty yards, I
heard a horse's hoofs, and looking round saw a girl riding at full
speed across the veldt. She had no doubt gone to fetch the men who were
away or to the next farm to summon assistance. The draught of water had
done me a world of good, and I soon broke into a run, though I did not
conceal from myself that I was in a bad fix. Once out of sight of the
farm I changed my course, and did so several times in the course of the
next two hours; then, on getting to the crest of high ground, I saw a
river half a mile away. This, I felt sure, was Broot Spruit. Before
starting to walk down I looked round, and a little over a mile away
could see a party of some fifteen Boers. I ran at full speed down the
slope, and could see no other place where I could make a fight of it;
but many of the rivers have, like those here, steep banks, and I could
at least sell my life dearly. It could only be for a time, for some of
the Boers would cross the spruit and take me in rear. Still, there was
nothing else to be done.

"When I reached the bank I gave a shout of satisfaction. The river was
in flood; there must have been rain up in the hills, and you know how
quickly the streams rise. Unless the Boers knew of some very shallow
place, there would be no crossing it; for it was running like a
mill-stream, and except at some waggon drift the banks were almost
perpendicular. At any rate I could not hope to swim half across before
the Boers came up, and so I must fight it out where I was. I had
scarcely found a point where I could get a comfortable foothold on the
bank, with my head just above the level, when the Boers appeared on the
top of the hill. They stopped for a minute and then broke up, and
scattering rode forward. They felt sure that I must have made for the
river, as there was no other place where I could be concealed. When
they came within a couple of hundred yards of it they dismounted, and
three or four came forward on foot. When the nearest was within a
hundred yards of me I fired.

"At so short a distance, and with so good a rest, I could not miss, and
before the smoke cleared away I winged another, and the rest ran back
hastily. I sent a shot or two among them as they were consulting, with
the result that they rode off three or four hundred yards farther back.
They did not attempt to return my fire, for, except when I raised my
head for a moment, they could see nothing of me. They doubtless learned
from the women that I had a Colt's rifle and a brace of revolvers, and
that if they were to make a rush across the open not many of them were
likely to reach me. After a talk two or three of them mounted their
horses and rode so as to strike the river both above and below me,
intending no doubt to cross if they found a place where there was a
chance of doing so. I felt pretty sure that they would do nothing till
it was dark, then they would crawl up and make a rush; I was certain,
anyhow, that they would not give it up, as there were two of their
number lying on the veldt besides the two at the farmhouse. There was,
however, more pluck in them than I had given them credit for, for about
mid-day they began to advance, crawling along the ground as if stalking
a quarry. The men who had gone out on horseback had all returned, but
just as the others started crawling up three of them galloped away down
stream. I determined at once to shift my position a bit, so as to put
off the evil hour. I pulled a stone as big as my head out of the clay
of the bank and put it on the edge where my head had been, and then got
down into the water. It was waist-deep at a couple of feet from the
bank, which above was too steep to walk along. I had gone a hundred
yards when I saw, seven or eight inches above the water-level, a hole,
and pushing my arm in I found it was a place where a good bit of the
bank had caved in. Laying my gun and pistols down on a ledge I felt
about farther. At the top it went in nearly three feet, and was higher
at the back than it was at the water's edge. At any rate it afforded a
good chance of safety. Holding the revolvers, the chamber of the rifle,
and my ammunition above water, I stooped until I could get into the
hole, which was but just wide enough for the purpose; then I pushed
myself back to the end. I found there was just height enough for me to
sit with my mouth above water. The back sloped so that I had to dig my
heels into the clay to prevent myself from slipping forward.

"It was not a comfortable position, but that was a secondary
consideration. I had noticed as I came along that the river was already
falling, so that I had no fear of being drowned as long as I kept my
position. With some trouble I fastened my pistols and ammunition on the
brim of my hat; the rifle I was holding between my knees. There I sat
hour after hour. Fortunately, being pretty near midsummer day, the
water was not cold. I had at least the consolation of knowing what a
state of fury the Boers must be in. They would have seen by my
footsteps where I had entered the river, just below where I had been
standing. No doubt they would have gone along the top of the bank to
see if I had come out of the water again, and when they reached their
friends on horseback and heard that I had not swum down the river, they
would have concluded that I must have been drowned. Had I managed to
cross, they would have seen me climb the opposite bank.

"In an hour the water had fallen to my shoulders, and when it became
dark it was but waist-deep where I was sitting. To make a long story
short, by midnight the water was below my feet and still falling
rapidly. I waited a couple of hours and then started to cross. It was
about fifty yards wide, and I was fully half-way over before it reached
my chin. The stream had lost much of its force, and I had no difficulty
in swimming across the rest of the way, though the water was deep until
I was within a couple of yards of the bank. Then I climbed the bank and
made off. I saw nothing more of my pursuers, and three days later I
arrived at Standerton, and remained there til the end of the war, for
the gallant little town repulsed all attempts of the Boers to capture
it."

"That was a narrow escape indeed, Richards," Captain Brookfield said.
"If you hadn't had your wits about you the Boers would certainly have
got you. It was a first-rate hiding-place, but I don't think many of us
would have thought of adopting it. Now, will someone else give us a
yarn?"

Two or three more stories were told, and then the party broke up,
feeling all the better for having for an hour avoided the standing
topic. Two days later all were settled at Chieveley again, and it was
generally believed that the next attack would take place very shortly,
and that it would probably be directed against Colenso. That evening a
farmer came into camp. His horse had dropped dead a mile away. He
stopped, as he passed through the tents of the scouts, and asked where
he could find the general. Captain Brookfield, who heard the question,
stepped out from his tent with Chris, to whom he had been talking.

"Why, Searle, is it you? I thought the voice was familiar to me. What
is it?"

"I have ridden in to get help. The other day a raiding party of Boers
came down through Inadi, and riding in between Dingley Dell and Botha's
Castle--you know the hill--swept off a quantity of cattle. They have
not penetrated so far before, and no one about thought that there was
any danger while you were attacking them up here. One of the farmers
rode to Greytown for help. Most of the young men there had joined one
or other of the colonial troops, but fifteen of us said that we could
go out. It seemed that there were not more than some fifteen or twenty
Boers. Well, I can't tell you all about it, for, as it is a matter of
life and death, I have not a moment to lose. However, we came up to
them north of Botha's Castle. We had a sharp fight. Two of our men were
killed and five of the Boers; the rest rode off. We set to work to
bunch all the cattle, and as we were at it we were attacked suddenly by
a party sixty or seventy strong. The fellows that we had driven off had
evidently come across them and brought them down upon us. We made a
running fight, but our horses were not so fresh as theirs; and seeing
that they had the speed of us we made for an empty farmhouse, and as
they rode up we brought down several of them.

"There was a wall round the yard, and the Boers drew off for a bit to
consider. Then they dismounted and planted themselves round the house
in such shelter as they could find within two or three hundred yards,
and the affair began in earnest. The first day they kept up a heavy
fire, to which we could make but little reply, for it was certain death
to lift a head above the wall or to show one's self at a window even
for a moment. We lost three men that way. During the night they tried
to carry the place, but we were all at the wall; and had the best of
it, as we had only to show our heads, while they were altogether
exposed. There was not much firing next day, and it was evident that
they meant to starve us out. There was not a scrap of food to be found
in the place; but fortunately there was a small thatched kraal inside
the yard which gave some forage for the horses. The next day we killed
one of them for food.

"That night we agreed that when the Boers saw that we did not surrender
in a day or two they would be sure that we must be eating the horses,
as any food we brought with us must be exhausted, and they would then
make a determined attack; for we knew we had killed eight or ten of
them, and that they would not go away. So we decided that the only hope
was for one of us to ride here; we tossed up who should try to get
through the Boers, and the lot fell upon me. I took the best of the
horses. We had agreed from the first that this would have to be done,
and had given what scraps of bread we could spare to it; besides which,
they were all in fair condition, as the yard was strewn with rubbish,
and some party of Boers had ripped up all the beds and straw mattresses
and scattered the contents about.

"Some of them were sure to be on watch, and I rode at a walk. I made
for the north, as that side was less likely to be watched. I had gone
about two hundred yards when a man jumped up just in front of me. My
rifle was ready, and before he could lift his I shot him, and then
clapped spurs to nay horse. There was a tremendous hubbub; shots were
fired at random in all directions, but I doubt whether they could have
seen me after I had gone fifty yards. I rode for a quarter of a mile
due north, and then turned west. I had no fear of being overtaken, for
although the Boers would all have their horses close, in readiness to
mount if we should try to break out, I must have got a good quarter of
a mile start, and they were not likely to keep up the chase long, as
they could not tell which way I might have doubled, and if they pursued
far, it would be in the direction of Greytown. It was about a
seventy-mile ride, and as I started about twelve, I have done it in
nine hours. I foundered the horse, but fortunately he did not drop till
I was within half a mile of the camp. Now, where can I find the
general?"

"You will find him at Frere, but I am afraid it will be of no use. We
have tried him again and again--at least, one or other of us have done
so--to let us go out scouting, but he will not hear of it, though the
whole of us Colonials are terribly sore at leaving the whole country at
the mercy of the Boer marauders; and now that we shall probably be at
work here again directly, he is less likely than ever to let anyone go."

"You can't go without orders, I suppose?"

Captain Brookfield shook his head. "We are just as much under orders as
the regular troops are, and it would be a serious matter indeed to fly
in the face of his repeated orders on this subject." The farmer made a
gesture of despair.

"Captain Brookfield," Chris said, speaking for the first time, "I think
that by the terms of our enlistment in your corps we were to be allowed
to take our discharge whenever we asked for it?"

"That was so, Chris, but--"

"Then I beg now, sir, to tender our resignation from the present
moment."

"But Chris, you have but twenty men, and by what Searle says, there are
sixty or seventy of them."

"Of whom ten or so have been killed. Well, sir, we have fought against
nearly a hundred before now, and got the best of it; besides, we shall
have the help of the little party shut up. However, now that we have
resigned, that is our affair. I suppose that if we rejoin you, you will
have no objection to re-enlist us?"

Captain Brookfield smiled. "I should have no objection certainly,
Chris, but General Buller might have."

"I don't suppose he will know of our having been away, sir; he has
plenty more serious things to think of than the numerical strength of
your troop, and as the news of a skirmish some thirty miles north of
Greytown is not likely to be reported in the papers, or at any rate to
attract his attention, I don't think you need trouble yourself on that
score. Besides, if it was reported, it could only be said that one of
the besieged party escaping, returned with a small body of volunteers
he had collected; and the name of the Maritzburg Scouts would not be
mentioned. I am sure that Mr. Searle would impress the necessity for
silence about that point, on his friends."

"Well, I accept your resignation, Chris; a headstrong man will have his
way; and indeed I have great faith in your accomplishing, somehow, the
relief of this party."

The farmer had listened with surprise to this discussion between the
lad and Captain Brookfield. The latter now turned to him and said:

"This young gentleman is the commander of twenty lads of about his own
age. They have been in two serious fights, and in both cases against a
Boer force much superior to themselves in numbers, and I have as much
confidence in them as in any men in my troop. They are all good shots,
and admirably mounted, and you can be perfectly sure of them, and can
take my assurance that if any twenty men can relieve your friends, they
will do so."

"Will you be able to ride back again with us, sir? I can mount you."

"Certainly I can, if my friend Captain Brookfield can furnish me with a
meal before I start."

"That I will with much pleasure. How long will it be before you are
