
"Shades of the departed specs," cried David, also sitting straight and
peering with his keen blue eyes in a birdlike way along the sward. "It's
a mysteri--oh, Great Caesar!" then he fell on his back on the campus,
and rolled and laughed, to bring up red and shining, only to tumble over
and roll again.

"Of all the idiots in the universe, Dave Pepper," fumed Percy. "What's
the matter?"

"Your trouble has gone to your head," said David faintly. "Feel and see;
oh dear!"

[Illustration: "HOW YOU CAN SIT THERE AND LAUGH WHEN JOE IS IN DANGER, I
DON'T SEE," EXCLAIMED PERCY IRRITABLY.]

Percy's hand flew up to his thick mane of brown hair, that not all his
disgust and tireless training could persuade to lie smoothly, when he
picked off his beloved glasses, after an angry twitch or two.

"How you can sit there and laugh when Joe is in danger, I don't see," he
exclaimed irritably, adjusting them to his nose. "I've nearly killed
myself to catch you, and"--

"Joe in danger!" cried David, on his feet in an instant. "Oh, Percy,
what do you mean?" his cheeks whitening, and his blue eyes agleam.

"Joel's brought it on himself," said Percy, his irritation not going
down. "I must say, Dave, if he'd behave more like the rest of us, he'd
be"--

Then Polly's words, "Oh, dear, beautiful Joel!" came to mind, and he
coughed violently, holding fast the eyeglasses in their place.

"What danger?" demanded David, in his impatience shaking Percy's arm.

"Well, you must know, after last night's performance over Joe, that they
wouldn't let him alone."

"Last night's performance over Joel?" repeated David in astonishment.
"What yarn are you spinning now, Percy?"

"Goodness sake, you are yarning yourself," retorted Percy indignantly,
"to pretend that you don't know that last night a dozen or more fellows
called on Joe, and he handled 'em without gloves, so that Bingley and
Dobbs can't hardly step to-day."

"It's the first word I've heard of it," said David slowly, but
emphatically, and staggering back a step or two to look at Percy. "I was
out all the evening. Oh, magnificent old Joe!"

"Magnificent old Joe!" repeated Percy, "you better say 'poor Joe,' when
you know what they are intending to give him."




CHAPTER XIX.

MOTHER FISHER AND CHARLOTTE.


David's blue eyes flashed dangerously. "Tell all you know, Percy," he
said briefly.

"Dobbs heads it, as he did the first one," said Percy; "they've changed
their tactics, and will get at Joe on their way home from that
confounded meeting. Dave, can't you keep him from that?" and Percy,
forgetting himself, peered anxiously over his glasses.

"No," said David shortly, "and I sha'n't try."

"You're an idiot," cried Percy, in a passion, "a stupid, blind old
donkey! Joe will be mauled dreadfully," he howled, beating his hands
together in distress; "no help for it but to keep him away from that old
association meeting."

"Anything more to tell?" asked David.

"No," Percy shot out. "Bingley told me all he knew; but they wouldn't
let him catch much of it, because he's left the gang"--

David's feet by this time were flying over the Campus, so that Percy was
obliged to shout the remainder of the sentence after him. The
consequence was that several heads were popped out of as many windows in
the long gray dormitory fronting the Campus, their owners all engaged in
the pleasing duty of staring at Percy and the flying figure across the
grass.

"Now I'm in for it, for there's Dobbs, I vow," exclaimed Percy to
himself, in dismay; "he'll guess I've given Dave warning," and he tried
to strike a careless attitude, picking off his glasses to hold them up
and gaze long and earnestly through them into the nearest tree.

"You can't come it," jeered Dobbs, from his window. "No birdsnesting, I
promise you, Whitney; ha, ha!" And the other heads popped farther out
than ever, to add a few hisses.

Percy, maddened by the failure of his plan to divert suspicion, now lost
his head entirely, and sticking his eyeglasses on again, ran off like
lightning to his room, followed by "Little coward, we'll treat you
too--Look out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Jasper; now I'm bound for the next thing--Percy and Joel and
David," declared old Mr. King as Jack Loughead was cleverly off; "we are
so near, it's a pity not to drop down on them."

"Don't you think you ought to hurry back to Brierly?" asked Jasper,
having hard work not to show that he cared anything about it one way or
the other.

"No, I don't," answered his father, in his crispest fashion. "No one
needs me there; Mrs. Cabot is a host in herself, and those boys may--who
knows? At any rate, I must see how they are getting on, so we will go as
soon as you can get your things packed and sent home," and the old
gentleman glanced around the room at the various keepsakes and family
adornings that Jasper had brought with him to make life less lonely
while he made a business man of himself.

"Very well, father," said Jasper, he could not trust himself to say
more; and for the first time had to hurry away that his father might not
see his face. But old Mr. King was the farthest removed from carrying
the look of a person holding any interest whatever in Jasper's trouble,
for he went on to say, "And I do hope you will get it over with as
quickly as possible, Jasper, so that we may be off," then he fell to
reading the evening paper with great gusto.

Jasper seized his hat, rushed down stairs two steps at a time, nearly
overturning Buttons leaning on the post at the foot.

"Oh! beg pardon," said Jasper, quite as if it had been a gentleman he
had run against.

"You hain't hurt me none," said Buttons, staggering back to his support,
where he craned his neck in curiosity to watch young Mr. King's
impatience.

Once out in the park, a half-mile away, his hands thrust in their
pockets, Jasper slackened his pace, and breathed freer. Before him
seemed to be the little brown house; it was the first time he had seen
Mrs. Pepper--and they had just finished their long talk, when the mother
had thanked him for rescuing Phronsie from the organ-grinder. The five
little Peppers were begging him to come over again to see them, but Mrs.
Pepper laid her hand on his arm. "Be sure, Jasper," she warned, "that
your father is willing." He could see her black eyes looking down into
his face. What would she say now?

Jasper threw himself down on one of the seats under a friendly tree. "At
least, Polly, you sha'n't be ashamed of me," he said in a moment or two,
"and dear Mrs. Fisher," then he walked quietly off to make the last
preparations that his father had ordered.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, now, Charlotte," said Mrs. Fisher, "you needn't worry, not a
single bit," and she went on calmly sorting out the small flannel
petticoats in her lap. "That is rather thin," she said, holding up one
between her eyes and the light; "King Fisher, how you do kick things
out!"

"Mrs. Fisher!" exclaimed Charlotte Chatterton in amazement, "how can you
sit picking over flannel petticoats, when perhaps Polly will--oh, do
excuse me," she broke off hastily, "for speaking so."

"Polly? I'd trust my girl to know what was sense, and what was
nonsense," declared Mother Fisher crisply, and not taking off her
attention in the slightest from Baby's petticoats.

"Ar-goo--ar-goo!" screamed little King.

"So we would--wouldn't we, Birdie?" she said, nodding at him.

"But people do such very strange things in--in--love," said Charlotte,
her face full of distress, "I mean when love is in the question, Mrs.
Fisher."

"Polly doesn't," said Mrs. Fisher scornfully. "Polly has never been in
love; why, she is only twenty."

Charlotte gave an uneasy whirl and rushed off to the window.

"And there's that dreadful, hateful Mrs. Cabot," she cried, plunging
back, her pale eyes afire. "Oh! I feel so wicked, Mrs. Fisher, whenever
I think of her, I'd like to tear her, I would, for picking at Polly,"
she declared with venom.

"You needn't be afraid," repeated Mrs. Fisher calmly, "Polly knows Mrs.
Cabot through and through, and will never be influenced by anything she
says."

"Oh, dear, dear, dear!" cried Charlotte, wringing her long hands, "and
there's that Mr. Loughead, and everything is mixed up, and I can't
frighten you."

"Now, just see here, Charlotte," cried Mother Fisher, casting aside the
flannel petticoats to look up, "you must just put your mind off from all
this; I should never know you, my girl, you are always so sensible and
quiet. Why, Charlotte, what has gotten into you?"

"That's just it," cried Charlotte, a pink passion in her sallow cheeks,
"everybody thinks because I don't rant every day, that I haven't any
more feeling than a stick or a stone. Oh! do excuse me, Mrs. Fisher, but
I love Polly so!" And she flung herself down on her knees, burying her
face among the little flannel petticoats in Mother Fisher's lap.

"There--there, my dear," said Mrs. Fisher, smoothing Charlotte's pale
straight hair, "of course you love Polly; everybody does."

"And I don't--don't want her to marry that Pickering Dodge," mumbled
Charlotte.

"Certainly not; and she's no more likely to marry him than you are,"
said Mrs. Fisher coolly, giving gentle pats to Charlotte's head, while
King Fisher screamed and twitched his mother's gown in anger to see the
petting going on.

"Well, now I have two babies," said Mother Fisher, with a smile, lifting
him up to her lap, where he amused himself by beating on Charlotte's
head with both fat fists, till his mother seized them with one hand,
while she gently smoothed the girl's hair with the other. "Polly can be
trusted anywhere; and when she is in too much of a dilemma, then she
brings everything to mother."

Charlotte sat up straight and wiped her eyes.

"And we've got somebody else to worry about much more, and all our
sympathies ought to go out to him," said Mrs. Fisher gravely.

"Charlotte, I don't mind telling you that I am dreadfully sorry that
Grandpapa has taken Jasper away from his business." She sat King Fisher
abruptly on the floor, all the little petticoats tumbling after him, and
walked away so that Charlotte could not see her face. "Poor Jasper, he
loved his work so."

[Illustration: "WELL, NOW I HAVE TWO BABIES," SAID MOTHER FISHER]

"And that's just it," gasped Charlotte, somehow finding her feet to
hurry over to Mrs. Fisher, "Jasper has lost his work, and now oh
dear!--oh! can't you see, Mrs. Fisher"--and then frightened at her
boldness, she ran back to Baby.

"Charlotte Chatterton!" exclaimed Mrs. Fisher. There was something so
dreadful in her tone, that Charlotte, without a word, ran out of the
room--to meet little Dr. Fisher hurrying upstairs with his hands full of
letters. "A whole budget from Brierly," he announced joyfully; "two for
you, my girl," casting them into her hands. "And the folks are coming
home next week; that is, our folks--good news--eh, Charlotte?" then he
sped on to find his wife.

And at dinner Charlotte, sitting pale and immovable amidst all the chat,
let the news of Mr. and Mrs. Mason Whitney's and Dick's determination to
come on to greet the arrivals from the Brierly farmhouse, fall on
apparently unheeding ears.

"Charlotte!" cried Dr. Fisher at last, looking at her through his big
spectacles, "why, I thought you would rejoice with us," he added
reproachfully.

"Adoniram," exclaimed Mrs. Fisher across the table, for the first time
in her life looking as if she would like to step on his toes. The little
doctor stared at her a moment--"Oh--er--never mind, my dear," he cried
abruptly, turning to Charlotte. "I suppose you do not feel well."

"Yes, I do feel well," said Charlotte truthfully, not daring to look at
Mrs. Fisher, but keeping her eyes on the tablecloth.

"I have a letter from Mr. King--a very long one; he is going to see Joel
and David," Mother Fisher made haste to say; "I hope he hasn't heard
anything wrong about them," and a little anxious pucker came on her
forehead.

Charlotte Chatterton glanced up quickly, and seeing it, "Oh, I do
believe everything is all right, Mrs. Fisher," she exclaimed
involuntarily.

Mother Fisher looked straight at her with one of her brightest smiles.
"I guess so," she said, her brow clearing.

And after they had pulled back their chairs from the table, and the
little doctor had gone into his office for a minute, Mrs. Fisher
followed Charlotte out into the hall.

"Charlotte," and she put both hands on the girl's shoulders, "you and I
won't meddle with the Lord's will for Polly. Promise me that you'll not
say one word of what we were talking, to any one."

"I won't!" said Charlotte Chatterton.

"And now," said Mother Fisher, dropping her arms and resuming her usual
cheery manner, "you and I, Charlotte, have got to put our minds on
getting ready for the Whitneys and the home-coming, and we must make it
just the brightest time that ever was. I'm no good at thinking up ways
to celebrate," added Mrs. Fisher, with a little laugh, "Polly always did
that; so you must do it for me, you and the doctor, Charlotte. And you
better run in to his office now and make a beginning, for next week will
come before we know it," and with a motherly pat, and a "run along,
child," Mrs. Fisher waited to see Charlotte well on the way before she
turned to her own duties.

"Come in!" cried little Dr. Fisher, as she rapped at the office door.
"Oh, it's you, Charlotte," with a sigh of relief; "I'm sure I don't feel
much like dragging on my boots and going off to the Land's End to-night,
on a call."

"Mrs. Fisher thought I ought to come and see you, sir, about getting up
a plan to celebrate the home-coming next week," said Charlotte, feeling
her heart bounding already with delight. Would they really all be
together in a week?

"Now that's something like," exclaimed Dr. Fisher joyfully, and pushing
aside with a reckless hand his books and vials on the table; "sit down,
do, Charlotte; there," as Charlotte settled her long figure in the
opposite chair. "Now then!"

"I never got up a plan to celebrate anything in my life," said
Charlotte, folding her hands in dismay.

"Nor I either," confessed the little doctor in an equal tremor, "Polly
was always great at those things. But I suppose that's the reason my
wife set us two together, Charlotte, for she's the wisest of women, and
perhaps we ought to learn how to get up celebrations."

"If only Phronsie were home," breathed Charlotte wistfully. "I'm so
afraid our affair will be worse than nothing."

"I dare say," replied the little doctor cheerily, "but we can try, and
that goes a great way, Charlotte--trying does."

[Illustration: "I'VE ALWAYS FOUND," SAID DR. FISHER, "THAT ALL YOU HAD
TO DO TO START A THING, WAS TO BEGIN."]

Charlotte drew a long breath and moved uneasily in her chair. "If we
only knew how to begin," she said at last doubtfully.

"I've always found," said Dr. Fisher, springing from his chair, "that
all you had to do to start a thing was to--begin."

"Yes, that's just it," ruminated Charlotte, bringing up her hands to
hold her head with, "I think we are in a tight place, Dr. Fisher."

"Hum, that may be," assented the little man, "I like tight places. Now,
then, Charlotte, how do you say begin?"

Charlotte sat lost in thought for a minute, then she said, "Any way, I
think it would be best for us to get up something very simple, so long
as we are beginners."

"I think so too," agreed Dr. Fisher, "so that's settled. Now for the
first thing; what do you say we should do, Charlotte?"

"How would it do," asked Charlotte suddenly, "to invite everybody after
they have gotten over the first of the home-coming--after dinner, I
mean--into the drawing-room, and then tell them that we are not smart
enough to think up things, and ask them to give a recitation apiece, or
something of that sort?"

"Charlotte Chatterton!" exclaimed the little doctor, cramming his hands
into the side pockets of his office coat and staring at her.

