entered into, and began to try and chaff Oswald. Oswald said in an
undervoice to H. O.--

'Just take charge. I want to speak to the girls a sec. Call if you want
anything.' And then he drew the others away, to say he thought there'd
been enough of it, and considering the boys and new three men, perhaps
we'd better chuck it and go home. We'd been benevolent nearly four hours
anyway.

While this conversation and the objections of the others were going on,
H. O. perpetuated an act which nearly wrecked the Benevolent Bar.

Of course Oswald was not an eye or ear witness of what happened, but
from what H. O. said in the calmer moments of later life, I think this
was about what happened. One of the big disagreeable men said to H. O.--

'Ain't got such a thing as a drop o' spirit, 'ave yer?'

H. O. said no, we hadn't, only lemonade and tea.

'Lemonade and tea! blank' (bad word I told you about) 'and blazes,'
replied the bad character, for such he afterwards proved to be. 'What's
THAT then?'

He pointed to a bottle labelled Dewar's whisky, which stood on the table
near the spirit-kettle.

'Oh, is THAT what you want?' said H. O. kindly.

The man is understood to have said he should bloomin' well think so, but
H. O. is not sure about the 'bloomin'.

He held out his glass with about half the lemonade in it, and H. O.
generously filled up the tumbler out of the bottle, labelled Dewar's
whisky. The man took a great drink, and then suddenly he spat out what
happened to be left in his mouth just then, and began to swear. It was
then that Oswald and Dicky rushed upon the scene.

The man was shaking his fist in H. O.'s face, and H. O. was still
holding on to the bottle we had brought out the methylated spirit in for
the lamp, in case of anyone wanting tea, which they hadn't. 'If I was
Jim,' said the second ruffian, for such indeed they were, when he had
snatched the bottle from H. O. and smelt it, 'I'd chuck the whole show
over the hedge, so I would, and you young gutter-snipes after it, so I
wouldn't.'

Oswald saw in a moment that in point of strength, if not numbers, he and
his party were out-matched, and the unfriendly boys were drawing gladly
near. It is no shame to signal for help when in distress--the best ships
do it every day. Oswald shouted 'Help, help!' Before the words were out
of his brave yet trembling lips our own tramp leapt like an antelope
from the ditch and said--

'Now then, what's up?'

The biggest of the three men immediately knocked him down. He lay still.

The biggest then said, 'Come on--any more of you? Come on!'

Oswald was so enraged at this cowardly attack that he actually hit out
at the big man--and he really got one in just above the belt. Then he
shut his eyes, because he felt that now all was indeed up. There was
a shout and a scuffle, and Oswald opened his eyes in astonishment at
finding himself still whole and unimpaired. Our own tramp had artfully
simulated insensibleness, to get the men off their guard, and then had
suddenly got his arms round a leg each of two of the men, and pulled
them to the ground, helped by Dicky, who saw his game and rushed in at
the same time, exactly like Oswald would have done if he had not had his
eyes shut ready to meet his doom.

The unpleasant boys shouted, and the third man tried to help his
unrespectable friends, now on their backs involved in a desperate
struggle with our own tramp, who was on top of them, accompanied by
Dicky. It all happened in a minute, and it was all mixed up. The dogs
were growling and barking--Martha had one of the men by the trouser
leg and Pincher had another; the girls were screaming like mad and the
strange boys shouted and laughed (little beasts!), and then suddenly our
Pig-man came round the corner, and two friends of his with him. He
had gone and fetched them to take care of us if anything unpleasant
occurred. It was a very thoughtful, and just like him.

'Fetch the police!' cried the Pig-man in noble tones, and H. O. started
running to do it. But the scoundrels struggled from under Dicky and our
tramp, shook off the dogs and some bits of trouser, and fled heavily
down the road.

Our Pig-man said, 'Get along home!' to the disagreeable boys, and
'Shoo'd' them as if they were hens, and they went. H. O. ran back when
they began to go up the road, and there we were, all standing breathless
in tears on the scene of the late desperate engagement. Oswald gives you
his word of honour that his and Dicky's tears were tears of pure rage.
There are such things as tears of pure rage. Anyone who knows will tell
you so.

We picked up our own tramp and bathed the lump on his forehead with
lemonade. The water in the zinc bath had been upset in the struggle.
Then he and the Pig-man and his kind friends helped us carry our things
home.

The Pig-man advised us on the way not to try these sort of kind actions
without getting a grown-up to help us. We've been advised this before,
but now I really think we shall never try to be benevolent to the poor
and needy again. At any rate not unless we know them very well first.

We have seen our own tramp often since. The Pig-man gave him a job. He
has got work to do at last. The Pig-man says he is not such a very bad
chap, only he will fall asleep after the least drop of drink. We know
that is his failing. We saw it at once. But it was lucky for us he fell
asleep that day near our benevolent bar.

I will not go into what my father said about it all. There was a good
deal in it about minding your own business--there generally is in most
of the talkings-to we get. But he gave our tramp a sovereign, and the
Pig-man says he went to sleep on it for a solid week.



CHAPTER 12. THE CANTERBURY PILGRIMS

The author of these few lines really does hope to goodness that no one
will be such an owl as to think from the number of things we did when we
were in the country, that we were wretched, neglected little children,
whose grown-up relations sparkled in the bright haunts of pleasure, and
whirled in the giddy what's-its-name of fashion, while we were left to
weep forsaken at home. It was nothing of the kind, and I wish you to
know that my father was with us a good deal--and Albert's uncle (who is
really no uncle of ours, but only of Albert next door when we lived
in Lewisham) gave up a good many of his valuable hours to us. And the
father of Denny and Daisy came now and then, and other people, quite as
many as we wished to see. And we had some very decent times with them;
and enjoyed ourselves very much indeed, thank you. In some ways the
good times you have with grown-ups are better than the ones you have by
yourselves. At any rate they are safer. It is almost impossible, then,
to do anything fatal without being pulled up short by a grown-up ere yet
the deed is done. And, if you are careful, anything that goes wrong can
be looked on as the grown-up's fault. But these secure pleasures are not
so interesting to tell about as the things you do when there is no one
to stop you on the edge of the rash act.

It is curious, too, that many of our most interesting games happened
when grown-ups were far away. For instance when we were pilgrims.

It was just after the business of the Benevolent Bar, and it was a wet
day. It is not easy to amuse yourself indoors on a wet day as older
people seem to think, especially when you are far removed from your
own home, and haven't got all your own books and things. The girls were
playing Halma--which is a beastly game--Noel was writing poetry, H. O.
was singing 'I don't know what to do' to the tune of 'Canaan's happy
shore'. It goes like this, and is very tiresome to listen to--

     'I don't know what to do--oo--oo--oo!
     I don't know what to do--oo--oo!
     It IS a beastly rainy day
     And I don't know what to do.'

The rest of us were trying to make him shut up. We put a carpet bag over
his head, but he went on inside it; and then we sat on him, but he sang
under us; we held him upside down and made him crawl head first under
the sofa, but when, even there, he kept it up, we saw that nothing short
of violence would induce him to silence, so we let him go. And then he
said we had hurt him, and we said we were only in fun, and he said if
we were he wasn't, and ill feeling might have grown up even out of a
playful brotherly act like ours had been, only Alice chucked the Halma
and said--

'Let dogs delight. Come on--let's play something.'

Then Dora said, 'Yes, but look here. Now we're together I do want to say
something. What about the Wouldbegoods Society?'

Many of us groaned, and one said, 'Hear! hear!' I will not say which
one, but it was not Oswald.

'No, but really,' Dora said, 'I don't want to be preachy--but you know
we DID say we'd try to be good. And it says in a book I was reading only
yesterday that NOT being naughty is not enough. You must BE good. And
we've hardly done anything. The Golden Deed book's almost empty.'

'Couldn't we have a book of leaden deeds?' said Noel, coming out of his
poetry, 'then there'd be plenty for Alice to write about if she wants
to, or brass or zinc or aluminium deeds? We shan't ever fill the book
with golden ones.'

H. O. had rolled himself in the red tablecloth and said Noel was only
advising us to be naughty, and again peace waved in the balance. But
Alice said, 'Oh, H. O., DON'T--he didn't mean that; but really and
truly, I wish wrong things weren't so interesting. You begin to do a
noble act, and then it gets so exciting, and before you know where you
are you are doing something wrong as hard as you can lick.'

'And enjoying it too' Dick said.

'It's very curious,' Denny said, 'but you don't seem to be able to be
certain inside yourself whether what you're doing is right if you happen
to like doing it, but if you don't like doing it you know quite well. I
only thought of that just now. I wish Noel would make a poem about it.'

'I am,' Noel said; 'it began about a crocodile but it is finishing
itself up quite different from what I meant it to at first. Just wait a
minute.'


He wrote very hard while his kind brothers and sisters and his little
friends waited the minute he had said, and then he read:

'The crocodile is very wise, He lives in the Nile with little eyes, He
eats the hippopotamus too, And if he could he would eat up you.

'The lovely woods and starry skies He looks upon with glad surprise! He
sees the riches of the east, And the tiger and lion, kings of beast.

'So let all be good and beware Of saying shan't and won't and don't
care; For doing wrong is easier far Than any of the right things I know
about are.

And I couldn't make it king of beasts because of it not rhyming with
east, so I put the s off beasts on to king. It comes even in the end.'

We all said it was a very nice piece of poetry. Noel gets really ill if
you don't like what he writes, and then he said, 'If it's trying that's
wanted, I don't care how hard we TRY to be good, but we may as well
do it some nice way. Let's be Pilgrim's Progress, like I wanted to at
first.'

And we were all beginning to say we didn't want to, when suddenly Dora
said, 'Oh, look here! I know. We'll be the Canterbury Pilgrims. People
used to go pilgrimages to make themselves good.'

'With peas in their shoes,' the Dentist said. 'It's in a piece of
poetry--only the man boiled his peas--which is quite unfair.'

'Oh, yes,' said H. O., 'and cocked hats.'

'Not cocked--cockled'--it was Alice who said this. 'And they had staffs
and scrips, and they told each other tales. We might as well.'

Oswald and Dora had been reading about the Canterbury Pilgrims in a book
called A Short History of the English People. It is not at all short
really--three fat volumes--but it has jolly good pictures. It was
written by a gentleman named Green. So Oswald said--

'All right. I'll be the Knight.'

'I'll be the wife of Bath,' Dora said. 'What will you be, Dicky?'

'Oh, I don't care, I'll be Mr Bath if you like.'

'We don't know much about the people,' Alice said. 'How many were
there?'

'Thirty,' Oswald replied, 'but we needn't be all of them. There's a
Nun-Priest.'

'Is that a man or a woman?'

Oswald said he could not be sure by the picture, but Alice and Noel
could be it between them. So that was settled. Then we got the book and
looked at the dresses to see if we could make up dresses for the parts.
At first we thought we would, because it would be something to do,
and it was a very wet day; but they looked difficult, especially the
Miller's. Denny wanted to be the Miller, but in the end he was the
Doctor, because it was next door to Dentist, which is what we call him
for short. Daisy was to be the Prioress--because she is good, and has
'a soft little red mouth', and H. O. WOULD be the Manciple (I don't know
what that is), because the picture of him is bigger than most of the
others, and he said Manciple was a nice portmanteau word--half mandarin
and half disciple.

'Let's get the easiest parts of the dresses ready first.' Alice
said--'the pilgrims' staffs and hats and the cockles.'

So Oswald and Dicky braved the fury of the elements and went into the
wood beyond the orchard to cut ash-sticks. We got eight jolly good long
ones. Then we took them home, and the girls bothered till we changed our
clothes, which were indeed sopping with the elements we had faced.

Then we peeled the sticks. They were nice and white at first, but they
soon got dirty when we carried them. It is a curious thing: however
often you wash your hands they always seem to come off on anything
white. And we nailed paper rosettes to the tops of them. That was the
nearest we could get to cockle-shells.

'And we may as well have them there as on our hats,' Alice said. 'And
let's call each other by our right names to-day, just to get into it.
Don't you think so, Knight?'

'Yea, Nun-Priest,' Oswald was replying, but Noel said she was only half
the Nun-Priest, and again a threat of unpleasantness darkened the air.
But Alice said--

'Don't be a piggy-wiggy, Noel, dear; you can have it all, I don't want
it. I'll just be a plain pilgrim, or Henry who killed Becket.'

So she was called the Plain Pilgrim, and she did not mind.

We thought of cocked hats, but they are warm to wear, and the big garden
hats that make you look like pictures on the covers of plantation songs
did beautifully. We put cockle-shells on them. Sandals we did try, with
pieces of oil-cloth cut the shape of soles and fastened with tape, but
the dust gets into your toes so, and we decided boots were better for
such a long walk. Some of the pilgrims who were very earnest decided
to tie their boots with white tape crossed outside to pretend sandals.
Denny was one of these earnest palmers. As for dresses, there was no
time to make them properly, and at first we thought of nightgowns; but
we decided not to, in case people in Canterbury were not used to that
sort of pilgrim nowadays. We made up our minds to go as we were--or as
we might happen to be next day.

You will be ready to believe we hoped next day would be fine. It was.

Fair was the morn when the pilgrims arose and went down to breakfast.
Albert's uncle had had brekker early and was hard at work in his study.
We heard his quill pen squeaking when we listened at the door. It is not
