once more at his swollen left ankle, and he made a close calculation.
It would be three days, more likely four, before he could walk upon it.
Could he endure hunger that long? He could. He would! Crouched in his
nest with his back to the cliff, he had defense against any enemy in
his rifle and pistol. By faithful watching he might catch sight of some
wandering animal, a target for his rifle and then food for his stomach.
His wilderness wisdom warned him that there was nothing to do but sit
quiet and wait.

He scarcely moved for hours. As long as he was still his ankle troubled
him but little. The sun came out, silver bright, but it had no warmth.
The surface of the lake was shown only by the smoothness of its expanse;
the icy covering was the same everywhere over hills and valleys. Across
the lake he saw the steep down which he had slid, looming white and
lofty. In the distance it looked perpendicular, and, whatever its
terrors, it had, beyond a doubt, saved his life. He glanced down at his
swollen ankle, and, despite his helpless situation, he was thankful that
he had escaped so well.

About noon he moved enough to throw up the snowbanks higher all around
himself in the fashion of an Eskimos house. Then he let the fire die
except some coals that gave forth no smoke, stretched the blanket over
his head in the manner of a roof, and once more resumed his quiet and
stillness. He was now like a crippled animal in its lair, but he was
warm, and his wound did not hurt him. But hunger began to trouble him.
He was young and so powerful that his frame demanded much sustenance.
Now it cried aloud its need! He ate two or three handfuls of snow, and
for a few moments it seemed to help him a little, but his hunger soon
came back as strong as ever. Then he tightened his belt and sat in grim
silence, trying to forget that there was any such thing as food.

The effort of the will was almost a success throughout the afternoon,
but before night it failed. He began to have roseate visions of Long Jim
trying venison, wild duck, bear, and buffalo steaks over the coals. He
could sniff the aroma, so powerful had his imagination become, and,
in fancy, his month watered, while its roof was really dry. They were
daylight visions, and he knew it well, but they taunted him and made his
pain fiercer. He slid forward a little to the mouth of his shelter, and
thrust out his rifle in the hope that he would see some wild creature,
no matter what; he felt that he could shoot it at any distance, and then
he would feast!

He saw nothing living, either on earth or in the air, only motionless
white, and beyond, showing but faintly now through the coming twilight,
the lofty cliff that had saved him.

He drew back into his lair, and the darkness came down. Despite his
hunger, he slept fairly well. In the night a little snow fell at times,
but his blanket roof protected him, and he remained dry and warm. The
new snow was, in a way, a satisfaction, as it completely hid his trail
from the glance of any wandering Indian. He awoke the next morning to
a gray, somber day, with piercing winds from the northwest. He did not
feel the pangs of hunger until he had been awake about a half hour, and
then they came with redoubled force. Moreover, he had become weaker in
the night, and, added to the loss of muscular strength, was a decrease
in the power of the will. Hunger was eating away his mental as well as
his physical fiber. He did not face the situation with quite the same
confidence that he felt the day before. The wilderness looked a little
more threatening.

His lips felt as if he were suffering from fever, and his shoulders and
back were stiff. But he drew his belt tighter again, and then uncovered
his left ankle. The swelling had gone down a little, and he could move
it with more freedom than on the day before, but he could not yet walk.
Once more he made his grim calculation. In two days he could certainly
walk and hunt game or make a try for "The Alcove," so far as his ankle
was concerned, but would hunger overpower him before that time? Gaining
strength in one direction, he was losing it in another.

Now he began to grow angry with himself. The light inroad that famine
made upon his will was telling. It seemed incredible that he, so
powerful, so skillful, so self reliant, so long used to the wilderness
and to every manner of hardship, should be held there in a snowbank by
a bruised ankle to die like a crippled rabbit. His comrades could not be
more than ten miles away. He could walk. He would walk! He stood upright
and stepped out into the snow, but pain, so agonizing that he could
scarcely keep from crying out, shot through his whole body, and he sank
back into the shelter, sure not to make such an experiment again for
another full day.

The day passed much like its predecessor, except that he took down the
blanket cover of his snow hut and kindled up his fire again, more for
the sake of cheerfulness than for warmth, because he was not suffering
from cold. There was a certain life and light about the coals and the
bright flame, but the relief did not last long, and by and by he let it
go out. Then be devoted himself to watching the heavens and the surface
of the snow. Some winter bird, duck or goose, might be flying by, or a
wandering deer might be passing. He must not lose any such chance. He
was more than ever a fierce creature of prey, sitting at the mouth of
his den, the rifle across his knee, his tanned face so thin that the
cheek bones showed high and sharp, his eyes bright with fever and the
fierce desire for prey, and the long, lean body drawn forward as if it
were about to leap.

He thought often of dragging himself down to the lake, breaking a hole
in the ice, and trying to fish, but the idea invariably came only to be
abandoned. He had neither hook nor bait. In the afternoon he chewed the
edge of his buckskin hunting shirt, but it was too thoroughly tanned
and dry. It gave back no sustenance. He abandoned the experiment and lay
still for a long time.

That night he had a slight touch of frenzy, and began to laugh at
himself. It was a huge joke! What would Timmendiquas or Thayendanegea
think of him if they knew how he came to his end? They would put him
with old squaws or little children. And how Braxton Wyatt and his
lieutenant, the squat Tory, would laugh! That was the bitterest thought
of all. But the frenzy passed, and he fell into a sleep which was only
a succession of bad dreams. He was running the gauntlet again among
the Shawnees. Again, kneeling to drink at the clear pool, he saw in the
water the shadow of the triumphant warrior holding the tomahawk above
him. One after another the most critical periods of his life were lived
over again, and then he sank into a deep torpor, from which he did not
rouse himself until far into the next day.

Henry was conscious that he was very weak, but he seemed to have
regained much of his lost will. He looked once more at the fatal left
ankle. It had improved greatly. He could even stand upon it, but when he
rose to his feet he felt a singular dizziness. Again, what he had gained
in one way he had lost in another. The earth wavered. The smooth surface
of the lake seemed to rise swiftly, and then to sink as swiftly. The far
slope down which he had shot rose to the height of miles. There was a
pale tinge, too, over the world. He sank down, not because of his ankle,
but because he was afraid his dizzy head would make him fall.

The power of will slipped away again for a minute or two. He was ashamed
of such extraordinary weakness. He looked at one of his hands. It was
thin, like the band of a man wasted with fever, and the blue veins stood
out on the back of it. He could scarcely believe that the hand was his
own. But after the first spasm of weakness was over, the precious will
returned. He could walk. Strength enough to permit him to hobble along
had returned to the ankle at last, and mind must control the rest of his
nervous system, however weakened it might be. He must seek food.

He withdrew into the farthest recess of his covert, wrapped the blanket
tightly about his body, and lay still for a long time. He was preparing
both mind and body for the supreme effort. He knew that everything hung
now on the surviving remnants of his skill and courage.

Weakened by shock and several days of fasting, he had no great reserve
now except the mental, and he used that to the utmost. It was proof of
his youthful greatness that it stood the last test. As he lay there,
the final ounce of will and courage came. Strength which was of the mind
rather than of the body flowed back into his veins; he felt able to dare
and to do; the pale aspect of the world went away, and once more he was
Henry Ware, alert, skillful, and always triumphant.

Then he rose again, folded the blanket, and fastened it on his
shoulders. He looked at the snowshoes, but decided that his left ankle,
despite its great improvement, would not stand the strain. He must
break his way through the snow, which was a full three feet in depth.
Fortunately the crust had softened somewhat in the last two or three
days, and he did not have a covering of ice to meet.

He pushed his way for the first time from the lair under the cliff, his
rifle held in his ready hands, in order that he might miss no chance at
game. To an ordinary observer there would have been no such chance at
all. It was merely a grim white wilderness that might have been without
anything living from the beginning. But Henry, the forest runner, knew
better. Somewhere in the snow were lairs much like the one that he had
left, and in these lairs were wild animals. To any such wild animal,
whether panther or bear, the hunter would now have been a fearsome
object, with his hollow cheeks, his sunken fiery eyes, and his thin lips
opening now and then, and disclosing the two rows of strong white teeth.

Henry advanced about a rod, and then he stopped, breathing hard, because
it was desperate work for one in his condition to break his way through
snow so deep. But his ankle stood the strain well, and his courage
increased rather than diminished. He was no longer a cripple confined
to one spot. While he stood resting, he noticed a clump of bushes about
half a rod to his left, and a hopeful idea came to him.

He broke his way slowly to the bushes, and then he searched carefully
among them. The snow was not nearly so thick there, and under the
thickest clump, where the shelter was best, he saw a small round
opening. In an instant all his old vigorous life, all the abounding hope
which was such a strong characteristic of his nature, came back to him.
Already he had triumphed over Indians, Tories, the mighty slope, snow,
ice, crippling, and starvation.

He laid the rifle on the snow and took the ramrod in his right hand. He
thrust his left hand into the hole, and when the rabbit leaped for life
from his warm nest a smart blow of the ramrod stretched him dead at the
feet of the hunter. Henry picked up the rabbit. It was large and yet
fat. Here was food for two meals. In the race between the ankle and
starvation, the ankle had won.

He did not give way to any unseemly elation. He even felt a momentary
sorrow that a life must perish to save his own, because all these wild
things were his kindred now. He returned by the path that he had broken,
kindled his fire anew, dexterously skinned and cleaned his rabbit,
then cooked it and ate half, although he ate slowly and with intervals
between each piece. How delicious it tasted, and how his physical being
longed to leap upon it and devour it, but the power of the mind was
still supreme. He knew what was good for himself, and he did it.
Everything was done in order and with sobriety. Then he put the rest of
the rabbit carefully in his food pouch, wrapped the blanket about his
body, leaned back, and stretched his feet to the coals.

What an extraordinary change had come over the world in an hour! He had
not noticed before the great beauty of the lake, the lofty cliffs on the
farther shore, and the forest clothed in white and hanging with icicles.

The winter sunshine was molten silver, pouring down in a flood.

It was not will now, but actuality, that made him feel the strength
returning to his frame. He knew that the blood in his veins had begun
to sparkle, and that his vitality was rising fast. He could have gone
to sleep peacefully, but instead he went forth and hunted again. He
knew that where the rabbit had been, others were likely to be near, and
before he returned he had secured two more. Both of these he cleaned and
cooked at once. When this was done night had come, but he ate again,
and then, securing all his treasures about him, fell into the best sleep
that he had enjoyed since his flight.

He felt very strong the next morning, and he might have started then,
but he was prudent. There was still a chance of meeting the Iroquois,
and the ankle might not stand so severe a test. He would rest in his
nest for another day, and then he would be equal to anything. Few could
lie a whole day in one place with but little to do and with nothing
passing before the eyes, but it was a part of Henry's wilderness
training, and he showed all the patience of the forester. He knew,
too, as the hours went by, that his strength was rising all the while.
To-morrow almost the last soreness would be gone from his ankle and
then he could glide swiftly over the snow, back to his comrades. He
was content. He had, in fact, a sense of great triumph because he had
overcome so much, and here was new food in this example for future
efforts of the mind, for future victories of the will over the body. The
wintry sun came to the zenith, then passed slowly down the curve, but
all the time the boy scarcely stirred. Once there was a flight of small
birds across the heavens, and he watched them vaguely, but apparently he
took no interest. Toward night he stood up in his recess and flexed and
tuned his muscles for a long time, driving out any stiffness that might
come through long lack of motion. Then he ate and lay down, but he did
not yet sleep.

The night was clear, and he looked away toward the point where he knew
"The Alcove" lay. A good moon was now shining, and stars by the score
were springing out. Suddenly at a point on that far shore a spark of red
light appeared and twinkled. Most persons would have taken it for some
low star, but Henry knew better. It was fire put there by human hand for
a purpose, doubtless a signal, and as he looked a second spark appeared
by the first, then a third, then a fourth. He uttered a great sigh of
pleasure. It was his four friends signaling to him somewhere in the vast
unknown that they were alive and well, and beckoning him to come. The
lights burned for fifteen or twenty minutes, and then all went out
together. Henry turned over on his side and fell sound asleep. In the
morning he put on his snowshoes and started.




CHAPTER XIX. THE SAFE RETURN


The surface of the snow had frozen again in the night, and Henry found
good footing for his shoes. For a while he leaned most on the right
ankle, but, as his left developed no signs of soreness, he used them
equally, and sped forward, his spirits rising at every step. The air was
cold, and there was but little breeze, but his own motion made a wind
that whipped his face. The hollows were mostly gone from his cheeks, and
his eyes no longer had the fierce, questing look of the famishing wild
animal in search of prey. A fine red color was suffused through the
brown of his face. He had chosen his course with due precaution. The
broad surface, smooth, white, and glittering, tempted, but he put the
temptation away. He did not wish to run any chance whatever of another
Iroquois pursuit, and he kept in the forest that ran down close to the
water's edge. It was tougher traveling there, but he persisted.

But all thought of weariness and trouble was lost in his glorious
freedom. With his crippled ankle he had been really like a prisoner in
his cell, with a ball and chain to his foot. Now he flew along, while
the cold wind whipped his blood, and felt what a delight it was merely
to live. He went on thus for hours, skirting down toward the cliffs that
contained "The Alcove." He rested a while in the afternoon and ate the
last of his rabbit, but before twilight he reached the creek, and stood
at the hidden path that led up to their home.

Henry sat down behind thick bushes and took off his snowshoes. To one
who had never come before, the whole place would have seemed absolutely
desolate, and even to one not a stranger no sign of life would have been
visible had he not possessed uncommonly keen eyes. But Henry had such
eyes. He saw the faintest wisp of smoke stealing away against the
surface of the cliff, and he felt confident that all four were there. He
resolved to surprise them.

Laying the shoes aside, he crept so carefully up the path that he
dislodged no snow and made no noise of any kind. As he gradually
approached "The Alcove" he beard the murmur of voices, and presently, as
he turned an angle in the path, he saw a beam of glorious mellow light
falling on the snow.

But the murmur of the voices sent a great thrill of delight through him.
Low and indistinct as they were, they had a familiar sound. He knew all
those tones. They were the voices of his faithful comrades, the four who
had gone with him through so many perils and hardships, the little band
who with himself were ready to die at any time, one for another.

He crept a little closer, and then a little closer still. Lying almost
flat on the steep path, and drawing himself forward, he looked into "The
Alcove." A fire of deep, red coals glowed in one corner, and disposed
about it were the four. Paul lay on his elbow on a deerskin, and was
gazing into the coals. Tom Ross was working on a pair of moccasins, Long
Jim was making some kind of kitchen implement, and Shif'less Sol was
talking. Henry could hear the words distinctly, and they were about
himself.

"Henry will turn up all right," he was saying. "Hasn't he always done it
afore? Then ef he's always done it afore he's shorely not goin' to break
his rule now. I tell you, boys, thar ain't enough Injuns an' Tories
between Canady an' New Orleans, an' the Mississippi an' the Atlantic, to
ketch Henry. I bet I could guess what he's doin' right at this moment."

"What is he doing, Sol?" asked Paul.

"When I shet my eyes ez I'm doin' now I kin see him," said the shiftless
one. "He's away off thar toward the north, skirtin' around an Injun
village, Mohawk most likely, lookin' an' listenin' an' gatherin' talk
about their plans."

"He ain't doin' any sech thing," broke in Long Jim.

"I've sleet my eyes, too, Sol Hyde, jest ez tight ez you've shet yours,
an' I see him, too, but he ain't doin' any uv the things that you're
talkin' about."

"What is he doing, Jim?" asked Paul.

"Henry's away off to the south, not to the north," replied the long one,
"an' he's in the Iroquois village that we burned. One house has been
left standin', an' he's been occupyin' it while the big snow's on the
groun'. A whole deer is hangin' from the wall, an' he's been settin'
thar fur days, eatin' so much an' hevin' such a good time that the fat's
hangin' down over his cheeks, an' his whole body is threatenin' to bust
right out uv his huntin' shirt."

Paul moved a little on his elbow and turned the other side of his face
to the fire. Then he glanced at the silent worker with the moccasins.

"Sol and Jim don't seem to agree much in their second sight," he said.
"Can you have any vision, too, Tom?"

"Yes," replied Tom Ross, "I kin. I shet my eyes, but I don't see like
either Sol or Jim, 'cause both uv 'em see wrong. I see Henry, an' I see
him plain. He's had a pow'ful tough time. He ain't threatenin' to bust
with fat out uv no huntin' shirt, his cheeks ain't so full that they are
fallin' down over his jaws. It's t'other way roun'; them cheeks are sunk
a mite, he don't fill out his clothes, an' when he crawls along he drags
his left leg a leetle, though he hides it from hisself. He ain't spyin'
on no Injun village, an' he ain't in no snug camp with a dressed deer
hangin' by the side uv him. It's t'other way 'roan'. He's layin' almost
flat on his face not twenty feet from us, lookin' right in at us, an' I
wuz the first to see him."

All the others sprang to their feet in astonishment, and Henry likewise
sprang to his feet. Three leaps, and he was in the mellow glow.


"And so you saw me, Tom," he exclaimed, as he joyously grasped one hand
after another. "I might have known that, while I could stalk some of
you, I could not stalk all of you."

"I caught the glimpse uv you," said Silent Tom, "while Sol an' Jim wuz
talkin' the foolish talk that they most always talk, an' when Paul
called on me, I thought I would give 'em a dream that 'wuz true, an'
worth tellin'."

"You're right," said Henry. "I've not been having any easy time, and for
a while, boys, it looked as if I never would come back. Sit down, and I
will tell you all about it."

They gave him the warmest place by the fire, brought him the tenderest
food, and he told the long and thrilling tale.

"I don't believe anybody else but you would have tried it, Henry," said
Paul, when they heard of the fearful slide.

"Any one of you would have done it," said Henry, modestly.

"I'm pow'ful glad that you done it for two reasons," said Shif'less
Sol. "One, 'cause it helped you to git away, an' the other, 'cause
that scoundrel, Braxton Wyatt, didn't take you. 'Twould hurt my pride
tre-men-jeous for any uv us to be took by Braxton Wyatt."

"You speak for us all there, Sol," said Paul.

"What have all of you been doing?" asked Henry.

"Not much of anything," replied Shif'less Sol. "We've been scoutin'
