amazingly plentiful. Deer sprang up everywhere, and twice they caught
glimpses of bears shambling away. Squirrels chattered over their heads and
the little people of the forest rustled all about them.

"It shows that no human being has been through here recently," said Tayoga,
"else the game, big and little, would not have been stirring abroad with so
much confidence."

"Then as soon as we make the portage we can return to the river with the
canoe."

"Dagaeoga grows lazy. Does he not know that to do the hard thing
strengthens both mind and body? Has he forgotten what Mynheer Jacobus
Huysman told us so often in Albany? Now is a splendid opportunity for
Dagaeoga to harden himself a great deal."

"I realize it, Tayoga, but I don't want my mind and body to grow too hard.
When one is all steel one ceases to be receptive. Can you see the river
through the trees there?"

"I catch the glitter of sunlight on the water."

"I hope it looks like deep water."

"It is sufficient to float the canoe and the lazy Dagaeoga can take to his
paddle again."

They put their boat back into the stream, uttering great sighs of relief,
and resumed the far more pleasant travel by water, the day remaining golden
as if doing its best to please them. They had another long stretch of good
water, and they did not stop until they were well into the afternoon. Then
Tayoga proposed that they make a fire and cook all of the deer.

"It seems that the risk here is not great," he said, "and we may not have
the chance later on."

Robert, who still felt that they were protected and that for a day or two
no harm could come to them under any circumstances, was more than willing,
and they spent the remainder of the day in their culinary task. After dark
he slept three hours, to be followed by Tayoga for the same length of time,
and about midnight they started up the stream again, with their food cooked
and ready beside them.

Although the Onondaga shared Robert's feeling that they were protected for
the time, both exercised all their usual caution, believing thoroughly in
the old saying that heaven helps those who help themselves. It was this
watchfulness, particularly of ear, that caused them to hear the dip of
paddles approaching up the stream. Softly and in silence, they lifted the
canoe out of water and hid with it in the greenwood. Then they saw a fleet
of eight large canoes go by, all containing warriors, armed heavily and in
full war paint.

"Hurons," whispered Tayoga. "They go south for a great taking of scalps,
doubtless to join Montcalm, who is surely meditating another sudden and
terrible blow."

"And he will strike at our forts by Andiatarocte," rejoined Robert. "I hope
we can find Willet and Rogers soon and take the news. All the woods must be
full of warriors going south to Montcalm."

"They have French guns, and good ones too, and they are wrapped in French
blankets. Onontio does not forget the power of the warriors and draws them
to him."

The silent file of war canoes passed on and out of sight, and, for a space,
Robert's heart was heavy within him. He felt the call of battle, he ought
to be in the south, giving what he could to the defense against the might
of Montcalm, but to go now would be merely a dash in the dark. They must
continue to seek Willet and Rogers.

When the last Indian canoe was far beyond hearing they relaunched their own
and paddled until nearly daybreak, coming to a place where bushes and tall
grass grew thick in the shallow water at the edge of the river.

"Here," said Tayoga, "we will leave the canoe. A good hiding place offers
itself, and with the dawn it will be time for us to take to the woods."

They concealed with great art the little boat that had served them so well,
sinking it in the heart of the densest growth and then drawing back the
bushes and weeds so skillfully that the keenest Indian eye would not have
noticed that anyone had ever been there.

"I hope," said Robert sincerely, "that we'll have the chance to return
here some time or other and use it again."

"That rests in the keeping of Manitou," said the Onondaga, "and now we will
take up our packs and go eastward toward Oneadatote."

"But we won't go fast, because my pack, with all this venison in it, is by
no means light."

"It is no heavier than mine, Dagaeoga, but, as you say, we will not hasten,
lest we pass the Great Bear and the Mountain Wolf in the forest and not
know it. But I think we are safe in going toward Oneadatote, as Rogers and
his rangers usually operate in the region of George and Champlain."

They traveled two days and two nights and came once more among the high
ridges and peaks. They saw many Indian trails and always they watched for
another. On the third day Tayoga discovered traces in moss and he said with
great satisfaction to his comrade:

"Lo, Dagaeoga, we, too, be wise in our time. The print here speaks to me
like the print on the page of a book. It says that the Great Bear has
passed this way."

"I can tell that the traces were made by the feet of a white man," said
Robert, "but how do you know they are Dave's?"

"I have noticed that the Great Bear's feet are more slender than the
average. Also he bears less upon the heel. He poises himself more upon the
toe, like the great swordsman we saw him to be that time in Quebec."

"The distinctions are too fine for me, Tayoga, but I don't question your
own powers of observation. I accept your statement with gratitude and joy,
too, because now we know that Dave is alive, and somewhere in the great
northern forest of the Province of New York. I knew he could not be dead,
but it's a relief anyhow to have the proof. But as I see no other traces,
how is it, do you think, that he happens to be alone?"

"The Great Bear may have been making a little scout by himself. I still
think that he is with Rogers and the rangers, and when we follow his trail
we are likely to find soon that he has rejoined them."

The traces led north and east until they came to rocky ground, where they
were lost, and Tayoga assumed from the fact that they were several days
old, otherwise he could have made them out even in the more difficult
region. But when the path, despite all his searching, vanished in the air,
he began to look higher than the earth. Soon he smiled and said:

"Ah, the Great Bear is as wise as the fox and the serpent combined. He
knows that a little chance may lead to great results, and so he neglects
none of the little chances."

"I don't understand you," said Robert, puzzled.

The Onondaga bent over a bush and showed where a twig had been cut off.

"See the wound made by his knife," he said, "and look! here is another on a
bush farther on. Both wounds are partly healed, showing that the cut of the
knife was made several days ago. It occurred to the Great Bear that we
might strike his trail some time or other, and when he came to the stony
uplift upon which his moccasins would leave no sign, he made traces
elsewhere. He knew the chance of our ever seeing them was slight, and he
may have made thousands of other traces that we never will see, but the
possibility that we would see some one of the many became a probability."

"As you present it, it seems simple, Tayoga, but what an infinity of pains
he must have taken!"

"The Great Bear is that kind of a man."

The hard, rocky ground extended several miles and their progress over it
was, of necessity, very slow, as Tayoga was compelled to look with extreme
care for the signs the hunter might have left. He found the cut twigs five
times and twice footprints where softer soil existed between the rocks,
making the proofs conclusive to both, and when they emerged into a normal
region beyond they picked up his defined and clear trail once more.

"I shall be glad to see the Great Bear," said the Onondaga, "and I think he
will be as pleased to know certainly that we are alive as we are to be
assured that he is."

"He'd never desert us, and if you hadn't come to the Indian village I think
he'd have done so later on."

"The Great Bear is a man such as few men are. Now, his trail leads on,
straight and bold. He took no trouble to hide it, which proves that he had
friends in this region, and was not afraid to be followed. Here he sat on a
fallen log and rested a while."

"How do you know that, Tayoga?"

"See the prints in front of the log. They were made by the heels of his
moccasins only. He tilted his feet up until they rested merely on the
heels. The Great Bear could not have been in that attitude while standing.
Nay, there is more. The Great Bear sat down here not to rest but to think."

"It's just supposition with you, Tayoga."

"It is not supposition at all, Dagaeoga, it is certainty. Look, several
little pieces of the bark on the dead log where the Great Bear sat, are
picked off. Here are the places from which they were taken, and here are
the fragments themselves lying on the ground. The Great Bear must have been
thinking very hard and he must have been in great doubt to have had uneasy
hands, because, as you and I know, Dagaeoga, his mind and nerves are of the
calmest."

"What, then, do you think was on his mind?"

"He was undecided whether to go on towards Oneadatote or to turn back and
seek us anew. Here are three or four traces, a short and detached trail
leading in the direction from which we have come. Then the traces suddenly
turn. He sat down again and thought it over a second time."

"You can't possibly know that he resumed his seat on the log!"

"Oh, yes, I can, Dagaeoga. I wish all that we had to see was as easy,
because here is the second place on the log where he picked at the bark.
Mighty as the Great Bear is he cannot sit in two places at once. Not
Tododaho himself could do that."

"It's conclusive, and I find here at the end of the log his trail, leading
on toward the east."

"And he went fast, because the distance between his footprints lengthens.
But he did not do so long. He became very slow suddenly. The space between
the footprints shortens all at once. He turned aside, too, from his course,
and crept through the bushes toward the south."

"How do you know that he crept?"

"Because for many steps he rested his weight wholly on his toes. The traces
show it very clearly. The Great Bear was stalking something, and it was not
a foe."

"That, at least, is supposition, Tayoga."

"Not supposition, Dagaeoga, and while not absolute certainty it is a great
probability. The toeprints lead straight toward the tiny little lake that
you see shining through the foliage. It was game and not a foe that the
Great Bear was seeking. He wished to shoot a wild fowl. Look, the edge of
the lake here is low, and the tender water grasses grow to a distance of
several yards from the shore. It is just the place where wild ducks or wild
geese would be found, and the Great Bear secured the one he wanted. If you
will look closely, Dagaeoga, you will see the faint trace of blood on the
grass. Blood lasts a long time. Manitou has willed that it should be so,
because it is the life fluid of his creatures. It was a wild goose that the
Great Bear shot."

"And why not a wild duck?"

"Because here are two of the feathers, and even Dagaeoga knows they are
the feathers of a goose and not of a duck. It was, too, the fattest goose
in the flock."

"Which you have no possible way of knowing, Tayoga."

"But I do, Dagaeoga. It was the fattest goose of the flock, because the
fattest goose of the flock was the one that so wise and skillful a hunter
as the Great Bear would, as a matter of course, select and kill. Learn, O,
Dagaeoga, to trail with your mind as well as with your eye, and ear. The
day may come when the white man will equal the red man in intellect, but it
is yet far off. The Great Bear was very, very hungry, and we shall soon
reach the place where he cleaned and cooked his goose."

"Come, come, Tayoga! You may draw good conclusions from what you see, but
there are no prophets nowadays. You don't know anything about the state of
Dave's appetite, when he shot that goose, and you can't predict with
certainty that we'll soon come to the place where he made it ready for the
eating."

"I cannot, Dagaeoga! Why, I am doing it this very instant. Mind! Mind! Did
I not tell you to use your mind? O, Dagaeoga, when will you learn the
simpler things of life? The Great Bear would not have risked a shot at a
wild goose in enemy country, if he had not been very hungry. Otherwise he
would have waited until he rejoined the rangers to obtain food. And, having
risked his shot, and having obtained his goose, which was the fattest in
the flock, he became hungrier than ever. And having risked so much he was
willing to risk more in order to complete the task he had undertaken,
without which the other risks that he had run would have been all in vain."

"Tayoga, I can almost believe that you have your dictionary with you in
your knapsack."

"Not in my knapsack, Dagaeoga, but in my head, where yours also ought to
be. Ah, here is where the Great Bear began to make preparations to cook his
goose! His trail wanders back and forth. He was looking for fallen wood to
build the fire. And there, in the little sink between the hills, was where
he built it. Even you, Dagaeoga, can see the ashes and burnt ends of
sticks. The Great Bear must have been as hungry as a wolf to have eaten a
whole goose, and the fattest goose of the flock, too. How do I know he ate
it all? Look in the grass and leaves and you will find enough bones to make
the complete frame of a goose, and every bone is picked clean. Wild animals
might have gleaned on them, you say? No. Here is the trail of a wolf that
came to the dip after the Great Bear had gone, drawn by the savory odors,
but he turned back. He never really entered the dip. Why? When he stood at
the edge his acute and delicate senses told him no meat was left on the
bones, and a wolf neither makes idle exertion, nor takes foolish risk. He
went back at once. And if the wolf had not come, there is another reason
why I knew the Great Bear ate all the goose. He would not have thrown away
any of the bones with flesh still on them. He is too wise a man to waste.
He would have taken with him what was left of the goose. Having finished
his most excellent dinner, the Great Bear looked for a brook."

"Why a brook?"

"Because he was thirsty. Everyone is thirsty after a heavy meal. He turned
to the right, as the ground slopes down in that direction. Even you,
Dagaeoga, know that one is more likely to find a brook in a valley than on
a hilltop. Here is the brook, a fine, clear little stream with a sandy
bottom, and here is where the Great Bear knelt and drank of the cool water.
The prints of his strong knees show like carving on a wall. Finding that he
was still thirsty he came back for another drink, because the second prints
are a little distance from the first.

"Then, after rejoicing over the tender goose and his renewed strength, he
suddenly became very cautious. The danger from the warriors, which he had
forgotten or overlooked in his hunger, returned in acute form to his mind.
He came to the brook a third time, but not to drink. He intended to wade in
the stream that he might hide his trail, which, as you well know, Dagaeoga,
is the oldest and best of all forest devices for such purposes. How many
millions of times must the people of the wilderness have used it!

"Now the Great Bear had two ways to go in the water, up the stream or down
the stream, and you and I, Dagaeoga, think he went down the stream, because
the current leads on the whole eastward, which was the way in which he
wished to go. At least, we will choose that direction and I will take one
side of the bank and you the other."

They followed the brook more than a mile with questing eyes, and Tayoga
detected the point at which Willet had emerged, plunging anew into the
forest.

"Warriors, if they had picked up his trail, could have followed the brook
as we did," said Robert.

