stranger from beyond the seas had proved after all that he was a man
among men, and no Frenchwoman could resist a romance so strong and true
in the face of all that war could do.

John felt Julie's hand trembling in his, but she did not draw it away.
Her lashes were lowered a little now, but her gaze still rested upon
him, soft yet confident and powerful. He had believed in her courage. He
had believed that she would suffer no shock when she should see that he
was the strange man who had been at the wheel, and his confidence was
justified.

"And it was you who brought us up the mountain?" she said.

"The Prince of Auersperg himself chose me because I was a stranger and
he did not wish anyone else in the castle to know where you were sent."

He released her hand and rose. The soft but strong gaze was still upon
him, as if she were yet trying to persuade herself that it was reality.

"I felt all the time that some day we should leave the castle together,"
she said, "but I did not dream that it was you who sat before me as we
came up the mountain."

"But it was," said John, joyfully. "I think Wharton himself would have
complimented me on the way I drove the machine. I have a letter in my
pocket for Muller, the prince's forester who lives here, but it seems
that he is absent on other duty."

"And then," said the practical Suzanne, "it becomes us to take
possession of the house at once. Look forth, sir! how the storm beats!"

Through the open door they saw the snow driven past in sheets that
seemed almost solid. John handed the lantern to Suzanne and said:

"Wait here a moment."

"Where are you going, Mr. Scott?" exclaimed Julie. "You will not desert
us?"

"Never!"

He was out of the door in a couple of strides, and then he sprang into
the automobile. He had noticed a small garage back of the lodge and he
meant to save the machine, feeling sure that they would have need of it
later. In a few minutes it was safely inside with the door fastened so
tightly behind him that no wind could blow it loose, and he was back at
the lodge with the wind and snow driving so hard that he opened the door
but little, and, slipping in, slammed it shut. Then he turned the heavy
key in the lock, and stared in surprise and pleasure at the room.

It was a great apartment, the heavy log walls adorned with the horns and
stuffed heads of wild animals. Several bear skins and other rugs lay
upon the oaken floor. There were chairs and tables with books upon them,
and, at one end, the dry wood that filled a great fireplace was
crackling and flashing merrily. The practical Suzanne, noticing the
heap, had set a match to it at once, and already the room, great as it
was, was filled with warmth and light. Julie, having taken off her heavy
furs, was sitting in a chair before the fire, the leaping flames
deepening the light in her eyes and the new rose in her cheeks.

John's heart swelled with thankfulness and joy. He had not dreamed that
so much could be achieved. A day before he would have said that it was
impossible. As the whistling of the wind rose to a fierce roar and the
snow drove by, he realized, with a shudder at the danger escaped so
narrowly, that they had arrived just in time. The automobile itself
would have been driven from the path by the fierce Alpine storm now
raging.

The stern but gifted Suzanne had found lamps and had lighted them, and
like a capable soldier she was already looking over her field of battle.

"Not so bad," she said. "His Highness, Prince Karl of Auersperg, builds
a little palace and calls it his hunting lodge. But his heart would turn
black within him if he knew who was one of the guests in it today."

John smiled, and meeting Julie's eyes, he smiled again. He saw a flame
there to which his own soul responded, and he tingled from head to foot.
The omens had not been in vain. The blessings of the righteous had
availed. Again it may be said that he had no faith in the supernatural,
at least here on earth, but all things must have worked for him in a
world that seemed wholly against him. He believed that he read such a
thought too in the glowing dark blue of her own eyes.

"You are wonderfully right, Suzanne," said John. "Probably the Prince of
Auersperg had the lodge especially prepared for the coming of
Mademoiselle Julie. Perhaps there is a telephone."

"Truly there is, Mr. Scott," said Suzanne. "Here it is, in the corner."

"Then," said John, "it's very likely that we'll hear very soon from
Zillenstein, and since he has kept your journey secret it is sure to be
Prince Karl himself who will call you up. I must be the one to answer.
Now will you sit here by the fire, Miss Julie, and rest while your most
capable Suzanne and I look further into our new residence. There is no
possibility of any caller, save the worthy Muller, to whom I bear a
letter from the prince, in which I have no doubt I am highly
recommended."

"Very well, Mr. John, I obey you," said Julie, sitting down again in a
large armchair before the flames, where the ruddy light once more
deepened the gold of her hair and the rose of her cheeks. "It seems that
you intend to be master here."

"I'm master already. My rule has become supreme, nor am I any usurper.
Do I not hold a commission from Prince Karl of Auersperg, the owner of
this lodge, and did he not intrust you to my care? I mean to do my duty.
And now come, Suzanne, you and I will see what this wilderness castle of
ours contains."

The hunting lodge was worthy of a prince. It was built of massive logs,
but the interior was improved and finished in modern style. There were
no electric lights, but it contained almost every other luxury or
convenience. Besides the great room in which Julie was now sitting, they
found on the ground floor a writing-room well supplied, a small parlor,
a gunroom amply equipped with a variety of arms and ammunition, a
dining-room containing much princely silver, a butler's pantry, a
kitchen and a storeroom holding food enough to last them a year. Above
stairs were six bedrooms, any one of which the capable Suzanne could put
in order in half an hour. All the house had running water drawn from
some reservoir in the mountains.

John had seen such luxurious camps as this in the Adirondacks in his own
country, and there were many others scattered about the mountains of
Europe, but he was very grateful now to find such a refuge for Julie.
Again he realized how fortunate they had been to arrive so early. As he
looked from an upper window he saw that the storm was driving with
tremendous fury. Even behind the huge logs he heard the wind roaring and
thundering, and now and then, through the thick glass of the windows, he
caught a glimpse of a young pine torn up by its roots and whirled past.

Where was Muller, the forester, who had charge of the lodge and who
lived there, and what kind of a man was he? It was the only question
that was troubling him now. If he did not come soon he could not come
that night, nor perhaps the next day. The snowfall was immense, with
every sign of heavy continuance, and by morning it certainly would lie
many feet deep on the mountain. Traveling would be impossible. He heard
the distant sound of a bell, and knowing that the telephone was calling,
he ran down the stairway to the great room. Julie had risen and was
looking at the instrument with dilated eyes, as if it sounded a note of
alarm, as if their happy escape was threatened by a new danger. John
believed that she had fallen asleep before the heat of the fire, and
that the ring of the telephone had struck upon her dreaming ear like a
shell.

"It's he! It's the terrible prince himself!" she exclaimed, her
faculties not yet fully released from cloudy sleep.

"Very likely," said John, "but have no fear. Zillenstein is only six
leagues away at ordinary times, but it's six hundred tonight, with the
greatest storm that I've ever seen sweeping in between us."

He took down the receiver and put it to his ear.

"Who is there?" asked a deep voice, which he knew to be that of Prince
Karl.

"Castel, Your Highness."

"You arrived without accident?"

"Wholly without accident, Your Highness. We reached the lodge a few
minutes before the storm broke."

"The lady, Mademoiselle Lannes, is safe and comfortable?"

"Entirely so. Your Highness. The maid, Suzanne, is preparing her room
for her."

"You found Muller there waiting for you according to instructions?"

Some prudential motive prompted John to reply:

"Yes, Your Highness, he had everything ready and was waiting. I
presented your letter at once."

"You have done well, Castel. Keep the lady within the house, but the
storm will do that anyhow. Do not under any circumstances call me up,
but I will call you again when I think fit. Bear in mind that the reward
of both you and Muller shall be large, if you serve me well in this most
important matter."

"Yes, Your Highness. I thank you now."

"Keep it in mind, always."

"Yes, Your Highness."

His Highness, Prince Karl of Auersperg, replaced the telephone stand
upon the table in his bedroom at Zillenstein, and John Scott hung up the
receiver in the hunting lodge on the mountain.

"It was Prince Karl," he said to Julie, who still stood motionless
looking at him. "He wanted to know if you were safe and comfortable and
I said yes. He said he would call us up again but he won't."

He lifted a chair and shattered the telephone to fragments.

"It might afford a peculiar pleasure to talk with him," he said, "but
it's best that we have no further communication while we're here. An
incautious word or two might arouse suspicion and that's what we want
most to avoid. When he fails to get an answer to his call he'll think
that this huge snow has broken down the wire. Most likely it will do so
anyhow. And now, Miss Julie, Suzanne has your room ready for you. If you
wish to withdraw to it for a little while you'll find dinner waiting you
when you return."

"And the day of the abandoned hotel in Chastel has come back?"

"But a better and a longer day. We're prisoners here together on the
mountain, you and I, and your chaperon, servant and sometime ruler,
Suzanne Picard, who I find is not as grim as she looks."

There was a spark in his eyes as he looked at her, and an answering fire
leaped up in her own. He was in very truth a perfect and gentle knight,
who would gladly come so far and through so many dangers for her and for
her alone. He was her very own champion, and as her dark blue eyes
looked into the gray deeps of his her soul thrilled with the knowledge
of it. Deep red flushed her from brow to chin, and then slowly ebbed
away.

"John," she said, putting her hand in his, "no woman has ever owed more
gratitude to a man."

"And I am finding repayment now for what I was happy to do," he said,
kissing her hand again in that far-off knightly fashion.

Again the red tide in her cheeks and then she swiftly left the room, but
John threw himself in a chair before the great fire and gazed into the
coals. Wide awake, he was dreaming. He knew they would be days in the
lodge. The storm was so great that no one could come from Zillenstein in
a week. Providence or fortune had been so kind that he began to fear
enough had been done for them. Such good luck could not go on forever,
and there, too, was the man Muller who might make trouble when he came.

Nevertheless his feeling was but momentary. The extraordinary lightness
of heart returned. The storm roared without and at times it volleyed
down the chimney, making the flames leap and dance, but the sense of
security and safety was strong within him. The war passed by, forgotten
for the time. History, it was true, repeated itself, and this was the
abandoned hotel at Chastel over again, but they were in a far better
position now. No one could come against them, unless the man Muller
should prove to be a foe. And he resolved, too, gazing into the flames,
that they should not steal Julie from him here, as they had taken her at
Chastel.

Darkness, save for the gleam of the snow, came over the mountain, but
the flakes were driving so thick and fast that they formed a white
blanket before the window, as impervious as black night itself. It
reminded him of a great storm he had seen once on his uncle's ranch on
the high table land of Montana, but to him it came that night as a
friend and not as an enemy, cutting them off from Zillenstein and all
the dangers it held.

He lighted candles and lamps in the great room and all the smaller rooms
clustering about it. He would have everything cheerful for Julie when
she returned.

He had seen Suzanne take several heavy packages from the automobile and
he had no doubt that they had come amply provided with clothing, that
for Julie, belonging doubtless to a young cousin or niece of the prince
who stayed sometimes at Zillenstein.

As for himself, if they remained long he must depend upon the spare
raiment of the forester, and, remembering suddenly that he might effect
his own improvement, he hunted for Muller's room and discovered it on
the second floor. Here he found shaving materials, and rapidly cleared
his face of the young beard that he despised. Muller's clothing was
scattered about, and he judged from it that the forester was a man of
about his own size. After some hesitation, he took off his own coat and
put on a brilliant Tyrolean jacket which he surmised the owner reserved
for occasions of state.

"If you come, Mr. Muller, I'll try to explain to you why I do this,"
said John aloud. "I know you'll forgive me when I tell you it's in honor
of a lady."

Then he laughed at himself in a glass. It was a gorgeous jacket, but one
could wear more brilliant clothes in Europe than in America, and his
appearance was certainly improved. He returned to the great room and
someone sitting in the chair before the fire rose to receive him.

It was Julie all in white, a semi-evening dress that heightened in a
wonderful fashion her glorious, blond beauty. He had often thought how
this slender maid would bloom into a woman and now he beheld her here in
the lodge, his prisoner and not Auersperg's. A swift smile passed over
her face as she saw him, and bowing low before him she said:

"I see, Mr. John, that you have not wasted your time. You come arrayed
in purple and gold."

"But it's borrowed plumage, Miss Julie."

"And so is mine."

"It can't be. I'm sure it was made for you."

"The real owner wouldn't say so."

"You will forgive me if I tell you something, won't you?"

"It depends upon what it is."

The red in her checks deepened a little. The gray eyes of John were
speaking in very plain language to Julie.

"I must say it, stern necessity compels, if I don't I'll be very
unhappy."

"I wouldn't have you miserable."

"I want to tell you, Julie, that you are overwhelmingly beautiful
tonight."

"I've always heard that Americans were very bold, it's true."

"But remember the provocation, Julie."

"Ah, sir, I have no protection and you take advantage of it."

"There's Suzanne."

"But she's in the kitchen."

"Where I hope she'll stay until she's wanted."

She was silent and the red in her cheeks deepened again. But the blue
eyes and the gray yet talked together.

"I worship you, your beauty and your great soul, but your great soul
most of all," said the gray.

"Any woman would be proud to have a lover who has followed her through
so many and such great dangers, and who has rescued her at last. She
could not keep from loving him," said the blue.
