2. Oh, well for the fisherman's boy,
     That he shouts with his sister at play!
   Oh, well for the sailor lad,
     That he sings in his boat on the bay!

3. And the stately ships go on
     To their haven under the hill;
   But oh for the touch of a vanished hand,
     And the sound of a voice that is still!

4. Break, break, break,
     At the foot of thy crags, O sea!
   But the tender grace of a day that is dead
     Will never come back to me.



XCI. TRANSPORTATION AND PLANTING OF SEEDS.

Henry David Thoreau (b. 1817, d. 1862). This eccentric American author and
naturalist was born at Concord, Mass. He graduated at Harvard University
in 1837. He was a good English and classical scholar, and was well
acquainted with the literature of the East. His father was a maker of lead
pencils, and he followed the business for a time, but afterwards supported
himself mainly by teaching, lecturing, land surveying, and carpentering.
In 1845 he built himself a small wooden house near Concord, on the shore
of Walden Pond, where he lived about two years. He was intimate with
Hawthorne, Emerson, and other literary celebrities. His principal works
are "Walden, or Life in the Woods," "A Week on Concord and Merrimac
Rivers," "Excursions," "Maine Woods," "Cape Cod," "A Yankee in Canada,"
and "Letters to Various Persons." In descriptive power Mr. Thoreau has
few, if any, superiors.

1. In all the pines a very thin membrane, in appearance much like an
insect's wing, grows over and around the seed, and independent of it,
while the latter is being developed within its base. In other words, a
beautiful thin sack is woven around the seed, with a handle to it such as
the wind can take hold of, and it is then committed to the wind, expressly
that it may transport the seed and extend the range of the species; and
this it does as effectually as when seeds are sent by mail, in a different
kind of sack, from the patent office.

2. There is, then, no necessity for supposing that the pines have sprung
up from nothing, and I am aware that I am not at all peculiar in asserting
that they come from seeds, though the mode of their propagation by Nature
has been but little attended to. They are very extensively raised from the
seed in Europe, and are beginning to be here.

3. When you cut down an oak wood, a pine wood will not at once spring up
there unless there are, or have been quite recently, seed-bearing pines
near enough for the seeds to be blown from them. But, adjacent to a forest
of pines, if you prevent other crops from growing there, you will surely
have an extension of your pine forest, provided the soil is suitable.

4. As I walk amid hickories, even in August, I hear the sound of green
pignuts falling from time to time, cut off by the chickaree over my head.
In the fall I notice on the ground, either within or in the neighborhood
of oak woods, on all sides of the town, stout oak twigs three or four
inches long, bearing half a dozen empty acorn cups, which twigs have been
gnawed off by squirrels, on both sides of the nuts, in order to make them
more portable. The jays scream and the red squirrels scold while you are
clubbing and shaking the chestnut trees, for they are there on the same
errand, and two of a trade never agree.

5. I frequently see a red or a gray squirrel cast down a green chestnut
burr, as I am going through the woods, and I used to think, sometimes,
that they were cast at me. In fact, they are so busy about it, in the
midst of the chestnut season, that you can not stand long in the woods
without hearing one fall.

6. A sportsman told me that he had, the day before--that was in the middle
of October--seen a green chestnut burr dropped on our great river meadow,
fifty rods from the nearest wood, and much farther from the nearest
chestnut tree, and he could not tell how it came there. Occasionally, when
chestnutting in midwinter, I find thirty or forty nuts in a pile, left in
its gallery just under the leaves, by the common wood mouse.

7. But especially, in the winter, the extent to which this transportation
and planting of nuts is carried on, is made apparent by the snow. In
almost every wood you will see where the red or gray squirrels have pawed
down through the snow in a hundred places, sometimes two feet deep, and
almost always directly to a nut or a pine cone, as directly as if they had
started from it and bored upward,--which you and I could not have done. It
would be difficult for us to find one before the snow falls. Commonly, no
doubt, they had deposited them there in the fall. You wonder if they
remember the localities or discover them by the scent.

8. The red squirrel commonly has its winter abode in the earth under a
thicket of evergreens, frequently under a small clump of evergreens in the
midst of a deciduous wood. If there are any nut trees, which still retain
their nuts, standing at a distance without the wood, their paths often
lead directly to and from them. We, therefore, need not suppose an oak
standing here and there in the wood in order to seed it, but if a few
stand within twenty or thirty rods of it, it is sufficient.

9. I think that I may venture to say that every white-pine cone that falls
to the earth naturally in this town, before opening and losing its seeds,
and almost every pitch-pine one that falls at all, is cut off by a
squirrel; and they begin to pluck them long before they are ripe, so that
when the crop of white-pine cones is a small one, as it commonly is, they
cut off thus almost everyone of these before it fairly ripens.

10. I think, moreover, that their design, if I may so speak, in cutting
them off green, is partly to prevent their opening and losing their seeds,
for these are the ones for which they dig through the snow, and the only
white-pine cones which contain anything then. I have counted in one heap
the cores of two hundred and thirty-nine pitch-pine cones which had been
cut off and stripped by the red squirrel the previous winter.

11. The nuts thus left on the surface, or buried just beneath it, are
placed in the most favorable circumstances for germinating. I have
sometimes wondered how those which merely fell on the surface of the earth
got planted; but, by the end of December, I find the chestnut of the same
year partially mixed with the mold, as it were, under the decaying and
moldy leaves, where there is all the moisture and manure they want, for
the nuts fall fast. In a plentiful year a large proportion of the nuts are
thus covered loosely an inch deep, and are, of course, somewhat concealed
from squirrels.

12. One winter, when the crop had been abundant, I got, with the aid of a
rake, many quarts of these nuts as late as the tenth of January; and
though some bought at the store the same day were more than half of them
moldy, I did not find a single moldy one among those which I picked from
under the wet and moldy leaves, where they had been snowed on once or
twice. Nature knew how to pack them best. They were still plump and
tender. Apparently they do not heat there, though wet. In the spring they
are all sprouting.

13. Occasionally, when threading the woods in the fall, you will hear a
sound as if some one had broken a twig, and, looking up, see a jay pecking
at an acorn, or you will see a flock of them at once about it, in the top
of an oak, and hear them break it off. They then fly to a suitable limb,
and placing the acorn under one foot, hammer away at it busily, making a
sound like a woodpecker's tapping, looking round from time to time to see
if any foe is approaching, and soon reach the meat, and nibble at it,
holding up their heads to swallow while they hold the remainder very
firmly with their claws. Nevertheless, it often drops to the ground before
the bird has done with it.

14. I can confirm what William Barton wrote to Wilson, the ornithologist,
that "The jay is one of the most useful agents in the economy of nature
for disseminating forest trees and other nuciferous and hard-seeded
vegetables on which they feed. In performing this necessary duty they drop
abundance of seed in their flight over fields, hedges, and by fences,
where they alight to deposit them in the post holes, etc. It is remarkable
what numbers of young trees rise up in fields and pastures after a wet
winter and spring. These birds alone are capable in a few years' time to
replant all the cleared lands."

15. I have noticed that squirrels also frequently drop nuts in open land,
which will still further account for the oaks and walnuts which spring up
in pastures; for, depend on it, every new tree comes from a seed. When I
examine the little oaks, one or two years old, in such places, I
invariably find the empty acorn from which they sprung.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Mem'brane, a thin, soft tissue of interwoven fibers. 2.
Prop-a-ga'tion, the continuance of a kind by successive production. 4.
Port'a-ble, capable of being carried. 7. Trans-por-ta'tion, the act of
conveying from one place to another. 8. De--cid'u-ous, said of trees whose
leaves fall in autumn. 11. Ger'mi-nat-ing, sprouting, beginning to grow.
14. Or-ni-thol'o-gist, one skilled in the science which treats of birds.
E-con'o-my, orderly system, Dis-sem'i-nat-ing, scattering for growth and
propagation. Nu-cif 'er-ous, bearing nuts.



XCII. SPRING AGAIN.

Celia Thaxter (b. 1836, d. 1894), whose maiden name was Laighton, was born
in Portsmouth, N.H. Much of her early life was passed on White Island, one
of a group of small islands, called the Isles of Shoals, about ten miles
from the shore, where she lived in the lighthouse cottage. In 1867-68, she
published, in the "Atlantic Monthly," a number of papers on these islands,
which were afterwards bound in a separate volume. Mrs. Thaxter was a
contributor to several periodicals, and in strength and beauty of style
has few equals among American writers. The following selection is from a
volume of her poems entitled "Drift Weed."

1. I stood on the height in the stillness
     And the planet's outline scanned,
   And half was drawn with the line of sea
     And half with the far blue land.

2. With wings that caught the sunshine
     In the crystal deeps of the sky,
   Like shapes of dreams, the gleaming gulls
     Went slowly floating by.

3. Below me the boats in the harbor
     Lay still, with their white sails furled;
   Sighing away into silence,
     The breeze died off the world.

4. On the weather-worn, ancient ledges
     Peaceful the calm light slept;
   And the chilly shadows, lengthening,
     Slow to the eastward crept.

5. The snow still lay in the hollows,
     And where the salt waves met
   The iron rock, all ghastly white
     The thick ice glimmered yet.

6. But the smile of the sun was kinder,
     The touch of the air was sweet;
   The pulse of the cruel ocean seemed
     Like a human heart to beat.

7. Frost-locked, storm-beaten, and lonely,
     In the midst of the wintry main,
   Our bleak rock yet the tidings heard:
     "There shall be spring again!"

8. Worth all the waiting and watching,
     The woe that the winter wrought,
   Was the passion of gratitude that shook
     My soul at the blissful thought!

9. Soft rain and flowers and sunshine,
     Sweet winds and brooding skies,
   Quick-flitting birds to fill the air
     With clear delicious cries;

10. And the warm sea's mellow murmur
      Resounding day and night;
    A thousand shapes and tints and tones
      Of manifold delight,

11. Nearer and ever nearer
      Drawing with every day!
    But a little longer to wait and watch
      'Neath skies so cold and gray;

12. And hushed is the roar of the bitter north
      Before the might of the spring,
    And up the frozen slope of the world
      Climbs summer, triumphing.



XCIII. RELIGION THE ONLY BASIS OF SOCIETY.

William Ellery Channing (b. 1780, d. 1842), an eminent divine and orator,
was born at Newport, R.I. He graduated from Harvard with the highest
honors in 1798, and, in 1803, he was made pastor of the Federal Street
Church, Boston, with which he maintained his connection until his death.
Towards the close of his life, being much enfeebled, he withdrew almost
entirely from his pastoral duties, and devoted himself to literature. Dr.
Channing's writings are published in six volumes, and are mainly devoted
to theology.

1. Religion is a social concern; for it operates powerfully on society,
contributing in various ways to its stability and prosperity. Religion is
not merely a private affair; the community is deeply interested in its
diffusion; for it is the best support of the virtues and principles, on
which the social order rests. Pure and undefiled religion is to do good;
and it follows, very plainly, that if God be the Author and Friend of
society, then, the recognition of him must enforce all social duty, and
enlightened piety must give its whole strength to public order.

2. Few men suspect, perhaps no man comprehends, the extent of the support
given by religion to every virtue. No man, perhaps, is aware how much our
moral and social sentiments are fed from this fountain; how powerless
conscience would become without the belief of a God; how palsied would be
human benevolence, were there not the sense of a higher benevolence to
quicken and sustain it; how suddenly the whole social fabric would quake,
and with what a fearful crash it would sink into hopeless ruin, were the
ideas of a Supreme Being, of accountableness and of a future life to be
utterly erased from every mind.

3. And, let men thoroughly believe that they are the work and sport of
chance; that no superior intelligence concerns itself with human affairs;
that all their improvements perish forever at death; that the weak have no
guardian, and the injured no avenger; that there is no recompense for
sacrifices to uprightness and the public good; that an oath is unheard in
heaven; that secret crimes have no witness but the perpetrator; that human
existence has no purpose, and human virtue no unfailing friend; that this
brief life is everything to us, and death is total, everlasting
extinction; once let them thoroughly abandon religion, and who can
conceive or describe the extent of the desolation which would follow?

4. We hope, perhaps, that human laws and natural sympathy would hold
society together. As reasonably might we believe that were the sun
quenched in the heavens, our torches would illuminate, and our fires
quicken and fertilize the creation. What is there in human nature to
awaken respect and tenderness, if man is the unprotected insect of a day?
And what is he more, if atheism be true?

5. Erase all thought and fear of God from a community, and selfishness and
sensuality would absorb the whole man. Appetite, knowing no restraint, and
suffering, having no solace or hope, would trample in scorn on the
restraints of human laws. Virtue, duty, principle, would be mocked and
spurned as unmeaning sounds. A sordid self-interest would supplant every
feeling; and man would become, in fact, what the theory in atheism
declares him to be,--a companion for brutes.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Com-mu'ni-ty, society at large, the public. Dif-fu'sion,
extension, spread. En-light'ened, elevated by knowledge and religion. 2.
Fab'ric, any system composed of connected parts. Erased', blotted out. 3.
Per'pe-tra-tor, one who commits a crime. Ex-tinc'tion, a putting an end
to. 4. Fer'ti-lize, to make fruitful. A'the-ism, disbelief in God.
Sen-su-al'i-ty, indulgence in animal pleasure.



XCIV. ROCK ME TO SLEEP.

Elizabeth Akers Allen (b. 1832,--) was born at Strong, Maine, and passed
her childhood amidst the picturesque scenery of that neighborhood. She
lost her mother when very young, but inherited her grace and delicacy of
thought. Shortly after her mother's death, her father removed to
Farmington, Maine, a town noted for its literary people. Mrs. Allen's
early pieces appeared over the pseudonym of "Florence Percy." Her first
verses appeared when she was twelve years old; and her first volume,
entitled "Forest Buds from the Woods of Maine," was Published in 1856. For
some years she was assistant editor of the "Portland Transcript." The
following selection was claimed by five different persons, who attempted
to steal the honor of its composition.

1. Backward, turn backward, O Time, in your flight,
   Make me a child again, just for to-night!
   Mother, come back from the echoless shore,
   Take me again to your heart as of yore;
   Kiss from my forehead the furrows of care,
   Smooth the few silver threads out of my hair;
   Over my slumbers your loving watch keep;--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!

2. Backward, flow backward, O tide of the years!
   I am so weary of toil and of tears;
   Toil without recompense, tears all in vain;
   Take them, and give me my childhood again!
   I have grown weary of dust and decay,--
   Weary of flinging my soul wealth away;
   Weary of sowing for others to reap;--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!

3. Tired of the hollow, the base, the untrue,
   Mother, O mother, my heart calls for you!
   Many a summer the grass has grown green,
   Blossomed and faded, our faces between:
   Yet with strong yearning and passionate pain,
   Long I to-night for your presence again.
   Come from the silence so long and so deep;--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!

4. Over my heart in the days that are flown,
   No love like mother love ever has shone;
   No other worship abides and endures,
   Faithful, unselfish, and patient like yours:
   None like a mother can charm away pain
   From the sick soul, and the world-weary brain.
   Slumber's soft calms o'er my heavy lids creep;--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!

5. Come, let your brown hair, just lighted with gold,
   Fall on your shoulders again, as of old;
   Let it drop over my forehead to-night,
   Shading my faint eyes away from the light;
   For with its sunny-edged shadows once more,
   Haply will throng the sweet visions of yore;
   Lovingly, softly, its bright billows sweep;--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!

6. Mother, dear mother, the years have been long
   Since I last listened your lullaby song;
   Sing, then, and unto my soul it shall seem
   Womanhood's years have been only a dream!
   Clasped to your heart in a loving embrace,
   With your light lashes just sweeping my face,
   Never hereafter to wake or to weep:--
   Rock me to sleep, mother,--rock me to sleep!



XCV. MAN AND THE INFERIOR ANIMALS.

1. The chief difference between man and the other animals consists in
this, that the former has reason, whereas the latter have only instinct;
but, in order to understand what we mean by the terms reason and instinct,
it will be necessary to mention three things in which the difference very
distinctly appears.

2. Let us first, to bring the parties as nearly on a level as possible,
consider man in a savage state, wholly occupied, like the beasts of the
field, in providing for the wants of his animal nature; and here the first
distinction that appears between them is the use of implements. When the
savage provides himself with a hut or a wigwam for shelter, or that he may
store up his provisions, he does no more than is done by the rabbit, the
beaver, the bee, and birds of every species.

3. But the man can not make any progress in this work without tools; he
must provide himself with an ax even before he can cut down a tree for its
timber; whereas these animals form their burrows, their cells, or their
nests, with no other tools than those with which nature has provided them.
In cultivating the ground, also, man can do nothing without a spade or a
plow; nor can he reap what he has sown till he has shaped an implement
with which to cut clown his harvest. But the inferior animals provide for
themselves and their young without any of these things.

4. Now for the second distinction. Man, in all his operations, makes
mistakes; animals make none. Did you ever hear of such a thing as a bird
sitting on a twig lamenting over her half-finished nest and puzzling her
little head to know how to complete it? Or did you ever see the cells of a
beehive in clumsy, irregular shapes, or observe anything like a discussion
in the little community, as if there were a difference of opinion among
the architects?

5. The lower animals are even better physicians than we are; for when they
are ill, they will, many of them, seek out some particular herb, which
they do not, use as food, and which possesses a medicinal quality exactly
suited to the complaint; whereas, the whole college of physicians will
dispute for a century about the virtues of a single drug.

6. Man undertakes nothing in which he is not more or less puzzled; and
must try numberless experiments before he can bring his undertakings to
anything like perfection; even the simplest operations of domestic life
are not well performed without some experience; and the term of man's life
is half wasted before he has done with his mistakes and begins to profit
by his lessons.

7. The third distinction is that animals make no improvements; while the
knowledge, and skill, and the success of man are perpetually on the
increase. Animals, in all their operations, follow the first impulse of
nature or that instinct which God has implanted in them. In all they do
undertake, therefore, their works are more perfect and regular than those
of man.

8. But man, having been endowed with the faculty of thinking or reasoning
about what he does, is enabled by patience and industry to correct the
mistakes into which he at first falls, and to go on constantly improving.
A bird's nest is, indeed, a perfect structure; yet the nest of a swallow
of the nineteenth century is not at all more commodious or elegant than
those that were built amid the rafters of Noah's ark. But if we compare
the wigwam of the savage with the temples and palaces of ancient Greece
and Rome, we then shall see to what man's mistakes, rectified and improved
upon, conduct him.

9.  "When the vast sun shall veil his golden light
    Deep in the gloom of everlasting night;
    When wild, destructive flames shall wrap the skies,
    When ruin triumphs, and when nature dies;
