
This was a half-holiday, and the classes broke up at twelve o'clock.
Cassandra hoped to have a talk with Ruth before she went home, but when
she looked round for her little favorite she could not find her
anywhere. The foundationers were standing in knots talking eagerly to
each other. There was a sort of buzz or whisper going on in their midst.
Kathleen O'Hara darted from one group to another, smiled at one set of
girls, patted the shoulder of a favorite girl in another group, laughed
one time, said an emphatic word to another, and presently disappeared,
accompanied by Susy Hopkins.

Alice Tennant was standing by herself; she looked dull and depressed.
Cassandra went up to her.

"It there anything the matter, Alice?" she asked.

"Matter!" replied Alice. "Surely you must know that for yourself. Have
you not heard what a condition the school is in?"

"I have, of course, heard about the Wild Irish Girls," said Cassandra,
lowering her voice. "But surely the fact that there are a few naughty
girls in our midst need not upset the whole school?"

"It upsets me, anyhow," said Alice, "for I feel that I have brought it
on the school. I could cry. I only wish that mother had never been
induced to take Kathleen as a boarder. She is worse than troublesome;
she is a girl without principle."

"Oh, I don't think quite so bad as that, dear," said a gay voice at that
moment; and turning, Alice saw the piquant and beautiful face of the
girl she loathed. "I guessed, of course, that you must be alluding to
me," said Kathleen. "I am bad, but I have my own principles--and a good
old-fashioned set, worth a great deal."

She nodded impertinently to both the girls, and then reentered the
school.

"I left my satchel and came back for it," she said as she vanished from
their view.

"Yes," said Alice, "that is just like her--just the sort of thing she
would do. She is always daring every one. I do wish some strong
influence could be brought to bear on her. There is no doubt she is very
clever, and when she likes she can be extremely agreeable."

"She is extremely pretty, you know, and that goes a long way."

"Not with me, thank goodness!" said Alice. "In fact, I almost hate her
face. I detest people who are always grinning and smiling and showing
themselves off. My opinion is that schoolgirls ought to be modest, and
attentive to their books, and not thinking of giving themselves airs.
But there! no one agrees with me. Mother and the boys are fairly mad on
Kathleen; and as to the servants, there's nothing they wouldn't do for
her. Every one combines to spoil her; I don't see that she has the least
chance."

Cassandra talked a little longer to Alice, and then prepared to go home.
She was disappointed that she had not seen Ruth; but Ruth had promised
to be with her quite early in the afternoon. They were both to work for
two hours, and afterwards their coach was to arrive. Ruth would spend
the entire afternoon at Cassandra's home. On her way back Florence
Archer suddenly joined her.

"Now, Cassie," she said, "what is it?"

"Oh, can't you guess for yourself, Flo? It is this. The school has got
into trouble, and the governors and Miss Ravenscroft mean to sift the
matter to the very bottom. It is pretty bad when all things are
considered, for if the girls won't tell they will be expelled--expelled
without any hope of returning. And I rather fancy Kathleen is the sort
of girl whom no one will betray. It is extremely awkward, and I feel
very miserable about it."

"You look it; and yet it isn't your affair. Your place in the school is
secure enough."

"What does that matter, Flo, when those you love are in danger?"

"Those you love in danger, Cassie! What do you mean now?"

"I mean just what I say. I am decidedly fond of little Ruth Craven. She
is placed in a hard position, but she is so clever and so pretty that
she could do anything. Well, I am certain that Ruth won't betray her
companions."

"I forgot," said Florence, "that she did belong to that silly society.
What a little goose she was!"

"She was led into it by Kathleen. They all were for that matter.
Kathleen seems to have a singular power over them."

"But Ruth doesn't belong to it now."

"No. I can't in justice to her explain any further, Florence. I will
tell you all I can, of course; but may I say good-bye now, for I have a
good deal to do before dinner?"

"You are not half as friendly as you used to be," said Florence,
pouting. "You hardly ever ask me to your house, and when I ask you to
mine you always have an excuse ready. It is somewhat hard on me that
Ruth Craven should have come between us."

"But she hasn't. I wish that you would believe that she hasn't. I have
to give her a sort of protecting love; but you and I, Flo, are equal in
our love. Surely we can afford to be kind to a little girl who has not
our advantages."

"Oh, if you put it in that way, I don't mind a bit," said Florence
cheerfully. "Well, good-bye for the present. We'll meet to-morrow
morning."

The girls parted, and Florence went on her way home.

Meanwhile Ruth had also gone on her way. She walked slowly. Once or
twice she stopped. Once when in a somewhat narrow and lonely path she
paused and looked up at the sky, and then down at the ground beneath her
feet. Once she uttered a short, expressive sort of sigh; and once she
said half-aloud:

"I do hope God will help me. I do want to do just what is right."

Thus, lagging as she walked, she by slow degrees reached her home. Mrs.
Craven happened to be out, but old Mr. Craven was seated by the fire. He
was feeling rather poorly to-day. He had a large account-book open in
front of him, and when Ruth entered he laid down the pen with which he
had been summing up his figures.

"I can't make them quite right," he said slowly.

"Why, grandfather, what is the matter?" said Ruth in some surprise.

The old man's large clear blue eyes were fixed on the child.

"I had a curious feeling this morning," he said; "but I know now it was
only a dream. I thought I was back in the shop again. I was up, my dear;
I had taken a bit of a walk, and I came in and sat down by the fire. It
came over me all of a sudden how lazy I was, and how wrong to neglect
the shop and not give your grandmother a bit of help with the customers;
and so strong was the notion over me that I unlocked the old bureau and
took out the account-books. I said to myself I can at least square
everything up for her, and that will help her as much as anything. She
was always a rare one to see a good balance at the end of the week. If
she had a good balance and all things nicely squared up, we'd have a
nice little joint for Sunday; and she'd put on her little bonnet and
best mantle, and we'd go for a walk in the country arm-in-arm, just like
the Darby and Joan we were, Ruthie, and which we are. But if the balance
didn't come out on the right side she'd stay at home. She'd never cry or
despair; that wasn't her way, bless you! She'd say, 'We must think of
some way of saving, John, or we must do a bit more selling of the
stock.' She was a rare one to contrive."

Ruth had heard this story of her grandmother many and many a time
before, but her grandfather's look frightened her. She went up to him
and closed the big account-book.

"You have balanced things a long time ago," she said. "Don't fret now.
May I put the account-book aside?"

"You may, darling; you may. But the accounts ain't balanced, Ruthie; we
are on the wrong side of the ledger, my love--on the wrong side of the
ledger."

Ruth said nothing more. She put the book back into the drawer and locked
it. Then she sat down by her grandfather's side.

"Would you rather I got you your dinner," she said, "or would you rather
I talked to you for a little?"

"I'd a sight rather my little Ruth sat near me and let me place my hand
on her hair. Your hair is jet-black, Ruthie--almost blue-black. So was
your father's hair, my child. He was a very handsome boy. I never looked
for it that he would die in the foreign parts and leave you to your
grandmother and me. But you have been a rare blessing to us--a rare
blessing."

"Sometimes I think," said Ruth slowly, "that I have been a great care.
It must have cost you a great deal to feed and clothe me."

"No, no, child; far from that. You were always the bit of good luck--on
the right side of the balance--always, always."

Ruth took the old man's hand and pressed it between both her own.
Presently she rubbed her cheeks softly against it.

"Grandfather," she said, "are you all right now--quite wide awake, I
mean? Has the dream about the shop and the wrong accounts passed out of
your head?"

"Why, yes, darling; of course it was only a dream."

"Then I'd like to ask you something."

"Ask away, my little Ruth. You are such a busy little maid now, what
with your school, and what with your lessons, and what with that big
scholarship--sixty pounds a year. Ah! we shall have a fine right side of
the ledger when little Ruth has brought home sixty pounds a year."

Ruth stifled a groan.

"I am rather puzzled," she said, "and I want to put a question to you."

"Yes, my darling; I am prepared to listen."

"I know a girl," said Ruth after a pause--she thought that she would
tell her story that way--"I know a girl at school, and she has been
kindly treated. She is one of the foundation girls, but some of the
girls who are not foundationers have singled her out and been specially
good to her."

"Eh, eh! Well, that's good of them," said old Mr. Craven.

"They have been very good to her; but that Irish girl whom I told you
about, she started a society--no special harm in itself--at least it
didn't seem harm to the girl I have been telling you about, and she
joined it. She joined it for a bit, and she liked it--that is, on the
whole--but afterwards a girl who had not joined the society and did not
belong to the foundationers, one whom I am sorry to say the
foundationers did not care for at all, offered a great kindness to this
girl--a very special and tremendous kindness--and the girl in her own
mind decided that she would be doing wrong not to accept it. So she did
accept it, and--Are you listening, grandfather?"

"Indeed I am, little maid. Go on, my child; I'm attending to every
word."

"The girl decided to accept the kindness from the paying girl, and to do
that she had to give up the society. She was sorry to give it up, but it
seemed to her that it was the only right and honorable thing to do. She
could not belong to both--to one side of the school and to the other;
she must take her stand with one or the other; so she decided for her
own special benefit to take her stand with the paying girls."

"On the whole, perhaps, she was right," said the old man. "Can't say
unless I know everything; but on the whole, perhaps, she was right."

"I think she was, grandfather," said Ruth slowly. "But now please
listen. The head-mistress at the school and the governors have found out
about the secret society. They have found out that it exists, but they
don't know much more. They know, however, that its influence is bad in
the school, and they are determined to crush it out. In order to do this
they must get full particulars. They must get the name of the leader. I
am afraid that they know the name of the leader, but they must also get
the names of her companions--all the names--and as much as possible of
the rules of the society. Now the only girl not a member of the society
who can give those particulars is the girl I have been talking about;
for, of course, she knows, as she belonged to it at one time although
she has now left it. And the governors and the head-mistress sent for
this girl and asked her to betray her companions--those girls to whom
she had sworn fealty--and the girl refused."

"Quite right," said old Mr. Craven.

The color rushed into Ruth's cheeks. She clasped her grandfather's hand
firmly.

"She thought it right, but something dreadful is going to happen. It
will be terribly hard for the girl if she sticks to her resolve, for the
governors of the school have presented what they call an ultimatum to
her; they have given her from now till Saturday to make up her mind, and
if she refuses on Saturday grandfather, she is to be expelled publicly.
Her sentence will be proclaimed in the presence of all the school, and
she will be watched walking out of the schoolroom and out of the big
gates, which will close behind her for ever, and all her chance
goes--all her golden prospects. Nevertheless, grandfather, speaking to
me from your own heart, ought the girl to betray her companions?"

"Upon my word!" said the old man, who was intensely moved by Ruth's
story. It did not occur to him for one moment that the little girl was
talking about herself. "I tell you what, Ruth," he said; "I must think
over it. I pity that poor girl. I don't think the governors ought to put
any girl in such a position."

"They are sorry, but they say they must. They must get at the truth;
they must crush out the insurrection."

"But it is turning king's evidence," said the old man. "I don't see how
a girl is to be expected to betray her companions."

"That is the position, grandfather. And now I think I will get you your
dinner."

Ruth went out of the room into the little kitchen. For a minute she
pressed her hands against her face.

"Grandfather agrees with me," she said to herself. "I am glad I
consulted him. No one ever had a clearer head for business or for right
and wrong than grandfather when he is at his best. He was at his best
just now. I feel stronger. I won't betray Kathleen O'Hara."




CHAPTER XXIII.

RUTH WILL NOT BETRAY KATHLEEN.


Soon after dinner Ruth walked over to Cassandra's house. Cassandra was
so anxious to see her, so determined to use her influence on what she
considered the scale of right, that she was waiting for Ruth at the
little gate.

"Ah! here you are," she said. "I am so glad to see you. Mother has gone
out for the day; we will have a whole delightful afternoon to ourselves.
We can do some good work."

"Let us," said Ruth.

She felt feverish and excited. As a rule she was very calm, but now her
heart beat too fast. She was thinking of her grandfather, and of what it
would mean to him and the old grandmother when she came back on Saturday
a disgraced girl, expelled from her high estate, her golden chance
snatched from her. Nevertheless she had always been pretty firm, and
pretty well resolved to do what she thought right. She was firmer now,
and quite resolved.

"Shall we go in at once and set to work?" she said. "I want to read that
bit of Tasso over again before Miss Renshaw comes."

"No, no," said Cassandra. "You are always in such a fidget to learn,
Ruth. Come into the garden; I want to talk to you."

Ruth looked full round at her companion. She saw something in
Cassandra's eye which made her slightly shiver. Then she said:

"Very well."

Cassandra opened the little gate which led into the tiny fruit and
vegetable garden. There was a narrow path, bordered on each side with a
box-hedge, down which the girls walked. Presently Cassandra slipped her
arm round Ruth's waist.

"You knew, of course," she said, "how much I love you."

"You are awfully good to me, Cassie."

"As a rule I am not fond of what schoolgirls call falling in love,"
continued Cassandra; "but I love you. There is nothing I wouldn't do for
you."

"Thank you," said Ruth again.

She wondered what Cassandra would say on Saturday. Surely after Saturday
no girl who belonged to the Great Shirley School would like to speak to
her.

"Now I want to tell you something," continued Cassandra. "I saw Miss
Ravenscroft this morning. She told me about you and your position with
the governors."

"Oh, need we talk of that?" said Ruth coloring, stopping in her walk,
and turning to face Cassandra.

"Why shouldn't we? I wish you would tell me everything. Why are you
going to be so obstinate? But of course you won't be. You will--you
must--change your mind. She told me--Miss Ravenscroft did--because she
likes you, Ruth, and she would be so terribly sorry if you got into
trouble over this matter. She said you are certain to get into most
serious, terrible trouble, for the governors will on no account depart
from their firm resolve to expel you from the school. You will have
defied their authority, and that is what they cannot permit. It is on
that ground they will expel you, but it is strong enough; no one can
suppose for a moment that they are acting with injustice."

"I am glad it is on that ground," said Ruth softly.

"Then of course you will be wise, Ruth. It is silly and quixotic, for
the sake of a girl like Kathleen O'Hara, to ruin all your own
prospects."

"It is scarcely that--and yet it is that," said Ruth slowly. "It is
because I will not be a traitor," she added, lowering her voice, then
flinging up her head and gazing proudly before her.

"I knew you were quixotic. I knew that was at the bottom of it," said
Cassandra. "But you will think it over, Ruth. It would be too terrible
to see you denounced in the presence of the whole school, and sent out
of the school for ever. Think of losing your scholarship. Think of the
help you want to give your grandparents. Think of your own future."

"I think of them all," said Ruth; "but I also think of what father would
have said if he were alive. You see Cassandra, before all things he was
a gentleman."

Cassandra started. She looked full at Ruth.

"Is that a slap at me?" she asked.

"No; I did not mean it as a slap at you or anybody. I only see how the
matter looks to me, and how it would have looked to father, and how it
looks to grandfather. There are some people born that way; I think,
after a fashion, I am one of them. There are others who would look at
the thing from a different point of view, but I don't think I envy those
others. Shall we go in now and set to work?"

"You are an extraordinary girl," said Cassandra. "I really don't know
whether I love you or hate you most for being such a little goose. Well,
Ruth, if that is your mind, I don't know why you care to go in to work,
for it will be all over in a day or two--all over--and your fate
sealed."

"Nevertheless I should like to read that piece of Tasso, and do my work
with Miss Renshaw. Shall we go in?" said Ruth.

Cassandra somehow did not dare to say any more. Afterwards, when Ruth
