around her, wherever she might chance to be.

The first individual who broke in upon her was that animated piece of
ragged door-mat, Toozle. This imbecile little dog was not possessed of
much delicacy of feeling. Having been absent on a private excursion of
his own into the mountain when the schooner arrived, he only became
aware of the return of his lost, loved, and deeply-regretted mistress,
when he came back from his trip. The first thing that told him of her
presence was his own nose, the black point of which protruded with
difficulty a quarter of an inch beyond the mass of matting which totally
extinguished his eyes, and, indeed, every other portion of his head.

Coming down the hill immediately behind Sandy Cove at a breakneck
scramble, Toozle happened to cross the path by which his mistress had
ascended to her tree. The instant he did so, he came to a halt so sudden
that one might have fancied he had been shot. In another moment he was
rushing up the hill in wild excitement, giving an occasional yelp of
mingled surprise and joy as he went along. The footsteps led him a
little beyond the tree, and then turned down towards it, so that he had
the benefit of the descent in making the final onset.

The moment he came in sight of Alice he began to bark and yelp in such
an eager way that the sounds produced might be described as an
intermittent scream. He charged at once with characteristic want of
consideration, and, plunging headlong into Alice's bosom, sought to
cover her face with kisses; that is, with _licks_, that being the
well-known canine method of doing the thing!

"O Toozle! how glad, glad, glad, I am to see you! my own darling
Toozle!" cried Alice, actually shedding tears.

Toozle screamed with delight. It was almost too much for him. Again and
again he attempted to lick her face, a familiarity which Alice gently
declined to permit; so he was obliged to content himself with her hand.

It has often struck us as surprising, that little dogs--usually so
intelligent and apt to learn in other matters--should be so dull of
apprehension in this. Toozle had the experience of a lifetime to
convince him that Alice objected to have her face licked, and would on
no account permit it, although she was extremely liberal in regard to
her hands; but Toozle ignored the authority of experience. He was at
this time a dog of mature years; but his determination to kiss Alice was
as strong as it had been when, in the tender years of his infancy, he
had entertained the mistaken belief that she was his own mother.

He watched every unguarded moment to thrust forward his black, not to
say impertinent, little snout; and although often reproved, he still
remained unconvinced, resolutely returned to the charge, and was not a
bit ashamed of himself.

On the present occasion, Toozle behaved like a canine lunatic, and Alice
was beginning to think of exercising a little tender violence in order
to restrain his superabundant glee, when another individual appeared on
the scene, and for a time, at least, relieved her.

The second comer was our dark friend, Kekupoopi. She by some mischance
had got separated from her young mistress, and immediately went in
search of her. She found her at once, of course; for, as water finds its
level, so love finds its object, without much loss of time.

"O Toozle!--bee! hee!--am dat you?" exclaimed Poopy, who was as much
delighted in her way to see the dog as Alice had been.

Toozle was, in his way, as much delighted to see Poopy as he had been
to see Alice;--no, we are wrong, not quite so much as that, but still
extremely glad to see her, and evinced his joy by extravagant sounds and
actions. He also evinced his scorn for the opinion that some foolish
persons hold, namely, that black people are not as good as white, by
rushing into Poopy's arms and attempting to lick her black face as he
had tried to do to Alice. As the dark-skinned girl had no objection (for
tastes differ, you see), and received the caresses with a quiet "Hee!
hee!" Toozle was extremely gratified.

Now, it happened that Jo Bumpus, oppressed with a feeling of concern for
his former captain, and with a feeling of doubt as to the stirring
events in which he was an actor being waking realities, had wandered up
the mountain-side in order to indulge in profound philosophical
reflections.

Happening to hear the noise caused by the joyful meeting which we have
just described, he turned aside to see what all the "row" could be
about, and thus came unexpectedly on Alice and her friends.

About the same time it chanced (for things sometimes do happen by chance
in a very remarkable way, it chanced that Will Corrie, being also much
depressed about Gascoyne), resolved to take into his confidence Dick
Price, the boatswain, with whom during their short voyage together he
had become intimate.

He found that worthy seated on a cask at the end of the rude pile of
coral rocks that formed the quay of Sandy Cove, surrounded by some of
his shipmates, all of whom, as well as himself, were smoking their pipes
and discussing things in general.

Corrie went forward and pulled Dick by the sleeve.

"Hallo, boy! what do you want with me?" said the boatswain.

"I want to speak to you."

"Well, lad, fire away."

"Yes, but I want you to come with me," said the boy, with an anxious and
rather mysterious look.

"Very good--heave ahead," said the boatswain, getting up, and
following Corrie with a peculiarly nautical roll.

After he had been led through the settlement and a considerable way up
the mountain in silence, the boatswain suddenly stopped and said:
"Hallo! hold on; my timbers won't stand much more o' this sort o' thing.
I was built for navigatin' the seas,--I was not for cruisin' on the
land. We're far enough out of ear-shot, I s'pose in this here bit of a
plantation. Come, what have ye got to say to me? You ain't a goin' to
tell me the Freemason's word, are ye? For, if so, don't trouble
yourself; I wouldn't listen to it on no account w'atever. It's too
mysterious, that is, for me."

"Dick Price," said Corrie, looking up in the face of the seaman, with a
serious expression that was not often seen on his round countenance,
"you're a man."

The boatswain looked down at the youthful visage in some surprise.

"Well, I s'pose I am," said he, stroking his beard complacently.

"And you know what it is to be misunderstood, misjudged, don't you?"

"Well, now I come to think on it, I believe I _have_ had that
misfortune--'specially w'en I've ordered the powder-monkeys to make
less noise; for them younkers never do seem to understand me. As for
misjudgin', I've often an' over again heard 'em say I was the crossest
feller they ever did meet with; but they _never_ was more out in their
reckoning."

Corrie did not smile; he did not betray the smallest symptom of power
either to appreciate or to indulge in jocularity at that moment. But
feeling that it was useless to appeal to the former experience of the
boatswain, he changed his plan of attack.

"Dick Price," said he, "it's a hard case for an innocent man to be
hanged."

"So it is, boy,--oncommon hard. I once know'd a poor feller as was
hanged for murderin' his old grandmother. It was afterwards found out
that he never done the deed; but he was the most incorrigible thief and
poacher in the whole place; so it wasn't such a mistake, after all."

"Dick Price," said Corrie, gravely, at the same time laying his hand
impressively on his companion's arm, "I'm a _tremendous_ joker--_awful_
fond o' fun and skylarkin'."

"'Pon my word, lad, if you hadn't said so yourself, I'd scarce have
believed it. You don't look like it just now, by no manner o' means."

"But I am, though," continued Corrie; "and I tell you that in order to
show you that I am very, _very_ much in earnest at this moment, and that
you _must_ give your mind to what I've got to say."

The boatswain was impressed by the fervor of the boy. He looked at him
in surprise for a few seconds, then nodded his head, and said, "Fire
away!"

"You know that Gascoyne is in prison!" said Corrie.

"In course I does. That's one rascally pirate less on the seas, anyhow."

"He is not so bad as you think, Dick."

"Whew!" whistled the boatswain. "You're a friend of his, are ye?"

"No, not a friend; but neither am I an enemy. You know he saved my life,
and the lives of two of my friends, and of your own captain, too."

"Well, there's no denying that; but he must have been the means of
takin' away more lives than what he has saved."

"No, he hasn't," cried Corrie, eagerly. "That's it, that's just the
point; he has saved more than ever he took away, and he's sorry for what
he has done; yet they're going to hang him. Now, I say, that's
sinful--it's not just. It shan't be done, if I can prevent it; and you
must help me to get him out of this scrape,--you must, indeed, Dick
Price."

The boatswain was quite taken aback. He opened his eyes wide with
surprise, and putting his head to one side, gazed earnestly and long at
the boy, as if he had been a rare old painting.

Before he could reply, the furious barking of a dog attracted Corrie's
attention. He knew it to be the voice of Toozle. Being well acquainted
with the locality of Alice's tree, he at once concluded that she was
there; and knowing that she would certainly side with him, and that the
side she took _must_ necessarily be the winning side, he resolved to
bring Dick Price within the fascination of her influence.

"Come, follow me," said he; "we'll talk it over with a friend of mine."

The seaman followed the boy obediently, and in a few minutes stood
beside Alice.

Corrie had expected to find her there, but he had not counted on meeting
with Poopy and Jo Bumpus.

"Hallo, Grampus! is that you?"

"Wot! Corrie, my boy, is it yourself? Give us your flipper, small though
it be. I didn't think I'd niver see ye agin, lad."

"No more did I, Grampus; it was very nearly all up with us."

"Ah, my boy!" said Bumpus, becoming suddenly very grave, "you've no
notion, how near it was all up with _me_. Why, you won't believe it, I
was all but scragged."

"Dear me! what is scragged?" inquired Alice.

"You don't mean to say you don't know!" exclaimed Bumpus.

"No, indeed, I don't."

"Why, it means being hanged. I was so near hanged, just a day or two
back, that I've had an 'orrible pain in my neck ever since at the bare
thought of it! But who's your friend?" said Bumpus, turning to the
boatswain.

"Oh! I forgot him,--he's the boatswain of the Talisman. Dick Price, this
is my friend John Bumpus."

"Glad to know you, Dick Price."

"Same to you, and luck, John Bumpus."

The two sea-dogs joined their enormous palms, and shook hands cordially.

After these two had indulged in a little desultory conversation, Will
Corrie, who, meanwhile, consulted with Alice in an undertone, brought
them back to the point that was uppermost in his mind.

"Now," said he, "it comes to this,--we must not let Gascoyne be hanged."

"Why, Corrie!" cried Bumpus, in surprise, "that's the very thing I was
a-thinkin' of w'en I comed up here and found Miss Alice under the tree."

"I'm glad to hear that, Jo; it's what has been on my own mind all the
morning. But Dick Price, he is not convinced that he deserves to escape.
Now you tell him all _you_ know about Gascoyne, and I'll tell him all
_I_ know; and if he don't believe us, Alice and Poopy will tell him all
_they_ know; and if that won't do, you and I will take him up by the
legs and pitch him into the sea!"

"That bein' how the case stands, fire away," said Dick Price, with a
grin, sitting down on the grass and busily filling his pipe.

Dick was not so hard to be convinced as Corrie had feared. The glowing
eulogiums of Bumpus, and the earnest pleadings of Alice, won him over
very soon. He finally agreed to become one of the conspirators.

"But how is the thing to be done?" asked Corrie, in some perplexity.

"Ah! that's the p'int," observed Dick, looking profoundly wise.

"Nothing easier," said Bumpus, whose pipe was by this time keeping pace
with that of his new friend. "The case is as clear as mud. Here's how it
is. Gascoyne is in limbo; well, we are out of limbo. Good. Then, all
we've got for to do is to break into limbo and shove Gascoyne out of
limbo, and help him to escape. It's all square, you see, lads."

"Not so square as you seem to think," said Henry Stuart, who at that
moment stepped from behind the stem of the tree, which had prevented
the party from observing his approach.

"Why not?" said Bumpus, making room for the young man to sit beside
Alice on the grass.

"Because," said Henry, "Gascoyne won't agree to escape."

"Not agree for to escape!"

"No. If the prison doors were opened at this moment, he would not walk
out."

Bumpus became very grave, and shook his head. "Are ye sartin sure o'
this?" said he.

"Quite sure," replied Henry, who now detailed part of his recent
conversation with the pirate captain.

"Then it's all up with him!" said Bumpus; "and the pirate will meet his
doom, as I once heard a feller say in a play--though I little thought to
see it acted in reality."

"So he will," added Dick Price.

Corrie's countenance fell, and Alice grew pale, Even Poopy and Toozle
looked a little depressed.

"No; it is _not_ all up with him," cried Henry Stuart, energetically. "I
have a plan in my head which I think will succeed, but I must have
assistance. It won't do, however, to discuss this before our young
friends. I must beg of Alice and Poopy to leave us. I do not mean to say
I could not trust you, Alice, but the plan must be made known only to
those who have to act in this matter. Rest assured, dear child, that I
shall do my best to make it successful."

Alice sprang up at once. "My father told me to follow him some time
ago," said she. "I have been too long of doing so already. I _do_ hope
you will succeed."

So saying, and with a cheerful "Good-by!" the little girl ran down the
mountain-side, closely followed by Toozle and Poopy.

As soon as she was gone, Henry turned to his companions and unfolded to
them his plan,--the details and carrying out of which, however, we
must reserve for another chapter.




CHAPTER XXIX.

BUMPUS IS PERPLEXED--MYSTERIOUS COMMUNINGS, AND A CURIOUS LEAVE-TAKING.


"It's a puzzler," said Jo Bumpus to himself,--for Jo was much in the
habit of conversing with himself; and a very good habit it is, one that
is often attended with much profit to the individual, when the
conversation is held upon right topics and in a proper spirit,--"it's a
puzzler, it is; that's a fact."

Having relieved his mind of this observation, the seaman proceeded to
cut down some tobacco, and looked remarkably grave and solemn as if "it"
were not only a puzzler, but an alarmingly serious puzzler.

"Yes, it's the biggest puzzler as ever I comed across," said he, filling
his pipe; for John, when not roused, got on both mentally and physically
by slow stages.

"Niver know'd its equal," he continued, beginning to smoke, which
operation, as the pipe did not "draw" well at first, prevented him from
saying anything more.

It was early morning when Bumpus said all this, and the mariner was
enjoying his morning pipe in a reclining attitude on the grass beneath
Alice Mason's favorite tree, from which commanding position he gazed
approvingly on the magnificent prospect of land and sea which lay
before him, bathed in the light of the rising sun.

"It _is_ wery koorious," continued John, taking his pipe out of his
mouth and addressing himself to _it_ with much gravity--"_wery_
koorious. Things _always_ seems wot they isn't, and turns out to be wot
they didn't appear as if they wasn't; werry odd indeed, it is! Only to
think that this here sandal-wood trader should turn out for to be
Henry's father and the widow's mother,--or, I mean, the widow's
husband,--an' a pirate an' a deliverer o' little boys and girls out o'
pirate's hands,--his own hands, so to speak,--not to mention captings in
the Royal Navy, an' not sich a bad feller after all, as won't have his
liberty on no account wotiver, even if it was gived to him for nothin',
and yet wot can't get it if he wanted it iver so much; and to think that
Jo Bumpus should come for to lend hisself to--Hallo! Jo, back yer
tops'ls! Didn't Henry tell ye that ye wasn't to convarse upon that there
last matter even with yerself, for fear o' bein' overheard and sp'ilin'
the whole affair? Come, I'll refresh myself."

The refreshment in which Jo proposed to indulge was of a peculiar kind
which never failed him,--it was the perusal of Susan's love-letter.

He now sat up, drew forth the precious and much-soiled epistle, unfolded
and spread it out carefully on his knees, placed his pipe very much on
one side of his mouth, in order that the smoke might not interfere with
his vision, and began to read.

"'_Peeler's Farm_,'--ah! Susan, darlin', it's Jo Bumpus as would give
all he has in the world, includin' his Sunday clo's, to be anchored
alongside o' ye at that same farm!--'_Sanfransko_.' I misdoubt the
spellin' o' that word, Susan, dear; it seems to me raither short, as if
ye'd docked off its tail. Howsomdever--'_For John bumpuss_'--O Susan,
Susan! if ye'd only remember the big B, and there ain't two esses. I'm
sure it's not for want o'tellin' ye, but ye was never great in the way
ov memry or spellin'. Pr'aps it's as well. Ye'd ha' bin too perfect, an'
that's not desirable by no means,--'_my darlin' Jo_,'--ay, _them's_ the
words. It's that as sets my 'art a b'ilin' over like."

Here Jo raised his eyes from the letter, and revelled silently in the
thought for at least two minutes, during which his pipe did double duty
in half its usual time. Then he recurred to his theme; but some parts he
read in silence, and without audible comment.

"Aye," said he, "'_sandle-wood skooners, the Haf ov thems pirits_'--so
they is, Susan. It's yer powers o' prophesy as amazes me; '_an' The
other hafs no beter_;' a deal wus, Susan, if ye only know'd it. Ah! my
sweet gal, if ye knew wot a grief that word '_beter_' was to me before I
diskivered wot it wos, ye'd try to improve yer hand o' write, an' make
fewer blots!"

At this point Jo was arrested by the sound of footsteps behind him. He
folded up his letter precipitately, thrust it into his left
breast-pocket, and jumped up with a guilty air about him.

"Why, Bumpus! we have startled you out of a morning nap, I fear," said
Henry Stuart, who, accompanied by his mother, came up at that moment.
"We are on our way to say good-by to Mr. Mason. As we passed this knoll
I caught sight of you, and came up to ask about the boat."

"It's all right," said Bumpus, who quickly recovered his
composure,--indeed, he had never lost much of it. "I've bin down to
Saunder's store and got the ropes for your--"

"Hush, man! there is no need of telling what they are for," said Henry,
with a mysterious look at his mother.

"Why not tell me all, Henry?" said Mrs. Stuart; "surely, you can trust
me?"

"Trust you, mother!" replied the youth, with a smile. "I should think
