"Well, sir, I think that we can do that with four hands less than
we have now. You see, there are nineteen and the two mates and
myself. Say two of the wounded won't be able to lend a hand, that
makes us twenty, to say nothing of Jake and Pedro. So, even if you
took four hands, we should be pretty even in numbers; and if our
men could not each whip two Belgians, they had better give up the
sea."

"Yes, I have no doubt that they could do that, and were it not for
Carthew and his friend I would not hesitate to take eight men. I
don't know about the other, but you may be sure that Carthew will
fight hard. He is playing a desperate game. Still, I think that I
might take four, especially as I think the chance of Miss
Greendale's being brought on board, until he believes that we have
left these waters, is very small.

"Very well, then, that is settled. The five blacks, Lechmere and
myself, and four of the sailors, will make a strong party. Serve
muskets and cutlasses out to the blacks; and the same, with a brace
of pistols, to each of the hands that go with us. While we are away
let two of the men dress up in my white duck shirts and jackets,
and in white straw hats. Let them always keep aft, and sit about in
the deck chairs, and always go down below by the main companion.
That will make them think that I am still on board; while if there
is no one on the deck aft they will soon guess that we have landed.

"You understand all that we have been saying, Dominique?"

"Me understand, sar, and tink him bery good plan. Me suah to find
out which way dat rascal hab gone. Plenty of black fellows glad to
earn two dollar to guide us. Dey no money here. Two dollars big sum
to them."

"All right, Dominique, but we won't stick at two dollars. If it
were necessary I would pay two hundred cheerfully for news."

"We find dem widout dat," the black said, confidently. "Not good
offer too much. If black man offered two dollars he bery glad. If
offered twenty he begin to say to himself, 'Dis bery good affair;
perhaps someone else give forty.'"

"There is something in that, Dominique. Anyhow I shall leave that
part of the business to you. As a rule, I shall keep in hiding with
the boatmen and sailors all day. I shall be no good for asking
questions, for I don't know much French, and the dialect the
negroes of these islands speak is beyond me altogether. I cannot
understand the boatmen at all."

"Black men here bad, sar; not like dem in de other islands. Here
dey tink themselves better than white men; bery ignorant fellows,
sar. Most of dem lost religion, and go back to fetish. Bery bad
dat. All sorts of bad things in dat affair. Kill children and women
to make fetish. Bad people, sar, and dey are worse here than at San
Domingo."

There was nothing to do all day, but to sit on deck and watch the
brigantine. Most of the blacks had been landed, and only three or
four sailors remained on watch on deck. Frank and George Lechmere,
in their broad straw hats, sat and smoked in the deck chairs; the
former's eyes wandering over the mountains as if in search of
something that might point out Bertha's hiding place. The hills
were for the most part covered with trees, with here and there a
little clearing and a patch of cultivated ground, with two or three
huts in the centre. With the glasses solitary huts could be seen,
half hidden by trees, here and there; and an occasional little
wreath of light smoke curling up showed that there were others
entirely hidden in the forest.

"Don't you think, Major," George Lechmere said after a long pause,
"that it would be a good thing to have the gig every night at some
point agreed on, such as the spot where we land? You see, sir,
there is no saying what may happen. We may have to make a running
fight of it, and it would be very handy to have the boat to fall
back upon."

"Yes, I think that a good idea, George. I will tell Hawkins to send
it ashore, say at ten o'clock every night. There is no chance
whatever of our being down before that. They are sure to have taken
her a long distance up the hills; and though, of course, one cannot
say at present, it is pretty certain that we shall have to attack
after dark.

"It is important that we should land where there is some sort of a
path. I noticed one or two such places as we came along. We may as
well get into the dinghy and row down and choose a spot now. Of
course, they will be watching from the brigantine, but when they
see the same number that went come back again, they will suppose
that we have only gone for a row, or perhaps to get a shot at
anything we come across. We may as well take a couple of guns with
us."

A mile down the inlet they came upon just the spot they were
searching for. The shore was level for a few yards from the water's
edge, and from here there was a well-marked path going up the slope
behind.

"We will fix upon this spot, George. It will be easy for the boats
to find it in the dark, from that big tree close to the water's
edge. Now we will paddle about for half an hour before we go back."

An hour later they returned to the yacht, and George began at once
to make arrangements for the landing.



Chapter 17.

"I Should keep watch and watch regularly, Hawkins. I do not say
that it is likely, but it is quite possible that they may make an
attempt to surprise us, cut all our throats, and then sink the
Osprey. He might attack with his boats, and with a lot of native
craft. At any rate, it is worth while keeping half the crew always
on deck. Be sure and light the cabin as usual. They would suspect
that I was away if they did not see the saloon skylights lit up.

"There is no saying when I may be back. It may be three nights, it
may be six, or, for all that I know, it may be longer than that.
You may be sure that if I get a clue I shall follow it up wherever
it leads me."

The strictest silence was maintained among the men. The two men at
the oars were told to row very slowly, and above all things to
avoid splashing. The boat was exceedingly low in the water, much
too low for safety except in perfectly calm water; as, including
the two men at the oars, there were thirteen on board.

Frank had thought it, however, inadvisable to take the dinghy also,
for this was lying behind the stern, and it might have been noticed
had they pulled her up to the gangway. The gig had been purposely
left on the side hidden from the brigantine, and as they rowed away
pains were taken to keep the yacht in a line with her. They held on
this course, indeed, until they were close in to the shore, and
then kept in under its shelter until the curve hid them altogether.

"Be very careful as you row back, lads, and go very slowly. A
ripple on this smooth water might very well be noticed by them,
even if they could not make out a boat."

"Ay, ay, sir, we will be careful."

They had brought a lantern with them, covered with canvas, except
for a few inches in front.

"Me take him, sar, and go first," Dominique said. "Den if we meet
anyone you all stop quiet, and me go on and talk with them."

Frank followed Dominique, George keeping beside him where there was
room for two to walk abreast, at other times falling just behind.
Then came the sailors, and the four black boatmen were in the rear.
They had been told that, in case they were halted, and heard
Dominique in conversation, they were to pass quietly through the
others, and be ready to join him and help him if necessary. With
the exception of Dominique, Frank and George Lechmere, all carried
muskets. The pilot declined to take one.

"Me neber fired off gun in my life, sar. Me more afraid of gun than
of dose rascals. Dominique fight with um sword; dat plenty good for
him."

The path mounted the hill until they were, as Frank thought, some
three hundred feet above the water. Here the ground was cultivated,
and after walking for ten minutes they saw two or three lights in
front.

"You stop here, sar," Dominique said, handing the lantern to Frank.
"Me go on and see how best get round de village. Must not be seen
here. If native boat come in at night suah to go up to end ob
water, and land at village dere."

The negro soon returned, and said that the cultivated land extended
on both sides of the village, and there was no difficulty in
crossing it. The village was passed quietly, and when it was once
well behind them they came down upon the path again, which was much
larger and better marked than it had been before. After following
it for half a mile, they came upon a road, which led obliquely up
from the water, and ran somewhat inland.

"This is no doubt the road from the village at the head of the arm
of the bay. They have probably come along here, though they may
have turned more directly into the hills. That is the first point
to find out, Dominique."

"Yes, sar, next village we see me go in wid two ob de boatmen and
ask a few questions."

Following the path along for another few hundred yards, they saw a
road ahead of them. Here they halted, and two of the blacks handed
over their muskets and cutlasses to the care of the sailors.
Dominique also left his cutlass behind him, and as he went on gave
instructions to his two companions.

"Now look here," he said in negro French, "don't you say much. I
will do the talking, but just say a word or two if they ask
questions. Mind we three belong to the brigantine. I am the pilot.
The captain has given me a message to send to his friends who have
gone up into the hills. He asked me to take it, but I am not sure
about the way. I am ready to pay well for a guide. I expect that
they will say that the ladies came along, but that they do not know
how they went afterwards. Then we ask him to come as guide, and
promise to pay him very well."

By this time they were close to the hut, which, as Dominique
assured himself before knocking at the door, stood alone. There was
an old man and woman inside, and a boy of about seventeen.
Dominique took off his hat as he entered, and said in French:

"Excuse me for disturbing you so late. I am the pilot of a vessel
now in the bay, and have been sent by the captain to carry an
important message to a gentleman who landed with another and two
ladies and some armed men. He did not give me sufficient directions
to find him, and I thought that if they passed along here you might
be able to put me in the way."

"They came along here between eleven and twelve, I think. We saw
them," the old man said, "and we heard afterwards that the ladies
were being taken away because the ship was, they thought, going to
be attacked by a pirate that had followed them. The people from the
villages went to help fight, for the gentleman had bought many
things and had paid well for them, and each man was promised a
dollar if there was no fighting, and four dollars if they helped
beat off the pirate."

"Yes, that was so," Dominique said, "but it seems that it was a
mistake. Still we had cause for alarm, for the other vessel
followed us strangely. However, it is all explained now, and I have
been sent with this message, because the captain thought that if he
sent a white sailor they would not give him the information."

"Do you know, Sebastian?" the old man asked his son.

"Yes, they turned off to the right two miles further on."

"Look here, boy," Dominique said, "we were promised twenty dollars
if we took the message straight. Now, if you will go with us and
find out, we will give you five of them. As we are strangers to the
people here, they might not answer our questions; but if you go and
say that you have to carry the message, no doubt they will tell you
which way they have gone."

The lad jumped up.

"I will go with you," he said; "but perhaps when we get there you
will not give me the money."

"Look here," Dominique said, taking three dollars from his pocket.
"I will leave these with your father, and will hand you the other
two as soon as we get within sight of the place where they are."

The lad was quite satisfied. Five dollars was more than he could
earn by two months' work. As soon as they went out, Dominique
whispered to one of the boatmen to go back and tell Frank what had
taken place, and to beg him to follow at some distance behind.
Whenever they took a fresh turning, one of the boatmen would always
be left until he came up.

Frank had some difficulty in understanding the boatman's French,
and it was rather by his gestures than his words that he gathered
his meaning. As soon as the message was given the negro hurried on
until he overtook Dominique.

"I am sorry now that we did not bring Pedro," Frank said. "However,
I think we made out what he had to say. Dominique has got someone
to go with him to do the questioning, as he arranged with me; and
he will leave one or other of the men every time he turns off from
the road he is following. That will be a very good arrangement. So
far we have been most fortunate. We know now that we are following
them, and it will be hard if we don't manage to keep the clue now
that we have once got hold of it."

When they came to the road that branched off to the right, the
other boatman was waiting. He pointed up the road and then ran on
silently ahead. No fresh turn was made for a long distance. Twice
they were stopped by one of the blacks, who managed to inform them
that Dominique and the guide were making inquiries at a hut ahead.

The road had now become a mere track, and was continually mounting.
Other tracks had branched off, leading, Frank supposed, to small
hill villages. After going some ten miles, the lad told Dominique
that it was useless for him to go further, for that there were no
more huts near the track. Beyond the fact that the two women were
on horseback when they passed the last hut, nothing was learned
there.

"It is of no use to go further," the guide said. "There are no
houses near here to inquire at, and there are three or four more
paths that turn off from here. We must stop until morning, and then
I will go on alone and make inquiries of shepherds and cottagers;
but, you see, I thought that we should find them tonight. If I work
all day tomorrow, I shall expect three more dollars."

"You shall have them," Dominique said. "Here is my blanket. I will
share one with one of my boatmen."

The lad at once lay down and pulled the blanket over his head. As
soon as he did so, Dominique motioned to the two boatmen to do the
same, and then went back along the track until he met Frank's
party. As the hills were for the most part covered with trees
almost up to their summits, Frank and his party had only to turn a
short distance off from the path, on receiving Dominique's news
that the guide had stopped.

"It is half past one," Frank said, holding the lantern, which the
pilot had left with them, to his watch. "We shall get four hours'
sleep. You had better serve a tot of grog all round, George. It
will keep out the damp night air."

One of the blacks was carrying a basket, and each of the men had
brought a water bottle and pannikin.

"Put some water in it, lads," Frank said, "and it would be a good
thing to eat a bit of biscuit with it."

Dominique had told Frank that the guide had made some remark about
the two blacks dropping behind so often, and the latter took out
his handkerchief, tore it into eight pieces, and gave it to him.

"Wherever you turn off, Dominique, drop one of these pieces on the
path. That will be quite sufficient."

"Yes, sar; but you see we don't know when we start up path whether
it be right path or no. We go up one, if find dat hit not de one
dey go, den come back again and try anoder. What we to do?"

After thinking for some little time, Frank suggested that
Dominique's best way would be to tell the guide that he was
footsore, and that as several paths would have to be searched, he
and one of the men would sit down there. The other would accompany
the boy, and bring down word when the right path had been
discovered.

As soon as it became light Frank, without rousing the men, went out
into the path and moved cautiously up it. He had but just started
when he saw Dominique coming towards him.

"All right, sar. Boy gone on; he hunt about. When he find he send
Sam back to fetch me. De oder stay with him."

"Oh, you have sent both with him."

"Yes, sar, me thought it better. If only one man go, when he come
back, boy could talk to people. Perhaps talk too much, so sent both
men."

"That was the best plan, no doubt," Frank agreed. "I will join the
men, and remain there until you come for me."

"Dat best thing, sar. People might come along, better dey not see
you."

It was twelve o'clock before Dominique joined the waiting group in
the wood.

"They have been a long time finding the track, Dominique."

"Yes, sar, bery long time. Dey try four tracks, all wrong. Den dey
try 'nother. Sam say boy tell him try that last, because bad track;
lead ober hills, to place where Obi man live. Black fellow no like
to go there. Bad men there; steal children away, make sacrifice to
fetish. All people here believe that Obi man bery strong. Dey send
presents to him to make rain or to kill enemy, but dey no like go
near him demselves. Dere was a hut a little up dat road. Party went
by dere yesterday. No more houses on road. Sam say boy wait dere
till he bring me back to him; den go home. Not like to go further;
say can't miss way dat path. Leads straight to Obi man's place.
Fetish on road strike people dead dat go dar without leab ob Obi
man."

"That will suit us well altogether," Frank said. "How far is it to
where the guide is?"

"One and a half hours' walk."

"Then we will be off at once."

All were glad to be on the move again, and in spite of the heat
they proceeded at a rapid pace, until the boatman, Sam, said that
they were close to the spot where he had left his companions with
the guide. The rest then entered the wood, and Dominique went on
with the boatman.

Ten minutes later a young negro came down the path. They had no
doubt that it was the guide. Dominique arrived two or three minutes
later.

"I suppose that was the guide that went down," Frank said, as he
stepped out.

"Dat him, sar," he said. "Quite sure path go to Obi man's place. It
was miles away in centre of hills. I pretend want him to go on. He
said no go for thousand dollars. So me pay him his money, and he go
back. He tell me no use hunt for friends if Obi man hab not giben
dem leab to go and see him. Den the fetish change dem all into
snakes. If he gib leab and not know dat me and oder two men were
friends, den de fetish change us into snakes."

"Well, there is one comfort, Dominique, we shall be able to march
boldly along without being afraid of meeting anyone."

"Yes, sar. Sam be a little frightened, but not much. Not believe
much in San Domingo about fetish. Dey better dan dese Hayti people.
Still Sam not like it."

"I suppose you told him that he was a fool, Dominique?"

"Yes, sar. Me tell him, too, dat white man tink nothing ob Obi man.
Hang him by neck if he tries fetish against dem."

Having picked up Sam, they proceeded at a brisk pace along the
path, Frank leading the way with George Lechmere.

"You see," he said, "Carthew must have been uneasy in his mind all
along. I have no doubt that directly he put into the bay, and
decided to make this his headquarters, he set about preparing some
place where he could carry them off to, and where there would be
