country. By so doing they avoided all parties of the English troops, and
reached the Irish army without adventure. Walter at once reported himself
to General Sarsfield, and related all that had taken place in Dublin.

"You have done excellently, Mr. Davenant, and your escape from capture
was an extraordinary one. Unfortunately, the betrayal of what was doing,
and the arrest of our friends, is likely to upset all the plans you had
arranged."

"I hope not, sir," Walter said. "I know that they were all careful to
have no written documents, for it was always possible that the houses of
the Catholics might be searched."

"That may be so," the general said; "but I fear that this traitor will
have managed to overhear some of the conversation; and the fact of their
meeting, and of your escape, will in itself tell against them
sufficiently to ensure their being kept in prison, at any rate for a
considerable time; and, even if released, they would be suspected
persons, and would be unable to make the slightest move."

The general's previsions were justified. The whole of those arrested were
retained in prison for some months, and no such general rising as had
been planned was ever carried into effect.

During the winter, stores and ordnance arrived from France for the supply
of the Irish army, and from England for the use of the British, and a
great number of officers from the Continent also joined both armies.

The discontent among the Irish at the apathy of France was extreme. They
had embarked in the war on the strength of the promises of King Louis.
None of these promises had been fulfilled. The supplies of arms and money
had been most meagre, the few thousand troops sent had never taken part
in any of the operations, and their coming had been much more than
counterbalanced by the troops sent from Ireland in exchange for them. An
additional cause of discontent was given by the fact that William
exchanged all the prisoners taken in Ireland for Dutch prisoners, in the
hands of Louis, and the Irish so handed over were all incorporated in the
French army.

So great was the discontent that, had a proclamation of pardon and
protection been offered, the whole Irish army would have disbanded, and
all resistance ceased. But Louis, alarmed at finding that it was likely
William would be freed from his troubles at home, and be at liberty to
give his whole attention to the war on the Continent, sent fresh promises
of large and speedy aid; and despatched General Saint Ruth to take the
command in Ireland, in place of Lauzun, who had returned to France.

This appointment caused fresh discontent among the Irish. Their cause had
already been well-nigh ruined by the interference and incapacity of the
French generals, and, on the retirement of Lauzun, they had confidently
expected that Sarsfield would be appointed commander-in-chief, and that
henceforth there would be unity of design in their operations. Saint Ruth
was accompanied by a large number of young French officers, whose
demeanour still further widened the breach between the French and Irish.

Saint Ruth at once inspected the army, now concentrated between Limerick
and Athlone. Except that there was a great deficiency in horses for the
cavalry, the army was greatly improved in discipline and appearance since
the battle of the Boyne, for both officers, petty officers, and men had
learned their duties. The army had passed the winter in comfortable
quarters, and had been well supplied with food.

The difficulty was to find horses. The rapparees had carried off many of
the chargers of the English cavalry, by stratagem, and it was a common
practice of the Danish and other foreign troops to sell their horses to
the Irish, at the outposts, and pretend that they were stolen. Still, the
supply was altogether insufficient, and Saint Ruth, finding that he could
not get horses from the enemy, determined to take them from his friends.

A proclamation was accordingly issued, inviting all the gentry throughout
the country held by the Irish, to meet him at Limerick, mounted and
accoutered in the best manner. Reports were spread that an important
communication was to be made to the gentlemen of the country, from King
James, and that many marks of honour and distinction were to be
conferred.

Accordingly, there was a very numerous attendance of gentry on the day
fixed. Saint Ruth appeared on the ground with a large body of cavalry. He
made a speech to the gentlemen--complimented them on their punctual
attendance and gallant appearance; told them that it was necessary that
every man should make sacrifices for the defence of his religion and his
estates, and requested them to hand over their horses to the cavalry. He
then at once rode off the ground, leaving the cavalry to take possession
of the horses.

Anger and expostulation were useless, and the gentlemen had to return on
foot, sadder men; but the army obtained a large and valuable addition of
horses, and Saint Ruth was able to march out at the head of twenty
thousand foot, and five thousand well-appointed cavalry.

Their direction was Athlone, towards which point Ginckle was also
directing his movements, having assembled his whole force at Mullingar,
withdrawing the garrisons from almost all the towns, in order to raise
his force in the field. The alarm in Dublin was, in consequence, extreme,
and the council and lords justices besought Ginckle not to leave them
without protection; but he only replied that they had it in their own
power to put an end to the war, by publishing such a declaration of
pardon and security, for person and property, as would satisfy the Irish
in James's army. But the council, even in this moment of alarm, refused
to renounce their golden hopes of confiscation.

Ginckle's first attack was directed against the village of Ballymore,
which lay between Mullingar and Athlone. It was defended by a thousand
cavalry and infantry, and a sergeant and a few men were posted, in a
castle, on an eminence some distance from the village. The first attack
was made on the castle, but the sergeant and his little garrison made a
long and gallant resistance, and the savage Dutchman was so infuriated at
the opposition that, when at last the post was taken, he ordered the
gallant sergeant to be at once hung.

He then sent word to the garrison of the village that, if they did not
surrender, he would serve them as he had served the sergeant. They were
unmoved by the threat, and made a long and gallant defence against the
whole of Ginckle's army; and the Dutch general was unable to overcome
their resistance, till he at last offered fair terms of surrender. The
position being a strong and important one, Ginckle spent some days in
adding to the defensive works the Irish had erected, before he moved
forward and sat down in front of Athlone. His army was well provided with
heavy artillery and everything necessary for a siege, and he was firmly
resolved that there should be no repetition of the disastrous failure of
the preceding autumn.



Chapter 14: Athlone.


The Irish had, this time, determined to defend not only that portion of
Athlone situated on the west of the river, but the English town on the
east. The fortifications here were repaired and added to, and the town
was abundantly supplied with stores and ammunition. It was, however,
unable to resist the heavy artillery which Ginckle brought to play
against it. Walls, buildings, and towers crumbled beneath the heavy
cannonade; and although the Irish repelled, with great slaughter, several
assaults upon it, the place became at last untenable, and they abandoned
that part of the town, and retired by the bridge across the river to the
Irish town.

The British, on entering the eastern town, found it a mere mass of ruins,
with the dead bodies of the soldiers lying everywhere, half covered with
the wreck of the works they had died in defending. The taking of this
portion of Athlone had cost Ginckle dearly, and he was but little nearer
the object of his efforts, for he was separated from the Irish town by
the Shannon, and the western arch of the bridge was broken down by the
defenders.

Eleven large guns and three mortars now came up from Dublin, and he
erected a succession of batteries upon the ruins of the English town, and
opened fire upon the castle of Athlone, which, although a building of
great strength, soon crumbled into ruins beneath the fire of the heavy
artillery brought to bear upon it. A mill, which stood in the river, and
was connected with the bridge, was set on fire, and the sixty soldiers
posted in it, being unable to escape, were all burned. Night and day,
seven great batteries played incessantly upon the town.

On the 26th of June, thirty waggons loaded with powder and a hundred
carts with cannon balls arrived from Dublin, and enabled the besiegers to
keep up their fire without intermission. The interior of the town was
reduced to ruins--nothing remained erect save the city walls, in which
the breaches, as fast as they were made, were repaired by the Irish. The
slaughter among those so employed was very heavy; but there was no lack
of men, the places of those who fell being at once supplied by others
willing to give their lives in the defence of the town.

At last, there was nothing more that the besiegers could do. The town was
reduced to ashes, but the river and the broken arch still separated them
from the ruins. To remain much longer where they were was impossible, for
the country on every side was exhausted, and no longer afforded food for
man or horse. The country people had fled, from the cruelty and
spoliation of Ginckle's foreign soldiery, carrying with them all their
effects; and the Irish light troops and armed peasantry hovered round the
camp, laid the country waste, and intercepted their supplies and
communications with Dublin.

Ginckle held a council of war, to consider what was to be done. It was
admitted that they must force the passage of the river without loss of
time, or submit to the alternative of retreat, and the utter failure of
the campaign. It was finally resolved to attempt the passage of the
bridge by throwing a wooden gallery over the broken arch, and forcing
their way across, at all cost. Additional batteries were now raised on
the bank of the river, and a heavy fire was poured, without intermission,
upon the Irish on their side of the broken arch.

Both parties had erected a breastwork on the bridge, at their respective
sides of the breach, and from behind this, day and night, a continued
musketry fire was kept up, the grenadiers of the English army throwing
grenades into the enemy's works. After some days, the breastwork on the
Irish side was set on fire by the continued assault of shot and grenades.
The wattles of which it was composed, dried by the hot weather, were soon
in a blaze, and, under cover of the flames and smoke, the English ran
forward the great beams they had prepared in readiness, and threw them
across the gap in the bridge.

The fire from all the batteries on the English side was directed against
the burning breastwork, while the grenadiers hastened to lay planks
across the beams to complete the bridge. The work was well-nigh done when
an Irish sergeant and ten men, all clad in armour, leaped through the
flames of the breastwork, and began to hew with their axes at the beams
and planks.

For a moment, the British were paralysed at the daring action. Then the
batteries and musketry fire again opened, a storm of shot and bullets
swept across the bridge, and the whole of the gallant fellows fell dead;
but in a moment another party, similarly armed, dashed through the flames
and took their places.

Regardless of the fire they whirled their axes. Nine fell, but the last
two gave the final stroke to the beams. The bridge fell with a crash into
the river below, and the two survivors recrossed the breastwork and
joined their friends within, amid the wild enthusiasm of the defenders;
an enthusiasm in which even the baffled assailants joined, for the
British grenadiers gave a cheer, in token of their admiration at the
gallantry and devotion of the deed.

In all history, there is no record of a more gallant action than this,
performed by two sergeants and twenty men, who thus encountered almost
certain death to maintain their post. The destruction of the temporary
bridge filled Ginckle and his officers with consternation, and the manner
in which their design had been baffled showed the spirit of the
defenders, and the magnitude of the task which they had undertaken.

But it was resolved, at another council which was called, to attempt one
more effort before abandoning the enterprise. A finished platform was
constructed. This was to be thrown over the arch, and a chosen body of
the bravest troops in the army were to throw themselves across, and try
to force a passage. At the same time, a division was to cross the river
by a ford near the bridge, and another to attempt to cross by a bridge of
pontoons, prepared in readiness.

The Irish were informed, by French deserters, of what was going on in the
English camp, and early on the morning of the assault, several strong
divisions of the Irish army were seen marching down from the camp, two
miles away, into the town. Here they were drawn up, in readiness to
repulse the assault.

The British were some time before they were ready for the attack, but at
ten o'clock the whole army stood in close order, ready to advance.

The first to move forward were those who were to carry the bridge. The
Irish guns, which still remained intact, opened upon them, but they
pressed forward along the bridge to the broken arch, and, with less
trouble than had been anticipated, threw the platform across it. Instead
of rushing forward at once, the grenadiers stood behind their breastwork
and hurled their grenades at the Irish grenadiers, who stood in close
order on the opposite edge.

These, however, stood their ground, and hurled their grenades with great
effect into the column. One of these exploded against the English
breastwork and set it on fire. It at once blazed up. A strong west wind
was blowing, and drove the smoke and flames into the faces of the English
grenadiers, who for some time strove in vain to extinguish the flames,
notwithstanding the heavy fire which the defenders poured into them. They
had at last to fall back, and the Irish, sallying from behind their
breastwork, pulled down the burning timbers on to the bridge, which was
soon in flames.

The other divisions of the English army, finding that the grenadiers on
the bridge made no progress, did not attempt to perform their part of the
work, and finally the whole retreated to their camp.

That evening, another council of war was held. Matters now looked
desperate, and the fact that the enterprise had, this time, failed owing
to the hesitation of the troops to push forward to the attack of the
enemy, made the prospect appear more hopeless. Nevertheless, in spite of
the opposition of Generals Ginckle and Mackey, the council determined
that one more attempt should be made, and that this should be carried out
at daylight next morning, in the hopes of taking the Irish by surprise.

It was accordingly given out that the army would retreat in the morning,
and the heavy guns were withdrawn from the batteries. Saint Ruth, who was
convinced that Athlone could not be taken, and who had spent the greater
portion of his time in entertaining the ladies and gentry of the
neighbourhood with balls and fetes, fell into the trap, and, contrary to
the opinion and advice of the Irish generals, recalled from the town the
regiments which had marched in that morning, and replaced them with only
three battalions of inferior troops. The Irish officers remonstrated
warmly, but Saint Ruth, to show his disdain for their opinions, invited a
large party of ladies and gentlemen to an entertainment in the evening.

In the night, the British army prepared for the attack. The commanders of
the respective divisions all led their troops in person.

The garrison of the town were all asleep. In Saint Ruth's camp the
festivities were over, and the general and his officers had retired. The
Irish sentinels, who noted the movement in the British camp, supposed
that they were mustering to retreat, and thus the three British columns
drew up inside the town wall, in readiness to advance, without a notion
of their purpose being entertained on the opposite side of the river.

One column, headed by sixty chosen men in complete armour, was to cross
the bridge and throw a platform over the arch; another to cross by the
ford: the third by a pontoon bridge. When the church bell tolled six, the
three columns advanced simultaneously, and, before the Irish were
thoroughly awake, the leading battalions had forded the river, the
platform was in its place, and the troops pouring into the town.

A few guns were hastily discharged, and then the men of the three Irish
regiments in the town fled in haste, to avoid capture by the columns
pouring across the river by the ford and pontoon bridge. Many, indeed,
were captured whilst asleep. Saint Ruth, roused from sleep by the sound
of cannon, ordered the troops to arms, but it was too late. The town, or
rather its ruins, were in the possession of the British, and the
brilliant success, which had been won by the valour and determination of
the Irish troops, was forfeited by the carelessness, folly, and
self-confidence of the French general.

Had he listened to the advice of the Irish officers, the attempt, like
those which had preceded it, must have failed, and in that case there was
nothing remained to Ginckle but a precipitous retreat to Dublin, with the
loss of the whole of the advantages gained in the previous campaign, and
the necessity of bringing the war to an end by the concession of the
rights and privileges of the Irish Catholics and landowners. The whole
course of history was changed by the folly of one man. Ginckle had taken
Athlone, but it was at a vast cost of life, and he was more than ever
impressed with the magnitude of the task of subduing Ireland, so long as
the people were driven to desperation by the threatened confiscation of
all their lands, and by the persecution of their religion. King William,
too, was more anxious than ever for the termination of hostilities, and,
on the very day that the news of the fall of Athlone reached him, he
issued a proclamation offering protection, security of all possessions,
and continuance in any offices which they held under James, to all who
would lay down their arms in three weeks' time.

The issue of such a proclamation as this, a year before, would have
satisfied the Irish and put a stop to the war; but it was now too late.
The promises made had been broken, over and over again, and the Irish had
but too much reason to fear that, when all opposition ceased, the council
and their train of greedy adherents would again obtain the ascendency,
and would continue their work of spoliation and robbery.

Moreover, the Irish army did not feel itself in any way beaten. It was
not its fault that the second siege of Athlone had not terminated as the
former siege and that of Limerick had done, and that Ginckle's army was
not hurrying back, defeated and disorganized, to Dublin. They felt that,
at the battle of the Boyne, they had suffered no defeat, although, in
accordance with the general plan, they had fallen back, and they eagerly
