time.

"I should think," he said to himself, "the doctor must be a man of
large property, and most likely of noble family, who has taken up
his profession from pure love of it. He is evidently full of
energy, and has an intense desire to see Russia greater and higher
in the rank of nations. I suppose that, like Kelly, he is one of
the principal medical officers in the army. Certainly he must be a
man of considerable influence to obtain my transfer here so easily,
and to see that I travelled so comfortably. I wonder where he is
going to take me this morning."

Four or five minutes later Charlie's friend appeared at the door.
He was evidently out of temper. He sprung hastily into the vehicle,
as if he had altogether forgotten that he had asked Charlie to
accompany him.

Then, as his eye fell on him, he nodded and said briefly, "Jump
in."

A little surprised at the unceremonious address, Charlie sprang
into the seat beside him without hesitation, seeing that his
companion was evidently so much out of temper that he was not
thinking of what he was doing at the moment. The coachman cracked
his whip, and the spirited horses went off, at a rate of speed that
threatened danger to persons traversing the narrow streets of the
town. The cracking of the coachman's whip, and an occasional loud
shout and the jangling of the bells, gave, however, sufficient
warning of their approach.

Charlie smiled at the alacrity with which every one sprang out of
the way, and either leapt into doorways or squeezed themselves
against the wall. He was surprised, however, to see that not only
did the townspeople show no resentment, at the reckless pace at
which the carriage was driven, but that the soldiers, officers as
well as men, cleared out as quickly, and without any expression of
indignation or anger.

Indeed, most of them, as soon as they gained a place of safety,
saluted his companion.

"These Russians have evidently a higher respect for their doctors
than have the Swedes," he said to himself. "I am sure that not even
the chief surgeon of the army would be treated with anything like
the same respect, and, indeed, no one would recognize him at all,
if he were not in uniform."

The doctor seemed to pay no attention to what was passing round
him, but was muttering angrily to himself. It was not until they
dashed out into the open country that he seemed to remember
Charlie's presence at his side.

"These people are enough to vex one of the saints, by their
stupidity," he said. "Unless they have some one standing behind
them with a whip, they cannot be trusted to do what they are told.
It is not that they are not willing, but that they are stupid. No
one would believe that people could be so stupid. They drive me
well nigh to madness sometimes, and it is the more irritating
because, against stupidity, one is powerless. Beating a man or
knocking him down may do him good if he is obstinate, or if he is
careless, but when he is simply stupid it only makes him more
stupid than before. You might as well batter a stone wall.

"You slept well and breakfasted well, Captain Carstairs?"

"Excellently well, thank you. What superb horses you have, doctor."

"Yes. I like travelling fast. Life is too short to throw away time
in travelling. A busy man should always keep good horses."

"If he can afford to do so," Charlie said with a laugh. "I should
say that every one, busy or not, would like to sit behind such
horses as these, and, as you say, it would save a good deal of time
to one who travelled much. But three such horses as these would
only be in the reach of one with a very long purse."

"They were bred here. Their sire was one of three given by the king
of England to the czar. The dams were from the imperial stables at
Vienna. So they ought to be good."

Charlie guessed that the team must have been a present from the
czar, and, remembering what Doctor Kelly had said of the czar's
personal communications with him, he thought that the ruler of
Russia must have a particular liking for doctors, and that the
medical profession must be a more honoured and profitable one in
Russia than elsewhere.

After driving with great rapidity for upwards of an hour along the
banks of the Neva, Charlie saw a great number of people at work on
an island in the middle of the river, some distance ahead, and soon
afterwards, to his surprise, observed a multitude on the flat, low
ground ahead.

"This is what I have brought you to see," his companion said. "Do
you know what they are doing?"

"It seems to me that they are building a fortress on that island."

"You are right. We have got a footing on the sea, and we are going
to keep it. While Charles of Sweden is fooling away his time in
Poland, in order to gratify his spite against Augustus, we are
strengthening ourselves here, and never again will Sweden wrest
Ingria from our hands."

"It is marvellous how much has been done already," Charlie said, as
he looked at the crowd of workmen.

"Everything was prepared," his companion said. "While the army was
invading Livonia, and driving the remnant of the Swedes into Revel,
thousands of carts laden with piles of wood, stone, and cement were
moving towards Ingria. Tens of thousands of workmen and peasants
were in motion from every part of Russia towards this point, and,
the day after Notteburg surrendered, they began their work here. It
was the opportunity in the lifetime of a nation, and we have seized
it. The engineers who had, in disguise, examined it months ago, had
reported that the island was covered at high tides, and was unfit
to bear the foundations of even the slightest buildings. Piles are
being driven in, as close as they will stand, over every foot of
ground in it. Over this a coating of concrete many feet thick will
be laid, and on this the fortress, which is to be the centre and
heart of Russia, will rise. In the fort will stand a pile, which
will be the tomb of the future czars of Russia, and there in front
of us, where you see fifty thousand peasants at work, shall be the
future capital of the empire."

"But it is a swamp," Charlie said in astonishment, alike at the
vastness of the scheme, and the energy with which it was being
prosecuted.

"Nature has made it a swamp," his companion said calmly, "but man
is stronger than nature. The river will be embanked, the morass
drained, and piles driven everywhere, as has been done in the
island, and the capital will rise here. The fort has already been
named the Fortress of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. The capital will
be named alike after the patron saint and its founder--Petersburg."

They had now reached the spot. The carriage stopped and they
alighted. Charlie saw, with astonishment, that a wide deep cut had
been driven, between the road and the river, in a straight line.
Looking down into it, he saw that it was paved with the heads of
piles, and that carts were already emptying loads of concrete down
upon it.

"Every bag of cement, every stone that you see, has been brought
from a great distance," his companion said. "There is not a stone
to be had within fifty miles of this spot. The work would seem
well-nigh impossible, but it is the work of a nation. In another
month, there will be a hundred and fifty thousand peasants at work
here, and well nigh as many carts, bringing materials for the work
and provisions for the workers."

"It is stupendous! But it will take years to complete, and it will
surely be terribly unhealthy here?"

"I calculate the work will occupy ten years, and will cost a
hundred thousand, maybe two hundred thousand lives," the other said
calmly; "but what is that to the making of a nation? Before, Russia
was stifled, she could not grow. Now we have a communication with
the world. The island that lies at the mouth of the Neva will be
fortified, and become a great naval arsenal and fort. Along the
walls which will rise here will be unloaded the merchandise of
Europe, and in exchange the ships will carry away our products.
Some day we shall have another port on the south, but for the
present this must suffice. You will say that this is dangerously
near our frontier, but that will soon be remedied. As we have
pushed the Swedes out of Ingria, so in time shall we drive them
from Livonia on the west, and from Finland on the north.

"But I must to work."

And he motioned to a group of five or six officers, who had been
standing a short distance away, to approach him.

Charlie was struck with the air of humility with which they saluted
his companion, who at once asked a number of questions as to the
supplies that had arrived, the progress that had been made, at a
point where they had met with a deep slough into which the piles
had penetrated without meeting with any firm ground, the number of
huts that had been erected during the past three days for the
reception of labourers, the state of stocks of meat and flour, and
other particulars. To each he gave short, sharp orders. When they
had left, he turned to Charlie.

"You guess who I am, I suppose?"

"I guess now, your majesty," Charlie said respectfully, "but until
now the idea that my kind friend was the czar himself never entered
my mind. I understood, from Doctor Kelly, that you were a surgeon."

"I don't think he said so," the czar replied. "He simply said that
I could perform an amputation as well as he could, which was not
quite true. But I studied surgery for a time in Holland, and
performed several operations under the eyes of the surgeons there.

"I saw that you did not recognize my name. It is known to every
Russian, but doubtless you never heard of me save as Peter the
Czar. Directly you mentioned it to the commandant at Bercov, and
described my appearance, he knew who it was you were speaking of,
and despatched a messenger at once to me. He will be here in the
course of a week or so. Upon your report of the state of the
prison, I at once despatched an order for him to hand over his
command to the officer next in rank, and to proceed hither at once.
He is evidently a good administrator, and heaven knows I have need
of such men here.

"I was pleased with you, when I saw you with my friend Doctor
Kelly. It was pleasant not to be known, and hear a frank opinion
such as you gave me, and as you know, I sent you back on the
following morning. I certainly told Kelly, at the time, not to
mention who I was, but I did not intend that he should keep you in
ignorance of it after I had left, and it was not until I heard,
from your jailer at Bercov, that you were ignorant that Peter
Michaeloff was the czar, that I knew that he had kept you in
ignorance of it until the end.

"I should have liked to have kept you as my guest for a time, but
winter comes on early and suddenly, and if you did not go now you
might be detained here until the spring. I have therefore given
orders that one of the Swedish vessels we captured on the lake
should be got in readiness, and its crew placed on board again. You
shall embark in an hour, and it shall carry you to any port in
Sweden you may choose. The wind is from the east, and you have
every chance of a quick run thither."

Charlie expressed his warm thanks to the czar for his thoughtful
kindness.

"I have much to do now," the czar said, "and must hand you over to
the care of one of my officers. He will accompany you, in my
carriage, to the spot where the vessel is lying, near the mouth of
the river, and will there see you on board. Should the fortune of
war again throw you into our hands, do not lose an hour in sending
a message to Peter Michaeloff."

So saying, the czar shook hands with Charlie, beckoned an officer
to him and gave him instructions, and then moved away among the
workmen, while Charlie, with his conductor, took their places in
the vehicle and drove rapidly off.

An hour later, he was on board the Swedish vessel, whose master and
crew were delighted at their sudden and unlooked for release. The
former was overjoyed, for the vessel was his own property.

"You will find your things in your cabin, sir," he said. "They were
sent on board this morning, together with food and wine sufficient
for a month's voyage, whereas, with this wind, we ought not to be
more than four days. At which port will you land?"

"I would rather go to Gottenburg, captain, though it is farther for
you than Stockholm."

"It shall be Gottenburg, sir. It is thanks to you that I have got
my liberty and my ship, and a day or two can make no difference to
me."

Charlie, indeed, had thought the matter over as he drove along. He
would not be able to rejoin the army until it had gone into winter
quarters, and therefore decided that he would go to Gottenburg,
apply for six months' leave, and spend the winter with his father.
Somewhat puzzled at the mention of his things having gone on board,
he went into the cabin, and found there a handsome pelisse trimmed
with costly furs, two robes composed of valuable skins, and a
change of clothes.

The wind held fair, blowing strongly, and four days later he
arrived at Gottenburg.



Chapter 16: In England Again.


Charlie was received with delight by his father, whom he had not
seen since the spring of the previous year.

"Then you got my letter, Charlie?" Sir Marmaduke asked, when the
first greetings were over. "And yet, I do not see how you could
have done so. It is little over a fortnight since I wrote, and I
had not looked for you for another month yet."

"I have certainly received no letter, father. A fortnight ago I was
in a Russian prison, and my arrival here, in so short a time, seems
to me almost miraculous;" and he then briefly related his singular
experiences.

"Now about the letter, father," he said, as he concluded. "I
suppose you must have written to ask me to get leave for a time, as
it seems that you were expecting me shortly. I suppose you felt
that you would like me with you, for a time."

"So I should, lad, of that you may be sure, but I should not have
called you away for that. No, I had this letter the other day from
old Banks. You know he writes to me once a year. His letters have
been only gossip so far, for you know my precious cousin kicked him
out of the house, as soon as he took possession; but this is a
different matter. Read it for yourself."

Charlie took the letter, and with some trouble spelt through the
crabbed handwriting.

It began:

"Honoured sir and master, I hope that this finds you and Captain
Charles both well in health. I have been laid up with rhematis in
the bones, having less comfort in my lodgings than I used to have
at Lynnwood. Your honour will have heard that King William has
fallen from his horse, and broken his collarbone, and died. May the
Lord forgive him for taking the place of better men. Anne has come
to the throne, and there were some hopes that she would, of
herself, step aside and let him to whom the throne rightly belongs
come to it. Such, however, has not been the case, and those who
know best think that things are no forwarder for William's death,
rather indeed the reverse, since the Princess Anne is better liked
by the people than was her sister's husband.

"There is no sure news from Lynnwood. None of the old servants are
there; and I have no one from whom I can learn anything for
certain. Things however are, I hear, much worse since young Mr.
Dormay was killed in the duel in London, of which I told you in my
last letter.

"Dame Celia and Mistress Ciceley go but seldom abroad, and when
seen they smile but little, but seem sad and downcast. The usurper
has but small dealing with any of the gentry. There are always men
staying there, fellows of a kind with whom no gentleman would
consort, and they say there is much drinking and wild going on. As
Captain Charles specially bade me, I have done all that I could to
gather news of Nicholson. Till of late I have heard nothing of him.
He disappeared altogether from these parts, just after your honour
went away. News once came here from one who knew him, and who had
gone up to London on a visit to a kinsman, that he had met him
there, dressed up in a garb in no way according with his former
position, but ruffling it at a tavern frequented by loose blades,
spending his money freely, and drinking and dicing with the best of
them.

"A week since he was seen down here, in a very sorry state, looking
as if luck had gone altogether against him. Benjamin Haddock, who
lives, as you know, close to the gate of Lynnwood, told me that he
saw one pass along the road, just as it was dusk, whom he could
swear was that varlet Nicholson. He went to the door and looked
after him to make sure, and saw him enter the gate. Next day
Nicholson was in Lancaster. He was spending money freely there, and
rode off on a good horse, which looked ill assorted with his
garments, though he purchased some of better fashion in the town.
It seemed to me likely that he must have got money from the
usurper. I do not know whether your honour will deem this news of
importance, but I thought it well to write to you at once. Any
further news I may gather, I will send without fail.

"Your humble servant,

"John Banks."

"There is no doubt that this is of importance," Charlie said, when
he had read the letter through. "It is only by getting hold of this
villain that there is any chance of our obtaining proof of the foul
treachery of which you were the victim. Hitherto, we have had no
clue whatever as to where he was to be looked for. Now, there can
be little doubt that he has returned to his haunts in London. I
understand now, father, why you wanted me to get leave. You mean
that I shall undertake this business."

"That was my thought, Charlie. You are now well-nigh twenty, and
would scarce be recognized as the boy who left four years ago. The
fellow would know me at once, and I might be laid by the heels
again under the old warrant; besides being charged with breaking
away from the custody of the soldiers. Besides, in this business
youth and strength and vigour are requisite. I would gladly take
the matter in my own hands, but methinks you would have a better
chance of bringing it to a favourable issue. Now that Anne is on
the throne, she and her advisers will look leniently upon the men
whose only fault was devotion to her father; and if we can once get
this foul charge of assassination lifted from our shoulders, I and
Jervoise and the others who had to fly at the same time, may all be
permitted to return, and obtain a reversal of the decree of the Act
of Confiscation of our estates.

"I have no friends at court, but I know that Jervoise was a close
acquaintance, years ago, of John Churchill, who is now Duke of
Marlborough, and they say high in favour with Anne. I did not think
of it when I wrote to you, but a week later it came to my mind that
his intervention might be very useful, and I took advantage of an
officer, leaving here for the army, to send by him a letter to
Jervoise, telling him that there was now some hope of getting at
the traitor who served as John Dormay's instrument in his plot
against us. I said that I had sent for you, and thought it probable
you would take the matter in hand; and I prayed him to send me a
letter of introduction for you to the duke, so that, if you could
by any means obtain the proof of our innocence of this pretended
plot, he might help you to obtain a reversal of the Act of
Confiscation against us all. I have asked him to write at once, and
I will send the letter after you, as soon as I get it.

"I know nothing of London, but I have heard of the Bull's Head, in
Fenchurch Street, as being one frequented by travellers from the
country. You had best put up there, and thither I will forward the
note from Jervoise."

"The letter will be a useful one, indeed, father, when I have once
wrung the truth from that villain Nicholson. It will be an
expedition after my own heart. There is first the chance of
punishing the villain, and then the hope of restoring you to your
place at dear old Lynnwood."

"You must be careful, Charlie. Remember it would never do to kill
the rascal. That would be the greatest of misfortunes; for, with
his death, any chance of unmasking the greater villain would
disappear."

"I will be careful, father. I cannot say how I shall set about the
matter, yet. That must depend upon circumstances; but, as you say,
above all things I must be careful of the fellow's life. When is
there a ship sailing, father?"

"The day after tomorrow, Charlie. You will want that time for
getting clothes, suitable to a young gentleman of moderate
condition, up from the country on a visit to London. You must make
up your mind that it will be a long search before you light on the
fellow, for we have no clue as to the tavern he frequents. As a
roistering young squire, wanting to see London life, you could go
into taverns frequented by doubtful characters, for it is probably
in such a place that you will find him.

"However, all this I must leave to you. You showed yourself, in
that Polish business, well able to help yourself out of a scrape,
and if you could do that among people of whose tongues you were
ignorant, you ought to be able to manage on English soil."

"At any rate, I will do my best, father, of that you may be sure. I
