struck upon a newly-formed coral reef; and that the coral--which,
when first made, is not very hard--had crashed to pieces under the
shock, and so she lay in safety upon the bed of pounded fragments.




Chapter 19: South Sea Idols.



When order and tranquility were perfectly restored, the admiral
ordered a boat to be lowered and soundings to be taken, intending
to put out the anchors ahead, and to get her off by working upon
them with the windlass. It was found, however, that under the
forefoot of the vessel the water deepened so rapidly that, at a
distance of a few fathoms, no soundings could be obtained. This
plan, therefore, was abandoned.

The prospect seemed dark, indeed. The ship's boats would, at most,
only carry half the men on board; and if the ship had to be
abandoned, the whole of her treasures must be lost, as well as many
lives.

"There is an island far away to the south," the admiral said. "If
the worst come, we must seek refuge on that. It will be well to
send a boat to examine it, and see what capabilities it offers for
the purpose. Then if the weather holds fair we can make several
trips, and land our men, and a portion at least of our valuables."

"Will you let me go, sir, with my three friends?" Ned asked. "The
canoe which we took from our last halting place will carry the four
of us and, as she paddles swiftly, we may be back before many
hours."

"The idea is a good one," Captain Drake said. "Make for the island.
It is, I should say, fifteen miles off. When you have reached it,
see if there be water, fuel, and other necessaries, and whether the
landing be good. If you should come upon any natives, parley with
them. Take a few articles as presents, and explain to them, if they
will come out here with their canoes and aid to bring the things
ashore, we will give them presents, which will make them wealthy
beyond their grandest dreams.

"Be careful, my boys. I know that you will be brave, if necessary;
but care and caution are the great things, and remember that our
safety depends upon yours."

The young men speedily lowered the canoe, under the shelter of the
lee side of the ship, took some beads, calicoes, and other
articles, and then, seating themselves in the boat, paddled rapidly
away. At first they felt a little awkward in using the paddles, in
which they had had no practice, whatever. But being powerful men,
and accustomed to the use of oars, they soon fell into regular
stroke, and the light boat danced rapidly over the waters. The
distance was further than Captain Drake had imagined, the clearness
of the air making the land appear nearer than it really was; and it
was only after three hours of hard work that they neared it.

It turned out to be an island of about a mile in length, so far as
they could judge. A reef of coral ran round it. The center of the
island was somewhat elevated, and was covered with coconut trees;
and it was this, alone, which had enabled it to be seen, from so
great a distance, from the deck of the Golden Hind.

Paddling round the reef, they came to an opening and, entering
this, found themselves in perfectly smooth water, and were soon on
shore.

"Our best way to look for water," Ned said, "will be to follow the
beach all round the island. If there is any stream, we must then
come upon it. We had better take our arms, and haul up the canoe."

Ned, although the youngest of the party, being an officer of the
ship, was naturally in command.

"It will be hard," Reuben said, "if we do not meet with some
adventure. This is the first time that I have been out with you,
Ned. The others have had their share, and it will be hard upon me
if, when I get home, I have not some tale to tell my friends."

"I hope that it will not be so," Ned said, "for more than story
telling depends upon our success. I fear the Golden Hind is fixed
fast, and that all the fruits of our expedition are lost, even if
our lives be saved. Everything depends upon the report we may make
when we return; and anything that should occur to delay us, or to
prevent our bearing back tidings of this place to the admiral,
would be bad fortune, indeed."

"I don't mean," Reuben said, "anything that would prevent our
returning. But we might do something, and yet return safely."

A walk round the island showed no signs of water; nor, although
they searched for some hours, walking backwards and forwards across
it, could they find any sign of a pool. It was clear that there
were no fresh-water springs on the island, and that the vegetation
depended entirely upon the rain that fell in the regular season.
But they discovered, from the top of the island, another and much
larger one; lying, still again, some fifteen miles to the south.

After much deliberation, they determined to make for this; as it
was of importance that they should have some news, of a place to
which the goods could be transported, to carry back to the ship.
This island was much higher, and there appeared every probability
that water, and all they required, would be found there.
Accordingly, taking their place in the canoe, they again paddled
out through the entrance to the reef, and steered their course for
their new discovery.

This was a large island, measuring at least, as they judged from
the view of the one side, twenty miles round. The shores were
steep, and they rowed for some time before they succeeded in
finding a place where a landing could be effected. Then a deep bay
suddenly opened out, and into this they rowed.

Scarcely had they fairly entered it when, from some bushes near the
shore, two large war canoes, crowded with natives, shot out and
made towards them. The lads at first grasped their muskets, but Ned
said:

"Let the arms be. We are here to make peace with the natives, and
must take our chance."

They stood up in the canoe, holding up their arms in token of
amity. The canoes came alongside at racing pace, the natives
uttering yells of joy. The canoe had evidently been seen
approaching the island, and preparations had been made to seize it,
immediately on its arrival.

Ned held up in his hands the beads and pieces of cloth. But the
natives were too excited for pause or negotiation. In an instant
the boys were seized and placed on board the canoes, two in each.
They were tenderly handled, and were clearly objects of veneration
rather than of hostility. The moment that they were on board, the
contents of the canoe were transferred to the large boat; and it
was then cast adrift, and the two war boats, at full speed, made
out through the passage.

Ned endeavored, in vain, to attract the attention of the leaders of
the savages to his gestures; and to explain to them that there was
a vessel, from which he had come, at a short distance off; and
that, if they would accompany him thither, they would obtain large
quantities of the beads and cloth which he showed them. The
natives, however, were too much excited to pay any attention to his
efforts; and with a sigh of despair he sat down by the side of
Reuben, who was in the same boat with him; as the canoes, on
emerging from the bay, turned their heads to the southwest, and
paddled steadily and rapidly away from the island.

"Whither can they be going to take us?" Reuben said.

"They must belong to some other island," Ned answered, "and be a
war party, which has come on plundering purposes here. What a
misfortune! What terribly bad luck! They have clearly never seen
white men before, and regard us as superior beings; and so far as
we are concerned, it is probable that our lives are safe. But what
will the admiral think, when night comes on and we do not return?
What will become of our comrades?"

And at the thought of their messmates, left without help in so
perilous a position, Ned fairly broke down and cried.

For some hours the natives continued their course without
intermission, and gradually an island, which had at first seemed
like a low cloud on the horizon, loomed up nearer and nearer; and
at last, just as night fell, they landed upon its shores. Here in a
bay a village of huts, constructed of the boughs of trees, had been
raised; and the arrival of the war canoes was greeted, with wild
and prolonged cries, by the women and children. All prostrated
themselves in wonder and astonishment when the white men, in their
strange attire, were brought on shore; and Ned saw that his
suspicions were correct, and that they were regarded by their
captors as gods. Further proof was given of this when they were
escorted to a large shed, composed of a roof of thatch supported on
four upright posts, which stood in the center of the village.

Under this were placed some of the hideous effigies which the South
Sea Islanders worship, and which are affixed to the prow of their
boats; and may be seen in the British Museum, and in other places
where collections of Indian curiosities are exhibited. These
effigies were carved in the shape of human beings, with enormous
goggle eyes, splashes of bright paint, and strange and immense
headdresses of brilliant colors.

Here the lads were motioned to sit down, and the natives brought
them offerings of cocoas, and other fruits. The boys could hardly
help laughing at their strange position, surrounded by these
hideous idols.

"You wanted an adventure, Reuben, and you have got one, indeed,"
Ned said. "You are translated into a heathen god and, if you ever
get home, will have your story to tell, which will astonish the
quiet firesides in Devonshire."

"Ought we not to refuse to accept this horrid worship?" Gerald
said.

"I think not," Ned replied. "It can do no harm; and we are, at
least, better than these wooden idols. So long at least as we are
taken for gods, our lives are safe. But I would not say as much if
they once became convinced, by our actions, that we are men like
themselves."

"But we cannot sit here, all our lives, among these idols," Reuben
said.

"I agree with you there, Reuben; but patience does wonders, and I
am not troubled in the least about ourselves. Sooner or later, a
way of escape will present itself; and when it does, be assured
that we will use it. Patience is all that we require, now. It is of
our poor shipmates that I am thinking."

As night fell, great bonfires were lighted. The natives indulged in
wild dances round them, and feasting and festivities were kept up
all through the night. Four watches were stationed, one at each
post of the temple; and the boys saw that, for the present, at
least, all thought of escape was out of the question. And
therefore, stretching themselves at full length on the sand, they
were speedily asleep.

For some days, the position remained unchanged. The boys were well
fed, and cared for. Offerings of fruit, fish, and other eatables
were duly presented. A perfumed wood which, according to the native
ideas, personified incense, was burned in large quantities round
the temple, and nearly choked the boys with its smoke.

Upon the fifth day, it was clear that some expedition was being
prepared. Four large war canoes were dragged down and placed in the
water; and the great idols, which stood in the bow of each, were
removed and carried up to the temple, and placed there in position.
Then the boys were motioned to come down to the beach.

"I do believe," said Tom, bursting into a shout of laughter, "that
they are going to put us in the bows of their canoes, in place of
their old gods."

The others joined in the laughter, for to act as the figurehead of
a canoe was indeed a comical, if an unpleasant situation.

When they reached the boats, the boys saw that their suspicions
were correct, and that the natives were preparing to lash them to
the lofty prows; which rose, some twelve feet above the water, in a
sweep inwards.

"This will never do," Tom said. "If we are fastened like that, our
weight will cut us horribly. Let us show them how to do it."

Whereupon, with great gravity he took a large piece of flat wood,
and motioned to the savages to lash this in front of the bow of one
of the boats, at a height of three feet above the water, so as to
afford a little platform upon which he could stand. The natives at
once perceived the drift of what he was doing, and were delighted
that their new deities should evince such readiness to fall in with
their plans. The additions were made at once to the four canoes;
but while this was being done, some of the leading chiefs, with
every mark of deference, approached the boys with colored paints;
and motioned, to them, that they would permit them to deck them in
this way.

Again the boys indulged in a hearty laugh and, stripping off their
upper garments, to the immense admiration of the natives. They
themselves applied paint in rings, zigzags, and other forms to
their white shirts; painted a large saucer-like circle round the
eyes with vermilion, so as to give themselves something the
appearance of the great idols; and having thus transmogrified
themselves, each gravely took his place upon his perch; where,
leaning back against the prow behind them, they were by no means
uncomfortable.

"If these fellows are going, as I expect, upon a war expedition,"
Ned shouted to his friends, as the boats, keeping regularly
abreast, rowed off from the island; amidst a perfect chaos of
sounds, of yells, beatings of rough drums made of skins stretched
across hollow trunks of trees, and of the blowing of conch shells;
"our position will be an unpleasant one. But we must trust to
circumstances to do the best. At any rate, we must wish that our
friends conquer; for the next party, if we fall into their hands,
might take it into their heads that we are devils instead of gods,
and it might fare worse with us."

It was manifest, as soon as they started, that the object of the
expedition was not the island upon which they had been captured,
but one lying away to the south. It was a row of several hours
before they approached it. As they did so, they saw columns of
smoke rise from several points of the shore, and knew that their
coming there was observed by the islanders.

Presently six canoes, equally large with their own and crowded with
men, were observed pulling out, and yells of defiance came across
the water.

"It is clear," Tom said, "that this island is stronger than our
own; and that it is only on the strength of our miraculous presence
that the islanders expect to conquer their foes; for they would
never, with four canoes, venture to attack a place of superior
force, unless they deemed that their victory was certain."

With wild yells, which were answered boldly from their own canoes,
the enemy approached, and the combat began with a general discharge
of arrows. Then the canoes rowed into each other, and a general and
desperate hand-to-hand combat commenced. The enthusiasm with which
the inmates of the boys' canoes were animated at first gave them
the superiority, and they not only beat back the attacks of their
foes but, leaping into their enemy's boats, succeeded in clearing
two of them of their occupants. Numbers, however, told; and the
enemy were, with very heavy clubs and spears, pointed with sharp
shells, gradually forcing the adventurers back; when Ned saw that a
little supernatural interference was desirable, to bring matters
straight again. Giving the word to his friends, he stood up on his
perch and, swinging himself round, alighted in the boat; giving as
he did so a loud British cheer, which was answered by that of his
comrades. Then, with his arms erect, he began to move along the
benches of the canoe, towards the conflict which was raging on
either side.

The sudden interference of the four deities, at the head of the
boat, was received with a yell of terror by the natives who were
attacking them; which was increased when the boys, each seizing a
club from the hands of a native, jumped into the enemy's canoes,
and began to lay about them with all their strength. This was,
however, required but for a moment. The sight of so terrible and
unexampled an apparition appalled the islanders; who, springing
overboard with yells of despair, swam rapidly towards land, leaving
their boats in the hands of the victors.

These indulged in wild yells of triumph, knelt before their good
geniuses, and then, taking their places, paddled towards the shore.
Before they had reached it, however, the defeated savages had
landed and, running up to their village, had borne the news of the
terrible apparitions which had taken part against them.

The conquerors, on reaching the village, found it deserted;
plundered it of a few valuables; carried down all their enemy's
gods in triumph into the canoes; and then, having fired the huts,
started again, with the ten canoes, towards their own island.

Their triumphant arrival at the village was received with frantic
excitement and enthusiasm. The sight of six canoes towed in, by the
four belonging to the place, was greeted with something of the same
feeling which, in Nelson's time, Portsmouth more than once
experienced upon an English vessel arriving with two captured
French frigates, of size superior to herself. And when the warriors
informed their relatives of the interposition of the white gods in
their favor, the latter rose to an even higher estimation in public
opinion than before. They were escorted to their shrine with wild
dancing and gesticulation, and great heaps of fruit, fish, and
other luxuries were offered to them, in token of the gratitude of
the people.

But this was not all. A few hours later a solemn council was held
on the seashore, and after a time a great hurrying to and fro was
visible in the village. Then, to the sound of their wild music,
with dancing, brandishing of spears, and the emission of many wild
yells, the whole population moved up towards the shrine.

"What can they be going to do now?" Tom said. "Some fresh piece of
homage, I should guess. I do wish they would leave us alone. It is
annoying enough to be treated as a god, without being disturbed by
these constant worshippings."

When the crowd arrived before the shed they separated, and in the
midst were discovered four girls. On their heads were wreaths of
flowers, and their necks and arms were loaded with necklaces, and
shells, and other ornaments.

"Don't laugh, you fellows," said Ned. "I do believe that they have
brought us four wives, in token of their gratitude."

The lads had the greatest difficulty in restraining themselves from
marring the effect of the solemnity by ill-timed laughter. But they
put a great restraint upon themselves, and listened gravely while
the chief made them a long harangue, and pointed to the four
damsels; who, elated at the honor of being selected, but somewhat
shy at being the center of the public gaze, evidently understood
that the village had chosen them to be the wives of the gods.

Although the boys could not understand the words of the speaker,
there was no question as to his meaning, and they consulted
together as to the best steps to be taken, under the circumstances.

"We must temporize," said Tom. "It would never do for them to
consider themselves slighted."

After a short consultation, they again took their places in a
solemn row, in front of the shed. Reuben, who was the tallest and
most imposing of the set, and who was evidently considered by the
villagers to be the leading deity, then addressed a long harangue
to the chief and villagers. He beckoned to the four girls, who
timidly advanced, and one knelt at the feet of each of the whites.

Then Reuben motioned that a hut must be built, close to the shrine;
and, pointing to the sun, he traced its way across the sky, and
made a mark upon the ground. This he repeated fourteen times,
signifying that the girls must be shut up in the hut and guarded
safely for that time, after which the nuptials would take place.

"You are quite sure, Ned," he said, pausing and turning round to
his friend, "that we shall be able to make our attempt to escape
before the end of the fourteen days? Because it would be fearful,
indeed, if we were to fail, and to find ourselves compelled to
marry these four heathen women."

