across it, in many places, and had broken down the bridges.

"It was a gallant exploit, sir. I will, myself, take you in to the
king."

Oswald took off his jerkin.

"I am but in poor plight to show myself before his majesty," he said,
as he handed it to Roger.

"Ah! I remember this good fellow," the earl said. "He is not one easily
forgotten, for 'tis seldom one sees so stout a man-at-arms.

"As to your dress, 'tis nought; and indeed, it is in better order than
most in camp, for the soldiers have no tents, and have, for the last
forty-eight hours, been over their ankles in mud and water.

"Have you been with Mortimer ever since we harried Glendower's valley?"

"No, my lord. I returned after that to the north, and was at Alnwick
for nine months. Then Sir Henry sent me back again to Ludlow, in order
that I might keep him well informed of the extent of this rebellion,
concerning which but few tidings came to him."

They had, by this time, arrived at the entrance of the king's tent. The
two sentries on duty there stood back and saluted, as the earl entered,
followed by Oswald.

"This, sire, is a messenger, one Master Oswald Forster, an esquire of
Sir Henry Percy's. He had been sent by his lord to Ludlow, to keep him
acquainted with the extent of this rebellion. Some few days since, a
royal messenger reached the town, with a letter for you; as doubtless,
in London, they cannot have known which way you were marching, and
directed it there, so that it might be forwarded to you thence. Sir
Edmund, having your royal order not to send any force away, would have
been at a loss how to forward it; deeming that it would need a strong
body of men-at-arms to penetrate to you, as he knew, from what had
happened on the two last expeditions, that the Welsh, being unable to
oppose your advance, would swarm behind you, so as to prevent
reinforcements or convoys of provisions from reaching you. He was,
therefore, doubtful as to what course to adopt, when this gentleman
volunteered to carry it to you; and this he has accomplished, attended
by but a single follower. Knowing that he could only hope to reach you
on foot, he and his man-at-arms left their horses at Welshpool; and
have made their way through the woods on foot, not without adventure,
having lost their way in the storm, and having slept in the wood for
two days, and killed five Welshmen, scarcely escaping a crowd of others
as they came in."

"A very gallant deed, sir," the king said to Oswald, as the latter bent
upon one knee and handed the letter to him. "By Our Lady, it was no
slight thing to venture through the woods, swarming with these wild
Welshmen. How long have you been an esquire to Percy?"

"Over three years, sire."

"I met Master Forster at Chester," the earl said. "He commanded a score
of Percy's men, and rode with us when we captured Glendower's house.
The knights with him told me that he and his little band had done
excellent service, in the fight when the Welsh made their first
irruption; and that Sir Henry Percy had written in the warmest terms to
Mortimer, saying that the gentleman stood high in his regard, and that
he had the most perfect confidence in him, and had selected him for the
service since he was able to write well, and could, therefore,
communicate freely with him as to the troubles on the Welsh border."

"And have you been at Mortimer's ever since that time?" the king asked.

Oswald noticed that each time Mortimer's name was mentioned, the king's
brow was somewhat clouded.

"Not so, your majesty. I returned to the north, with Percy's men, a few
days after the capture of Glendower's house. I came back to Ludlow in
the spring."

"Why did Sir Henry Percy despatch you there again?" the king asked,
sharply.

"From what he said, sire, it was because he was anxious to know whether
the rebellion was growing, fearing that there might be some
correspondence between Glendower and the Scots; and that, if it should
come to a point when you might have to lead the whole force of the
south to put the Welsh down, the Scots might make a great irruption
into the northern counties, and it would be needful for him to keep a
larger body of men than usual under arms; as the earl, his father, and
the Earl of Westmoreland, would have to stand the whole brunt of the
matter, for a time, without aid from the south."

The king's brow cleared.

"It was a thoughtful act of Sir Henry," he said; "and 'tis like enough
that the Scots will, as you say, take advantage of our troubles here;
and it is well, therefore, that the Lords of the Northern Marches
should hold themselves in readiness.

"What think you, Talbot? It seems to me that the bold service this
esquire has performed merits reward."

"I think so, indeed," the earl said. "It was a singular act of
courage."

The king drew his sword from his scabbard.

"Kneel, sir," he said.

And, as Oswald knelt, the king laid the sword across his shoulder, and
said, "Rise, Sir Oswald Forster."

Oswald rose.

"I thank you, my Lord King," he said, "and trust that I may live for
many years to do worthy knightly service to my liege, who has so highly
honoured me."

"My lord," the king said to Talbot, "I leave it to you to see that this
young knight is provided with horse and armour. Unfortunately there is
more than one suit without an owner, at present. You will do well to
wait with me while I open this letter; which, maybe, contains matter of
moment."

Feeling that his audience was over, Oswald bowed deeply, and left the
tent to rejoin Roger.

"What said the king, master?"

"He spoke much more highly of what we had done, Roger, than it
deserved; and as a reward for the service, he has just knighted me."

"I think that he has done well, master!" Roger exclaimed, joyously. "I
had hoped that Hotspur would have done it, after that adventure with
the Bairds; of which, as Alwyn told me, he spoke to him in tones of
wondrous praise."

"That was a private business, Roger, and he would know that I would
much rather that, when knighthood came, I should receive it for service
in the field. The king regards our coming here as a service to himself,
and therefore rewarded me; but I would rather that it should have been
for service in the field, against the enemy, than for tramping through
the forest."

"Yes, but a forest full of Welshmen," Roger said, "who are more to be
feared, in that way, than when met in open fight."

"Earl Talbot spoke very kindly of me, and said that he had heard that,
with Percy's men, I had done good service in that fight with the Welsh,
near Knighton."

"That was certainly pretty hot work, master--I shall get to say Sir
Oswald, in time; but at present my tongue is not used to it. What are
we to do now?"

"The king asked Lord Talbot to provide me with armour, and a horse; so
we must wait until he comes this way."

It was half an hour before the earl came out.

"The letter was of importance," he said, "and it is well that it was
brought on.

"Now, Sir Oswald, let us see to your matter. Two days ago Sir William
Baxter was killed, by a sudden attack of the Welsh, while he was
burning a village. His men rallied, beat off the Welsh, and brought his
body in; and methinks his armour will fit you, though he was shorter,
by two or three inches, than yourself."

He accompanied Oswald to one of a small group of tents, standing a
quarter of a mile farther down the road.

"Is Sir William Baxter's squire here?"

A young man at once came up.

"I was his esquire, my lord."

"I have the king's orders," the earl said, "that his arms, armour, and
horses are to be handed over, forthwith, to Sir Oswald Forster here,
who will take command of his troop. He will take over all the other
belongings of the knight."

The young squire bowed.

"I will hand them over to you, sir."

"You will, of course, take possession of the tent also, Sir Oswald. Sir
William was one of my knights. He was unwedded, and has no male kin;
therefore, you need have no hesitation in taking his belongings; which
indeed we should, in any case, have little chance of taking back with
us, for our waggons are but few, and will daily become fewer: for on
such roads as these, both waggons and horses break down, and it will be
as much as we can do to carry even necessities with us.

"Come to my tent at noon, it lacks but an hour of it, and I will
present you at dinner to some of my knights; among whom, for the
present, I shall rank you."

So saying, he turned away. The young squire held open the entrance of
the tent, for Oswald to enter, and followed him in.

"It seems a strange thing to be thus possessed of another man's goods,"
he said.

"It is often so," the squire said, "and sometimes even his estates go
with them, also. As the earl said, Sir William Baxter had none to whom
these things could have been given; seeing that he had, so far as I
know, only one sister, to whom armour and horses could be of no use.
She is one of the Countess of Talbot's ladies."

"And what are you going to do, yourself?"

"For the present, I know not," the squire said. "I had been with Sir
William Baxter but three years. The knight I served with, before, was
thrown from his horse and killed; and Sir William, who had been just
knighted, took me into his service."

"How long have you been a squire?"

"Six years, and I hoped that, in this campaign, I might have done
something to win my spurs."

"I am but a poor knight, Master--" and he paused.

"Henry Pemberton," the squire said.

"And being but knighted today, and having no lands to keep up my
knighthood, it may be that the earl will appoint you to another of his
knights; but should he not do so, I shall be glad if, for the rest of
this campaign, you will ride with me; and trust that you, too, may have
an opportunity of gaining knighthood, before it is over. But whether or
no, as soon as we cross the border again, I doubt not that you will be
able to find some lord under whom you may gain advancement."

"I will gladly do so, Sir Oswald. 'Tis strange that I should not have
seen your face before; for, since we left Worcester, I have come to
know the greater part of the esquires here."

"I arrived but an hour ago," Oswald replied, "having made my way
through the Welsh, on foot, with that tall fellow you saw without."

"That was a dangerous deed, truly," Pemberton said, in tones of
surprise. "May I ask why you essayed so perilous a feat?"

"I was the bearer of a despatch for the king. I was an esquire to Sir
Henry Percy, but have for some time been staying with his
brother-in-law, Sir Edmund Mortimer.

"Had Sir William a man-at-arms, who served as his servant? For I shall
make my man-at-arms, who has gone through many adventures with me, has
fought by my side, and saved my life, my second squire."

"Yes, a very good and trusty fellow."

"Then of course I shall keep him on. Now, will you tell my man to come
in?

"Roger," he said, "You doubtless heard the earl's words, and I am now
master of this tent, together with the armour, horses, and clothes of
Sir William Baxter. Master Henry Pemberton will act as my squire,
during the campaign. You will be my second squire."

"Well, master, I never looked so high as to become an esquire; and
would rather remain a simple man-at-arms, were it not that it will keep
me near you."

"You will find Roger a good comrade, Master Pemberton. He has been a
man-at-arms at his own choice; for, as he can read and write as well as
any clerk, he might have done better for himself."

Pemberton looked, with some surprise, at Roger. He himself had not
these accomplishments, and he was surprised at finding a man-at-arms so
well endowed.

"As you may tell by his speech," Oswald went on, "he is, like myself, a
Northumbrian; and has done good service in the wars with the Scots."

"That I can well imagine," the squire said, with a smile. "I would
certainly wish for no stouter comrade."

"We must see about arms and armour for you, Roger," Oswald said.

"There will be no difficulty about that. None whatever, Sir Oswald. We
have lost fully three hundred men, since we crossed the border, and a
hundred and fifty since we came here, four days since. There is a pile
of harness and arms, lying by the roadside; and there, methinks, it is
likely it will lie. You have but to go with him, when you have attired
yourself and buckled on spurs, and you can pick and choose among it.
Assuredly, no one will gainsay you."

Oswald now changed his attire. The clothes were handsome, and fitted
him well. Then he buckled on the golden spurs, put on the knightly
armour--for he had observed that the earl, and the knights that he had
seen in the camp, all kept on full armour, being ever in expectation of
sudden attack.

"Truly you make a handsome figure, Sir Oswald," said Roger, who had
been assisting him. "Little did I think, when I used to rail at you at
your books, that you would grow into so stalwart a man; and that I
should follow you in the field, as your squire. Your armour fits you as
if made for you, save that these cuishes scarce meet your body armour.
In truth, though bad for him, it was lucky for you that the master of
this tent came to his death when he did."

"I like a steel cap better than this helmet, though I say not that it
looks so well."

"Not by a long way," Roger said. "Nought could become you better. What
cognizance do you mean to take?"

"I have not thought about it, yet. There will be time enough for that,
after the war is over."

"Well, at any rate, master, I will today set about getting Sir William
Baxter's off the shield. Methinks that, with some sand from the river
bed, I shall be able to manage it with an hour's rubbing."

"Now, come along, Roger. There is no time to be lost, for I dine at
midday with the Earl of Talbot. Master Pemberton will show us where the
armour is lying."

There was, indeed, a large pile.

Oswald then said, "As you are known, Master Pemberton, you had better
stop here; for it will take some picking before Roger is suited. As it
is but two minutes to twelve, I must hurry back to Lord Talbot's tent."

Some seven or eight knights were already there. Lord Talbot introduced
him to them and, as they dined, Oswald related, at their request, more
particularly how he had got through the Welsh--a task that seemed to
them well-nigh impossible, since the soldiers dared not venture even to
the edge of the forest, so thickly were the Welsh posted there.

"That man-at-arms must be a stalwart fellow, indeed," said one, "to
kill three Welshmen with nought but a quarterstaff."

"If you had seen the man, and the staff, Sir Victor, you would not be
surprised," Lord Talbot said. "He stands some six feet four, and has
shoulders that might rival Samson's. As to his quarterstaff, I marked
it. It was of oak, and full two inches across; and a blow with it, from
such arms, would crack an iron casque, to say nothing of a Welsh
skull."



Chapter 18: Glendower.


For the next ten days the weather was so bad that no operations could
be carried on. Every little stream was swollen to a raging torrent.
Horses, carrying men in full armour, could scarce keep their feet on
the slippery moor; and even the footmen had the greatest difficulty in
getting about; and all excursions were given up, for the Welsh,
barefooted and unweighted with armour, would have been able to fall
upon them to great advantage, and could then evade pursuit, with ease.

The number of sick increased rapidly, and it became necessary to send
another convoy back to Llanidloes; where the guard were to join the
force that had gone there, ten days before, and to escort some waggons
of flour and a number of cattle, that had been brought there from
Welshpool by a strong levy from Shropshire.

Ten knights, a hundred mounted men-at-arms, as many on foot, and fifty
archers were considered sufficient to escort the sick; who, to the
number of two hundred, were closely packed in the ten waggons that were
to return with flour. Three of Lord Talbot's knights were to form part
of the escort, and among these Oswald was chosen by the earl.

It was hoped that the convoy would reach the town without being
attacked, for great pains had been taken to prevent the news of its
approaching departure getting about; for there were many Welshmen in
the camp, employed in looking after the baggage animals, and in other
offices. They had all been hired for the service on the other side of
the border; but it was believed that some of them, at least, must be in
communication with the enemy; who were thereby enabled to gather in
force, to oppose any parties who sallied out from the camp.

The consequence was that, until half an hour before it left, none save
a few of the leaders were aware of the starting of the convoy. Then
orders were rapidly issued. The knights and men-at-arms who had been
selected for the service had but a few minutes to prepare themselves.
The horses were harnessed to the waggons, and the sick and wounded
carried out and placed in them, with the greatest expedition, and the
party set out in less than half an hour after the first order had been
given. It had gone but a quarter of a mile when the shouts among the
woods, on either side, showed that the Welsh were vigilant. Horns were
blown in all directions, the sound growing fainter and fainter, in the
hills.

"We shall not get through undisturbed," one of the knights said to
Oswald, who was riding next to him.

"No, I think we shall have fighting. It would have been better had we
and the men-at-arms been told to leave our horses behind. In this deep
soil they will be of little use in a fight, and we should do better on
foot."

"It would be terrible, marching in our heavy armour."

"Doubtless it would have been so, but I should not have minded that.
The distance is but six miles; and although, in this slippery plain,
the toil would have been great, methinks that we could have made a
better fight than on horseback; and as these waggons travel but slowly,
we could have kept up with them."

"We can dismount, if necessary," the knight said; "but, for my part, I
would rather ride than tramp through this deep mud."

Their progress was indeed slow, the waggons frequently sank almost up
to their axles in the mud, and it needed all the efforts of the
dismounted men to get them out. A deep silence had succeeded the outcry
in the woods.

"I like not this silence, Sir Oswald," the knight said; when, after an
hour's hard work, they were still but two miles from the camp.

"Nor do I," Oswald said. "It seems unnatural. Do you not think, Sir
William, that it would be well if all were to take the picket ropes
from their horses' necks, and knot them two and two, fastening one end
to a waggon and the other to a horse's girth. In that way fifty
men-at-arms might be roped on to the waggons, and would aid those
drawing them, greatly."

"The idea is a very good one," the knight said.

He rode forward to Sir Eustace de Bohun, who was in command, and
informed him of Oswald's suggestion, which was at once adopted. As soon
as it was carried out, the dismounted men were ordered to push behind
the waggons, which now proceeded at a much faster rate than before.

They were just half-way to the town, and beginning to entertain hopes
that they should get through without being attacked, when a horn
sounded; and from the forest on both sides, a crowd of men rushed out,
and poured a volley of arrows into the convoy. Hasty orders were
shouted by Sir Eustace, the ropes were thrown off, and the troops
formed up in a double line on each side of the waggons.

The knights and mounted men formed the outside line, and the footmen
stood a pace or two behind them; so as to cover them from attack,
should the Welsh break through. Oswald's esquire was on one side of
him, Roger on the other.

The waggons continued to move forward, for at this point the road was
better, running across a bare rock, and the horses were therefore able
to draw them along without any assistance. Sir Eustace therefore gave
the order for the escort to continue their way, marching on each side
of the train.

"We must fight our way through, men," he shouted; "every minute will
doubtless add to their numbers."

For a short time the arrows flew fast. But the Welsh bows were not to
be compared, in point of strength, with those used by the English
archers; and the arrows fell harmlessly upon the armour of the
men-at-arms, while on the other hand, the English archers shot so
strongly and truly that, after a short time, the Welsh bowmen fell
back. As they did so, however, a crowd of footmen poured out from the
forest; and, with loud shouts and yells, rushed forward.

"Halt the waggons!" Sir Eustace cried. "Keep good order, men, and we
shall soon drive this rabble off."

The archers had time but to send three flights of arrows among their
assailants, when these threw themselves upon the line. They were armed
with short axes, heavy clubs, and other rough weapons; and for a time,
the horsemen kept their order and beat them back; but as the horns
continued to sound, the Welsh swarmed down in such numbers that they
broke in between their mounted foes; some trying to tear them from
