
"We may as well have another go of chocolates now, in case they get
squashed up going in," suggested Coote, who avoided the legal aspect of
the case.

The door opened at last, and our heroes, some of whom knew the ways of
the place, made a stampede over the forms and through the witness-box
into the front seat reserved for the use of the public, where they
spread themselves out luxuriously, and celebrated their achievement by a
further tax on the friendly Duffield's creams.

The court rapidly filled.  The interest which Tom White's case had
evoked had grown into positive excitement since his arrest, and our
heroes had reason to congratulate themselves on their punctuality as
they saw the crowded forms behind them and the jostling group at the
door.

"There's Webster at the back; shall you nod to him?" asked Heathcote.

"Yes--better," said Dick, speaking for the "Firm."

Whereupon all three turned their backs on the bench and nodded cheerily
to Mr Webster, who never saw them, so busy was he in edging his way to
a seat.

Having discharged this public duty our heroes resumed their seats just
in time to witness the arrival of the usher of the court, followed by a
man in a wig, and a couple of reporters.

"It's getting hot, I say," said Dick, speaking more of his emotions than
of the state of the atmosphere.

It got hotter rapidly; for two of the Templeton police appeared on the
scene and looked hard at the front public bench.  Then the solicitors'
seats filled up, and the magistrates' clerk bustled in to his table.
And before these alarming arrivals had well brought the perspiration to
our heroes' brows, the appearance of two magistrates on the bench sent
up the temperature to tropical.

"Order in the court!" cried the usher.

Whereupon Duffield, in his excitement, dropped a chocolate on the floor
and turned pale as if expecting immediate sentence of death.

However, the worst was now over.  And when it appeared that the two
magistrates were bluff, good-humoured squires, who seemed to have no
particular spite against anybody, and believed everything the clerk told
them, the spirits of our heroes revived wonderfully, and Duffield's bag
travelled briskly in consequence.

To the relief of the "Firm," the first case was not Tom White's.  It was
that of a vagrant who was charged with the heinous crimes of begging and
being unable to give an account of herself.  The active and intelligent
police gave their evidence beautifully, and displayed an amount of
shrewdness and heroism in the taking up of this wretched outcast which
made every one wonder they were allowed to waste their talents in so
humble a sphere as Templeton.

The magistrates put their heads together for a few seconds, and then
summoned the clerk to put his head up, too, and the result of the
consultation was that the poor creature was ordered to be taken in at
the Union and cared for.

Duffield's bag was getting very light by the time this humane decision
was come to.  Only one round was left, and that was deferred by mutual
consent when the clerk called out "Thomas White!"

Our heroes sat up in their seats and fixed their eyes on the dock.

In a moment Tom White, as rollicking as ever, but unusually sober, stood
in it, and gazed round the place in a half-dazed way.

As his eyes came down to the front public bench, our heroes' cheeks
flushed and their eyes looked straight in front of them.

Duffield and Raggles, on the contrary, being the victims of no pangs of
conscience, after looking hurriedly round to see that neither the
magistrates, the police, nor the usher observed them, winked recognition
at their old servant in distress.

This was too much for Dick.  These two fellows who weren't "in it" at
all were backing Tom up in public, whereas his "Firm," who were in it,
and had come down for the express purpose of looking after the prisoner,
were doing nothing.  "Better nod," he whispered.

And the "Firm" nodded, shyly but distinctly.

Tom White was not the sort of gentleman to cut his friends on an
occasion like this, and he, seeing himself thus noticed, and
recognising, in a vague sort of way, his patrons, favoured the front
public bench with five very pronounced nods, greatly to the
embarrassment of the young gentlemen there, and vastly to the
indignation of the police and officials of the court.

"Order there, or the court will be cleared!" cried the clerk, in a tone
of outraged propriety; "How dare you?"

Our heroes, not being in a position to answer the question by reason of
their tongues being glued to the roofs of their mouths, remained silent,
and tried as best they could to appear absorbed in the shape of their
own boots.

"If such a thing occurs again," persisted the clerk, "their worships
will take very serious notice of it."

"Their worships," who had not a ghost of an idea what the clerk was
talking about, said "very serious," and asked that the case might
proceed.

It proceeded, and under its cover our agitated heroes gradually raised
their countenances from their boots, and felt their hearts, which had
just now stood still, beating once more in their honest bosoms.

For any one not personally interested, the case was prosy enough.

A solicitor got up and said he appeared for Tom's three partners, who
charged him with pledging the _Martha_ and appropriating the money,
whereas the _Martha_ belonged to the four of them, and Tom had no right
to raise money on her except by mutual consent.

The three partners and the pawnbroker were put into the witness-box, and
gave their evidence in a lame sort of way.

Tom was invited to ask any questions he desired of the witnesses, and
said "Thank'ee, sir," to each offer.  He had nothing that he "knowed of
to ask them.  He was an unfortunate labouring man that had lost his
living, and he hoped gentlemen would remember him."

He accompanied this last appeal with a knowing look and grin at the
occupants of the front public bench, who immediately blushed like turkey
cocks, and again dropped their heads towards their boots.

"Have you anything to say about the disappearance of the boat?" said the
clerk, shuffling his notes.

"Only, your worship," said the solicitor, "that on the 4th of June last
the _Martha_ disappeared from her berth on the beach, and, as White
disappeared at the same time and refuses to give an account of himself
at that particular time, the prosecutors are convinced he removed the
boat himself."

In support of this very vague charge a policeman was called, who gave a
graphic account of the beauties of the moonlight on the night in
question, and of how he had seen, from his beat on the Parade, a figure
move stealthily across the sands to the place where White's boat was
supposed to be.  He couldn't quite, swear that the figure was White or
that the boat was the _Martha_ but he didn't know who either could be if
they were not.  The figure might have been a boy, but, as he was a
quarter of a mile off, he couldn't say.  He never left his beat till one
in the morning.  By that time the tide was in.  He didn't actually see
Tom White row off in the _Martha_ but neither of them was to be seen in
Templeton next day.

After this piece of conclusive evidence the public looked at one another
and shook their heads, and thought what wonderful men the Templeton
police were for finding out things.

"Have you any questions to ask the witness?" demanded the clerk of Tom.

"Thank'ee, no, sir; it's all one to me," said Tom.  "Bless yer!  I never
knows nothing about it till a young gentleman says to me, 'They're after
you,' says he; 'scuttle off.'  So I scuttled off.  Bless you, sir, I
didn't know I was doing harm."

Under this thunderbolt Dick almost collapsed.  Fortunately, Tom's short
memory kept him from recognising him in the matter any more than the
other occupants of the seat.  He nodded generally to the young gentlemen
as a body--a most compromising nod, and one which included all five in
it meaning.

One of the magistrates who saw it looked up and asked genially:--

"You don't mean to say it was one of those young gentlemen, prisoner?"

"Bless you, sir, likely as not.  They young gentlemen, sir, always spare
a trifle for a honest--"

"Yes, yes; we don't want all that!  If you have no more questions to ask
the constable, the constable may stand down."

The constable stood down, and a brief consultation again ensued between
the Bench and the clerk which Dick, firmly believing that it referred to
him, watched with terrible interest.

"Yes," said the magistrate, looking up, "we remand the case for a week."

Dick breathed again.  The storm had blown over after all.  Not only had
he himself escaped punishment for conspiring against the ends of
justice, but Tom White had still another week during which something
might turn up.

The court emptied rapidly as the case ended.

"Rather hot! wasn't it?" said Duffield, as the five found themselves
outside, solacing themselves with the last "go" of the creams.

"Awful!" said the "Firm" from the bottom of their hearts, and feeling
that many afternoons like this would materially shorten their days.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

HOW OUR HEROES TURN THEIR ATTENTION TO THE CHASE.

During the few days which followed their gallant but unsuccessful
attempt to "back up" Tom White, the "Firm" found plenty to think about
nearer home.

The rumour of the revolution in the "Select Sociables" spread rapidly
over Templeton, and Freckleton was almost mobbed more than once by his
new admirers.  However, he kept his head, and steered his new ship
craftily and carefully.  By appealing to the patriotism and honour of
his "Sociables," he succeeded in getting the rules so amended and
purified, that in a few days, instead of being a select Club of the
worst characters in Templeton, its constitution was open enough to admit
any boy who in any way proved himself a credit to the school.

A still more important step was the voluntary disbanding of the old Club
for the purpose of placing the new rules before a meeting of the whole
school.  This was not an easy thing to accomplish, for the old members
knew, most of them, that their qualifications were the reverse of those
which would make them eligible for membership according to the new
rules.  They therefore clung tenaciously to their hold, and it was not
until Freckleton compromised the matter by promising to hold them
eligible for election to the new Club, and exempt them from the
conditions other fellows would have to fulfil to become eligible, that
they finally gave way.

It was a great day when, by virtue of a personal invitation to each boy
in the Hermit's name, Templeton met together in the Great Hall to put
the new Club on its feet.

It was remarked at this meeting that the Sixth took their places as
ordinary Templetonians in the body of the hall, and not on the dais, and
that the Den, which usually herded together at the lower end, was
distributed here and there impartially.

In fact, everyone was equal to-day, and the very knowledge of the fact
seemed to put dignity and order into the assembly.

After rather an awkward pause, during which it seemed doubtful how the
business ought to begin, Freckleton stepped up on to the platform.  His
appearance was greeted by cheers, which, however, he immediately
extinguished.

"I think," said he, quietly, "as this is quite a private meeting, you
will all see cheering is hardly the thing.  Suppose we do without it.
It is very good of you fellows to come here in such numbers, and I only
hope you'll not hesitate to say what you think about the proposal I am
going to make--for the question is one which the whole school ought to
decide, and not any one particular clique or set among us.  (Hear,
hear.)  You, all of you, know I believe, what the object of the meeting
is.  Up till quite recently we had a Club in Templeton which rejoiced in
the name of the 'Select Sociables.'  (Laughter.)  It wasn't a public
Club--(laughter)--but most of the school, I fancy, had heard of its
existence.  (Laughter.)  Gentlemen laugh, but I assure them I am telling
the truth, and have good reason to know what I am talking about, as I
happened to be the president of the 'Select Sociables.'  (Hear, hear.)
We found the Club wasn't altogether flourishing.  (Laughter.)  Some of
the rules wanted looking to, and a few of the members were not exactly
the best specimens of Templeton form.  (Loud laughter.)  Gentlemen think
there was a joke in that, I suppose.  I didn't see it myself.  We put
our heads together to see how the Club could be improved, and I am bound
to say the old members came forward most patriotically and gave up their
undoubted rights, in order to make the Club a thoroughly Templeton
affair."

Cheers were raised here for the old "Sociables," who never felt so
virtuous in all their lives.

"Now you want to hear what our proposal is.  You'll understand it best
if I read the rough rules which the committee has drawn up:--"

1.  That the Club be called the "Select Sociables."

2.  That the number of members be limited to thirty.

3.  That not more than six members be chosen from any one Form.

"This is to prevent the Club getting crowded out with Sixth-form
fellows--(loud cheers from the juniors)--or fellows from the Junior
Third.  (Laughter from the seniors.)  It will insure each form getting
represented on it by half a dozen of its best men."

4.  That all Templetonians are eligible who have either--

(_a_) Gained any prize or promotion in the school examinations.

(_b_) Played in any of the school-house matches, senior or junior.
(Cheers.)

(_c_) Won any event at the school sports.

(_d_) Run through any hunt with the Harriers.  (Cheers.)

(_e_) Swum round the Black Buoy.  (Loud cheers.)

(_f_) Done anything which, in the opinion of the school, has been for
the good of Templeton.

5.  That all elections take place by ballot.

6.  That the first thirty members be elected by ballot by the whole
school, and future vacancies be filled up by the Club.

7.  That all the original members of the old Club shall be considered
eligible for election whether they have complied with any of the
conditions named or not.  (Laughter and blushes.)

8.  That if there are less than six fellows eligible in any Form, the
number may be filled up from eligible candidates in the Form below.

"There, that's--roughly speaking--how it is proposed the new Club should
be formed."

"We should like to know," said Cresswell, rising, "what the Club will
do, when it will meet, and so on?"

"Well," said Freckleton, "we thought we could get leave to use the
library every evening; and, being a Sociable Club we should try to
afford to take in a few of the illustrated and other papers, and manage
supper together now and then, and make ourselves as comfortable as
possible,"--(laughter and cheers, especially from the youngsters).  "If
we got talent enough in the Club, we might give the school a concert or
a dramatic performance now and then, or, in the summer, try our hand at
a picnic or a fishing cruise.  If Cresswell gets elected himself--and
he'd better not be too sure--he'll find out that the 'Sociables' will
have a very good idea of making themselves snug."  (Laughter.)

"Is there to be any entrance-fee or subscription?" asked Birket.  "We
think fellows might be asked to subscribe half-a-crown a term.  It's not
very much; and as the juniors usually have twice as much spare cash as
we seniors, we don't think they will shy at the Club for that,"--(loud
cheers and laughter from the juniors).

"There's just one other thing, by the way," continued the Hermit.  "It's
only, perhaps, to be talking about turning fellows out of the Club, but
we think we ought to protect ourselves by some rule which will make any
member of the Club who does anything low or discreditable to Templeton
liable to be politely requested to retire.  I don't mean mere monitors'
rows, of course.  Fellows aren't obliged to get into them, though they
do.  But I don't think we ought to be too stiff, and turn a fellow out
because he happens to get a hundred lines from Cartwright, for climbing
one of the elms.  (Laughter, and 'hear, hear,' from Cartwright.)  He's
no business to climb elms, and it's quite right to give him lines for
it.  But as long as he doesn't do that sort of thing systematically, in
defiance of rules, then, I say, let him find some place other than the
club-room, to do his lines in--(hear, hear).  The fellows the Club will
want to protect itself against are the cads and sneaks and cheats, who
may be knowing enough to keep square with the monitors, but are neither
Select nor Sociable enough for a Club like ours.  There, I never made
such a long speech in all my life; I'm quite ashamed of myself."

Templeton forgot its good manners, and cheered loudly at this point.

There was something about the genial, unassuming, straightforward Hermit
which touched the fellows on their soft side, and made them accept him
with pride as a representative of the truest Templeton spirit.  They
might not, perhaps, love him as fondly as they loved dear old lazy
Ponty, but there was not one fellow who did not admire and respect him,
or covet his good opinion.

As soon as silence was obtained, Mansfield rose.

It was a self-denying thing to do, and the Captain knew it.  There was
very little affection in the silence which fell on the room.  He had
given up, long since, expecting it.  It said much for him that its
absence neither soured nor embittered him.  It made him unhappy, but he
kept that to himself, and let it influence him not a whit in the path of
duty he had set before him--a path from which not even the hatred of
Templeton would have driven him.

"I'm sure we are all very grateful to Freckleton," he said.  "It will be
an honour to anyone to get into the Club, and for those who don't get on
at first, it will be something to look forward to and work for.  I don't
think a better set of rules could have been drawn up.  It will be a
thoroughly representative Club of all that is good in Templeton.  It
doesn't favour any one set of fellows more than another.  Fellows who
are good at work, and fellows who are good at sports have all an equal
chance.  The only sort of fellows it doesn't favour are the louts and
the cads, and the less they are favoured anywhere in Templeton the
better.  It's a shame to trouble Freckleton with more questions, but
some of us would like to know when the ballot for the new Club is to
take place, and how he proposes we should vote?"

There was a faint cheer as the Captain sat down.  Templeton, whatever
its likes and dislikes were, always appreciated generosity.  And the
Captain's honest, ungrudging approval of a comrade who had already
distanced him in the hold he exercised over Templeton, pleased them, and
told in the speaker's favour.

"I think the best way would be," said Freckleton, "for every fellow to
make a list of the thirty fellows he thinks most eligible, between now
and to-day week.  If he can't think of thirty, then let him put down all
he can, remembering that there are not to be more than six in any form.
To-day week we'll have the ballot, and fellows will drop their lists
into the box, and the highest thirty will be elected."

"Hadn't we better have a list posted up somewhere of the names of
fellows in each form who are eligible?" asked someone.

"Certainly.  I'll have one up to-morrow, and if there are any
corrections and additions to make, there will be time to make them, and
get out a final list two days before the election."

Among the crowd which jostled in front of the list on the library door,
next day, might have been seen the eager and disconsolate faces of our
three heroes.

Alas! not one of their names was there!  Everybody else's seemed to be
there but their's.  Aspinall's was there, of course, for Aspinall had
won his remove with honour last term.  Raggles was there, for Raggles
had played in the junior tennis fours of Westover's against the rival
houses.  Spokes was there, for Spokes had swum round the Black Buoy, and
become a "shark."  Even Gosse was there, for Gosse had "walked over" for
the high jumps for boys under 4 foot, 6 inches, last sports.

Dick gulped down something like a groan, as he strained his eyes up and
down the cruel list, in the vague hope of finding his name in some
corner, however humble.

But no.  He turned away at last, with his two disconsolate friends,
feeling more humiliated than he had ever felt in his life.

He had done nothing for Templeton--he, who had passed for a leader among
his compeers, and for a hero among his inferiors!

His record was absolutely empty.  In school he had failed miserably; out
of school he had shirked sports in which he ought easily to have
excelled and "rotted" when he might have been doing good execution for
Templeton.  He scoured his memory to think of anything that might savour
of credit.  There was the New Boys' Race.  He had won that, but that was
all, and it didn't count.  He had thrashed Culver and been patted on the
back for it, but that hadn't got him on to the list.

And, except for these two exploits, what good had he done?  Nay, hadn't
he done harm instead of good?  He had dragged Heathcote after him, and
Heathcote and he had dragged Coote; and here they were all left out in
the cold.

Dick remembered the Ghost's letter, and could have kicked himself for
being so slow to take its advice.
