names of those invited to play.  He stopped a moment, looked towards
Ernest, and then turned away.

"I say, Buttar, do go and try and find him," said Ernest, in a low
voice, relenting in a moment.  "Ask him--press him to join us."

Buttar gladly set off on the mission; but though he looked in every
direction, and inquired of everybody he met, Ellis was nowhere to be
found.

"It cannot be helped; I wish that we had from the first asked him to
join us," remarked Ernest, when Buttar returned to him with his report.

"Of whom do you speak?" asked Selby, a biggish and very gentlemanly boy.

"Of Ellis," said Buttar.

"Oh, we are much better without him," answered Selby.  "There cannot be
a doubt that he is not a satisfactory person, and you two fellows lose
caste a good deal by associating with him.  The idea is that he imposes
on you; not that you believe he has been guilty of an act of dishonesty,
and still consent to be intimate with him."

"An act of dishonesty!" exclaimed Ernest, with astonishment.  "I cannot
believe that."

Buttar repeated almost the same words.

"There can be no doubt about it.  I heard the story this winter from a
fellow who had been at the same school with him, and whose veracity I
cannot doubt.  He told me that Ellis was always looked upon as a very
quiet, rather sawny sort of a fellow, without any harm; that he kept
much to himself, and had no intimate friends.  He was also always poor,
and spent no money in the way other boys were in the habit of doing.

"There was another boy at the school who had always a good deal of
money, sometimes as much as three or four pounds in his purse at a time.
He was a very good sort of fellow, so he was thought, but rather soft.
Ellis and he became intimate, and were looked upon as great friends,
till on one occasion Arden, on going to his desk, found that his purse
was gone, and, as he declared, with five pounds in it.  A hunt was
instituted in every direction; the masters were told of the loss, and
the boys began to suspect each other.  Soon it was whispered about that
one of the boys was the thief.  It was very extraordinary that just at
this time Ellis appeared to have a good deal of money in his possession.
He spent more than he had ever before done.  Certainly, in two or more
instances it was by giving it in charity.  He bought also a microscope
and some books, which another boy said that he had heard him remark he
wished to have, but had not the money to buy them.  These of themselves
were suspicious circumstances; and many said that they thought Ellis
must have taken the money.  Some days afterwards suspicion grew into
certainty when, on the master ordering all the boys to get up from their
seats, that the school desks might be examined, a purse was found in
Ellis's, which on being held up was claimed by Arden as that which had
held his money.  Ellis appeared to be struck dumb when he heard this.
He stammered out that he had that very morning picked up the purse in
the road near a hedge, and that he had intended going round to discover
whether it belonged to any of the boys at the school.  As it was empty,
he knew that it would not be of much consequence, and that he had
forgotten to make the inquiries he proposed.  Of course everybody
believed this to be a very lame defence; but the master inquired into
the matter, and to the surprise of the boys said that he was satisfied,
and that Ellis had fully accounted to him for the way he had become
possessed of the money and the purse.  The boys seemed to think that the
master was more easily satisfied than he ought to have been, because he
did not want to lose a pupil; at all events, Ellis was looked upon as a
thief, and sent to Coventry.  This treatment affected his health, and he
was soon afterwards removed by his friends from the school.  That is all
I know about the matter."

"I am glad we did not ask him to play football," exclaimed Buttar.  "The
story is a very ugly one.  I do not like the look of things."

Ernest gave a look of reproach at Buttar.  "I am far from convinced that
poor Ellis was guilty of the theft imputed to him," he remarked;
"knowing him as I do, and as you ought to know him, Buttar, he acted on
the occasion just as I should have expected him to do.  However, while
such stories are going about, it is certainly better for his sake and
ours that he should not play in any of our games."

"Certainly," said Selby.  "If he cannot offer us a proper explanation, I
for one should object to play with him.  But never mind him at present.
It is high time that we should get ready for our game.  Have you
prepared the football, Bracebridge?  It was your business to do so, or
to get it done."

"Oh, I can do it very well myself," said Ernest, "I have two first-rate
new ones hanging up in the play-room; they only want refilling.  Come
with me, and we will douse them in the pond."  Two large footballs, but
very flaccid-looking, were brought out, and by tying a stone and a line
to them they were both very soon thoroughly soaked.  He then took them
out, and brought them into the house.  First he took one, and undoing
the lacing which confined one side, he drew out a flaccid bladder.
"This is the sort of football we use here," he said, holding it up to
Selby.  "It cannot be easily rendered unserviceable by thorn, nail, or
spike of any sort.  If the bladder is injured, its place can be supplied
for a few pence, and the leather casing will last for years.  This is my
blow-pipe," he added, producing a piece of tobacco-pipe.  Undoing the
mouth of the bladder, round which a piece of string was tightly
fastened, he inserted his pipe, and very soon filled it with air.
Before this, however, he had put back the bladder into its case.  Having
completed the filling of the bladder, he tightly laced up the ball so as
to completely enclose it.  "You see," he observed, "should this get
pricked, even while we are playing, I can easily stop up the hole by
forming a neck, and tying a piece of thin string round it.  Buttar, do
you take charge of the other ball in case it is wanted.  It is high time
for us to be on the ground, to see that the goals are properly erected."

Ernest, Buttar, and Selby on this hurried off to the park field where
the game was to be played.  The Doctor allowed football to be played, on
the understanding that it would immediately be prohibited should one boy
intentionally kick another; and two of the masters were required to be
present to see that the game was carried on properly.  The goals were
about a hundred and thirty yards apart.  They were formed of two upright
poles, eight feet from each other, with a cross-bar to secure them at
the top.  The aim of the players was to pass the ball through their
opponents' goal, and, of course, to prevent it from being passed through
their own.

Ernest could not help feeling proud when he found forty boys ranged
under him, many older and bigger than himself.  He forgot for the time
all about poor Ellis as he ran with one of the big footballs in his hand
to the ground where the game was to be played, followed by those who had
placed themselves under his leadership.  Lemon and his party were there
before him.  Some of them, it must be owned, rather looked down upon him
as a young upstart, and expected an easy victory.  Lemon, however, when
he consented to have him as opponent, knew well that he was one not to
be despised, and endeavoured to impress upon his followers the necessity
of playing their best.

"Those youngsters are sharp, active little fellows," he observed.  "You
must keep your eyes about you, and your legs going, or they will get the
better of us, depend on that."

Ernest, on his part, addressed the boys on his side, and pointed out to
them that those with whom they were about to contend were big and
strong, and practised players, and that they could only hope to beat
them by activity, watchfulness, and the exercise of their utmost skill.

These principles of action Ernest had learned from his father; they were
such as his own mind eagerly grasped, which he brought into practice in
his subsequent career, and which were the main cause of his success.

Lemon and Ernest tossed up for the first kick.  Ernest won.  With the
ball raised high in his two hands, he walked rapidly into the middle of
the ground.  The sky was blue, the air keen and cutting; a brilliant
glow of exuberant health sat on the cheeks of nearly all the players.  A
few only, who had begun to fancy themselves men, and to smoke and to
drink, and to imitate other vices of lawless and ignorant youths--no
longer boys, and yet unworthy of the true manhood they are assuming,--
looked pale.  There was a strange mixture of heights and sizes assembled
together; big fellows, like Lemon, Selby, Barber; and little ones, like
Eden, Dawson, Jones, Tomlinson, and others whose names have not hitherto
been mentioned.  Ernest, Buttar, Bouldon, and Gregson came between the
two sets as to size, but not far distant from the older ones as to
intelligence and the respect in which they were held.  Bouldon would by
himself have been classed differently, but from associating so much with
steady first-class boys--first-class as to estimation--by showing that
he really wished to do right, he gained a good character among his
superiors.

"All ready!" sung out Ernest; and letting the ball drop, he kicked it
with all his might in the direction of Lemon's goal.

Now the opposite party rushed in, and sent it flying back over his head
and the heads of several standing behind him; but Buttar and Gregson had
fully expected this, and were prepared accordingly to defend their goal.
They met the ball hopping along in full career, and sent it back so far
that, before anybody could rush in, Ernest had been able to give it an
expediting kick, and to send it very close up to his opponent's goal.
Now there was a general and terrific rush up towards Lemon's goal, and
his followers found that they had good reason to dread the impetuosity
and courage of the smaller boys.  Ernest had chiefly selected his side
from among those who possessed most pluck and endurance.  Fearless of
kicks, overthrows, or crushes, on they dashed at the ball.  Now and then
a big fellow like Barber would try and get a kick at it; but immediately
he was met by a dozen sharp-moving toes, which struck away so
desperately that he could never get a fair kick.  For a long time the
ball kept moving backwards and forwards near Lemon's goal, the attention
of all his side being required to prevent it from being kicked through
it.  Several times it rose into the air, but was speedily sent back
again; yet no one on Ernest's side could manage to send it back over the
heads of their opponents.  Buttar and Tom Bouldon were always in the
midst of the _melee_.  More than once Bouldon was overthrown, but he
always picked himself up, and however much damaged, postponed, as he
said, an inspection of his wounds till the game was over.  Ernest, as in
duty bound, had to avoid a _melee_, that when the ball came out of it he
might be in a position to direct the movements of his party.  Gregson
never got into one intentionally; but when he did, he showed that he was
as steady and fearless as any one; but his tactics were to keep moving
about, to be ready to assist his chief, or to take up the ball when it
approached the goal.  Some called him the sluggish player; but Lemon's
party found it difficult enough to send the ball through the goal when
he was to be found anywhere near it.  Dawson and three or four other big
fellows had got the ball between them, and were pushing it forward
triumphantly, having completely overwhelmed Ernest and his immediate
supporters by sheer strength, and were fully expecting to drive it
without impediment through the goal, when Gregson, who had been standing
a little on one side, saw them coming.  Only little Eden and some other
small boys were near, but they, one and all, if not for the honour of
the game, were ready to risk anything for the sake of Bracebridge.
Gregson called them.  They all saw what was required of them.  Gregson
rushed in, fully meeting the ball; with a swinging leg, he gave it a
lifting kick, and sent it right over the heads of his opponents.  The
little fellows rushed in behind them, and began to kick on the ball.
This compelled the big fellows once more to separate, and again to
retrograde so as to front it.  Gregson, Eden, and their companions threw
themselves impetuously on it.  One after the other went over it, till
the ball was hidden under a heap of boys.  Barber, and some others,
dared not kick, or they would have done so; and while they were lifting
up their opponents to get once more at the ball, Ernest, Buttar,
Bouldon, and others came up to the rescue, and once more the ball was
banded backwards and forwards as furiously as ever.  For long the
fortune of the day appeared as doubtful as ever.  I have observed that
big boys never play so well, when opposed to others evidently smaller,
than themselves, as they do when their antagonists are of the same age
and strength as they are.  This, perhaps, was one of the secrets of
Ernest's success in all the matches he played.  He chose his side for
cleverness, and activity, and daring, and, what was more, they all
trusted in him, and were ready to do anything he ordered.  Every now and
then there was a loud shout and a tremendous rush, and finally the ball
would come out of the _melee_ and, left in the power of a few trusted
players, could be seen flying backwards and forwards between them, each
side watching for a favourable opportunity to drive it at once home to
the goal.  Now, at length, Ernest has got it.  It was sent to the
extreme right of the players.  This was done by a dodge of Gregson's.
He was invaluable for any movement of the sort, and staunch as steel.
Onward Ernest kicks the ball; his side rush in to prevent the approach
of their opponents, who have mostly been led off to the ground.  A few
only are fully aware of what is about to occur.  A few rush on
desperately to stop the progress of the ball; but the young ones are too
energetic and too quick for them.  They urge it on; the rest stand for
an instant aside, to let Ernest give a last kick.  It is a grand effort
of strength and skill, and the ball flies through the goal, amid the
shouts of all his side, echoed by the applause of the spectators.

Lemon and many of his supporters took their defeat very good-naturedly,
and with sincerity congratulated Ernest and his side on their success.
A few of the less amiably disposed were somewhat sulky, especially among
those of his own size; so was Barber, who was afraid that he should lose
the influence he wished to obtain from being beaten by the younger boys.
This was only one of several games.  Ernest was not always successful;
twice his side were beat thoroughly, but they made up for it afterwards,
and in the end won more games than the bigger boys, much to the surprise
of the latter, who could not tell how it had occurred.  Some, like
Barber, said that there must have been some underhand play, and abused
Lemon as the cause of their defeat.  Lemon at last heard some of their
remarks.

"If big fellows will smoke, and booze, and over-eat themselves, how can
they expect to be as active and wide-awake as little fellows, who have
not begun such follies?" he remarked quietly.  "It matters little, let
me assure them, what such fellows say of me."

Both Ernest and Buttar had thought a good deal about the matter of
Ellis.  After a lengthened consultation, when their hearts relented
towards him, they resolved to press him once more to join their games;
but he resolutely refused.

"No," he replied.  "You have believed me guilty, or you would not have
treated me coldly.  I do not blame you--far from it.  If you heard the
story about me, as I know it has been repeated, you could not have done
otherwise, unless you had thought right to believe my word before that
of others.  Should the time ever come when I can, to your satisfaction,
prove my innocence, we will then be on the same terms as before."

"Oh, but we do believe you innocent, Ellis," said Ernest.  "Not a shadow
of doubt remains on my mind that you are so, and I am sure Buttar thinks
as I do."

"Very well," answered Ellis, with unusual coldness; "I rejoice to hear
it.  I have taken my resolution.  I cannot bear fluctuations of
friendship.  If I am ever able to prove my innocence, as I ought to have
endeavoured to prove it long ago, I trust that we shall stand on the
same footing that we did before."

Nothing any of his friends could say after this altered the resolution
Ellis had formed of not playing in any of the games with the other boys,
or of associating on intimate terms with any of them.  Still he himself
was far from idle in his play-hours.  He was a constant exerciser on the
gymnastic poles, and never failed to practise, when he could, both with
the foils and broadsword.  He also took lessons regularly in dancing and
drilling, and seemed anxious to perfect himself in all athletic
exercises.

However coldly others had treated Ellis, there was one person who ever
turned a deaf ear to the stories told of him, and never for a moment
altered his conduct towards him.  That was Monsieur Malin.  From the
time Ellis had begun to learn French of him he had become his firm
friend.  Some believed that Ellis had confided to him the circumstances
of his past history; but the less generous could not understand how he
had managed to secure the regard of the French master, and fancied that
he had invented some tale to gain his sympathy.

Thus the half-year drew on; the cold weather at last passed away.
Spring commenced, the flowers bloomed, the leaves came out on the trees,
the birds began to sing, the fish to dart and leap out of the water.
Ernest and Buttar were reminded of a visit they promised, long, long
before, to pay to John Hodge.  They agreed to make it a fishing
expedition, and to try their luck in the wide stream they had crossed on
that day memorable for their hare hunt.  They invited Gregson to
accompany them.  They wished to ask Ellis, but the moment school was
over he had disappeared, and had not even waited for dinner.  To absent
himself he must have obtained leave from the Doctor; so they set off
without him.  They were very merry.  Gregson was excessively amusing,
with his quaint anecdotes about animal life and the adventures which had
happened to him.

"I would rather go elephant and lion hunting for a year than become
prime minister of England," he observed, laughing.  "Nothing could
compensate me for not being allowed to live in the country,--the largest
fortune would not, had I to spend it in London; and I should prefer
Australia or New Zealand, or the wilds of the Cape Colony, or Natal, or
the backwoods of Canada.  Still I am a Briton, and wherever I might go I
should like to live under the flag of old England."

Ernest and Buttar echoed the last sentiment.

"But," said Ernest, "for my part I should not wish to live without the
society of my equals in knowledge and intelligence.  In my opinion, the
interchange of ideas and information is one of the charms of existence.
In that way we get, in the most agreeable manner, at the pith and marrow
