These peculiarities were so far taken advantage of by the rats that they
ceased to fly with their wonted precipitancy when his step was heard,
and in course of time they did not even dive into their holes as in
former days, but sat close to them and waited until the merchant had
passed, knowing well that he was not capable of running at them.  One
large young rat in particular--quite a rattling blade in his way--at
length became so bold that he stood his ground one forenoon, and
deliberately stared at Mr Denham as he tottered up to the office-door.

We notice this fact because it occurred on the memorable day when Mr
Denham admitted to himself that he was breaking down, and that something
must be done to set him up again.  He thought, as he sat at his desk,
leaning his head on his right hand, that sea-air might do him good, and
the idea of a visit to his sister at Deal flitted across his mind; but,
remembering that he had for many years treated that sister with frigid
indifference, and that he had dismissed her son Guy harshly and without
sufficient reason from his employment a few years ago, he came to the
conclusion that Deal was not a suitable locality.  Then he thought of
Margate and Ramsgate, and even ventured to contemplate the Scotch
Highlands, but his energy being exhausted by illness, he could not make
up his mind, so he sighed and felt supremely wretched.

Had there been any one at his elbow, to suggest a plan of some sort, and
urge him to carry it out, he would have felt relieved and grateful.  But
plans for our good are usually suggested and urged by those who love us,
and Denham, being a bachelor and a misanthrope, happened to have no one
to love him.  He was a very rich man--very rich indeed; and would have
given a great deal of gold at that moment for a very small quantity of
love, but love is not a marketable commodity.  Denham knew that and
sighed again.  He felt that in reference to this thing he was a beggar,
and, for the first time in his life, experienced something of a beggar's
despair.

While he sat thus, musing bitterly, there came a tap at the door.

"Come in."

The tapper came in, and presented to the astonished gaze of Mr Denham
the handsome face and figure of Guy Foster.

"I trust you will forgive my intrusion, uncle," said Guy in apologetic
tones, as he advanced with a rather hesitating step, "but I am the
bearer of a message from my mother."

Denham had looked up in surprise, and with a dash of sternness, but the
expression passed into one of sadness mingled with suffering.  He
pointed to a chair and said curtly, "Sit down," as he replaced his
forehead on his hand, and partially concealed his haggard face.

"I am deeply grieved, dear uncle," continued Guy, "to see you looking so
very ill.  I do sincerely hope--"

"Your message?" interrupted Denham.

"My mother having heard frequently of late that you are far from well,
and conceiving that the fresh air of Deal might do you good, has sent me
to ask you to be our guest for a time.  It would afford us very great
pleasure, I assure you, uncle."

Guy paused here, but Mr Denham did not speak.  The kindness of the
unexpected and certainly unmerited invitation, put, as it was, in tones
which expressed great earnestness and regard, took him aback.  He felt
ill at ease, and his wonted self-possession forsook him.  Probably much
of this was owing to physical weakness.

"Come, uncle," said Guy affectionately, "you won't refuse us?  We all
live together in the cottage now, but we don't quite fill it; there is
still one room to spare, and my wife will be delighted to--"

"Your wife!" exclaimed Denham in amazement.

"Yes, uncle," replied Guy in some surprise.  "Did you not get our
cards?"

Mr Denham rested his forehead again in his hand in some confusion, for
he remembered having received a letter long ago, the address of which he
knew to be in his nephew's hand, and supposing it to be an application
to be taken back into the office, he had tossed it into the fire without
opening it.  Feeling much perplexed, he said--"Oh, ah,--what is the
lady's name?"

"Lucy Burton was her maiden name," said Guy; "she is the daughter of an
Independent minister, who was formerly a scripture-reader in Ramsgate."

"Humph!" ejaculated Denham.  "Pray, may I ask what your profession is
_now_?"

"I am cashier in the office of a very intimate friend of ours--Mr
Summers."

"What! the house with which we do so much business?"

"The same," said Guy with a smile; "but tell me, uncle, will you come
and stay with us?  _Do_ say you will, if it were only for a week or
two."

"I'll think of it, nephew."

Mr Denham did think of it.  More than that, he went, and said he would
stay a week.  He stayed a week, and found himself in such comfortable
quarters that he resolved to stay a fortnight.  He did so, and then
agreed to remain a month.  Finally, it became a standing joke with
Bluenose, who was a frequent visitor at the cottage kitchen, that he
(Denham) was no better than the play-actors, who were always at their
"last week but one," and never could get any farther.

But Mr Denham's health did not improve.  He had imbibed so much tar and
fog and filth through his nostrils that his constitution could not
recover from the effects, and at last it began to dawn upon him that
health was of greater value than gold; that the accumulation of wealth
was not the main object for which man had been created; that there was a
future in regard to which it would be well that he should now make some
inquiries.

Here Mr Denham turned by a sort of instinct to Amy Russell, whose face
was like a beam of sunshine in Sandhill cottage, and whose labours among
the poor and the afflicted showed that she regarded life in this world
as a journey towards a better; as an opportunity of doing good; as a
ladder leading to a higher and happier sphere.  In regard to this sphere
he (Denham) knew next to nothing--except, of course, intellectually.
Mr Denham turned to the right quarter for comfort, and found it.

Still the merchant's health did not improve, so his physicians
recommended a sea-voyage.  At an earlier period in his career he would
as soon--sooner perhaps--have taken a balloon voyage, but sickness had
taught him wisdom.  He gave in; consented to take a passage in one of
his own ships, the "Trident" (which had made several good voyages to
Australia), and ere long was ploughing over the billows of the South
Seas on his way to the antipodes.  Such is life!

Wonderful coincidences are of constant occurrence in this world.  It
chanced that in the same year that Mr Denham made up his mind to take a
voyage to Australia and back, Bax and Tommy Bogey made up their minds to
give up digging for gold, and return to their native land.  Their
companion, Harry Benton, preferred to remain in the colony.

Bax and Tommy had only made enough to keep themselves alive in the
gold-fields until their last year; but, during this year they had been
more successful.  They hit on a good "claim," worked it out, and cleared
two thousand pounds!  With this they resolved to retire, and push their
fortunes at home.  Believing that they could realise more by carrying
their gold home in dust and nuggets than by selling it in the colony,
they had it packed in boxes, and took it aboard ship along with them.
The ship that chanced to be ready to sail for England at this time was
the "Trident," and almost the first face they saw on going aboard was
the well-known visage of Mr Denham!

Sea air had done him good.  He looked strong and well--comparatively.
Bax and he started, and gazed in surprise on each other.

"How are you?" said Denham with some stiffness of manner.

"Thank you, very well," answered Bax.

Then both men felt and looked a little awkward.

"A-hem!" coughed Denham.

"Hope you're well, sir?" said Bax.

There was little in the words, but there was much in the tone in which
this was said.  Mr Denham advanced and held out his hand.  Bax shook it
warmly.  They were sufficiently good friends during the whole of that
voyage, although there was just enough of remembrance of former days in
the breast of each to prevent anything like cordiality between them.

The homeward voyage was prosperous.  Favouring gales wafted them on
their way.  No storms arose to cause anxiety to the brave, or to terrify
the timid, and few incidents worthy of notice occurred until after they
had doubled the Cape of Good Hope.  But soon after this they met with an
adventure which deserves record.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

A FIRE AT SEA.

On the troubled breast of the Atlantic, a little to the southward of
that great collection of sea-weed, known by the name of the Sargasso
Sea, lay a large ship.

She was in distress, for her flag was hoisted with the Union Jack down.
The nature of her distress was apparent from a column of thick smoke
that issued from the fore-hatch.  The most terrible of all calamities
had befallen her--she was on fire!

That she was an emigrant ship was apparent from the great number of
human beings--men, women, and children--who crowded her decks.  Before
the fire broke out she had weathered a severe gale, the effects of which
had not yet passed away, for, although there was little wind, the waves
were still high, and the burning ship rolled and plunged heavily.

How the fire originated no one could tell, but the instant it was
discovered, the captain, who was a brave and able man, took prompt
measures for its extinction.  But his utmost efforts failed of success,
because (the old story) there was _no suitable machinery on board for
the extinction of fire_!  The owners of this ship, however, were not,
like too many, utterly regardless of human life.  On the contrary they
had done a great deal--much more than is done by many ship-owners--for
the comfort and safety of those who had entrusted their lives to them.
There were boats on board sufficient to carry the entire crew and
passengers; and two of these were lifeboats.  There was also a large
supply of life-buoys and life-jackets; the latter being made of cork, in
such a form that the wearers might be able to work in them without
inconvenience.  But in preparing the ship for sea, fire had not been
sufficiently considered.  There was no fire-engine aboard.  Buckets
there were, and these were plied with vigour, but, as we have said,
without success.

Finding that the fire continued to gain strength, the captain ordered
the ship to be scuttled; in other words, to be flooded by opening the
lower ports and letting the sea rush in.  The ship was one of those old
East Indiamen, which in former days carried guns and marines like our
men-of-war.  The ports were soon knocked out, and the sea burst in,
foaming and splashing like a mill-race when the sluice is drawn as it
swept towards the hold, carrying boxes, bulk-heads, loose furniture and
all before it.  When it poured in a mighty cataract into the hold, the
terrified multitude that crowded the upper deck entertained the hope for
a few minutes that the fire would certainly be put out.  Their hope was
quickly crushed, for the ship soon gave signs of being waterlogged and
threatened to settle down, rendering it necessary to close the ports
before the fire was subdued.

A wail of despair rose, from them when this was done, for now they knew
that the ship was doomed, and that death in two of its most appalling
forms stared them in the face.  The scene that followed was
heart-rending.  The more timid among the passengers lost self-command.
Some fell on their knees, and with bitter cries implored God to have
mercy on them.  Others took passionate farewell of each other, or sat
clinging to each other in the silence of despair.  Many became frantic,
rushed about the decks and tore their hair, and a few of the braver
spirits moved calmly and silently about, doing anything that required to
be done, or coolly making preparation for the last struggle.

Among these last were several women, who, sustained by the Christian's
hope, went about comforting their companions and calming the poor
children.  In some cases they became the centres of little groups of men
and women, who listened intently while they read the word of God, or
joined with them in prayer.  Many cursing lips had become silent now, or
tremblingly attempted to call on our Saviour, for the first time, _in
earnest_.

Meanwhile the officers and crew were not idle.  Preparation was made to
lower the boats.  The lifebuoys and belts were got ready, and everything
was done to facilitate the abandoning of the vessel before she should be
utterly consumed.

The ordinary ship's boats were converted into lifeboats by the simple
contrivance of fastening small empty casks all round them under the
seats, and a large-sized cask in the stern and bow of each.

As the sea was still running high, the operation of lowering was a
matter of difficulty and danger.  The women and children were put into
the first boat while it hung suspended at the davits.  Two men stood by
to detach the hooks that held the boat by the bow and stern the instant
she should touch the water.  This was the moment of danger; for, if one
man should succeed in this and the other fail, the inevitable
consequence would be that the stern or the bow of the boat would be
jerked into the air, and the people in her hurled into the sea.

Four boats were lowered and cast off in safety.  The fifth, which
contained men chiefly, with only two or three women and no children, was
upset.  The man in the bow could not detach his hook; it remained fast
while the stern hook was cast off; and when the ship rose it hung
suspended by the bow.  Instantly the people in her were struggling in
the waves.  The captain, knowing that this might occur, had ordered a
dozen of the strongest of his men to put on cork life-belts, and stand
in the main chains to be in readiness.  These at once leaped into the
sea, and supported the people, until another boat was lowered for them.
But a misfortune here befell them.  While one of the boats was swinging
it was dashed against the ship's side so violently as to be stove in and
rendered useless.  This accident happened also to another boat, so that,
even by overloading those that remained, it would now be impossible to
accommodate every one.

In this dilemma, the captain at once gave orders to heave overboard all
the spare spars and the hencoops, together with enough of cordage for
the construction of a raft.  This was promptly done, and the raft was
sufficiently far advanced in the course of an hour to admit of the
emigrants being placed upon it.

It was during the formation of this raft that the great value of the
life-belts became manifest.  While the spars were in a loose and
half-fastened state, the men were obliged to work in the water.  To have
done this without the support of the belts would have been very
exhausting, almost impossible; but with their floating power the men
could work with both hands, and move about almost as freely in the water
as on land.

The life-buoys were also of the greatest value at this time; for the
burning ship became so hot, before the raft was ready, that the
passengers were obliged to jump overboard and get upon it as they best
could, or float about until there was room for them all.  In these
circumstances the buoys were the means of saving the lives of some who
could not swim.

It was late in the evening when the raft was commenced, and night was
far advanced before it was completed.  During all this time the boats
remained close to it, after having hauled it a short distance from the
burning ship, which latter was now a mass of flame from the deck to the
mast-heads, rendering the whole scene as bright as day.  After the
rigging was consumed, and the masts had fallen over the side, the hull
continued to burn, for a considerable time, with less flame but with a
dull red glow that afforded sufficient light to the workers.  It was
fortunate the light lasted so long, for the night was so dark that it
would otherwise have been almost impossible to have worked at the raft--
tossed and rolled about as it was by the heavy sea.

It was a strange weird sight, that busy glowing scene of disaster out
upon the black ocean at midnight; and wonderful--unaccountable--did it
appear in the eyes of the night-watch on board the "Trident," as that
ship came over the sea, ploughing up the water before a steady breeze
which had sprung up soon after the sun went down.

"What can it be?" said Mr Denham to the captain when they first
observed the light on the horizon.

"A steamer, perhaps," replied the captain.

"No steamer ever spouted fire like that," said Bax, who was the only
other passenger on deck, all the others having gone to rest; "the
steamers on the American lakes and rivers do indeed spout sparks and
flames of fire like giant squibs, but then they burn wood.  Ocean
steamers never flare up like that.  I fear it is a ship on fire."

"Think you so?  Steer straight for it, captain," said Mr Denham, whose
heart, under the influence of bad health, and, latterly, of considerable
experience in the matter of human suffering, had become a little softer
than it used to be.

The ship's course was altered, and long before the wreck was reached her
decks swarmed with men and women who had got up in haste at the first
mention of the word "fire"--some of them with a confused notion that
their own vessel was in danger!

It was indeed a novel and terribly interesting sight to most of those on
board the "Trident."  At first they saw the burning vessel like a red
