business."

Katie looked at Fanny and smiled.  Fanny returned the smile, and
immediately left the room.

"Show him in, Mrs Cackles."

The landlady withdrew, and ushered in no less a personage than Billy
Towler himself, who stopped at the door, and stood with his hat in his
hand, and an unusually confused expression in his looks.  "Please,
miss," said Billy, "you knows me, I think?"

Katie admitted that she knew him, and, knowing in her heart that she
meant to befriend him, it suddenly occurred to her that it would be well
to begin with a little salutary severity by way of punishment for his
former misdeeds.

"Last time I saw you, miss, I _did_ you," said Billy with a slight grin.

"You did," replied Katie with a slight frown, "and I hope you have come
to apologise for your naughty conduct."

"Well, I can't 'xactly say as I have come to do that, but I dessay I may
as well begin that way.  I'm very sorry, miss, for havin' _did_ you, an'
I've called now to see if I can't _do_ you again."

Katie could not restrain a laugh at the impudence of this remark, but
she immediately regretted it, because Billy took encouragement and
laughed too; she therefore frowned with intense severity, and, still
remembering that she meant ultimately to befriend the boy, resolved to
make him in the meantime feel the consequences of his former misdeeds.

"Come, boy," she said sharply, "don't add impertinence to your
wickedness, but let me know at once what you want with me."

Billy was evidently taken aback by this rebuff.  He looked surprised,
and did not seem to know how to proceed.  At length he put strong
constraint upon himself, and said, in rather a gruff tone--

"Well, miss, I--a--the fact is--you know a gal named Nora Jones, don't
you?  Anyhow, she knows you, an' has said to me so often that you was a
parfect angel, that--that--"

"That you came to see," interrupted Katie, glancing at her shoulders,
"whether I really had wings, or not, eh?"

Katie said this with a still darker frown; for she thought that the
urchin was jesting.  Nothing was further from his intention.  Knowing
this, and, not finding the angelic looks and tones which he had been led
to expect, Billy felt still more puzzled and inclined to be cross.

"Seems to me that there's a screw loose somewheres," said Billy,
scratching the point of his nose in his vexation.  "Hows'ever, I came
here to ax your advice, and although you cer'nly don't 'ave wings nor
the style o' looks wot's usual in 'eavenly wisiters, I'll make a clean
breast of it--so here goes."

Hereupon the poor boy related how he had been decoyed from the Grotto--
of which establishment he gave a graphic and glowing account--and said
that he was resolved to have nothing more to do with Morley Jones, but
meant to return to the Grotto without delay--that evening if possible.
He had a difficulty, however, which was, that he could not speak freely
to Nora about her father, for fear of hurting her feelings or
enlightening her too much as to his true character, in regard to which
she did not yet know the worst.  One evil result of this was that she
had begun to suspect there was something wrong as to his own affection
for herself--which was altogether a mistake.  Billy made the last remark
with a flush of earnest indignation and a blow of his small hand on his
diminutive knee!  He then said that another evil result was that he
could not see his way to explain to Nora why he wished to be off in such
a hurry, and, worst of all, he had not a sixpence in the world wherewith
to pay his fare to London, and had no means of getting one.

"And so," said Katie, still keeping up her fictitious indignation, "you
come to beg money from me?"

"Not to beg, Miss--to borrer."

"Ah! and thus to _do_ me a second time," said Katie.

It must not be supposed that Katie's sympathetic heart had suddenly
become adamantine.  On the contrary, she had listened with deep interest
to all that her youthful visitor had to say, and rejoiced in the thought
that she had given to her such a splendid opportunity of doing good and
frustrating evil; but the little spice of mischief in her character
induced her still to keep up the fiction of being suspicious, in order
to give Billy a salutary lesson.  In addition to this, she had not quite
got over the supposed insult of being mistaken for an angel!  She
therefore declined, in the meantime, to advance the required sum--
ten-and-sixpence--although the boy earnestly promised to repay her with
his first earnings.

"No," she said, with a gravity which she found it difficult to maintain,
"I cannot give you such a sum until I have seen and consulted with my
father on the subject; but I may tell you that I respect your sentiments
regarding Nora and your intention to forsake your evil ways.  If you
will call here again in the evening I will see what can be done for
you."

Saying this, and meditating in her heart that she would not only give
Billy the ten-and-sixpence to enable him to return to the Grotto, but
would induce her father to give him permanent employment in one of his
ships, she showed Billy to the door, and bade him be a good boy and take
care of himself.

Thereafter she recalled Fanny, and, for her benefit, re-enacted the
whole scene between herself and Billy Towler, in a manner so graphic and
enthusiastic, as to throw that amiable creature into convulsions of
laughter, which bade fair to terminate her career in a premature fit of
juvenile apoplexy.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

MYSTERIOUS DOINGS.

Disappointed, displeased, and sorely puzzled, Billy Towler took his way
towards the harbour, with his hands thrust desperately into his pockets,
and an unwonted expression of discontent on his countenance.  So deeply
did he take the matter to heart, that he suffered one small boy to
inquire pathetically, "if 'e'd bin long in that state o' grumps?" and
another to suggest that, "if 'e couldn't be 'appier than that, 'e'd
better go an' drown hisself," without vouchsafing a retort, or even a
glance of recognition.

Passing the harbour, he went down to the beach, and there unexpectedly
met with Mr Morley Jones.

"Hallo! my young bantam," exclaimed Morley, with a look of surprise.

"Well, old Cochin-china, wot's up?" replied Billy, in a gruff tone.
"Drunk as usual, I see."

Being somewhat desperate, the boy did not see, or did not mind the
savage glance with which Mr Jones favoured him.  The glance was,
however, exchanged quickly for an idiotic smile, as he retorted--

"Well, I ain't so drunk but I can see to steer my course, lad.  Come,
I've got a noo boat, what d'ye say to go an' have a sail?  The fact is,
Billy, I was just on my way up to the house to ax you to go with me, so
it's good luck that I didn't miss you.  Will 'ee go, lad?"

At any other time the boy would have refused; but his recent
disappointment in regard to the angelic nature of Katie still rankled so
powerfully in his breast, that he swung round and said--"Get along,
then--I'm your man--it's all up now--never say die--in for a penny in
for a pound," and a variety of similar expressions, all of which tended
to convince Mr Jones that Billy Towler happened to be in a humour that
was extremely suitable to his purposes.  He therefore led him towards
his boat, which, he said, was lying on the beach at Broadstairs all
ready to shove off.

The distance to Broadstairs was about two miles, and the walk thither
was enlivened by a drunken commentary on the fallacy of human hopes in
general on the part of Mr Jones, and a brisk fire of caustic repartee
on the part of Master Towler.

A close observer might have noticed that, while these two were passing
along the beach, at the base of the high cliffs of chalk running between
Ramsgate and Broadstairs, two heads were thrust cautiously out of one of
the small caverns or recesses which have been made in these cliffs by
the action of the waves.  The one head bore a striking resemblance to
that of Robert Queeker, Esquire, and the other to that of Mr Larks.

How these two came to be together, and to be there, it is not our
business to say.  Authors are fortunately not bound to account for
everything they relate.  All that we know is, that Mr Queeker was there
in the furtherance, probably, of his secret mission, and that Mr Larks'
missions appeared to be always more or less secret.  At all events,
there they were together; fellow-students, apparently, of the geology or
conchology of that region, if one might judge from the earnest manner in
which they stooped and gazed at the sands, and picked up bits of flint
or small shells, over which they held frequent, and, no doubt, learned
discussions of an intensely engrossing nature.

It might have been also noticed by a close observer, that these
stoopings to pick up specimens, and these stoppages to discuss,
invariably occurred when Mr Jones and Master Billy chanced to pause or
to look behind them.  At last the boat was reached.  It lay on the beach
not far from the small harbour of Broadstairs, already surrounded by the
rising tide.  About the same time the geological and conchological
studies of Messrs. Queeker and Larks coming to an end, these scientific
men betook themselves suddenly to the shelter of a small cave, whence
they sat watching, with intense interest, the movements of the man and
boy, thus proving themselves gifted with a truly Baconian spirit of
general inquiry into simple facts, with a view to future inductions.

"Jump in, Billy," said Jones, "and don't wet your feet; I can easily
shove her off alone."

Billy obeyed.

"Hallo! wot have 'ee got here?" he cried, touching a large tarpaulin bag
with his foot.

"Only some grub," answered Jones, putting his shoulder to the bow of the
boat.

"And a compass too!" cried Billy, looking round in surprise.

"Ay, it may come on thick, you know," said Jones, as the boat's keel
grated over the sand.

"I say, stop!" cried Billy; "you're up to some mischief; come, let me
ashore."

Mr Jones made no reply, but continued to push off the boat.  Seeing
this, the boy leaped overboard, but Jones caught him.  For one instant
there was a struggle; then poor Billy was lifted in the strong man's
arms, and hurled back into the boat.  Next moment it was afloat, and
Jones leaped inboard.  Billy was not to be overcome so easily, however.
He sprang up, and again made a leap over the gunwale, but Jones caught
him by the collar, and, after a severe struggle, dragged him into the
boat, and gave him a blow on the head with his clenched fist, which
stunned him.  Then, seizing the oars, he pulled off.  After getting well
away from the beach he hoisted a small lug-sail, and stood out to sea.

All this was witnessed by the scientific men in the cave through a
couple of small pocket-telescopes, which brought the expression of
Jones's and Billy's countenances clearly into view.  At first Mr
Queeker, with poetic fervour, started up, intent on rushing to the
rescue of the oppressed; but Mr Larks, with prosaic hardness of heart,
held him forcibly back, and told him to make his mind easy, adding that
Mr Jones had no intention of doing the boy any further harm.  Whereupon
Queeker submitted with a sigh.  The two friends then issued from the
cave, shook hands, and bade each other goodbye with a laugh--the man
with the keen grey eyes following the path that led to Broadstairs,
while the lawyer's clerk returned to Ramsgate by the beach.

Meanwhile the sun went down, and the lanterns of the _Goodwin_, the
_Gull_, and the _South sandhead_ floating lights went up.  The shades of
evening fell, and the stars came out--one by one at first; then by twos
and threes; at last by bursts of constellations, until the whole heavens
glowed with a galaxy of distant worlds.  During all this time Mr Jones
sat at the helm of his little boat, and held steadily out to sea.  The
wind being light, he made small progress, but that circumstance did not
seem to trouble him much.

"You'd better have a bit supper, lad," said Jones in a careless way.
"Of course you're welcome to starve yourself if 'ee choose, but by so
doin' you'll only make yourself uncomfortable for nothing.  You're in
for it now, an' can't help yourself."

Billy was seated on one of the thwarts, looking very savage, with his
right eye nearly closed by the blow which had caused him to succumb.

"P'r'aps I mayn't be able to help myself," he replied, "but I can peach
upon _you_, anyhow."

"So you can, my lad, if you want to spend eight or ten years in limbo,"
retorted Jones, spitting out his quid of tobacco, and supplying its
place with a new one.  "You and I are in the same boat, Billy, whether
ashore or afloat; we sink or swim together."

No more was said for some time.  Jones knew that the boy was in his
power, and resolved to bide his time.  Billy felt that he had at least
the chance of being revenged if he chose to sacrifice himself, so he
"nursed his wrath to keep it warm."

About an hour afterwards a squall struck the boat, and nearly capsized
it; but Jones, who was quite sobered by that time, threw her head
quickly into the wind, and Billy, forgetting everything else, leaped up
with his wonted activity, loosened the sail, and reefed it.  The squall
soon passed away, and left them almost becalmed, as before.

"That was well done, Billy," said Jones, in a cheerful tone; "you'd make
a smart sailor, my lad."

Billy made no reply; and, despite his efforts to the contrary, felt
highly flattered.  He also felt the pangs of hunger, and, after
resisting them for some time, resolved to eat, as it were, under
protest.  With a reckless, wilful air, therefore, he opened the
tarpaulin bag, and helped himself to a large "hunk" of bread and a piece
of cheese.  Whereupon Mr Jones smiled grimly, and remarked that there
was nothing like grub for giving a man heart--except grog, he added,
producing a case-bottle from his pocket and applying it to his mouth.

"Have a pull, lad?  No! well, please yourself.  I ain't goin' to join
the temperance move myself yet," said Jones, replacing the bottle in his
pocket.

The short squall having carried the boat nearer to the Gull lightship
than was desirable, Mr Jones tried to keep as far off from her as
possible, while the tide should sweep them past; but the wind having
almost died away, he did not succeed in this; however, he knew that
darkness would prevent recognition, so he thought it best not to take to
the oars, but to hold on, intending to slip quietly by, not supposing
that Billy would think it of any use to hail the vessel; but Billy
happened to think otherwise.

"Gull ahoy! hoy!" he shouted at the top of his shrill voice.

"Boat ahoy!" responded Jack Shales, who happened to be on duty; but no
response was given to Jack, for the good reason that Jones had instantly
clapped his hand on Billy's mouth, and half-choked him.

"That's odd," remarked Jack, after repeating his cry twice.  "I could
swear it was the voice of that sharp little rascal Billy Towler."

"If it wasn't it was his ghost," replied Jerry MacGowl, who chanced to
be on deck at the time.

"Sure enough it's very ghost-like," said Shales, as the boat glided
silently and slowly out of the circle of the lantern's light, and faded
from their vision.

Mr Jones did not follow up his act with further violence.  He merely
assured Billy that he was a foolish fellow, and that it was of no use to
struggle against his fate.

As time wore on, poor Billy felt dreadfully sleepy, and would have given
a good deal for some of the grog in his companion's case-bottle, but,
resolving to stand upon his dignity, would not condescend to ask for it.
At length he lay down and slept, and Jones covered him with a
pilot-coat.

No soft spot in the scoundrel's heart induced him to perform this act of
apparent kindness.  He knew the poor boy's temperament, and resolved to
attack him on his weakest point.

When Billy awoke the day was just breaking.  He stretched himself,
yawned, sat up, and looked about him with the confused air of one not
quite awake.

"Hallo!" he cried gaily, "where on earth am I?"

"You ain't on earth, lad; you're afloat," replied Jones, who still sat
at the helm.

At once the boy remembered everything, and shrank within himself.  As he
did so, he observed the pilot-coat which covered him, and knew that it
must have been placed where it was by Jones.  His resolution to hold out
was shaken; still he did not give in.

Mr Jones now began to comment in a quiet good-natured way upon the
weather and the prospects of the voyage (which excited Billy's curiosity
very much), and suggested that breakfast would not be a bad thing, and
that a drop o' rum might be agreeable, but took care never to make his
remarks so pointed as to call for an answer.  Just as the sun was rising
he got up slowly, cast loose the stays and halyards of mast and sail,
lifted the mast out of its place, and deliberately hove the whole affair
