The Esquimau nodded his shaggy head, and showed a row of remarkably
white teeth environed by a thick black beard and moustache, by way of
reply to the look of the child.

With a laughing nod to Kaga, who stood watching them, Edith stepped in
and seated herself on a deerskin robe; Annatock and Peetoot sat down
beside her; the enormous whip gave a crack like a pistol-shot, and the
team of fifteen dogs, uttering a loud cry, bounded away over the sea.

The sledge on which Edith was seated was formed very much in the same
manner as the little sled which had been made for her at Fort Chimo.  It
was very much larger, how ever, and could have easily held eight or ten
persons.  The runners, which were shod with frozen mud (a substance that
was now becoming nearly unfit for use owing to the warm weather), were a
perfect wonder of ingenuity--as, indeed, was the whole machine--being
pieced and lashed together with lines of raw hide in the most
complicated manner and very neatly.  The dogs were each fastened by a
separate line to the sledge, the best dog being placed in the centre and
having the longest line, while the others were attached by lines
proportionably shorter according to the distance of each from the
leading dog, and the outsiders being close to the runners of the sledge.
All the lines were attached to the front bar of the machine.  There
were many advantages attending this mode of harnessing, among which were
the readiness with which any dog could be attached or detached without
affecting the others, and the ease with which Annatock, when so
inclined, could lay hold of the line of a refractory dog, haul him back
without stopping the others, and give him a cuffing.  This, however, was
seldom done, as the driver could touch any member of the team with the
point of his whip.  The handle of this terrible instrument was not much
more than eighteen or twenty inches long, but the lash was upwards of
six yards!  Near the handle it was about three inches broad, being thick
cords of walrus-hide platted; it gradually tapered towards the point,
where it terminated in a fine line of the same material.  While driving,
the long lash of this whip trails on the snow behind the sledge, and by
a peculiar sleight of hand its serpentine coils can be brought up for
instant use.

No backwoodsman of Kentucky was ever more perfect in the use of his
pea-rifle or more certain of his aim than was Annatock with his
murderous whip.  He was a dead shot, so to speak.  He could spread
intense alarm among the dogs by causing the heavy coil to whiz over them
within a hair's-breadth of their heads; or he could gently touch the
extreme tip of the ear of a skulker, to remind him of his duty to his
master and his comrades; or, in the event of the warning being
neglected, he could bring the point down on his flank with a crack like
a pistol-shot, that would cause skin and hair to fly, and spread yelping
dismay among the entire pack.  And how they did run!  The sledge seemed
a mere feather behind the powerful team.  They sprang forth at full
gallop, now bumping over a small hummock or diverging to avoid a large
one, anon springing across a narrow gap in the ice, or sweeping like the
snowdrift over the white plain, while the sledge sprang and swung and
bounded madly on behind them; and Annatock shouted as he flourished his
great whip in the excitement of their rapid flight, and Peetoot laughed
with wild delight, and Edith sat clasping her hands tightly over her
knees--her hood thrown back, her fair hair blown straight out by the
breeze, her cheeks flushed, her lips parted, and her eyes sparkling with
emotion as they whirled along in their mad and swift career.

In half an hour the low village was out of sight, and in half an hour
more they arrived at the place where a number of the Esquimaux were
scattered in twos and threes over the ice, searching for seal-holes, and
preparing to catch them.

"What is that man doing?" cried Edith, pointing to an Esquimau who,
having found a hole, had built a semicircular wall of snow round it to
protect him from the light breeze that was blowing, and was sitting,
when Edith observed him, in the attitude of one who listened intently.
The hood of his sealskin coat was over his head, so that his features
were concealed.  At his feet lay a stout, barbed seal-spear, the handle
of which was made of wood, and the barb and lower part of ivory.  A
tough line was attached to this, and the other end of it was fastened
round the man's waist; for when an Esquimau spears a seal, he prepares
to conquer or to die.  If he does not haul the animal out of the hole,
there is every probability that it will haul him into it.  But the
Esquimau has laid it down as an axiom that a man is more than a match
for a seal; therefore he ties the line round his waist,--which is very
much like nailing the colours to the mast.  There seems to be no
allowance made for the chance of an obstreperously large seal allowing
himself to be harpooned by a preposterously small Esquimau; but we
suppose that this is the exception to the rule.

As Edith gazed, the Esquimau put out his hand with the stealthy motion
of a cat and lifted his spear.  The next instant the young ice that
covered the hole was smashed, and, in an instant after, the ivory barb
was deep in the shoulder of an enraged seal, which had thus fallen a
sacrifice to his desire for fresh air.  The Esquimau immediately lay
back almost at full length, with his heels firmly imbedded in two
notches cut in the ice at the edge of the hole; the seal dived, and the
man's waist seemed to be nearly cut in two.  But the rope was tough and
the man was stout, and although the seal was both, it was conquered in
the course of a quarter of an hour, hauled out, and thrown exultingly
upon the ice.

This man had only watched at the seal-hole a couple of hours, but the
natives frequently sit behind their snow walls for the greater part of a
day, almost without moving hand or foot.

Having witnessed this capture, Annatock drove on until the most of his
countrymen were left behind.  Suddenly he called to the dogs to halt,
and spoke in a deep, earnest tone to his nephew, while both of them
gazed intently towards a particular quarter of the sea.  Edith looked in
the same direction, and soon saw the object that attracted their
attention, but the only thing it seemed like to her was an enormous cask
or barrel.

"What is it?" said she to Peetoot, as Annatock selected his largest
spear and hastened towards the object.

Of course Edith received no reply save a broad grin; but the little
fellow followed up this remark, if we may so call it, by drawing his
fingers through his lips, and licking them in a most significant manner.
Meanwhile Annatock advanced rapidly towards the object of interest,
keeping carefully behind hummocks of ice as he went, and soon drew near
enough to make certain that it was a walrus, apparently sound asleep,
with its blunt snout close to its hole, ready to plunge in should an
enemy appear.

Annatock now advanced more cautiously, and when within a hundred yards
of the huge monster, lay down at full length on his breast, and began to
work his way towards it after the manner of a seal.  He was so like a
seal in his hairy garments that he might easily have been mistaken for
one by a more intellectual animal than a walrus.  But the walrus did not
awake, and he approached to within ten yards.  Then, rising suddenly to
his feet, Annatock poised the heavy weapon, and threw it with full force
against the animal's side.  It struck, and, as if it had fallen on an
adamantine rock, it bounded off and fell upon the ice, with its hard
point shattered and its handle broken in two.

For one instant Annatock's face blazed with surprise; the next, it
relapsed into fifty dimples, as he roared and tossed up his arms with
delight at the discovery that the walrus had been frozen to death beside
its hole!

This catastrophe is not of unfrequent occurrence to these _elephants_ of
the northern seas.  They are in the habit of coming up occasionally
through their holes in the ice to breathe, and sometimes they crawl out
in order to sleep on the ice, secure, in the protection of their
superabundant fat, from being frozen--at least easily.  When they have
had enough of sleep, or when the prickling sensation on their skin warns
them that nothing is proof against the cold of the Polar Seas, and that
they will infallibly freeze if they do not make a precipitate retreat to
the comparatively warm waters below, they scramble to their holes, crush
down the new ice with their tusks and thick heads, and plunge in.  But
sometimes the ice which forms on the holes when they are asleep is too
strong to be thus broken, in which case the hapless monster lays him
down and dies.

Such was the fate of the walrus which Annatock was now cutting up with
his axe into portable blocks of beef.  For several days previous to the
thaw which had now set in, the weather had been intensely cold, and the
walrus had perished in consequence of its ambitious desire to repose in
the regions above.

Not far from the spot where this fortunate discovery had been made,
there was a large sheet of recently-formed black ice, where the main ice
had been broken away and the open water left.  The sheet, although much
melted by the thaw, was still about three inches thick, and quite
capable of supporting a man.  While Annatock was working with his back
to this ice, he heard a tremendous crash take place behind him.  Turning
hastily round, he observed that the noise was caused by another enormous
walrus, the glance of whose large round eyes and whose loud snort showed
clearly enough that he was not frozen like his unfortunate companion.
By this time the little boy had come up with Edith and the sledge.  So
Annatock ordered him to take the dogs behind a hummock to keep them out
of sight, while he selected several strong harpoons and a lance from the
sledge.  Giving another lance to Peetoot, he signed to Edith to sit on
the hummock while he attacked the grisly monster of the deep.

While these preparations were being made, the walrus dived; and while it
was under water, the man and the boy ran quickly forward a short
distance, and then lay down behind a lump of ice.  Scarcely had they
done so when the walrus came up again with a loud snort, splashing the
water with its broad, heavy flippers--which seemed a sort of compromise
between legs and fins--and dashing waves over the ice as it rolled about
its large, unwieldy carcass.  It was truly a savage-looking monster, as
large as a small elephant, and having two tusks of a foot and a half
long.  The face bore a horrible resemblance to that of a man.  Its crown
was round and bulging, its face broad and massive, and a thick,
bristling moustache--rough as the spines of a porcupine--covered its
upper lip, and depended in a shaggy dripping mass over its mouth.  After
spluttering about a short time it dived again.

Now was Annatock's time.  Seizing a harpoon and a coil of line, he
muttered a few words to the boy, sprang up, and running out upon the
smooth ice, stood by the edge of the open water.  He had not waited here
more than a few seconds when the black waters were cleft by the blacker
head of the monster, as it once more ascended to renew its elephantine
gambols in the pool.  As it rose, the Esquimau threw up his arm and
poised the harpoon.  For one instant the surprised animal raised itself
breast-high out of the water, and directed a stare of intense
astonishment at the man.  That moment was fatal.  Annatock buried the
harpoon deep under its left flipper.  With a fierce bellow the brute
dashed itself against the ice, endeavouring in its fury to reach its
assailant; but the ice gave way under its enormous weight, while
Annatock ran back as far as the line attached to the harpoon would
permit him.

The walrus, seeing that it could not reach its enemy in this way, seemed
now to be actually endued with reason.  It took a long gaze at Annatock,
and then dived.  But the Esquimau was prepared for this.  He changed his
position hastily, and played his line the meanwhile, fixing the point of
his lance into the ice, in order to give him a more effective hold.
Scarcely had he done so than the spot he had just left was smashed up,
and the head of the walrus appeared, grinning and bellowing as if in
disappointment.  At this moment Peetoot handed his uncle a harpoon, and,
ere the animal dived, the weapon was fixed in his side.  Once more
Annatock changed his position; and once again the spot on which he had
been standing was burst upwards.  It was a terrible sight to see that
unearthly-looking monster smashing the ice around it, and lashing the
blood-stained sea into foam, while it waged such mortal war with the
self-possessed and wary man.  How mighty and strong the one! how
comparatively weak and seemingly helpless the other!  It was the triumph
of mind over matter--of reason over blind brute force.  But Annatock
fought a hard battle that day ere he came off conqueror.  Harpoon after
harpoon was driven into the walrus; again and again the lance pierced
deep into its side and drank its life-blood; but three hours had passed
away before the dead carcass was dragged from the deep by the united
force of dogs and man.  During this terrible combat Edith had looked on
with such intense interest that she could scarcely believe her eyes when
she found, from the position of the sun, that the day was far advanced.
It was too late now to think of cutting up the carcasses without
assistance, so Annatock determined to return home and tell his
countrymen of his good fortune.

It is a custom among the Esquimaux to consider every animal that is
killed as the common property of all--the successful hunter being
entitled to all the titbits, besides his portion of the equal dividend;
so that Annatock knew he had only to give the signal, and every
able-bodied man in the village, and not a few of the women and children,
would descend like vultures on the spoil.  Jumping into his sledge, he
stretched out his exhausted frame at full length beside Edith, and
committed the whip to Peetoot.

"I'm so glad," cried Edith, with a beaming face, "that we have killed
this beast.  The poor people will have plenty to eat now."

"Ha! ha! _ha_!" roared Peetoot, giving increased emphasis to each
successive shout, and prolonging the last into a yell of delight, as he
cracked the ponderous whip from side to side like a volley of pistolry.

"O Peetoot!" exclaimed Edith, in a remonstrative tone, as the sledge
swayed to and fro with the rate at which they were sweeping over the
plain, "don't drive so fast; you will kill the poor dogs!"

"Ho! ho! _ho-o-o_!  Eeduck!" roared the boy, aiming a shot at the
leader's left ear, and bringing the thick end of the whip down on the
flanks of the six hindmost dogs.

Thus, amid a volley of roars, remonstrances, yells, yelps, and pistolry,
Edith and her friends scoured over the frozen sea, and swept into the
Esquimau camp like a whirlwind.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

ANOTHER DESPERATE BATTLE, AND A DECIDED VICTORY--THE ESQUIMAUX SUFFER A
SEVERE LOSS.

The night that followed the day of which we have given an account in the
last chapter was a night of rest to Edith, but not to the Esquimaux.

Scarcely allowing themselves time to harness their dogs, after the news
reached them, they set off for the scene of action in a body.  Every
sledge was engaged, every able-bodied male and female started.  None
were left in camp except the sick, of whom there were few; and the aged,
of whom there were fewer.  While engaged in the hurried preparations for
departure the women sang with delight, for they had been living on very
short allowance for some weeks past, and starvation had been threatening
them; so that the present success diffused among these poor creatures a
universal feeling of joy.  But their preparations were not numerous.  A
short scene of excited bustle followed Annatock's arrival, a few yells
from the dogs at starting, and the deserted camp was so silent and
desolate that it seemed as if human beings had not been there for
centuries.

It did not continue long, however, in this state.  Two or three hours
later, and the first of the return parties arrived, groaning under the
burdens they carried and dragged behind them.  The walrus-flesh was
packed on the dog-sledges; but as for the few seals that had been
caught, they were sledges to themselves--cords being tied to their
tails, to which a dozen natives attached themselves, and dragged the
carcasses over the snow.

Peetoot, whose spirit that night seemed to be intoxicated with success,
and who felt that he was the lion of the night (after Annatock!), seated
himself astride of one of the dead seals, and was dragged into camp on
this novel sledge, shouting a volley of unintelligible jargon at the top
of his voice, in the midst of which "Eeduck" frequently resounded.  At
length the last lingerer arrived, and then began a feast of the most
extraordinary kind.  The walrus-flesh was first conveyed to the igloo of
Annatock, where it was cut up and distributed among the natives.  The
women seemed quite frantic with joy, and went about from hut to hut
embracing one another, by way of congratulation.  Soon the lamps of the
village were swimming with oil, the steaks stewing and roasting, the
children provided with pieces of raw blubber to keep them quiet while
the larger portions were being cooked, and the entire community
gormandising and rejoicing as savages are wont to do when suddenly
visited with plenty in the midst of starvation.

During all this scene, Edith went about from hut to hut enjoying
herself.  Nay, reader, be not horrified; thou knowest not the pliable
and accommodating nature of humanity.  Edith did not enjoy the filth by
which she was surrounded--far from it; neither did she enjoy the sight
of raw blubber being sucked by little babies, especially by her own
favourite; but she _did_ enjoy the sight of so much plenty where, but a
few hours ago, starvation had begun to threaten a visit; and she did
enjoy and heartily sympathise with the undoubted and great happiness of
her hospitable friends.  A very savoury dish, with a due proportion of
lean to the fat, cut specially to suit her taste, smoked on Eeduck's
table that night, and Peetoot and the baby helped her to eat it.  Really
it would be a matter of nice calculation to ascertain whether Peetoot or
the baby laughed most on this jovial occasion.  Undoubtedly the former
had the best of it in regard to mere noise; nevertheless the pipe of the
latter was uncommonly shrill, and at times remarkably racy and
obstreperous.  But as the hours flew by, the children throughout the
camp generally fell asleep, while their seniors sat quietly and
contentedly round their kettles and lamps, eating and slumbering by
turns.  The amount of food consumed was enormous, and quite beyond the
belief of men accustomed to the appetites of temperate zones; but we beg
them to remember that arctic frosts require to be met with arctic
stimulants, and of these an immense quantity of unctuous food is the
best.

Next morning the Esquimaux were up and away by daybreak, with their dogs
and sledges, to bring home the remainder of the walrus-meat; for these
poor people are not naturally improvident, and do not idle their time in
luxurious indolence until necessity urges them forth again in search of
food.  In this respect they are superior to Indians, who are notoriously
improvident and regardless of the morrow.

This day was signalised by another piece of success on the part of
Annatock and his nephew, who went to the scene of yesterday's battle on
foot.  Edith remained behind, having resolved to devote herself entirely
to the baby, to make up for her neglect of the previous day.  On
reaching the place where the walrus had been slain, Annatock cut off and
bound up a portion with which he intended to return to the camp.  While
he was thus employed, along with a dozen or more of his countrymen,
Peetoot came running towards him, saying that he thought he saw a seal
lying on the ice far ahead.  Having a harpoon and two spears with them,
Annatock left his work and followed his nephew to the spot where it was
supposed to be lying.  But on reaching the place they found that it was
gone, and a few bells floating at the surface of the hole showed where
it had made its descent to the element below.  With the characteristic
indifference of a man accustomed to the vicissitudes and the
disappointments of a hunter's life, the elder Esquimau uttered a grunt
and turned away.  But he had not proceeded more than a few paces when
his eye became riveted on the track of some animal on the ice, which
appeared to his practised eye to be quite fresh.  Upon examination this
proved to be the case, and Annatock spoke earnestly for a few minutes
with his nephew.  The boy appeared from his gestures to be making some
determined remarks, and seemed not a little hurt at the doubting way in
which his uncle shook his head.  At length Peetoot seized a spear, and,
turning away, followed the track of the animal with a rapid and
determined air; while Annatock, grasping the other spear, followed in
the boy's track.

A brisk walk of half an hour over the ice and hummocks of the sea
carried them out of sight of their companions, but did not bring them up
with the animal of which they were in chase.  At length Peetoot halted,
and stooped to scrutinise the track more attentively.  As he did so an
enormous white bear stalked out from behind a neighbouring hummock of
ice, and after gazing at him for a second or two, turned round and
walked slowly away.

The elder Esquimau cast a doubtful glance at his nephew, while he
lowered the point of his spear and seemed to hesitate; but the boy did
not wait.  Levelling his spear, he uttered a wild shout and ran towards
the animal, which instantly turned towards the approaching enemy with a
look of defiance.  If Annatock had entertained any doubts of his
nephew's courage before, he had none now; so, casting aside all further
thought on the subject, he ran forward along with him to attack the
bear.  This was a matter attended with much danger, however, and there
was some reason in the man feeling a little uncertainty as to the
courage of a youth who, he was aware, now faced a bear for the first
time in his life!

At first the two hunters advanced side by side towards the
fierce-looking monster, but as they drew near they separated, and
approached one on the right, the other on the left of the bear.  As it
was determined that Annatock should give the death-wound, he went
towards the left side and hung back a moment, while Peetoot advanced to
the right.  When about three yards distant the bear rose.  The action
had a powerful and visible effect upon the boy; for as polar bears are
comparatively long-bodied and short-legged, their true proportions are
not fully displayed until they rear on their hind legs.  It seemed as if
the animal actually grew taller and more enormous in the act of rising,
and the boy's cheek blanched while he shrank backwards for a moment.  It
was only for a moment, however.  A quick word of encouragement from
Annatock recalled him.  He stepped boldly forward as the bear was
glancing savagely from side to side, uncertain which enemy to attack
first, and, thrusting his lance forward, pricked it sharply on the side.
This decided the point.  With a ferocious growl the animal turned to
