Great Eastern and her work, bringing out the humorous aspects of
telegraphy and of quick communication between India and England.

"Come, let's go and see if we can find anything to eat," said Sam, when
tired of this man.

"Who is that?" asked Robin, as they moved through the crowd.

"Why, that's the Bahee himself.  See, he has got hold of Captain Halpin,
and seems greatly pleased to lead him about."

The Rajah did indeed exhibit much satisfaction in his beaming brown face
at having got hold of so noted a character as the commander of the
monster ship, and it was pleasant to see the almost childlike glee, with
which, taking the captain by the hand, he threaded his way through the
crowd, introducing him right and left to his friends.  Not less pleasant
was it to observe the lively interest, with which the natives regarded
the captain when they learned who he was.

At this point in the evening's proceedings, a gentleman in civilian
costume came up to Sam Shipton, and asked him if he were acquainted with
Mr Davis--one of the petty officers of the Great Eastern.

"I know him slightly," said Sam.

"He has got into trouble, sir," said the stranger, "and begged me to
find you, if possible, and take you to him.  I have been on board the
Great Eastern looking for you, and was directed here."

"That's strange," returned Sam, "I have seldom spoken to the man.  Are
you sure he did not send you for some one else--one of his mess-mates?"

"Quite sure, sir.  And he bade me urge you to go quickly, else you may
be too late."

"Well--lead the way.  Come, Robin, I'm sorry to quit this gay and
festive scene--especially before supper--but it can't be helped.  You'll
go with me, and we can return together."

The stranger seemed to hesitate a moment, as if annoyed at Robin being
thus asked to go, but, as if quickly making up his mind, led them out of
the Rajah's residence, and, after a smart walk, conducted them into one
of the poorer districts of the city.

"What sort of trouble has the man got into?" asked Sam as they went
along.

"I really do not know.  He will tell you when you see him, I suppose.  I
am only a casual acquaintance of his, and came on this errand to oblige
him, solely because he seemed in great mental distress and was very
urgent."

Soon the conversation turned upon cable-laying, and, finding that Robin
had been at the laying of the Atlantic cable of 1856, the stranger
inquired about the attempts that had been made to injure that cable.

"Tell me, now, would you think it a sin," he said, with a peculiar look
at Sam, "to drive a nail into the cable so as to destroy it, if you were
offered the sum of ten thousand pounds?"

"Of course I would," said Sam, looking at his conductor with surprise.
"I wonder that you should ask the question."

"Why should you wonder," returned the man with a smile, "at any question
which aims at the investigation of that great enigma styled the human
mind?  I am fond of the study of character, and of those principles of
good and evil which influence men.  Under given circumstances and
conditions, the commission of a certain sin is greatly more blameworthy
than the commission of the same sin under different conditions and
circumstances.  Do you not think so?"

"Of course I do," said Sam.  "The man who, having been born and brought
up among pickpockets, and under strong temptation commits a theft, is
not nearly so guilty as the man would be who, having been trained under
refined and Christian influences, should commit a similar theft; but I
do not see the application of your argument, for your question did not
refer to the relative depth of guilt, but to the sinfulness or innocence
of a certain dastardly act for a tempting sum of money."

"I may not have put my question very philosophically," returned the
stranger, "but I would like to have your opinion as to whether you
think, under _any_ circumstances of distress--poverty, for instance,
with those dependent on one dying of hunger--a man would be justified in
destroying the power of a telegraph cable for a sum of money--part, let
us suppose, paid in advance, and the remainder after the deed had been
accomplished."

"My opinion is that no circumstances whatever would justify such an
act," said Sam with indignation.  "Don't you agree with me, Robin?"

"Of _course_ I do," said Robin with even greater indignation.

"And _I_ quite agree with you, gentlemen," said the stranger, with a
wider smile than before; "but I like to have my opinions corroborated or
combated by other minds.  We have now reached our destination; please
follow me, and stoop a little, for the ceiling of the passage is rather
low, and the poor people here cannot afford to light it."

The recent discussion had diverted Sam's mind from the character of the
place into which he had been led, but a suspicion which had been growing
now assailed him forcibly.

"Keep your stick handy," he whispered to Robin, at the same time
grasping more firmly a stout cudgel which he carried.

These precautions seemed needless, however, for the stranger, opening
with a latch-key a door at the further end of the dark passage, ushered
them into a dimly lighted room, where about a dozen men were seated
round a table drinking and smoking.

The men rose on the entrance of the visitors and received them with
courtesy.

"Mr Davis will be glad to see you, sir," said one; "he has been in much
anxiety, but here he comes and will speak for himself."

A door at the other end of the room opened, and a tall slightly-built
man entered.  Sam saw at once that he was not Davis.

"Fool!" growled the man, with a savage look at the stranger who had
conducted them there, "you have brought the _wrong man_!"

"I had already begun to suspect as much," returned the other, with a
light laugh.

Swallowing his disgust, apparently with an effort, the slim man turned
to Sam and said, "A mistake has been made, sir.  One or two of my
friends here will conduct you to any part of the city you may wish to go
to."

"I require no assistance," said Sam, flushing with sudden indignation.
"I believe that you are conspirators, and will take particular note of
your dwelling, in order that I may spoil your game."

He was about to turn and quit the room, when he was suddenly seized from
behind by two powerful men, who seemed to have come on the scene by
rising through the floor!  At the same moment Robin was similarly
secured.  They did not, however, submit tamely.  Both were strong-bodied
as well as high-spirited, and Sam was large as well as strong.

But what were their powers against such odds!  For a few seconds they
struggled furiously.  Then, feeling that their efforts were fruitless,
they ceased.

"It is as well to go quietly, my fine fellows," said the slim man in a
slightly sarcastic tone.  "We are not only more than a match for you,
but we happen to belong to a class of gentlemen who don't allow trifles
to stand in their way.  At the same time we object to murder when we can
get along without it.  Some of us will therefore conduct you to another
part of the city.  Now, I give you fair warning, if you struggle or try
to make a noise on the way, we will silence you in a manner that will
effectually keep you quiet for ever.  Just have your knives handy, men,
and don't exercise forbearance if these gentlemen turn out to be fools."

A prick in their necks by the point of some sharp instrument emphasised
these words to Robin and Sam, and, at the same time, proved that the
subordinates were quite ready, perhaps even anxious, to obey their
superior.  They suffered themselves, therefore, to be blindfolded, and
led out of the house.

Of course once or twice they both thought of making a sudden struggle
and endeavouring to throw off their captors, but the vice-like strength
of the fingers that held them, and the recollection of the sharp
instruments near their necks induced discretion; besides, the absence of
the sound of footsteps told them that they could not count on aid from
passers-by, even if the dwellers in such a region had been willing to
assist them, which was not probable.

After passing quickly along several streets, the men who led them
stopped and relaxed their hold.

"Now, you stand quiet for half a minute," said one of them gruffly;
"there's a knife close to each of your spines at this moment."

Thus warned, the captives stood still for nearly a minute.  Then Sam
lost patience.

"Well," he said, angrily, "how long do you mean to keep us here?"

Receiving no reply, he suddenly pulled the handkerchief from his eyes
and assumed the pugilistic attitude with the celerity of one whose life
may depend on his action, but the only enemy to be seen was Robin, who,
having also pulled down the handkerchief, stood staring at his comrade
in mute surprise.

"They're gone!" cried Sam, bursting into a fit of laughter.  "The
villains!  The scoundrels!  But who can they be?  I fear there can be
little doubt as to what mischief they are up to."

"We have not the smallest clue to trace them by," said Robin, with a
vexed expression.

"Not the smallest.  I don't even know what quarter of the town we are in
now," returned Sam.

"The handkerchiefs!" exclaimed Robin with sudden animation.

"Well, what of them?"

"They--they may have names in the corners."

Again the risible Sam burst into a loud laugh, as the idea of scoundrels
possessing any handkerchiefs of their own at all, much less having their
names marked in the corners; and poor Robin, whose memories of maternal
care had prompted the thought, felt some degree of confusion, which was
deepened when he discovered that the kerchiefs, with which their eyes
had been bound, were their own.

They were startled by a gruff voice demanding to know what they were
laughing at, and kicking up such a row at that time of the morning!

It was one of the guardians of the night, who became very polite on
drawing nearer and being informed, in a mild voice, by Sam that they had
lost their way and would be much indebted for guidance, for Sam thought
it best to say nothing about their adventure until they had had ample
time to think it over and decide what was best to be done.

Having been directed how to go, having lost themselves a second time,
and been directed again by another guardian, they found themselves at
last in the neighbourhood of the port, and here the sound of loud
voices, as if engaged in some nocturnal orgies, was heard in the
distance.

"As we seem in for a night of adventure," said Sam, "we may as well
accept our fate, and go see what it's all about."

"Agreed," said Robin.

Hurrying forward, they came upon a remarkable and picturesque scene.
The engineers of the Great Eastern had chosen the previous day for the
laying of the mile of land-line, with which the cable was to be
connected.  The burying of it in its appointed home had commenced at
half-past six in the evening and had continued all through the night.
It was about 2 a.m. when our adventurers came upon the scene.  The
trench was cut through ground on which a number of soldiers were
encamped, whose white tents looked ghostlike in the feeble star-light,
and lines of naked natives were seen, waving lanterns, pushing along the
mysterious cable, or, with hands and feet busily pressing down the loose
soil that covered the buried portion.

The whole operation was conducted with a superabundance of noise, for
the burying of a rope in a trench three feet deep was in itself such a
tremendous joke to the coolies, that they entered upon it with much
excitement as a sort of unusual piece of fun.  That they were in some
degree also impressed with the mysterious and important object of their
work might have been gathered from their chant:--"Good are the
cable-wallahs, great are their names; good are the cable-wallahs, wah!
wah! wah! great are the cable-wallahs, wah!" which they continued
without intermission all through the night, to their own intense delight
and to the annoyance no doubt of the military unfortunates who were
encamped on the ground.

Besides the naked fellows who, in their excitement and activity,
resembled good-humoured, brown demons, there were many other figures in
English dress moving about, directing and encouraging, running from
point to point, flitting to and fro like wills-o'-the-wisp, for all bore
lights, and plunged ever and anon out of sight in the trench.  Between
three and four o'clock the work was completed; tests were taken, the
portion of cable was pronounced perfect, and communication was thus
established between the cable-house and Rampart Row.  This was the first
link in the great chain of submarine telegraphy between India and
England.

"Now, Robin," said Sam, with a tremendous yawn, "as we've seen the first
act in the play, it is time, I think, to go home to bed."

With a yawn that rivalled that of his comrade, Robin admitted the
propriety of the proposal, and, half an hour later, they turned in, to
sleep--"perchance to dream!"



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

DESCRIBES SEVERAL IMPORTANT EVENTS.

The laying of this thick shore-end of the cable was an important point
in the great work.

By that time Robin and cousin Sam had been regularly installed as
members of the expedition, and were told off with many others to assist
at the operation.

The Chiltern carried the great coil in her tanks.  After rounding Colaba
Point into Back Bay, she found a barge waiting to receive some
two-and-a-half miles of the cable, with which she was to proceed to the
shore.  The barge resembled a huge Noah's Ark, having a canvas awning to
protect the cable, which was very sensitive to heat.

A measure of anxiety is natural at the beginning of most enterprises,
and there were some who dreaded a "hitch" with superstitious fear, as if
it would be a bad omen.  But all went well.

"Now then, boys--shove her along; push her through," said an experienced
leader among the cable-hands, who grasped the great coil and guided it.
The men took up the words at once, and, to this species of spoken
chorus, "shove her along, push her through," the snaky coil was sent
rattling over the pulley-wheels by the tank and along the wooden gutter
prepared for it, to the paying-out wheel at the Chiltern's stern, whence
it plunged down into the barge, where other experienced hands coiled it
carefully round and round the entire deck.

It is difficult to describe the almost tender solicitude with which all
this was done.  The cable was passed carefully--so carefully--through
all the huge staples that were to direct its course from the fore-tank
to the wheel at the stern.  Then it was made to pass over a wheel here
and under a wheel there, to restrain its impetuosity, besides being
passed three times round a drum, which controlled the paying-out.  A man
stood ready at a wheel, which, by a few rapid turns, could bring the
whole affair to a standstill should anything go wrong.  In the fore-tank
eight men guided each coil to prevent entanglement, and on deck men were
stationed a few feet apart all along to the stern, to watch every foot
as it passed out.  Three hours completed the transfer.  Then the barge
went slowly shoreward, dropping the cable into the sea as she went.

It was quite a solemn procession!  First went a Government steam-tug,
flaunting flags from deck to trucks as thick as they could hang.  Then
came the barge with her precious cargo.  Then two boats full of
cable-hands, and an official gig pulled by a Chinaman, while the
steam-launch Electric kept buzzing about as if superintending all.

When the tug had drawn the barge shoreward as far as she could with
safety, the smaller "Electric" took her place.  When she also had
advanced as far as her draught allowed, a boat carried to the shore a
hawser, one end of which was attached to the cable.  Then the
cable-hands dropped over the sides of the barge up to waist, chest, or
neck, (according to size), and, ranging themselves on either side of the
rope and cable, dragged the latter to the shore, up the trench made for
its reception, and laid its end on the great stone table, where it was
made fast, tested by the electricians, as we have said, and pronounced
perfect.

A few more days had to pass before the insatiable Great Eastern was
filled with coal and reported ready for sea.  Then, as a matter of
course, she wound up with a grand feast--a luncheon--on board, at which
many of the leading authorities and merchants of Bombay were present,
with a brilliant company which entirely filled the spacious saloons.

"Owing to circumstances," said Sam to Robin that day, "over which we
have no control, you and I cannot be included among the guests at this
approaching feast."

"I'm sorry for that, Sam," said our hero.

"Why so, Robin?  Does a morbid devotion to chicken and ham, or sweets,
influence you?"

"Not at all, though I make no pretence of indifference to such things,
but I should so much like to hear the speeches."

"Well, my boy, your desire shall be gratified.  Through the influence of
our, I might almost say miraculous, friend, Frank Hedley, we shall be
permitted to witness the proceedings from a retired corner of the
saloon, in company with crockery and waiters and other _debris_ of the
feast."

