and proposed a public-house instead, as being more cheerful.

Just opposite that public-house there stood one of those grand
institutions which are still in their infancy, but which, we are
persuaded, will yet take a prominent part in the rescue of thousands of
mankind from the curse of strong drink.  It was a "public-house without
drink"--a coffee-tavern, where working men could find a cheap and
wholesome meal, a cheerful, warm, and well-lit room wherein to chat and
smoke, and the daily papers, without being obliged to swallow fire-water
for the good of the house.

Bones looked at the coffee-house, and thought of suggesting it to his
companion.  He even willed to do so, but, alas! his will in this matter
was as weak as the water which he mingled so sparingly with his grog.
Shame, which never troubled him much when about to take a vicious
course, suddenly became a giant, and the strong man became weak like a
little child.  He followed Aspel into the public-house, and the result
of this first effort at reformation was that both men returned home
drunk.

It seemed a bad beginning, but it _was_ a beginning, and as such was not
to be despised.

When Phil and Pax reached Archangel Court, a-glow with hope and good
resolves, they found the subjects of their desires helplessly asleep in
a corner of the miserable room, with Mrs Bones preparing some warm and
wholesome food against the period of their recovery.

It was a crushing blow to their new-born hopes.  Poor little Pax had
entertained sanguine expectations of the effect of an appeal from Phil,
and lost heart completely.  Phil was too much cast down by the sight of
his friend to be able to say much, but he had a more robust spirit than
his little friend, and besides, had strong faith in the power and
willingness of God to use even weak and sinful instruments for the
accomplishment of His purposes of mercy.

Afterwards, in talking over the subject with his friend Sterling, the
city missionary, he spoke hopefully about Aspel, but said that he did
not expect any good could be done until they got him out of his
miserable position, and away from the society of Bones.

To his great surprise the missionary did not agree with him in this.

"Of course," he said, "it is desirable that Mr Aspel should be restored
to his right position in society, and be removed from the bad influence
of Bones, and we must use all legitimate means for those ends; but we
must not fall into the mistake of supposing that `no good can be done'
by the Almighty to His sinful creatures even in the worst of
circumstances.  No relatives or friends solicited the Prodigal Son to
leave the swine-troughs, or dragged him away.  It was God who put it
into his heart to say `I will arise and go to my father.'  It was God
who gave him `power to will and to do.'"

"Would you then advise that we should do nothing for him, and leave him
entirely in the hands of God?" asked Phil, with an uncomfortable feeling
of surprise.

"By no means," replied the missionary.  "I only combat your idea that no
good can be done to him if he is left in his present circumstances.  But
we are bound to use every influence we can bring to bear in his behalf,
and we must pray that success may be granted to our efforts to bring him
to the Saviour.  Means must be used as if means could accomplish all,
but means must not be depended on, for `it is God who giveth us the
victory.'  The most appropriate and powerful means applied in the wisest
manner to your friend would be utterly ineffective unless the Holy
Spirit gave him a receptive heart.  This is one of the most difficult
lessons that you and I and all men have to learn, Phil--that God must be
all in all, and man nothing whatever but a willing instrument.  Even
that mysterious willingness is not of ourselves, for `it is God who
maketh us both to will and to do of His good pleasure.'  `Without me,'
says Jesus, `ye can do nothing.'  A rejecter of Jesus, therefore, is
helpless for good, yet responsible."

"That is hard to understand," said Phil, with a perplexed look.

"The reverse of it is harder to understand, as you will find if you
choose to take the trouble to think it out," replied the missionary.

Phil Maylands did take the trouble to think it out.  One prominent trait
in his character was an intense reverence for truth--any truth, every
truth--a strong tendency to distinguish between truth and error in all
things that chanced to come under his observation, but especially in
those things which his mother had taught him, from earliest infancy, to
regard as the most important of all.

Many a passer-by did Phil jostle on his way to the Post-Office that day,
after his visit to the missionary, for it was the first time that his
mind had been turned, earnestly at least, to the subject of God's
sovereignty and man's responsibility.

"Too deep by far for boys," we hear some reader mutter.  And yet that
same reader, perchance, teaches her little ones to consider the great
fact that God is One in Three!

No truth is too deep for boys and girls to consider, if they only
approach it in a teachable, reverent spirit, and are brought to it by
their teacher in a prayerful spirit.  But fear not, reader.  We do not
mean to inflict on you a dissertation on the mysterious subject referred
to.  We merely state the fact that Phil Maylands met it at this period
of his career, and, instead of shelving it--as perhaps too many do--as a
too difficult subject, which might lie over to a more convenient season,
tackled it with all the energy of his nature.  He went first to his
closet and his knees, and then to his Bible.

"To the law and to the testimony" used to be Mrs Maylands' watchword in
all her battles with Doubt.  "To whom shall we go," she was wont to say,
"if we go not to the Word of God?"

Phil therefore searched the Scripture.  Not being a Greek scholar, he
sought help of those who were learned--both personally and through
books.  Thus he got at correct renderings, and by means of dictionaries
ascertained the exact meanings of words.  By study he got at what some
have styled the general spirit of Scripture, and by reading _both_ sides
of controverted points he ascertained the thoughts of various minds.  In
this way he at length became "fully persuaded in his own mind" that
God's sovereignty and man's responsibility are facts taught in
Scripture, and affirmed by human experience, and that they form a great
unsolvable mystery--unsolvable at least by man in his present condition
of existence.

This not only relieved his mind greatly, by convincing him that, the
subject being bottomless, it was useless to try to get to the bottom of
it, and wise to accept it "as a little child," but it led him also to
consider that in the Bible there are two kinds of mysteries, or deep
things--the one kind being solvable, the other unsolvable.  He set
himself, therefore, diligently to discover and separate the one kind
from the other, with keen interest.

But this is by the way.  Phil's greatest anxiety and care at that time
was the salvation of his old friend and former idol, George Aspel.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

PLANS AND COUNTER PLANS.

One evening Phil sat in the sorting-room of the General Post-Office with
his hand to his head--for the eight o'clock mail was starting; his head,
eyes, and hands had been unusually active during the past two hours, and
when the last bundle of letters dropped from his fingers into the
mail-bags, head, eyes, and hands were aching.

A row of scarlet vans was standing under a platform, into which
mail-bags, apparently innumerable, were being shot.  As each of these
vans received its quota it rattled off to its particular railway
station, at the rate which used, in the olden time, to be deemed the
extreme limit of "haste, haste, post haste."  The yard began to empty
when eight o'clock struck.  A few seconds later the last of the scarlet
vans drove off; and about forty tons of letters, etcetera, were flying
from the great centre to the circumference of the kingdom.

Phil still sat pressing the aching fingers to the aching head and eyes,
when he was roused by a touch on the shoulder.  It was Peter Pax, who
had also, by that time, worked his way upwards in the service.

"Tired, Phil?" asked Pax.

"A little, but it soon passes off," said Phil lightly, as he rose.
"There's no breathing-time, you see, towards the close, and it's the
pace that kills in everything."

"Are you going to Pegaway Hall to-night?" asked Pax, "because, if so,
I'll go with you, bein', so to speak, in a stoodious humour myself."

"No, I'm not going to study to-night,--don't feel up to it.  Besides, I
want to visit Mr Blurt.  The book he lent me on Astronomy ought to be
returned, and I want to borrow another.--Come, you'll go with me."

After exchanging some books at the library in the basement, which the
man in grey had styled a "magnificent institootion," the two friends
left the Post-Office together.

"Old Mr Blurt is fond of you, Pax."

"That shows him to be a man of good taste," said Pax, "and his lending
you and me as many books as we want proves him a man of good sense.  Do
you know, Phil, it has sometimes struck me that, what between our
Post-Office library and the liberality of Mr Blurt and a few other
friends, you and I are rather lucky dogs in the way of literature."

"We are," assented Phil.

"And ought, somehow, to rise to somethin', some time or other," said
Pax.

"We ought--and will," replied the other, with a laugh.

"But do you know," continued Pax, with a sigh, "I've at last given up
all intention of aiming at the Postmaster-Generalship."

"Indeed, Pax!"

"Yes.  It wouldn't suit me at all.  You see I was born and bred in the
country, and can't stand a city life.  No; my soul--small though it be--
is too large for London.  The metropolis can't hold me, Phil.  If I were
condemned to live in London all my life, my spirit would infallibly
bu'st its shell an' blow the bricks and mortar around me to atoms."

"That's strange now; it seems to me, Pax, that London is country and
town in one.  Just look at the Parks."

"Pooh! flat as a pancake.  No ups and downs, no streams, no thickets, no
wild-flowers worth mentioning--nothin' wild whatever 'cept the child'n,"
returned Pax, contemptuously.

"But look at the Serpentine, and the Thames, and--"

"Bah!" interrupted Pax, "would you compare the Thames with the clear,
flowing, limpid--"

"Come now, Pax, don't become poetical, it isn't your forte; but listen
while I talk of matters more important.  You've sometimes heard me
mention my mother, haven't you?"

"I have--with feelings of poetical reverence," answered Pax.

"Well, my mother has been writing of late in rather low spirits about
her lonely condition in that wild place on the west coast of Ireland.
Now, Mr Blurt has been groaning much lately as to his having no female
relative to whom he could trust his brother Fred.  You know he is
obliged to look after the shop, and to go out a good deal on business,
during which times Mr Fred is either left alone, or under the care of
Mrs Murridge, who, though faithful, is old and deaf and stupid.  Miss
Lillycrop would have been available once, but ever since the fire she
has been appropriated--along with Tottie Bones--by that female Trojan
Miss Stivergill, and dare not hint at leaving her.  It's a good thing
for her, no doubt, but it's unfortunate for Mr Fred.  Now, do you see
anything in the mists of that statement?"

"Ah--yes--just so," said Pax; "Mr Blurt wants help; mother wants
cheerful society.  A sick-room ain't the perfection of gaiety, no doubt,
but it's better than the west coast of Ireland--at least as depicted by
you.  Yes, somethin' might come o' that."

"More may come of it than you think, Pax.  You see I want to provide
some sort of home for George Aspel to come to when we save him--for
we're sure to save him at last.  I feel certain of that," said Phil,
with something in his tone that did not quite correspond to his
words--"quite certain of that," he repeated, "God helping us.  I mean to
talk it over with May."

They turned, as he spoke, into the passage which led to Mr Flint's
abode.

May was at home, and she talked the matter over with Phil in the boudoir
with the small window, and the near prospect of brick wall, and the
photographs of the Maylands, and the embroidered text that was its
occupant's sheet-anchor.

She at once fell in with his idea about getting their mother over to
London, but when he mentioned his views about her furnishing a house so
as to offer a home to his friend Aspel, she was apparently distressed,
and yet seemed unable to explain her meaning, or to state her objections
clearly.

"Oh!  Phil, dear," she said at last, "don't plan and arrange too much.
Let us try to walk so that we may be led by God, and not run in advance
of him."

Phil was perplexed and disappointed, for May not only appeared to throw
cold water on his efforts, but seemed unwilling to give her personal aid
in the rescue of her old playmate.  He was wrong in this.  In the
circumstances, poor May could not with propriety bring personal
influence to bear on Aspel, but she could and did pray for him with all
the ardour of a young and believing heart.

"It's a very strange thing," continued Phil, "that George won't take
assistance from any one.  I know that he is in want--that he has not
money enough to buy respectable clothes so as to be able to appear among
his old friends, yet he will not take a sixpence from me--not even as a
loan."

May did not answer.  With her face hid in her hands she sat on the edge
of her bed, weeping at the thought of her lover's fallen condition.
Poor May!  People said that telegraphic work was too hard for her,
because her cheeks were losing the fresh bloom that she had brought from
the west of Ireland, and the fingers with which she manipulated the keys
so deftly were growing very thin.  But sorrow had more to do with the
change than the telegraph had.

"It must be pride," said her brother.

"Oh!  Phil," she said, looking up, "don't you think that shame has more
to do with it than pride?"

Phil stooped and kissed her.

"Sure it's that, no doubt, and I'm a beast entirely for suggesting
pride."

"Supper!  Hallo in there," shouted Mr Flint, thundering at the door;
"don't keep the old 'ooman waiting!"

Phil and May came forth at once, but the former would not remain to
supper.  He had to visit Mr Blurt, he said, and might perhaps sup with
him.  Pax would go with him.

"Well, my lads, please yourselves," said Mr Flint,--wheeling the old
woman to the table, on which smoked a plentiful supply of her favourite
sausages.

"Let me take the cat off your lap, grannie," said May.

"Let the cat be, lassie; it's daein' nae ill.  Are the callants gaein'
oot?"

"Yes, grannie," said Phil, "we have business to attend to."

"Bizness!" exclaimed Mrs Flint.  "Weel, weel, they lay heavy burdens on
'ee at that Post-Office.  Night an' day--night an' day.  They've maist
killed my Solomon.  They've muckle to answer for."

In her indignation she clenched her fist and brought it down on her
knee.  Unfortunately the cat came between the fist and the knee.  With
its usual remonstrative mew it fled and found a place of rest and refuge
in the coal-box.

"But it's not to the Post-Office we're goin', grannie," said Phil,
laying his hand kindly on the old woman's shoulder.

"What o' that? what o' that?" she exclaimed somewhat testily at being
corrected, "has that onything to dae wi' the argiment?  If ye git yer
feet wat, bairns, mind to chynge them--an' whatever ye dae--"

She stopped suddenly.  One glance at her placid old countenance sufficed
to show that she had retired to the previous century, from which nothing
now could recall her except sausages.  The youths therefore went out.

Meanwhile Mr Enoch Blurt sat in his brother's back shop entertaining a
visitor.  The shop itself had, for a considerable time past, been put
under the care of an overgrown boy, who might--by courtesy and a
powerful stretch of truth--have been styled a young man.

Jiggs--he appeared to have no other name--was simply what men style a
born idiot: not sufficiently so to be eligible for an asylum, but far
enough gone to be next to useless.  Mr Blurt had picked him up
somewhere, in a philanthropic way--no one ever knew how or where--during
one of his many searches after George Aspel.  Poor Mr Blurt was not
happy in his selection of men or boys.  Four of the latter whom he had
engaged to attend the shop and learn the business had been dismissed for
rough play with the specimens, or making free with the till when a few
coppers chanced to be in it.  They had failed, also, to learn the
business; chiefly because there was no business to learn, and Mr Enoch
Blurt did not know how to teach it.  When he came in contact with Jiggs,
Mr Blurt believed he had at last secured a prize, and confided that
belief to Mrs Murridge.  So he had, as regards honesty.  Jiggs was
honest to the core; but as to other matters he was defective--to say the
least.  He could, however, put up and take down the shutters, call Mr
Blurt down-stairs if wanted--which he never was; and tell customers,
when he was out, to call again--which he never did, as customers never
darkened the door.  Jiggs, however, formed a sufficient scarecrow to
street boys and thieves.

The visitor in the back shop--to whom we now return--was no less a
personage than Miss Gentle, whose acquaintance Mr Blurt had made on
board the ill-fated mail steamer _Trident_.  That lady had chanced, some
weeks before, to pass the ornithological shop, and, looking in, was
