
"Get up," he said, "and don't do that.  Come along here."

"No, no; I can't go before the Doctor.  Severn, you always were a good
fellow--a better chap than I am.  Pray, pray, forgive me this once!"

"And you will never do so any more?" cried Glyn half-mockingly.

"Never! never!  I swear I won't!"

"Well," said Glyn, whose rage seemed to have entirely evaporated, "I
suppose that it would pretty well ruin you, at all events for this
school.  I don't want to be hard on you; but I can't help half-hating
you, Slegge, for the way you have behaved to that poor little beggar
Burton.  Look here, Slegge, if you say honestly that you beg pardon--"

"Yes," cried the lad.  "I do beg your pardon, Severn!"

"No; I don't want you to beg my pardon," cried Glyn.  "I can take care
of myself.  I want you to tell that poor little chap that you are sorry
you ill-used him, and promise that you will never behave badly to him
again."

"Yes, yes.  I will, I will.  But you are going to tell the Doctor?"

"No, I shall not.  I am not a sneak," said Glyn, "nor a coward neither.
I have shown you that, and I am not going to jump on a fellow when he's
down.  But come along here."

"To the Doctor's?  Oh no, no!"

"Be quiet, I tell you, and wipe your eyes and blow your nose.  You don't
want everybody to see?"

"No, no.--Thank you!--No," cried the big fellow hurriedly.  "I couldn't
help it.  I am not well.  I must go to my room and have a wash before
the breakfast-bell rings.  May I go now?"

"No; you will be all right.  The fellows won't see.  I only want you to
come over here to where Burton is.  No, there he goes!  I'll call him
here.  There, don't show that we have been quarrelling.--Hi!  Burton!"
cried Glyn, stepping to the garden-hedge and shouting loudly, with the
effect that as soon as the little fellow realised who called he came
bounding towards him, but every now and then with a slight limp.

"Just a quiet word or two that you are sorry you hurt him; and I want
you to show it afterwards--not in words."

"You want me, Severn?" cried the little fellow, looking from one to the
other wonderingly as soon as he realised that his friend was not alone.

"Yes.  Slegge and I have been talking about you.  He wants to say a word
or two to you about hurting you the other day."

The little fellow glanced more wonderingly than ever at his big enemy.

"Does he?" he said dubiously, and he turned his eyes from one to the
other again.

"Oh yes," said Slegge, with rather a pitiful attempt to speak in a
jocular tone, which he could not continue to the end.  "I am precious
sorry I kicked you so hard.  But you'll forgive me and shake hands--
won't you, Burton?"

"Ye-es, if you really are sorry," said the little fellow, slowly raising
his hand, which was snatched at and forcibly wrung, just as the
breakfast-bell rang out, and Slegge turned and dashed off towards the
schoolhouse as hard as he could run.

"I say, Severn," said little Burton, turning his eyes wonderingly up at
his companion, who had playfully caught him by the ear and begun leading
him towards where the bell was clanging out loudly as Sam Grigg tugged
at the rope, "do you think Slegge means that?"

"Oh yes.  I have been talking to him about it, and I am sure he's very
sorry now."

"Oh, I say, Severn," cried the little fellow joyously, and with his eyes
full of the admiration he felt, "what a chap you are!"

Some one who sat near took an observation that morning over the
breakfast that Slegge did not seem to enjoy his bread and butter, and
set it down to the butter being too salt; and though the Doctor waited
for days in the anticipation that the sender of the anonymous letter
would come to him to confess, he expressed himself to the masters as
disappointed, for the culprit did not come, and the affair died out in
the greater interest that was taken later on in the matter of the belt.

Still, somebody did go to see the Doctor, and he looked at him
wonderingly, for it was not the boy he expected to see, but the very
last whom he would have ventured to suspect.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

GLYN'S WORRIED BRAIN.

"Is any one with the Doctor, Wrench?"

"No, sir," replied the man distantly, and he looked curiously at Glyn.
"Aren't you well this morning, sir?"

"Yes--no.  Don't ask questions," cried the boy petulantly.

"All right, sir," said the man.  "I don't want to ask no questions.
There's been too much of it lately.  Suspicions and ugly looks, and the
rest of it.  I'd have given warning the other day, only if I had, the
next thing would have been more suspicion and the police perhaps had in
to ask me why I wanted to go.  Shall I ask the Doctor, sir, if he will
see you?"

"No," cried Glyn, and walking past the man he tapped at the study-door,
and in response to the Doctor's deep, "Come in," entered.

"What does this mean?" muttered Wrench.  "I don't like listening; but if
I went there and put my ear to the keyhole I could catch every word; and
so sure as I did somebody would come into the hall and find me at it.
So I won't go.  But what does it mean?  Young Severn's found out all
about it, as sure as I stand here.  Then it's one of the boys after all.
Well, I don't care about it as long as it ain't me or Sam, so I'll go
on with my work."

Meanwhile Glyn had entered, closed the door after him, and stood gazing
at the Doctor with a curious sensation in his breast that seemed to stop
all power of speaking connectedly, as he had meant to do when he had
obeyed the impulse to make a clean breast to his old preceptor.

"Well, Severn," said the Doctor gravely, as he laid down his pen, thrust
up his glasses till they were stopped by the stiff grey hair, and
allowed himself to sink back in his writing-chair, "you wish to speak to
me?"

"Yes, sir, please; I--" Glyn stopped short.

That was all that would come, so the Doctor waited for a few moments to
give him time to collect himself, and then with an encouraging smile:
"Are you unwell, my boy?  Do you wish to see our physician?"

Glyn uttered a kind of gasp, and then, making a tremendous effort, the
power to speak returned, and he cried, "Oh no, sir; I am quite well,
only--only I am in great trouble, and I want to speak to you."

"Indeed!" said the Doctor gravely, as he placed his elbows upon the
table, joined his finger-tips, and looked over them rather sadly at his
visitor.  "I am glad you have come, my boy," he continued gently, "for I
like my pupils to look up to me as if for the time being I stood in the
place of their parents.  Now then, speak out.  What is it?  Some fresh
quarrel between you and Mr Slegge?"

"No, sir," cried Glyn.  "It's about that dreadful business of Singh's
belt."

"Ah!" said the Doctor, rather more sharply.  "You know something about
it?"

"Yes, sir.  It's about that I have come.  About people being wrongfully
suspected, and all the unpleasantry."

"Indeed!" said the Doctor, and he now spoke rather coldly.  "You know,
Severn, where it is?"

"I--I think so, sir.  Yes, sir," continued the boy, speaking more
firmly, "and I want to tell you all I do know."

The Doctor fixed his eyes rather sternly now, for a strange suspicion
was entering his mind, due to the boy's agitated manner and his
hesitating, half-reticent speech.

"Well," he said, "go on; and I beg, my boy, that you tell me everything
without reservation, though I am sorry, deeply grieved, that you should
have to come and speak to me like this."

Glyn seemed to breathe far more freely now, and as if the nervous
oppression at his breast had passed away.

"You see, sir," he began, "I have known all along that Singh had that
very valuable belt.  It was his father's, and the Maharajah used to wear
it; and when he died my father took charge of it and all the Maharajah's
valuable jewels as well."

"Yes," said the Doctor slowly.  "He was the late Prince's executor and
Singh's guardian."

"Yes, sir; and Singh was very eager to have it--oh, months and months
before we came over here to school, and my father used to smile at him
and tell him that he had far better not have it until he had grown
older, and asked him why he who was such a boy yet should want such a
rich ornament, and told him it was vanity.  But Singh said it wasn't
that; it was because the people had been used to see his father wear it,
and that now he was dead and he had become Maharajah they would think
more of him and look up to him if he wore the belt himself.  You see,
sir, Singh told me it was like being crowned."

"I see," said the Doctor gravely, and he kept his eyes fixed upon the
young speaker.  "Go on."

"Well, sir, father always put him off, and Singh didn't like it, and
asked for it again and again; but my father would never let him have it
till we were coming slowly over here to England.  We stopped for a month
in Ceylon, and when we sailed again to come here, one day Singh asked
father again to let him have it, so that he could wear the belt as soon
as we reached England.  And then father said he should have it if he
would make a promise not to wear it unless he had to appear before the
Queen.  Then he was to put it away again, and not make a parade of
himself in a country where the greatest people in the land were always
dressed in the plainest way."

"Your father spoke wisely and well, my boy," said the Doctor gravely.
"Great men do not depend upon show, but upon the jewels of worth and
wisdom with which they have adorned themselves in their careers.  Well,
I repeat I am very glad you have come.  Go on."

"Yes, sir," said Glyn, clearing his throat.  "Singh promised father that
he would do exactly as he was told, and the next day my father told me
to try and keep Singh to his word.  He said it would be very absurd now
that we were going among strangers and a lot of boys of our own ages if
Singh were tempted to make a show of the royal belt.  `You be watchful,'
he said, `and help him when he seems weak, for he has naturally a good
deal of Eastern vanity and pride in him.'"

"Quite true," said the Doctor softly; "but he has improved wonderfully
since he has been here."

"Yes, sir; but every now and then he has bad fits, and has wanted to
show off; but I was always able to stop him.  Then, you see, sir--"

Glyn broke down, and as he met the Doctor's steady gaze he seemed to
make effort after effort to proceed, but in vain.

"I told you, my boy," said the Doctor encouragingly, "to speak to me as
if I were your father."

"Yes, sir, I know," cried Glyn passionately, "and I want to speak out
plainly and clearly, but it won't come."

"Yes," said the Doctor gravely; "it will, my boy.  Go on to the end."

"Yes, sir," cried Glyn.  "Well, sir, there has been all this trouble
about the belt when it was missed out of Singh's box."

The Doctor bowed his head.

"I seem to have been able to think of nothing else, and I couldn't do my
lessons--I could hardly eat my meals--and at night I couldn't sleep for
thinking about the belt and what my father would say about it being
lost."

The Doctor bowed his head again very slowly and solemnly, and fixed his
eyes once more upon Glyn's flushed face.

"You see, sir, my father said so much to me about Singh being as it were
in my charge, and told me how he trusted in my example, and in me being
ready to give Singh a sensible word whenever he was disposed to do
anything not becoming to an English lad."

"Exactly, my boy," said the Doctor.  "Your father is a worthy trustee of
this young ward, and it will be a terrible shock to him when he hears of
this--er--er--accident and the loss."

"Yes, sir, for you see, as he is the old Maharajah's executor, the royal
belt was in his care till Singh is old enough to be his own master; and
father will feel that he is to blame for giving way and letting Singh
have it so soon."

"Exactly," said the Doctor; "but, my boy, it seems to me that you are
rather wandering away from your purpose, and are not telling me
everything exactly as I should wish."

"It's because, sir, it won't come; something seems to stop me.  But I am
trying, sir."

"Well, I believe you, my boy," said the Doctor.  "Go on."

"Yes, sir.  Well, I told you that I could hardly eat or sleep for
thinking about it."

The Doctor sighed.

"And it seemed so horrid, sir, that so many people should be suspected
for what one person alone must have done."

"Yes," said the Doctor, fixing him with his eyes again; and then as he
met the boy's frank, unblenching eyes his brow began to wear a curious
look of perplexity, and he disjoined the tips of his fingers, picked up
his quill-pen, and began slowly to litter the table-top by stripping off
the plume.

"Well, sir," continued Glyn, speaking very hurriedly now, "I have always
been dreaming about it, and waking up with starts, sir, fancying I heard
some one creeping into the room to get to Singh's box; and one night it
was so real that I seemed to hear some one go to Singh's bedside, take
out the keys from his pocket, crawl to his box, unlock it, and lift the
lid, and then shut it and lock it again.  And I lay there, sir, with my
hands and face wet with perspiration, wanting to call out to Singh; but
I couldn't stir.  But when all was silent again I crept out of bed and
went to his box to find the keys in it; and I opened it quickly and felt
inside, feeling sure that it was one of the boys who had stolen the belt
and who had repented and come and put it back again."

"And had he?" cried the Doctor, startled out of his grave calmness.

"No, sir; I think it was only my fancy.  But I have been something like
that over and over again."

"Ah!" said the Doctor gravely once more.  "The workings, my boy, of an
uneasy mind."

"Yes, sir, and that's what held me back from coming to you to speak
out."

"Go on," said the Doctor; "and speak plainly and to the point, my boy.
What more have you to say?"

"Only this, sir," cried Glyn huskily, "that the night before last I lay
awake for a long time, thinking and thinking about the belt and about
Singh lying there sleeping so easily and not troubling himself in the
least about the loss of the emeralds; and then all at once, when my head
was so hot with the worry that I felt as if I must get out and drink
some cold water.--I don't know how it was, but I began going over the
big cricket-match in the field, and it was as if it was the day before,
and I was fidgeting and fidgeting about the crowd there'd be, and a lot
of strangers walking about the grounds and perhaps finding their way
into the empty dormitories; and it all worried me so, sir, that it made
me think that somebody dishonest might go to Singh's box and carry off
the emeralds, and they would never be found again."

The Doctor leaned forward a little to gaze more fixedly in his pupil's
eyes.  Then rising slowly, he reached over and placed his cool white
hand upon Glyn's forehead.

"Yes, sir," said the boy quickly, "it's hot--it's hot; but it comes like
that sometimes.  I believe it's from thinking too much."

"Ah!" said the Doctor, subsiding again into his chair.

"Well, sir, I was so worried about the belt that I thought I wouldn't
say anything to Singh, but that I would take his keys, get out the case,
and bring it to you in the morning."

"Ah!" cried the Doctor excitedly now.  "It would not have been right, my
boy.  But you did not do that."

"No, sir," said the boy, with a bitter laugh; "for the next minute I
thought you would put it in your table-drawer, and that it wouldn't be
safe there, for strangers might come into this room, so I--" Glyn
stopped, and the Doctor waited patiently.  "It seemed so weak and
foolish, sir," continued Glyn at last, after moistening his parched lips
with his tongue, "but I must tell you.  I seemed to be obliged to do it.
I took out the case and went downstairs past all the boys' rooms, and
got out through the lecture-hall window to go across the playground to
the cricket-shed where the boys' lockers are, and there I opened our
locker and took out a ball of kite-string."

"Yes," said the Doctor.  "Go on, go on."

"Then, sir, I came back across the playground and turned into the yard
to go into the well-house, where I tied the end of the kite-string round
the case very tightly and safely, and then leaned over and lifted one of
the flaps of the well lid--"

"And lowered the case down into the well?" cried the Doctor excitedly.

"Yes, sir," said Glyn; "and I could smell the cool, damp sides of the
place, and hear a faint dripping of the water as I let the string run
through my fingers, till at last the case splashed and it ran down more
slowly, seeming to jerk a little to and fro as a flat thing does when it
sinks, till I felt it touch the bottom.  And then I leaned over to feel
for a place where I could tie the string to one of the loose bricks at
