each of them dressed in the purest white, that Rosamund, who was
considered quite the handsomest girl in the school, seemed to sink into
commonplace in comparison. But no one had time to make any remark.

Irene said lightly, "Oh, so you are the others!" and then nodded to one
and all; and turning to Agnes, she said in a low tone, "These are the
rest of the girls, Aggie; and I'm ever so hungry. Aren't you, Aggie?"

Mrs. Merriman came in and conducted her young group to the room where
supper was laid out, and here the first cross occurred to disturb
Irene's good temper; for Agnes was placed at the other side of the
table, between Phyllis Flower and Agnes Sparkes. Agnes Sparkes was
bending toward her and talking in her lively way. She was remarking on
the similarity of their names, and little Agnes was looking up at her
older companion and smiling back, not at all frightened; for, as she
said to herself, people were so kind to her.

Miss Frost, anxious, pale, and miserable, was watching her treasure as
she gave a little bit of her heart, at least, first to one girl and then
to another, and poor Miss Frost's face looked anything but inviting.
Her nose was red, her cheeks pinched and hollow, her eyes somewhat dim.
She felt inclined to cry.

Rosamund, however, boldly asked Laura Everett to change places with her,
and sat next to Irene.

"Why have they taken Agnes away?" said Irene. "I don't like it. I have a
great mind to walk round the table and to snatch her away from those two
horrid creatures at the other end, and to bring her to us. Why shouldn't
she sit between us? I know she wishes it, poor little darling!"

"We had better leave her alone for the present, Irene; supper won't take
long. Don't take any notice. I'll ask Mrs. Merriman to let Agnes sit
next to you in future; but don't make a fuss now."

"I hate being good. I don't think I can stand it," said Irene in a most
rebellious tone. And then she scowled at Miss Frost in quite her old
ferocious way, so that the governess looked more anxious and unhappy
than ever. But this was nothing to the scowl she presently gave Lucy
Merriman. She fixed her bright eyes on Lucy's face, and not only a frown
came between her brows, but the frown was succeeded by a mocking laugh,
and then she said in a low tone, which yet was clear as a bell, "I saw
you in church one Sunday, and you frightened me so much that I had to go
out."

This remark was so strange and unexpected that most of the girls gave
utterance to a nervous laugh; but Professor Merriman raised his voice.

"Irene," he said, "that is not at all a polite thing to say. I must have
a little talk with you when supper is over, for you are not to say
unkind things to your neighbors, or of them, as long as you are in my
house."

The firmness of his voice and the dignity of his bearing had a slight
effect on Irene. Rosamund began to talk rapidly to her on different
subjects, and by and by the meal came to an end.

That evening nothing very extraordinary occurred; but Irene, without
waiting for any one, rushed down to the room and seized little Agnes's
hand.

"Come, Agnes," she said, "it is time for you to go to bed."

"I am the person who has charge of putting the little ones to bed," said
Miss Frost, going up and speaking in a trembling tone.

"You may put all the other little ones to bed, as far as I am
concerned," said Irene; "but you don't put my Agnes to bed."

"But she is my Agnes, too."

"No; she is mine. Agnes, say at once that you belong altogether to me;
that you are my darling, my doll, my baby."

"I do love you," said little Agnes; "but of course I love Emily,
too--dear old Emily!"

She laid her hand on her elder sister's arm and looked up affectionately
into her face.

"I thought, Irene, I said I wished to speak to you," remarked the
Professor then; and before Irene could reply he had taken her hand and
led her into the study.

He made her sit down, and seated himself opposite to her.

"Now, my dear," he said, "you are going to be under my roof for a few
weeks. The term as a rule lasts about twelve weeks--that is, three
months."

"An eternity--impossible to live through it," said Irene.

"I hope you may not find it an eternity; but, anyhow, it is arranged
that you are to stay here, and during that time you must be subjected to
the rules of discipline."

"What is discipline?" said Irene.

"One of the rules of discipline is to obey those put in command of
you."

"In command of me? But there is no one in command of me!"

"I am in command of you, and so is my wife, and so are your three
governesses."

"And what do you mean to do now that you are in command of me?"

"I, for one, hope to help you, Irene, to be a good girl."

"I think," said Irene steadily, "that I'd rather be a naughty girl. When
I was at The Follies I used to do what dear Rosamund wished; and then
sweet little Agnes came, and she loved me, and I loved her and did kind
things for her, and I felt ever so much better; but I am not at all
better at your horrid school."

"Did any one ever happen to punish you, Irene?"

"Punish me?" said Irene, opening her eyes.

"Yes, punish you."

"Well, no. I don't think anybody would try to do it a second time."

"I don't wish to punish you, my dear child." The Professor rose and took
one of Irene's little hands. "I want to help you, dear--to help you with
all my might and main. I know you are different from other girls."

"Yes," said Irene, speaking in her old wild strain; "I am a changeling.
That's what I am."

"Nevertheless, dear--we won't discuss that--you have a soul within you
which can be touched, influenced. All I ask of you is to obey certain
rules. One of them is that you do not say unkind things about your
fellow-pupils. Now, you spoke very unkindly to my daughter at supper
to-night."

"I don't like her," said Irene bluntly.

"But that doesn't alter the fact that she is my daughter and one of your
school-fellows."

"Well, I can't like her if I can't. You don't want me to be dishonest
and tell lies, do you?"

"No, but I want you to be courteous; and ill-feelings are always wrong,
and can be mastered if we apply ourselves in the right spirit. I must,
therefore, tell you, Irene, that the next time I hear you speak, or it
is reported to me that you speak, unkindly of any of your
school-fellows, and if you perform any naughty, cowardly, childish
tricks, you will have to come to me, and--I don't quite know what I
shall be obliged to do, but I shall have a talk with you, my dear. Now,
that is enough for the present."

"Thank you," said Irene, turning very red, and immediately leaving the
room.

The Professor sighed when she had gone.

"How are we ever to manage her?" he said to himself.

In truth, he had not the least idea. Irene was not the sort of girl who
could be easily softened, even by a nature as gentle and kind and
patient as his. She required firm measures. Nevertheless, he had made a
deeper impression than he had any idea of; and when the little girl went
up to her room presently, and saw that Agnes was in bed, but wide awake
and waiting ready to fling her arms tightly round her companion's neck,
some of the sore feeling left her heart.

"Oh, Aggie, I have you! and you will never, never love that other horrid
Agnes, or that dreadful Phyllis, or that hateful Lucy, or any of the
girls in the school as you love me."

"Oh, indeed, I never could, Irene--I never could!" said little Agnes.
"But you don't mind Em putting me to bed, do you, for it makes her so
happy? Her hands were quite trembling with joy, and she said she had not
been so happy for a long time."

"Well, she is your sister, and she's a good old sort. But, Agnes, how
are we to live in this school? Tell me, can you endure it?"

"I was at another school, and this one seems perfectly beautiful," said
little Agnes. "I think all the girls are quite nice."

"You had better not begin to praise them overmuch, or I shall be
jealous."

"What is being jealous?" said the little girl.

"Why, just furious because somebody cares for you, or even pretends to
care for you. I don't want anybody to love you but myself."

"I don't think I should quite like that," said little Agnes. "Though I
have promised to love you best, I should like others to be kind to me."

"There you are, with your sweet little eyes full of tears, and I have
caused them! But I'm dead-tired myself. Anyhow, it will only last for
twelve weeks--truly an eternity, but an eternity which has an end. Shall
we sleep in one bed to-night, Agnes? I won't be a moment undressing.
Will you come and cuddle close to me, and let me put my arms round you
and feel that you are my own little darling?"

"Yes, indeed, I should love it!" said little Agnes.




CHAPTER XXIV.

GUNPOWDER IN THE ENEMY'S CAMP.


Miss Archer was a most splendid director of a school. She was the sort
of woman who could read girls' characters at a glance; and as her object
was to spare Mrs. Merriman all trouble, and as she was now further
helped by Miss Frost, a most excellent teacher herself, and Mademoiselle
Omont took the French department, there was very little trouble in
arranging the lessons of the different girls.

Irene, on the morning after her arrival, awoke in a bad temper,
notwithstanding the fact that sweet little gentle Agnes was lying close
to her, with her pretty head of fair hair pressed against the elder
girl's shoulder. But when she went downstairs, and took her place in the
class, and found that, after all, she was not such an ignoramus as her
companions evidently expected to find her, her spirits rose, and for the
first time in her existence a sense of ambition awoke within her. It
would be something to conquer Lucy Merriman--the proud, the disdainful,
the unpleasant Lucy. After what Professor Merriman had said, Irene made
up her mind to say nothing more in public against Lucy; but her real
feelings of dislike toward her became worse and worse.

Now, Lucy's feelings towards Irene, which were those of contempt and
utter indifference until they met, were now active. She was amazed to
find within herself a power of disliking certain of her fellow-creatures
which she never thought she could have possessed. She was not a girl to
make violent friendships, but she did not know that she could dislike so
heartily. She hated Rosamund with a goodly hatred, but now that hatred
was extended to Irene. Why should Irene be so pretty and yet so naughty,
so lovable and yet so detestable? For very soon the peculiar little girl
began to exercise a certain power over more than one other girl in the
school; and except that she kept herself a good deal apart, and absorbed
little Agnes Frost altogether, for the first week she certainly did
nothing that any one could complain of. Then she was not only remarkable
for her beauty, which must arrest the attention of everybody, but she
was also undeniably clever. Laura Everett was greatly taken with her, so
was Annie Millar, so was Phyllis Flower, and so was Agnes Sparkes.
Rosamund assumed the position of a calm and careful guardian angel over
both Irene and little Agnes. She had a talk with both Mrs. Merriman and
the Professor, and also with Miss Frost, on the day after their arrival.

"I will promise to be all that you want me to be if you will allow me to
have a certain power over Irene and over little Agnes Frost, a power
which will be felt rather than seen. I want little Agnes to sit next to
Irene at meals; and I want this not for Agnes' sake--for she is such a
dear little girl that she would make friends wherever she was
placed--but for Irene's sake, for I don't want her to become jealous. At
present she has a hard task in conquering herself, and my earnest desire
is to help her all I can."

"I know that, dear," said Professor Merriman; and he looked with kind
eyes at the fine, brave girl who stood upright before him.

Mrs. Merriman and Miss Frost also agreed to Rosamund's suggestion, and
in consequence there was a certain amount of peace in the school. This
peace might have gone on, and things might have proved eminently
satisfactory, had it not been for Lucy herself. But Lucy could now
scarcely contain her feelings. Rosamund exceeded her in power of
acquiring knowledge; she excelled her in grace and beauty. And now there
was Rosamund's friend, a much younger girl, who in some ways was already
Lucy's superior; for Irene had a talent for music that amounted to
genius, whereas Lucy's music was inclined to be merely formal, although
very correct. There were other things, too, that little Irene could pick
up even at a word or a glance. Agnes did not much matter; her talents
were quite ordinary. She was just a loving and lovable little child,
that was all; but when Lucy sometimes met a glance of triumph in
Rosamund's dark eyes, and saw the light dancing in Irene's, she began to
turn round and plan for herself how she could work out a very pretty
little scheme of revenge.

Now, there seemed no more secure way of doing this than by detaching
little Agnes from Irene; for, however naughty Irene might be, however
careless at her tasks, one glance at her little companion had always the
effect of soothing her. Suppose Lucy were to make little Agnes her
friend? That certainly would seem a very simple motive; for Lucy, in
reality, was not interested in small children. She acknowledged that
Agnes had more charm than most of her companions, and, in short, she was
worth winning.

"The first thing I must do is to detach her from Irene. She does not
know anything about Irene at present, but I can soon open her eyes,"
thought Lucy to herself.

The school began, as almost all schools do, toward the middle of
September, and it was on a certain afternoon in a very sunny and warm
October that Lucy invited little Agnes Frost to take a walk with her.
She did this feeling sure that the child would come willingly, for both
Irene and Rosamund were spending the half-holiday at The Follies. Miss
Frost was busily engaged, and beginning to enjoy her life, and little
Agnes was standing in her wistful way by one of the doors of the
schoolroom when Lucy came by.

"Why, Agnes," said Lucy, "have you no one to play with?"

"Oh, yes, I have every one," said Agnes, raising her eyes, which
appealed to all hearts; "only my darling Irene is away, and I miss her."

"Well, you can't expect her to be always with you--can you?"

"Of course not. It is very selfish of me; but I miss her all the same."

"Now, suppose," said Lucy suddenly--"suppose you take me as your friend
this afternoon. What shall we do? I am a good bit older than you, but I
am fond of little girls."

Agnes looked at Lucy. In truth, she had never disliked any one; but Lucy
Merriman was as little to her taste as any girl could be.

"There's Agnes Sparkes. Perhaps she wouldn't mind playing with me," said
she after a pause.

"As you please, child. If you prefer Agnes you can go and search for
her."

"No, no, I don't," said Agnes, who wouldn't hurt a fly if she could help
it. "I will go for a walk with you, Miss Merriman."

"Lucy, if you please," said Lucy. "We are both school-fellows, are we
not?"

"Only I feel so very small, and so very nothing at all beside you,"
replied Agnes.

"But you are a good deal beside me. It is true you are small; but how
old are you?"

"I was eleven my last birthday. I am two years younger than dear Irene;
but Irene says that I am ten years older than she is in some ways."

"Twenty--thirty--forty, I should say," remarked Lucy, with a laugh.
"Well, come along; let's have a good time. What shall we do?"

"Whatever you like--Lucy," said the little girl, making a pause before
she ventured on the Christian name.

"That's right. I am glad you called me Lucy. We all like you, little
Agnes; and it isn't in every school where the sister of one of the
governesses would be tolerated as you are tolerated here."

"I don't quite understand what you mean by that."

"Well, your sister is one of the governesses."

"Yes, I know."

"And yet we are all very fond of you."

"It is very kind of you; but they were all fond of me at Mrs. England's
school; and when I was at that sort of school at Mrs. Henderson's, where
there were boys as well as girls, the girls used to quarrel with the
boys as to who was to play with me. People have always been kind to me.
I don't exactly know why."

"But I do, I think," said Lucy; "because you are taking, and can make
people love you. It is a great gift. Now, give me your hand. We'll walk
along by the riverside. It's so pretty there, is it not?"

"Yes, lovely," said little Agnes.

Lucy walked fast. Presently they sat down on a low mossy bank, and Lucy
spread out her skirt so that Agnes might sit on it, so as to avoid any
chance of taking a chill.

