  26. Where is the Pause? Why?

  Note the transitions in ll. 27, 31, 32, and 33. How is
  each one indicated?

  38. STOOD, STEPPED, STRUCK. Observe the increased
  Emphasis. Compare ll. 46 and 69.

  41-43. Note the contrast. What is the Inflection on each
  part? (Introduction, p. 20.)

  45-66. What state of mind does Herve Riel's speech
  indicate throughout? What feelings predominate when he
  addresses (_a_) the Malouins, (_b_) the officers? What
  Time, Pitch, Force, and Stress are the natural
  expression?

  46. COWARDS, FOOLS, ROGUES. What is the Inflection on
  each word? (Introduction, p. 20.)

  65. KEEL SO MUCH, ETC. Note the Pause and Grouping.

  72, 73-76, 77-84. What is the predominant feeling in
  each passage?

  104-113. Compare the self-control of Damfreville's
  speech with the impulsive shout of the preceding stanza.
  What is the resulting difference in vocal expression?

  114-116. Note the Pause and Grouping.

  118-122. What is the Inflection? (Introduction, p. 17.)

  129-132. Observe the Grouping.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL

Daniel V


Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and
drank wine before the thousand. Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine,
commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem;
that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might
drink therein. Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken
out of the temple of the house of God which was in Jerusalem; and the
king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.
They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over
against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's
palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote. Then the
king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against
another. The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the
Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the
wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me
the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a
chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the
kingdom. Then came in all the king's wise men: but they could not read
the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.
Then was the king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was
changed in him, and his lords were astonied.

Now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his lords came
into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, O king, live for
ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be
changed: There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the
holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and
wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of
the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers; Forasmuch as
an excellent spirit and knowledge and understanding, interpreting of
dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were
found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let
Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.

Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and
said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of
the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry?
I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and
that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.
And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in before me,
that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the
interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of
the thing: And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make
interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the
writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt
be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to
thyself, and give thy reward to another; yet I will read the writing
unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation. O thou king,
the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and
majesty, and glory, and honour: And for the majesty that he gave him,
all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him:
whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he
would he set up; and whom he would he put down. But when his heart was
lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his
kingly throne, and they took his glory from him: And he was driven
from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his
dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen,
and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the
most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over
it whomsoever he will. And thou, his son, O Belshazzar, hast not
humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this; But has lifted up
thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels
of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy
concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of
silver, of gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor
hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are
all thy ways, hast thou not glorified: Then was the part of the hand
sent from him; and this writing was written.

And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy
kingdom, and finished it. TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and
art found wanting. PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the
Medes and Persians. Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel
with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a
proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the
kingdom.

In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And
Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two
years old.


  Give a dramatic form to this extract, indicating by
  suitable titles the various scenes suggested and the
  parts that would properly belong to the scenery, the
  action, and the dialogue respectively. The different
  parts may be read by different readers before one reader
  attempts all the parts.

       *       *       *       *       *


PAUL'S DEFENCE BEFORE KING AGRIPPA

Acts xxvi


1. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for
thyself. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself:
I think myself happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself
this day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused of
the Jews: especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs
and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to
hear me patiently.

2. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine
own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews; which knew me from the
beginning, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect
of our religion I lived a Pharisee. And now I stand and am judged for
the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers: unto which
promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope
to come. For which hope's sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the
Jews.

3. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead? I verily thought with myself, that I ought to
do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing
I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in
prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when
they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished
them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and
being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto
strange cities.

4. Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from
the chief priests, at midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from
heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and
them which journeyed with me. And when we were all fallen to the
earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew
tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks. And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said,
I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. But rise, and stand upon thy feet:
for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a
minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen, and
of those things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering thee
from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in
me.

5. Whereupon, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
vision: but shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and
throughout all the coasts of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, that
they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.
For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple, and went about to
kill me. Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this
day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than
those which the prophets and Moses did say should come: that Christ
should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from
the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.

6. And as he thus spake for himself, Festus said with a loud voice,
Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad. But
he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of
truth and soberness. For the king knoweth of these things, before whom
also I speak freely: for I am persuaded that none of these things are
hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner. King
Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.
Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian. And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also
all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I
am, except these bonds.

7. And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor,
and Bernice, and they that sat with them: And when they were gone
aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing
worthy of death or of bonds. Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man
might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar.


  PREPARATORY.--Under what circumstances did Paul deliver
  this defence? Picture the scene.

  What attitude of mind characterizes the chief speaker?
  How does this affect the reading?

  How are the direct speeches in Pars. 1, 4, 6, and 7 made
  to stand out from the narrative? (Introduction, p. 24.)

  How do the mental and emotional states of the various
  speakers differ? Indicate this difference by the Quality
  of the voice. (Introduction, p. 34.)

  Point out the Climax in Par. 3. How does the voice
  express it?

  IF THEY WOULD TESTIFY. What change in the voice
  subordinates this clause? (Introduction, p. 33.) Give
  another example from Par. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE STRANDED SHIP


  Far up the lonely strand the storm had lifted her.
  And now along her keel the merry tides make stir
  No more. The running waves that sparkled at her prow
  Seethe to the chains and sing no more with laughter now.
  No more the clean sea-furrow follows her. No more
  To the hum of her gallant tackle the hale Nor'-westers roar.
  No more her bulwarks journey. For the only boon they crave
  Is the guerdon of all good ships and true, the boon of
    a deep-sea grave.

    _Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
    To sway with the long weed, swing with the drowned,
    Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
    Far below the keels of the outward bound._

  No more she mounts the circles from Fundy to the Horn,
  From Cuba to the Cape runs down the tropic morn,
  Explores the Vast Uncharted where great bergs ride in ranks,
  Nor shouts a broad "Ahoy" to the dories on the Banks.
  No more she races freights to Zanzibar and back,
  Nor creeps where the fog lies blind along the liner's track,
  No more she dares the cyclone's disastrous core of calm
  To greet across the dropping wave the amber isles of palm.

    _Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
    To sway with the long weed, swing with the drowned,
    Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
    Far below the keels of the outward bound._

  Amid her trafficking peers, the wind-wise, journeyed ships,
  At the black wharves no more, nor at the weedy slips,
  She comes to port with cargo from many a storied clime.
  No more to the rough-throat chantey her windlass creaks in time.
  No more she loads for London with spices from Ceylon,--
  With white spruce deals and wheat and apples from St. John.
  No more from Pernambuco with cotton-bales,--no more
  With hides from Buenos Ayres she clears for Baltimore.

    _Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
    To sway with the long weed, swing with the drowned,
    Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
    Far below the keels of the outward bound._

  Wan with the slow vicissitudes of wind and rain and sun
  How grieves her deck for the sailors whose hearty brawls are done!
  Only the wandering gull brings word of the open wave,
  With shrill scream at her taffrail deriding her alien grave.
  Around the keel that raced the dolphin and the shark
  Only the sand-wren twitters from barren dawn till dark;
  And all the long blank noon the blank sand chafes and mars
  The prow once swift to follow the lure of the dancing stars.

    _Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
    To sway with the long weed, swing with the drowned,
    Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
    Far below the keels of the outward bound._

  And when the winds are low, and when the tides are still,
  And the round moon rises inland over the naked hill,
  And o'er her parching seams the dry cloud-shadows pass,
  And dry along the land-rim lie the shadows of thin grass,
  Then aches her soul with longing to launch and sink away
  Where the fine silts lift and settle, and sea-things drift
    and stray,
  To make the port of Last Desire, and slumber with her peers
  In the tide-wash rocking softly through the unnumbered years.

    _Take me out, sink me deep in the green profound,
    To sway with the long weed, swing with the drowned,
    Where the change of the soft tide makes no sound,
    Far below the keels of the outward bound._

      --_Charles G. D. Roberts (By arrangement)_


  PREPARATORY.--What is the fundamental idea of the first
  three stanzas? Of the fourth stanza? Of the last stanza?
  Of the refrain? Apply these ideas to human life? What
  feelings do they arouse? Show that these feelings grow
  stronger as the poem advances.

  What Time, Pitch, and Stress are the natural expression
  of the atmosphere pervading the poem? Where are they
  most marked?

  What effect has the atmosphere of the last stanza on the
  Quality of the voice?

  HER, STIR. (Appendix A, 10.)

  STRAND, FAR, CALM, BRAWLS. Distinguish the sound of _a_
  in these words, and select other words from the poem
  with the same sound. (Appendix A, 1.)

  What is the Inflection on the negative statements in the
  first three stanzas? On the entreaty in the refrain?
  (Introduction, p. 18.)

  What effect do the falling Inflection, and the marked
  Pause after MORE, l. 3, stanza 1 produce?

  AND WHEN THE WINDS ... GRASS. What is the Inflection?
  What is the Shading when compared with the next line?

       *       *       *       *       *


SIR PATRICK SPENS


  The king sits, in Dunfermline toun,
  Drinking the blude-red wine;
  "O whare will I get a skeely skipper,
  To sail this new ship o' mine?"

  O up and spake an eldern knight,
  Sat at the king's right knee,--
  "Sir Patrick Spens is the best sailor,
  That ever sailed the sea."

  The king has written a braid letter,
  And sealed it wi' his hand,
  And sent it to Sir Patrick Spens,
  Was walking on the strand.

  "To Noroway, to Noroway,
  To Noroway o'er the faem;
  The king's daughter of Noroway,
  'Tis thou maun bring her hame."

  The first word that Sir Patrick read,
  Sae loud, loud laughed he;
  The neist word that Sir Patrick read,
  The tear blindit his e'e.

  "O wha is this has done this deed,
  And tauld the king o'me,
  To send us out, this time o' the year,
  To sail upon the sea?

  Be't wind, be't weet, be't hail, be't sleet,
  Our ship must sail the faem;
  The king's daughter of Noroway,
  'Tis we must fetch her hame."

  They hoysed their sails on Monenday morn,
  Wi' a' the speed they may;
  They hae landed in Noroway,
  Upon a Wodensday.

  They hadna been a week, a week,
  In Noroway, but twae,
  When that the lords o' Noroway
  Began aloud to say,--

  "Ye Scottishmen spend a' our king's goud,
