His new friends warmly pressed them to stop and dine with them; but
Ralph pleaded that the balloon was to start at five in the morning,
and that he wished Percy to lie down, and get a good night's sleep
before starting. The carriage had been discharged, hours since; but
one of the officers ordered a carriage of General Trochu's to the
door and, after a hearty leave taking, the boys returned to their
hotel.

"What a curious scene it is, Percy," Ralph said. "Who would think
that we were in a besieged city? Everything looks very much as
usual: the shops are open; people walk about and chat, and smoke,
and drink their coffee or absinthe, just as usual. The only
difference is, that everyone is in some sort of uniform or other.
One does not see a single able-bodied man altogether in civilian
dress; and at night the streets are very dismal, owing to there
being no gas."

"How much longer do they seem to expect to hold out, Ralph?"

"Another two months, anyhow; perhaps three, or even more. There
seems to be a large stock of everything, and everyone is put on to
a regular allowance--just enough to live upon, and no more."

"I seem to have everything I want, Ralph; lots of beef tea, and
soup, and jelly, and so on."

"Yes, Percy; but you obtain your food from the hospital. The hotel
could not furnish anything of the kind, I can tell you.

"Here we are. Now you lie down at once, and get to sleep. I will
wake you in plenty of time."

At ten minutes before the appointed time, the boys arrived at the
Northern Railway Station; which presented a very different appearance
to that which it ordinarily wore. No whistle of locomotives, or
rumble of heavy trains, disturbed the silence of the station. A smell
of varnish pervaded the whole place; and several empty balloons hung
from the roof, undergoing the process of drying. The official--who
had received them at the entrance--conducted them outside the station;
and there, in the light of some torches, a great black mass could be
seen, swaying heavily to and fro. The aeronaut was standing beside it.

"Here are the gentlemen who accompany you," the officer said to him.

"How are you, gentlemen?" he said, cheerily. "We have a fine night,
or rather morning; the wind is northerly. I suppose this is your
first ascent?"

"Yes, indeed," Ralph said, "and I own I hope it will be the last.
Have the dispatches arrived?"

"No; I have the mail bags, but not the dispatches Hush! There are a
horse's hoofs."

A few minutes afterwards a railway official brought a note, which
he delivered to Monsieur Teclier.

"Bah!" he said, in an annoyed tone, "why cannot they be punctual?"

"What is it, sir?" Ralph asked.

"A note from the general, to say that the dispatches will not be
ready for an hour. That means an hour and a half; and by that time
it will be light enough to be seen, and we shall have to run the
gauntlet. However, I suppose it cannot be helped.

"The best thing will be to pass the time as cheerfully as we can;
and that certainly will not be in waiting out here, in this bitter
cold. I have, fortunately, a few bottles of excellent wine in the
car; so I propose, gentlemen, that we go in to a fire, have a glass
of wine, and smoke a cigar, tranquilly."

Monsieur Teclier gave a few directions concerning the balloon; and
they then adjourned to a work shed near, where a good fire was
blazing, for the use of the men employed in filling the balloon.
Here the hour and a half of waiting passed pleasantly.

At a quarter to seven, the dispatches arrived. They were hastily
placed in the car, in which everything else had already been
packed. The Barclays took their place, the word was given, "Let go
all!" and, in another instant, the earth seemed to sink away from
under them, and they were rising over the tops of the houses.

The dawn had already broken, gray and uncertain. Light clouds were
floating overhead. For two or three minutes, not a word was spoken.
The scene was so wonderful--the effect so extraordinary, to the
boys--that they were unable to utter a word. Every instant, the
earth seemed to sink away from them; every instant, their view
extended farther and farther; and the distant fields, villages, and
hills seemed actually to spring into sight.

"It is wonderful!" Ralph said, at last.

"Magnificent!" Percy responded.

"I wonder whether they see us?" Ralph said.

"We shall soon know," Monsieur Teclier said. "We have crossed the
river, and over the walls already. In another five minutes, we
shall be over their lines."

There were good telescopes in the car, and the boys directed them
upon the immense panorama below them.

"What fort is that, immediately beneath us?" Ralph asked.

"That is Vanves. The village you see there is Chatillon. Look out
now, we may expect visitors, in a minute."

He had hardly spoken before they heard a faint sound, followed by
others similar.

"That is musketry," Monsieur Teclier said. "Listen."

They did listen, and heard a peculiar whistling sound; which seemed
below, around, and about them.

"That is a whistle of bullets; there is no mistaking them," Ralph
said.

"We are too low," Monsieur Teclier said. "Throw out that bundle of
newspapers; we will go up a little."

Ralph did so.

"What would be the consequence, if a bullet hit the balloon?"

"No consequence at all, except that a slight escape of gas would
take place.

"There, we are going into the clouds now, and they will not trouble
any more about us."

"I thought that we were going to have wind," Ralph said. "The
barometer at the hotel had fallen a good deal; and the clouds,
before we started, looked like it but, now we are once up here, we
do not seem to move."

In another two minutes, they passed through the layer of clouds,
and the sun shone brightly upon them. They looked down on a sea of
white mist, without a break.

"There," Ralph continued, "we are entirely becalmed. These clouds
below do not move, nor do we."

"You cannot tell that," Monsieur Teclier said. "We go in the same
direction, and at the same speed, as the clouds. It is just as if
you were in a boat, at night, upon a rapid stream. If you could see
no banks, or other stationary objects, you might believe yourself
to be standing still; while you were being drifted forward, at the
rate of twenty miles an hour. We may be traveling, now, forty or
fifty miles an hour; and as I agree with you, as to the look of the
clouds before starting, I believe that we are doing so--or, at any
rate, that we are traveling fast--but in what direction, or at what
rate, I have no means, whatever, of knowing.

"Even if we found that we moved, relatively to the clouds below us,
that would only show that this upper current was somewhat different
from that below."

"But how are we to find out about it?" Percy asked.

"We must keep a sharp lookout for rifts in the clouds. If we could
get a peep of the earth, only for a minute, it would be sufficient
to tell us the direction and, to some extent, the speed at which we
are going."

The boys, in vain, hung over the side. The sea of clouds beneath
them changed, and swelled, and rolled its masses of vapor over each
other; as if a contest of some gigantic reptiles were going on with
them.

"There must be a great deal of wind, to account for these rapid
changes of form," Percy said, after a long silence. "Suppose you
see nothing of the earth? At what time will you begin to descend?"

"In five hours from the time of starting, at twenty-five miles an
hour--supposing that the wind holds north--we should fall south of
the Loire, somewhere between Orleans and Bourges. At eleven
o'clock, then, I will let out gas; and go down below the clouds, to
see whereabouts we are. If we cannot recognize the country, or see
any river which may guide us, we shall at least see our direction
and rate of movement; and can either throw out more newspapers, and
keep on for awhile, or descend at once."

It was just ten o'clock, when Ralph gave a sudden cry.

"The sea!" he said; "the sea!"

"Impossible," Monsieur Teclier said, hanging over the side; "I can
see nothing."

"Nor can I, now," Ralph said; "but I caught a glimpse, just now,
and I will almost swear to its being the sea--though how we could
get there, I don't know."

"If it is," the aeronaut said, "the wind must be blowing half a
gale, up here; and must have changed entirely, either to the west
or south. It is too serious to hesitate; we must find out if your
eyes have not deceived you."

So saying, he pulled the valve.

"Keep a sharp lookout, and look at the compass."

"There, there!" the boys cried, as the clouds opened again, for an
instant. "It is the sea, and we are going west."

"Then we are over the Atlantic," Monsieur Teclier said.

The gas was roaring from the valve above, and the balloon sank
rapidly into the stratum of clouds. For a minute, all was silent;
and then a cry broke from them all. They were a considerable
distance from the coast, and were driving along with great
rapidity. Immediately under the balloon was an island, of no great
size and, beyond that, no land whatever was visible.

"We must descend on that island, or we are lost. It is our only
chance."

The valve was still open; and its influence was easily seen, for
the balloon sank rapidly down through the opening of the clouds.

"We shan't be down in time," the boys exclaimed, simultaneously.

It was but too evident. The balloon, when the first general view of
the situation had been obtained, was fully a mile high; and was
traveling seaward at the rate of thirty miles an hour. The island,
at the point at which they were crossing, was about three miles
wide; but they had passed fully half a mile over it, before they
obtained a fair view. In five minutes, therefore, they would be
beyond the land again; and they had to fall a mile, in that time.

"Cut the balloon to pieces," Monsieur Teclier said. "Tear it up. We
must risk everything."

The boys seized the silk, tore, and hacked at it; as did the
aeronaut. In two minutes, a vast quantity of gas had escaped from
the rents, and the silk was doubled up near the top of the net.

Illustration: The Sea! The Sea!

"That will do," Monsieur Teclier said. "We shall be down in time,
now."

The boys looked over the car and, accustomed as they had been to
face danger, were appalled.

"It is all up with us, this time," Ralph said; "we shall he
smashed, altogether."

"No," the aeronaut exclaimed, "the silk is acting as a parachute,
now, and checking the descent. Now, help me to throw out all the
bundles."

They did so, working silently and with difficulty; for the car was
oscillating so greatly that they were obliged to hold on, by its
side, not to be thrown out. The descent was less rapid than it had
been, but was still sufficiently alarming.

"Is there a chance?" Ralph said.

"We shall get off with a shaking," Monsieur Teclier said. "The car
is made of wicker work, and is as elastic as a ball. Drop the
grapnel, now; in another minute, we shall be within holding
distance."

As the balloon neared the ground, the oscillation became less
violent, and the pace diminished.

"The grapnel is on the ground," Percy said, looking over.

"Hold tight, hold tight," Monsieur Teclier said, warningly. "We
shall catch fast on to those trees."

There was a tearing and rending, a series of tremendous jerks, and
then a bump against the ground; which threw them all into the
bottom of the car, from which the next jerk threw them out on to
the ground. Fortunately the ground was even, and the soil had
lately been plowed; but the shock was so violent that it was some
minutes before either of the boys recovered consciousness. When
they did so, they found that two or three gentlemen were leaning
over them; while several peasants were endeavoring, under the
direction of Monsieur Teclier, to hold the balloon--which was
thrashing the ground with great violence.

"Thank God, you are all alive," one of the gentlemen said.

A peasant now came running up, with some water. The gentleman who
had spoken dashed a little in their faces.

"I do not think any of your limbs are broken," he said. "Do you
feel any pain?"

"I feel sore and bruised, all over," Ralph said, getting up with
some assistance; "but I don't think that anything serious is the
matter.

"How are you, Percy?"

"I don't think I am hurt seriously, Ralph; but I would rather lie
still, for the present."

Ralph explained to the gentleman--who again leaned over Percy, and
felt his pulse--that his brother had been recently ill, and was
still weak.

"Ah, that accounts for it," the gentleman said. "I do not think
that he is seriously hurt. I am a doctor; and was luckily out
riding with these gentlemen, when we happened to look up and saw
your balloon falling, like a stone, from the clouds. We thought at
first that you must be dashed to pieces; but when we saw that the
speed was being a little checked, we had some hope, and galloped in
the direction in which it was falling. We were within five hundred
yards when you fell, but we hardly expected to see anyone alive.

"Do not try to move," he said to Percy. "We sent a man for a
vehicle, and a few necessaries, before we set off ourselves."

"Where have we fallen?" Ralph asked. "We were astonished to find
ourselves over the sea, for the wind was north when we started."

"You have fallen upon Belle Isle," the gentleman said, "so the wind
must have changed materially, since you started."

Monsieur Teclier now came up.

"I must really congratulate you both," he said to Ralph, "upon your
coolness and presence of mind, in a very frightful position. The
oldest aeronaut could not have shown more nerve."

"You see," Ralph said, "we have been pretty often in danger, now;
and although the sort of danger was new, the degree of danger was
not."

The gentlemen smiled a little, as Ralph spoke. The Barclays had
come out in plain clothes, bringing their uniform in the balloon
for, in the event of the balloon having fallen among the Germans,
it was of course essential that they should be able to get off,
unobserved. They therefore looked mere lads; and their talk, of
having passed through as great a danger as that which had just made
the spectators of it feel faint and sick only to witness, appeared
to be a mere bit of exaggerated braggadocio.

A light cart now arrived, in which some mattresses had been laid;
some bandages, and other surgical necessaries had also been added,
together with a bottle of brandy.

"Fortunately we do not want any of these, except the brandy," the
surgeon said. "A little of that will do you all good.

"Now a few strips of plaster,"--this was to Monsieur Teclier, whose
face was cut a good deal--"and then you will do, till you get to
the town."

The three voyagers were now helped into the cart; for they were all
very stiff and greatly shaken, and were glad to stretch themselves
out on the mattresses, covered over with blankets, until they
reached the little town. Here they were met by the whole
population, cheering lustily. Another wagon had been sent off for
the balloon; and a number of people now set out to search for the
bags of dispatches, etc. which had been thrown out during the last
part of the descent. The Sous Prefect at the island placed his
house at once at their disposal. But they said that they would
rather go to a hotel, first, and take a hot bath--which the doctor
recommended them--but should be very happy to breakfast with him,
after that. Before going to the hotel, however, Monsieur Teclier
sent off a dispatch to Tours; saying that he had arrived at Belle
Isle with news from Paris, at a quarter to seven; and that, at that
time, everything was going on well.

He next inquired as to means of reaching the mainland. The wind was
dead off shore, and a sailing vessel would have taken a long time
to make the passage. However, there was a small steamer in harbor;
and the Sous Prefect took upon himself to engage that the fires
should be lighted, at once, and that they should cross in two or
three hours.

After reaching the hotel they were examined carefully by the
surgeon; who pronounced that no harm, whatever, had been done to
them, and that they had escaped with a few contusions, and a good
shaking.

The breakfast was quite an ovation. All the principal people of the
place were assembled; and when Monsieur Teclier entered, followed
by the young Barclays, the gentlemen clapped their hands and
cheered, and the ladies waved their handkerchiefs. After breakfast,
the Sous Prefect proposed an adjournment into the drawing room; and
now the voyagers each became the center of a knot of questioners as
to the voyage.

Monsieur Teclier--as was natural--conversed with the Sous Prefect
and other leading men of the town, while their wives and daughters
gathered round the lads. Ralph had given his name as Barclay, and
had stated that Percy was his brother; but he had said nothing as
to their being in the army, as he wished to avoid the oft-repeated
tale which the declaration of his rank was sure to necessitate. He
had even said a word to Monsieur Teclier, begging him to say the
Messieurs Barclay, instead of Captains Barclay--unless, of course,
he were actually questioned upon the matter. Percy was allowed to
sit in an easy chair, unmolested--for he was quite done up--and
Ralph talked for both, relating many details of their journey from
Paris; and the ladies examined him most minutely as to his
sensation, and especially whether he was not horribly frightened.

Among those standing in a group round the young Barclays was a
lieutenant of Mobiles; who evidently by no means approved of the
attention, and interest which they excited among the ladies; and
who had made several sarcastic remarks, during the course of the
narrative. Presently a servant came in and, walking up to Monsieur
Teclier, said that two swords had been picked up; had they fallen
from the balloon?

"Yes," Monsieur Teclier said, "they belong to those gentlemen."

The servant came up to Ralph, and told him that the swords had been
picked up. Ralph at once drew out a five-franc piece, and asked the
servant to give it to the man who had found them.

"Ah," said the officer of Mobiles, with a scarcely concealed sneer,
"so you have come out from Paris to serve? I should have imagined
that there were plenty of opportunities to distinguish yourselves,
there. However, you must have had good interest, to get places in a
balloon."
