said, keep a man alive for at least five minutes.  He has time,
therefore, to reach the surface, so that danger from this source is not
nearly so great as it used to be.

Such restoratives as suggested themselves to the chief onlookers were
applied, and, to the surprise of every one, the diver began to show
signs of returning life.  In a few minutes he began to retch, and soon
vomited a large quantity of clotted blood.  After a time he began to
whisper a few words.

"Cheer up, my lad," said the captain in a kindly voice, as he went down
on one knee beside the prostrate man; "don't attempt to speak or exert
yourself in any way.  You'll be all right in a few days.  We'll have
your dress taken off and send you below, where you shall be taken good
care of."

With returning vitality came back Maxwell's inbred obstinacy.  He would
not hold his tongue, but insisted on explaining his sensations to his
comrades as they busied themselves taking off his dress--a rather
violent operation at all times, and very difficult in the circumstances.

"W'y messmates," he said, "I hadn't even time to guess wot 'ad 'appened.
Got no warnin' wotsomedever.  I just felt a tree-mendous shock all of a
suddent that struck me motionless--as if Tom Sayers had hit me a
double-handed cropper on the top o' my beak an' in the pit o' my
bread-basket at one an' the same moment.  Then came an 'orrible pressure
as if a two-thousand-ton ship 'ad bin let down a-top o' me, an' arter
that I remembers nothin'."

It is probable that the poor fellow would have gone on with his
comments, though he spoke with difficulty and in a feeble voice, in
which none of his characteristic gruffness remained, if he had not been
cut short by Joe Baldwin and Rooney Machowl lifting him up and carrying
him below.

Rooney, who carried his shoulders, took occasion to say while on the way
down:--

"David, boy, did ye find anny treasure?"

"No;--see'd nothin'."

"Ow, ow, worse luck!" sighed Rooney.

Maxwell was made comfortable with a glass of weak brandy and water--
hot--and his comrades returned on deck, where they found Edgar
Berrington commencing to put on the diving-dress.

"Goin' down, sir?" inquired Joe.

"Yes.  We have fortunately another air-tube, and I want to complete the
work we have begun."

"Is there not a risk," whispered Aileen to her father, "that the same
accident may happen again?"

"Ah, true," answered Mr Hazlit aloud; "the water appears to be very
deep, Mr Berrington.  Do you not think it probable that the air-tube
may burst a second time?"

"I think not," replied Edgar, as he sat down to have his helmet affixed
to the dress.  "The best made articles are liable to possess flaws.
Even the most perfect railway-wheel, in which the cleverest engineer
alive might fail to detect a fault, may conceal a dangerous flaw.  There
is no certainty in human affairs.  All we can say is that, when we
consider the thousands of divers who are daily employed all over the
world, accidents of the kind you have just witnessed are not numerous.
If I were to refrain from going down because this accident has occurred,
I might as well refrain evermore from entering a railway-carriage.  We
_must_ risk something sometimes in our progress through life, Mr
Hazlit.  It was intended that we should.  Why were we gifted with the
quality of courage if risk and danger were never to be encountered?"

The screwing on of the bull's-eye put a stop to further remark, and a
few seconds later our hero went over the side, while Ram-stam, smiling
benignant indifference as to the event which had so recently happened,
steadily performed his duty.

As Mr Hazlit and Aileen watched the bubbles that rose in multitudes to
the surface, the former repeated to himself, mentally, "Yes, we must
risk something sometimes in our progress through life."  He went on
repeating this until at last he followed it up with the sudden
reflection:--"Well, perhaps I _must_ risk my daughter's happiness in
this youth's hands, even though he _is_ penniless.  He seems an able
fellow; will, doubtless, make his way anywhere.  At all events it is
quite evident that he will risk his life anywhere!  Besides, now I think
of it, he said something about lending me some hundred pounds or so.
Perhaps he is not absolutely penniless.  It is quite certain that I am.
Curious sentiment that of his: `We must risk something sometimes.'  Very
curious, and quite new--at least exhibited to me in quite a new light."

While Mr Hazlit's mind ran on thus, and his eyes dreamily watched the
bubbles on the surface of the sea, our hero was grubbing like a
big-headed goblin among the wreckage at the bottom.

He moved about from place to place in that slow leaning fashion which
the resistance of water renders unavoidable, but he found nothing
whatever to repay him for his trouble.  There were beams and twisted
iron-work, and overturned guns, and a few bales, but nothing that bore
the least resemblance to boxes or bags of money.

One or two large cases he discovered, and forced them open with the
crowbar, which Maxwell had dropped when he was struck insensible, but
they contained nothing worth the labour of having them hoisted up.  At
last he was about to leave, after a careful search of more than an hour,
when he espied something shining in a corner of what had once been the
pirate-chief's cabin.  He took it up and found it to be a small box of
unusual weight for its size.  His sense of touch told him that it was
ornamented with carving on its surface, but the light was not sufficient
to enable him to see it distinctly.  His heart beat hopefully, however,
as he hastened as fast as the water would permit out of the cabin, and
then, to his joy he found that it was Aileen Hazlit's jewel-box!  How it
came there he could not guess; but the reader partly knows the truth,
and can easily imagine that when the pirate-chief sent his other
valuables to the swift prow, as before mentioned, he kept this--the most
precious of them all--close to his own person to the last, desiring, no
doubt, to have it always under his own eye.

Not troubling himself much, however, with such speculations, Edgar
returned to the cabin, placed the box where he found it, and spent full
half-an-hour more in plying his crowbar in the hope of discovering more
of the pirate's horde.  While thus engaged he received two or three
signals to "Come up" from Joe Baldwin, who held his life-line; but he
signalled back "All right--let me alone," and went on with his work.

At last there came the signal "Come up!" given with such a peremptory
tug that he was fain, though unwilling, to comply.  Taking the box under
his arm he began to ascend slowly.  On gaining the surface he was made
at once aware of the reason of the repeated signalling, for a sudden
squall had burst upon the eastern sea, which by that time, although
perfectly calm below, was tumbling about in waves so large that the
gun-boat was tossing like a cork at her anchor, and it was found to be
almost impossible to work the air-pump.  In fact it was only by having
two men stationed to keep Ram-stam on his legs that the thing could be
done!

With some difficulty Edgar was got on board, and the order was
immediately given to weigh anchor.

Expressing great surprise at the state of things he found above water,
and regret that he had not sooner attended to orders, Edgar placed the
box on the deck.  Then he unrobed, and drawing on his trousers and a
canvas jacket he issued from behind the funnel--which had been his
robing-room--and went aft, where he found Aileen seated between her
friend Miss Pritty and her father.

"Miss Hazlit," he said with a peculiar smile, "allow me to introduce you
to an old friend."

He held up before her the carved steel box.

"My mother's jewel-case!" she exclaimed, with a look of intense
surprise.

"My--my wife's jewels!" stammered Mr Hazlit, in equal surprise;
"whereon earth--why--how--where--young man, did you find them?"

"I found them at the bottom of the sea," replied Edgar.  "It is the
second time, strange to say, that I have had the pleasure of fishing
them up from that vast repository of riches where, I doubt not, many
another jewel-case still lies, and will continue to lie, unclaimed for
ever.  Meanwhile, I count myself peculiarly fortunate in being the means
of restoring _this_ case to its rightful owner."

So saying he placed it in the hands of Aileen.

The captain, who had watched the whole scene with quiet interest and a
peculiar curl about his black moustache, as well as a twinkle in his
sharp black eye, uttered a short laugh, thrust his hands into his
pockets, and walked away to give the order that the steamer's head
should be laid precisely "sou', sou'-west, and by south, half-south,"
with a slight--almost a shadowy--leaning in the direction of
"southerly."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  We may as well state here that our information on this subject
was obtained from Captain John Hewat, formerly in command of the steam
gun-boat _Rainbow_,--belonging to Sir James Brooke, K.C.B., Rajah of
Sarawak,--in which he had six years' experience of pirate-hunting in the
eastern seas, and now captain of one of Donald Currie and Company's
magnificent line of Cape steamers.  Perhaps we ought to apologise for
thus dragging the gallant captain into fiction, but we trust he will
find that, in regard to his own particular doings, we have stuck pretty
closely to fact.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS, ENDING WITH A "SCRIMMAGE" UNDER WATER.

We are back again in Hong-Kong--in the pagoda--with our old friends
seated comfortably round their little table enjoying a good supper.

Pretty little Mrs Machowl has prepared it, and is now assisting at the
partaking of it.  Young Master Teddy Machowl is similarly engaged on his
father's knee.  The child has grown appallingly during its father's
absence!  Ram-stam and Chok-foo are in waiting--gazing at each other
with the affection of Chinese lovers re-united.

"What a sight you are, Rooney!" said Mrs Machowl, pausing between bites
to look at her husband.

"Sure it's the same may be said of yoursilf, cushla!" replied Rooney,
stuffing his child's mouth with sweet potato.

"Yes, but it's what a _fright_ you are, I mane," said Mrs Machowl.

"An' it's what a purty cratur _you_ are that _I_ mane," replied Rooney,
repeating the dose to Teddy, who regarded his father with looks of deep
affection.

"Ah!  Go 'long wid you.  Sure it's your nose is spoilt entirely," said
Mrs Machowl.

"An' it's your own that is swaiter than iver, which more than makes up
the difference," retorted her lord.--"Howld it open as wide as ye can
this time, Ted, me boy; there, that's your sort--but don't choke, ye
spalpeen."

There seemed indeed some occasion for the latter admonition, for Teddy,
unused to such vigorous treatment, was beginning to look purple in the
face and apoplectic about the eyes.  In short, there is every
probability that an attack of croup, or something dreadful, would have
ensued if the child's mother had not risen hastily and snatched it away
from the would-be infanticide.

"Now then, Ram-stam and Chok-foo," said Edgar Berrington, putting down
his spoon, "clear away the rat's-tail soup, and bring on the roast
puppy."

Grinning from ear to ear, and with almost closed eyes, the Chinese
servitors obeyed.

While they cleared the table and laid the second course, the
conversation became general.  Previously it had been particular,
referring chiefly to the soup and the free circulation of the salt.

"So, then," observed Joe Baldwin, leaning back in his chair, "we must
make up our minds to be content with what we have got.  Well, it an't so
bad after all!  Let me see.  How much did you say the total is, Mister
Eddy?"

"Close upon eight thousand five hundred pounds."

"A tidy little sum," observed Rooney, with an air of satisfaction.

"Eight thousand--eh?" repeated Joe; "hum, well, we'll cut off the five
hundred for expenses and passage home, and that leaves eight thousand
clear, which, according to agreement, gives each of us two thousand
pounds."

Maxwell, who still looked pale and thin from the effects of his late
accident, nodded his head slowly, and growled, "Two thousand--jus' so."

"An' that, Molly, my dear," said Rooney, "if properly invisted, gives
you an' me a clair income--only think, an _income_, Molly--of wan
hundred a year!  It's true, cushla!  That ye won't be able to rowl in
yer carridge an' walk in silks an' satins on that income, but it'll pay
the rint an' taxes, owld girl, an' help Teddy to a collidge eddication--
to say nothin' o' pipes an' baccy.  Ochone!--if we'd only not lost the
first haul, we'd have bin millerinaires be this time.  I wouldn't have
called the Quane me grandmother."

"Come, Rooney, be grateful for what you've got," said Edgar.  "Enough is
as good as a feast."

"Ah!  Sur, it'll be time to say that when we've finished the puppy,"
replied the Irishman, as Chok-foo placed on the board a savoury roast
which bore some resemblance to the animal named, though, having had its
head and legs amputated, there could be no absolute certainty on the
point.  Whatever it was, the party attacked it with relish, and silence
reigned until it was finished, after which conversation flowed again--
somewhat languidly at first.  When, however, pipes were got out by those
who smoked, and chairs were placed in the verandah, and no sound was
heard around save the yelling of Chinese children who were romping in
the Chinese kennel that skirted the pagoda, and the champing of the jaws
of Ram-stam and Chok-foo as they masticated inside--then came the feast
of reason, not to mention the flow of soul.

"I wonder what our friends at Whitstable will say to this ventur' of
ours," said Maxwell.

"Have you many friends there?" asked Edgar.

"Many?--of course I has.  W'y, I suppose every English diver must have
friends there."

"Where is it?" asked Edgar.

"Why, sir, don't you know Whitstable?" exclaimed Joe Baldwin, in
surprise.

"You forget, Joe," replied Edgar, with a smile, "that although I have
learnt how to dive, and have read a good deal about the history of
diving, I am only an amateur after all, and cannot be supposed to know
everything connected with the profession.  All I know about Whitstable
is that it is a port somewhere in the south of England."

"Right, sir," said Joe, "but it's more than that; it lies on the coast
of Kent, and is famous for its oyster-beds and its divers.  How it came
to be a place of resort for divers _I_ don't know, but so it is, an' I
_have_ heard say it was divin' for oysters in days of old that gave the
natives a taste for the work.  Anyhow, they've got the taste very
decided somehow, an' after every spell o' dirty weather they're sure to
have telegrams from all parts of the coast, and you'll see Lloyds'
agents huntin' up the divers in the public-houses an' packin' 'em off
wi' their gear right and left by rail to look after salvage.

"These men," continued Joe, "are most of 'em handicraftmen as well as
divers, because you know, sir, it would be of no use to send down a mere
labourer to repair the bottom of a ship, no matter how good he was at
divin'; so, you'll find among 'em masons, and shipbuilders, and
carpenters, and engineers--"

"Ah!" interrupted Edgar, "I was just wondering how they would manage if
it were found necessary to have the engines of a sunk steamer taken to
pieces and sent up."

"Well, sir," rejoined Joe, "they've got men there who can dive, and who
know as much about marine engines as you do yourself.  And these men
make lots of tin, for a good diver can earn a pound a day, an' be kept
in pretty regular employment in deep water.  In shallow water he can
earn from ten to fifteen shillings a day.  Besides this, they make
special arrangements for runnin' extra risks.  Then the savin' they
sometimes effect is amazin'.  Why, sir, although you do know somethin'
of the advantages of diving, you can never know fully what good they do
in the world at large.  Just take the case of the _Agamemnon_ at
Sebastopol--"

"Och!" interrupted Rooney, whose visage was perplexed by reason of his
pipe refusing to draw well, "wasn't (puff) that a good job intirely
(puff!  There; you're all right at last!)  He was a friend o' mine that
managed that job.  Tarry, we called him--though that wasn't his right
name.  This is how it was.  The fleet was blazin' away at the
fortifications, an' of coorse the fortifications--out o' politeness if
nothin' else--was blazin' away at the fleet, and smoke was curlin' up
like a chimbley on fire, an' big balls was goin' about like pais in a
rattle, an' small shot like hail was blowin' horizontal, an' men was
bein' shot an' cut to pieces, an' them as warn't was cheerin' as if
there was any glory in wholesale murther--bah!  I wouldn't give a day at
Donnybrook wid a shillelah for all the sieges of Sebastopool as ever I
heard tell of.  Well, suddintly, bang goes a round shot slap through the
hull of the _Agamemnon_, below the water-line!  Here was a pretty to do!
The ordinary coorse in this case would have bin to haul out of action,
go right away to Malta, an' have the ship docked and repaired there.
But what does they do?  Why, they gets from under fire for a bit, and
sends down my friend Tarry to look at the hole.  He goes down, looks at
it, then comes up an' looks at the Commodore,--bowld as brass.

"`I can repair it,' says Tarry.

"`Well, do,' says the Commodore.

"So down he goes an' does it, an' very soon after that the _Agamemnon_
went into action again, and blazed away at the walls o' the owld place
