'ten' ter dey business. Den w'en dey come back dey'd fine whar some un
been nibblin' at dey butter. Dey tuck'n hide dat butter all 'roun' in de
spring-house; dey sot it on de rafters, en dey bury it in de san'; yit
all de same de butter 'ud come up missin'.

"Bimeby it got so dey dunner w'at ter do; dey zamin' de tracks, en dey
fine out dat de man w'at nibble dey butter is little Wattle Weasel. He
come in de night, he come in de day; dey can't ketch 'im. Las' de
creeturs tuck'n helt er confab, en dey 'gree dat dey hatter set some un
fer ter watch en ketch Wattle Weasel.

"Brer Mink wuz de fus' man 'p'inted, 'kaze he wa'n't mo'n a half a
han'[69] no way you kin fix it. De t'er creeturs dey tuck'n went off ter
dey wuk, en Brer Mink he tuck'n sot up wid de butter. He watch en he
lissen, he lissen en he watch; he ain't see nothin', he ain't year
nothin'. Yit he watch, 'kaze der t'er creeturs done fix up a law dat ef
Wattle Weasel come w'iles somebody watchin' en git off bidout gittin'
kotch, de man w'at watchin' ain't kin eat no mo' butter endurin' er dat
year.

"Brer Mink, he watch en he wait. He set so still dat bimeby he git de
cramps in de legs, en des 'bout dat time little Wattle Weasel pop he
head und' de do'. He see Brer Mink, en he hail 'im:--

"'Heyo, Brer Mink! you look sorter lonesome in dar. Come out yer en less
take a game er hidin'-switch.'

"Brer Mink, he wanter have some fun, he did, en he tuck'n jine Wattle
Weasel in de game. Dey play en dey play twel, bimeby, Brer Mink git so
wo' out dat he ain't kin run, skacely, en des soon ez dey sets down ter
res', Brer Mink, he draps off ter sleep. Little Wattle Weasel, so mighty
big en fine, he goes en nibbles up de butter, en pops out de way he come
in.

    [Illustration: "HE SORTER HUNCH BRER POSSUM IN DE SHORT RIBS,
    EN AX 'IM HOW HE COME ON"]

"De creeturs, dey come back, dey did, en dey fine de butter nibbled, en
Wattle Weasel gone. Wid dat, dey marks Brer Mink down, en he ain't
kin eat no mo' butter dat year. Den dey fix up 'n'er choosement en
'p'int Brer Possum fer ter watch de butter.

"Brer Possum, he grin en watch, and bimeby, sho' 'nuff, in pop little
Wattle Weasel. He come in, he did, en he sorter hunch Brer Possum in de
short ribs, en ax 'im how he come on. Brer Possum mighty ticklish, en
time Wattle Weasel totch 'im in de short ribs, he 'gun ter laugh. Wattle
Weasel totch 'im ag'in en laugh wusser, en he keep on hunchin' 'im dat
a-way twel bimeby Brer Possum laugh hisse'f plum outer win', en Wattle
Weasel lef 'im dar en nibble up de butter.

"De creeturs, dey tuck'n mark Brer Possum down, en 'p'int Brer Coon.
Brer Coon, he tuck'n start in all so mighty fine; but w'iles he settin'
dar, little Wattle Weasel banter 'im fer a race up de branch. No sooner
say dan yer dey went! Brer Coon, he foller de tu'ns er de branch, en
little Wattle Weasel he take'n take nigh cuts, en 't wa'n't no time 'fo'
he done run Brer Coon plum down. Den dey run down de branch, and 'fo'
Brer Coon kin ketch up wid 'im, dat little Wattle Weasel done got back
ter de noggin er butter, en nibble it up.

"Den de creeturs tuck'n mark Brer Coon down, dey did, en 'p'int Brer Fox
fer ter watch de butter. Wattle Weasel sorter 'fear'd 'er Brer Fox. He
study long time, en den he wait twel night. Den he tuck'n went 'roun' in
de ole fiel' en woke up de Killdees[70] en druv 'roun' todes de
spring-house. Brer Fox year um holler, en it make he mouf water. Bimeby,
he 'low ter hisse'f dat 't ain't no harm ef he go out en slip up on
one."

"Dar now!" said Aunt Tempy.

"Brer Fox tuck'n slip out, en Wattle Weasel he slicked in, en bless yo'
soul! dar goes de butter!"

"Enty!" exclaimed Daddy Jack.

"Brer Fox he git marked down," continued Uncle Remus, "en den de
creeturs tuck'n 'p'int Brer Wolf fer ter be dey watcher. Brer Wolf, he
sot up dar, he did, en sorter nod, but bimeby he year some un talkin'
outside de spring-house. He h'ist up he years en lissen. Look lak some
er de creeturs wuz gwine by, en talkin' 'mungs' deysef'; but all Brer
Wolf kin year is dish yer:--

"'I wonder who put dat ar young sheep down dar by de chinkapin tree, en
I like ter know wharbouts Brer Wolf is.'

"Den it seem lak dey pass on, en ole Brer Wolf, he fergotted w'at he in
dar fer, en he dash down ter de chinkapin tree, fer ter git de young
sheep. But no sheep dar, en w'en he git back, he see signs whar Wattle
Weasel done bin in dar en nibble de butter.

"Den de creeturs tuck'n mark Brer Wolf down, en 'p'int Brer B'ar fer ter
keep he eye 'pun de noggin er butter. Brer B'ar he tuck'n sot up dar, he
did, en lick he paw, en feel good. Bimeby Wattle Weasel come dancin' in.
He 'low:--

"'Heyo, Brer B'ar, how you come on? I 'low'd I yeard you snortin' in
yer, en I des drapt in fer ter see.'

"Brer B'ar tell him howdy, but he sorter keep one eye on 'im. Little
Wattle Weasel 'low:--

"'En you got ticks on yo' back, Brer B'ar?'

"Wid dat Wattle Weasel 'gun ter rub Brer B'ar on de back en scratch 'im
on de sides, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he 'uz stretch out fast asleep en
sno'in' lak a saw-mill. Co'se Wattle Weasel git de butter. Brer B'ar he
got marked down, and den de creeturs ain't know w'at dey gwine do
skacely.

"Some say sen' fer Brer Rabbit, some say sen' fer Brer Tarrypin; but
las' dey sent fer Brer Rabbit. Brer Rabbit, he tuck a notion dat dey 'uz
fixin' up some kinder trick on 'im, en dey hatter beg mightily, mon,
'fo' he 'ud come en set up 'longside er dey butter.

"But bimeby he 'greed, en he went down ter de spring-house en look
'roun'. Den he tuck'n got 'im a twine string, en hide hisse'f whar he
kin keep he eye on de noggin er butter. He ain't wait long 'fo' yer
come Wattle Weasel. Des ez he 'bout ter nibble at de butter, Brer Rabbit
holler out:--

"'Let dat butter 'lone!'

"Wattle Weasel jump back lak de butter bu'nt 'im. He jump back, he did,
en say:--

"'Sho'ly dat mus' be Brer Rabbit!'

"'De same. I 'low'd you'd know me. Des let dat butter 'lone.'

"'Des lemme git one little bit er tas'e, Brer Rabbit.'

"'Des let dat butter 'lone.'

"Den Wattle Weasel say he want er run a race. Brer Rabbit 'low he tired.
Wattle Weasel 'low he want er play hidin'. Brer Rabbit 'low dat all he
hidin' days is pas' en gone. Wattle Weasel banter'd en banter'd 'im, en
bimeby Brer Rabbit come up wid a banter er he own.

"'I'll take'n tie yo' tail,' sezee, 'en you'll take'n tie mine, en den
we'll see w'ich tail de strongest.' Little Wattle Weasel know how weakly
Brer Rabbit tail is, but he ain't know how strong Brer Rabbit bin wid he
tricks. So dey tuck'n tie der tails wid Brer Rabbit twine string.

"Wattle Weasel wuz ter stan' inside en Brer Rabbit wuz ter stan'
outside, en dey wuz ter pull 'gin' one er n'er wid dey tails. Brer
Rabbit, he tuck'n slip out'n de string, en tie de een' 'roun' a tree
root, en den he went en peep at Wattle Weasel tuggin' en pullin'. Bimeby
Wattle Weasel 'low:--

"'Come en ontie me, Brer Rabbit, 'kaze you done outpull me.'

"Brer Rabbit sot dar, he did, en chaw he cud, en look lak he feel sorry
'bout sump'n'. Bimeby all de creeturs come fer ter see 'bout dey butter,
'kaze dey fear'd Brer Rabbit done make way wid it. Yit w'en dey see
little Wattle Weasel tie by de tail, dey make great 'miration 'bout Brer
Rabbit, en dey 'low he de smartest one er de whole gang."


FOOTNOTES:

[69] That is, could do no more than half the work of a man.

[70] Killdeers--a species of plover.




LVI

BRER RABBIT TIES MR. LION


There was some comment and some questions were asked by the little boy
in regard to Wattle Weasel and the other animals; to all of which Uncle
Remus made characteristic response. Aunt Tempy sat with one elbow on her
knee, her head resting in the palm of her fat hand. She gazed intently
into the fire, and seemed to be lost in thought. Presently she
exclaimed:--

"Well, de Lord he'p my soul!"

"Dat's de promise, Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus, solemnly.

Aunt Tempy laughed, as she straightened herself in her chair, and
said:--

"I des knowed dey wuz sump'n' 'n'er gwine 'cross my min' w'en I year
talk 'bout dat ar sheep by de chinkapin tree."

"Out wid it, Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus, by way of encouragement; "out
wid it; free yo' min', en des make yo'se'f welcome."

"No longer'n Sunday 'fo' las', I 'uz 'cross dar at de Spivey place en I
tuck'n year'd a nigger man tellin' de same tale, en I 'low ter myse'f
dat I'd take'n take it en kyar' it home en gin it out w'en I come ter
pass de time wid Brer Remus en all uv um. I 'low ter myse'f I'll take it
en kyar' it dar, en I'll des tell it my own way."

"Well, den," said Uncle Remus, approvingly, "me en dish yer chap, we er
willin' en a-waitin', en ez fer Brer Jack over dar, we kin say de same
fer him, 'kaze I up en year 'im draw mighty long breff des now lak he
fixin' fer ter snort. But you neenter min' dat ole creetur, Sis Tempy.
Des push right ahead."

"Ah-h-h-e-e!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, snapping his bright little eyes at
Uncle Remus with some display of irritation; "you tek-a me fer be sleep
ebry tam I shed-a me y-eye, you is mek fool-a you'se'f. _Warrah yarrah
garrah tarrah!_"[71]

"Brer Remus!" said Aunt Tempy, in an awed whisper, "maybe he's a-cunju'n
un you."

"No-no!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, snappishly, "me no cuncher no'n' 't all.
Wun me cuncher you all you yeddy bone crack. Enty!"

"Well, in de name er de Lord, don't come a-cunju'n wid me, 'kaze I'm des
as peaceable ez de day's long," said Aunt Tempy.

Uncle Remus smiled and closed his eyes with an air of disdain, caught
from his old Mistress, the little boy's grandmother, long since dead.

"Tell yo' tale, Sis Tempy," he said pleasantly, "en leave de talk er
cunju'n ter de little nigger childun. We er done got too ole fer dat
kinder foolishness."

This was for the ear of the little boy. In his heart Uncle Remus was
convinced that Daddy Jack was capable of changing himself into the
blackest of black cats, with swollen tail, arched back, fiery eyes, and
protruding fangs. But the old man's attitude reassured Aunt Tempy, as
well as the child, and forthwith she proceeded with her story:--

"Hit seem like dat one time w'en Brer Rabbit fine hisse'f way off in de
middle er de woods, de win' strike up un 'gun ter blow. Hit blow down on
de groun' en it blow up in de top er de timber, en it blow so hard twel
terreckerly Brer Rabbit tuck a notion dat he better git out fum dar 'fo'
de timber 'gun ter fall.

"Brer Rabbit, he broke en run, en, Man--Sir![72] w'en dat creetur run'd
he run'd, now you year w'at I tell yer! He broke en run, he did, en he
fa'rly flew 'way fum dar. W'iles he gwine 'long full tilt, he run'd
ag'in' ole Mr. Lion. Mr. Lion, he hail 'im:--

"'Heyo, Brer Rabbit! Wat yo' hurry?'

"'Run, Mr. Lion, run! Dey's a harrycane comin' back dar in de timbers.
You better run!'

"Dis make Mr. Lion sorter skeer'd. He 'low:--

"'I mos' too heavy fer ter run fur, Brer Rabbit. W'at I gwine do?'

"'Lay down, Mr. Lion, lay down! Git close ter de groun'!'

"Mr. Lion shake his head. He 'low:--

"'Ef win' lierbul fer ter pick up little man like you is, Brer Rabbit,
w'at it gwine do wid big man like me?'

"'Hug a tree, Mr. Lion, hug a tree!'

"Mr. Lion lash hisse'f wid his tail. He 'low:--

"'Wat I gwine do ef de win' blow all day en a good part er de night,
Brer Rabbit?'

"'Lemme tie you ter de tree, Mr. Lion! lemme tie you ter de tree!'

"Mr. Lion, he tuk'n 'gree ter dis, en Brer Rabbit, he got 'im a hick'ry
split[73] en tie 'im hard en fast ter de tree. Den he tuck'n sot down,
ole Brer Rabbit did, en wash his face en han's des same ez you see de
cats doin'. Terreckerly Mr. Lion git tired er stan'in' dar huggin' de
tree, en he ax Brer Rabbit w'at de reason he ain't keep on runnin', en
Brer Rabbit, he up'n 'low dat he gwine ter stay der en take keer Mr.
Lion.

"Terreckerly Mr. Lion say he ain't year no harrycane. Brer Rabbit say he
ain't needer. Mr. Lion say he ain't year no win' a-blowin'. Brer Rabbit
say he ain't needer. Mr. Lion say he ain't so much ez year a leaf
a-stirrin'. Brer Rabbit say he ain't needer. Mr. Lion sorter study, en
Brer Rabbit sot dar, he did, en wash his face en lick his paws.

"Terreckerly Mr. Lion ax Brer Rabbit fer ter onloose 'im.

Brer Rabbit say he fear'd. Den Mr. Lion git mighty mad, en he 'gun ter
beller wuss'n one er deze yer bull-yearlin's. He beller so long en he
beller so loud twel present'y de t'er creeturs dey 'gun ter come up fer
ter see w'at de matter.

"Des soon ez dey come up, Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n 'gun ter talk biggity
en strut 'roun', en, Man--Sir! w'en dem yuthers see dat Brer Rabbit done
got Mr. Lion tied up, I let you know dey tuck'n walked way 'roun' 'im,
en 't wuz many a long day 'fo' dey tuck'n pestered ole Brer Rabbit."

Here Aunt Tempy paused. The little boy asked what Brother Rabbit tied
Mr. Lion for; but she did n't know; Uncle Remus, however, came to the
rescue.

"One time long 'fo' dat, honey, Brer Rabbit went ter de branch fer ter
git a drink er water, en ole Mr. Lion tuck'n druv 'im off, en fum dat
time out Brer Rabbit bin huntin' a chance fer ter ketch up wid 'im."

"Dat's so," said Aunt Tempy, and then she added:--

"I 'clare I ain't gwine tell you all not na'er n'er tale, dat I ain't.
'Kaze you des set dar en you ain't crack a smile fum de time I begin. Ef
dat'd 'a' bin Brer Remus, now, dey'd 'a' bin mo' gigglin' gwine on dan
you kin shake a stick at. I'm right down mad, dat I is."

"Well, I tell you dis, Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus, with unusual
emphasis, "ef deze yer tales wuz des fun, fun, fun, en giggle, giggle,
giggle, I let you know I'd a-done drapt um long ago. Yasser, w'en it
come down ter gigglin' you kin des count ole Remus out."


FOOTNOTES:

[71] This is simply "gullah" negro talk intended to be unintelligible,
and therefore impressive. It means "One or the other is as good as
t'other."

[72] An expression used to give emphasis and to attract attention; used
in the sense that Uncle Remus uses "Gentermens!"

[73] Hickory withe.




LVII

MR. LION'S SAD PREDICAMENT


The discussion over Aunt Tempy's fragmentary story having exhausted
itself, Daddy Jack turned up his coat collar until it was as high as the
top of his head, and then tried to button it under his chin. If this
attempt had been successful, the old African would have presented a
diabolical appearance; but the coat refused to be buttoned in that
style. After several attempts, which created no end of amusement for the
little boy, Daddy Jack said:--

"Da Lion, 'e no hab bin sma't lak B'er Rabbit. 'E strong wit' 'e fut, 'e
strong wit' 'e tush, but 'e no strong wit' 'e head. 'E bery foolish,
'cep' 'e is bin hab chance ter jump 'pon dem creetur.

"One tam 'e bin come by B'er Rabbit in da road; 'e ahx um howdy; 'e ahx
um wey 'e gwan. B'er Rabbit say 'e gwan git fum front de Buckra Man wut
bin comin' 'long da road. B'er Rabbit say:--

"'Hide you'se'f, B'er Lion; da Buckra ketch-a you fer true; 'e is bin
ketch-a you tam he pit 'e y-eye 'pon you; 'e mekky you sick wit' sorry.
Hide fum da Buckra, B'er Lion!'

"Da Lion, 'e shekky 'e head; 'e say:--

"'Ki! Me no skeer da Buckra Man. I glad fer shum. I ketch um en I kyar
um wey I lif; me hab da Buckra Man fer me bittle. How come you bein'
skeer da Buckra Man, B'er Rabbit?'

"B'er Rabbit look all 'bout fer see ef da Buckra bin comin'. 'E say:--

"'Me hab plenty reason, B'er Lion. Da Buckra Man shoot-a wit' one gun.
'E r'ise um too 'e y-eye, 'e p'int um stret toze you; 'e say _bang!_ one
tam, 'e say _bang!_ two tam: dun you is bin git hu't troo da head en
cripple in da leg.'

"Lion, 'e shek 'e head; 'e say:--

"'Me no skeer da Buckra Man. I grab-a da gun. I ketch um fer me
brekwus.'

"B'er Rabbit, 'e lahff; 'e say:--

"'Him quare fer true. Me skeer da Buckra, me no skeer you; but you no
skeer da Buckra. How come dis?'

"Da Lion lash 'e tail; 'e say:--

"'Me no skeer da Buckra, but me skeer da Pa'tridge; me berry skeer da
Pa'tridge.'

"B'er Rabbit, 'e lahff tel 'e kin lahff no mo'. 'E say:--

"'How come you skeer da Pa'tridge? 'E fly wun you wink-a you' eye; 'e
run en 'e fly. Hoo! me no skeer 'bout dem Pa'tridge. Me skeer da
Buckra.'

"Da Lion, 'e look all 'bout fer see ef da Pa'tridge bin comin'. 'E
say:--

"'I skeer da Pa'tridge. Wun me bin walk in da bushside, da Pa'tridge 'e
hol' right still 'pon da groun' tel me come dey-dey, en dun 'e fly
up--_fud-d-d-d-d-d-e-e!_ Wun 'e is bin do dat me is git-a skeer berry
bahd.'"

No typographical device could adequately describe Daddy Jack's imitation
of the flushing of a covey of partridges, or quail; but it is needless
to say that it made its impression upon the little boy. The old African
went on:--

"B'er Rabbit, 'e holler un lahff; 'e say:--

"'Me no skeer da Pa'tridge. I bin run dem up ebry day. Da no hu't-a you,
B'er Lion. You hol' you' eye 'pon da Buckra Man. Da Pa'tridge, 'e no hab
no gun fer shoot-a you wit'; da Buckra, 'e is bin hab one gun two
tam.[74] Let da Pa'tridge fly, B'er Lion; but wun da Buckra Man come you
bes' keep in de shady side. I tell you dis, B'er Lion.'

"Da Lion, 'e stan' um down 'e no skeer da Buckra Man, en bimeby 'e say
goo'-bye; 'e say 'e gwan look fer da Buckra Man fer true.

"So long tam, B'er Rabbit is bin yeddy one big fuss in da timber; 'e
yeddy da Lion v'ice. B'er Rabbit foller da fuss tel 'e is bin come 'pon
da Lion wey 'e layin' 'pon da groun'. Da Lion, 'e is moan; 'e is groan;
'e is cry. 'E hab hole in 'e head, one, two, t'ree hole in 'e side; 'e
holler, 'e groan. B'er Rabbit, 'e ahx um howdy. 'E say:--

"'Ki, B'er Lion, wey you hab fine so much trouble?'

"Da Lion, 'e moan, 'e groan, 'e cry; 'e say:--

"'Ow, ma Lord! I hab one hole in me head, one, two, t'ree hole in me
side, me leg bin bruk!'

"B'er Rabbit bin hol' 'e head 'pon one side; 'e look skeer. 'E say:--

"'Ki, B'er Lion! I no know da Pa'tridge is so bahd lak dat. I t'ink 'e
fly 'way un no hu't-a you. Shuh-shuh! wun I see dem Pa'tridge I mus' git
'pon turrer side fer keep me hide whole.'

"Da Lion, 'e groan, 'e moan, 'e cry. B'er Rabbit, 'e say:--

"'Da Pa'tridge, 'e berry bahd; 'e mus' bin borry da Buckra Man gun.'

"Da Lion, 'e groan, 'e cry:--

"''E no da Pa'tridge no'n 'tall. Da Buckra Man is bin stan' way off un
shoot-a me wit' 'e gun. Ow, ma Lord!'

"B'er Rabbit, 'e h'ist 'e han'; 'e say:--

"'Wut I bin tell-a you, B'er Lion? Wut I bin tell you 'bout da Buckra
Man? Da Pa'tridge no hu't-a you lak dis. 'E mek-a da big fuss, but 'e no
hu't-a you lak dis. Da Buckra Man, 'e no mek no fuss 'cep' 'e p'int 'e
gun at you--_bang!_'"

"And what then?" the little boy asked, as Daddy Jack collapsed in his
seat, seemingly forgetful of all his surroundings.
