withdrew. But not before the delicate poison sac at its base inside the
wasp-body had contracted and squirted down the slender hollow of the
sting a drop of liquid fire. And so it was not well with Eurypelma in
his insides. Victor he seemed to be, but if he could think, he must have
had grave doubts about the joys of victory.

For a curious drowsiness was coming over him. Perhaps, disquieting
thought, it was the approaching stupor of the poison's working. His
strong long legs became limp, they would not work regularly, they could
not hold his heavy hairy body up from the ground. He would get into his
hole and rest. But it was too late. And after a few uneven steps, victor
Eurypelma settled heavily down beside his amazon victim, inert and
forevermore beyond fighting. He was paralyzed.

And so Mary and I brought him home in our collecting box, together with
the torn body of Pepsis with her wings of slow fire dulled by the dust
of her last struggles. And though it is a whole month now since
Eurypelma received his stab from the poisoned javelin of Pepsis, he has
not recovered; nor will he ever. When you touch him, he draws up slowly
one leg after another, or moves a palpus feebly. But it is living death;
a hopeless paralytic is the king.

Dear reader, you are of course as bright as Mary, and so you have
noticed, as she did right away, the close parallel between what happened
to Eurypelma and what happened to the measuring-worms brought by
Ammophila to her nest burrow as described in the first story in this
book. And so, like Mary, you realize that the vendetta or life feud
between the tarantula family and the family of Pepsis, the tarantula
hawk, is based on reasons of domestic economy rather than on those of
sentiment, which determine vendettas in Corsica and feuds in Kentucky.

To be quite plain, Pepsis fights Eurypelma to get his huge, juicy body
for food for her young; and Eurypelma fights Pepsis to keep from
becoming paralyzed provender. If Pepsis had escaped unhurt in the combat
at which Mary and I "assisted," as the French say, as enthralled
spectators, we should have seen her drag by mighty effort the limp,
paralyzed, spider giant to her nest hole not far distant--a great hole
twelve inches deep and with a side chamber at the bottom. There she
would have thrust him down the throat of the burrow, and then crawled in
and laid an egg on the helpless beast, from which in time would have
hatched the carnivorous wasp grub. Pepsis has many close allies among
the wasps, all black or steely blue with smoky or dull-bronze wings, and
they all use spiders, stung and paralyzed, to store their nest holes
with.

"Do the little black and blue wasps hunt the little spiders and the
larger ones the big spiders?" asked Mary.

"Exactly," I respond, "and the giant wasp of them all, Pepsis, the queen
of the wasp amazons, hunts only the biggest spider of them all,
Eurypelma, the tarantula king, and we have seen her do it."

"Well," says Mary, "even if she wants him for her children to eat, it's
a real vendetta, isn't it?"

"Indeed it is," I answer, "it's more real, and fiercer, and more
relentless, and more persistent than any human vendetta that ever was.
For every Pepsis mother in the world is always hunting for Eurypelmas to
fight. And not _all_ Corsicans have a vendetta on hand, nor all
Kentuckians a feud."



391

        Sewell Ford (1868-) is noted for his fine
        stories about horses, especially those in
        _Horses Nine_, from which the following story
        of "Pasha" is taken. (By permission of the
        publishers, Charles Scribner's Sons, New York.)
        Pasha plays a most important part in a human
        romance with war as a background, and the
        combination is very effective. Mr. Ford's
        _Torchy_ stories are also very popular with
        young people.


PASHA, THE SON OF SELIM

SEWELL FORD

Long, far too long, has the story of Pasha, son of Selim, remained
untold.

The great Selim, you know, was brought from far across the seas, where
he had been sold for a heavy purse by a venerable sheik, who tore his
beard during the bargain and swore by Allah that without Selim there
would be for him no joy in life. Also he had wept quite convincingly on
Selim's neck--but he finished by taking the heavy purse. That was how
Selim, the great Selim, came to end his days in Fayette County,
Kentucky. Of his many sons, Pasha was one.

In almost idyllic manner were spent the years of Pasha's coltdom. They
were years of pasture roaming and blue grass cropping. When the time was
ripe, began the hunting lessons. Pasha came to know the feel of the
saddle and the voice of the hounds. He was taught the long, easy lope.
He learned how to gather himself for a sail through the air over a
hurdle or a water-jump. Then when he could take five bars clean, when he
could clear an eight-foot ditch, when his wind was so sound that he
could lead the chase from dawn until high noon, he was sent to the
stables of a Virginia tobacco-planter who had need of a new hunter and
who could afford Arab blood.

In the stalls at Gray Oaks stables were many good hunters, but none
better than Pasha. Cream-white he was, from the tip of his splendid,
yard-long tail to his pink-lipped muzzle. His coat was as silk plush,
his neck as supple as a swan's, and out of his big, bright eyes there
looked such intelligence that one half expected him to speak. His lines
were all long, graceful curves, and when he danced daintily on his
slender legs one could see the muscles flex under the delicate skin.

Miss Lou claimed Pasha for her very own at first sight. As no one at
Gray Oaks denied Miss Lou anything at all, to her he belonged from that
instant. Of Miss Lou, Pasha approved thoroughly. She knew that
bridle-reins were for gentle guidance, not for sawing or jerking, and
that a riding-crop was of no use whatever save to unlatch a gate or to
cut at an unruly hound. She knew how to rise on the stirrup when Pasha
lifted himself in his stride, and how to settle close to the pig-skin
when his hoofs hit the ground. In other words, she had a good seat,
which means as much to the horse as it does to the rider.

Besides all this, it was Miss Lou who insisted that Pasha should have
the best of grooming, and she never forgot to bring the dainties which
Pasha loved, an apple or a carrot or a sugarplum. It is something, too,
to have your nose patted by a soft gloved hand and to have such a person
as Miss Lou put her arm around your neck and whisper in your ear. From
no other than Miss Lou would Pasha permit such intimacy.

No paragon, however, was Pasha. He had a temper, and his whims were as
many as those of a school-girl. He was particular as to who put on his
bridle. He had notions concerning the manner in which a currycomb should
be used. A red ribbon or a bandanna handkerchief put him in a rage,
while green, the holy color of the Mohammedan, soothed his nerves. A
lively pair of heels he had, and he knew how to use his teeth. The black
stable-boys found that out, and so did the stern-faced man who was known
as "Mars" Clayton. This "Mars" Clayton had ridden Pasha once, had ridden
him as he rode his big, ugly, hard-bitted roan hunter, and Pasha had not
enjoyed the ride. Still, Miss Lou and Pasha often rode out with "Mars"
Clayton and the parrot-nosed roan. That is, they did until the coming of
Mr. Dave.

In Mr. Dave, Pasha found a new friend. From a far Northern State was Mr.
Dave. He had come in a ship to buy tobacco, but after he had bought his
cargo he still stayed at Gray Oaks, "to complete Pasha's education," so
he said.

Many ways had Mr. Dave which Pasha liked. He had a gentle manner of
talking to you, of smoothing your flanks and rubbing your ears, which
gained your confidence and made you sure that he understood. He was firm
and sure in giving command, yet so patient in teaching one tricks, that
it was a pleasure to learn.

So, almost before Pasha knew it, he could stand on his hind legs, could
step around in a circle in time to a tune which Mr. Dave whistled, and
could do other things which few horses ever learn to do. His chief
accomplishment, however, was to kneel on his forelegs in the attitude of
prayer. A long time it took Pasha to learn this, but Mr. Dave told him
over and over again, by word and sign, until at last the son of the
great Selim could strike a pose such as would have done credit to a
Mecca pilgrim.

"It's simply wonderful!" declared Miss Lou.

But it was nothing of the sort. Mr. Dave had been teaching tricks to
horses ever since he was a small boy, and never had he found such an apt
pupil as Pasha.

Many a glorious gallop did Pasha and Miss Lou have while Mr. Dave stayed
at Gray Oaks, Dave riding the big bay gelding that Miss Lou, with all
her daring, had never ventured to mount. It was not all galloping
though, for Pasha and the big bay often walked for miles through the
wood lanes, side by side and very close together, while Miss Lou and Mr.
Dave talked, talked, talked. How they could ever find so much to say to
each other Pasha wondered.

But at last Mr. Dave went away, and with his going ended good times for
Pasha, at least for many months. There followed strange doings. There
was much excitement among the stable-boys, much riding about, day and
night, by the men of Gray Oaks, and no hunting at all. One day the
stables were cleared of all horses save Pasha.

"Some time, if he is needed badly, you may have Pasha, but not now."
Miss Lou had said. And then she had hidden her face in his cream-white
mane and sobbed. Just what the trouble was Pasha did not understand, but
he was certain "Mars" Clayton was at the bottom of it.

No longer did Miss Lou ride about the country. Occasionally she galloped
up and down the highway, to the Pointdexters and back, just to let Pasha
stretch his legs. Queer sights Pasha saw on these trips. Sometimes he
would pass many men on horses riding close together in a pack, as the
hounds run when they have the scent. They wore strange clothing, did
these men, and they carried, instead of riding-crops, big shiny knives
that swung at their sides. The sight of them set Pasha's nerves
tingling. He would sniff curiously after them and then prick forward his
ears and dance nervously.

Of course Pasha knew that something unusual was going on, but what it
was he could not guess. There came a time, however, when he found out
all about it. Months had passed when, late one night, a hard-breathing,
foam-splotched, mud-covered horse was ridden into the yard and taken
into the almost deserted stable. Pasha heard the harsh voice of "Mars"
Clayton swearing at the stable-boy. Pasha heard his own name spoken, and
guessed that it was he who was wanted. Next came Miss Lou to the
stable.

"I'm very sorry," he heard "Mars" Clayton say, "but I've got to get out
of this. The Yanks are not more than five miles behind."

"But you'll take good care of him, won't you?" he heard Miss Lou ask
eagerly.

"Oh, yes; of course," replied "Mars" Clayton, carelessly.

A heavy saddle was thrown on Pasha's back, the girths pulled cruelly
tight, and in a moment "Mars" Clayton was on his back. They were barely
clear of Gray Oaks driveway before Pasha felt something he had never
known before. It was as if someone had jabbed a lot of little knives
into his ribs. Roused by pain and fright, Pasha reared in a wild attempt
to unseat this hateful rider. But "Mars" Clayton's knees seemed glued to
Pasha's shoulders. Next Pasha tried to shake him off by sudden leaps,
sidebolts, and stiff-legged jumps. These man[oe]uvres brought vicious
jerks on the wicked chain-bit that was cutting Pasha's tender mouth
sorrily and more jabs from the little knives. In this way did Pasha
fight until his sides ran with blood and his breast was plastered thick
with reddened foam.

In the meantime he had covered miles of road, and at last, along in the
cold gray of the morning, he was ridden into a field where were many
tents and horses. Pasha was unsaddled and picketed to a stake. This
latter indignity he was too much exhausted to resent. All he could do
was to stand, shivering with cold, trembling from nervous excitement,
and wait for what was to happen next.

It seemed ages before anything did happen. The beginning was a tripping
bugle-blast. This was answered by the voice of other bugles blown here
and there about the field. In a moment men began to tumble out of the
white tents. They came by twos and threes and dozens, until the field
was full of them. Fires were built on the ground, and soon Pasha could
scent coffee boiling and bacon frying. Black boys began moving about
among the horses with hay and oats and water. One of them rubbed Pasha
hurriedly with a wisp of straw. It was little like the currying and
rubbing with brush and comb and flannel to which he was accustomed and
which he needed just then, oh, how sadly. His strained muscles had
stiffened so much that every movement gave him pain. So matted was his
coat with sweat and foam and mud that it seemed as if half the pores of
his skin were choked.

He had cooled his parched throat with a long draught of somewhat muddy
water, but he had eaten only half of the armful of hay when again the
bugles sounded and "Mars" Clayton appeared. Tightening the girths, until
they almost cut into Pasha's tender skin, he jumped into the saddle and
rode off to where a lot of big black horses were being reined into line.
In front of this line Pasha was wheeled. He heard the bugles sound once
more, heard his rider shout something to the men behind, felt the wicked
little knives in his sides, and then, in spite of aching legs, was
forced into a sharp gallop. Although he knew it not, Pasha had joined
the Black Horse Cavalry.

The months that followed were to Pasha one long, ugly dream. Not that he
minded the hard riding by day and night. In time he became used to all
that. He could even endure the irregular feeding, the sleeping in the
open during all kinds of weather, and the lack of proper grooming. But
the vicious jerks on the torture-provoking cavalry bit, the flat sabre
blows on the flank which he not infrequently got from his ill-tempered
master, and, above all, the cruel digs of the spur-wheels--these things
he could not understand. Such treatment he was sure he did not merit.
"Mars" Clayton he came to hate more and more. Some day, Pasha told
himself, he would take vengeance with teeth and heels, even if he died
for it.

In the meantime he had learned the cavalry drill. He came to know the
meaning of each varying bugle-call, from reveille, when one began to paw
and stamp for breakfast, to mournful taps, when lights went out, and the
tents became dark and silent. Also, one learned to slow from a gallop
into a walk; when to wheel to the right or to the left, and when to
start on the jump as the first notes of a charge were sounded. It was
better to learn the bugle-calls, he found, than to wait for a jerk on
the bits or a prod from the spurs.

No more was he terror-stricken, as he had been on his first day in the
cavalry, at hearing behind him the thunder of many hoofs. Having once
become used to the noise, he was even thrilled by the swinging metre of
it. A kind of wild harmony was in it, something which made one forget
everything else. At such times Pasha longed to break into his long,
wind-splitting lope, but he learned that he must leave the others no
more than a pace or two behind, although he could have easily
outdistanced them all.

Also, Pasha learned to stand under fire. No more did he dance at the
crack of carbines or the zipp-zipp of bullets. He could even hold his
ground when shells went screaming over him, although this was hardest of
all to bear. One could not see them, but their sound, like that of great
birds in flight, was something to try one's nerves. Pasha strained his
ears to catch the note of each shell that came whizzing overhead, and,
as it passed, looked inquiringly over his shoulder as if to ask, "Now
what on earth was that?"

But all this experience could not prepare him for the happenings of that
never-to-be-forgotten day in June. There had been a period full of hard
riding and ending with a long halt. For several days hay and oats were
brought with some regularity. Pasha was even provided with an apology
for a stall. It was made by leaning two rails against a fence. Some hay
was thrown between the rails. This was a sorry substitute for the roomy
box-stall, filled with clean straw, which Pasha always had at Gray Oaks,
but it was as good as any provided for the Black Horse Cavalry.

And how many, many horses there were! As far as Pasha could see in
either direction the line extended. Never before had he seen so many
horses at one time. And men! The fields and woods were full of them;
some in brown butternut, some in homespun gray, and many in clothes
having no uniformity of color at all. "Mars" Clayton was dressed better
than most, for on his butternut coat were shiny shoulder-straps, and it
was closed with shiny buttons. Pasha took little pride in this. He knew
his master for a cruel and heartless rider, and for nothing more.

One day there was a great parade, when Pasha was carefully groomed for
the first time in months. There were bands playing and flags flying.
Pasha, forgetful of his ill-treatment and prancing proudly at the head
of a squadron of coal-black horses, passed in review before a big,
bearded man wearing a slouch hat fantastically decorated with long
plumes and sitting a great black horse in the midst of a little knot of
officers.

Early the next morning Pasha was awakened by the distant growl of heavy
guns. By daylight he was on the move, thousands of other horses with
him. Nearer and nearer they rode to the place where the guns were
growling. Sometimes they were on roads, sometimes they crossed fields,
and again they plunged into the woods where the low branches struck
one's eyes and scratched one's flanks. At last they broke clear of the
trees to come suddenly upon such a scene as Pasha had never before
witnessed.

Far across the open field he could see troop on troop of horses coming
toward him. They seemed to be pouring over the crest of a low hill, as
if driven onward by some unseen force behind. Instantly Pasha heard,
rising from the throats of thousands of riders, on either side and
behind him, that fierce, wild yell which he had come to know meant the
approach of trouble. High and shrill and menacing it rang as it was
taken up and repeated by those in the rear. Next the bugles began to
sound, and in quick obedience the horses formed in line just on the edge
of the woods, a line which stretched on either flank until one could
hardly see where it ended.

From the distant line came no answering cry, but Pasha could hear the
bugles blowing and he could see the fronts massing. Then came the order
to charge at a gallop. This set Pasha to tugging eagerly at the bit, but
for what reason he did not know. He knew only that he was part of a
great and solid line of men and horses sweeping furiously across a field
toward that other line which he had seen pouring over the hill crest.

He could scarcely see at all now. The thousands of hoofs had raised a
cloud of dust that not only enveloped the onrushing line, but rolled
before it. Nor could Pasha hear anything save the thunderous thud of
many feet. Even the shrieking of the shells was drowned. But for the
restraining bit Pasha would have leaped forward and cleared the line.
Never had he been so stirred. The inherited memory of countless desert
raids, made by his Arab ancestors, was doing its work. For what seemed a
long time this continued, and then, in the midst of the blind and
frenzied race, there loomed out of the thick air, as if it had appeared
by magic, the opposing line.

Pasha caught a glimpse of something which seemed like a heaving wall of
tossing heads and of foam-whitened necks and shoulders. Here and there
gleamed red, distended nostrils and straining eyes. Bending above was
another wall, a wall of dusty blue coats, of grim faces, and of
dust-powdered hats. Bristling above all was a threatening crest of
waving blades.

What would happen when the lines met? Almost before the query was
thought there came the answer. With an earth-jarring crash they came
together. The lines wavered back from the shock of impact and then the
whole struggle appeared to Pasha to centre about him. Of course this was
not so. But it was a fact that the most conspicuous figure in either
line had been that of the cream-white charger in the very centre of the
Black Horse regiment.

For one confused moment Pasha heard about his ears the whistle and clash
of sabres, the spiteful crackle of small arms, the snorting of horses,
and the cries of men. For an instant he was wedged tightly in the
frenzied mass, and then, by one desperate leap, such as he had learned
on the hunting field, he shook himself clear.

Not until some minutes later did Pasha notice that the stirrups were
dangling empty and that the bridle-rein hung loose on his neck. Then he
knew that at last he was free from "Mars" Clayton. At the same time he
felt himself seized by an overpowering dread. While conscious of a
guiding hand on the reins Pasha had abandoned himself to the fierce joy
of the charge. But now, finding himself riderless in the midst of a
horrid din, he knew not what to do, nor which way to turn. His only
impulse was to escape. But where? Lifting high his fine head and
snorting with terror he rushed about, first this way and then that,
frantically seeking a way out of this fog-filled field of dreadful
pandemonium. Now he swerved in his course to avoid a charging squad, now
he was turned aside by prone objects at sight of which he snorted
fearfully. Although the blades still rang and the carbines still spoke,
there were no more to be seen either lines or order. Here and there in
the dust-clouds scurried horses, some with riders and some without, by
twos, by fours, or in squads of twenty or more. The sound of shooting
and slashing and shouting filled the air.

To Pasha it seemed an eternity that he had been tearing about the field
when he shied at the figure of a man sitting on the ground. Pasha was
about to wheel and dash away when the man called to him. Surely the
tones were familiar. With wide-open, sniffing nostrils and trembling
knees, Pasha, stopped and looked hard at the man on the ground.

"Pasha! Pasha!" the man called weakly. The voice sounded like that of
Mr. Dave.

"Come, boy! Come, boy!" said the man in a coaxing tone, which recalled
to Pasha the lessons he had learned at Gray Oaks years before. Still
Pasha sniffed and hesitated.

"Come here, Pasha, old fellow. For God's sake, come here!"

There was no resisting this appeal. Step by step Pasha went nearer. He
continued to tremble, for this man on the ground, although his voice was
that of Mr. Dave, looked much different from the one who had taught him
tricks. Besides, there was about him the scent of fresh blood. Pasha
could see the stain of it on his blue trousers.

"Come, boy. Come, Pasha," insisted the man on the ground, holding out an
encouraging hand. Slowly Pasha obeyed until he could sniff the man's
fingers. Another step and the man was smoothing his nose, still speaking
gently and coaxingly in a faint voice. In the end Pasha was assured that
the man was really the Mr. Dave of old, and glad enough Pasha was to
know it.

"Now, Pasha," said Mr. Dave, "we'll see if you've forgotten your tricks,
and may the good Lord grant you haven't. Down, sir! Kneel, Pasha,
kneel!"

It had been a long time since Pasha had been asked to do this, a very
long time; but here was Mr. Dave asking him, in just the same tone as
of old, and in just the same way. So Pasha, forgetting his terror under
the soothing spell of Mr. Dave's voice, forgetting the fearful sights
and sounds about him, remembering only that here was the Mr. Dave whom
he loved, asking him to do his old trick--well, Pasha knelt.

"Easy now, boy; steady!" Pasha heard him say. Mr. Dave was dragging
himself along the ground to Pasha's side. "Steady now, Pasha; steady,
boy!" He felt Mr. Dave's hand on the pommel. "So-o-o, boy; so-o-o-o!"
Slowly, oh, so slowly, he felt Mr. Dave crawling into the saddle, and
although Pasha's knees ached from the unfamiliar strain, he stirred not
a muscle until he got the command, "Up, Pasha, up!"

Then, with a trusted hand on the bridle-rein, Pasha joyfully bounded
away through the fog, until the battle-field was left behind. Of the
long ride that ensued only Pasha knows, for Mr. Dave kept his seat in
the saddle more by force of muscular habit than anything else. A man who
has learned to sleep on horseback does not easily fall off, even though
he has not the full command of his senses. Only for the first hour or so
did Pasha's rider do much toward guiding their course. In
hunting-horses, however, the sense of direction is strong. Pasha had
it--especially for one point of the compass. This point was south. So,
unknowing of the possible peril into which he might be taking his rider,
south he went. How Pasha ever did it, as I have said, only Pasha knows;
but in the end he struck the Richmond Pike.

It was a pleading whinny which aroused Miss Lou at early daybreak. Under
her window she saw Pasha, and on his back a limp figure in a blue,
dust-covered, dark-stained uniform. And that was how Pasha's cavalry
career came to an end. That one fierce charge was his last.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Washington home of a certain Maine Congressman you may see, hung
in a place of honor and lavishly framed, the picture of a horse. It is
very creditably done in oils, is this picture. It is of a cream-white
horse, with an arched neck, clean, slim legs, and a splendid flowing
tail.

Should you have any favors of state to ask of this Maine Congressman it
would be the wise thing, before stating your request, to say something
nice about the horse in the picture. Then the Congressman will probably
say, looking fondly at the picture: "I must tell Lou--er--my wife, you
know, what you have said. Yes, that was Pasha. He saved my neck at
Brandy Station. He was one-half Arab, Pasha was, and the other half,
sir, was human."



392

        Louisa de la Ramee (1839-1908), an English
        novelist, is generally known by her pseudonym
        "Ouida," which was the result of a child's
        attempt to pronounce her first name. Her novels
        had strong popular qualities: intensely
        dramatic, with sentiment rather high-pitched
        and always verging on the sensational. The
        intense human interest is constantly present in
        her work and accounts for her great vogue. Two
        of her stories, "The Dog of Flanders" and
        "Moufflou," have gained a permanent place in
        juvenile literature. They are popular among
        sixth, seventh, and eighth grade pupils.


MOUFFLOU

"OUIDA"

Moufflou's masters were some boys and girls. They were very poor, but
they were very merry. They lived in an old, dark, tumble-down place, and
their father had been dead five years; their mother's care was all they
knew; and Tasso was the eldest of them all, a lad of nearly twenty, and
he was so kind, so good, so laborious, so cheerful, so gentle, that the
children all younger than he adored him. Tasso was a gardener. Tasso,
however, though the eldest and mainly the bread-winner, was not so much
Moufflou's master as was little Romolo, who was only ten, and a cripple.
Romolo, called generally Lolo, had taught Moufflou all he knew; and that
all was a very great deal, for nothing cleverer than was Moufflou had
ever walked upon four legs.

Why Moufflou?

Well, when the poodle had been given to them by a soldier who was going
back to his home in Piedmont, he had been a white woolly creature a year
old, and the children's mother, who was a Corsican by birth, had said
that he was just like a _moufflon_, as they call sheep in Corsica. White
and woolly this dog remained, and he became the handsomest and biggest
poodle in all the city, and the corruption of Moufflou from Moufflon
remained the name by which he was known; it was silly, perhaps, but it
suited him and the children, and Moufflou he was.

They lived in an old quarter of Florence, in that picturesque zigzag
which goes round the grand church of Or San Michele, and which is almost
more Venetian than Tuscan in its mingling of color, charm, stateliness,
popular confusion, and architectural majesty. The tall old houses are
weather-beaten into the most delicious hues; the pavement is
enchantingly encumbered with peddlers and stalls and all kinds of trades
going on in the open air, in that bright, merry, beautiful Italian
custom which, alas, alas! is being driven away by new-fangled laws which
deem it better for the people to be stuffed up in close, stewing rooms
without air, and would fain do away with all the good-tempered politics
and the sensible philosophies and the wholesome chatter which the
open-street trades and street gossipry encourage, for it is good for the
populace to _sfogare_ and in no other way can it do so one-half so
innocently. Drive it back into musty shops, and it is driven at once to
mutter sedition. . . . But you want to hear about Moufflou.

Well, Moufflou lived here in that high house with the sign of the lamb
in wrought iron, which shows it was once a warehouse of the old guild of
the Arte della Lana. They are all old houses here, drawn round about
that grand church which I called once, and will call again, like a
mighty casket of oxidized silver. A mighty casket indeed, holding the
Holy Spirit within it; and with the vermilion and the blue and the
orange glowing in its niches and its lunettes like enamels, and its
statues of the apostles strong and noble, like the times in which they
were created,--St. Peter with his keys, and St. Mark with his open book,
and St. George leaning on his sword, and others also, solemn and austere
as they, austere though benign, for do they not guard the White
Tabernacle of Oreagna within?

The church stands firm as a rock, square as a fortress of stone, and the
winds and the waters of the skies may beat about it as they will, they
have no power to disturb its sublime repose. Sometimes I think of all
the noble things in all our Italy Or San Michele is the noblest,
standing there in its stern magnificence, amidst people's hurrying feet
and noisy laughter, a memory of God.

The little masters of Moufflou lived right in its shadow, where the
bridge of stone spans the space between the houses and the church high
in mid-air; and little Lolo loved the church with a great love. He loved
it in the morning-time, when the sunbeams turned it into dusky gold and
jasper; he loved it in the evening-time, when the lights of its altars
glimmered in the dark, and the scent of its incense came out into the
street; he loved it in the great feasts, when the huge clusters of
lilies were borne inside it; he loved it in the solemn nights of winter;
the flickering gleam of the dull lamps shone on the robes of an apostle,
or the sculpture of a shield, or the glow of a casement-moulding in
majolica. He loved it always, and, without knowing why, he called it _la
mia chiesa_.

Lolo, being lame and of delicate health, was not enabled to go to school
or to work, though he wove the straw covering of wine-flasks and plaited
the cane matting with busy fingers. But for the most part he did as he
liked, and spent most of his time sitting on the parapet of Or San
Michele, watching the venders of earthenware at their trucks, or
trotting with his crutch (and he could trot a good many miles when he
chose) out with Moufflou down a bit of the Stocking-makers' Street,
along under the arcades of the Uffizi, and so over the Jewellers'
Bridge, and out of byways that he knew into the fields on the hill-side
upon the other bank of Arno. Moufflou and he would spend half the
day--all the day--out there in daffodil-time; and Lolo would come home
with great bundles and sheaves of golden flowers, and he and Moufflou
were happy.

His mother never liked to say a harsh word to Lolo, for he was lame
through her fault; she had let him fall in his babyhood, and the
mischief had been done to his hip never again to be undone. So she never
raised her voice to him, though she did often to the others,--to
curly-pated Cecco, and pretty black-eyed Dina, and saucy Bice, and
sturdy Beppo, and even to the good, manly, hard-working Tasso. Tasso was
the mainstay of the whole, though he was but a gardener's lad, working
in the green Cascine at small wages. But all he earned he brought home
to his mother; and he alone kept in order the lazy, high-tempered
Sandro, and he alone kept in check Bice's love of finery, and he alone
could with shrewdness and care make both ends meet and put _minestra_
always in the pot and bread always in the cupboard.

When his mother thought, as she thought indeed almost ceaselessly, that
with a few months he would be of the age to draw his number, and might
draw a high one and be taken from her for three years, the poor soul
believed her very heart would burst and break; and many a day at
twilight she would start out unperceived and creep into the great church
and pour her soul forth in supplication before the White Tabernacle.

Yet, pray as she would, no miracle could happen to make Tasso free of
military service: if he drew a fatal number, go he must, even though he
take all the lives of them to their ruin with him.

One morning Lolo sat as usual on the parapet of the church, Moufflou
beside him. It was a brilliant morning in September. The men at the
hand-barrows and at the stall were selling the crockery, the silk
handkerchiefs, and the straw hats which form the staple of the commerce
that goes on round about Or San Michele,--very blithe, good-natured, gay
commerce, for the most part, not got through, however, of course,
without bawling and screaming, and shouting and gesticulating, as if the
sale of a penny pipkin or a twopenny pie-pan were the occasion for the
exchange of many thousands of pounds sterling and cause for the whole
world's commotion. It was about eleven o'clock; the poor petitioners
were going in for alms to the house of the fraternity of San Giovanni
Battista; the barber at the corner was shaving a big man with a cloth
tucked about his chin, and his chair set well out on the pavement; the
sellers of the pipkins and pie-pans were screaming till they were
hoarse, "_Un soldo l'uno, due soldi tre!_" big bronze bells were booming
till they seemed to clang right up to the deep-blue sky; some brethren
of the Misericordia went by bearing a black bier; a large sheaf of
glowing flowers--dahlias, zinnias, asters, and daturas--was borne
through the huge arched door of the church near St. Mark and his open
book. Lolo looked on at it all, and so did Moufflou, and a stranger
looked at them as he left the church.

"You have a handsome poodle there, my little man," he said to Lolo, in a
foreigner's too distinct and careful Italian.

"Moufflou is beautiful," said Lolo, with pride. "You should see him when
he is just washed; but we can only wash him on Sundays, because then
Tasso is at home."

"How old is your dog?"

"Three years old."

"Does he do any tricks?"

"Does he!" said Lolo, with a very derisive laugh: "why, Moufflou can do
anything! He can walk on two legs ever so long; make ready, present, and
fire; die; waltz; beg, of course; shut a door; make a wheelbarrow of
himself; there is nothing he will not do. Would you like to see him do
something?"

"Very much," said the foreigner.

To Moufflou and to Lolo the street was the same thing as home; this
cheery _piazzetta_ by the church, so utterly empty sometimes, and
sometimes so noisy and crowded, was but the wider threshold of their
home to both the poodle and the child.

So there, under the lofty and stately walls of the old church, Lolo put
Moufflou through his exercises. They were second nature to Moufflou, as
to most poodles. He had inherited his address at them from clever
parents, and, as he had never been frightened or coerced, all his
lessons and acquirements were but play to him. He acquitted himself
admirably, and the crockery-venders came and looked on, and a sacristan
came out of the church and smiled, and the barber left his customer's
chin all in a lather while he laughed, for the good folk of the quarter
were all proud of Moufflou and never tired of him, and the pleasant,
easy-going, good-humored disposition of the Tuscan populace is so far
removed from the stupid buckram and whale-bone in which the new-fangled
democracy wants to imprison it.

The stranger also was much diverted by Moufflou's talents, and said,
half aloud, "How this clever dog would amuse poor Victor! Would you
bring your poodle to please a sick child I have at home!" he said, quite
aloud, to Lolo, who smiled and answered that he would. Where was the
sick child?

"At the Gran Bretagna; not far off," said the gentleman. "Come this
afternoon, and ask for me by this name."

He dropped his card and a couple of francs into Lolo's hand, and went
his way. Lolo, with Moufflou scampering after him, dashed into his own
house, and stumped up the stairs, his crutch making a terrible noise on
the stone.

"Mother, mother! see what I have got because Moufflou did his tricks,"
he shouted. "And now you can buy those shoes you want so much, and the
coffee that you miss so of a morning, and the new linen for Tasso, and
the shirts for Sandro."

For to the mind of Lolo two francs was as two millions,--source
unfathomable of riches inexhaustible!

With the afternoon he and Moufflou trotted down the arcades of the
Uffizi and down the Lung' Arno to the hotel of the stranger, and,
showing the stranger's card, which Lolo could not read, they were shown
at once into a great chamber, all gilding and fresco and velvet
furniture.

But Lolo, being a little Florentine, was never troubled by externals, or
daunted by mere sofas and chairs: he stood and looked around him with
perfect composure; and Moufflou, whose attitude, when he was not
romping, was always one of magisterial gravity, sat on his haunches and
did the same.

Soon the foreigner he had seen in the forenoon entered and spoke to him,
and led him into another chamber, where stretched on a couch was a
little wan-faced boy about seven years old; a pretty boy, but so pallid,
so wasted, so helpless. This poor little boy was heir to a great name
and a great fortune, but all the science in the world could not make him
strong enough to run about among the daisies, or able to draw a single
breath without pain. A feeble smile lit up his face as he saw Moufflou
and Lolo; then a shadow chased it away.

"Little boy is lame like me," he said, in a tongue Lolo did not
understand.

"Yes, but he is a strong little boy, and can move about, as perhaps the
suns of his country will make you do," said the gentleman, who was the
poor little boy's father. "He has brought you his poodle to amuse you.
What a handsome dog! is it not?"

"Oh, _buffins_!" said the poor little fellow, stretching out his wasted
hands to Moufflou, who submitted his leonine crest to the caress.

Then Lolo went through the performance, and Moufflou acquitted himself
ably as ever; and the little invalid laughed and shouted with his tiny
thin voice, and enjoyed it all immensely, and rained cakes and biscuits
on both the poodle and its master. Lolo crumped the pastries with
willing white teeth, and Moufflou did no less. Then they got up to go,
and the sick child on the couch burst into fretful lamentations and
outcries.

"I want the dog! I will have the dog!" was all he kept repeating.

But Lolo did not know what he said, and was only sorry to see him so
unhappy.

"You shall have the dog to-morrow," said the gentleman, to pacify his
little son; and he hurried Lolo and Moufflou out of the room, and
consigned them to a servant, having given Lolo five francs this time.

"Why, Moufflou," said Lolo, with a chuckle of delight, "if we could find
a foreigner every day, we could eat meat at supper, Moufflou, and go to
the theatre every evening?"

And he and his crutch clattered home with great eagerness and
excitement, and Moufflou trotted on his four frilled feet, the blue bow
with which Bice had tied up his curls on the top of his head, fluttering
in the wind. But, alas! even his five francs could bring no comfort at
home. He found his whole family wailing and mourning in utterly
inconsolable distress.

Tasso had drawn his number that morning, and the number was seven, and
he must go and be a conscript for three years.

The poor young man stood in the midst of his weeping brothers and
sisters, with his mother leaning against his shoulder, and down his own
brown cheeks the tears were falling. He must go, and lose his place in
the public gardens, and leave his people to starve as they might, and be
put in a tomfool's jacket, and drafted off among cursing and swearing
and strange faces, friendless, homeless, miserable! And the
mother,--what would become of the mother?

Tasso was the best of lads and the mildest. He was quite happy sweeping
up the leaves in the long alleys of the Cascine, or mowing the green
lawns under the ilex avenues, and coming home at supper-time, among the
merry little people and the good woman that he loved. He was quite
contented; he wanted nothing, only to be let alone; and they would not
let him alone. They would haul him away to put a heavy musket in his
hand and a heavy knapsack on his back, and drill him, and curse him, and
make him into a human target, a live popinjay.

No one had any heed for Lolo and his five francs, and Moufflou,
understanding that some great sorrow had fallen on his friends, sat down
and lifted up his voice and howled.

Tasso must go away!--that was all they understood. For three long years
they must go without the sight of his face, the aid of his strength, the
pleasure of his smile: Tasso must go! When Lolo understood the calamity
that had befallen them, he gathered Moufflou up against his breast, and
sat down too on the floor beside him and cried as if he would never stop
crying.

There was no help for it; it was one of those misfortunes which are, as
we say in Italian, like a tile tumbled on the head. The tile drops from
a height, and the poor head bows under the unseen blow. That is all.

"What is the use of that?" said the mother, passionately, when Lolo
showed her his five francs. "It will not buy Tasso's discharge."

Lolo felt that his mother was cruel and unjust, and crept to bed with
Moufflou. Moufflou always slept on Lolo's feet.

The next morning Lolo got up before sunrise, and he and Moufflou
accompanied Tasso to his work in the Cascine.

Lolo loved his brother, and clung to every moment whilst they could
still be together.

"Can nothing keep you, Tasso?" he said, despairingly, as they went down
the leafy aisles, whilst the Arno water was growing golden as the sun
rose.

Tasso sighed.

"Nothing, dear. Unless Gesu would send me a thousand francs to buy a
substitute."

And he knew he might as well have said, "If one could coin gold ducats
out of the sunbeams on Arno water."

Lolo was very sorrowful as he lay on the grass in the meadow where Tasso
was at work, and the poodle lay stretched beside him.

When Lolo went home to dinner (Tasso took his wrapped in a handkerchief)
he found his mother very agitated and excited. She was laughing one
moment, crying the next. She was passionate and peevish, tender and
jocose by turns; there was something forced and feverish about her which
the children felt but did not comprehend. She was a woman of not very
much intelligence, and she had a secret, and she carried it ill, and
knew not what to do with it; but they could not tell that. They only
felt a vague sense of disturbance and timidity at her unwonted manner.

The meal over (it was only bean-soup, and that is soon eaten), the
mother said sharply to Lolo, "Your aunt Anita wants you this afternoon.
She has to go out, and you are needed to stay with the children: be off
with you."

Lolo was an obedient child; he took his hat and jumped up as quickly as
his halting hip would let him. He called Moufflou, who was asleep.

"Leave the dog," said his mother, sharply. "'Nita will not have him
messing and carrying mud about her nice clean rooms. She told me so.
Leave him. I say."

"Leave Moufflou!" echoed Lolo, for never in all Moufflou's life had Lolo
parted from him. Leave Moufflou! He stared open-eyed and open-mouthed at
his mother. What could have come to her?

"Leave him, I say," she repeated, more sharply than ever. "Must I speak
twice to my own children? Be off with you, and leave the dog, I say."

And she clutched Moufflou by his long silky mane and dragged him
backwards, whilst with the other hand she thrust out of the door Lolo
and Bice.

Lolo began to hammer with his crutch at the door thus closed on him; but
Bice coaxed and entreated him.

"Poor mother has been so worried about Tasso," she pleaded. "And what
harm can come to Moufflou? And I do think he was tired, Lolo; the
Cascine is a long way; and it is quite true that Aunt 'Nita never liked
him."

So by one means and another she coaxed her brother away; and they went
almost in silence to where their Aunt Anita dwelt, which was across the
river, near the dark-red bell-shaped dome of Santa Spirito.

It was true that her aunt had wanted them to mind her room and her
babies whilst she was away carrying home some lace to a villa outside
the Roman gate, for she was a lace-washer and clear-starcher by trade.
There they had to stay in the little dark room with the two babies, with
nothing to amuse the time except the clang of the bells of the church of
the Holy Spirit, and the voices of the lemonade-sellers shouting in the
street below. Aunt Anita did not get back till it was more than dusk,
and the two children trotted homeward hand in hand, Lolo's leg dragging
itself painfully along, for without Moufflou's white figure dancing on
before him he felt very tired indeed. It was pitch dark when they got to
Or San Michele, and the lamps burned dully.

Lolo stumped up the stairs wearily, with a vague, dull fear at his small
heart.

"Moufflou, Moufflou!" he called. Where was Moufflou? Always at the first
sound of his crutch the poodle came flying towards him. "Moufflou,
Moufflou!" he called all the way up the long, dark twisting stone stair.
He pushed open the door, and he called again, "Moufflou, Moufflou!"

But no dog answered to his call.

"Mother, where is Moufflou?" he asked, staring with blinking, dazzled
eyes into the oil-lit room where his mother sat knitting. Tasso was not
then home from work. His mother went on with her knitting; there was an
uneasy look on her face.

"Mother, what have you done with Moufflou, _my_ Moufflou?" said Lolo,
with a look that was almost stern on his ten-year-old face.

Then his mother, without looking up and moving her knitting-needles very
rapidly, said,--

"Moufflou is sold!"

And little Dina, who was a quick, pert child, cried, with a shrill
voice,--

"Mother has sold him for a thousand francs to the foreign gentleman."

"Sold him!"

Lolo grew white and grew cold as ice; he stammered, threw up his hands
over his head, gasped a little for breath, then fell down in a dead
swoon, his poor useless limb doubled under him.

When Tasso came home that sad night and found his little brother
shivering, moaning, and half delirious, and when he heard what had been
done, he was sorely grieved.

"Oh, mother, how could you do it?" he cried. "Poor, poor Moufflou! and
Lolo loves him so!"

"I have got the money," said his mother, feverishly, "and you will not
need to go for a soldier: we can buy your substitute. What is a poodle,
that you mourn about it? We can get another poodle for Lolo."

"Another will not be Moufflou," said Tasso, and yet was seized with such
a frantic happiness himself at the knowledge that he would not need go
to the army, that he too felt as if he were drunk on new wine, and had
not the heart to rebuke his mother.

"A thousand francs!" he muttered; "a thousand francs! _Dio mio!_ Who
could ever have fancied anybody would have given such a price for a
common white poodle? One would think the gentleman had bought the church
and the tabernacle!"

"Fools and their money are soon parted," said his mother, with cross
contempt.

It was true: she had sold Moufflou.

The English gentleman had called on her while Lolo and the dog had been
in the Cascine, and had said that he was desirous of buying the poodle,
which had so diverted his sick child that the little invalid would not
be comforted unless he possessed it. Now, at any other time the good
woman would have sturdily refused any idea of selling Moufflou; but that
morning the thousand francs which would buy Tasso's substitute were
forever in her mind and before her eyes. When she heard the foreigner
her heart gave a great leap, and her head swam giddily, and she thought,
in a spasm of longing--if she could get those thousand francs! But
though she was so dizzy and so upset she retained her grip on her native
Florentine shrewdness. She said nothing of her need of the money; not a
syllable of her sore distress. On the contrary, she was coy and wary,
affected great reluctance to part with her pet, invented a great offer
made for him by a director of a circus, and finally let fall a hint that
less than a thousand francs she could never take for poor Moufflou.

The gentleman assented with so much willingness to the price that she
instantly regretted not having asked double. He told her that if she
would take the poodle that afternoon to his hotel the money should be
paid to her; so she despatched her children after their noonday meal in
various directions, and herself took Moufflou to his doom. She could not
believe her senses when ten hundred-franc notes were put into her hand.
She scrawled her signature, Rosina Calabucci, to a formal receipt, and
went away, leaving Moufflou in his new owner's rooms, and hearing his
howls and moans pursue her all the way down the staircase and out into
the air.

She was not easy at what she had done.

"It seemed," she said to herself, "like selling a Christian."

But then to keep her eldest son at home,--what a joy that was! On the
whole, she cried so and laughed so as she went down the Lung' Arno that
once or twice people looked at her, thinking her out of her senses, and
a guard spoke to her angrily.

Meanwhile, Lolo was sick and delirious with grief. Twenty times he got
out of his bed and screamed to be allowed to go with Moufflou, and
twenty times his mother and his brothers put him back again and held him
down and tried in vain to quiet him.

The child was beside himself with misery. "Moufflou! Moufflou!" he
sobbed at every moment; and by night he was in a raging fever, and when
his mother, frightened, ran in and called in the doctor of the quarter,
that worthy shook his head and said something as to a shock of the
nervous system, and muttered a long word,--"meningitis."

Lolo took a hatred to the sight of Tasso, and thrust him away, and his
mother too.

"It is for you Moufflou is sold," he said, with his little teeth and
hands tight clinched.

After a day or two Tasso felt as if he could not bear his life, and went
down to the hotel to see if the foreign gentleman would allow him to
have Moufflou back for half an hour to quiet his little brother by a
sight of him. But at the hotel he was told that the _Milord Inglese_ who
had bought the dog of Rosina Calabucci had gone that same night of the
purchase to Rome, to Naples, to Palermo, _chi sa_?

"And Moufflou with him?" asked Tasso.

"The _barbone_ he had bought went with him," said the porter of the
hotel. "Such a beast! Howling, shrieking, raging all the day, and all
the paint scratched off the _salon_ door."

Poor Moufflou! Tasso's heart was heavy as he heard of that sad helpless
misery of their bartered favorite and friend.

"What matter?" said his mother, fiercely, when he told her. "A dog is a
dog. They will feed him better than we could. In a week he will have
forgotten--_che!_"

But Tasso feared that Moufflou would not forget. Lolo certainly would
not. The doctor came to the bedside twice a day, and ice and water were
kept on the aching hot little head that had got the malady with the long
name, and for the chief part of the time Lolo lay quiet, dull, and
stupid, breathing heavily, and then at intervals cried and sobbed and
shrieked hysterically for Moufflou.

"Can you not get what he calls for to quiet him with a sight of it?"
said the doctor. But that was not possible, and poor Rosina covered her
head with her apron and felt a guilty creature.

"Still, you will not go to the army," she said to Tasso. Clinging to
that immense joy for her consolation. "Only think! we can pay Guido
Squarcione to go for you. He always said he would go if anybody would
pay him. Oh, my Tasso, surely to keep you is worth a dog's life!"

"And Lolo's?" said Tasso, gloomily. "Nay, mother, it works ill to meddle
too much with fate. I drew my number; I was bound to go. Heaven would
have made it up to you somehow."

"Heaven sent me the foreigner; the Madonna's own self sent him to ease a
mother's pain," said Rosina, rapidly and angrily. "There are the
thousand francs safe to hand in the _cassone_, and what, pray, is it we
miss? Only a dog like a sheep, that brought gallons of mud in with him
every time it rained, and ate as much as any one of you."

"But Lolo?" said Tasso, under his breath.

His mother was so irritated and so tormented by her own conscience that
she upset all the cabbage broth into the burning charcoal.

"Lolo was always a little fool, thinking of nothing but the church and
the dog and nasty field-flowers," she said, angrily. "I humored him ever
too much because of the hurt to his hip, and so--and so--"

Then the poor soul made matters worse by dropping her tears into the
saucepan, and fanning the charcoal so furiously that the flame caught
her fan of cane-leaves, and would have burned her arm had not Tasso been
there.

"You are my prop and safety always. Who would not have done what I did?
Not Santa Felicita herself," she said, with a great sob.

But all this did not cure poor Lolo.

The days and the weeks of the golden autumn weather passed away, and he
was always in danger, and the small close room where he slept with
Sandro and Beppo and Tasso was not one to cure such an illness as had
now beset him. Tasso went to his work with a sick heart in the Cascine,
where the colchicum was all lilac among the meadow grass, and the ashes
and elms were taking their first flush of the coming autumnal change. He
did not think Lolo would ever get well, and the good lad felt as if he
had been the murderer of his little brother.

True, he had had no hand or voice in the sale of Moufflou, but Moufflou
had been sold for his sake. It made him feel half guilty, very unhappy,
quite unworthy of all the sacrifice that had been made for him. "Nobody
should meddle with fate," thought Tasso, who knew his grandfather had
died in San Bonifazio because he had driven himself mad over the
dream-book trying to get lucky numbers for the lottery and become a rich
man at a stroke.

It was rapture, indeed, to know that he was free of the army for a time
at least, that he might go on undisturbed at his healthful labor, and
get a rise in wages as time went on, and dwell in peace with his family,
and perhaps--perhaps in time earn enough to marry pretty flaxen-haired
Biondina, the daughter of the barber in the piazzetta. It was rapture
indeed; but then poor Moufflou!--and poor, poor Lolo! Tasso felt as if
he had bought his own exemption by seeing his little brother and the
good dog torn in pieces and buried alive for his service.

And where was poor Moufflou?

Gone far away somewhere south in the hurrying, screeching, vomiting,
braying train it made Tasso giddy only to look at as it rushed by the
green meadows beyond the Cascine on its way to the sea.

"If he could see the dog he cries so for, it might save him," said the
doctor, who stood with grave face watching Lolo.

But that was beyond any one's power. No one could tell where Moufflou
was. He might be carried away to England, to France, to Russia, to
America,--who could say? They did not know where his purchaser had gone.
Moufflou even might be dead.

The poor mother, when the doctor said that, went and looked at the ten
hundred-franc notes that were once like angels' faces to her, and said
to them,--

"Oh, you children of Satan, why did you tempt me? I sold the poor,
innocent, trustful beast to get you, and now my child is dying!"

Her eldest son would stay at home, indeed; but if this little lame one
died! Rosina Calabucci would have given up the notes and consented never
to own five francs in her life if only she could have gone back over the
time and kept Moufflou, and seen his little master running out with him
into the sunshine.

More than a month went by, and Lolo lay in the same state, his yellow
hair shorn, his eyes dilated and yet stupid, life kept in him by a
spoonful of milk, a lump of ice, a drink of lemon-water; always
muttering, when he spoke at all, "Moufflou, Moufflou, _dov' e_
Moufflou?" and lying for days together in somnolence and
unconsciousness, with the fire eating at his brain and the weight lying
on it like a stone.

The neighbors were kind, and brought fruit and the like, and sat up with
him, and chattered so all at once in one continuous brawl that they were
enough in themselves to kill him, for such is ever the Italian fashion
of sympathy in all illness.

But Lolo did not get well, did not even seem to see the light at all, or
to distinguish any sounds around him; and the doctor in plain words told
Rosina Calabucci that her little boy must die. Die, and the church so
near! She could not believe it. Could St. Mark, and St. George, and the
rest that he had loved so do nothing for him? No, said the doctor, they
could do nothing; the dog might do something, since the brain had so
fastened on that one idea; but then they had sold the dog.

"Yes; I sold him!" said the poor mother, breaking into floods of
remorseful tears.

So at last the end drew so nigh that one twilight time the priest came
out of the great arched door that is next it. Mark, with the Host
uplifted, and a little acolyte ringing the bell before it, and passed
across the piazzetta, and went up the dark staircase of Rosina's
dwelling, and passed through the weeping, terrified children, and went
to the bedside of Lolo.

Lolo was unconscious, but the holy man touched his little body and limbs
with the sacred oil, and prayed over him, and then stood sorrowful with
bowed head.

Lolo had had his first communion in the summer, and in his preparation
for it had shown an intelligence and devoutness that had won the
priest's gentle heart.

Standing there, the holy man commended the innocent soul to God. It was
the last service to be rendered to him save that very last of all when
the funeral office should be read above his little grave among the
millions of nameless dead at the sepulchres of the poor at Trebbiano.

All was still as the priest's voice ceased; only the sobs of the mother
and of the children broke the stillness as they kneeled; the hand of
Biondina had stolen into Tasso's.

Suddenly, there was a loud scuffling noise; hurrying feet came patter,
patter, patter up the stairs, a ball of mud and dust flew over the heads
of the kneeling figures, fleet as the wind Moufflou dashed through the
room and leaped upon the bed.

Lolo opened his heavy eyes, and a sudden light of consciousness gleamed
in them like a sunbeam. "Moufflou!" he murmured, in his little thin
faint voice. The dog pressed close to his breast and kissed his wasted
face.

Moufflou was come home!

And Lolo came home too, for death let go its hold upon him. Little by
little, very faintly and flickeringly and very uncertainly at the first,
life returned to the poor little body, and reason to the tormented,
heated little brain. Moufflou was his physician; Moufflou, who, himself
a skeleton under his matted curls, would not stir from his side and
looked at him all day long with two beaming brown eyes full of
unutterable love.

Lolo was happy; he asked no questions,--was too weak, indeed, even to
wonder. He had Moufflou; that was enough.

Alas! though they dared not say so in his hearing, it was not enough for
his elders. His mother and Tasso knew that the poodle had been sold and
paid for; that they could lay no claim to keep him; and that almost
certainly his purchaser would seek him out and assert his indisputable
right to him. And then how would Lolo ever bear that second
parting?--Lolo, so weak that he weighed no more than if he had been a
little bird.

Moufflou had, no doubt, traveled a long distance and suffered much. He
was but skin and bone; he bore the marks of blows and kicks; his once
silken hair was all discolored and matted; he had, no doubt, traveled
far. But then his purchaser would be sure to ask for him, soon or late,
at his old home; and then? Well, then if they did not give him up
themselves, the law would make them.

Rosina Calabucci and Tasso, though they dared say nothing before any of
the children, felt their hearts in their mouths at every step on the
stair, and the first interrogation of Tasso every evening when he came
from his work was, "Has any one come for Moufflou?" For ten days no one
came, and their first terrors lulled a little.

On the eleventh morning, a feast-day, on which Tasso was not going to
his labors in the Cascine, there came a person, with a foreign look, who
said the words they so much dreaded to hear: "Has the poodle that you
sold to an English gentleman come back to you?"

Yes: his English master claimed him!

The servant said that they had missed the dog in Rome a few days after
buying him and taking him there; that he had been searched for in vain,
and that his master had thought it possible the animal might have found
his way back to his old home: there had been stories of such wonderful
sagacity in dogs: anyhow, he had sent for him on the chance; he was
himself back on the Lung' Arno. The servant pulled from his pocket a
chain, and said his orders were to take the poodle away at once: the
little sick gentleman had fretted very much about his loss.

Tasso heard in a very agony of despair. To take Moufflou away now would
be to kill Lolo,--Lolo so feeble still, so unable to understand, so
passionately alive to every sight and sound of Moufflou, lying for hours
together motionless with his hand buried in the poodle's curls, saying
nothing, only smiling now and then, and murmuring a word or two in
Moufflou's ear.

"The dog did come home," said Tasso, at length, in a low voice; "angels
must have shown him the road, poor beast! From Rome! Only to think of
it, from Rome! And he a dumb thing! I tell you he is here, honestly: so
will you not trust me just so far as this? Will you let me go with you
and speak to the English lord before you take the dog away? I have a
little brother sorely ill--"

He could not speak more, for tears that choked his voice.

At last the messenger agreed so far as this: Tasso might go first and
see the master, but he would stay here and have a care they did not
spirit the dog away,--"for a thousand francs were paid for him," added
the man, "and a dog that can come all the way from Rome by itself must
be an uncanny creature."

Tasso thanked him, went up-stairs, was thankful that his mother was at
mass and could not dispute with him, took the ten hundred-franc notes
from the old oak _cassone_, and with them in his breast-pocket walked
out into the air. He was but a poor working lad, but he had made up his
mind to do an heroic act. He went straightway to the hotel where the
English _milord_ was, and when he had got there remembered that still he
did not know the name of Moufflou's owner; but the people of the hotel
knew him as Rosina Calabucci's son, and guessed what he wanted, and said
the gentleman who had lost the poodle was within, up-stairs, and they
would tell him.

Tasso waited some half-hour with his heart beating sorely against the
packet of hundred-franc notes. At last he was beckoned up-stairs, and
there he saw a foreigner with a mild fair face, and a very lovely lady,
and a delicate child who was lying on a couch. "Moufflou! Where is
Moufflou?" cried the little child, impatiently, as he saw the youth
enter.

Tasso took his hat off, and stood in the door-way an embrowned, healthy,
not ungraceful figure, in his working-clothes of rough blue stuff.

"If you please, most illustrious," he stammered, "poor Moufflou has come
home."

The child gave a cry of delight; the gentleman and lady one of wonder.
Come home! All the way from Rome!

"Yes, he has, most illustrious," said Tasso, gaining courage and
eloquence; "and now I want to beg something of you. We are poor, and I
drew a bad number, and it was for that my mother sold Moufflou. For
myself, I did not know anything of it; but she thought she would buy my
substitute, and of course she could; but Moufflou is come home, and my
little brother Lolo, the little boy your most illustrious first saw
playing with the poodle, fell ill of the grief of losing Moufflou, and
for a month has lain saying nothing sensible, but only calling for the
dog, and my old grandfather died of worrying himself mad over the
lottery numbers, and Lolo was so near dying that the Blessed Host had
been brought, and the holy oil had been put on him, when all at once
there rushes in Moufflou, skin and bone, and covered with mud, and at
the sight of him Lolo comes back to his senses, and that is now ten days
ago, and though Lolo is still as weak as a new-born thing, he is always
sensible, and takes what we give him to eat, and lies always looking at
Moufflou, and smiling, and saying, 'Moufflou! Moufflou!' and, most
illustrious, I know well you have bought the dog, and the law is with
you, and by the law you claim it, but I thought perhaps, as Lolo loves
him so, you would let us keep the dog, and would take back the thousand
francs, and myself I will go and be a soldier, and heaven will take care
of them all somehow."

Then Tasso, having said all this in one breathless, monotonous
recitative, took the thousand francs out of his breast-pocket and held
them out timidly towards the foreign gentleman, who motioned them aside
and stood silent.

"Did you understand, Victor?" he said, at last, to his little son.

The child hid his face in his cushions.

"Yes, I did understand something: let Lolo keep him; Moufflou was not
happy with me."

But he burst out crying as he said it.

Moufflou had run away from him.

Moufflou had never loved him, for all his sweet cakes and fond caresses
and platefuls of delicate savory meats. Moufflou had run away and found
his own road over two hundred miles and more to go back to some little
hungry children, who never had enough to eat themselves and so,
certainly, could never give enough to eat to the dog. Poor little boy!
He was so rich and so pampered and so powerful, and yet he could never
make Moufflou love him!

Tasso, who understood nothing that was said, laid the ten hundred-franc
notes down on a table near him.

"If you would take them, most illustrious, and give me back what my
mother wrote when she sold Moufflou," he said, timidly, "I would pray
for you night and day, and Lolo would too; and as for the dog, we will
get a puppy and train him for your little _signorino_; they can all do
tricks, more or less, it comes by nature; and as for me, I will go to
the army willingly; it is not right to interfere with fate; my old
grandfather died mad because he would try to be a rich man, by dreaming
about it and pulling destiny by the ears, as if she were a kicking mule;
only, I do pray of you, do not take away Moufflou. And to think he
trotted all those miles and miles, and you carried him by train too, and
he never could have seen the road, and he had no power of speech to
ask--"

Tasso broke down again in his eloquence, and drew the back of his hand
across his wet eyelashes.

The English gentleman was not altogether unmoved.

"Poor faithful dog!" he said, with a sigh. "I am afraid we were very
cruel to him, meaning to be kind. No; we will not claim him, and I do
not think you should go for a soldier; you seem so good a lad, and your
mother must need you. Keep the money, my boy, and in payment you shall
train up the puppy you talk of, and bring him to my little boy. I will
come and see your mother and Lolo to-morrow. All the way from Rome! What
wonderful sagacity! what matchless fidelity!"

You can imagine, without any telling of mine, the joy that reigned in
Moufflou's home when Tasso returned thither with the money and the good
tidings both. His substitute was bought without a day's delay, and Lolo
rapidly recovered. As for Moufflou, he could never tell them his
troubles, his wanderings, his difficulties, his perils; he could never
tell them by what miraculous knowledge he had found his way across
Italy, from the gates of Rome to the gates of Florence. But he soon grew
plump again, and merry, and his love for Lolo was yet greater than
before.

By the winter all the family went to live on an estate near Spezia that
the English gentleman had purchased, and there Moufflou was happier than
ever. The little English boy is gaining strength in the soft air, and he
and Lolo are great friends, and play with Moufflou and the poodle puppy
half the day upon the sunny terraces and under the green orange boughs.
Tasso is one of the gardeners there; he will have to serve as a soldier
probably in some category or another, but he is safe for the time, and
is happy. Lolo, whose lameness will always exempt him from military
service, when he grows to be a man means to be a florist, and a great
one. He has learned to read, as the first step on the road of his
ambition.

"But oh, Moufflou, how _did_ you find your way home?" he asks the dog a
hundred times a week.

How indeed!

No one ever knew how Moufflou had made that long journey on foot, so
many weary miles; but beyond a doubt he had done it alone and unaided,
for if any one had helped him they would have come home with him to
claim the reward.



393

        Olive Thorne Miller (1831-1918) is remembered
        in the history of American juvenile literature
        as a writer on birds. Her purpose was to show
        truly the characteristics and habits of the
        "little brothers of the air." The following
        selection illustrates the style of much of her
        work. Some of her books that may appropriately
        be used as literature in the third, fourth, or
        fifth grade are _The Children's Book of Birds_,
        _Little Brothers of the Air_, _Little Folks in
        Feathers and Fur_, and _Four Handed Folk_. (The
        selection that follows is from the first-named
        book, and is used by permission of and by
        special arrangement with the publishers, The
        Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.)


BIRD HABITS

OLIVE THORNE MILLER


I. WHERE HE SLEEPS

Most birds sleep on their feet.

You know how a canary goes to sleep, all puffed out like a ball, with
his head buried in the feathers of his shoulder. He may stick his bill
over behind the top of the wing, but he never "puts his head under his
wing," as you have heard.

Sometimes he stands straight up on one leg, with the other drawn up out
of sight in his feathers, but more often he sits down on the perch,
still resting on his feet. Most wild birds of the perching kind sleep in
the same way.

It is only lately that we have begun to find out where birds sleep,
because it is dark when they go to bed, and they get up before it is
light enough for us to see them.

The only way to catch them in bed is to go out in the evening, and start
them up after they have gone to sleep. And this is not very kind to the
poor little birds. Some men who are trying to learn about the habits of
birds have tried this way, and so have found out some of their
sleeping-places.

One thing they have learned is that the nest is not often used for a
bed, except for the mother while she is sitting and keeping her little
ones warm.

Robins and orioles, and others, creep into the thick branches of an
evergreen tree, close up to the trunk. Some crawl under the edge of a
haystack, others into thick vines or thorny bushes. All these are meant
for hiding-places, so that beasts that prowl about at night, and like to
eat birds, will not find them.

Tree sparrows like to sleep in holes in the ground like little caves.
The men who found these cosy little bedrooms think they are places dug
out by field mice, and other small animals, for their own use. And when
they are left, the birds are glad to take them.

When the weather is cold, some birds sleep under the snow. You may think
that would not be very warm, and it is not so warm as a bed in the house
with plenty of blankets. But it is much warmer than a perch in a tree,
with nothing but leaves to keep off the wind.

While the snow is falling, some birds find it as good as blankets for
their use. Grouse, who live on the ground, dive into a snow-bank and
snuggle down quietly, while the snow falls and covers them all over and
keeps the cold wind off. Air comes through the snow, so they do not
smother.

Some birds creep into a pile of brush that is covered with snow, and
find under the twigs little places like tents, where the snow has been
kept out by the twigs, and they sleep there, away from the wind and
storm outside.

Water birds find the best sleeping-places on the water, where they float
all night like tiny boats. Some of them leave one foot hanging down and
paddling a little, while they sleep, to keep from being washed to the
shore.

Bob-white and his family sleep in a close circle on the ground, all with
their heads turned outward, so that they can see or hear an enemy,
whichever way he comes.

Hawks and eagles are said to sleep standing, never sitting on the feet
like a canary. Some ducks and geese do even more: they sleep standing on
one foot. Woodpeckers and chimney swifts hang themselves up by their
claws, using their stiff tail for a brace, as if it were a third leg.

Some birds, like the crows, sleep in great flocks. They agree upon a
piece of woods, and all the crows for miles around come there every
night. Sometimes thousands of them sleep in this one bedroom, called a
crow roost. Robins do the same, after the young are big enough to fly so
far.

Audubon, who has told us so much about birds, once found a hollow tree
which was the sleeping-room of chimney swifts. The noise they made going
out in the morning was like the roar of a great mill-wheel.

He wanted to see the birds asleep. So in the daytime, when they were
away, he had a piece cut out at the foot of the tree, big enough to let
him in, and then put back, so the birds would not notice anything
unusual.

At night, after the swifts were abed, he took a dark lantern and went
in. He turned the light upon them little by little, so as not to startle
them. Then he saw the whole inside of the tree full of birds. They were
hanging by their claws, side by side, as thick as they could hang. He
thought there were as many as twelve thousand in that one bedroom.


II. HIS TRAVELS

Most of our birds take two long journeys every year, one in the fall to
the south, and the other in the spring back to the north. These journeys
are called "migrations."

The birds do not go all at once, but in many cases those of a kind who
live near each other collect in a flock and travel together. Each
species or kind has its own time to go.

It might be thought that it is because of the cold that so many birds
move to a warmer climate. But it is not so; they are very well dressed
to endure cold. Their feather suits are so warm that some of our
smallest and weakest birds are able to stay with us, like the chickadee
and the golden-crowned kinglet. It is simply because they cannot get
food in winter, that they have to go.

The fall travel begins soon after the first of July. The bobolink is one
of the first to leave us, though he does not start at once on his long
journey. By that time his little folk are full grown, and can take care
of themselves, and he is getting on his winter suit, or moulting.

Then some morning all the bobolinks in the country are turned out of
their homes in the meadows, by men and horses and mowing machines, for
at that time the long grass is ready to cut.

Then he begins to think about the wild rice that is getting just right
to eat. Besides, he likes to take his long journey to South America in
an easy way, stopping here and there as he goes. So some morning we miss
his cheerful call, and if we go to the meadow we shall not be able to
see a single bobolink.

There, too, are the swallows, who eat only small flying insects. As the
weather grows cooler, these tiny flies are no longer to be found. So the
swallows begin to flock, as it is called. For a few days they will be
seen on fences and telegraph wires, chattering and making a great noise,
and then some morning they will all be gone.

They spend some time in marshes and lonely places before they at last
set out for the south.

As the days grow shorter and cooler, the warblers go. These are the
bright-colored little fellows, who live mostly in the tops of trees.
Then the orioles and the thrushes and the cuckoos leave us, and most
birds who live on insects.

By the time that November comes in, few of them will be left. Birds who
can live on seeds and winter berries, such as cedar-berries and
partridge-berries, and others, often stay with us,--bluebirds, finches,
and sometimes robins.

Many birds take their journey by night. Think of it! Tiny creatures,
that all summer go to bed at dark, start off some night, when it seems
as if they ought to be asleep, and fly all night in the dark.

When it grows light, they stop in some place where they can feed and
rest. And the next night, or two or three nights later, they go on
again. So they do until they reach their winter home, hundreds or
thousands of miles away.

These night flyers are the timid birds, and those who live in the woods
and do not like to be seen,--thrushes, wrens, vireos, and others. Birds
with strong wings, who are used to flying hours every day, and bolder
birds, who do not mind being seen, take their journey by daylight.

Most of them stop now and then, a day or two at a time, to feed and
rest. They fly very high, and faster than our railroad trains can go.

In the spring the birds take their second long journey, back to their
last year's home.

How they knew their way on these journeys, men have been for many years
trying to find out. They have found that birds travel on regular roads,
or routes, that follow the rivers and the shore of the ocean. They can
see much better than we can, and even in the night they can see water.

One such road, or highway, is over the harbor of New York. When the
statue of Liberty was set up on an island in the harbor a few years ago,
it was put in the birds' path.

Usually they fly too high to mind it; but when there is a rain or fog
they come much lower, and, sad to say, many of them fly against it and
are killed.

We often see strange birds in our city streets and parks, while they are
passing through on their migration, for they sometimes spend several
days with us.



394

        Ernest Thompson Seton (1860--) was born in
        England, but has lived most of his life in
        America. He began his career as an artist. He
        made more than 1,000 drawings of birds and
        animals for the _Century Dictionary_. Later he
        began to write about animals and has achieved
        unusual success in that field. His _Wild
        Animals at Home_, _Wild Animal Ways_, _The
        Biography of a Grizzly_, and _Wild Animals I
        Have Known_ are all greatly enjoyed by young
        people. ("The Poacher and the Silver Fox" is
        taken from the first-mentioned book, by
        permission of the publishers, Doubleday, Page &
        Co., Garden City, New York.)


THE POACHER AND THE SILVER FOX

ERNEST THOMPSON SETON

How is it that all mankind has a sneaking sympathy with a poacher? A
burglar or a pickpocket has our unmitigated contempt; he clearly is a
criminal; but you will notice that the poacher in the story is
generally a reckless daredevil with a large and compensatory amount of
good-fellow in his make-up--yes, I almost said, of good citizenship. I
suppose, because in addition to the breezy, romantic character of his
calling, seasoned with physical danger as well as moral risk, there is
away down in human nature a strong feeling that, in spite of man-made
laws, the ancient ruling holds that "wild game belongs to no man till
some one makes it his property by capture." It may be wrong, it may be
right, but I have heard this doctrine voiced by red men and white, as
primitive law, once or twice; and have seen it lived up to a thousand
times.

Well, Josh Cree was a poacher. This does not mean that every night in
every month he went forth with nefarious tricks and tools, to steal the
flesh and fur that legally were not his. Far from it. Josh never poached
but once. But that's enough; he had crossed the line, and this is how it
came about:

As you roll up the Yellowstone from Livingston to Gardiner you may note
a little ranch-house on the west of the track with its log stables, its
corral, its irrigation ditch, and its alfalfa patch of morbid green. It
is a small affair, for it was founded by the handiwork of one honest
man, who with his wife and small boy left Pennsylvania, braved every
danger of the plains, and secured this claim in the late '80's. Old man
Cree--he was only forty, but every married man is "Old Man" in the
West--was ready to work at any honest calling from logging or sluicing
to grading and muling. He was strong and steady, his wife was steady and
strong. They saved their money, and little by little they got the small
ranch-house built and equipped; little by little they added to their
stock on the range with the cattle of a neighbour, until there came the
happy day when they went to live on their own ranch--father, mother, and
fourteen-year-old Josh, with every prospect of making it pay. The
spreading of that white tablecloth for the first time was a real
religious ceremony, and the hard workers gave thanks to the All-father
for His blessing on their every effort.

One year afterward a new event brought joy: there entered happily into
their happy house a little girl, and all the prairie smiled about them.
Surely their boat was well beyond the breakers.

But right in the sunshine of their joy the trouble cloud arose to block
the sky. Old man Cree was missing one day. His son rode long and far on
the range for two hard days before he sighted a grazing pony, and down a
rocky hollow near, found his father, battered and weak, near death, with
a broken leg and a gash in his head.

He could only gasp "Water" as Josh hurried up, and the boy rushed off to
fill his hat at the nearest stream.

They had no talk, for the father swooned after drinking, and Josh had to
face the situation; but he was Western trained. He stripped himself of
all spare clothing, and his father's horse of its saddle blanket; then,
straightening out the sick man, he wrapped him in the clothes and
blanket, and rode like mad for the nearest ranch-house. The neighbour, a
young man, came at once, with a pot to make tea, an axe, and a rope.
They found the older Cree conscious but despairing. A fire was made, and
hot tea revived him. Then Josh cut two long poles from the nearest
timber and made a stretcher, or travois, Indian fashion, the upper ends
fast to the saddle of a horse, while the other ends trailed on the
ground. Thus by a long, slow journey the wounded man got back. All he
had prayed for was to get home. Every invalid is sure that if only he
can get home all will soon be well. Mother was not yet strong, the baby
needed much care, but Josh was a good boy, and the loving best of all
was done for the sick one. His leg, set by the army surgeon of Fort
Yellowstone, was knit again after a month, but had no power. He had no
force; the shock of those two dire days was on him. The second month
went by, and still he lay in bed. Poor Josh was the man of the place
now, and between duties, indoors and out, he was worn body and soul.

Then it was clear they must have help. So Jack S---- was engaged at the
regular wages of $40 a month for outside work, and a year of struggle
went by, only to see John Cree in his grave, his cattle nearly all gone,
his widow and boy living in a house on which was still $500 of the
original mortgage. Josh was a brave boy and growing strong, but
unboyishly grave with the weight of care. He sold off the few cattle
that were left, and set about keeping the roof over his mother and baby
sister by working a truck farm for the market supplied by the summer
hotels of the Park, and managed to come out even. He would in time have
done well, but he could not get far enough ahead to meet that 10 per
cent mortgage already overdue.

The banker was not a hard man, but he was in the business for the
business. He extended the time, and waited for interest again and again,
but it only made the principal larger, and it seemed that the last ditch
