gold cock and silver hen, which ran even closer to him than they had
done to his brothers.  Sorely tempted, he longed to give them chase;
but, remembering in time that he had been bidden to look neither to the
right nor to the left, with a mighty effort he turned his eyes away.
Then the gold and silver staffs seemed to spring from the earth before
him, but this time also he overcame; and though the fruit from the
magic tree almost touched his mouth, he brushed it aside and went
steadily on.

That day the cows wandered father than ever they had done before, and
never stopped till they had reached a moor where the heather was
burning.  The fire was fierce, but the cows took no heed, and walked
steadily through it, Covan the Brown-haired following them.  Next they
plunged into a foaming river, and Covan plunged in after them, though
the water came high above his waist.  On the other side of the river
lay a wide plain, and here the cows lay down, while Covan looked about
him.  Near him was a house built of yellow stone, and from it came
sweet songs, and Covan listened, and his heart grew light within him.

While he was thus waiting there ran up to him a youth, scarcely able to
speak so swiftly had he sped; and he cried aloud:

'Hasten, hasten, Covan the Brown-haired, for your cows are in the corn,
and you must drive them out!'

'Nay,' said Covan smiling, 'it had been easier for you to have driven
them out than to come here to tell me.'  And he went on listening to
the music.

Very soon the same youth returned and cried with panting breath:

'Out upon you, Covan son of Gorla, that you stand there agape.  For our
dogs are chasing your cows, and you must drive them off!'

'Nay, then,' answered Covan as before, 'it had been easier for you to
call off your dogs than to come here to tell me.'  And he stayed where
he was till the music ceased.

Then he turned to look for the cows, and found them all lying in the
place where he had left them; but when they saw Covan they rose up and
walked homewards, taking a different path to that they had trod in the
morning.  This time they passed over a plain so bare that a pin could
not have lain there unnoticed, yet Covan beheld with surprise a foal
and its mother feeding there, both as fat as if they had pastured on
the richest grass.  Further on they crossed another plain, where the
grass was thick and green, but on it were feeding a foal and its
mother, so lean that you could have counted their ribs.  And further
again the path led them by the shores of a lake whereon were floating
two boats; one full of gay and happy youths, journeying to the land of
the Sun, and another with grim shapes clothed in black, travelling to
the land of Night.

'What can these things mean?' said Covan to himself, as he followed his
cows.

Darkness now fell, the wind howled, and torrents of rain poured upon
them.  Covan knew not how far they might yet have to go, or indeed if
they were on the right road.  He could not even see his cows, and his
heart sank lest, after all, he should have failed to bring them safely
back.  What was he to do?

He waited thus, for he could go neither forwards nor backwards, till he
felt a great friendly paw laid on his shoulder.

'My cave is just here,' said the Dog of Maol- mor, of whom Covan son of
Gorla had heard much.  'Spend the night here, and you shall be fed on
the flesh of lamb, and shall lay aside three-thirds of thy weariness.'

And Covan entered, and supped, and slept, and in the morning rose up a
new man.

'Farewell, Covan,' said the Dog of Maol-mor.  'May success go with you,
for you took what I had to give and did not mock me.  So, when danger
is your companion, wish for me, and I will not fail you.'

At these words the Dog of Maol-mor disappeared into the forest, and
Covan went to seek his cows, which were standing in the hollow where
the darkness had come upon them.

At the sight of Covan the Brown-haired they walked onwards, Covan
following ever behind them, and looking neither to the right nor to the
left.  All that day they walked, and when night fell they were in a
barren plain, with only rocks for shelter.

'We must rest here as best we can,' spoke Covan to the cows.  And they
bowed their heads and lay down in the place where they stood.  Then
came the black raven of Corri- nan-creag, whose eyes never closed, and
whose wings never tired; and he fluttered before the face of Covan and
told him that he knew of a cranny in the rock where there was food in
plenty, and soft moss for a bed.

'Go with me thither,' he said to Covan, 'and you shall lay aside
three-thirds of your weariness, and depart in the morning refreshed,'
and Covan listened thankfully to his words, and at dawn he rose up to
seek his cows.

'Farewell!' cried the black raven.  'You trusted me, and took all I had
to offer in return for the food you once gave me.  So if in time to
come you need a friend, wish for me, and I will not fail you.'

As before, the cows were standing in the spot where he had left them,
ready to set out.  All that day they walked, on and on, and on, Covan
son of Gorla walking behind them, till night fell while they were on
the banks of a river.

'We can go no further,' spake Covan to the cows.  And they began to eat
the grass by the side of the stream, while Covan listened to them and
longed for some supper also, for they had travelled far, and his limbs
were weak under him.  Then there was a swish of water at his feet, and
out peeped the head of the famous otter Doran-donn of the stream.

'Trust to me and I will find you warmth and shelter,' said Doran-donn;
'and for food fish in plenty.'  And Covan went with him thankfully, and
ate and rested, and laid aside three-thirds of his weariness.  At
sunrise he left his bed of dried sea-weed, which had floated up with
the tide, and with a grateful heart bade farewell to Doran-donn.

'Because you trusted me and took what I had to offer, you have made me
your friend, Covan,' said Doran-donn.  'And if you should be in danger,
and need help from one who can swim a river or dive beneath a wave,
call to me and I will come to you.'  Then he plunged into the stream,
and was seen no more.

The cows were standing ready in the place where Covan had left them,
and they journeyed on all that day, till, when night fell, they reached
the cottage.  Joyful indeed was the old man as the cows went into their
stables, and he beheld the rich milk that flowed into the pail of the
golden-haired maiden with the silver comb.

'You have done well indeed,' he said to Covan son of Gorla.  'And now,
what would you have as a reward?'

'I want nothing for myself,' answered Covan the Brown-haired; 'but I
ask you to give me back my brothers and my sister who have been lost to
us for three years past.  You are wise and know the lore of fairies and
of witches; tell me where I can find them, and what I must do to bring
them to life again.'

The old man looked grave at the words of Covan.

'Yes, truly I know where they are,' answered he, 'and I say not that
they may not be brought to life again.  But the perils are great--too
great for you to overcome.'

'Tell me what they are,' said Covan again, 'and I shall know better if
I may overcome them.'

'Listen, then, and judge.  In the mountain yonder there dwells a roe,
white of foot, with horns that branch like the antlers of a deer.  On
the lake that leads to the land of the Sun floats a duck whose body is
green and whose neck is of gold.  In the pool of Corri- Bui swims a
salmon with a skin that shines like silver, and whose gills are
red--bring them all to me, and then you shall know where dwell your
brothers and your sister!'

'To-morrow at cock-crow I will begone!' answered Covan.

The way to the mountain lay straight before him, and when he had
climbed high he caught sight of the roe with the white feet and the
spotted sides, on the peak in front.

Full of hope he set out in pursuit of her, but by the time he had
reached that peak she had left it and was to be seen on another.  And
so it always happened, and Covan's courage had well-nigh failed him,
when the thought of the Dog of Maol-mor darted into his mind.

'Oh, that he was here!' he cried.  And looking up he saw him.

'Why did you summon me?' asked the Dog of Maol-mor.  And when Covan had
told him of his trouble, and how the roe always led him further and
further, the Dog only answered:

'Fear nothing; I will soon catch her for you.'  And in a short while he
laid the roe unhurt at Covan's feet.

'What will you wish me to do with her?' said the Dog.  And Covan
answered:

'The old man bade me bring her, and the duck with the golden neck, and
the salmon with the silver sides, to his cottage; if I shall catch
them, I know not.  But carry you the roe to the back of the cottage,
and tether her so that she cannot escape.'

'It shall be done,' said the Dog of Maol-mor.

Then Covan sped to the lake which led to the land of the Sun, where the
duck with the green body and the golden neck was swimming among the
water-lilies.

'Surely I can catch him, good swimmer as I am,' to himself.  But, if he
could swim well, the duck could swim better, and at length his strength
failed him, and he was forced to seek the land.

'Oh that the black raven were here to help me!' he thought to himself.
And in a moment the black raven was perched on his shoulder.

'How can I help you?' asked the raven.  And Covan answered:

'Catch me the green duck that floats on the water.'  And the raven flew
with his strong wings and picked him up in his strong beak, and in
another moment the bird was laid at the feet of Covan.

This time it was easy for the young man to carry his prize, and after
giving thanks to the raven for his aid, he went on to the river.

In the deep dark pool of which the old man had spoken the silver-sided
salmon was lying under a rock.

'Surely I, good fisher as I am, can catch him,' said Covan son of
Gorla.  And cutting a slender pole from a bush, he fastened a line to
the end of it.  But cast with what skill he might, it availed nothing,
for the salmon would not even look at the bait.

'I am beaten at last, unless the Doran-donn can deliver me,' he cried.
And as he spoke there was a swish of the water, and the face of the
Doran-donn looked up at him.

'O catch me, I pray you, that salmon under the rock!' said Covan son of
Gorla.  And the Doran-donn dived, and laying hold of the salmon by his
tail, bore it back to the place where Covan was standing.

'The roe, and the duck, and the salmon are here,' said Covan to the old
man, when he reached the cottage.  And the old man smiled on him and
bade him eat and drink, and after he hungered no more, he would speak
with him.

And this was what the old man said: 'You began well, my son, so things
have gone well with you.  You set store by your mother's blessing,
therefore you have been blest.  You gave food to the raven when it
hungered, you were true to the promise you had made to me, and did not
suffer yourself to be turned aside by vain shows.  You were skilled to
perceive that the boy who tempted you to leave the temple was a teller
of false tales, and took with a grateful heart what the poor had to
offer you.  Last of all, difficulties gave you courage, instead of
lending you despair.

And now, as to your reward, you shall in truth take your sister home
with you, and your brothers I will restore to life; but idle and
unfaithful as they are their lot is to wander for ever.  And so
farewell, and may wisdom be with you.'

'First tell me your name?' asked Covan softly.

'I am the Spirit of Age,' said the old man.

[Taken from a Celtic Story.  Translated by Doctor Macleod Clarke.]



           The Princess Bella-Flor



Once upon a time there lived a man who had two sons.  When they grew up
the elder went to seek his fortune in a far country, and for many years
no one heard anything about him.  Meanwhile the younger son stayed at
home with his father, who died at last in a good old age, leaving great
riches behind him.

For some time the son who stayed at home spent his father's wealth
freely, believing that he alone remained to enjoy it.  But, one day, as
he was coming down stairs, he was surprised to see a stranger enter the
hall, looking about as if the house belonged to him.

'Have you forgotten me?' asked the man.

'I can't forget a person I have never known,' was the rude answer.

'I am your brother,' replied the stranger, 'and I have returned home
without the money I hoped to have made.  And, what is worse, they tell
me in the village that my father is dead.  I would have counted my lost
gold as nothing if I could have seen him once more.'

'He died six months ago,' said the rich brother, 'and he left you, as
your portion, the old wooden chest that stands in the loft.  You had
better go there and look for it; I have no more time to waste.'  And he
went his way.

So the wanderer turned his steps to the loft, which was at the top of
the storehouse, and there he found the wooden chest, so old that it
looked as if it were dropping to pieces.

'What use is this old thing to me?' he said to himself.  'Oh, well, it
will serve to light a fire at which I can warm myself; so things might
be worse after all.'

Placing the chest on his back, the man, whose name was Jose, set out
for his inn, and, borrowing a hatchet, began to chop up the box.  In
doing so he discovered a secret drawer, and in it lay a paper.  He
opened the paper, not knowing what it might contain, and was astonished
to find that it was the acknowledgment of a large debt that was owing
to his father.  Putting the precious writing in his pocket, he hastily
inquired of the landlord where he could find the man whose name was
written inside, and he ran out at once in search of him.

The debtor proved to be an old miser, who lived at the other end of the
village.  He had hoped for many months that the paper he had written
had been lost or destroyed, and, indeed, when he saw it, was very
unwilling to pay what he owed.  However, the stranger threatened to
drag him before the king, and when the miser saw that there was no help
for it he counted out the coins one by one.  The stranger picked them
up and put them in his pocket, and went back to his inn feeling that he
was now a rich man.

A few weeks after this he was walking through the streets of the
nearest town, when he met a poor woman crying bitterly.  He stopped and
asked her what was the matter, and she answered between her sobs that
her husband was dying, and, to make matters worse, a creditor whom he
could not pay was anxious to have him taken to prison.

'Comfort yourself,' said the stranger kindly; 'they shall neither send
your husband to prison nor sell your goods.  I will not only pay his
debts but, if he dies, the cost of his burial also.  And now go home,
and nurse him as well as you can.'

And so she did; but, in spite of her care, the husband died, and was
buried by the stranger.  But everything cost more than he expected, and
when all was paid he found that only three gold pieces were left.

'What am I to do now?' said he to himself.  'I think I had better go to
court, and enter into the service of the king.'

At first he was only a servant, who carried the king the water for his
bath, and saw that his bed was made in a particular fashion.  But he
did his duties so well that his master soon took notice of him, and in
a short time he rose to be a gentleman of the bedchamber.

Now, when this happened the younger brother had spent all the money he
had inherited, and did not know how to make any for himself.  He then
bethought him of the king's favourite, and went whining to the palace
to beg that his brother, whom he had so ill-used, would give him his
protection, and find him a place.  The elder, who was always ready to
help everyone spoke to the king on his behalf, and the next day the
young man took up is work at court.

Unfortunately, the new-comer was by nature spiteful and envious, and
could not bear anyone to have better luck than himself.  By dint of
spying through keyholes and listening at doors, he learned that the
king, old and ugly though he was, had fallen in love with the Princess
Bella-Flor, who would have nothing to say to him, and had hidden
herself in some mountain castle, no one knew where.

'That will do nicely,' thought the scoundrel, rubbing his hands.  'It
will be quite easy to get the king to send my brother in search of her,
and if he returns without finding her, his head will be the forfeit.
Either way, he will be out of MY path.'

So he went at once to the Lord High Chamberlain and craved an audience
of the king, to whom he declared he wished to tell some news of the
highest importance.  The king admitted him into the presence chamber
without delay, and bade him state what he had to say, and to be quick
about it.

'Oh, sire! the Princess Bella-Flor--' answered the man, and then
stopped as if afraid.

'What of the Princess Bella-Flor?' asked the king impatiently.

'I have heard--it is whispered at court--that your majesty desires to
know where she lies in hiding.'

'I would give half my kingdom to the man who will bring her to me,'
cried the king, eagerly.  'Speak on, knave; has a bird of the air
revealed to you the secret?'

'It is not I, but my brother, who knows,' replied the traitor; 'if your
majesty would ask him--' But before the words were out of his mouth the
