dismal tolling is enough to unnerve the stoutest heart, and if we ring
for all who die its sounds will never cease while the plague is among
us; therefore, father, I implore you to discontinue it. Let there be
services held daily in the church, but I beseech you strive in your
discourses to cheer the people rather than to depress them, and to dwell
more upon the joys that await those who die as Christian men and women
than upon the sorrows of those who remain behind. My wife and mother
will anon be down in the village and will strive to cheer and comfort
the people, and I look to you for aid in this matter."

The priest, who was naturally a timid man, nevertheless nerved himself
to carry out Walter's suggestions, and soon the dismal tones of the bell
ceased to be heard in the village.

Walter despatched messengers to all the outlying farms desiring his
tenants to meet him that afternoon at the castle in order that measures
might be concerted for common aid and assistance. An hour later Dame
Vernon and Edith came down and visited all the houses where the plague
had made its appearance, distributing their soups, and by cheering and
comforting words raising the spirits of the relatives of the sufferers.

The names of all the women ready to aid in the general work of nursing
were taken down, and in the afternoon at the meeting at the castle the
full arrangements were completed. Work was to be carried on as usual
in order to occupy men's minds and prevent them from brooding over the
ravages of the plague. Information of any case that occurred was to
be sent to the castle, where soups and medicines were to be obtained.
Whenever more assistance was required than could be furnished by the
inmates of a house another woman was to be sent to aid. Boys were told
off as messengers to fetch food and other matters as required from the
castle.

So, bravely and firmly, they prepared to meet the pestilence; it spread
with terrible severity. Scarce a house which did not lose some of its
inmates, while in others whole families were swept away. All day Walter
and his wife and Dame Vernon went from house to house, and although they
could do nothing to stem the progress of the pestilence, their presence
and example supported the survivors and prevented the occurrence of any
of the panic and disorder which in most places accompanied it.

The castle was not exempt from the scourge. First some of the domestics
were seized, and three men and four women died. Walter himself was
attacked, but he took it lightly, and three days after the seizure
passed into a state of convalescence. Dame Vernon was next attacked, and
expired six hours after the commencement of the seizure. Scarcely was
Walter upon his feet than Ralph, who had not for a moment left his
bedside, was seized, but he too, after being at death's door for some
hours, turned the corner. Lastly Edith sickened.

By this time the scourge had done its worst in the village, and
three-fifths of the population had been swept away. All the male
retainers in the castle had died, and the one female who survived was
nursing her dying mother in the village.

Edith's attack was a very severe one. Walter, alone now, for Ralph,
although convalescent, had not yet left his bed, sat by his wife's
bedside a prey to anxiety and grief; for although she had resisted the
first attack she was now, thirty-six hours after it had seized her, fast
sinking. Gradually her sight and power of speech faded, and she sank
into the state of coma which was the prelude of death, and lay quiet and
motionless, seeming as if life had already departed. Suddenly Walter was
surprised by the sound of many heavy feet ascending the stairs. He went
out into the ante-room to learn the cause of this strange tumult, when
five armed men, one of whom was masked, rushed into the room. Walter
caught up his sword from the table.

"Ruffians," he exclaimed, "how dare you desecrate the abode of death?"

Without a word the men sprang upon him. For a minute he defended himself
against their attacks, but he was still weak, his guard was beaten down,
and a blow felled him to the ground.

"Now settle her," the masked man exclaimed, and the band rushed into the
adjoining room. They paused, however, at the door at the sight of the
lifeless figure on the couch.

"We are saved that trouble," one said, "we have come too late."

The masked figure approached the couch and bent over the figure.

"Yes," he said, "she is dead, and so much the better."

Then he returned with the others to Walter.

"He breathes yet," he said. "He needs a harder blow than that you gave
him to finish him. Let him lie here for a while, while you gather your
booty together; then we will carry him off. There is scarcely a soul
alive in the country round, and none will note us as we pass. I would
not despatch him here, seeing that his body would be found with wounds
upon it, and even in these times some inquiry might be made; therefore
it were best to finish him elsewhere. When he is missed it will be
supposed that he went mad at the death of his wife, and has wandered
out and died, may be in the woods, or has drowned himself in a pond or
stream. Besides, I would that before he dies he should know what hand
has struck the blow, and that my vengeance, which he slighted and has
twice escaped, has overtaken him at last."

After ransacking the principal rooms and taking all that was valuable,
the band of marauders lifted the still insensible body of Walter, and
carrying it down-stairs flung it across a horse. One of the ruffians
mounted behind it, and the others also getting into their saddles the
party rode away.

They were mistaken, however, in supposing that the Lady Edith was dead.
She was indeed very nigh the gates of death, and had it not been for the
disturbance would assuredly have speedily entered them. The voice of her
husband raised in anger, the clash of steel, followed by the heavy fall,
had awakened her deadened brain. Consciousness had at once returned to
her, but as yet no power of movement. As at a great distance she had
heard the words of those who entered her chamber, and had understood
their import. More and more distinctly she heard their movements about
the room as they burst open her caskets and appropriated her jewels, but
it was not until silence was restored that the gathering powers of life
asserted themselves; then with a sudden rush the blood seemed to course
through her veins, her eyes opened, and her tongue was loosed, and with
a scream she sprang up and stood by the side of her bed.

Sustained as by a supernatural power she hurried into the next room. A
pool of blood on the floor showed her that what she had heard had not
been a dream or the fiction of a disordered brain. Snatching up a cloak
of her husband's which lay on a couch, she wrapped it round her, and
with hurried steps made her way along the passages until she reached the
apartment occupied by Ralph. The latter sprang up in bed with a cry of
astonishment. He had heard but an hour before from Walter that all
hope was gone, and thought for an instant that the appearance was an
apparition from the dead. The ghastly pallor of the face, the eyes
burning with a strange light, the flowing hair, and disordered
appearance of the girl might well have alarmed one living in even less
superstitious times, and Ralph began to cross himself hastily and to
mutter a prayer when recalled to himself by the sound of Edith's voice.

"Quick, Ralph!" she said, "arise and clothe yourself. Hasten, for your
life. My lord's enemies have fallen upon him and wounded him grievously,
even if they have not slain him, and have carried him away. They would
have slain me also had they not thought I was already dead. Arise and
mount, summon everyone still alive in the village, and follow these
murderers. I will pull the alarm-bell of the castle."

Ralph sprang from his bed as Edith left. He had heard the sound of many
footsteps in the knight's apartments, but had deemed them those of the
priest and his acolytes come to administer the last rites of the church
to his dying mistress. Rage and anxiety for his master gave strength
to his limbs. He threw on a few clothes and rushed down to the stables,
where the horses stood with great piles of forage and pails of water
before them, placed there two days before, by Walter when their last
attendant died. Without waiting to saddle it, Ralph sprang upon the back
of one of the animals, and taking the halters of four others started at
a gallop down to the village.

His news spread like wild fire, for the ringing of the alarm-bell of
the castle had drawn all to their doors and prepared them for something
strange. Some of the men had already taken their arms and were making
their way up to the castle when they met Ralph. There were but five men
in the village who had altogether escaped the pestilence; others had
survived its attacks, but were still weak. Horses there were in plenty.
The five men mounted at once, with three others who, though still weak,
were able to ride.

So great was the excitement that seven women who had escaped the disease
armed themselves with their husbands' swords and leaped on horseback,
declaring that, women though they were, they would strike a blow for
their beloved lord, who had been as an angel in the village during the
plague. Thus it was scarcely more than ten minutes after the marauders
had left the castle before a motley band, fifteen strong, headed by
Ralph, rode off in pursuit, while some of the women of the village
hurried up to the castle to comfort Edith with the tidings that the
pursuit had already commenced. Fortunately a lad in the fields had
noticed the five men ride away from the castle, and was able to point
out the direction they had taken.

At a furious gallop Ralph and his companions tore across the country.
Mile after mile was passed. Once or twice they gained news from
labourers in the field of the passage of those before them, and knew
that they were on the right track. They had now entered a wild and
sparsely inhabited country. It was broken and much undulated, so that
although they knew that the band they were pursuing were but a short
distance ahead they had not yet caught sight of them, and they hoped
that, having no reason to dread any immediate pursuit, these would soon
slacken their pace. This expectation was realized, for on coming over a
brow they saw the party halted at a turf-burner's cottage in the hollow
below. Three of the men had dismounted; two of them were examining the
hoof of one of the horses, which had apparently cast a shoe or trodden
upon a stone. Ralph had warned his party to make no sound when they came
upon the fugitives. The sound of the horses' hoofs was deadened by the
turf, and they were within a hundred yards of the marauders before they
were perceived; then Ralph uttered a shout and brandishing their swords
the party rode down at a headlong gallop.

The dismounted men leaped to their saddles and galloped off at full
speed, but their pursuers were now close upon them. Ralph and two of his
companions, who were mounted upon Walter's best horses, gained upon them
at every stride. Two of them were overtaken and run through.

The man who bore Walter before him, finding himself being rapidly
overtaken, threw his burden on to the ground just as the leader of the
party had checked his horse and was about to deliver a sweeping blow at
the insensible body.

With a curse at his follower for ridding himself of it, he again
galloped on. The man's act was unavailing to save himself, for he was
overtaken and cut down before he had ridden many strides; then Ralph and
his party instantly reined up to examine the state of Walter, and
the two survivors of the band of murderers continued their flight
unmolested.



CHAPTER XIX: BY LAND AND SEA


Walter was raised from the ground, water was fetched from the cottage,
and the blood washed from his head by Ralph, aided by two of the
women. It had at once been seen that he was still living, and Ralph on
examining the wound joyfully declared that no great harm was done.

"Had Sir Walter been strong and well," he said, "such a clip as this
would not have knocked him from his feet, but he would have answered it
with a blow such as I have often seen him give in battle; but he was but
barely recovering and was as weak as a girl. He is unconscious from
loss of blood and weakness. I warrant me that when he opens his eyes and
hears that the lady Edith has risen from her bed and came to send me to
his rescue, joy will soon bring the blood into his cheeks again. Do one
of you run to the hut and see if they have any cordial waters; since the
plague has been raging there are few houses but have laid in a provision
in case the disease should seize them."

The man soon returned with a bottle of cordial water compounded of
rosemary, lavender, and other herbs. By this time Walter had opened his
eyes. The cordial was poured down his throat, and he was presently able
to speak.

"Be of good cheer, Sir Walter," Ralph said; "three of your rascally
assailants lie dead, and the other two have fled; but I have better news
still for you. Lady Edith, who you told me lay unconscious and dying,
has revived. The din of the conflict seems to have reached her ears and
recalled her to life, and the dear lady came to my room with the news
that you were carried off, and then, while I was throwing on my clothes,
roused the village to your assistance by ringing the alarm-bell. Rarely
frightened I was when she came in, for methought at first it was her
spirit."

The good news, as Ralph had predicted, effectually roused Walter, and
rising to his feet he declared himself able to mount and ride back at
once. Ralph tried to persuade him to wait until they had formed a litter
of boughs, but Walter would not allow it.

"I would not tarry an instant," he said, "for Edith will be full of
anxiety until I return. Why, Ralph, do you think that I am a baby? Why,
you yourself were but this morning unable to walk across the room, and
here you have been galloping and fighting on my behalf."

"In faith," Ralph said, smiling, "until now I had forgotten that I had
been ill."

"You have saved my life, Ralph, you and my friends here, whom I thank
with all my heart for what they have done. I will speak more to them
another time, now I must ride home with all speed."

Walter now mounted; Ralph took his place on one side of him, and one of
his tenants on the other, lest he should be seized with faintness; then
at a hand-gallop they started back for the castle. Several women of the
village had, when they left, hurried up to the castle. They found Edith
lying insensible by the rope of the alarm-bell, having fainted when she
had accomplished her object. They presently brought her round; as she
was now suffering only from extreme weakness, she was laid on a couch,
and cordials and some soup were given to her. One of the women took her
place at the highest window to watch for the return of any belonging to
the expedition.



Edith felt hopeful as to the result, for she thought that their
assailants would not have troubled to carry away the body of Walter had
not life remained in it, and she was sure that Ralph would press them so
hotly that sooner or later the abductors would be overtaken.

An hour and a half passed, and then the woman from above ran down with
the news that she could see three horsemen galloping together towards
the castle, with a number of others following in confused order behind.

"Then they have found my lord," Edith exclaimed joyfully, "for Ralph
would assuredly not return so quickly had they not done so. It's a good
sign that they are galloping, for had they been bearers of ill news
they would have returned more slowly; look out again and see if they are
bearing one among them."

The woman, with some of her companions, hastened away, and in two or
three minutes ran down with the news that Sir Walter himself was one of
the three leading horsemen. In a few minutes Edith was clasped in her
husband's arms, and their joy, restored as they were from the dead to
each other, was indeed almost beyond words.

The plague now abated fast in Westerham, only two or three more persons
being attacked by it. As soon as Edith was sufficiently recovered to
travel Walter proceeded with her to London and there laid before the
king and prince a complaint against Sir James Carnegie for his attempt
upon their lives. Even in the trance in which she lay, Edith had
recognized the voice which had once been so familiar to her. Walter,
too, was able to testify against him, for the rough jolting on horseback
had for a while restored his consciousness, and he had heard words
spoken, before relapsing into insensibility from the continued bleeding
of his wound, which enabled him to swear to Sir James Carnegie as one of
his abductors.

The king instantly ordered the arrest of the knight, but he could not
be found; unavailing search was made in every direction, and as nothing
could be heard of him it was concluded that he had left the kingdom. He
was proclaimed publicly a false and villainous knight, his estates were
confiscated to the crown, and he himself was outlawed. Then Walter and
his wife returned home and did their best to assist their tenants in
struggling through the difficulties entailed through the plague.

So terrible had been the mortality that throughout England there was a
lack of hands for field work, crops rotted in the ground because there
were none to harvest them, and men able to work demanded twenty times
the wages which had before been paid. So great was the trouble from this
source that an ordinance was passed by parliament enacting that severe
punishment should be dealt upon all who demanded wages above the
standard price, and even more severe penalties inflicted upon those who
should consent to pay higher wages. It was, however, many years before
England recovered from the terrible blow which had been dealt her from
the pestilence.

While Europe had been ravaged by pestilence the adherents of France and
England had continued their struggle in Brittany in spite of the terms
of the truce, and this time King Edward was the first open aggressor,
granting money and assistance to the free companies, who pillaged and
plundered in the name of England. The truce expired at the end of 1348,
but was continued for short periods. It was, however, evident that both
parties were determined ere long to recommence hostilities. The French
collected large forces in Artois and Picardy, and Edward himself
proceeded to Sandwich to organize there another army for the invasion of
France.
