
"The only son of Stefan Loristan.  Look at him."

The old man in the chair turned slowly and looked, steadily, and with
questioning curiosity touched with grave surprise.  He had keen and
clear blue eyes.

Then Marco, still erect and silent, waited again.  The Prince had
merely said to him, "an old man whom it might interest to see you."  He
had plainly intended that, whatsoever happened, he must make no outward
sign of seeing more than he had been told he would see--"an old man."
It was for him to show no astonishment or recognition.  He had been
brought here not to see but to be seen.  The power of remaining still
under scrutiny, which The Rat had often envied him, stood now in good
stead because he had seen the white head and tall form not many days
before, surmounted by brilliant emerald plumes, hung with jeweled
decorations, in the royal carriage, escorted by banners, and helmets,
and following troops whose tramping feet kept time to bursts of
military music while the populace bared their heads and cheered.

"He is like his father," this personage said to the Prince. "But if any
one but Loristan had sent him--His looks please me."  Then suddenly to
Marco, "You were waiting outside while the storm was going on?"

"Yes, sir," Marco answered.

Then the two exchanged some words still in the lowered voice.

"You read the news as you made your journey?" he was asked. "You know
how Samavia stands?"

"She does not stand," said Marco.  "The Iarovitch and the Maranovitch
have fought as hyenas fight, until each has torn the other into
fragments--and neither has blood or strength left."

The two glanced at each other.

"A good simile," said the older person.  "You are right.  If a strong
party rose--and a greater power chose not to interfere--the country
might see better days."  He looked at him a few moments longer and then
waved his hand kindly.

"You are a fine Samavian," he said.  "I am glad of that.  You may go.
Good night."

Marco bowed respectfully and the man with the tired face led him out of
the room.

It was just before he left him in the small quiet chamber in which he
was to sleep that the Prince gave him a final curious glance.  "I
remember now," he said.  "In the room, when you answered the question
about Samavia, I was sure that I had seen you before.  It was the day
of the celebration.  There was a break in the crowd and I saw a boy
looking at me.  It was you."

"Yes," said Marco, "I have followed you each time you have gone out
since then, but I could never get near enough to speak. To-night seemed
only one chance in a thousand."

"You are doing your work more like a man than a boy," was the next
speech, and it was made reflectively.  "No man could have behaved more
perfectly than you did just now, when discretion and composure were
necessary."  Then, after a moment's pause, "He was deeply interested
and deeply pleased.  Good night."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the gardens had been thrown open the next morning and people were
passing in and out again, Marco passed out also.  He was obliged to
tell himself two or three times that he had not wakened from an amazing
dream.  He quickened his pace after he had crossed the street, because
he wanted to get home to the attic and talk to The Rat.  There was a
narrow side-street it was necessary  for him to pass through if he
wished to make a short cut.  As he turned into it, he saw a curious
figure leaning on crutches against a wall.  It looked damp and forlorn,
and he wondered if it could be a beggar.  It was not.  It was The Rat,
who suddenly saw who was approaching and swung forward.  His face was
pale and haggard and he looked worn and frightened.  He dragged off his
cap and spoke in a voice which was hoarse as a crow's.

"God be thanked!" he said.  "God be thanked!" as people always said it
when they received the Sign, alone.  But there was a kind of anguish in
his voice as well as relief.

"Aide-de-camp!" Marco cried out--The Rat had begged him to call him so.
"What have you been doing?  How long have you been here?"

"Ever since I left you last night," said The Rat clutching tremblingly
at his arm as if to make sure he was real.  "If there was not room for
two in the hollow, there was room for one in the street. Was it my
place to go off duty and leave you alone--was it?"

"You were out in the storm?"

"Weren't you?" said The Rat fiercely.  "I huddled against the wall as
well as I could.  What did I care?  Crutches don't prevent a fellow
waiting.  I wouldn't have left you if you'd given me orders.  And that
would have been mutiny.  When you did not come out as soon as the gates
opened, I felt as if my head got on fire.  How could I know what had
happened?  I've not the nerve and backbone you have.  I go half mad."
For a second or so Marco did not answer.  But when he put his hand on
the damp sleeve, The Rat actually started, because it seemed as though
he were looking into the eyes of Stefan Loristan.

"You look just like your father!" he exclaimed, in spite of himself.
"How tall you are!"

"When you are near me," Marco said, in Loristan's own voice, "when you
are near me, I feel--I feel as if I were a royal prince attended by an
army.  You ARE my army."  And he pulled off his cap with quick
boyishness and added, "God be thanked!"

The sun was warm in the attic window when they reached their lodging,
and the two leaned on the rough sill as Marco told his story.  It took
some time to relate; and when he ended, he took an envelope from his
pocket and showed it to The Rat.  It contained a flat package of money.

"He gave it to me just before he opened the private door," Marco
explained.  "And he said to me, 'It will not be long now. After
Samavia, go back to London as quickly as you can--AS QUICKLY AS YOU
CAN!'"

"I wonder--what he meant?" The Rat said, slowly.  A tremendous thought
had shot through his mind.  But it was not a thought he could speak of
to Marco.

"I cannot tell.  I thought that it was for some reason he did not
expect me to know," Marco said.  "We will do as he told us. As quickly
as we can."  They looked over the newspapers, as they did every day.
All that could be gathered from any of them was that the opposing
armies of Samavia seemed each to have reached the culmination of
disaster and exhaustion.  Which party had the power left to take any
final step which could call itself a victory, it was impossible to say.
Never had a country been in a more desperate case.

"It is the time!" said The Rat, glowering over his map.  "If the Secret
Party rises suddenly now, it can take Melzarr almost without a blow.
It can sweep through the country and disarm both armies. They're
weakened--they're half starved--they're bleeding to death; they WANT to
be disarmed.  Only the Iarovitch and the Maranovitch keep on with the
struggle because each is fighting for the power to tax the people and
make slaves of them.  If the Secret Party does not rise, the people
will, and they'll rush on the palaces and kill every Maranovitch and
Iarovitch they find. And serve them right!"

"Let us spend the rest of the day in studying the road-map again," said
Marco.  "To-night we must be on the way to Samavia!"



XXVI

ACROSS THE FRONTIER

That one day, a week later, two tired and travel-worn boy-mendicants
should drag themselves with slow and weary feet across the frontier
line between Jiardasia and Samavia, was not an incident to awaken
suspicion or even to attract attention. War and hunger and anguish had
left the country stunned and broken.  Since the worst had happened, no
one was curious as to what would befall them next.  If Jiardasia
herself had become a foe, instead of a friendly neighbor, and had sent
across the border galloping hordes of soldiery, there would only have
been more shrieks, and home-burnings, and slaughter which no one dare
resist.  But, so far, Jiardasia had remained peaceful.  The two
boys--one of them on crutches--had  evidently traveled far on foot.
Their poor clothes were dusty and travel-stained, and they stopped and
asked for water at the first hut across the line. The one who walked
without crutches had some coarse bread in a bag slung over his
shoulder, and they sat on the roadside and ate it as if they were
hungry.  The old grandmother who lived alone in the hut sat and stared
at them without any curiosity.  She may have vaguely wondered why any
one crossed into Samavia in these days.  But she did not care to know
their reason.  Her big son had lived in a village which belonged to the
Maranovitch and he had been called out to fight for his lords.  He had
not wanted to fight and had not known what the quarrel was about, but
he was forced to obey.  He had kissed his handsome wife and four sturdy
children, blubbering aloud when he left them.  His village and his good
crops and his house must be left behind.  Then the Iarovitch swept
through the pretty little cluster of homesteads which belonged to their
enemy.  They were mad with rage because they had met with great losses
in a battle not far away, and, as they swooped through, they burned and
killed, and trampled down fields and vineyards.  The old woman's son
never saw either the burned walls of his house or the bodies of his
wife and children, because he had been killed himself in the battle for
which the Iarovitch were revenging themselves.  Only the old
grandmother who lived in the hut near the frontier line and stared
vacantly at the passers-by remained alive.  She wearily gazed at people
and wondered why she did not hear news from her son and her
grandchildren.  But that was all.

When the boys were over the frontier and well on their way along the
roads, it was not difficult to keep out of sight if it seemed
necessary.  The country was mountainous and there were deep and thick
forests by the way--forests so far-reaching and with such thick
undergrowth that full-grown men could easily have hidden themselves.
It was because of this, perhaps, that this part of the country had seen
little fighting.  There was too great opportunity for secure ambush for
a foe.  As the two travelers went on, they heard of burned villages and
towns destroyed, but they were towns and villages  nearer Melzarr and
other fortress-defended cities, or they were in the country surrounding
the castles and estates of powerful nobles and leaders.  It was true,
as Marco had said to the white-haired personage, that the Maranovitch
and Iarovitch had fought with the savageness of hyenas until at last
the forces of each side lay torn and bleeding, their strength, their
resources, their supplies exhausted.

Each day left them weaker and more desperate.  Europe looked on with
small interest in either party but with growing desire that the
disorder should end and cease to interfere with commerce. All this and
much more Marco and The Rat knew, but, as they made their cautious way
through byways of the maimed and tortured little country, they learned
other things.  They learned that the stories of its beauty and
fertility were not romances.  Its heaven-reaching mountains, its
immense plains of rich verdure on which flocks and herds might have fed
by thousands, its splendor of deep forest and broad clear rushing
rivers had a primeval majesty such as the first human creatures might
have found on earth in the days of the Garden of Eden.  The two boys
traveled through forest and woodland when it was possible to leave the
road.  It was safe to thread a way among huge trees and tall ferns and
young saplings.  It was not always easy but it was safe.  Sometimes
they saw a charcoal-burner's hut or a shelter where a shepherd was
hiding with the few sheep left to him.  Each man they met wore the same
look of stony suffering in his face; but, when the boys begged for
bread and water, as was their habit, no one refused to share the little
he had.  It soon became plain to them that they were thought to be two
young fugitives whose homes had probably been destroyed and who were
wandering about with no thought but that of finding safety until the
worst was over.  That one of them traveled on crutches added to their
apparent helplessness, and that he could not speak the language of the
country made him more an object of pity.  The peasants did not know
what language he spoke.  Sometimes a foreigner came to find work in
this small town or that.  The poor lad might have come to the country
with his father and mother and then have been caught in the whirlpool
of war and tossed out on the world parent-less.  But  no one asked
questions.  Even in their desolation they were silent and noble people
who were too courteous for curiosity.

"In the old days they were simple and stately and kind.  All doors were
open to travelers.  The master of the poorest hut uttered a blessing
and a welcome when a stranger crossed his threshold.  It was the custom
of the country," Marco said.  "I read about it in a book of my
father's.  About most of the doors the welcome was carved in stone.  It
was this--'The Blessing of the Son of God, and Rest within these
Walls.'"

"They are big and strong," said The Rat.  "And they have good faces.
They carry themselves as if they had been drilled--both men and women."

It was not through the blood-drenched part of the unhappy land their
way led them, but they saw hunger and dread in the villages they
passed.  Crops which should have fed the people had been taken from
them for the use of the army; flocks and herds had been driven away,
and faces were gaunt and gray.  Those who had as yet only lost crops
and herds knew that homes and lives might be torn from them at any
moment.  Only old men and women and children were left to wait for any
fate which the chances of war might deal out to them.

When they were given food from some poor store, Marco would offer a
little money in return.  He dare not excite suspicion by offering much.
He was obliged to let it be imagined that in his flight from his ruined
home he had been able to snatch at and secrete some poor hoard which
might save him from starvation. Often the women would not take what he
offered.  Their journey was a hard and hungry one.  They must make it
all on foot and there was little food to be found.  But each of them
knew how to live on scant fare.  They traveled mostly by night and
slept among the ferns and undergrowth through the day.  They drank from
running brooks and bathed in them.  Moss and ferns made soft and
sweet-smelling beds, and trees roofed them.  Sometimes they lay long
and talked while they rested.  And at length a day came when they knew
they were nearing their journey's end.

"It is nearly over now," Marco said, after they had thrown themselves
down in the forest in the early hours of one dewy morning.  "He said
'After Samavia, go back to London as quickly as you can--AS QUICKLY AS
YOU CAN.'  He said it twice.  As if--something were going to happen."

"Perhaps it will happen more suddenly than we think--the thing he
meant," answered The Rat.

Suddenly he sat up on his elbow and leaned towards Marco.

"We are in Samavia!" he said "We two are in Samavia!  And we are near
the end!"

Marco rose on his elbow also.  He was very thin as a result of hard
travel and scant feeding.  His thinness made his eyes look immense and
black as pits.  But they burned and were beautiful with their own fire.

"Yes," he said, breathing quickly.  "And though we do not know what the
end will be, we have obeyed orders.  The Prince was next to the last
one.  There is only one more.  The old priest."

"I have wanted to see him more than I have wanted to see any of the
others," The Rat said.

"So have I," Marco answered.  "His church is built on the side of this
mountain.  I wonder what he will say to us."

Both had the same reason for wanting to see him.  In his youth he had
served in the monastery over the frontier--the one which, till it was
destroyed in a revolt, had treasured the five-hundred-year-old story of
the beautiful royal lad brought to be hidden among the brotherhood by
the ancient shepherd.  In the monastery the memory of the Lost Prince
was as the memory of a saint.  It had been told that one of the early
brothers, who was a decorator and a painter, had made a picture of him
with a faint halo shining about his head.  The young acolyte who had
served there must have heard wonderful legends.  But the monastery had
been burned, and the young acolyte had in later years crossed the
frontier and become the priest of a few mountaineers whose little
church clung to the mountain side.  He had worked hard and faithfully
and was worshipped by his people.  Only the secret Forgers of the Sword
knew that his most ardent  worshippers were those with whom he prayed
and to whom he gave blessings in dark caverns under the earth, where
arms piled themselves and men with dark strong faces sat together in
the dim light and laid plans and wrought schemes.

This Marco and The Rat did not know as they talked of their desire to
see him.

"He may not choose to tell us anything," said Marco.  "When we have
given him the Sign, he may turn away and say nothing as some of the
others did.  He may have nothing to say which we should hear.  Silence
may be the order for him, too."

It would not be a long or dangerous climb to the little church on the
rock.  They could sleep or rest all day and begin it at twilight.  So
after they had talked of the old priest and had eaten their black
bread, they settled themselves to sleep under cover of the thick tall
ferns.

It was a long and deep sleep which nothing disturbed.  So few human
beings ever climbed the hill, except by the narrow rough path leading
to the church, that the little wild creatures had not learned to be
afraid of them.  Once, during the afternoon, a hare hopping along under
the ferns to make a visit stopped by Marco's head, and, after looking
at him a few seconds with his lustrous eyes, began to nibble the ends
of his hair.  He only did it from curiosity and because he wondered if
it might be a new kind of grass, but he did not like it and stopped
nibbling almost at once, after which he looked at it again, moving the
soft sensitive end of his nose rapidly for a second or so, and then
hopped away to attend to his own affairs.  A very large and handsome
green stag-beetle crawled from one end of The Rat's crutches to the
other, but, having done it, he went away also. Two or three times a
bird, searching for his dinner under the ferns, was surprised to find
the two sleeping figures, but, as they lay so quietly, there seemed
nothing to be frightened about. A beautiful little field mouse running
past discovered that there were crumbs lying about and ate all she
could find on the moss. After that she crept into Marco's pocket and
found some excellent ones and had quite a feast.  But she disturbed
nobody and the boys slept on.

It was a bird's evening song which awakened them both.  The bird
alighted on the branch of a tree near them and her trill was rippling
clear and sweet.  The evening air had freshened and was fragrant with
hillside scents.  When Marco first rolled over and opened his eyes, he
thought the most delicious thing on earth was to waken from sleep on a
hillside at evening and hear a bird singing.  It seemed to make
exquisitely real to him the fact that he was in Samavia--that the Lamp
was lighted and his work was nearly done.  The Rat awakened when he
did, and for a few minutes both lay on their backs without speaking.
At last Marco said, "The stars are coming out.  We can begin to climb,
Aide-de-camp."

Then they both got up and looked at each other.

"The last one!" The Rat said.  "To-morrow we shall be on our way back
to London--Number 7 Philibert Place.  After all the places we've been
to--what will it look like?"

"It will be like wakening out of a dream," said Marco.  "It's not
beautiful--Philibert Place.  But HE will be there," And it was as if a
light lighted itself in his face and shone through the very darkness of
it.

And The Rat's face lighted in almost exactly the same way.  And he
pulled off his cap and stood bare-headed.  "We've obeyed orders," he
said.  "We've not forgotten one.  No one has noticed us, no one has
