but I decided I couldn't do that, because it would be acting a lie, and
father told us after mother died that was something we must never, never
do. It is just as bad to act a lie as to tell one, though I know some
people, right here in the Glen, who act them, and never seem to feel a
bit bad about it. I will not mention any names, but I know who they are
and so does father.

"Then I tried my best to catch cold and really be sick by standing on the
snowbank in the Methodist graveyard with my bare feet until Jerry pulled
me off. But it didn't hurt me a bit and so I couldn't get out of going
to church. So I just decided I would put my boots on and go that way. I
can't see why it was so wrong and I was so careful to wash my legs just
as clean as my face, but, anyway, father wasn't to blame for it. He was
in the study thinking of his sermon and other heavenly things, and I
kept out of his way before I went to Sunday School. Father does not look
at people's legs in church, so of course he did not notice mine, but all
the gossips did and talked about it, and that is why I am writing this
letter to the _Journal_ to explain. I suppose I did very wrong, since
everybody says so, and I am sorry and I am wearing those awful stockings
to punish myself, although father bought me two nice new black pairs as
soon as Mr. Flagg's store opened on Monday morning. But it was all my
fault, and if people blame father for it after they read this they are
not Christians and so I do not mind what they say.

"There is another thing I want to explain about before I stop. Mary
Vance told me that Mr. Evan Boyd is blaming the Lew Baxters for stealing
potatoes out of his field last fall. They did not touch his potatoes.
They are very poor, but they are honest. It was us did it--Jerry and
Carl and I. Una was not with us at the time. We never thought it was
stealing. We just wanted a few potatoes to cook over a fire in Rainbow
Valley one evening to eat with our fried trout. Mr. Boyd's field was the
nearest, just between the valley and the village, so we climbed over his
fence and pulled up some stalks. The potatoes were awful small, because
Mr. Boyd did not put enough fertilizer on them and we had to pull up a
lot of stalks before we got enough, and then they were not much bigger
than marbles. Walter and Di Blythe helped us eat them, but they did not
come along until we had them cooked and did not know where we got them,
so they were not to blame at all, only us. We didn't mean any harm, but
if it was stealing we are very sorry and we will pay Mr. Boyd for them
if he will wait until we grow up. We never have any money now because we
are not big enough to earn any, and Aunt Martha says it takes every cent
of poor father's salary, even when it is paid up regularly--and it isn't
often--to run this house. But Mr. Boyd must not blame the Lew Baxters
any more, when they were quite innocent, and give them a bad name.

"Yours respectfully,

"FAITH MEREDITH."



CHAPTER XXVI. MISS CORNELIA GETS A NEW POINT OF VIEW

"Susan, after I'm dead I'm going to come back to earth every time when
the daffodils blow in this garden," said Anne rapturously. "Nobody may
see me, but I'll be here. If anybody is in the garden at the time--I
THINK I'll come on an evening just like this, but it MIGHT be just at
dawn--a lovely, pale-pinky spring dawn--they'll just see the daffodils
nodding wildly as if an extra gust of wind had blown past them, but it
will be _I_."

"Indeed, Mrs. Dr. dear, you will not be thinking of flaunting worldly
things like daffies after you are dead," said Susan. "And I do NOT
believe in ghosts, seen or unseen."

"Oh, Susan, I shall not be a ghost! That has such a horrible sound. I
shall just be ME. And I shall run around in the twilight, whether it is
morn or eve, and see all the spots I love. Do you remember how badly I
felt when I left our little House of Dreams, Susan? I thought I could
never love Ingleside so well. But I do. I love every inch of the ground
and every stick and stone on it."

"I am rather fond of the place myself," said Susan, who would have died
if she had been removed from it, "but we must not set our affections too
much on earthly things, Mrs. Dr. dear. There are such things as fires
and earthquakes. We should always be prepared. The Tom MacAllisters
over-harbour were burned out three nights ago. Some say Tom MacAllister
set the house on fire himself to get the insurance. That may or may not
be. But I advise the doctor to have our chimneys seen to at once. An
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. But I see Mrs. Marshall
Elliott coming in at the gate, looking as if she had been sent for and
couldn't go."

"Anne dearie, have you seen the _Journal_ to-day?"

Miss Cornelia's voice was trembling, partly from emotion, partly from
the fact that she had hurried up from the store too fast and lost her
breath.

Anne bent over the daffodils to hide a smile. She and Gilbert had
laughed heartily and heartlessly over the front page of the _Journal_
that day, but she knew that to dear Miss Cornelia it was almost a
tragedy, and she must not wound her feelings by any display of levity.

"Isn't it dreadful? What IS to be done?" asked Miss Cornelia
despairingly. Miss Cornelia had vowed that she was done with worrying
over the pranks of the manse children, but she went on worrying just the
same.

Anne led the way to the veranda, where Susan was knitting, with Shirley
and Rilla conning their primers on either side. Susan was already on
her second pair of stockings for Faith. Susan never worried over poor
humanity. She did what in her lay for its betterment and serenely left
the rest to the Higher Powers.

"Cornelia Elliott thinks she was born to run this world, Mrs. Dr.
dear," she had once said to Anne, "and so she is always in a stew over
something. I have never thought _I_ was, and so I go calmly along. Not
but what it has sometimes occurred to me that things might be run a
little better than they are. But it is not for us poor worms to nourish
such thoughts. They only make us uncomfortable and do not get us
anywhere."

"I don't see that anything can be done--now--" said Anne, pulling out
a nice, cushiony chair for Miss Cornelia. "But how in the world did Mr.
Vickers allow that letter to be printed? Surely he should have known
better."

"Why, he's away, Anne dearie--he's been away to New Brunswick for a
week. And that young scalawag of a Joe Vickers is editing the _Journal_
in his absence. Of course, Mr. Vickers would never have put it in, even
if he is a Methodist, but Joe would just think it a good joke. As you
say, I don't suppose there is anything to be done now, only live it
down. But if I ever get Joe Vickers cornered somewhere I'll give him
a talking to he won't forget in a hurry. I wanted Marshall to stop our
subscription to the _Journal_ instantly, but he only laughed and said
that to-day's issue was the only one that had had anything readable in
it for a year. Marshall never will take anything seriously--just like a
man. Fortunately, Evan Boyd is like that, too. He takes it as a joke and
is laughing all over the place about it. And he's another Methodist! As
for Mrs. Burr of Upper Glen, of course she will be furious and they will
leave the church. Not that it will be a great loss from any point of
view. The Methodists are quite welcome to THEM."

"It serves Mrs. Burr right," said Susan, who had an old feud with the
lady in question and had been hugely tickled over the reference to her
in Faith's letter. "She will find that she will not be able to cheat the
Methodist parson out of HIS salary with bad yarn."

"The worst of it is, there's not much hope of things getting any
better," said Miss Cornelia gloomily. "As long as Mr. Meredith was
going to see Rosemary West I did hope the manse would soon have a
proper mistress. But that is all off. I suppose she wouldn't have him on
account of the children--at least, everybody seems to think so."

"I do not believe that he ever asked her," said Susan, who could not
conceive of any one refusing a minister.

"Well, nobody knows anything about THAT. But one thing is certain,
he doesn't go there any longer. And Rosemary didn't look well all the
spring. I hope her visit to Kingsport will do her good. She's been gone
for a month and will stay another month, I understand. I can't remember
when Rosemary was away from home before. She and Ellen could never bear
to be parted. But I understand Ellen insisted on her going this time.
And meanwhile Ellen and Norman Douglas are warming up the old soup."

"Is that really so?" asked Anne, laughing. "I heard a rumour of it, but
I hardly believed it."

"Believe it! You may believe it all right, Anne, dearie. Nobody is in
ignorance of it. Norman Douglas never left anybody in doubt as to his
intentions in regard to anything. He always did his courting before the
public. He told Marshall that he hadn't thought about Ellen for years,
but the first time he went to church last fall he saw her and fell in
love with her all over again. He said he'd clean forgot how handsome
she was. He hadn't seen her for twenty years, if you can believe it. Of
course he never went to church, and Ellen never went anywhere else
round here. Oh, we all know what Norman means, but what Ellen means is a
different matter. I shan't take it upon me to predict whether it will be
a match or not."

"He jilted her once--but it seems that does not count with some people,
Mrs. Dr. dear," Susan remarked rather acidly.

"He jilted her in a fit of temper and repented it all his life," said
Miss Cornelia. "That is different from a cold-blooded jilting. For my
part, I never detested Norman as some folks do. He could never over-crow
ME. I DO wonder what started him coming to church. I have never been
able to believe Mrs. Wilsons's story that Faith Meredith went there and
bullied him into it. I've always intended to ask Faith herself, but I've
never happened to think of it just when I saw her. What influence could
SHE have over Norman Douglas? He was in the store when I left, bellowing
with laughter over that scandalous letter. You could have heard him at
Four Winds Point. 'The greatest girl in the world,' he was shouting.
'She's that full of spunk she's bursting with it. And all the old
grannies want to tame her, darn them. But they'll never be able to do
it--never! They might as well try to drown a fish. Boyd, see that you
put more fertilizer on your potatoes next year. Ho, ho, ho!' And then he
laughed till the roof shook."

"Mr. Douglas pays well to the salary, at least," remarked Susan.

"Oh, Norman isn't mean in some ways. He'd give a thousand without
blinking a lash, and roar like a Bull of Bashan if he had to pay five
cents too much for anything. Besides, he likes Mr. Meredith's sermons,
and Norman Douglas was always willing to shell out if he got his brains
tickled up. There is no more Christianity about him than there is about
a black, naked heathen in Africa and never will be. But he's clever and
well read and he judges sermons as he would lectures. Anyhow, it's well
he backs up Mr. Meredith and the children as he does, for they'll need
friends more than ever after this. I am tired of making excuses for
them, believe ME."

"Do you know, dear Miss Cornelia," said Anne seriously, "I think we have
all been making too many excuses. It is very foolish and we ought to
stop it. I am going to tell you what I'd LIKE to do. I shan't do it, of
course"--Anne had noted a glint of alarm in Susan's eye--"it would be
too unconventional, and we must be conventional or die, after we reach
what is supposed to be a dignified age. But I'd LIKE to do it. I'd like
to call a meeting of the Ladies Aid and W.M.S. and the Girls Sewing
Society, and include in the audience all and any Methodists who have
been criticizing the Merediths--although I do think if we Presbyterians
stopped criticizing and excusing we would find that other denominations
would trouble themselves very little about our manse folks. I would
say to them, 'Dear Christian friends'--with marked emphasis on
'Christian'--I have something to say to you and I want to say it good
and hard, that you may take it home and repeat it to your families.
You Methodists need not pity us, and we Presbyterians need not pity
ourselves. We are not going to do it any more. And we are going to say,
boldly and truthfully, to all critics and sympathizers, 'We are PROUD of
our minister and his family. Mr. Meredith is the best preacher Glen
St. Mary church ever had. Moreover, he is a sincere, earnest teacher of
truth and Christian charity. He is a faithful friend, a judicious pastor
in all essentials, and a refined, scholarly, well-bred man. His family
are worthy of him. Gerald Meredith is the cleverest pupil in the Glen
school, and Mr. Hazard says that he is destined to a brilliant career.
He is a manly, honourable, truthful little fellow. Faith Meredith is
a beauty, and as inspiring and original as she is beautiful. There
is nothing commonplace about her. All the other girls in the Glen put
together haven't the vim, and wit, and joyousness and 'spunk' she has.
She has not an enemy in the world. Every one who knows her loves her.
Of how many, children or grown-ups, can that be said? Una Meredith
is sweetness personified. She will make a most lovable woman. Carl
Meredith, with his love for ants and frogs and spiders, will some day
be a naturalist whom all Canada--nay, all the world, will delight to
honour. Do you know of any other family in the Glen, or out of it, of
whom all these things can be said? Away with shamefaced excuses and
apologies. We REJOICE in our minister and his splendid boys and girls!"

Anne stopped, partly because she was out of breath after her vehement
speech and partly because she could not trust herself to speak further
in view of Miss Cornelia's face. That good lady was staring helplessly
at Anne, apparently engulfed in billows of new ideas. But she came up
with a gasp and struck out for shore gallantly.

"Anne Blythe, I wish you WOULD call that meeting and say just that!
You've made me ashamed of myself, for one, and far be it from me
to refuse to admit it. OF COURSE, that is how we should have
talked--especially to the Methodists. And it's every word of it
true--every word. We've just been shutting our eyes to the big
worth-while things and squinting them on the little things that don't
really matter a pin's worth. Oh, Anne dearie, I can see a thing when
it's hammered into my head. No more apologizing for Cornelia Marshall!
_I_ shall hold MY head up after this, believe ME--though I MAY talk
things over with you as usual just to relieve my feelings if the
Merediths do any more startling stunts. Even that letter I felt so bad
about--why, it's only a good joke after all, as Norman says. Not many
girls would have been cute enough to think of writing it--and all
punctuated so nicely and not one word misspelled. Just let me hear any
Methodist say one word about it--though all the same I'll never forgive
Joe Vickers--believe ME! Where are the rest of your small fry to-night?"

"Walter and the twins are in Rainbow Valley. Jem is studying in the
garret."

"They are all crazy about Rainbow Valley. Mary Vance thinks it's the
only place in the world. She'd be off up here every evening if I'd let
her. But I don't encourage her in gadding. Besides, I miss the creature
when she isn't around, Anne dearie. I never thought I'd get so fond of
her. Not but what I see her faults and try to correct them. But she has
never said one saucy word to me since she came to my house and she is
a GREAT help--for when all is said and done, Anne dearie, I am not so
young as I once was, and there is no sense denying it. I was fifty-nine
my last birthday. I don't FEEL it, but there is no gainsaying the Family
Bible."



CHAPTER XXVII. A SACRED CONCERT

In spite of Miss Cornelia's new point of view she could not help feeling
a little disturbed over the next performance of the manse children.
In public she carried off the situation splendidly, saying to all the
gossips the substance of what Anne had said in daffodil time, and saying
it so pointedly and forcibly that her hearers found themselves feeling
rather foolish and began to think that, after all, they were making too
much of a childish prank. But in private Miss Cornelia allowed herself
the relief of bemoaning it to Anne.

"Anne dearie, they had a CONCERT IN THE GRAVEYARD last Thursday evening,
while the Methodist prayer meeting was going on. There they sat, on
Hezekiah Pollock's tombstone, and sang for a solid hour. Of course,
I understand it was mostly hymns they sang, and it wouldn't have been
quite so bad if they'd done nothing else. But I'm told they finished
up with _Polly Wolly Doodle_ at full length--and that just when Deacon
Baxter was praying."

"I was there that night," said Susan, "and, although I did not say
anything about it to you, Mrs. Dr. dear, I could not help thinking that
it was a great pity they picked that particular evening. It was truly
blood-curdling to hear them sitting there in that abode of the dead,
shouting that frivolous song at the tops of their lungs."

"I don't know what YOU were doing in a Methodist prayer meeting," said
Miss Cornelia acidly.

"I have never found that Methodism was catching," retorted Susan
stiffly. "And, as I was going to say when I was interrupted, badly as I
