
"You had better fetch some more, Jose. We mean to keep a big fire
burning here night and day; it will make the place cheerful. I will
have a fire also burning where we are at work below. Now, senora, we
will rig up some blankets on a line between the pillars at the end of
the room opposite to that in which we found the skeletons, so as to
make a special apartment for you and Dias. We will spread our beds at
night near the fire."

The screen was soon made. A cord was run from the wall to the pillar
next to it, some five feet above the floor, and three blankets were
sufficient to fill the space.

Harry was about to make another line from the pillar, when Maria said:

"I would rather not, senor; I am not a bit afraid. This screen is quite
large enough, and it will be more cheerful not to be shut up
altogether, as then, when I am lying down, I can see the reflection of
the fire on the walls, and it will be much more cheerful."

Then a blazing fire was lit. The wood was almost as dry as tinder, and
burnt without smoke. It was built almost touching the back wall, in
which, some five feet above the fire, Harry with a pick made a hole
four inches deep.

While he was doing this, Jose went down and cut a sapling four inches
in diameter, growing in a cleft on the rock, and from this cut off two
six-foot lengths and brought them up. One end of the thickest of these
was driven into the hole and tightly wedged in there, the other end was
lashed securely to an upright beam.

"There, Maria," he said when it was finished, "you will be able to hang
your pots and kettles from that at any height you like above the fire.
Now, you can set to work as soon as you like, to get breakfast for us.
We have been at work for four or five hours, and have good appetites."

"I have the cakes ready to bake, senor, and I sha'n't be long before I
get an olla ready for you."

"Well, Jose, what do you think of the place?" Harry asked.

"I should like it better if it were not so big," the lad said. "I shall
want a broom, senor, to sweep out the dust."

"It is three inches deep," Maria said.

"I should not bother about that, Maria; it would be a tremendous job to
sweep such a big room, and the dust is so fine that it would settle
again and cover everything. Besides, it will be a good deal softer to
lay our beds on than the stones would be, so I think you had better let
it remain as it is, especially as you are fond of going about without
your shoes. I think I will rig up a blanket against the doorway. It
will make the place look a good deal more snug, and will keep the bats
from returning."

"I am not afraid of the bats, now I know what they are; but I should be
constantly expecting them to rush out again."

"I expect a good many went back last night," Harry said. "We won't put
the blankets up till after dark. They are sure to come out again; then,
as soon as they have gone, we will close it, and they won't be able to
get in when they come back before daybreak."

Harry's expectations were fulfilled. At dusk a stream of bats rushed
out again, but this time quite noiselessly. The rush lasted for three
or four minutes. As soon as they had gone, the blankets were hung up,
and fastened across the doorway.

"They will be puzzled when they come back."

"Yes, senor," Maria said; "but when they find that they can't get in
here, they will come in through the openings above."

"So they will; I did not think of that. But when they once find that
they cannot get out here in the evening, they will go out where they
came in, and we shall have no more trouble with them. I don't know
whether they are good to eat?"

Maria gave a little cry of horror.

"Oh, senor! I could not eat such horrible things!"

"Their appearance is against them, Maria; but when people eat
alligators, frogs, snakes, and even rats, I don't see why a bat should
be bad. However, we won't touch them unless we are threatened by
starvation."

"I should indeed be starving before I could touch bats' flesh, senor."

"Well," Harry said, "if people eat monkeys, rats, and squirrels--and it
seems to me that a bat is something of a mixture of the three--one
might certainly eat bats, and if we are driven to it I should not mind
trying; but I promise you that I won't ask you to cook them."

They chatted for another hour, and then Maria went off to her corner.
The brothers spread their beds by the fire, and Jose had his blanket
and poncho, and it was arranged that any of them who woke should put
fresh logs on the fire.

They were all roused just before dawn by a squeaking and twittering
noise. They threw on fresh logs, and as these blazed up they could see
a cloud of bats flying overhead. They kept on going to the doorway, and
when they found they could not get through they retired with angry
squeaks. The light was gradually breaking, and in a few minutes all had
flown out through the opening. Harry and his brother followed them, and
could see them flitting about the upper windows. Presently, as if by a
common impulse, they poured in through the various openings.

"I don't suppose we shall see any more of them," Harry said, "and I own
that I shall be glad. There is something very weird in their noiseless
flitting about, and in the shadows the fire casts on the ceiling."

"They are a great deal larger than any bats I have seen," Bertie said.

"I have seen as large, or larger, at Bombay and some of the towns on
the coast."

"They bite people's toes when they are asleep, don't they?"

"Yes, the great vampire bat does, but I have never heard of any others
doing so. They live on insects, and some of them are, I believe,
vegetarian."

"Are vampire bats found here?"

"I do not think so; I fancy that they inhabit Java and other islands in
the Malay Archipelago. However, they are certainly rare, wherever they
come from, and you can dismiss them altogether from your mind."

"I was glad when I heard your voices, senors," Maria said when she
appeared a quarter of an hour later. "I knew they would not hurt me;
but I was horribly frightened, and wrapped myself up in my blanket and
lay there till I heard you talking, and I heard the logs thrown on the
fire; then I felt that it was all right."

"I don't suppose they will come again, Maria."

After drinking a cup of coffee, with a small piece of maize cake,
Bertie said:

"What is the programme for to-day?"

"We can't do much till Dias comes back. We may as well go down and have
a look at the lower rooms. I don't think there is much dust on the
floor there, but while Jose is away looking after the mules we will cut
enough bushes to make a couple of brooms. We shall want the place swept
as clean as possible, so that we can look about, but I don't think
there is the least chance of our being able to move the stones. Before
we do anything we will go down to the pool and have a swim, and dive
out through the entrance and have a look at those rocks."

"That is right," Bertie said. "I was longing for one yesterday morning,
but of course the first thing to be done was to examine this place."

"Would it be safe for me to bathe, senor?"

"Quite safe, Maria; the slope is very gradual, and you need have no
fear of getting out of your depth suddenly. We will be off at once,
Bertie."




CHAPTER XVII

AT WORK


Harry and his brother went to the edge of the pool, where they
undressed and waded out. They found that the bottom of the passage
sloped more gradually at the edge of the water than it did higher up,
and they were able to walk out till they came to the point where the
roof dipped into the water. They dived, and in a few strokes came up
beyond the roof.

"This is glorious!" Bertie said. "We have often bathed in pools, but
this is a different thing altogether. It is more than a year since we
had our last dip in the sea, the day we arrived at Callao."

Although there was little or no wind, the rollers were breaking on the
line of rocks outside, pouring over the lower points in volumes of
foam, and coming in broken waves up the passage.

"We mustn't go beyond the point, Bertie, or we may be dashed against
the foot of the cliff. We will climb up that rock to the left; it is
not too steep, and I think we can manage it. From there we shall get a
good view of this side of the house and of the situation in general."

It required considerable care to climb the rocks, and more than once
they hurt their feet on sharp projections. The top of the rock,
however, was smooth by the action of time and sea, and they were able
to sit down on it in comfort.

"The castle is just as you described it, Bertie; and certainly no one
sailing past, however close he came outside these rocks, would be able
to detect it. No doubt the stone of which it is built is the same as
that of the cliffs. Most likely it was taken from the ravine where the
passage now is, and had fallen from the arch above. It might have been
more noticeable at first, but now it is weathered into exactly the same
tint as the cliffs. The openings are very dodgily placed, and a
stranger would not dream that they went many inches in. Now, from where
we stand we can look up into that curious opening on the top story. I
have been puzzling over that ever since I saw it, but can't think of
any possible reason for its having been cut like that, except to enable
them to throw stones on to any boat that came into this passage behind
the rocks; and yet that can hardly have been the case, for, as I
remarked, there are no stones piled up there. Certainly they had a very
large number of arrows, but stones would be very much more useful than
arrows against a boat almost under their feet. However, that does not
concern us now. This line of rocks must greatly aid in hiding the house
from the sea. They are higher than you thought they were, looking down
at them from above. We are quite thirty feet above the water, and at
two or three points they are at least ten or twelve feet higher. Of
course a short way out no one would be able to see that they were
detached from the cliff, or that there was any passage whatever behind
them.

"Besides, they break the force of the waves. If it was not for them it
would be impossible for any boat to come up close to the face of the
house, and a heavy storm might even break down the wall altogether. A
tremendous sea would roll in here in a westerly gale; and if it hadn't
been for these rocks it would have been necessary to build the lower
part of the house absolutely solid to resist the sea. It is possible
that the rocks were higher than they now are when the place was first
constructed, in which case the house might have been almost entirely
hidden from sight. Well, we may as well go back again, Bertie; we know
all there is to be known about this side."

They swam back into the tunnel, dressed, and went out.

"We have come out, Maria," Bertie called. "The coast is clear for you.
The water is not so deep as we thought it was, and you can walk out to
the point where the roof comes down on to the water without getting out
of your depth."

It did not take them long to cut a number of switches to serve as
brooms, and a couple of handles. They carried them up into the house,
and lashed the switches firmly on to the handles. The work was rough,
but the brooms when completed were large, and, although not strong
enough for heavy work, would do well to sweep aside the thin layer of
almost impalpable dust on the floor below.

"Shall we take wood down there, Harry?"

"No; I think a fire would be a drawback rather than an assistance. It
would be very valuable if we were working at one spot, but it could
give no general light in a place a hundred feet long. We will take a
torch down, and hold it and sweep by turns. We shall only want, to
begin with, to make a clear path a couple of feet wide down the middle.
Of course later on we shall clear it all. That will be sufficient to
enable us to see how the floor is constructed, whether with big blocks
or small ones, how closely they are fitted together, and so on. It is
certainly unlikely that we shall find any indication as to where
chambers exist."

It took but a very short time to clear the path; the dust was so light
that one sweep of the broom cleared it away. When they got to the
farther end they returned to examine the floor. For four or five feet
from the cistern the rock had been evidently untouched, except to cut
off any projecting points. Then there was a clear line running across
the path. Bertie held the torch down close to it. Harry knelt down and
examined it.

"This is a clean cut, Bertie. It is evidently solid above this, but the
stone is not quite the same colour on each side of it, and it looks as
if they had cut away the rock here and begun to build so as to keep the
floor level. The cut may be six inches deep and it may be a foot, that
doesn't matter. The face of this stone is very smooth, but it is not
cut; it is, I think, the face of the natural fracture. Move the torch
along and let us see where the next join is. Ah, here it is!"

The slab was four feet across.

"You had better sweep the dust off both ways, Bertie, so that we may
see what size it is."

It was, they found, about eight feet long.

"It has straight edges, Harry, almost as straight as if it had been
sawn."

"Very likely it was sawn, Bertie; They could have had no tools that
would cut a hard stone like this regularly, but as they were certainly
clever builders they must have employed some means to do it. Possibly
they used a saw without teeth, for however much they might have
hardened the copper, the teeth could not have stood, but if they had a
hard copper band fixed like the saw some masons use, and kept the stone
moistened with fine sand, they might have cut into it. Of course it
would have been a slow process; but they would not have needed to go
far into the stone, for when they got down two or three inches they
might have broken it through by dropping a heavy weight on the end. It
would not have mattered if the fracture had not been straight below the
cut, for only on the surface would they have wanted to fit accurately
to the next stone. In another way they might have got a straight edge,
that is, by driving very dry wedges into the cut made by the saw, and
then moistening them. I know that great stones can be split in that
way. They may have used both methods. However, it doesn't matter to us
much how they did it. It is clear that they could in some way or other
cut stones. As they took the trouble to do so here, we may conclude
that they were anxious to have a smooth floor that would be extremely
difficult to get up.

"They would never have taken all this trouble if they had merely been
making a floor for a cellar. For that purpose it would only have been
necessary to throw rocks and stones of all sizes into the vacant space
below, and when it was nearly full, to level it with small stones and
sand. That they chose to undertake such tremendous labour as the making
of so regular a floor as this must have been, shows that they had some
very strong motive for doing so."

Going carefully along the track they had cleared, they found that the
stones were of different sizes; some were but two feet wide, others as
much as ten, but all fitted so closely together that it was difficult
to see the joints.

"It is going to be a hard job to get these out, Bertie," Harry said,
when they had completed their examination, "and it is lucky for us that
the room gradually narrows from sixteen feet wide to two at the other
end, and when we stepped it we made it eighty feet long. We need not
take up the stones near the rock wall, for the ravine would naturally
narrow as it went lower, and the depth would be greatest by the side of
the wall of the tunnel."

"Well, we shall soon blow up the stones when we have got the powder."

"I hope so, Bertie; but I see that we shall have difficulty unless
these top stones are extraordinarily thick."

Bertie looked surprised. "Why, I should have thought the thicker they
were the more difficult to break up."

"Beyond a certain point that would be so. But suppose they are six
inches thick, you may take it for granted that underneath there will be
rubble, loose stuff, except where any chambers may be built. If we were
to bore a hole through this top layer the powder, instead of splitting
the stones up, would expend its force among the loose stuff beneath it;
and besides, instead of remaining in its place, it might get scattered,
and we would then get no explosion at all."

"Then we should only have to make the hole four inches deep, Harry?"

"As a result of which there would only be two inches of tamping over
the powder, and this would blow right out, as if from a little mortar,
and would have no effect whatever upon the stone. I have no doubt that
we shall find some way to get over these difficulties, but it is
evident that the work will not be all clear sailing."

"Of course we shall manage it somehow, Harry, even if we have to smash
up all the stones with the sledge-hammers Dias will bring us."

"Is breakfast nearly ready, senora? That swim in the sea has given us a
prodigious appetite. Did you enjoy it?"

Maria nodded.

"It is very nice, senor; but I should have liked it better if the water
had not been so blue. It seems so strange bathing in blue water."

"You will soon get accustomed to it," Bertie laughed. "There are no
pools except that one two miles up the valley. Besides, it is much
nicer to have a great bathing chamber all to yourself. Here comes Jose!"

"Well, Jose, are the mules all right?" he shouted.

"Yes, but I had difficulty in catching them. They had evidently been
frightened by something, and were three miles up the valley with their
coats all staring. It must have been either a puma or a jaguar. Of
course they must have got wind of him in time; but as, fortunately,
they were not tethered, they were able to get away from him."

"I should think he must be up somewhere among the bushes, Jose," Harry
said. "We had better go down tonight and see if he returns again. We
shall be losing some of the mules if we don't put a stop to his
marauding. Besides, it will be very dangerous for you, Jose, cutting the
wood up there, if he is lurking somewhere. It is fortunate that you
escaped yesterday."

"I expect he was on the other side of the ravine, senor; and even if he
had not been, the sound of the chopping would have scared him. They
will not often attack in the daytime."

When they had finished their breakfast Jose asked what he should do
next.

"There is nothing else to do, so it would be as well to take our
pickaxes and get some of those brackets out of the walls. We will begin
with the other rooms of this floor and leave these here till the last."

"I will come and hold a torch for you, senors," Maria said. "I like to
be doing something. I will wash up first, and then I shall have nothing
to do till it is time to get ready for dinner. Now I know there is a
savage beast about I should not like to go down the ladder."

"There is very little chance of his coming down the rocks," Harry said.
"He is more likely to be lying somewhere on the other side watching the
mules."

No move was made until the woman was ready to start. Then they lit two
torches. She took one and Bertie the other, while Jose and Harry took
two picks. It was hard work, for the brackets were driven far into the
pillars and walls. It was necessary to knock away the stones round them
to a depth of two or three inches before they could be got out. They
worked one at each side of a bracket, relieving each other by turns,
and after four hours' work only eighteen brackets had been got out. As
far as they could tell by lifting them, the weight was somewhat greater
than they had at first supposed. Harry could hold one out in each hand
for a minute and a half, Bertie and Jose for a little over half a
minute, and they agreed that they must be about twenty pounds each.

By this time their shoulders ached, and it was agreed that they had
done a good day's work. For the rest of the day they did nothing but
sit on the sill of the window and smoke quietly. The next day's work
was similar, and twenty more brackets were got out. Late in the
afternoon they saw Dias coming down the steps, and at once went down
the ladder to meet him.

"Have you got everything, Dias?"

"I think so, senor, and I can tell you that the mules have had a pretty
heavy load to bring back."

"Well, we will go with you at once, Dias, and bring some of the things
up. I expect you have had nothing to eat since the morning. Before you
do anything else you had better go in. Your wife has been keeping a
dish hot for you, as she did not know when you might arrive."

"I shall not be long before I come and help you, senor. I have
unsaddled the mules and turned them out to graze."

"It is just as well, Dias, for there is a beast somewhere about that
gave them a fright last night. We will get all the eatables up
to-night, the powder and drills and hammers we can very well leave till
to-morrow morning."

It took them four trips to bring the provisions over, for it required
two of them to carry each sack of flour, and indeed all had to give
their aid in getting them up the rocky slope at the foot of the wall.

"No one seemed to think it unusual, your taking so large a load, I
hope, Dias?" Harry said as they sat down to their evening meal.
