
"What did you hear, Wilson?"

"I heard the women scream," Wilson said reluctantly, "and five or six
shots were fired. There has been no sound since then."

Bathurst stood silent for a minute.

"I do not think they will have killed the women," he said; "they did not
do so at Cawnpore. They will take them there. No doubt they killed the
men. Let me think for a moment. Now," he said after a long pause, "we
must be doing. Murad, your father and friends have given their word for
the safety of those you took prisoners; that they have been massacred
is no fault of your father or of you. This gentleman and myself are the
only ones saved, as far as we know. Are you sure that none others came
ashore?"

"The others were all killed, we alone remaining," Murad said. "I will go
back to my father, and he will go to Cawnpore and demand vengeance."

"You can do that afterwards, Murad; the first thing is to fulfill
your promise, and I charge you to take this sahib in safety down to
Allahabad. You must push on at once, for they may be sending out from
Cawnpore at daylight to search the bushes here to see if any have
escaped. You must go on with him tonight as far as you can, and in the
morning enter some village, buy native clothes, and disguise him, and
then journey on to Allahabad."

"I will do that," the young Rajah said; "but what about yourself?"

"I shall go into Cawnpore and try to rescue any they may have taken.
I have a native cloth round me under my other clothes, as I thought it
might be necessary for me to land before we got to Cawnpore to see if
danger threatened us. So I have everything I want for a disguise about
me."

"What are you saying, Bathurst?" Wilson asked.

"I am arranging for Murad and his follower to take you down to
Allahabad, Wilson. I shall stop at Cawnpore."

"Stop at Cawnpore! Are you mad, Bathurst?"

"No, I am not mad. I shall stop to see if any of the ladies have been
taken prisoners, and if so, try to rescue them. Rujub, the juggler, is
there, and I am confident he will help me."

"But if you can stay, I can, Bathurst. If Miss Hannay has been made
prisoner, I would willingly be killed to rescue her."

"I know you would, Wilson, but you would be killed without being able to
rescue her; and as I should share your fate, you would render her rescue
impossible. I can speak the native language perfectly, and know native
ways. I can move about among them without fear of exciting their
suspicion. If you were with me this would be impossible; the first time
you were addressed by a native you would be detected; your presence
would add to my difficulties a hundredfold. It is not now a question of
fighting. Were it only that, I should be delighted to have you with me.
As it is, the thing is impossible. If anything is done, I must do it
alone. If I ever reach Miss Hannay, she shall know that you were ready
to run all risks to save her. No, no, you must go on to Allahabad, and
if you cannot save her now, you will be with the force that will save
her, if I should fail to do so, and which will avenge us both if it
should arrive too late to rescue her. Now I must get you to bandage my
head, for I feel faint with loss of blood. I will take off my shirt and
tear it in strips. I have got a native disguise next to the skin. We may
as well leave my clothes behind me here."

As soon as Wilson, with the assistance of Murad, had bandaged the wound,
the party struck off from the river, and after four hours' walking came
down upon it again two miles below Cawnpore. Here Bathurst said he would
stop, stain his skin, and complete his disguise.

"I hate leaving you," Wilson said, in a broken voice. "There are only
you and I left of all our party at Deennugghur. It is awful to think
they have all gone--the good old chief, the Doctor, and Richards, and
the ladies. There are only we two left. It does seem such a dirty,
cowardly thing for me to be making off and leaving you here alone."

"It is not cowardly, Wilson, for I know you would willingly stay if you
could be of the slightest use; but, as, on the contrary, you would only
add to the danger, it must be as I have arranged. Goodby, lad; don't
stay; it has to be done. God bless you! Goodby, Murad. Tell your father
when you see him that I know no shadow of broken faith rests on him."

So saying, he turned and went into a clump of bushes, while Wilson,
too overpowered to speak, started on his way down country with the two
natives.



CHAPTER XIX.


Now alone, Bathurst threw himself down among the bashes in an attitude
of utter depression.

"Why wasn't I killed with the others?" he groaned. "Why was I not killed
when I sat there by her side?"

So he lay for an hour, and then slowly rose and looked round. There was
a faint light in the sky.

"It will be light in another hour," he said to himself, and he again sat
down. Suddenly he started. Had someone spoken, or had he fancied it?

"Wait till I come."

He seemed to hear the words plainly, just as he had heard Rujub's
summons before.

"That's it; it is Rujub. How is it that he can make me hear in this way?
I am sure it was his voice. Anyhow, I will wait. It shows he is thinking
of me, and I am sure he will help me. I know well enough I could do
nothing by myself."

Bathurst assumed with unquestioning faith that Isobel Hannay was alive.
He had no reason for his confidence. That first shower of grape might
have killed her as it killed others, but he would not admit the doubt
in his mind. Wilson's description of what had happened while he was
insensible was one of the grounds of this confidence.

He had heard women scream. Mrs. Hunter and her daughter were the only
other women in the boat. Isobel would not have screamed had those
muskets been pointed at her, nor did he think the others would have done
so. They screamed when they saw the natives about to murder those who
were with them. The three women were sitting together, and if one had
fallen by the grape shot all would probably have been killed. He felt
confident, therefore, that she had escaped; he believed he would have
known it had she been killed.

"If I can be influenced by this juggler, surely I should have felt it
had Isobel died," he argued, and was satisfied that she was still alive.

What, however, more than anything else gave him hope was the picture
on the smoke. "Everything else has come true," he said to himself; "why
should not that? Wilson spoke of the Doctor as dead. I will not believe
it; for if he is dead, the picture is false. Why should that thing of
all others have been shown to me unless it had been true? What seemed
impossible to me--that I should be fighting like a brave man--has
been verified. Why should not this? I should have laughed at such
superstition six months ago; now I cling to it as my one ground for
hope. Well, I will wait if I have to stay here until tomorrow night."

Noiselessly he moved about in the little wood, going to the edge and
looking out, pacing to and fro with quick steps, his face set in
a frown, occasionally muttering to himself. He was in a fever of
impatience. He longed to be doing something, even if that something led
to his detention and death. He said to himself that he should not care
so that Isobel Hannay did but know that he had died in trying to rescue
her.

The sun rose, and he saw the peasants in the fields, and caught the note
of a bugle sounding from the lines at Cawnpore. At last--it had seemed
to him an age, but the sun had been up only an hour--he saw a figure
coming along the river bank. As it approached he told himself that it
was the juggler; if so, he had laid aside the garments in which he last
saw him, and was now attired as when they first met. When he saw him
turn off from the river bank and advance straight towards the wood, he
had no doubt that it was the man he expected.

"Thanks be to the holy ones that you have escaped, sahib," Rujub said,
as soon as he came within speaking distance of Bathurst. "I was in
an agony last night. I was with you in thought, and saw the boats
approaching the ambuscade. I saw you leap over and swim to shore. I saw
you fall, and I cried out. For a moment I thought you were killed. Then
I saw you go on and fall again, and saw your friends carry you in. I
watched you recover and come on here, and then I willed it that you
should wait here till I came for you. I have brought you a disguise, for
I did not know that you had one with you. But, first of all, sit down
and let me dress your wound afresh. I have brought all that is necessary
for it."

"You are a true fried, Rujub. I relied upon you for aid; do you know why
I waited here instead of going down with the others?"

"I know, sahib. I can tell your thoughts as easily when you are away
from me as I can when we are together."

"Can you do this with all people?"

"No, my lord; to be able to read another's thoughts it is necessary
there should be a mystic relation established between them. As I walked
beside your horse when you carried my daughter before you after saving
her life, I felt that this relation had commenced, and that henceforward
our fates were connected. It was necessary that you should have
confidence in me, and it was for that reason that I showed you some of
the feats that we rarely exhibit, and proved to you that I possessed
powers with which you were unacquainted. But in thought reading my
daughter has greater powers than I have, and it was she who last night
followed you on your journey, sitting with her hand in mine, so that my
mind followed hers."

"Do you know all that happened last night, Rujub?" Bathurst said,
summoning up courage to ask the question that had been on his lips from
the first.

"I only know, my lord, that the party was destroyed, save three white
women, who were brought in just as the sun rose this morning. One
was the lady behind whose chair you stood the night I performed at
Deennugghur, the lady about whom you are thinking. I do not know the
other two; one was getting on in life, the other was a young one."

The relief was so great that Bathurst turned away, unable for a while to
continue the conversation. When he resumed the talk, he asked, "Did you
see them yourself, Rujub?"

"I saw them, sahib; they were brought in on a gun carriage."

"How did they look, Rujub?"

"The old one looked calm and sad. She did not seem to hear the shouts of
the budmashes as they passed along. She held the young one close to
her. That one seemed worn out with grief and terror. Your memsahib sat
upright; she was very pale and changed from the time I saw her that
evening, but she held her head high, and looked almost scornfully at the
men who shook their fists and cried at her."

"And they put them with the other women that they have taken prisoners?"

Rujub hesitated.

"They have put the other two there, sahib, but her they took to
Bithoor."

Bathurst started, and an exclamation of horror and rage burst from him.

"To the Rajah's!" he exclaimed. "To that scoundrel! Come, let us go. Why
are we staying here?"

"We can do nothing for the moment. Before I started I sent off my
daughter to Bithoor; she knows many there, and will find out what is
being done and bring us word, for I dare not show myself there. The
Rajah is furious with me because I did not support the Sepoys, and
suffered conditions to be made with your people, but now that all has
turned out as he wished, I will in a short time present myself before
him again, but for the moment it was better that my daughter should go,
as I had to come to you. But first you had better put on the disguise I
have brought you. You are too big and strong to pass without notice in
that peasant's dress. The one I have brought you is such as is worn
by the rough people; the budmashes of Cawnpore. I can procure others
afterwards when we see what had best be done. It will be easy enough to
enter Bithoor, for all is confusion there, and men come and go as they
choose, but it will be well nigh impossible for you to penetrate where
the memsahib will be placed. Even for me, known as I am to all the
Rajah's officers, it would be impossible to do so; it is my daughter in
whom we shall have to trust."

Bathurst rapidly put on the clothes that Rujub had brought with him, and
thrust a sword, two daggers, and a brace of long barreled pistols into
the sash round his waist.

"Your color is not dark enough, sahib. I have brought dye with me; but
first I must dress the wound on your head, and bandage it more neatly,
so that the blood stained swathings will not show below the folds of
your turban."

Bathurst submitted himself impatiently to Rujub's hands. The latter cut
off all the hair that would show under the turban, dyed the skin
the same color as the other parts, and finally, after darkening his
eyebrows, eyelashes, and mustache, pronounced that he would pass
anywhere without attracting attention. Then they started at a quick walk
along the river, crossed by the ferryboat to Cawnpore, and made their
way to a quiet street in the native town.

"This is my house for the present," Rujub said, producing a key and
unlocking a door. He shouted as he closed the door behind him, and an
old woman appeared.

"Is the meal prepared?" he asked.

"It is ready," she said.

"That is right. Tell Rhuman to put the pony into the cart."

He then led the way into a comfortably furnished apartment where a meal
was laid.

"Eat, my lord," he said; "you need it, and will require your strength."

Bathurst, who, during his walk, had felt the effects of the loss of
blood and anxiety, at once seated himself at the table and ate, at first
languidly, but as appetite came, more heartily, and felt still more
benefited by a bottle of excellent wine Rujub had placed beside him. The
latter returned to the room just as he had finished. He was now attired
as he had been when Bathurst last met him at Deennugghur.

"I feel another man, Rujub, and fit for anything."

"The cart is ready," Rujub said. "I have already taken my meal; we do
not eat meat, and live entirely on vegetables. Meat clouds the senses,
and simple food, and little of it, is necessary for those who would
enter the inner brotherhood."

At the door a small native cart was standing with a pony in the shafts.

"You will go with us, Rhuman," Rujub said, as he and Bathurst took their
seats in the cart.

The boy squatted down at Rujub's feet, taking the reins and whip, and
the pony started off at a brisk pace. Upon the way Rujub talked of
various matters, of the reports of the force that was gathering at
Allahabad, and the madness of the British in supposing that two or three
thousand men could withstand the forces of the Nana.

"They would be eaten up," he said; "the troops will go out to meet them;
they will never arrive within sight of Cawnpore."

As Bathurst saw that he was talking for the boy to hear, rather than to
himself, he agreed loudly with all that he said, and boasted that even
without the Nana's troops and the Sepoys, the people of Cawnpore could
cut the English dogs to pieces.

The drive was not a long one, and the road was full of parties going
to or returning from Bithoor--groups of Sepoy officers, parties of
budmashes from Cawnpore, mounted messengers, landowners with their
retainers, and others. Arriving within a quarter of a mile of the
palace, Rujub ordered the boy to draw aside.

"Take the horse down that road," he said, "and wait there until we
return. We may be some time. If we are not back by the time the sun
sets, you will return home."

As they approached the palace Bathurst scanned every window, as if he
hoped to see Isobel's face at one of them. Entering the garden, they
avoided the terrace in front of the house, and sauntering through the
groups of people who had gathered discussing the latest news, they took
their seat in a secluded corner.

Bathurst thought of the last time he had been there, when there had been
a fete given by the Rajah to the residents of Cawnpore, and contrasted
the present with the past. Then the gardens were lighted up, and a crowd
of officers and civilians with ladies in white dresses had strolled
along the terrace to the sound of gay music, while their host moved
about among them, courteous, pleasant, and smiling. Now the greater
portion of the men were dead, the women were prisoners in the hands of
the native who had professed such friendship for them.

"Tell me, Rujub," he said presently, "more about this force at
Allahabad. What is its strength likely to be?"

"They say there is one British regiment of the line, one of the plumed
regiments with bare legs, and one of the white Madras regiments; they
have a few guns, a very few horsemen; that is all, while there are
twenty thousand troops here. How can they hope to win?"

"You will see they will win," Bathurst said sternly. "They have often
fought well, but they will fight now as they never fought before; every
man will feel himself an avenger of the foul treachery and the brutal
massacres that have been committed. Were it but one regiment that is
coming up instead of three, I would back it against the blood stained
wretches."

"They are fighting for freedom," Rujub said.

"They are fighting for nothing of the sort," Bathurst replied hotly;
"they are fighting for they know not what--change of masters, for
license to plunder, and because they are ignorant and have been led
away. I doubt not that at present, confident as they may be of victory,
most of them in their hearts regret what they have done. They have
forfeited their pensions, they have thrown away the benefits of their
years of service, they have been faithless to their salt, and false
to their oaths. It is true that they know they are fighting with ropes
round their necks, but even that won't avail against the discipline and
the fury of our troops. I feel as certain, Rujub, that, in spite of the
odds against them, the English will triumph, as if I saw their column
marching into the town. I don't profess to see the future as you do, but
I know enough to tell you that ere long that palace you can see through
the trees will be leveled to the ground, that it is as assuredly doomed
as if fire had already been applied to its gilded beams."

Rujub nodded. "I know the palace is doomed. While I have looked at it
it has seemed hidden by a cloud of smoke, but I did not think it was the
work of the British--I thought of an accident."

"The Rajah may fire it with his own hands," Bathurst said; "but if he
does not, it will be done for him."

"I have not told you yet, sahib," Rujub said, changing the subject, "how
it was that I could neither prevent the attack on the boats nor warn you
that it was coming. I knew at Deennugghur that news had been sent of
the surrender to the Nana. I remained till I knew you were safely in the
boats, and then rode to Cawnpore. My daughter was at the house when
I arrived, and told me that the Nana was furious with me, and that it
would not be safe for me to go near the palace. Thus, although I feared
that an attack was intended, I thought it would not be until the boats
passed the town. It was late before I learnt that a battery of artillery
and some infantry had set out that afternoon. Then I tried to warn you,
but I felt that I failed. You were not in a mood when my mind could
communicate itself to yours."

"I felt very uneasy and restless," Bathurst said, "but I had not
the same feeling that you were speaking to me I had that night at
Deennugghur; but even had I known of the danger, there would have been
no avoiding it. Had we landed, we must have been overtaken, and it would
have come to the same thing. Tell me, Rujub, had you any idea when I saw
you at Deennugghur that if we were taken prisoners Miss Hannay was to be
brought here instead of being placed with the other ladies?"

"Yes, I knew it, sahib; the orders he gave to the Sepoys were that every
man was to be killed, and that the women and children were to be taken
to Cawnpore, except Miss Hannay, who was to be carried here at once. The
Rajah had noticed her more than once when she was at Cawnpore, and had
made up his mind that she should go to his zenana."

"Why did you not tell me when you were at Deennugghur?"

"What would have been the use, sahib? I hoped to save you all; besides,
it was not until we saw her taken past this morning that we knew that
the Miss Hannay who was to be taken to Bithoor was the lady whom my
daughter, when she saw her with you that night, said at once that you
loved. But had we known it, what good would it have done to have told
you of the Rajah's orders? You could not have done more than you have
done. But now we know, we will aid you to save her."

"How long will your daughter be before she comes? It is horrible waiting
here."

"You must have patience, sahib. It will be no easy work to get the lady
away. There will be guards and women to look after her. A lady is not to
be stolen out of a zenana as a young bird is taken from its nest."

"It is all very well to say 'Be patient,'" Bathurst said, getting up and
walking up and down with quick angry strides. "It is maddening to sit
here doing nothing. If it were not that I had confidence in your power
and will to aid me, I would go into the palace and stab Nana Sahib to
the heart, though I were cut to pieces for it the moment afterwards."

"That would do no good to the lady, sahib," Rujub said calmly. "She
would only be left without a friend, and the Nana's death might be
the signal for the murder of every white prisoner. Ah, here comes my
daughter."

Rabda came up quickly, and stopped before Bathurst with her head bowed
and her arms crossed in an attitude of humility. She was dressed in the
attire worn by the principal servants in attendance upon the zenana of a
Hindoo prince.

"Well, what news, Rabda?" Bathurst asked eagerly.

"The light of my lord's heart is sick. She bore up till she arrived here
and was handed over to the women. Then her strength failed her, and she
fainted. She recovered, but she is lying weak and exhausted with all
that she has gone through and suffered."

"Where is she now?"

"She is in the zenana, looking out into the women's court, that no men
are ever allowed to enter."

"Has the Rajah seen her?"

"No, sahib. He was told the state that she was in, and the chief lady
of the zenana sent him word that for the present she must have quiet and
rest, but that in two or three days she might be fit to see him."

"That is something," Bathurst said thankfully. "Now we shall have time
to think of some scheme for getting her out."

"You have been in the zenana yourself, Rabda?" Rujub asked.

"Yes, father; the mistress of the zenana saw me directly an attendant
told her I was there. She has always been kind to me. I said that you
were going on a journey, and asked her if I might stay with her and act
as an attendant until you returned, and she at once assented. She asked
if I should see you before you left, and when I said yes, she asked if
you could not give her some spell that would turn the Rajah's thoughts
from this white girl. She fears that if she should become first favorite
in the zenana, she might take things in her hands as English women do,
and make all sorts of changes. I told her that, doubtless, the English
girl would do this, and that I thought she was wise to ask your
assistance."

"You are mad, Rabda," her father said angrily; "what have I to do with
spells and love philters?"

"No, father, I knew well enough you would not believe in such things,
but I thought in this way I might see the lady, and communicate with
her."

"A very good idea, Rabda," Bathurst said. "Is there nothing you can do,
Rujub, to make her odious to the Nana?"

"Nothing, sahib. I could act upon some people's minds, and make them
think that the young lady was afflicted by some loathsome disease, but
not with the Nana. I have many times tried to influence him, but without
success: his mind is too deep for mine to master, and between us there
is no sympathy. Could I be present with him and the girl I might do
something--that is, if the powers that aid me would act against him; but
this I do not think."

"Rujub," Bathurst said suddenly, "there must have been medical stores
taken when the camp was captured--drugs and things of that sort. Can you
find out who has become possessed of them?"

"I might find out, sahib. Doubtless the men who looted the camp will
have sold the drugs to the native shops, for English drugs are highly
prized. Are there medicines that can act as the mistress of the zenana
wishes?"

"No; but there are drugs that when applied externally would give the
appearance of a terrible disease. There are acids whose touch would burn
and blister the skin, and turn a beautiful face into a dreadful mask."

"But would it recover its fairness, sahib?"

"The traces might last for a long time, even for life, if too much were
used, but I am sure Miss Hannay would not hesitate for a moment on that
account."

"But you, sahib--would you risk her being disfigured?"

"What does it matter to me?" Bathurst asked sternly. "Do you think love
is skin deep, and that 'tis only for a fair complexion that we choose
our wives? Find me the drugs, and let Rabda take them into her with
a line from me. One of them you can certainly get, for it is used, I
believe, by gold and silver smiths. It is nitric acid; the other is
caustic potash, or, as it is sometimes labeled, lunar caustic. It is in
little sticks; but if you find out anyone who has bought drugs or cases
of medicines, I will go with you and pick them out."

"There will be no difficulty about finding out where the English drugs
are. They are certain to be at one of the shops where the native doctors
buy their medicines."

"Let us go at once, then," Bathurst said. "You can prepare some harmless
drink, and Rabda will tell the mistress of the zenana it will bring out
a disfiguring eruption. We can be back here again this evening. Will
you be here, Rabda, at sunset, and wait until we come? You can tell the
