absolutely unassailable. The streams even in midsummer come down as full
and cold as ever from the mountains."

"We'll have water and plenty of it in a day or two. The scouts say that
the Confederate force at the springs is not strong enough to withstand
us."

"But General Buell, not knowing exactly what General Bragg intends
with his divided force, has divided his own in order to meet him at all
points."

"Has he done that?" exclaimed Dick aghast. Like other young officers he
felt perfectly competent to criticize anybody.

"He has, and it seems to me that when the enemy divided was the time for
us to unite or remain united. Then we could scoop him up in detail. Why,
Dick, with an army of sixty thousand men or so, made of such material as
ours has shown itself to be, we could surely beat any Southern force in
Kentucky!"

"Especially as we have no Lees and Stonewall Jacksons to fight."

"Maybe General Buell has divided his force in order to obtain plenty of
water," said Pennington. "We fellows ought to be fair to him."

"Perhaps you're right," said Warner, "and you're right when you say we
ought to be fair to him. I know it will be a great relief to General
Buell to find that we three are supporting his management of this army.
Shall I go and tell him, Frank?"

"Not now, but you can a little later on. Suppose you wait until a day or
two after the battle which we all believe is coming."

The three boys were really in high spirits. Little troubled them but the
dryness and the dust. They had tasted so much of defeat and drawn battle
in the east that they had an actual physical sense of better things in
the west. The horizons were wider, the mountains were lower, and there
was not so much enveloping forest. They did not have the strangling
sensation, mental only, which came from the fear that hostile armies
would suddenly rush from the woods and fall upon their flank.

Besides, there was Shiloh. After all, they had won Shiloh, and the
coming of this very Buell who led them now had enabled them to win it.
And Shiloh was the only great battle that they had yet really won.

They camped that night in the dry fields. The Winchester regiment was a
part of the division under McCook, while Buell with the rest of the army
was some miles away. It was still warm, although October was now seven
days old, and Dick had never before heard the grass and leaves rustle
so dryly under the wind. Off in the direction of Perryville they saw
the dim gleam of red, and they knew it came from the camp-fires of the
Southern army. Buell had in his detached divisions sixty thousand
men, most of them veterans and Dick believed that if they were brought
together victory was absolutely sure on the morrow.

The troops around the Winchester regiment were lads from Ohio, and they
affiliated readily. Most of the new men were in these Ohio regiments,
and Dick, Warner and Frank felt themselves ancient veterans who could
talk to the recruits and give them good advice. And the recruits took
it in the proper spirit. They looked up with admiration to those who had
been at Shiloh, and the Second Manassas and Antietam.

Dick thought their spirit remarkable. They were not daunted at all by
the great failures in the east. They did not discount the valor of the
Southern troops, but they asked to be led against them.

"Come over here," said one of the Ohio boys to Dick. "Ahead of us and
on the side there's rough ground with thick woods and deep ravines. I'll
show you something just at the edge of the woods. Bring your friends
with you."

The twilight had already turned to night and Dick, calling Warner and
Pennington, went with his new friend. There, flowing from under a great
stone, shaded by a huge oak, was a tiny stream of pure cold water a
couple of inches deep but seven or eight inches broad. Under the stone
a beautiful basin a foot and a half across and about as deep had been
chiselled out.

"A lot of us found it here," said the Ohio boy, "and we found, too, a
tin cup chained to a staple driven into the stone. See, it's here still.
We haven't broken the chain. I suppose it belongs to some farmer close
by. The boys brought other tin cups and we drank so fast that the brook
itself became dry. The water never got any further than the pool. I
suppose it's just started again. Drink."

The boys drank deeply and gratefully. No such refreshing stream had ever
flowed down their throats before.

"Ohio," said Dick, "you're a lovely, dirty angel."

"I guess I am," said Ohio, "'cause I found the spring. It turned me from
an old man back to a boy again. Cold as ice, ain't it? I can tell you
why. This spring starts right at the North Pole, right under the pole
itself, dives away down into the earth, comes under Bering Sea and then
under British America, and then under the lakes, and then under Ohio,
and then under a part of Kentucky, and then comes out here especially to
oblige us, this being a dry season."

"I believe every word you say, Ohio," said Warner, "since your
statements are proved by the quality of the water. I could easily
demonstrate it as a mathematical proposition."

"Don't you pay any attention to him, Ohio," said Dick. "He's from
Vermont, and he's so full of big words that he's bound to get rid of
some of them."

"I'm not doubting you, Vermont," said Ohio. "As you believe every word I
said, I believe every word you said."

"There's nothing extraordinary about them things," said another Ohio
boy belonging to a different brigade, who was sitting near. "Do you know
that we swallowed a whole river coming down here? We began swallowing it
when we crossed the Ohio, just like a big snake swallowing a snake not
quite so big, taking down his head first, then keeping on swallowing
him until the last tip of his tail disappeared inside. It was a good big
stream when we started, water up to our knees, but we formed across it
in a line five hundred men deep and then began to drink as we marched
forward. Of course, a lot of water got past the first four hundred lines
or so, but the five hundredth always swallowed up the last drop."

"We marched against that stream for something like a hundred and fifty
miles. No water ever got past us. We left a perfectly dry bed behind.
Up in the northern part of the state not a drop of water came down the
river in a month. We followed it, or at least a lot of us did, clean
to its source in some hills a piece back of us. We drank it dry up to a
place like this, only bigger, and do you know, a fellow of our company
named Jim Lambert was following it up under the rocks, and we had to
pull him out by the feet to keep him from being suffocated. That was
four days ago, and we had a field telegram yesterday from a place near
the Ohio, saying that a full head of water had come down the river
again, three feet deep from bank to bank and running as if there had
been a cloudburst in the hills. Mighty glad they were to see it, too."

There was a silence, but at length a solemn youth sitting near said in
very serious tones:

"I've thought over that story very thoroughly, and I believe it's a
lie."

"Vermont," said the first Ohio lad, "don't you have faith in my friend's
narrative?"

"I believe every word of it," said Warner warmly. "Our friend here, who
I see can see, despite the dim light, has a countenance which one could
justly say indicates a doubtful and disputatious nature, wishes to
discredit it because he has not heard of such a thing before. Now, I
ask you, gentlemen, intelligent and fair-minded as I know you are, where
would we be, where would civilization be if we assumed the attitude of
our friend here. If a thing is ever seen at all somebody sees it first,
else it would never be seen. _Quod erat demonstrandum_. You remember
your schooldays, of course. I thank you for your applause, gentlemen,
but I'm not through yet. We have passed the question of things seen,
and we now come to the question of things done, which is perhaps more
important. It is obvious even to the doubtful or carping mind that if
a new thing is done it is done by somebody first. Others will do it
afterward, but there must and always will be a first.

"Nobody ever swallowed a river before, beginning at its mouth and
swallowing it clean down to its source, but a division of gallant young
troops from Ohio have done so. They are the first, and they must and
always will be the first. Doubtless, other rivers will be swallowed
later on. As the population increases, larger rivers will be swallowed,
but the credit for initiating the first and greatest pure-water drinking
movement in the history of the world will always belong to a brave army
division from the state of Ohio."

A roar of applause burst forth, and Warner, standing up, bowed
gracefully with his hand upon his heart. Then came a dead silence, as
a hand fell upon the Vermonter's shoulder. Warner looked around and
his jaw fell. General McCook, who commanded this part of the army, was
standing beside him.

"Excuse me, sir, I--" began Warner.

"Never mind," said the general. "I had come for a drink of water, and
hearing your debate I stopped for a few moments behind a tree to listen.
I don't know your name, young gentleman."

"Warner, sir, George Warner, first lieutenant in the regiment of Colonel
Winchester."

"I merely wished to say, Lieutenant Warner, that I listened to your
speech from the first word to the last, and I found it very cogent and
powerful. As you say, things must have beginnings. If there is no
first, there can be no second or third. I am entirely convinced by your
argument that our army swallowed a river as it marched southward.
In fact, I have often felt so thirsty that I felt as if I could have
swallowed it myself all alone."

There was another roar of applause, and as a dozen cups filled with
water were pushed at the general, he drank deeply and often, and then
retired amid further applause.

"They'll fight well for him, to-morrow," said Dick.

"No doubt of it," said Warner.

They went into the edge of the wood and sought sleep and rest. But there
was much merry chatter first among these lads, for many of whom death
had already spread its somber wings.




CHAPTER XIII. PERRYVILLE


Dick slept very well that night. The water from the little spring,
gushing out from under the rock, had refreshed him greatly. He would
have rejoiced in another bath, such as one as they had luxuriated in
that night before Frankfort, but it was a thing not be dreamed of now,
and making the best of things as they were, he had gone to sleep among
his comrades.

The dryness of the ground had at least one advantage. They had not colds
and rheumatism to fear, and, with warm earth beneath them and fresh air
above, they slept more soundly than if they had been in their own beds.
But while they were sleeping the wary Sergeant Whitley was slipping
forward among the woods and ravines. He had received permission from
Colonel Winchester, confirmed by a higher officer, to go on a scout, and
he meant to use his opportunity. He had made many a scouting trip on
the plains, where there was less cover than here, and there torture and
death were certain if captured, but here it would only be imprisonment
among men who were in no sense his personal enemies, and who would not
ill-treat him. So the sergeant took plenty of chances.

He passed the Union pickets, entered a ravine which led up between two
hills and followed it for some distance. In a cross ravine he found a
little stream of water, flowing down from some high, rocky ground above,
and, at one point, he came to a pool several yards across and three or
four feet deep. It was cool and fresh, and the sergeant could not resist
the temptation to slip off his clothes and dive into it once or twice.
He slipped his clothes on again, the whole not consuming more than five
minutes, and then went on much better equipped for war than he had been
five minutes before.

Then he descended the hills and came down into a valley crossed by a
creek, which in ordinary times had plenty of water, but which was now
reduced to a few muddy pools. The Southern pickets did not reach so far,
and save for the two tiny streams in the hills this was all the water
that the Northern army could reach. Farther down, its muddy and detached
stream lay within the Confederate lines.

Crossing the creek's bed the sergeant ascended a wooded ridge, and now
he proceeded with extreme caution. He had learned that beyond this ridge
was another creek containing much more water than the first. Upon its
banks at the crossing of the road stood the village of Perryville, and
there, according to his best information and belief, lay the Southern
army. But he meant to see with his own eyes and hear with his own ears,
and thus return to McCook's force with absolute certainty.

The sergeant, as he had expected, found cover more plentiful than it was
on the plains, but he never stalked an Indian camp with more caution. He
knew that the most of the Southern scouts and skirmishers were as wary
as the Indians that once hunted in these woods, and that, unless he used
extreme care, he was not likely to get past them.

He came at last to a point where he lay down flat on his stomach and
wormed himself along, keeping in the thickest shadow of woods and
bushes. The night was bright, and although his own body was blended with
the ground, he could see well about him. The sergeant was a very patient
man. Life as a lumberman and then as a soldier on the plains had taught
him to look where he was crawling. He spent a full hour worming himself
up to the crest of that ridge and a little way down on the other side.
In the course of the last fifteen minutes he passed directly between two
alert and vigilant Southern pickets. They looked his way several times,
but the sergeant was so much in harmony with the color scheme of the
earth on which he crept, that no blame lay upon them for not seeing him.

The sergeant was already hearing with his own ears. He heard these
pickets and others talking in low voices of the Northern army and of
their own. They knew that Buell's great force was approaching from
different points and that a battle was expected on the morrow. He knew
this already, but he wanted to know how much of the Confederate army lay
in Perryville, and he intended to see with his own eyes.

Having passed the first line of pickets the sergeant advanced more
rapidly, although he still kept well under cover. Advancing thus he
reached the bed of the creek and hid himself against the bank, allowing
his body to drop down in the water, in order that he might feel the
glorious cool thrill again, and also that he might be hidden to the
neck. His rifle and ammunition he laid at the edge of the bank within
reach. Situated thus comfortably, he used his excellent eyes with
excellent results. He could see Perryville on his left, and also a great
camp on some heights that ran along the creek. There were plenty of
lights in this camp, and, despite the lateness of the hour, officers
were passing about.

It was obvious to the sergeant that many thousands of soldiers were on
those heights, and now he wanted to hear again with his own ears. He did
not dare go any nearer, and the water in the creek was growing cold to
his body. But his patience was great, and still he waited, only his head
showing above the water, and it hidden in the black gloom of the bank's
shadows.

His reward came by-and-by. A number of cavalrymen led their horses down
to the creek to drink, and while the horses drank and then blew the
water away from their noses, the men talked at some length, enabling the
sergeant to pick up important scraps of information.

He learned that the heights were occupied by Hardee with two divisions.
It was the same Hardee, the famous tactician who had been one of the
Southern generals at Shiloh. Polk was expected, but he had not yet come
up. Bragg, too, would be there.

The brave sergeant's heart thumped as he listened. He gathered that
Polk, perhaps, could not arrive before noon, and here was a brilliant
chance to destroy a large part of the Southern army early in the
morning.

He waited until all the cavalrymen had gone away with their horses, and
then he crawled cautiously out of the stream. His limbs were cold and
stiff, but his enforced exercise in crawling soon brought back their
flexibility. He passed between the pickets again, and, when he was
safely beyond their hearing, he rose and stretched himself again and
again.

The sergeant greatly preferred walking to crawling. Primitive men might
have crawled, but to do so made the modern man's knees uncommonly sore.
So he continued to stretch, to inhale great draughts of air, and to feel
proudly that he was a man who walked upright and not a bear or a pig
creeping on four legs through the bushes.

He reached his own army not long afterward, and, walking among the
thousands of sleeping forms, reached the tree under which Colonel
Winchester slept.

"Colonel," he said gently.

The colonel awoke instantly and sat up. Despite the dusk he recognized
Whitley at once.

"Well, sergeant?" he said.

"I've been clean over the ridge to the rebel camp. I reached the next
creek and lay on the heights just beyond it. I've seen with my own
eyes and I've heard with my own ears. They've only two divisions there,
though they're expectin' Polk to come up in the mornin' an' Bragg, too.
Colonel, I'm a good reckoner, as I've seen lots of war, and they ain't
got more `n fifteen thousand men there on the creek, while if we get all
our divisions together we can hit `em with nigh on to sixty thousand.
For God's sake, Colonel, can't we do it?"
