The little boy brought them to a house, and at the window was a good,
bright mother-face. The little boy rushed in, and through the window
they could see him hugging his mother, then his eager lips moving and
his quick hands pointing.

A lady in soft green clothes came out, spoke kindly to them, and took
them into the oddest house they had ever seen. It was very bare, there
were no ornaments, and yet every single thing was beautiful, from
the dresser with its rows of bright china, to the thick squares of
Eastern-looking carpet on the floors. I can't describe that house; I
haven't the time. And I haven't heart either, when I think how different
it was from our houses. The lady took them all over it. The oddest thing
of all was the big room in the middle. It had padded walls and a soft,
thick carpet, and all the chairs and tables were padded. There wasn't a
single thing in it that anyone could hurt itself with.

'What ever's this for?--lunatics?' asked Cyril.

The lady looked very shocked.

'No! It's for the children, of course,' she said. 'Don't tell me that in
your country there are no children's rooms.'

'There are nurseries,' said Anthea doubtfully, 'but the furniture's all
cornery and hard, like other rooms.'

'How shocking!' said the lady;'you must be VERY much behind the times in
your country! Why, the children are more than half of the people; it's
not much to have one room where they can have a good time and not hurt
themselves.'

'But there's no fireplace,' said Anthea.

'Hot-air pipes, of course,' said the lady. 'Why, how could you have a
fire in a nursery? A child might get burned.'

'In our country,' said Robert suddenly, 'more than 3,000 children are
burned to death every year. Father told me,' he added, as if apologizing
for this piece of information, 'once when I'd been playing with fire.'

The lady turned quite pale.

'What a frightful place you must live in!' she said. 'What's all the
furniture padded for?' Anthea asked, hastily turning the subject.

'Why, you couldn't have little tots of two or three running about in
rooms where the things were hard and sharp! They might hurt themselves.'

Robert fingered the scar on his forehead where he had hit it against the
nursery fender when he was little.

'But does everyone have rooms like this, poor people and all?' asked
Anthea.

'There's a room like this wherever there's a child, of course,' said the
lady. 'How refreshingly ignorant you are!--no, I don't mean ignorant,
my dear. Of course, you're awfully well up in ancient History. But I see
you haven't done your Duties of Citizenship Course yet.'

'But beggars, and people like that?' persisted Anthea 'and tramps and
people who haven't any homes?'

'People who haven't any homes?' repeated the lady. 'I really DON'T
understand what you're talking about.'

'It's all different in our country,' said Cyril carefully; and I have
read it used to be different in London. Usedn't people to have no homes
and beg because they were hungry? And wasn't London very black and
dirty once upon a time? And the Thames all muddy and filthy? And narrow
streets, and--'

'You must have been reading very old-fashioned books,' said the lady.
'Why, all that was in the dark ages! My husband can tell you more about
it than I can. He took Ancient History as one of his special subjects.'

'I haven't seen any working people,' said Anthea.

'Why, we're all working people,' said the lady; 'at least my husband's a
carpenter.'

'Good gracious!' said Anthea; 'but you're a lady!'

'Ah,' said the lady, 'that quaint old word! Well, my husband WILL enjoy
a talk with you. In the dark ages everyone was allowed to have a smoky
chimney, and those nasty horses all over the streets, and all sorts of
rubbish thrown into the Thames. And, of course, the sufferings of the
people will hardly bear thinking of. It's very learned of you to know it
all. Did you make Ancient History your special subject?'

'Not exactly,' said Cyril, rather uneasily. 'What is the Duties of
Citizenship Course about?'

'Don't you REALLY know? Aren't you pretending--just for fun? Really not?
Well, that course teaches you how to be a good citizen, what you must
do and what you mayn't do, so as to do your full share of the work of
making your town a beautiful and happy place for people to live in.
There's a quite simple little thing they teach the tiny children. How
does it go...?

   'I must not steal and I must learn,
   Nothing is mine that I do not earn.
   I must try in work and play
   To make things beautiful every day.
   I must be kind to everyone,
   And never let cruel things be done.
   I must be brave, and I must try
   When I am hurt never to cry,
   And always laugh as much as I can,
   And be glad that I'm going to be a man
   To work for my living and help the rest
   And never do less than my very best.'

'That's very easy,' said Jane. '_I_ could remember that.'

'That's only the very beginning, of course,' said the lady; 'there are
heaps more rhymes. There's the one beginning--

   'I must not litter the beautiful street
   With bits of paper or things to eat;
   I must not pick the public flowers,
   They are not MINE, but they are OURS.'

'And "things to eat" reminds me--are you hungry? Wells, run and get a
tray of nice things.'

'Why do you call him "Wells"?' asked Robert, as the boy ran off.

'It's after the great reformer--surely you've heard of HIM? He lived in
the dark ages, and he saw that what you ought to do is to find out what
you want and then try to get it. Up to then people had always tried
to tinker up what they'd got. We've got a great many of the things he
thought of. Then "Wells" means springs of clear water. It's a nice name,
don't you think?'

Here Wells returned with strawberries and cakes and lemonade on a tray,
and everybody ate and enjoyed.

'Now, Wells,' said the lady, 'run off or you'll be late and not meet
your Daddy.'

Wells kissed her, waved to the others, and went.

'Look here,' said Anthea suddenly, 'would you like to come to OUR
country, and see what it's like? It wouldn't take you a minute.'

The lady laughed. But Jane held up the charm and said the word.

'What a splendid conjuring trick!' cried the lady, enchanted with the
beautiful, growing arch.

'Go through,' said Anthea.

The lady went, laughing. But she did not laugh when she found herself,
suddenly, in the dining-room at Fitzroy Street.

'Oh, what a HORRIBLE trick!' she cried. 'What a hateful, dark, ugly
place!'

She ran to the window and looked out. The sky was grey, the street was
foggy, a dismal organ-grinder was standing opposite the door, a beggar
and a man who sold matches were quarrelling at the edge of the pavement
on whose greasy black surface people hurried along, hastening to get to
the shelter of their houses.

'Oh, look at their faces, their horrible faces!' she cried. 'What's the
matter with them all?'

'They're poor people, that's all,' said Robert.

'But it's NOT all! They're ill, they're unhappy, they're wicked! Oh,
do stop it, there's dear children. It's very, very clever. Some sort of
magic-lantern trick, I suppose, like I've read of. But DO stop it. Oh!
their poor, tired, miserable, wicked faces!'

The tears were in her eyes. Anthea signed to Jane. The arch grew, they
spoke the words, and pushed the lady through it into her own time and
place, where London is clean and beautiful, and the Thames runs clear
and bright, and the green trees grow, and no one is afraid, or anxious,
or in a hurry. There was a silence. Then--

'I'm glad we went,' said Anthea, with a deep breath.

'I'll never throw paper about again as long as I live,' said Robert.

'Mother always told us not to,' said Jane.

'I would like to take up the Duties of Citizenship for a special
subject,' said Cyril. 'I wonder if Father could put me through it. I
shall ask him when he comes home.'

'If we'd found the Amulet, Father could be home NOW,' said Anthea, 'and
Mother and The Lamb.'

'Let's go into the future AGAIN,' suggested Jane brightly. 'Perhaps we
could remember if it wasn't such an awful way off.'

So they did. This time they said, 'The future, where the Amulet is, not
so far away.'

And they went through the familiar arch into a large, light room with
three windows. Facing them was the familiar mummy-case. And at a table
by the window sat the learned gentleman. They knew him at once, though
his hair was white. He was one of the faces that do not change with age.
In his hand was the Amulet--complete and perfect.

He rubbed his other hand across his forehead in the way they were so
used to.

'Dreams, dreams!' he said; 'old age is full of them!'

'You've been in dreams with us before now,' said Robert, 'don't you
remember?'

'I do, indeed,' said he. The room had many more books than the Fitzroy
Street room, and far more curious and wonderful Assyrian and Egyptian
objects. 'The most wonderful dreams I ever had had you in them.'

'Where,' asked Cyril, 'did you get that thing in your hand?'

'If you weren't just a dream,' he answered, smiling, you'd remember that
you gave it to me.'

'But where did we get it?' Cyril asked eagerly.

'Ah, you never would tell me that,' he said, 'You always had your little
mysteries. You dear children! What a difference you made to that old
Bloomsbury house! I wish I could dream you oftener. Now you're grown up
you're not like you used to be.'

'Grown up?' said Anthea.

The learned gentleman pointed to a frame with four photographs in it.

'There you are,' he said.

The children saw four grown-up people's portraits--two ladies, two
gentlemen--and looked on them with loathing.

'Shall we grow up like THAT?' whispered Jane. 'How perfectly horrid!'

'If we're ever like that, we sha'n't know it's horrid, I expect,' Anthea
with some insight whispered back. 'You see, you get used to yourself
while you're changing. It's--it's being so sudden makes it seem so
frightful now.'

The learned gentleman was looking at them with wistful kindness. 'Don't
let me undream you just yet,' he said. There was a pause.

'Do you remember WHEN we gave you that Amulet?' Cyril asked suddenly.

'You know, or you would if you weren't a dream, that it was on the 3rd
December, 1905. I shall never forget THAT day.'

'Thank you,' said Cyril, earnestly; 'oh, thank you very much.'

'You've got a new room,' said Anthea, looking out of the window, 'and
what a lovely garden!'

'Yes,' said he, 'I'm too old now to care even about being near the
Museum. This is a beautiful place. Do you know--I can hardly believe
you're just a dream, you do look so exactly real. Do you know...' his
voice dropped, 'I can say it to YOU, though, of course, if I said it to
anyone that wasn't a dream they'd call me mad; there was something about
that Amulet you gave me--something very mysterious.'

'There was that,' said Robert.

'Ah, I don't mean your pretty little childish mysteries about where you
got it. But about the thing itself. First, the wonderful dreams I used
to have, after you'd shown me the first half of it! Why, my book on
Atlantis, that I did, was the beginning of my fame and my fortune, too.
And I got it all out of a dream! And then, "Britain at the Time of the
Roman Invasion"--that was only a pamphlet, but it explained a lot of
things people hadn't understood.'

'Yes,' said Anthea, 'it would.'

'That was the beginning. But after you'd given me the whole of the
Amulet--ah, it was generous of you!--then, somehow, I didn't need to
theorize, I seemed to KNOW about the old Egyptian civilization. And
they can't upset my theories'--he rubbed his thin hands and laughed
triumphantly--'they can't, though they've tried. Theories, they call
them, but they're more like--I don't know--more like memories. I KNOW
I'm right about the secret rites of the Temple of Amen.'

'I'm so glad you're rich,' said Anthea. 'You weren't, you know, at
Fitzroy Street.'

'Indeed I wasn't,' said he, 'but I am now. This beautiful house and this
lovely garden--I dig in it sometimes; you remember, you used to tell
me to take more exercise? Well, I feel I owe it all to you--and the
Amulet.'

'I'm so glad,' said Anthea, and kissed him. He started.

'THAT didn't feel like a dream,' he said, and his voice trembled.

'It isn't exactly a dream,' said Anthea softly, 'it's all part of the
Amulet--it's a sort of extra special, real dream, dear Jimmy.'

'Ah,' said he, 'when you call me that, I know I'm dreaming. My little
sister--I dream of her sometimes. But it's not real like this. Do you
remember the day I dreamed you brought me the Babylonish ring?'

'We remember it all,' said Robert. 'Did you leave Fitzroy Street because
you were too rich for it?'

'Oh, no!' he said reproachfully. 'You know I should never have done such
a thing as that. Of course, I left when your old Nurse died and--what's
