said "well-TRAINED." Well-trained in what way?  He felt his forehead
prickle slightly as he thought of the smiling, keen look which set
itself so straight upon him.  Had he spoken to him in Samavian for an
experiment, to see if he would be startled into forgetting that he had
been trained to seem to know only the language of the country he was
temporarily living in?  But he had not forgotten. He had remembered
well, and was thankful that he had betrayed nothing.  "Even exiles may
be Samavian soldiers.  I am one.  You must be one," his father had said
on that day long ago when he had made him take his oath.  Perhaps
remembering his training was being a soldier.  Never had Samavia needed
help as she needed it to-day.  Two years before, a rival claimant to
the throne had assassinated the then reigning king and his sons, and
since then, bloody war and tumult had raged.  The new king was a
powerful man, and had a great following of the worst and most
self-seeking of the people.  Neighboring countries had interfered for
their own welfare's sake, and the newspapers had been full of stories
of savage fighting and atrocities, and of starving peasants.

Marco had late one evening entered their lodgings to find Loristan
walking to and fro like a lion in a cage, a paper crushed and torn in
his hands, and his eyes blazing.  He had been reading of cruelties
wrought upon innocent peasants and women and children.  Lazarus was
standing staring at him with huge tears running down his cheeks.  When
Marco opened the door, the old soldier strode over to him, turned him
about, and led him out of the room.

"Pardon, sir, pardon!" he sobbed.  "No one must see him, not even you.
He suffers so horribly."

He stood by a chair in Marco's own small bedroom, where he half pushed,
half led him.  He bent his grizzled head, and wept like a beaten child.

"Dear God of those who are in pain, assuredly it is now the time to
give back to us our Lost Prince!" he said, and Marco knew the words
were a prayer, and wondered at the frenzied intensity of it, because it
seemed so wild a thing to pray for the return of a youth who had died
five hundred years before.

When he reached the palace, he was still thinking of the man who had
spoken to him.  He was thinking of him even as he looked at the
majestic gray stone building and counted the number of its stories and
windows.  He walked round it that he might make a note in his memory of
its size and form and its entrances, and guess at the size of its
gardens.  This he did because it was part of his game, and part of his
strange training.

When he came back to the front, he saw that in the great entrance court
within the high iron railings an elegant but quiet-looking closed
carriage was drawing up before the doorway.  Marco stood and watched
with interest to see who would come out and enter it. He knew that
kings and emperors who were not on parade looked merely like
well-dressed private gentlemen, and often chose to go out as simply and
quietly as other men.  So he thought that, perhaps, if he waited, he
might see one of those well-known faces which represent the highest
rank and power in a monarchical country, and which in times gone by had
also represented the power over human life and death and liberty.

"I should like to be able to tell my father that I have seen the King
and know his face, as I know the faces of the czar and the two
emperors."

There was a little movement among the tall men-servants in the royal
scarlet liveries, and an elderly man descended the steps attended by
another who walked behind him.  He entered the carriage, the other man
followed him, the door was closed, and the carriage drove through the
entrance gates, where the sentries saluted.

Marco was near enough to see distinctly.  The two men were talking as
if interested.  The face of the one farthest from him was the face he
had often seen in shop-windows and newspapers. The boy made his quick,
formal salute.  It was the King; and, as he smiled and acknowledged his
greeting, he spoke to his companion.

"That fine lad salutes as if he belonged to the army," was what he
said, though Marco could not hear him.

His companion leaned forward to look through the window.  When he
caught sight of Marco, a singular expression crossed his face.

"He does belong to an army, sir," he answered, "though he does not know
it.  His name is Marco Loristan."

Then Marco saw him plainly for the first time.  He was the man with the
keen eyes who had spoken to him in Samavian.



IV

THE RAT

Marco would have wondered very much if he had heard the words, but, as
he did not hear them, he turned toward home wondering at something
else.  A man who was in intimate attendance on a king must be a person
of importance.  He no doubt knew many things not only of his own
ruler's country, but of the countries of other kings.  But so few had
really known anything of poor little Samavia until the newspapers had
begun to tell them of the horrors of its war--and who but a Samavian
could speak its language?  It would be an interesting thing to tell his
father--that a man who knew the King had spoken to him in Samavian, and
had sent that curious message.

Later he found himself passing a side street and looked up it. It was
so narrow, and on either side of it were such old, tall, and
sloping-walled houses that it attracted his attention.  It looked as if
a bit of old London had been left to stand while newer places grew up
and hid it from view.  This was the kind of street he liked to pass
through for curiosity's sake.  He knew many of them in the old quarters
of many cities.  He had lived in some of them.  He could find his way
home from the other end of it.  Another thing than its queerness
attracted him.  He heard a clamor of boys' voices, and he wanted to see
what they were doing.  Sometimes, when he had reached a new place and
had had that lonely feeling, he had followed some boyish clamor of play
or wrangling, and had found a temporary friend or so.

Half-way to the street's end there was an arched brick passage. The
sound of the voices came from there--one of them high, and thinner and
shriller than the rest.  Marco tramped up to the arch and looked down
through the passage.  It opened on to a gray flagged space, shut in by
the railings of a black, deserted, and ancient graveyard behind a
venerable church which turned its face toward some other street.  The
boys were not playing, but listening to one of their number who was
reading to them from a newspaper.

Marco walked down the passage and listened also, standing in the dark
arched outlet at its end and watching the boy who read.  He was a
strange little creature with a big forehead, and deep eyes which were
curiously sharp.  But this was not all.  He had a hunch back, his legs
seemed small and crooked.  He sat with them crossed before him on a
rough wooden platform set on low wheels, on which he evidently pushed
himself about.  Near him were a number of sticks stacked together as if
they were rifles.  One of the first things that Marco noticed was that
he had a savage little face marked with lines as if he had been angry
all his life.

"Hold your tongues, you fools!" he shrilled out to some boys who
interrupted him.  "Don't you want to know anything, you ignorant swine?"

He was as ill-dressed as the rest of them, but he did not speak in the
Cockney dialect.  If he was of the riffraff of the streets, as his
companions were, he was somehow different.

Then he, by chance, saw Marco, who was standing in the arched end of
the passage.

"What are you doing there listening?" he shouted, and at once stooped
to pick up a stone and threw it at him.  The stone hit Marco's
shoulder, but it did not hurt him much.  What he did not like was that
another lad should want to throw something at him before they had even
exchanged boy-signs.  He also did not like the fact that two other boys
promptly took the matter up by bending down to pick up stones also.

He walked forward straight into the group and stopped close to the
hunchback.

"What did you do that for?" he asked, in his rather deep young voice.

He was big and strong-looking enough to suggest that he was not a boy
it would be easy to dispose of, but it was not that which made the
group stand still a moment to stare at him.  It was something in
himself--half of it a kind of impartial lack of anything like
irritation at the stone-throwing.  It was as if it had not mattered to
him in the least.  It had not made him feel angry or insulted.  He was
only rather curious about it.  Because he was clean, and his hair and
his shabby clothes were brushed, the first impression given by his
appearance as he stood in the archway was that he was a young "toff"
poking his nose where it was not wanted; but, as he drew near, they saw
that the well-brushed clothes were worn, and there were patches on his
shoes.

"What did you do that for?" he asked, and he asked it merely as if he
wanted to find out the reason.

"I'm not going to have you swells dropping in to my club as if it was
your own," said the hunchback.

"I'm not a swell, and I didn't know it was a club," Marco answered.  "I
heard boys, and I thought I'd come and look.  When I heard you reading
about Samavia, I wanted to hear."

He looked at the reader with his silent-expressioned eyes.

"You needn't have thrown a stone," he added.  "They don't do it at
men's clubs.  I'll go away."

He turned about as if he were going, but, before he had taken three
steps, the hunchback hailed him unceremoniously.

"Hi!" he called out.  "Hi, you!"

"What do you want?" said Marco.

"I bet you don't know where Samavia is, or what they're fighting
about."  The hunchback threw the words at him.

"Yes, I do.  It's north of Beltrazo and east of Jiardasia, and they are
fighting because one party has assassinated King Maran, and the other
will not let them crown Nicola Iarovitch.  And why should they?  He's a
brigand, and hasn't a drop of royal blood in him."

"Oh!" reluctantly admitted the hunchback.  "You do know that much, do
you?  Come back here."

Marco turned back, while the boys still stared.  It was as if two
leaders or generals were meeting for the first time, and the rabble,
looking on, wondered what would come of their encounter.

"The Samavians of the Iarovitch party are a bad lot and want only bad
things," said Marco, speaking first.  "They care nothing for Samavia.
They only care for money and the power to make laws which will serve
them and crush everybody else.  They know Nicola is a weak man, and
that, if they can crown him king, they can make him do what they like."

The fact that he spoke first, and that, though he spoke in a steady
boyish voice without swagger, he somehow seemed to take it for granted
that they would listen, made his place for him at once.  Boys are
impressionable creatures, and they know a leader when they see him.
The hunchback fixed glittering eyes on him. The rabble began to murmur.

"Rat! Rat!" several voices cried at once in good strong Cockney.  "Arst
'im some more, Rat!"

"Is that what they call you?" Marco asked the hunchback.

"It's what I called myself," he answered resentfully.  "'The Rat.'
Look at me!  Crawling round on the ground like this!  Look at me!"

He made a gesture ordering his followers to move aside, and began to
push himself rapidly, with queer darts this side and that round the
inclosure.  He bent his head and body, and twisted his face, and made
strange animal-like movements.  He even uttered sharp squeaks as he
rushed here and there--as a rat might have done when it was being
hunted.  He did it as if he were displaying an accomplishment, and his
followers' laughter was applause.

"Wasn't I like a rat?" he demanded, when he suddenly stopped.

"You made yourself like one on purpose," Marco answered.  "You do it
for fun."

"Not so much fun," said The Rat.  "I feel like one.  Every one's my
enemy.  I'm vermin.  I can't fight or defend myself unless I bite.  I
can bite, though."  And he showed two rows of fierce, strong, white
teeth, sharper at the points than human teeth usually are.  "I bite my
father when he gets drunk and beats me.  I've bitten him till he's
learned to remember."  He laughed a shrill, squeaking laugh.  "He
hasn't tried it for three months--even when he was drunk--and he's
always drunk." Then he laughed again still more shrilly.  "He's a
gentleman," he said.  "I'm a gentleman's son.  He was a Master at a big
school until he was kicked out--that was when I was four and my mother
died.  I'm thirteen now.  How old are you?"

"I'm twelve," answered Marco.

The Rat twisted his face enviously.

"I wish I was your size!  Are you a gentleman's son?  You look as if
you were."

"I'm a very poor man's son," was Marco's answer.  "My father is a
writer."

"Then, ten to one, he's a sort of gentleman," said The Rat. Then quite
suddenly he threw another question at him.  "What's the name of the
other Samavian party?"

"The Maranovitch.  The Maranovitch and the Iarovitch have been fighting
with each other for five hundred years.  First one dynasty rules, and
then the other gets in when it has killed somebody as it killed King
Maran," Marco answered without hesitation.

"What was the name of the dynasty that ruled before they began
fighting?  The first Maranovitch assassinated the last of them," The
Rat asked him.

"The Fedorovitch," said Marco.  "The last one was a bad king."

"His son was the one they never found again," said The Rat. "The one
they call the Lost Prince."

Marco would have started but for his long training in exterior
self-control.  It was so strange to hear his dream-hero spoken of in
this back alley in a slum, and just after he had been thinking of him.

"What do you know about him?" he asked, and, as he did so, he saw the
group of vagabond lads draw nearer.

"Not much.  I only read something about him in a torn magazine I found
in the street," The Rat answered.  "The man that wrote about him said
he was only part of a legend, and he laughed at people for believing in
him.  He said it was about time that he should turn up again if he
intended to.  I've invented things about him because these chaps like
to hear me tell them.  They're only stories."

"We likes 'im," a voice called out, "becos 'e wos the right sort; 'e'd
fight, 'e would, if 'e was in Samavia now."

Marco rapidly asked himself how much he might say.  He decided and
spoke to them all.

"He is not part of a legend.  He's part of Samavian history," he said.
"I know something about him too."

"How did you find it out?" asked The Rat.

"Because my father's a writer, he's obliged to have books and papers,
and he knows things.  I like to read, and I go into the free libraries.
You can always get books and papers there.  Then I ask my father
questions.  All the newspapers are full of things about Samavia just
now."  Marco felt that this was an explanation which betrayed nothing.
It was true that no one could open a newspaper at this period without
seeing news and stories of Samavia.

The Rat saw possible vistas of information opening up before him.

"Sit down here," he said, "and tell us what you know about him.  Sit
down, you fellows."

There was nothing to sit on but the broken flagged pavement, but that
was a small matter.  Marco himself had sat on flags or bare ground
often enough before, and so had the rest of the lads.  He took his
place near The Rat, and the others made a semicircle in front of them.
The two leaders had joined forces, so to speak, and the followers fell
into line at "attention."

Then the new-comer began to talk.  It was a good story, that of the
Lost Prince, and Marco told it in a way which gave it reality.  How
could he help it?  He knew, as they could not, that it was real.  He
who had pored over maps of little Samavia since his seventh year, who
had studied them with his father, knew it as a country he could have
found his way to any part of if he had been dropped in any forest or
any mountain of it.  He knew every highway and byway, and in the
capital city of Melzarr could almost have made his way blindfolded.  He
knew the palaces and the forts, the churches, the poor streets and the
rich ones.  His father had once shown him a plan of the royal palace
which they had studied together until the boy knew each apartment and
corridor in it by heart.  But this he did not speak of.  He knew it was
one of the things to be silent about.  But of the mountains and the
emerald velvet meadows climbing their sides and only ending where huge
bare crags and peaks began, he could speak.  He could make pictures of
the wide fertile plains where herds of wild horses fed, or raced and
sniffed the air; he could describe the fertile valleys where clear
rivers ran and flocks of sheep pastured on deep sweet grass.  He could
speak of them because he could offer a good enough reason for his
knowledge of them.  It was not the only reason he had for his
knowledge, but it was one which would serve well enough.

"That torn magazine you found had more than one article about Samavia
in it," he said to The Rat.  "The same man wrote four. I read them all
in a free library.  He had been to Samavia, and knew a great deal about
it.  He said it was one of the most beautiful countries he had ever
traveled in--and the most fertile.  That's what they all say of it."

The group before him knew nothing of fertility or open country. They
only knew London back streets and courts.  Most of them had never
traveled as far as the public parks, and in fact scarcely believed in
their existence.  They were a rough lot, and as they had stared at
Marco at first sight of him, so they continued to stare at him as he
talked.  When he told of the tall Samavians who had been like giants
centuries ago, and who had hunted the wild horses and captured and
trained them to obedience by a sort of strong and gentle magic, their
mouths fell open.  This was the sort of thing to allure any boy's
imagination.

"Blimme, if I wouldn't 'ave liked ketchin' one o' them 'orses," broke
in one of the audience, and his exclamation was followed by a dozen of
like nature from the others.  Who wouldn't have liked "ketchin' one"?

When he told of the deep endless-seeming forests, and of the herdsmen
and shepherds who played on their pipes and made songs about high deeds
and bravery, they grinned with pleasure without knowing they were
grinning.  They did not really know that in this neglected,
broken-flagged inclosure, shut in on one side by smoke-blackened,
poverty-stricken houses, and on the other by a deserted and forgotten
sunken graveyard, they heard the rustle of green forest boughs where
birds nested close, the swish of the summer wind in the river reeds,
and the tinkle and laughter and rush of brooks running.
