without. Throwing on some clothes he ran rapidly downstairs and lighted
several lamps in the machine room. Then he went to the door, which was
already tottering under the heavy blows, shot back some of the bolts,
and then took his place by the side of the pile of barrels with a pistol
in his hand.

In another moment the door yielded and fell with a crash, and the crowd
with exultant cheers poured in.

They paused surprised and irresolute at seeing Ned standing quiet and
seemingly indifferent by the pile of barrels in the center of the room.

"Hold!" he said in a quiet, clear voice, which sounded distinctly over
the tumult. "Do not come any nearer, or it will be the worse for you.
Do you know what I have got here, lads? This is powder. If you doubt it,
one of you can come forward and look at this barrel with the head out by
my side. Now I have only got to fire my pistol into it to blow the mill,
and you with it, into the air, and I mean to do it. Of course I shall go
too; but some of you with black masks over your faces, who, I suppose,
live near here, may know something about me, and may know that my life
is not so pleasant a one that I value it in the slightest. As far as I
am concerned you might burn the mill and me with it without my lifting a
finger; but this mill is the property of my mother, brother, and sister.
Their living depends upon it, and I am going to defend it. Let one of
you stir a single step forward and I fire this pistol into this barrel
beside me."

And Ned held the pistol over the open barrel.

A dead silence of astonishment and terror had fallen upon the crowd. The
light was sufficient for them to see Ned's pale but determined face, and
as his words came out cold and steady there was not one who doubted that
he was in earnest, and that he was prepared to blow himself and them
into the air if necessary.

A cry of terror burst from them as he lowered the pistol to the barrel
of powder. Then in wild dismay every man threw down his arms and fled,
jostling each other fiercely to make their escape through the doorway
from the fate which threatened them. In a few seconds the place was
cleared and the assailants in full flight across the country. Ned
laughed contemptuously. Then with some difficulty he lifted the broken
door into its place, put some props behind it, fetched a couple of
blankets from his bed, and lay down near the powder, and there slept
quietly till morning.

Luke and Bill Swinton were down at the factory an hour before the usual
time. The assailants had for the most part come over from Huddersfield,
but many of the men from Varley had been among them. The terror which
Ned's attitude had inspired had been so great that the secret was less
well kept than usual, and as soon as people were astir the events of the
night were known to most in the village. The moment the news reached the
ears of Luke and Bill they hurried down to the mill without going in as
usual for their mug of beer and bit of bread and cheese at the "Brown
Cow." The sight of the shattered door at once told them that the rumors
they had heard were well founded. They knocked loudly upon it.

"Hullo!" Ned shouted, rousing himself from his slumbers; "who is there?
What are you kicking up all this row about?"

"It's oi, Maister Ned, oi and Bill, and glad oi am to hear your voice.
It's true, then, they haven't hurt thee?"

"Not a bit of it," Ned said as he moved the supports of the door. "I
think they got the worst of it."

"If so be as what oi ha' heard be true you may well say that, Maister
Ned. Oi hear as you ha' gived 'em such a fright as they won't get
over in a hurry. They say as you was a-sitting on the top of a heap of
gunpowder up to the roof with a pistol in each hand."

"Not quite so terrible as that, Luke; but the effect would have been the
same. Those twelve barrels of powder you see there would have blown the
mill and all in it into atoms."

"Lord, Maister Ned," Bill said, "where didst thou get that powder, and
why didn't ye say nowt about it? Oi ha' seen it up in the office, now
oi thinks on it. Oi wondered what them barrels piled up in a corner and
covered over wi' sacking could be; but it warn't no business o' mine to
ax."

"No, Bill, I did not want any of them to know about it, because these
things get about, and half the effect is lost unless they come as a
surprise; but I meant to do it if I had been driven to it, and if I had,
King Lud would have had a lesson which he would not have forgotten in
a hurry. Now, Luke, you and Bill had better help me carry them back to
their usual place. I don't think they are likely to be wanted again."

"That they won't be," Luke said confidently; "the Luddites ull never
come near this mill agin, not if thou hast twenty toimes as many
machines. They ha' got a froight they won't get over. They told me as
how some of the chaps at Varley was so freighted that they will be a
long toime afore they gets round. Oi'll go and ask tonight how that
Methurdy chap, the blacksmith, be a feeling. Oi reckon he's at the
bottom on it. Dang un for a mischievous rogue! Varley would ha' been
quiet enough without him. Oi be wrong if oi shan't see him dangling from
a gibbet one of these days, and a good riddance too."

The powder was stowed away before the hands began to arrive, all full of
wonder and curiosity. They learned little at the mill, however. Ned went
about the place as usual with an unchanged face, and the hands were soon
at their work; but many during the day wondered how it was possible that
their quiet and silent young employer should have been the hero of
the desperate act of which every one had heard reports more or less
exaggerated.

A lad had been sent over to Marsden the first thing for some carpenters,
and by nightfall a rough but strong door had been hung in place of that
which had been shattered. By the next day rumor had carried the tale all
over Marsden, and Ned on his return home was greeted by Charlie with:

"Why, Ned, there is all sorts of talk in the place of an attack upon the
mill the night before last. Why didn't you tell me about it?"

"Yes, Maister Ned," Abijah put in, "and they say as you blew up about a
thousand of them."

"Yes, Abijah," Ned said with a laugh, "and the pieces haven't come down
yet."

"No! but really, Ned, what is it all about?"

"There is not much to tell you, Charlie. The Luddites came and broke
open the door. I had got several barrels of powder there, and when they
came in I told them if they came any further I should blow the place up.
That put them in a funk, and they all bolted, and I went to sleep again.
That's the whole affair."

"Oh!" Charlie said in a disappointed voice, for this seemed rather tame
after the thrilling reports he had heard.

"Then you didn't blow up any of 'em, Maister Ned," Abijah said
doubtfully.

"Not a man jack, Abijah. You see I could not very well have blown them
up without going up myself too, so I thought it better to put it off for
another time."

"They are very wicked, bad men," Lucy said gravely.

"Not so very wicked and bad, Lucy. You see they are almost starving, and
they consider that the new machines have taken the bread out of their
mouths, which is true enough. Now you know when people are starving,
and have not bread for their wives and children, they are apt to get
desperate. If I were to see you starving, and thought that somebody or
something was keeping the bread out of your mouth, I dare say I should
do something desperate."

"But it would be wrong all the same," Lucy said doubtfully.

"Yes, my dear, but it would be natural; and when human nature pulls one
way, and what is right pulls the other, the human nature generally gets
the best of it."

Lucy did not exactly understand, but she shook her head gravely in
general dissent to Ned's view.

"Why did you not tell us when you came home to breakfast yesterday?"
Charlie asked.

"Because I thought you were sure to hear sooner or later. I saw all the
hands in the mill had got to know about it somehow or other, and I was
sure it would soon get over the place; and I would rather that I could
say, if any one asked me, that I had not talked about it to any one, and
was in no way responsible for the absurd stories which had got about.
I have been talked about enough in Marsden, goodness knows, and it is
disgusting that just as I should think they must be getting tired of the
subject here is something fresh for them to begin upon again."

As they were at tea the servant brought in a note which had just been
left at the door. It was from Mr. Thompson, saying that in consequence
of the rumors which were current in the town he should be glad to learn
from Ned whether there was any foundation for them, and would therefore
be obliged if he would call at eight o'clock that evening. His
colleague, Mr. Simmonds, would be present.

Ned gave an exclamation of disgust as he threw down the note.

"Is there any answer, sir?" the servant asked. "The boy said he was to
wait."

"Tell him to say to Mr. Thompson that I will be there at eight o'clock;
but that--no, that will do.

"It wouldn't be civil," he said to Charlie as the door closed behind the
servant, "to say that I wish to goodness he would let my affairs alone
and look to his own."

When Ned reached the magistrates at the appointed hour he found that
the inquiry was of a formal character. Besides the two justices, Major
Browne, who commanded the troops at Marsden, was present; and the
justices' clerk was there to take notes.

Mr. Simmonds greeted Ned kindly, Mr. Thompson stiffly. He was one of
those who had from the first been absolutely convinced that the lad had
killed his stepfather. The officer, who was of course acquainted with
the story, examined Ned with a close scrutiny.

"Will you take a seat, Ned?" Mr. Simmonds, who was the senior
magistrate, said. "We have asked you here to explain to us the meaning
of certain rumors which are current in the town of an attack upon your
mill."

"I will answer any questions that you may ask," Ned said quietly,
seating himself, while the magistrates' clerk dipped his pen in the ink
and prepared to take notes of his statement.

"Is it the case that the Luddites made an attack upon your mill the
night before last?"

"It is true, sir."

"Will you please state the exact circumstances."

"There is not much to tell," Ned said quietly. "I have for some time
been expecting an attack, having received many threatening letters. I
have, therefore, made a habit of sleeping in the mill, and a month ago
I got in twelve barrels of powder from Huddersfield. Before going to bed
of a night I always pile these in the middle of the room where the
looms are, which is the first as you enter. I have bells attached to the
shutters and doors to give me notice of any attempt to enter. The night
before last I was awoke by hearing one of them ring, and looking out of
the window made out a crowd of two or three hundred men outside. They
began to batter the door, so, taking a brace of pistols which I keep in
readiness by my bed, I went down and took my place by the powder. When
they broke down the door and entered I just told them that if they came
any further I should fire my pistol into one of the barrels, the head of
which I had knocked out, and, as I suppose they saw that I meant to do
it, they went off. That is all I have to tell, so far as I know."

The clerk's pen ran swiftly over the paper as Ned quietly made his
statement. Then there was a silence for a minute or two.

"And did you really mean to carry out your threat, Mr. Sankey?"

"Certainly," Ned said.

"But you would, of course, have been killed yourself."

"Naturally," Ned said dryly; "but that would have been of no great
consequence to me or any one else. As the country was lately about to
take my life at its own expense it would not greatly disapprove of my
doing so at my own, especially as the lesson to the Luddites would have
been so wholesale a one that the services of the troops in this part of
the country might have been dispensed with for some time."

"Did you recognize any of the men concerned?"

"I am glad to say I did not," Ned replied. "Some of them were masked.
The others were, so far as I could see among such a crowd of faces in a
not very bright light, all strangers to me."

"And you would not recognize any of them again were you to see them?"

"I should not," Ned replied. "None of them stood out prominently among
the others."

"You speak, Mr. Sankey," Mr. Thompson said, "as if your sympathies were
rather on the side of these men, who would have burned your mill, and
probably have murdered you, than against them."

"I do not sympathize with the measures the men are taking to obtain
redress for what they regard as a grievance; but I do sympathize very
deeply with the amount of suffering which they are undergoing from the
introduction of machinery and the high prices of provisions; and I am
not surprised that, desperate as they are, and ignorant as they are,
they should be led astray by bad advice. Is there any other question
that you wish to ask me?"

"Nothing at present, I think," Mr. Simmonds said after consulting his
colleague by a look. "We shall, of course, forward a report of the
affair to the proper authorities, and I may say that although you appear
to take it in a very quiet and matter of fact way, you have evidently
behaved with very great courage and coolness, and in a manner most
creditable to yourself. I think, however, that you ought immediately to
have made a report to us of the circumstances, in order that we might
at once have determined what steps should be taken for the pursuit and
apprehension of the rioters."

Ned made no reply, but rising, bowed slightly to the three gentlemen and
walked quietly from the room.

"A singular young fellow!" Major Browne remarked as the door closed
behind him. "I don't quite know what to make of him, but I don't think
he could have committed that murder. It was a cowardly business, and
although I believe he might have a hand in any desperate affair, as
indeed this story he has just told us shows, I would lay my life he
would not do a cowardly one."

"I agree with you," Mr. Simmonds said, "though I own that I have never
been quite able to rid myself of a vague suspicion that he was guilty."

"And I believe he is so still," Mr. Thompson said. "To me there is
something almost devilish about that lad's manner."

"His manner was pleasant enough," Mr. Simmonds said warmly, "before that
affair of Mulready. He was as nice a lad as you would wish to see till
his mother was fool enough to get engaged to that man, who, by the way,
I never liked. No wonder his manner is queer now; so would yours be, or
mine, if we were tried for murder and, though acquitted, knew there was
still a general impression of our guilt."

"Yes, by Jove," the officer said, "I should be inclined to shoot myself.
You are wrong, Mr. Thompson, take my word for it. That young fellow
never committed a cowardly murder. I think you told me, Mr. Simmonds,
that he had intended to go into the army had it not been for this
affair? Well, his majesty has lost a good officer, for that is just the
sort of fellow who would lead a forlorn hope though he knew the breach
was mined in a dozen places. It is a pity, a terrible pity!"




CHAPTER XVIII: NED IS ATTACKED


As Ned had foreseen and resented, the affair at the mill again made him
the chief topic of talk in the neighborhood, and the question of his
guilt or innocence of the murder of his stepfather was again debated
with as much earnestness as it had been when the murder was first
committed. There was this difference, however, that whereas before he
had found but few defenders, for the impression that he was guilty was
almost universal, there were now many who took the other view.

The one side argued that a lad who was ready to blow himself and two
or three hundred men into the air was so desperate a character that he
would not have been likely to hesitate a moment in taking the life of a
man whom he hated, and who had certainly ill treated him. The other side
insisted that one with so much cool courage would not have committed a
murder in so cowardly a way as by tying a rope across the road which his
enemy had to traverse. One party characterized his conduct at the mill
as that of the captain of a pirate ship, the other likened it to any of
the great deeds of devotion told in history--the death of Leonidas and
his three hundred, or the devotion of Mutius Scaevola.

Had Ned chosen now he might have gathered round himself a strong party
of warm adherents, for there were many who, had they had the least
encouragement, would have been glad to shake him by the hand and to show
their partisanship openly and warmly; but Ned did not choose. The doctor
and Mr. Porson strongly urged upon him that he should show some sort of
willingness to meet the advances which many were anxious to make.

"These people are all willing to admit that they have been wrong, Ned,
and really anxious to atone as far as they can for their mistake in
assuming that you were guilty. Now is your time, my boy; what they
believe today others will believe tomorrow; it is the first step toward
living it down. I always said it would come, but I hardly ventured to
hope that it would come so soon."

"I can't do it, Mr. Porson; I would if I could, if only for the sake of
the others; but I can't talk, and smile, and look pleasant. When a man
knows that his mother lying at home thinks that he is a murderer how is
he to go about like other people?"

"But I have told you over and over again, Ned, that your mother is
hardly responsible for her actions. She has never been a very reasonable
being, and is less so than ever at present. Make an effort, my boy, and
mix with others. Show yourself at the cricket match next week. You know
the boys are all your firm champions, and I warrant that half the people
there will flock round you and make much of you if you will but give
