
Name the different objects you see in the picture. What did the artist
desire to tell? What is the central object? Where is the scene of the
picture placed? What time of the day and of the year does it show?

Describe the boy. How old is he? What impresses you most about him?

Suppose your teacher took the class to this lake for a day's outing.
Write a composition on how the day was spent.


       *       *       *       *       *




_74_



A BUILDER'S LESSON.


Memorize:


       "How shall I a habit break?"
       As you did that habit make.
       As you gathered, you must lose;
       As you yielded, now refuse.
       Thread by thread the strands we twist
       Till they bind us, neck and wrist;
       Thread by thread the patient hand
       Must untwine, ere free we stand.
       As we builded, stone by stone,
       We must toil, unhelped, alone,
       Till the wall is overthrown.

       But remember, as we try,
       Lighter every test goes by;
       Wading in, the stream grows deep
       Toward the center's downward sweep;
       Backward turn, each step ashore
       Shallower is than that before.

       Ah, the precious years we waste
       Leveling what we raised in haste:
       Doing what must be undone
       Ere content or love be won!
       First, across the gulf we cast
       Kite-borne threads, till lines are passed,
       And habit builds the bridge at last!


_John Boyle O'Reilly._


       *       *       *       *       *


Memory Gem:


Habit is a cable. Every day we weave a thread, until at last it is so
strong we cannot break it.


       *       *       *       *       *




_75_


in ured'
ru' di ments
nine' ti eth
ma tur' er
ac' cu ra cy
in ad vert' ence
an' ec dotes
e ner' vate
in cor' po ra ted
dig' ni fied
in junc' tion
pre var i ca' tion



WASHINGTON AND HIS MOTHER.


Some of the most interesting anecdotes of the early life of Washington
were derived from his mother, a dignified matron who, by the death of
her husband, while her children were young, became the sole conductress
of their education. To the inquiry, what course she had pursued in
rearing one so truly illustrious, she replied, "Only to require
obedience, diligence, and truth."

These simple rules, faithfully enforced, and incorporated with the
rudiments of character, had a powerful influence over his future
greatness.

He was early accustomed to accuracy in all his statements, and to speak
of his faults and omissions without prevarication or disguise. Hence
arose that noble openness of soul, and contempt of deceit in others,
which ever distinguished him. Once, by an inadvertence of his youth,
considerable loss had been incurred, and of such a nature as to
interfere with the plans of his mother. He came to her, frankly owning
his error, and she replied, while tears of affection moistened her eyes,
"I had rather it should be so, than that my son should have been guilty
of a falsehood."

She was careful not to enervate him by luxury or weak indulgence. He was
inured to early rising, and never permitted to be idle. Sometimes he
engaged in labors which the children of wealthy parents would now
account severe, and thus acquired firmness of frame and a disregard of
hardship.

The systematic employment of time, which from childhood he had been
taught, was of great service when the weight of a nation's concerns
devolved upon him. It was then observed by those who surrounded him,
that he was never known to be in a hurry, but found time for the
transaction of the smallest affairs in the midst of the greatest and
most conflicting duties.

Such benefit did he derive from attention to the counsels of his mother.
His obedience to her commands, when a child, was cheerful and strict;
and as he approached to maturer years, the expression of her slightest
wish was law.

At length, America having secured her independence, and the war being
ended, Washington, who for eight years had not tasted the repose of
home, hastened with filial reverence to ask his mother's blessing. The
hero, "first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his
countrymen," came to lay his laurels at his mother's feet.

This venerable woman continued, till past her ninetieth year, to be
respected and beloved by all around. With pious grief, Washington closed
her eyes and laid her in the grave which she had selected for herself.

We have now seen the man who was the leader of victorious armies, the
conqueror of a mighty kingdom, and the admiration of the world, in the
delightful attitude of an obedient and affectionate son. She, whom he
honored with such filial reverence, said that "he had learned to command
others by first learning to obey."

Let those, then, who in the morning of life are ambitious of future
eminence, cultivate the virtue of filial obedience, and remember that
they cannot be either fortunate or happy while they neglect the
injunction, "My son, keep thy father's commandments, and forsake not the
law of thy mother."


[Illustration: _L.E. Fournier._]


       *       *       *       *       *


CONDUCTRESS, a woman who leads or directs.

The suffix _-ess_ is used to form feminine name-words.

Tell what each of the following words means:



ab' bess
ac' tress
duch' ess
li' on ess
count' ess
po' et ess
song' stress
au' thor ess
di rect' ress



Use the following homonyms in sentences:


air, ere, e'er, heir; oar, ore, o'er; in, inn; four, fore; vain, vein;
vale, veil; core, corps; their, there; hear, here; fair, fare; sweet,
suite; strait, straight.


       *       *       *       *       *




_76_


na' tal
a main'
toc' sin
re count' ed



WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY.


       'Tis splendid to have a record
         So white and free from stain
       That, held to the light, it shows no blot,
         Though tested and tried amain;
       That age to age forever
         Repeats its story of love,
       And your birthday lives in a nation's heart,
         All other days above.

       And this is Washington's glory,
         A steadfast soul and true,
       Who stood for his country's honor
         When his country's days were few.
       And now when its days are many,
         And its flag of stars is flung
       To the breeze in radiant glory,
         His name is on every tongue.

       Yes, it's splendid to live so bravely,
         To be so great and strong,
       That your memory is ever a tocsin
         To rally the foes of wrong;
       To live so proudly and purely,
         That your people pause in their way,
       And year by year, with banner and drum,
         Keep the thought of your natal day.


_Margaret E. Sangster._

By permission of the author.


       *       *       *       *       *




_77_


Brit' on (un)
ant' lers
wrin' kled
vet' er an
im mor' tal



THE SWORD OF BUNKER HILL.


       He lay upon his dying bed,
         His eye was growing dim,
       When, with a feeble voice, he called
         His weeping son to him:
       "Weep not, my boy," the veteran said,
         "I bow to heaven's high will;
       But quickly from yon antlers bring
         The sword of Bunker Hill."

       The sword was brought; the soldier's eye
         Lit with a sudden flame;
       And, as he grasped the ancient blade,
         He murmured Warren's name;
       Then said, "My boy, I leave you gold,
         But what is richer still,
       I leave you, mark me, mark me well,
         The sword of Bunker Hill.

       "'Twas on that dread, immortal day,
         I dared the Briton's band;
       A captain raised his blade on me,
         I tore it from his hand;
       And while the glorious battle raged,
         It lightened Freedom's will;
       For, son, the God of Freedom blessed
         The sword of Bunker Hill.

       "Oh! keep this sword," his accents broke,--
         A smile--and he was dead;
       But his wrinkled hand still grasped the blade,
         Upon that dying bed.
       The son remains, the sword remains,
         Its glory growing still,
       And twenty millions bless the sire
         And sword of Bunker Hill.


_William R. Wallace._


[Illustration:]


       *       *       *       *       *




_78_


es' say
buoy' ant
in sip' id
fe quent' ing
scowl' ing ly
sug ges' tion
in tel' li gence
sin' gu lar ly
so lic' i tude
com pet' i tor
phi los' o pher
ve' he ment ly
tre men' dous ly
ex pos tu la' tion
ig no min' i ous ly



THE MARTYR'S BOY.


It is a youth full of grace, and sprightliness, and candor, that comes
forward with light and buoyant steps across the open court, towards the
inner hall; and we shall hardly find time to sketch him before he
reaches it. He is about fourteen years old, but tall for that age, with
elegance of form and manliness of bearing. His bare neck and limbs are
well developed by healthy exercise; his features display an open and
warm heart, while his lofty forehead, round which his brown hair
naturally curls, beams with a bright intelligence. He wears the usual
