"Because at this spot my life was in great peril a few days ago, or
rather, here started the peril from which I have been delivered most
mercifully."

An hour later he stood on the solid stone doorstep of Master Benjamin
Hardy, important ship owner, merchant and financier. The whimsical
fancy that so often turned his troubles and hardships into little
things seized Robert again. He adjusted carefully his somewhat
bedraggled clothing, set the sword and pistols in his belt at a rakish
slant, put the pack on the step beside him, and, lifting the heavy
brass knocker, struck loudly. He heard presently the sound of
footsteps inside, and Master Jonathan Pillsbury, looking thinner and
sadder than ever, threw open the door. When he saw who was standing
before him he stared and stared.

"Body o' me!" he cried at last, throwing up his hands. "Is it
Mr. Lennox or his ghost?"

"It's Mr. Lennox and no ghost," said Robert briskly. "Let me in,
Mr. Pillsbury. I've grown cold standing here on the steps."

"Are you sure you're no ghost?"

"Quite sure. Here pinch me on the arm and see that I'm substantial
flesh. Not quite so hard! You needn't take out a piece. Are you
satisfied now?"

"More than satisfied, Mr. Lennox! I'm delighted, Overjoyed! We feared
that you were dead! Where have you been?"

"I've been serving on board a slaver on the Guinea coast. That's a
long distance from here, and it was an exciting life, but I'm back
again safe and sound, Master Jonathan."

"I don't understand you. You jest, Mr. Lennox."

"And so I do, but I tell you, Master Jonathan, I'm glad to be back
again, you don't know how glad. Do you hear me, Master Jonathan? The
sight of you is as welcome as that of an angel!"

The air grew black before him, and he reeled and would have fallen,
but the strong arm of Jonathan Pillsbury caught him. In a moment or
two his eyes cleared and he became steady.

"It was not altogether a pleasure voyage of yours," said Master
Jonathan, dryly.

"No, Mr. Pillsbury, it wasn't. But I came near fainting then, because
I was so glad to see you. Is Mr. Hardy here?"

"No, he has gone to the Royal Exchange. He has been nigh prostrated
with grief, but I persuaded him that business might lighten it a
little, and he went out today for the first time. Oh, young sir, he
will be truly delighted to find that you have come back safely,
because, although you may know it not, he has a strong affection for
you!"

"And I have a high regard for him, Master Jonathan. He has been most
kind to me."

"Come in, Mr. Lennox. Sit down in the drawingroom and rest yourself,
while I hurry forth with the welcome news."

Robert saw that his prim and elderly heart was in truth rejoiced, and
his own heart warmed in turn. Obscure and of unknown origin though he
might be, friends were continually appearing for him everywhere. A
servant took his weapons and what was left of his pack, Master
Jonathan insisted upon his drinking a small glass of wine to refresh
himself, and then he was left alone in the imposing drawing-room of
Mr. Hardy.

He sank back in a deep chair of Spanish leather, and shutting his eyes
took several long breaths of relief. He had come back safely and his
escape seemed marvelous even to himself. As he opened his eyes a mild
voice said:

"And so Dagaeoga who went, no one knows where, has returned no one
knows how."

Tayoga, smiling but grave, and looking taller and more majestic than
ever, stood before him.

"Aye, I'm back, and right glad I am to be here!"  exclaimed Robert,
springing to his feet and seizing Tayoga's hand. "Oh, I've been on a
long voyage, Tayoga! I've been to the coast of Africa on a slaver,
though we caught no slaves, and I was wrecked on the coast of Acadia,
and I fought and walked my way back to New York! But it's a long tale,
and I'll not tell it till all of you are together. I hope you were not
too much alarmed about me, Tayoga."

"I know that Dagaeoga is in the keeping of Manitou. I have seen too
many proofs of it to doubt. I was sure that at the right time he would
return."

Mr. Hardy came presently and then Willet. They made no display of
emotion, but their joy was deep. Then Robert told his story to them
all.

"Did you see any name on the wrecked schooner?"  asked Mr. Hardy.

"None at all," replied Robert. "If she had borne a name at any time
I'm sure it was painted out."

"Nor did you hear the captain called by name, either?"

"No, sir. It was always just 'captain' when the men addressed him."

"That complicates our problem. There's no doubt in my mind that you
were the intended victim of a conspiracy, from which you were saved by
the storm. I can send a trusty man down the North Jersey coast to
examine the wreck of the schooner, but I doubt whether he could learn
anything from it."

He drew Willet aside and the two talked together a while in a low
voice, but with great earnestness.

"We have our beliefs," said Willet at length, "but we shall not be
able to prove anything, no, not a thing, and, having nothing upon
which to base an accusation against anybody, we shall accuse nobody."

"'Tis the prudent way," Hardy concurred, "though there is no doubt in
my mind about the identity of the man who set this most wicked pot to
brewing."

Robert had his own beliefs, too, but he remained silent.

"We'll keep the story of your absence to ourselves," said
Mr. Hardy. "We did not raise any alarm, believing that you would
return, a belief due in large measure to the faith of Tayoga, and
we'll explain that you were called away suddenly on a mission of a
somewhat secret nature to the numerous friends who have been asking
about you."

Willet concurred, and he also said it was desirable that they should
depart at once for Virginia, where the provincial governors were to
meet in council, and from which province Braddock's force, or a
considerable portion of it, would march. Then Robert, after a
substantial supper, went to his room and slept. The next morning, both
Charteris and Grosvenor came to see him and expressed their delight at
his return. A few days later they were at sea with Grosvenor and other
young English officers, bound for the mouth of the James and the great
expedition against Fort Duquesne.




CHAPTER XIV

THE VIRGINIA CAPITAL


They were on a large schooner, and while Robert looked forward with
eagerness to the campaign, he also looked back with regret at the
roofs of New York, as they sank behind the sea. The city suited
him. It had seemed to him while he was there that he belonged in it,
and now that he was going away the feeling was stronger upon him than
ever. He resolved once more that it should be his home when the war
was over.

Their voyage down the coast was stormy and long. Baffling winds
continually beat them back, and, then they lay for long periods in
dead calms, but at last they reached the mouth of the James, going
presently the short distance overland to Williamsburg, the town that
had succeeded Jamestown as the capital of the great province of
Virginia.

Spring was already coming here in the south and in the lowlands by the
sea, and the tinge of green in the foliage and the warm winds were
grateful after the winter of the cold north. Robert, eager as always
for new scenes, and fresh knowledge, anticipated with curiosity his
first sight of Williamsburg, one of the oldest British towns in North
America. He knew that it was not large, but he found it even smaller
than he had expected.

He and his comrades reached it on horseback, and they found that it
contained only a thousand inhabitants, and one street, straight and
very wide. On this street stood the brick buildings of William and
Mary, the oldest college in the country, a new capitol erected in the
place of one burned, not long before, and a large building called the
Governor's Palace. It looked very small, very quiet, and very content.

Robert was conscious of a change in atmosphere that was not a mere
matter of temperature. Keen, commercial New York was gone. Here,
people talked of politics and the land. The men who came into
Williamsburg on horseback or in their high coaches were owners of
great plantations, where they lived as patriarchs, and feudal
lords. The human stock was purely British and the personal customs and
modes of thought of the British gentry had been transplanted.

"I like it," said Grosvenor. "I feel that I've found England again."

"There appears to be very little town life," said Robert. "It seems
strange that Williamsburg is so small, when Virginia has many more
people than New York or Pennsylvania or Massachusetts."

"They're spread upon the land," said Willet. "I've been in Virginia
before. They don't care much about commerce, but you'll find that a
lot of the men who own the great plantations are hard and good
thinkers."

Robert soon discovered that in Virginia a town was rather a meeting
place for the landed aristocracy than a commercial center. The arrival
of the British troops and of Americans from other colonies brought
much life into the little capital. The people began to pour in from
the country houses, and the single street was thronged with the best
horses and the best carriages Virginia could show, their owners,
attended by swarms of black men and black women whose mouths were
invariably stretched in happy grins, their splendid white teeth
glittering.

There was much splendor, a great mingling of the fine and the tawdry,
as was inevitable in a society that maintained slavery on a large
scale. Nearly all the carriages had been brought from London, and they
were of the best. When their owners drove forth in the streets or the
country roundabout they were escorted by black coachmen and footmen in
livery. The younger men were invariably on horseback, dressed like
English country gentlemen, and they rode with a skill and grace that
Robert had never before seen equaled. The parsons, as in England, rode
with the best, and often drank with them too.

It was a proud little society, exclusive perhaps, and a little bit
provincial too, possibly, but it was soon to show to the world a group
of men whose abilities and reputation and service to the state have
been unequaled, perhaps, since ancient Athens. One warm afternoon as
Robert walked down the single street with Tayoga and Grosvenor, he saw
a very young man, only three or four years older than himself, riding
a large, white horse.

The rider's lofty stature, apparent even on horseback, attracted
Robert's notice. He was large of bone, too, with hands and feet of
great size, and a very powerful figure. His color was ruddy and high,
showing one who lived out of doors almost all the time.

The man, Robert soon learned, was the young officer, George
Washington, who had commanded the Virginians in the first skirmish
with the French and Indians in the Ohio country.

"One of most grave and sober mien," said Grosvenor. "I take him to be
of fine quality."

"There can scarce be a doubt of it," said Robert.

But he did not dream then that succeeding generations would reckon the
horseman the first man of all time.

Robert, Willet and Tayoga saw the governor, Dinwiddie, a thrifty
Scotchman, and offered to him their services, saying that they wished
to go with the Braddock expedition as scouts.

"But I should think, young sir," said Dinwiddie to Robert, "that you,
at least, would want a commission. 'Twill be easy to obtain it in the
Virginia troops."

"I thank you, sir, for the offer, which is very kind," said Robert,
"but I have spent a large part of my life in the woods with
Mr. Willet, and I feel that I can be of more use as a scout and
skirmisher. You know that they will be needed badly in the forest.
Moreover, Mr. Willet would not be separated from Tayoga, who in the
land of the Six Nations, known to themselves as the Hodenosaunee, is a
great figure."

Governor Dinwiddie regarded the Onondaga, who gave back his gaze
steadily. The shrewd Scotchman knew that here stood a man, and he
treated him as one.

"Have your way," he said. "Perhaps you are right. Many think that
General Braddock has little to fear from ambush, they say that his
powerful army of regulars and colonials can brush aside any force the
French and Indians may gather, but I've been long enough in this
country to know that the wilderness always has its dangers. Such eyes
as the eyes of you three will have their value. You shall have the
commissions you wish."

Willet was highly pleased. He had been even more insistent than Robert
on the point, saying they must not sacrifice their freedom and
independence of movement, but Grosvenor was much surprised.

"An army rank will help you," he said.

"It's help that we don't need," said Robert smiling.

The governor showed them great courtesy. He liked them and his
penetrating Scotch mind told him that they had quality. Despite his
hunter's dress, which he had resumed, Willet's manners were those of
the great world, and Dinwiddie often looked at him with
curiosity. Robert seemed to him to be wrapped in the same veil of
mystery, and he judged that the lad, whose manners were not inferior
to those of Willet, had in him the making of a personage. As for
Tayoga, Dinwiddie had been too long in America and he knew too much of
the Hodenosaunee not to appreciate his great position. An insult or a
slight in Virginia to the coming young chief of the Clan of the Bear,
of the nation Onondaga would soon be known in the far land of the Six
Nations, and its cost would be so great that none might count it. Just
as tall oaks from little acorns grow, so a personal affront may sow
the seed of a great war or break a great alliance, and Dinwiddie knew
it.

The governor, assisted by his wife and two daughters, entertained at
his house, and Robert, Tayoga, Willet, and Grosvenor, arrayed in their
best, attended, forming conspicuous figures in a great crowd, as the
Virginia gentry, also clad in their finest, attended. Robert, with
his adaptable and imaginative mind, was at home at once among them. He
liked the soft southern speech, the grace of manner and the good
feeling that obtained. They were even more closely related than the
great families of New York, and it was obvious that they formed a
cultivated society, in close touch with the mother country, intensely
British in manner and mode of thought, and devoted in both theory and
practice to personal independence.

As the spring was now well advanced the night was warm and the windows
and doors of the Governor's Palace were left open. Negroes in livery
played violins and harps while all the guests who wished
danced. Others played cards in smaller rooms, but there was no such
betting as Robert had seen at Bigot's ball in Quebec. There was some
drinking of claret and punch, but no intoxication. The general note
was of great gayety, but with proper restraints.

Robert noticed that the men, spending their lives in the open air and
having abundant and wholesome food, were invariably tall and big of
bone. The women looked strong and their complexions were rosy. The
same facility of mind that had made him like New York and Quebec, such
contrasting places, made him like Williamsburg too, which was
different from either.

Quickly at home, in this society as elsewhere, the hours were all too
short for him. Both he and Grosvenor, who was also adaptable, seeing
good in everything, plunged deep into the festivities. He danced with
young women and with old, and Willet more than once gave him an
approving glance. It seemed that the hunter always wished him to fit
himself into any group with which he might be cast, and to make
himself popular, and to do so Robert's temperament needed little
encouragement.

The music and the dancing never ceased. When the black musicians grew
tired their places were taken by others as black and as zealous, and
on they went in a ceaseless alternation. Robert learned that the
guests would dance all night and far into the next day, and that
frequently at the great houses a ball continued two days and two
nights.

About three o'clock in the morning, after a long dance that left him
somewhat weary, he went upon one of the wide piazzas to rest and take
the fresh air. There, his attention was specially attracted by two
young men who were waging a controversy with energy, but without
acrimony.

"I tell you, James," said one, who was noticeable for his great shock
of fair hair and his blazing red face, "that at two miles Blenheim is
unbeatable."

"Unbeatable he may be, Walter," said the other, "but there is no horse
so good that there isn't a better. Blenheim, I grant you, is a
splendid three year old, but my Cressy is just about twenty yards
swifter in two miles. There is not another such colt in all Virginia,
and it gives me great pride to be his owner."

The other laughed, a soft drawling laugh, but it was touched with
incredulity.

"You're a vain man, James," he said, "not vain for yourself, but vain
for your sorrel colt."

"I admit my vanity, Walter, but it rests upon a just basis. Cressy, I
repeat, is the best three year old in Virginia, which of course means
the best in all the colonies, and I have a thousand weight of prime
tobacco to prove it."

"My plantation grows good tobacco too, James, and I also have a
thousand weight of prime leaf which talks back to your thousand
weight, and tells it that Cressy is the second best three year old in
Virginia, not the best."

"Done. Nothing is left but to arrange the time."

Both at this moment noticed Robert, who was sitting not far away, and
they hailed him with glad voices. He remembered meeting them earlier
