
"I am afraid it won't help me."

"I am sorry," said Andy, politely.

He did not observe the covetous glance of the stranger as he noted the
large wallet and its contents. It occurred to him afterward that his
companion had not produced the bill he wished changed.

"Oh, well," said the stranger, carelessly, "it doesn't matter. I can get
the bill changed at the depot. Are you traveling on business?" he
inquired.

"Yes, sir."

"So am I. I represent the firm of Arnold & Constable, in New York.
Doubtless you have heard of them."

"Oh, yes. They are well known."

"I have been in their employ for five years. Before that I worked for
Claflin."

"Indeed!"

"You do not mention the name of your firm."

"No, I am traveling on private business for the head of the firm."

"Ah, yes. I don't wish to be inquisitive. You do right to keep the
business to yourself."

"You see, it is not my business."

"Just so! You are young for a business agent."

"That is true, but I am growing older every day."

"Exactly so! Good joke!"

Andy's companion laughed quite heartily, rather to the surprise of his
young acquaintance.

"I am very glad to have met you. You see, I am very social, and can't
stand being alone. By the way, where do you stop in Chicago?"

"At the Sherman House."

"Good hotel! I have stopped there often. Still, there is nothing as
homelike as a private house. I have a friend living in the city who
keeps a first-class boarding house and only charges transient guests a
dollar and a quarter a day. I wish you could be induced to go there with
me. At the hotel you will have to pay three or four dollars."

Now, Andy was naturally economical, and thought it would be praiseworthy
to save money for Mr. Crawford. He inquired the location of the boarding
house, and imprudently decided to act on his companion's proposal.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE TRAP.


Andy left the depot with his new acquaintance, who gave his name as
Percival Robinson, and, following his lead, boarded a horse car, which
took them both a distance of three miles to the southern part of the
city. As they went on, dwellings became scattering.

"Your friend's house seems quite out of the way," said Andy.

"Yes; but Chicago is a city of distances. It really doesn't make much
difference where you stop. Street cars will carry you anywhere."

"Still it would be pleasanter to be centrally located."

"But by going some way out you get cheaper accommodations."

"That is true," thought Andy; "and I have time enough."

At length Robinson signaled to the conductor to stop.

Andy followed him out of the car. They seemed to be in the very
outskirts of the city.

Robinson led the way to a rather shabby brick house standing by itself.
It was three stories in height.

"This is where my friend lives," he said, walking up the front steps and
ringing the front-door bell.

Two minutes later the door was opened by a red-haired man in his shirt
sleeves.

"Hello, Tom!" he exclaimed.

"I thought his name was Percival," Andy said to himself.

"My young friend and I will stay overnight with you," said Robinson.

"All right. Come in."

A door on the left was opened, and Andy saw a sanded floor, and on one
side of the room a bar.

"Go in there a minute," said Robinson, "while I speak to my friend."

Andy went in, and picked up a copy of the _Clipper_ from the table--the
only paper in the room.

In five minutes the two returned.

"I'll take your gripsack," said the man in shirt sleeves. "I will show
you to your room."

They went up two flights of stairs to a room on the third floor. It was
a small apartment about ten feet square, with a double bed in one
corner.

"I guess you'll both be comfortable here," said the landlord.

"I think I would rather have a room to myself," said Andy, by no means
satisfied.

"Sorry we can't accommodate you, but the house is full."

It didn't look so, but then the lodgers might be out.

Andy thought for a moment he would go downstairs, and take a car back to
the central part of the city, but he was afraid his action would seem
strange, and he made no objection.

"I guess we'll get along together," said Robinson, in an easy tone.

Andy didn't think so, but he found it awkward to make objections.

"I will take a wash," he said, seeing that the pitcher on the washstand
contained water.

"All right!" returned Robinson. "Just make yourself at home. I'll go
downstairs. You'll find me there."

Left alone, Andy reproached himself for his too ready yielding to the
plans of his companion. He wondered why he had done so.

"Mr. Crawford didn't ask me to be economical," he reflected. "He is
willing I should pay ordinary prices at a hotel. I think I have been
very foolish. However, I am in for it. It will serve as a lesson to me,
which I will remember hereafter."

He looked out of the window. There was a lot behind the hotel--if it was
a hotel--covered with ashes, tin cans, and other litter.

"I am sure," thought Andy, "this isn't the kind of hotel Mr. Crawford
wished me to stay at."

When he had washed he went downstairs. As he passed the door of the
barroom he saw Mr. Robinson inside, sitting at the table, with a bottle
and a glass before him.

"Come in, Grant, and have some whisky," he said.

"Thank you, but I don't care for whisky."

"Perhaps you would prefer beer?"

"I don't care to drink anything, thank you."

"You don't mean to say you're a temperance crank?"

"Yes, I think I am."

"Oh, well, do just as you please. By the way, it is the rule here to pay
for board in advance."

"How much is it?"

"A dollar and a quarter, please," said this red-haired man, who stood
behind the bar.

Andy paid over the money.

"I thought perhaps you would stay more than one day."

"No, I have little time. I shall have to leave to-morrow. I think, Mr.
Robinson, I will go out and take a walk."

"All right! Supper will be ready in two hours."

Andy nodded.

He had a great mind to go upstairs and get his gripsack. Then he would
be able to go where he pleased. He went out and began to walk about in
the neighborhood of the hotel.

It did not seem to be a very pleasant quarter of the city, and it was
certainly a good distance from the center.

"I sha'n't learn much about Chicago if I stay here," he thought.

Again he execrated his folly in so weakly yielding to the
representations of a man he knew nothing about.

He walked for half an hour and then returned slowly. There didn't seem
to be much to look at, and his walk had no interest for him.

Not far from the hotel he met a well-dressed boy, and was impelled to
speak to him.

"Do you live near by?" he asked.

"No, but I have an uncle living in that house over there. I came to
spend the day with my cousins."

"I am a stranger in this city. I met a man who took me to that brick
house. He recommended it as a cheap boarding place. Do you know anything
about it?"

"I know that it has a bad reputation."

"Will you tell me what you know about it? You will be doing me a favor."

"The bar does a good business in the evening. I have heard of several
cases where men who put up there complained of being robbed."

"Thank you. I am not much surprised to hear it."

"Have you taken a room there?"

"Yes. I am afraid I was foolish."

"I hope you won't be robbed--that's all."

"I should like to get out, but I am afraid if I come downstairs with my
grip they would try to stop my going."

"Where is your room?"

"At the back part of the house, looking out on the lot."

"I'll tell you what you can do," said the other boy, after a moment's
thought. "Have you paid anything for your room?"

"Yes, but I don't mind that."

"Then drop your grip out of the window. I'll catch it."

"I will."

"Then you can take a car and go down into the city."

"Do you know the way to the Sherman House?"

"Certainly."

"If you will go there with me, I'll make it worth your while."

"All right. I was just about going home, anyway."

"Then I'll go upstairs and get my bag."

Andy went to his room, opened the window, and, looking down, saw his new
boy friend.

"Are you ready?" he asked.

"Yes."

"You needn't try to catch it. There's nothing in it that will break."

"Fling her out!"

Andy did so.

"Now come down. You'll find me here."

An hour later supper was served. Percival Robinson and three other men,
likewise patrons of the barroom, sat down. The landlord himself was one
of the party.

"Where is the kid?" he asked.

"I saw him go out an hour ago," said one of the guests.

"He has probably come back and is in his room," said Robinson. "I will
go up and call him."

He went upstairs quickly and entered the room assigned to Andy and
himself. It was empty.

"The boy has taken a long walk," he said to himself.

Then he looked about for Andy's grip. It occurred to him that he would
have a good opportunity to examine its contents.

He started in surprise and dismay, for the grip was gone.

"He must have given me the slip," he exclaimed.

"Did any one see the boy go out with his gripsack?" he asked, as he
returned.

"I saw him go out, but he had nothing in his hand," answered the
landlord.

"Well, he's gone, bag and baggage," returned Robinson, very much
