glad that's over. Bein' a ghost jest about a minute is enough fur me. I
wuz scared to death lest I didn't groan good an' horrible."

"But you never did a better job in your life, Jim," said Henry, as he came
from behind a tree. "You and Paul were the finest ghosts I ever saw, and
no Indian will dare to set foot on this island in the next hundred years."

"It shorely was a sight to see them braves run," said Shif'less Sol.
"Thar's many a tired man in that lot now. I think some o' 'em didn't hit
the ice an' snow more'n twice between here an' the lan'."

"Paul's made the islan' ez safe fur us ez a stone fort ez long ez we want
to stay," said Tom Ross.

"It was a great plan, well done," said Henry.

Paul's face shone with the most intense delight. His imagination, leaping
forward to meet a crisis, had served them all greatly, and he was happy.
He had fought not with rifle and knife, but with the weapon of the
intellect.

"Now that this job is over, an' we're the big winners," said Shif'less
Sol, "I'm goin' to do what a tired man ought to do: go to sleep, wrapped
up in buffalo robes, an' sleep about forty hours."

"We'll all sleep," said Henry. "As Tom says, we're as safe as if we were
in a stone fort, and we don't need any guard."

An hour later all of the valiant five were slumbering peacefully within
their warm walls, and when they ate a good hot breakfast the next morning,
cooked in Jim Hart's best fashion, they laughed heartily and often over
the night's great event.

"I guess Mr. Braxton Wyatt will hev to work hard ag'in to prove to them
savages that he's real smart," said Shif'less Sol. "This is another time
that he's led 'em right out o' the little end o' the horn."

They luxuriated that day, resting most of the time In the hut, but on the
following day Henry and Ross went on a longer scouting expedition than
usual, this time in the direction of the Shawnee villages. The three who
were left behind broke fresh holes in the thick ice, and by the use of
much patience succeeded in catching several fine fish, which made a
pleasant addition to their daily diet.

Henry and Ross were gone nearly a week, but their comrades did not become
alarmed over their long absence. When they returned they brought with them
a budget of news from the Shawnee villages. Braxton Wyatt had returned to
the Shawnees, much disgusted with his stay among the Miamis, but still
resolved to form the great Indian alliance, and send it in the spring
against the white settlements in Kentucky.

"It's too late for them to do anything this winter," said Henry, and a
little exultation showed in his tone, "we've put that spoke in their
wheel; but they mean to hit us a terrible blow on the flank when warm
weather comes."

"What do you mean by 'on the flank'?" asked Paul.

"They've learned in some manner, maybe by way of Canada, that a big wagon
train is coming up through the Wilderness Road in the spring, to join our
settlements. If it gets there it will double our strength, but the Indians
mean to make a great curve to the south and east and strike it just as it
leaves the mountains."

"They're smart in that," said Shif'less Sol. "They'd be sure to hit them
wagons when they ain't expected."

"Yes," said Henry Ware, "if the train is not warned."

Paul looked at him and saw that his eyes were full of meaning.

"Then we are to warn that train," said Paul.

"Yes, when the time comes."

"It's the greatest work that we can do," said Paul, with emphasis, and the
others nodded their agreement. It was all that was needed to bind the five
together in the mighty task that they had begun.

Nothing more was said upon the subject for days, but Paul's mind was full
of it. His comrades and he had impeded the making of the great war trail,
and now they were to see that reenforcements safely reached their own. It
was a continuing task, and it appealed powerfully to the statesman so
strong in Paul.

A very cold winter moved slowly along, and they remained on the island,
though Henry and Ross ranged far and wide. On one of these expeditions the
two scouts met a wandering trapper, by whom they sent word again to their
people in the south that they were safe.

Henry and Ross also learned that Yellow Panther would lead the Miamis, Red
Eagle the Shawnees, and there would be detachments of Wyandots and others.
They would fall like a thunderbolt upon the wagon train, and destroy it
utterly.

"And Braxton Wyatt will be with them?" said Paul indignantly.

"Of course," replied Henry.

"Henry, we've got to save that wagon train, if every one of us dies
trying!" exclaimed Paul, with the greatest possible emphasis.

"Of course," said Henry again, quietly, but with the stern determination
that meant with him do or die.

"It's a part o' our job," drawled Shif'less Sol, "but it must be nigh a
thousand miles to the place whar the Wilderness Road comes out o' the
mountains. I see a terrible long journey ahead fur a tired man."

Henry smiled. They all knew that none would be more zealous on the march,
none more lion-hearted in battle, than this same Solomon Hyde, nicknamed
the shiftless one.

"When do we start?" asked Jim Hart.

"Not before the cold weather passes," replied Henry. "It wouldn't be worth
while. The emigrant train won't come through the mountains until spring,
and we can do better work here, watching the savages."

So they abode long in the hut on the haunted island, and had food and
warmth in plenty. But in the Indian villages there was the stir of
preparation for the great war trail in the spring, and also the sense of
mystery and oppression. Yellow Panther, the Miami, and Red Eagle, the
Shawnee, both felt in some strange, unaccountable way that they were
watched. Half-lost tracks of unknown feet were seen in the snow; strange
trails that ended nowhere were struck; three warriors, every one at a
different time, claimed to have seen a gigantic figure speeding in a pale
moonlight through the leafless forest; one of the bravest of the Shawnee
warriors was found dead, his head cleft so deep that they knew a mighty
hand, one of almost marvelous strength, had wielded the tomahawk. There
were signs of a terrible struggle in the snow, but who had attacked and
who defended they did not know, and the trail of the survivor was soon
lost. A mysterious dread filled both Shawnees and Miamis.

Braxton Wyatt raged at heart in the Shawnee village, and had theories of
his own, but he dared not tell them. It was known there that it was he who
had led the Miamis into the sacrilegious invasion of the haunted island,
and it would take his credit some time to recover from such a blow. To
reestablish himself thoroughly he must do valuable work for his red
friends on the coming great war trail. So he remained discreetly silent
about the haunted island, and told all he knew of the white settlements,
the Wilderness Road, and the way to trap the emigrant train. Here he could
really be of great assistance to the alliance, and he told the chiefs all
about the emigrants, how they marched, and how they would be encumbered
with women and children.

Meanwhile, the five never ceased their vigilance. Henry and Ross bought a
large quantity of ammunition from a Canadian trader whom they met on a
trip far to the north, and however much they used in the winter, they were
now assured of an abundance when they started southeast in the spring.

The winter was long and very cold. One snow fell upon another; one freeze
after another thickened the ice upon the lake; and when the wind blew, it
had the edge of a knife. But this could not last forever. One day the wind
shifted around and blew from the south. Paul, who was outside the hut
helping Jim Hart, felt a soft, warm breath on his face.

"Why, Jim!" he said, "the cold seems to be going away."

"So it is," said Jim Hart, "or at least it's gittin' ready. Spring ain't
far off, an' I'm glad, Paul. I'm tired uv winter, an' I want to be
strikin' out on the great war trail."

"So do I," said Paul.

"Wa'al, fur the matter o' that," said Shif'less Sol, "we've been on the
great war trail fur three or four months now. There ain't to be no change
except in the shiftin' o' the trail."

The warm wind continued to blow for days, the surface of the ice on the
lake softened, and the snow began to melt. Still it blew, and the melted
snow ran in rivers, the ice broke up into great sheets and chunks, and
these, too, rapidly dissolved. Then a warm rain came, pouring for a day
and a night, and the ice and snow were swept away entirely. But the whole
earth ran water. Lakes stood in the forest, and every brook and creek,
rushing in torrents, leaped its banks.

The five had remained in their hut when the rain came down, but two days
later Henry and Ross were rowed over in the canoe, and went away to spy
out the country. When they returned they said that the great war party of
the allied tribes would soon be in motion, and it was time for the five to
take their flight.

A warm sun had been shining for days, and the earth had dried again. The
turbulent brooks and creeks had withdrawn to their accustomed beds, and
faint touches of green were beginning to show in the wilderness.

"We'll leave our house just as we have built it," said Henry.

"Unless a white man should come wandering here, and that isn't likely, it
won't be disturbed. It's been a good place for us."

"Yes," said Paul, "it has been a good home to us. I've spent a happy
winter here, and I want to see it again."

But they had little time for sentiment. They were making the fast touches
of preparation for the second stage of the great war trail--arranging
clothing, light supplies of food, and, above all, ammunition. Then they
left at night in their canoe. As they approached the mainland, all, as if
by involuntary impulse, looked back at the haunted island, looming darkly
in the night.

"It was no haunted island for us," said Paul.

"No," said Henry.

They landed, hid the canoe, and then, plunging into the forest, sped far
to the south and east on tireless feet.




CHAPTER XIX

THE WARNING


Meanwhile war belts were passing through all the forest, from tribe to
tribe, to Shawnee, Miami, Ottawa, Wyandot--to every band, large or small.
Another great effort would be made to drive back the thin white vanguard
that was now entering the finest hunting ground savages had ever
known--the vast green wilderness of the Mississippi Valley, where the
warriors had roamed and killed game for unknown generations. Northern and
southern tribes had often met and fought in _Kain-tuck-ee_, but always
each retreated after the conflict to north or to south, leaving
_Kain-tuck-ee_ as it was before--a land of forest and canebrake, inhabited
only by the wild beast.

Now, every warrior felt that the coming of the white stream over the
mountains, however slender it might be at first, threatened a change,
great and disastrous to them, unless checked at once. These white men cut
down the forest, built houses that were meant to stay in one place--houses
of logs--and plowed up the fields where the forest had been. They felt in
some dim, but none the less certain, way that not only their favorite
hunting grounds, but they and their own existence, were threatened.

They had failed the year before in a direct attack upon the new
settlements, but these little oases in the wilderness must in time perish
unless the white stream coming over the mountains still reached them,
nourishing them with fresh bone and sinew, and making them grow. A great
wagon train was coming, and this they would strike, surprising it in the
vast, dark wilderness when it was not dreaming that even a single warrior
was near.

A great defeat they had suffered at Wareville the year before still stung,
and the spur of revenge was added to the spur of need. What they felt they
ought to do was exactly what they wanted to do, and they were full of
hope. They did not know that the stream flowing over the mountains, now so
small, was propelled by a tremendous force behind it, the great white race
always moving onward, and they expected nothing less than a complete
triumph.

Active warriors passed through the deep woods, bearing belts and messages.
Their faces were eager, and always they urged war. A long journey lay
before them, but the blow would be a master stroke. They were received
everywhere with joy and approval. The tomahawks were dug up, the war
dances were danced, the war songs sung, and the men began to paint their
faces and bodies for battle. A hum and a murmur ran through the
northwestern forests, the hum and murmur of preparation and hope. Only the
five, on their little island in the lake, yet heard this hum and murmur,
so ominous to the border, but they were ready to carry the message through
the wilderness to those to whom the warning meant the most.

       *       *       *       *       *

The largest wagon train that had yet crossed the mountains into
_Kain-tuck-ee_ toiled slowly along the Wilderness Road among the
foothills, bearing steadily toward the Northwest. The line of canvas
covers stretched away more than a hundred in number, and contained five
hundred souls, of whom, perhaps, half were men and boys capable of bearing
arms, the rest women and children.

They looked upon mountain, hill and forest, river and brook, with much the
same eyes as those with which Henry and Paul had beheld them not so very
long before, but they were not seeking at random in the wilderness as the
Wareville people had done. No, they moved forward now to a certain mark.
They were to join their brethren at Wareville and Marlowe, and double the
strength of the settlements. Word had come to them over the mountains
that the little outposts in the vast wilderness lived and flourished, and
the country was good. Moreover, they and their strength were needed.
Wareville and Marlowe looked for them as eagerly as they looked for
Wareville and Marlowe.

Spring was deepening, and already had drawn its robe of green over all the
earth, but Daniel Poe, the commander of the wagon train, paid little
attention to its beauty. He was nearly sixty years of age, but in the very
prime of his strength--a great, square-shouldered man, his head and face
covered with thick, black beard. His eyes had their habitual look of
watchful care. They had seen no Indian sign as they crossed the mountains,
but he knew now that they were on the Dark and Bloody Ground, and the
lives of five hundred human beings were a heavy responsibility.

"You are sure the country is entirely safe?" he said to Dick Salter, one
of his guides.

"I don't know no reason to doubt it," replied Salter. "The savages don't
often get down here. The villages uv the northwestern tribes must be close
on to a thousand miles from here, an' besides they were beat off last
year, an' beat badly, when they tried to rush Wareville."

"That is so," said Daniel Poe thoughtfully; "we had word of it. But,
Dick, we can't afford to take all these people into danger here in the
woods. Look at the women and children."

They had just begun to stop for the night, and to draw the wagons into a
circle in a convenient, slightly hollowed, open place. The women and
