than four hundred years ago. A great peace filled him. He had accepted
the white man's religion as he had learned it in the white man's school,
and at the same time he had kept his own. He did not see any real
difference between them. Manitou and God were the same, one was the name
in Iroquois and the other was the name in English. When he prayed to
either he prayed to both.

The darkness that precedes the dawn came. The great star on which
Tododaho lived went away, and the whole host swam into the void that is
without ending. The deeper dusk crept up, but Tayoga still sat
motionless, his eyes wide open, his ecstatic state lasting. He heard the
little animals stirring once more in the forest as the dawn approached,
and he felt very friendly toward them. He would not harm the largest or
the least of them. It was their wilderness as well as his, and Manitou
had made them as well as him.

The darkness presently began to thin away, and Tayoga saw the first
silver shoot of dawn in the east. The sun would soon rise over the great
wilderness that was his heritage and that he loved, clothing in fine,
spun gold the green forests, the blue lakes and the silver rivers. He
took a mighty breath. It was a beautiful world and he was glad that he
lived in it.

He awoke Robert and Willet, and they stood up sleepily.

"Did you have a good rest, Tayoga?" Robert asked.

"I did not sleep," the Onondaga replied.

"Didn't sleep? Why not, Tayoga?"

"In the night, Tandakora and two more came."

"What? Do you mean it, Tayoga?"

"They were coming, seeking to slay us as we slept, but I heard them.
Lest the Great Bear and Dagaeoga be awakened and lose the sleep they
needed so much, I took my bow and arrows and went into the forest and
met them."

Robert's breath came quickly. Tayoga's manner was quiet, but it was not
without a certain exultation, and the youth knew that he did not jest.
Yet it seemed incredible.

"You met them, Tayoga?" he repeated.

"Yes, Dagaeoga."

"And what happened?"

"The two warriors whom Tandakora brought with him lie still
in the forest. They will never move again. Tandakora escaped
with an arrow through his arm. He will not trouble us for a
week, but he will seek us later."

"Why didn't you awake us, Tayoga, and take us with you?"

"I wished to do this deed alone."

"You've done it well, that's sure," said Willet, "and now that all
danger has been removed we'll light our fire and cook breakfast."

After breakfast they shouldered their packs and plunged once more into
the greenwood, intending to reach as quickly as they could the hidden
canoe on the Richelieu, and then make an easy journey by water.




CHAPTER XIV

ON CHAMPLAIN


The three arrived at the Richelieu without further hostile encounter,
but they met a white forest runner who told them the aspect of affairs
in the Ohio country was growing more threatening. A small force from
Virginia was starting there under a young officer named Washington, and
it was reported that the French from Canada in numbers were already in
the disputed country.

"We know what we know," said Willet thoughtfully. "I've never doubted
that English and French would come into conflict in the woods, and if I
had felt any such doubts, our visit to Quebec would have driven them
away. I don't think our letters from the Governor of New York to the
Governor General of Canada will be of any avail."

"No," said Robert, soberly. "They won't. But I want to say to you, Dave,
that I'm full of gladness, because we've reached our canoe. Our packs
without increasing in size are at least twice as heavy as they were when
we started."

"I can join you in your hosannas, Robert. Never before did a canoe look
so fine to me. It's a big canoe, a beautiful canoe, a strong canoe, a
swift canoe, and it's going to carry us in comfort and far."

It was, in truth, larger than the one they had used coming up the
lakes, and, with a mighty sigh of satisfaction, Robert settled into his
place. Their packs, rifles, swords and the case containing Tayoga's bow
and arrows were adjusted delicately, and then, with a few sweeps of the
Onondaga's paddle, they shot out into the slow current of the river.
Robert and Willet leaned back and luxuriated. Tayoga wanted to do the
work at present, saying that his wrists, in particular, needed exercise,
and they willingly let him. They were moving against the stream, but so
great was the Onondaga's dexterity that he sent the canoe along at a
good pace without feeling weariness.

"It's like old times," said Willet. "There's no true happiness like
being in a canoe on good water, with the strong arm of another to paddle
for you. I'm glad you winged that savage, Tandakora, Tayoga. It would
spoil my pleasure to know that he was hanging on our trail."

"Don't be too happy, Great Bear," said Tayoga. "Within a week the
Ojibway will be hunting for us. Maybe he will be lying in wait on the
shores of the great lake, Champlain."

"If so, Tayoga, you must have him to feel the kiss of another arrow."

Tayoga smiled and looked affectionately at his bow and quiver.

"The Iroquois shaft can still be of use," he said, "and we will save our
ammunition, because the way is yet far."

"Deer shouldn't be hard to find in these woods," said Willet, "and when
we stop for the night we'll hunt one."

They took turns with the paddle, and now and then, drawing in under
overhanging boughs, rested a little. Once or twice they saw distant
smoke which they believed was made by Canadian and therefore hostile
Indians, but they did not pause to investigate. It was their desire to
make speed, because they wished to reach as quickly as they could the
Long House in the vale of the Onondaga. It was still possible to arrive
there before St. Luc should go away, because he would have to wait until
the fifty sachems chose to go in council and hear him.

On this, their return journey, Robert thought much of the chevalier and
was eager to see him again. Of all the Frenchmen he had met St. Luc
interested him most. De Galisonniere was gallant and honest and
truthful, a good friend, but he did not convey the same impression of
foresight and power that the chevalier had made upon him, and there was
also another motive, underlying but strong. He wished to match himself
in oratory before the fifty chiefs with Duquesne's agent. He was
confident of his gifts, discovered so recently, and he knew the road to
the mind and hearts of the Iroquois.

"What are you thinking so hard about, Robert?" asked Willet.

"Of St. Luc. I think we'll meet him in the vale of Onondaga. Do you ever
feel that you can look into the future, Dave?"

"Just what do you mean?"

"Nothing supernatural. Don't the circumstances and conditions sometimes
make you think that events are going to run in a certain channel? At the
very first glance the Chevalier de St. Luc interested me uncommonly, and
even in our exciting days in Quebec I thought of him. Now I have a
vision about him. His life and mine are going to cross many times."

The hunter looked sharply at the lad.

"That's a queer idea of yours, Robert," he said, "but when you think it
over it's not so queer, after all. It seems to be the rule that queer
things should come about."

"Now I don't understand you, Dave."

"Well, maybe I don't quite understand myself. But I know one thing,
Robert. St. Luc is always going to put you on your mettle, and you'll
always appear at your best before him."

"That's the way I feel about it, Dave. He aroused in me an odd mixture
of emotions, both emulation and defiance."

"Perhaps it's not so odd after all," said Willet.

Robert could not induce him to pursue the subject. He shied away from
St. Luc, and talked about the more immediate part of their journey,
recalling the necessity of finding another deer, as their supplies of
food were falling very low. Just before sunset they drew into the mouth
of a large creek and made the canoe fast. Tayoga, taking bow and quiver,
went into the woods for his deer, and within an hour found him. Then
they built a small fire sheltered well by thickets, and cooked supper.

The Onondaga reported game abundant, especially the smaller varieties,
and remarkably tame, inferring from the fact that no hunting parties had
been in the region for quite a while.

"We're almost in the country of the Hodenosaunee," he said, "but the
warriors have not been here. All of the outlying bands have gone back
toward Canada or westward into the Ohio country. This portion of the
land is deserted."

"Still, it's well to be careful, Tayoga," said the hunter. "That savage,
Tandakora, is going to make it the business of his life to hunt our
scalps, and if there's to be a great war I don't want to fall just
before it begins."

That night they dressed as much of their deer as they could carry, and
the next day they passed into Lake Champlain, which displayed all of its
finest colors, as if it had been made ready especially to receive them.
Its waters showed blue and green and silver as the skies above them
shifted and changed, and both to east and west the high mountains were
clothed in dark green foliage. Robert's eyes kindled at the sight of
nature's great handiwork, the magnificent lake more than a hundred miles
long, and the great scenery in which it was placed. It had its story and
legend too. Already it was famous in the history of the land and for
unbroken generations the Indians had used it as their road between north
and south. It was both the pathway of peace and the pathway of war, and
Robert foresaw that hostile forces would soon be passing upon it again.

They saw the distant smoke once more, and kept close to the western
shore where they were in the shadow of the wooded heights, their canoe
but a mote upon the surface of the water. In so small a vessel and
almost level with its waves, they saw the lake as one cannot see it from
above, its splendid expanse stretching away from north to south, until
it sank under the horizon, while the Green Mountains on the east and the
great ranges of New York on the west seemed to pierce the skies.

"It's our lake," said Robert, "whatever happens we can't give it up to
the French, or at least we'll divide it with the Hodenosaunee who can
claim the western shore. If we were to lose this lake no matter what
happened elsewhere I should think we had lost the war."

"We don't hold Champlain yet," said the hunter soberly. "The French
claim it, and it's even called after the first of their governors under
the Company of One Hundred Associates, Samuel de Champlain. They've put
upon it as a sign a name which we English and Americans ourselves have
accepted, and they come nearer to controlling it than we do. They're
advancing, too, Robert, to the lake that they call Saint Sacrement, and
that we call George. When it comes to battle they'll have the advantage
of occupation."

"It seems so, but we'll drive 'em out," said Robert hopefully.

"But while we talk of the future," said Tayoga in his measured and
scholastic English, "it would be well for us also to be watchful in the
present. The French and their Indians may be upon the lake, and we are
but three in a canoe."

"Justly spoken," said Willet heartily. "We can always trust you, Tayoga,
to bring us back to the needs of the moment. Robert, you've uncommonly
good eyes. Just you look to the north and to south with all your might,
and see if you can see any of their long canoes."

"I don't see a single dot upon the water, Dave," said the youth, "but I
notice something else I don't like."

"What is it, Robert?"

"Several little dark clouds hanging around the crests of the high
mountains to the west. Small though they are, they've grown somewhat
since I noticed them first."

"I don't like that either, Robert. It may mean a storm, and the lake
being so narrow the winds have sudden and great violence. But meanwhile,
I suppose it's best for us to make as much speed southward as we can."

Tayoga alone was paddling them, but the other two fell to work also, and
the canoe shot forward, Robert looking up anxiously now and then at the
clouds hovering over the lofty peaks. He noticed that they were still
increasing and that now they fused together. Then all the crests were
lost in the great masses of vapor which crept far down the slopes. The
blue sky over their heads turned to gray with amazing rapidity. The air
grew heavy and damp. Thunder, low and then loud, rolled among the
western mountains. Lightning blazed in dazzling flashes across the lake,
showing the waters yellow or blood red in the glare. The forest moaned
and rocked, and with a scream and a roar the wind struck the lake.

The water, in an instant, broke into great waves, and the canoe rocked
so violently that it would have overturned at once had not the three
possessed such skill with the paddle. Even then the escape was narrow,
and their strength was strained to the utmost.

"We must land somewhere!" exclaimed Willet, looking up at the lofty
shore.

But where? The cliff was so steep that they saw no chance to pull up
themselves and the canoe, and, keeping as close to it as they dared,
they steadied the frail vessel with their paddles. The wind continually
increased in violence, whistling and screaming, and at times assuming an
almost circular motion, whipping the waters of the lake into white foam.
Day turned to night, save when the blazing flashes of lightning cut the
darkness. The thunder roared like artillery.

Willet hastily covered the ammunition and packs with their blankets, and
continued to search anxiously for a place where they might land.

"The rain will be here presently," he shouted, "and it'll be so heavy
it'll come near to swamping us if we don't get to shelter first! Paddle,
lads! paddle!"

The three, using all their strength and dexterity, sent the canoe
swiftly southward, still hugging the shore, but rocking violently. After
a few anxious minutes, Robert uttered a shout of joy as he saw by the
lightning's flash a cove directly ahead of them with shores at a fair
slope. They sent the canoe into it with powerful strokes, sprang upon
the bank, and then drew their little craft after them. Selecting a spot
sheltered on the west by the lofty shore and on either side to a certain
extent by dense woods, they turned the canoe over, resting the edges
upon fallen logs which they pulled hastily into place, and crouched
under it. They considered themselves especially lucky in finding the
logs, and now they awaited the rain that they had dreaded.

It came soon in a mighty sweep, roaring through the woods, and burst
upon them in floods. But the canoe, the logs and the forest and the
slope together protected them fairly well, and the contrast even gave a
certain degree of comfort, as the rain beat heavily and then rushed in
torrents down to the lake.

"We made it just in time," said Willet. "If we had stayed on the water I
think we'd have been swamped. Look how high the waves are and how fast
they run!"

Robert as he gazed at the stormy waters was truly thankful.

"We have many dangers," he said, "but somehow we seem to escape them
all."

"We dodge 'em," said Willet, "because we make ready for 'em. It's those
who think ahead who inherit the world, Robert."

The storm lasted an hour. Then the rain ceased abruptly. The wind died,
the darkness fled away and the lake and earth, washed and cleansed anew,
returned to their old peace and beauty, only the skies seemed softer and
bluer, and the colors of the water more varied and intense.

They launched the canoe and resumed their journey to the south, but
when they had gone a few hundred yards Robert observed a black dot
behind them on the lake. Willet and Tayoga at once pronounced it a great
Indian canoe, containing a dozen warriors at least.

"Canadian Indians, beyond a doubt," said Tayoga, "and our enemies.
Perhaps Tandakora is among them."

"Whether he is or not," said Willet, "they've seen us and are in
pursuit. I suppose they stayed in another cove back of us while the
storm passed. It's one case where our foresight couldn't guard against
bad luck."

He spoke anxiously and looked up at the overhanging forest. But there
was no convenient cove now, and it was not possible for them to beach
the canoe and take flight on land. A new danger and a great one had
appeared suddenly. The long canoe, driven by a dozen powerful paddles,
was approaching fast.

"Hurons, I think," said Tayoga.

"Most likely," said the hunter, "but whether Hurons or not they're no
friends of ours, and there's hot work with the paddles before us.
They're at least four rifleshots away and we have a chance."

Now the three used their paddles as only those can who have life at
stake. Their light canoe leaped suddenly forward, and seemed fairly to
skim over the water like some great aquatic bird, but the larger craft
behind them gained steadily though slowly. Three pairs of arms, no
matter how strong or expert, are no match for twelve, and the hunter
frowned as he glanced back now and then.

