

AGNES GIBERNE'S WORKS--continued

ENID'S SILVER BOND. 5s.

"Enid's nature is essentially heroic.... The other characters are
cleverly sketched."--_Times_.

FIVE THOUSAND POUNDS. 2s.

"Youthful readers have reason to thank Miss Giberne for having written
this capital story."--_John Bull_.

ST. AUSTIN'S LODGE; or, Mr. Berkeley and his Nieces. 5s.

"A very good example of the author's well-known style. It is carefully
written, and is in all respects a conscientious
performance."--_Academy_.

BERYL AND PEARL. 5s.

"Characterised by unflagging vivacity and great dramatic
power."-_Christian Leader_.

"One of Miss Giberne's most delightful tales."--_Record_.

DECIMA'S PROMISE. 3s. 6d.

"One of the best and soundest books we have seen."--_Public Opinion_.

"The result of a disaster, Decima's distress, and the behaviour of the
parents, are touchingly told, and the whole case of conscience is
admirably, managed."--_Guardian_.

DAISY OF OLD MEADOW. 2s.

"There are few boys or girls to whom this story will not prove
interesting reading."--_Court Circular_.

KATHLEEN. 5s.

"Worthy of high praise, thoroughly good and very interesting."--_Church
Bells_.

"A fascinating tale."--_Record_.

OLD UMBRELLAS; or, Clarrie and her Mother. 2s.

"The book is bright and lively, and will be read with pleasure and
profit."--_Christian_.

MILES MURCHISON. Illustrated. Small crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.




By Dr. MACAULAY.

STRANGE YET TRUE. With many Illustrations. Extra crown 8vo. 5s.

       *       *       *       *       *

By S.M.S. CLARKE (Mrs. Pereira).

BARON AND SQUIRE. A Story of the Thirty Years' War. From the German of
N. NOELDECHEN. With Sixteen Illustrations. Extra crown 8vo. 5s.

THE DUKE'S PAGE; or, "In the Days of Luther." A Story for Boys. From the
German. Sixteen Illustrations. Extra crown 8vo. 5s.

"A spirited and attractive narrative."--_Literary Churchman_.

"A capital story for boys."--_Guardian_.

"This is one of the most fascinating historical tales we have ever
read."--_British Weekly_.

"Throughout incident succeeds incident, and the interest never flags
until the end is reached."--_Public Opinion_.

"A very good story.... Of sterling value."--_Spectator_.

THE TRIVIAL ROUND; or, Chapters of Village Life. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

"A book that will interest and refresh dwellers in cities with this
glimpse of a life in many respects different from their
own."--_Academy_.

"These scenes from village life will be a source of pleasure to very
many readers. The story is ably worked out and pleasantly told."--_John
Bull_.

       *       *       *       *       *

By Rev. J. REID HOWATT.

THE CHILDREN'S PEW. Extra crown 8vo. 6s.

THE CHILDREN'S PULPIT. A Year's Sermons and Parables for the Young.
Extra crown 8vo. 6s.

"The subjects are well selected; the style is always simple and
forcible; and the lessons which the preacher desires to impress upon the
mind are such as every youthful reader may appreciate. The sermons have
another merit--that of brevity."--_Scotsman_.

"Simple, suggestive, and singularly happy in illustration and
treatment."--_Word and Work_. ^

THE CHILDREN'S ANGEL. A Volume of Sermons to Children. Crown 8vo. 2s.
6d.

"Fifty-three brief addresses to children. Direct, as such things should
be; clear, as they must always be; and interesting, as, if any good is
to be done, they are bound to be--they contain a collection of truths
which children ought to be taught, and the teacher is always bright and
clear, which is saying a great deal."--_Church Bells_.

"These sermonettes are eminently practical, while their homely style and
freedom from cant are delightful."--_Christian Commonwealth_.




By Lady KENNETT-BARRINGTON.

BIBLE HISTORY FOR CHILDREN. With a Short History of Christianity after
the Days of the Apostles. With Illustrations. Small crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.

"This book is eminently adapted for children's capabilities, and has the
great advantage of keeping as nearly as possible to Bible language. It
is an excellent little book."--_Christian Commonwealth_.

"A little work that will commend itself to all who have to do with the
religious training of the young."--_Church Bells_.

"The work is well and carefully done, the main current of the Bible
story being rendered with point and brevity in the very spirit of the
Scriptures."--_School Board Chronicle_.


By WILLIAM CHARLES METCALFE.

STEADY YOUR HELM; or, Stowed Away. With Six Illustrations. Extra crown
8vo. 5s.

ABOVEBOARD. A Tale of Adventure on the Sea. With Six Illustrations.
Extra crown 8vo. 5s.

"This is a delightfully exciting tale of the adventures of two sailor
lads, with icebergs, pirates, and similar horrors of the sea. Its chief
defect is that it leaves off too soon, even at the end of more than 300
pages."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

"This story of a cruise is about as full of adventures as it can well
be. There is plenty of 'go' in the narrative, and the incidents succeed
each other with a very plausible probability."--_Spectator_.

"It is a long time since we have read anything racier, breezier, more
healthful and invigorating than Mr. Metcalfe's fine sea
story."--_Methodist Recorder._

FRANK WEATHERALL; or, Life in the Merchant Marine. A Sea Story for
Youth. Illustrated. Small crown 8vo. 2s.


By Mrs. SAXBY.

TOM AND HIS CROWS. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

VIKING BOYS. With Four Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

"Wholesome and manly in tone, the book is thoroughly fresh and natural."
--_Morning Post_.

"We prophesy that the tale of the Viking boys and their wild deeds will
become as popular as 'The Lads of Lunda,' and all the other stories with
which Mrs. Saxby has delighted us."--_Athenaeum_.

THE LADS OF LUNDA. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

"A perfect book for boys--generous, wholesome, manly in tone, and withal
thoroughly young, fresh, and natural. We recommend the book heartily,
not only to all boys, but to everybody who knows and likes brave
boys."-_Guardian_.

"A capital book. The tales are full of fun and pathos."--_Athenaeum_.

THE YARL'S YACHT. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

"'The Yarl's Yacht' is even superior in interest to its
predecessor."-_Standard_.

"Mrs. Saxby knows young people as few know them, and they will in return
thoroughly appreciate her. As long as she writes such genuine,
refreshing, happy family stories for them, they certainly will be most
fortunate."--_Spectator_.

"'The Yarl's Yacht' is a delightful sequel to the 'Lads of
Lunda.'"--_Times_.

THE HOME OF A NATURALIST. By JESSIE M.E. SAXBY and the Rev. BIOT
EDMONSTON. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

"We would fain linger long over the scenes which this excellent volume
brings up before us. The authors have put together a very refreshing set
of memories."--_Saturday Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *

By EVA TRAVERS EVERED POOLE. LOTTA'S LIFE MISTAKE. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 1s.

GOLDEN LINKS IN A LIFE CHAIN. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

"GOOD-NIGHT" THOUGHTS ABOUT GOD; or, Evening Readings for the Young.
Small crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

By BARLEY DALE.

A TALE OF OUGHTS AND CROSSES; or, Mr. Holland's Conquest. With
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

SPOILT GUY. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d. "A pretty tale, and
contains excellent religious teaching."--_Church, Sunday-School
Magazine._

CISSY'S TROUBLES. With Illustrations. Small crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.

"A very charming story."--_Yorkshire Post_.

"The book will be a favourite with young people, especially with our
girls."--_Family Churchman_.

LITTLE BRICKS. With Illustrations. Small crown 8vo. 1s. 6d. "The story
is fascinating from the interest which is excited and maintained It is
written with power and insight."--_Courant_.




By ELLEN L. DAVIS.

HIGH AND LOWLY: A Story of Hearts and Homes. With Illustrations. Crown
8vo. 1s. 6d.

YOKED TOGETHER: A Tale of Three Sisters. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
2s.

"A quiet domestic story of deep interest-, with several striking
situations, described with considerable power."--_Leeds Mercury_.

A BOY'S WILL. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.

"The book is full of life and character, and would be a fitting gift
alike to the Sunday-school teacher and the scholar."--_British
Messenger_.


By the Rev. GEORGE EVERARD, M.A.

YOUR SUNDAYS: Fifty-Two Short Readings. Especially intended for
Schoolboys. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

"YOUR INNINGS:" A Book for Schoolboys. Sixth Thousand. Crown 8vo. 1s.
6d.

EDIE'S LETTER; or, Talks with the Little Folks. 4to. 2s. 6d.


By Miss HAVERGAL.

STREAMLETS OF SONG FOR THE YOUNG. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

MORNING BELLS. Being Waking Thoughts for the Little Ones. Royal 32mo,
9d.; paper cover, 6d.

LITTLE PILLOWS. Being Good Night Thoughts for the Little Ones. 32mo,
9d.; paper cover, 6d.

MORNING STARS; or, Names of Christ for His Little Ones. 32mo. 9d.

THE FOUR HAPPY DAYS. 16mo. 1s.

BEN BRIGHTBOOTS, and Other True Stories. Crown 8vo. 1s.

BRUEY. A Little Worker for Christ. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.; paper cover, 1s.


MEMORIALS OF LITTLE NONY. A Biography of Nony Heywood, who was the First
Collector for the Bruey Branch of the Irish Society. By her Mother. With
Preface by Miss HAVERGAL, and a Portrait. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.




By the Rev. J.B. MACDUFF, D.D.

PARABLES OF THE LAKE; or, The Seven Stories of Jesus by the Lake of
Galilee. A Sunday Book for Young Readers. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
3s. 6d.

THE STORY OF A SHELL. A Romance of the Sea: with some Sea Teachings. A
Book for Boys and Girls. With Coloured Frontispiece and Other
Illustrations. Small 4to. 6s. Cheaper Edition, paper cover, 1s.; limp
cloth, 2s.

THE STORY OF BETHLEHEM. A Book for Children. With Illustrations by
THOMAS. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

HOSANNAS OF THE CHILDREN. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 5s.

THE WOODCUTTER OF LEBANON. A Story Illustrative of a Jewish Institution.
16mo. 2s.

TALES OF THE WARRIOR JUDGES. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

THE CITIES OF REFUGE; or, The Name of Jesus. A Sunday Book for the
Young. 16mo. 1s. 6d.

FERGUS MORTON. A Tale of a Scottish Boy. 18mo. 9d.

THE EXILES OF LUCERNA; or, The Sufferings of the Waldenses during the
Persecution of 1686. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

THE FOOTSTEPS OF ST. PAUL. Being a Life of the Apostle designed for
Youth. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 5s.

BRIGHTER THAN THE SUN; or, Christ the Light of the World. A Life of Our
Lord for the Young. With Illustrations by A. ROWAN. Post 4to. 3s. 6d.;
in paper cover, 1s.; limp cloth, 2s.

WILLOWS BY THE WATERCOURSES; or, God's Promises to the Young. 64mo. 6d.;
paper cover, 3d.




By Rev. J. JACKSON WRAY.

OLD CRUSTY'S NIECE. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

WILL IT LIFT? A Story of a London Fog. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
3s. 6d.

JACK HORNER THE SECOND. With Illustrations. Cr. 8vo. 2s;

SIMON HOLMES, THE CARPENTER IF ASPENDALE. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
3s. 6d.

THE SECRET OF THE MERE; or, Under the Surface. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

GARTON ROWLEY; or, Leaves from the Log of a Master Mariner. With
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

HONEST JOHN STALLIBRASS. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

THE CHRONICLES OF CAPSTAN CABIN. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

MATTHEW MELLOWDEW. With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

NESTLETON MAGNA. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

PETER PENGELLY. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d.

PAUL MEGGITT'S DELUSION. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

A MAN EVERY INCH OF HIM. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

_THE "KNAPSACK" SERIES_.

With Frontispiece. Small crown 8vo. 1s. each.

1. THE MAN WITH THE KNAPSACK; or, The Miller o Burnham Lee.

2. WIDOW WINPENNY'S WATCHWORD.

3. PRIMROSE GARTH.

4. "A SONG O' SIXPENCE" FOR THE BAIRNS.

5. GEOFFREY HALLAM; or, The Clerk of the Parish.




By Mrs. BARBOUR.

THE WAY HOME, AND HOW THE CHILDREN REACHED IT BY A RAILWAY ACCIDENT.
With Illustrations. Eighteenth Thousand. 16mo. 1s. 6d. limp; 2s. 6d.
boards.

THE IRISH ORPHAN IN A SCOTTISH HOME. A Sequel to "The Way Home." 16mo.
1s. limp; 2s. 6d. boards.

THE CHILD OF THE KINGDOM. Twenty-second Thousand. With Illustrations.
16mo. 1s. limp; 2s. 6d. boards.

THE SOUL-GATHERER. Seventeenth Thousand. 16mo. 1s. limp; cloth gilt, 2s.
6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

By Mrs. HAYCRAFT.

SUNWOOD GLORY; or, Through the Refiner's Fire. With Four Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

By ESME STUART.

A BRAVE FIGHT, AND OTHER STOKIES. With Four Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
2s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

By EDITH RALPH.

STEP BY STEP THROUGH THE BIBLE. Part I. A Scripture History for Little
Children. With a Preface by CUNNINGHAM GEIKIE, D.D., LL.D., and Twelve
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Part II. From Death of Joshua to end of the Old Testament. A Scripture
History for Little Children. Revised and recommended by CUNNINGHAM
GEIKIE, D.D., LL.D. Twelve Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.




MRS. LESTER'S GIRLS AND THEIR SERVICE. By the Author of "Miss Marston's
Girls and their Confirmation." With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

"A good book for young servants, or for reading at a sewing-class
attended by young women. Its tone and teaching are all we could
wish."--_Record_..

"Its evident truthfulness and fidelity to nature make us think that it
is founded upon much experience of young girls in the working class. To
such it would, no doubt, be exceedingly interesting."--_Literary
Churchman_.

MISS MARSTON'S GIRLS AND THEIR CONFIRMATION. With Frontispiece. Crown
8vo. 1s.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the Rev. DAVID MacEWAN, D.D.

THIS YEAR. Anniversary Addresses for the Young. Second Edition. Square
16mo. 1s.

By the Rev. JAMES WELLS, M.A.

BIBLE OBJECT-LESSONS. Addresses to Children. With Illustrations. Crown
8vo. 3s. 6d.

BIBLE ECHOES: Addresses to the Young. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

THE PARABLES OF JESUS. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 5s.

BIBLE CHILDREN. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

BIBLE IMAGES. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

"Mr. Wells has in these volumes been content to restrict himself to an
endeavour to win and instruct the young. He has done this with admirable
skill, with great transparency of meaning, vividness of treatment and
nicety of discrimination, combined with a befitting freedom and an
impressive earnestness."--_Literary World_.

"Mr. Wells contrives by a studied plainness of diction, by the
simplicity and directness of his style, by his evident earnestness and
kindliness, and a wealth of illustrative anecdotes, to minimise the
difficulties which children have to encounter in grasping new and
especially abstract ideas."--_Scotsman_.




By Lady DUNBOYNE.

BREAKING OF THE CLOUDS. Crown 8vo. Illustrated. 2s.

CHARITY. A Tale. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2s.

