
The night was very quiet. The horses, having grazed for an hour or two,
now rested content. The men not on guard, used to taking their sleep
where they could find it, were already in slumber. There was no wind.

The dark hours as usual were full of chill, but Ned's vigorous walk back
and forth kept him warm. He was joined after a while by the famous
scout, Henry Karnes, who, like "Deaf" Smith, seemed to watch all the
time, although he came and went as he pleased.

"Well, boy," said Karnes, "do you find it hard work, this watching and
watching and watching for hours and hours?"

"Not at all," replied Ned, responding to his tone of humorous kindness.
"I might have found it so once, but I don't now. I'm always anxious to
see what will happen."

"That's a good spirit to have," said Karnes, smiling, "and you need it
down here, where a man must always be watching for something. In Texas
boys have to be men now."

He walked back and forth with Ned, and the lad felt flattered that so
famous a scout should show an interest in him. The two were at the edge
of the wood and they could see duskily before them a stretch of bare
prairie. Karnes was watching this open space intently, and Ned was
watching it also.

The boy saw nothing, but suddenly he heard, or thought he heard, a low
sound. It was faint, but, unconsciously bending forward a little, he
heard it again. It was a metallic rattle and instantly he called the
attention of Karnes to it. The scout stopped his walk and listened. Then
Ned saw his form grow rigid and tense.

"Let's put our ears to the ground, Ned," said he.

The two stretched out ear to earth, and then Ned not only heard the
noise much more distinctly, but he knew at once what it was. He had
heard it more than once in the marching army of Cos. It was the sound
made by the approaching wheel of a cannon.

"Artillery," he said in a whisper.

"Beyond a doubt," said Karnes. "It means that the Mexicans have crossed
the river--there's a ford two or three hundred yards above--and mean to
attack us. It was your good ear, Ned, that gave us the first warning."

Ned flushed with pleasure at the compliment, but, a moment or two later,
they saw dark figures rising out of the prairie and advancing toward
them.

"Mexicans!" cried Karnes, and instantly fired at a dusky outline. The
figures flitted away in the dusk, but the camp of Bowie was aroused at
once. Inside of a minute every man was on his feet, rifle in hand,
facing the open place in the horseshoe. They knew that they could not be
attacked from the river. Bowie came to the side of Ned and Karnes.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Ned heard a sound," Karnes replied, "and when we put our ears to the
earth we knew that it was made by artillery. Then I saw their scouts and
skirmishers and fired upon them. They must have crossed the river in
strong force, Colonel."

"Very likely," said Bowie. "Well, we shall be ready for them. Henry, you
and Smith and the Ring Tailed Panther scout across the prairie there,
and see what has become of them."

"Can't I go, too?" asked Ned.

Bowie patted him on the shoulder.

"You young fire eater!" he replied. "Haven't you done enough for one
night? You gave us the first warning that the Mexicans were at hand. I
think you'd better rest now, and let these old boys do this job."

The three chosen men disappeared in the darkness, and Ned sat down among
the trees with Obed. They, like everybody else, waited as patiently as
they could for the reports of the scouts.

"Obed," said Ned, "do you think we're going to have a battle?"

"The signs point that way."

Bowie set everybody to work cutting out undergrowth, in order that they
might have a clear field for the work that they expected. By the time
this task was completed the scouts returned and their report was
alarming.

The Mexicans had crossed the river in heavy force, outnumbering the
troop of Texans at least five to one. They had artillery, infantry and
cavalry, and they were just out of range, expecting to attack at dawn.
The avenue of escape was cut off already.

"Very good," said Bowie. "We'll wait for them."

It was too dark to see, but Ned knew that his blue eyes were glittering.
He advanced to the point where the bluff rose nearly ten feet to the
edge of the prairie, and took a long look.

"I can see nothing," he said, "but I know you men are right. Now we'll
cut steps all along the edge of this bluff, in order that our men can
stand in them, and fire at the enemy as he comes. Then we'll have as
fine a fort here as anybody could ask."

The men fell to work with hatchets and big knives, cutting steps in the
soft earth, at least a hundred of them in order that everybody might
have a chance. Meanwhile the hour of dawn was at hand, but a heavy mist
had thickened over prairie and river. Beyond the mists and vapors, the
sun showed only a yellow blur, and it did not yet cast any glow over the
earth.

But Ned could clearly hear the Mexicans; officers shouting to men; men
shouting to horses; horses neighing and mules squealing, and he knew
from these noises that the report of their great force by the scouts was
correct. He also heard the clank of the artillery wheels again, and he
feared that the cannon would prove a very dangerous foe to them. All the
pulses in his body began to beat fast and hard.

"Will the sun ever get through the fog and let us see?" he exclaimed
impatiently. It was hard to wait at such a time.

"It's comin' through now," said the Ring Tailed Panther.

The pale yellow light turned suddenly to full red gold. The banks of
mist and vapor dissolved under the shining beams, and floated away in
shreds and patches. The river, the forest and the prairie rose up into
the light, everything standing out, sharp and clear.

Ned drew a deep breath. There was the Mexican array, massed along the
entire open space of the horseshoe, at least five to the Texan one, as
the scouts had said, and now not more than two hundred yards from them.
Five companies of cavalry were gathered ready to charge; infantry stood
just behind them and back of the infantry Ned caught the gleam of the
cannon he had heard in the night. Evidently the Mexicans had not yet
brought it to the front, because its fire would interfere with the
charge of the cavalry which they expected would end the battle in five
minutes. There was no chance for the Texans to retreat, but it was not
of retreat that they were thinking.

"How's your pulse, Ned?" asked the Ring Tailed Panther.

"It's beating fast and hard, I won't deny that," replied Ned, "but I
believe my finger will be steady when it presses the trigger."

"Fine feathers make fine Mexicans," said Obed White. "How they do love
color! That's a gorgeous array out there, and it seems a pity to break
it up."

The Mexican force certainly looked well. The cavalry, in brilliant
uniforms, presented a long front, their lances gleaming. The Texans,
standing in the steps that they had cut in the earth, were in sober
attire, but resolute eyes looked out from under their caps or the wide
brims of their hats.

"They'll charge in a moment," said Obed, "and they'll try to break their
way through the wood. They cannot ride down this bluff."

The Ring Tailed Panther raised his rifle, and looked down the sights.
His eyes were glittering. He drew the trigger and the sharp lashing
report ended the silence. A Mexican officer fell from his horse, and
then, with a great shout, the Mexican horsemen charged, presenting a
gallant array as they bent forward, their rifles and lances ready. The
beat of their horses' hoofs came over the prairie like roiling thunder.
They wheeled suddenly toward the wood, and then the infantry, advancing,
opened heavy and repeated volleys upon the Texans. The horsemen also
fired from their saddles.

It was the heaviest fire under which Ned had ever come, and, for a few
moments, he quivered all over. He saw a great blaze in front, above it a
cloud of lifting smoke, and he heard over his head the hum of many
bullets, like the whistling of hail, driven by a heavy wind. But he was
experienced enough now to note that the Mexican fire was wasted. That
bank was a wonderful protection.

"It's almost a shame to shoot 'em," roared the Ring Tailed Panther who
had reloaded. But up went his rifle, his finger pressed the trigger and
another Mexican officer fell from his horse. All along the Texan front
ran the rifle fire, a rapid crackling sound like the ripping apart of
some great cloth. But the Texans were taking aim. There was no confusion
among the hardy veterans of the plains. Lying against the face of the
bluff they were sending in their bullets with deadly precision. Horse
after horse in the charging host galloped away riderless over the
prairie, and the front rank of the infantry was shot down.

Ned, like the others, was loading and firing swiftly, but with care. The
imminent danger kept down any feeling that he would have had otherwise.
The Mexicans sought their lives, and he must seek theirs. The smoke and
the odor of burned gunpowder inflamed him. There was still a blaze in
front of him, but he also saw the brown faces of the Mexicans yet
pressing forward, and he yet heard the continued thunder of the charging
hoofs.

"Another bullet, Ned," roared the Ring Tailed Panther and he and the
others around him sent a fresh volley at the horsemen. The Mexican
cavalry could stand no more. Five companies strong, they broke and
galloped away, seeking only to escape from the deadly fire of the Texan
rifles. The infantry also gave back and for a few minutes there was a
lull.

"That's the end of Chapter One," said Obed White. "Our Mexican friends
came in haste and they will repent at a distance."

The smoke lifted and Ned saw many fallen, both men and horses, on the
plain in front of them, and there was confusion in the Mexican force,
which was now out of gunshot. Never had the Texan rifles done more
deadly service. The Texan loss was small.

Ned dropped down from the steps and sat on the grass. His face was wet
with perspiration, and he wiped it on his sleeve. He was compelled to
cough once or twice to clear his throat of the smoke. The Ring Tailed
Panther also was warm, but satisfied.

"A Texan does best in a fight against odds," he said, "an' we have the
odds to-day. But don't you think, Ned, that it's over already?"

"I don't," said Ned. "I know that they will be up to some new trick
soon. They will realize that they underrated us at first."

He sprang back into the steps that he had cut in the bluff, and took a
good look at the Mexicans.

"They are nearly ready with Chapter Second, Obed," he said. "They are
bringing up that cannon."

"Should have used it in the first place," said the Ring Tailed Panther.
"They didn't show much sense."

The Mexicans were running the gun forward to a little mound, whence they
could drop shells and shot over the edge of the bluff, directly among
the Texans. It was a far more formidable danger than the impulsive
charge, and Bowie at once took measures to meet it. He called the best
rifle shots. Among them were Ned, Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther.

"There are fifteen of you," said the dauntless leader, "and your rifles
will reach that gun. Shoot down every man who tries to handle it. The
rest of us will attend to the new charge that is coming."

The second attack was to be more formidable than the first. The Mexican
cavalry had massed anew. Ned saw the officers, driving the men into
place with the flats of swords, and he heard the note of a trumpet,
singing loud and clear over the prairie. Then his eyes turned back to
the gun, because there his duty lay.

Ned heard the trumpet peal again, and then the thud of hoofs. He saw the
rammers and spongers gather about the gun. The rifle of the Ring Tailed
Panther cracked, and the man with the rammer fell. Another picked it up,
but he went down before the bullet of Obed. Then a sponger fell, and
then the gunner himself was slain by the bullet. The Texans were doing
wonderful sharpshooting. The gun could not be fired, because nobody
could live near it long enough to fire it. Its entire complement was
cleared away by the swift little bullets.

Off to right and left, Ned heard again the rising crackle of the rifle
fire, and he also heard the steady monotonous beat of the hoofs. He knew
that the charge was still coming on, but Bowie would attend to that. He
and his immediate comrades never took their eyes from the gun. New
cannoneers, an entire complement, were rushing forward to take the place
of their fallen comrades. The Mexicans showed plenty of courage that
day but the deadly sharpshooters were slaying them as fast as they came.
They were yet unable to fire the gun. Nor could they draw it back from
its dangerous position. A second time all about it were slain, but a
third body came forward for the trial.

"Greasers or no greasers," cried Obed, "those are men of courage!"

But he continued to shoot straight at them nevertheless, and the third
group of cannoneers was fast melting away.

"Some of you aim at the mules hitched to the caisson," cried the Ring
Tailed Panther. "I hate to kill a mule, but it will be a help now."

One of the mules was slain and two others, wounded, dashed wildly
through the Mexican infantry, adding to the confusion and turmoil. The
last of the third group of cannoneers fell and the gun stood alone and
untouched, the shell still in place. No one now dared to approach it.
The dead now lay in a group all about it. Meanwhile, the second charge
broke like the first and the cavalry galloped wildly away.

Ned could turn his eyes now. He saw more riderless horses than before,
while the fallen, lying still on the prairie, had doubled in number.
Then his eyes turned back to the gun, standing somber and silent among
those who had died for it. The battle-fire gone, for the present, Ned
felt pity for the Mexicans who lay so thick about the cannon. Nor did he
fail to admire the courage that had been spent so freely, but in vain.

"They won't come again," said the Ring Tailed Panther, dropping to the
grass. "They have had enough."

"I don't blame 'em," said Obed, lying down by his side. "They must have
lost a third of their number, and they'd have lost another third if they
had charged once more."

"They're not going away," said Ned, who had remained on his perch.
"They're coming again."

A third time the Mexicans charged and a third time they were driven back
by the rifles. Then they formed on the prairie beyond gunshot, and
marched away to San Antonio, leaving behind the mournful and silent
cannon as proof alike of their courage and defeat.




CHAPTER XX

THE WHEEL OF FIRE


Ned watched the Mexicans marching away until the last lance had
disappeared behind a swell of the prairie. Then he joined in the cheer
that the Texans gave, after which he and his comrades went out upon the
field, and gazed upon their work. The killed among the Mexicans nearly
equaled in numbers the whole Texan force, sixteen lying dead around the
cannon alone, and many of them also had been wounded, while the Texans
had escaped with only a single man slain, and but few hurt. But Ned
quickly left the field. The sight of it was not pleasant to him,
although he was still heart and soul with the Texans, in what he
regarded as a defensive war.

Bowie drew his forces out of the horseshoe and they rode for the Texan
camp, carrying with them the trophies of arms that they had taken. On
their way they met Mr. Austin and a strong force who had heard of their
plight and who were now coming to their relief. They, too, rejoiced
greatly at the victory, and all went back in triumph to the Salado.

"Now that they have seen how we can fight I reckon that Mr. Austin and
Houston will order an attack right away on San Antonio," said the Ring
Tailed Panther.

"I don't believe they will," said Obed White. "Seeing is sometimes
doubting. I believe that they still fear our failure."

Ned inclined to Obed's belief but he said nothing. At twilight Urrea
came back, rejoicing and also full of regrets. He rejoiced over the
victory and he regretted that he had not been there.

"Seems to me, Don Francisco," said the Ring Tailed Panther, "that you're
missin' a lot of things."

"There's many a slip 'twixt Francisco and the fight-o," said Obed.

Ned was hurt by the irony of his friends, but Urrea only laughed as he
spread his blanket in a good place, and lay down on it.

"I will admit, gentlemen," he said in his precise English, "that I seem
always to be absent when anything important happens, but it is owing to
the nature of the service that I can best render the Texans. Being of
the Mexican race and knowing the country so thoroughly, I am of most
value as a seeker after information. I had gone off on a long scout
about San Antonio, and I have news which I have given to Mr. Austin."

"Spyin' is a dangerous business, but it's got to be done," said the Ring
Tailed Panther. Ned saw that he again looked with disfavor upon Urrea,
but he ascribed it as before to racial aversion.

Obed was right. Despite the brilliant victory of Bowie, Houston and
Austin still held back, and the Ring Tailed Panther roared long and
loud. But his roaring was cut short by an order for him, Obed, Ned and
Urrea to ride eastward to some of the little Texan towns in search of
help. The leaders were anxious that their utmost strength be gathered
when they should at last make the attack upon San Antonio. Since he
could not have just what he wished, the Panther was glad to get the new
task, and the others were content.

They rode away the next morning, armed and provisioned well. Their
horses, having rested long and fed abundantly, were strong and fresh,
and they went at a good pace, until they came to the last swell from
which they could see San Antonio. The town was distant, but it was
magnified in the clear Texas sunlight. It looked to Ned, sitting there
on his horse, like a large city. It had come to occupy a great place in
his mind and just now it was to him the most important town in the
world. He wondered if they would ever take it. Urrea, who was watching
him, smiled.

"I know what you are thinking," he said, "and I will wager that it was
just the same that I was thinking."

"I was trying to read the future and tell whether we would take San
Antonio," said Ned.

"Exactly. Those were my thoughts, too."

"I reckon you two wasn't far away from my trail either," said the Ring
Tailed Panther, "'cause I was figgerin' that we'd take it inside of a
month."

"Count me in, too," said Obed. "Great minds go in bunches. I was
calculating that we would capture it some day, but I left out the limit
of time."

They turned their horses, and when they reached the crest of the next
swell San Antonio was out of sight. Before them stretched the prairies,
now almost as desolate as they had been when the Indians alone roamed
over them. They passed two or three small cabins, each built in a
cluster of trees near a spring, but the occupants had gone, fled to a
town for shelter. One seemed to have been abandoned only an hour or two
ago, as the ashes were scarcely cold on the hearth, and a bucket of
water, with its gourd in it, still stood on the shelf. The sight moved
the Ring Tailed Panther to sentiment.

"Think of the women an' children havin' to sleep out on the prairie," he
said. "It ain't right an' fittin'."

"We'll bring them all back before we are through," said Obed.

They left the little cabin, exactly as they had found it, and then rode
at an increased pace toward the north and the east, making for the
settlements on the Brazos. A little while before nightfall, they met a
buffalo hunter who told them there were reports of a Mexican cavalry
force far north of San Antonio, although he could not confirm the truth
of the rumors. Urrea shook his head vigorously.
