so; but there are reasons for my not telling you everything just now.
Surely, you can trust _me_? I have told you as much as I think advisable
in the meantime. Ere long I will tell you all."

The widow sighed, and was fain to rest content. She sat down beside the
tree, while her companions talked together, apart, in low tones.

"Now Jo, my man," continued Henry, "_one_ of our friends must be got out
of the way."

"Wery good; I'm the man as'll do it."

"Of course I don't mean that he's to be killed!"

"In coorse not. Who is he?"

"Ole Thorwald."

"Wot! the descendant o' the Sea Kings, as he calls himself?"

"The same," said Henry, laughing at the look of surprise with which
Bumpus received this information.

"What has _he_ bin an' done?"

"He has done nothing as yet," said Henry; "but he will certainly thwart
our schemes if he hears of them. He has an inveterate ill-will to my
poor father (Henry lowered his voice as he proceeded), and I know has
suspicions that we are concocting some plan to enable him to escape,
and watches us accordingly. I find him constantly hanging about the
jail. Alas! if he knew how thoroughly determined Gascoyne is to refuse
deliverance unless it comes from the proper source, he would keep his
mind more at ease."

"Don't you think if you wos to tell him that Gascoyne _is_ yer father he
would side with us?" suggested Bumpus.

"Perhaps he would. I _think_ he would; but I dare not risk it. The
easier method will be to outwit him."

"Not an easy thing for to do, I'm afraid; for he's a cute old feller.
How is it to be done?" asked Bumpus.

"By telling him the truth," said Henry; "and _you_ must tell it to him."

"Well, that _is_ a koorious way," said Bumpus, with a broad grin.

"But not the whole truth," continued Henry. "You must just tell him as
much as it is good for him to know, and nothing more; and as the thing
must be done at once, I'll tell you what you have got to say."

Here the young man explained to the attentive Bumpus the course that he
was to follow, and, having got him thoroughly to understand his part, he
sent him away to execute it. Meanwhile he and his mother went in search
of Mr. Mason, who at the time was holding a consultation with the chiefs
of the native village, near the site of his burnt cottage. The
consultation had just been concluded when they reached the spot, and the
missionary was conversing with the native carpenter who superintended
the erection of his new home.

After the morning greeting, and a few words of general conversation,
Mrs. Stuart said: "We have come to talk with you in private; will you
walk to Alice's tree with us?"

"Certainly, my friend; I hope no new evils are about to befall us," said
the missionary, who was startled by the serious countenances of the
mother and son; for he was ignorant of the close relation in which they
stood to Gascoyne, as, indeed, was every one else in the settlement,
excepting Montague and his boatswain and Corrie, all of whom were
enjoined to maintain the strictest secrecy on the point.

"No; I thank God, all is well," replied Mrs. Stuart; "but we have come
to say that we are going away."

"Going away!" echoed the missionary, in surprise. "When?--where
to?--why? You amaze me, Mary."

"Henry will explain."

"The fact is, Mr. Mason?" said Henry, "circumstances require my absence
from Sandy Cove on a longer trip than usual, and I mean to take my
mother with me. Indeed, to be plain with you, I do not think it likely
that we shall return for a long time, perhaps not at all; and it is
absolutely necessary that we should go secretly. But we could not go
without saying good-by to you."

"We owe much to you, dear Mr. Mason," cried the widow, grasping the
missionary's hand and kissing it. "We can never, never forget you; and
will always pray for God's best blessings to descend on you and yours."

"This is overwhelming news!" exclaimed Mr. Mason, who had stood hitherto
gazing from the one to the other in mute astonishment. "But, tell me,
Mary" (here he spoke in earnest tones), "is not Gascoyne at the bottom
of this?"

"Mr. Mason," said Henry, "we never did, and never will deceive you.
There is a good reason for neither asking nor answering questions on
this subject _just now_. I am sure you know us too well to believe that
we think of doing what is wrong, and you can trust us--at least my
mother--that we will not do what is foolish."

"I have perfect confidence in your hearts, my dear friends," replied Mr.
Mason; "but you will forgive me if I express some doubt as to your
ability to judge between right and wrong when your feelings are deeply
moved, as they evidently are, from some cause or other, just now. Can
you not put confidence in me? I can keep a secret, and may, perhaps,
give you good counsel."

"No, no," said Henry, emphatically; "it will not do to involve you in
our affairs. It would not be right in us _just now_ to confide even in
you. I cannot explain why--you must accept the simple assurance in the
meantime. Wherever we go, we can communicate by letter, and I promise,
ere long, to reveal all."

"Well, I will not press you further; but I will commend you in prayer to
God. I do not like to part thus hurriedly, however. Can we not meet
again before you go?"

"We shall be in the cottage at four this afternoon, and will be very
glad if you will come to us for a short time," said the widow.

"That is settled, then; I will go and explain to the natives that I
cannot accompany them to the village till to-morrow. When do you leave?"

"To-night."

"So soon! Surely it is not--But I forbear to say more on a subject which
is forbidden. God bless you, my friends; we shall meet at four.
Good-by!"

The missionary turned from them with a sad countenance, and went in
search of the native chiefs; while Henry and his mother separated from
each other, the former taking the path that led to the little quay of
Sandy Cove, the latter that which conducted to her own cottage.




CHAPTER XXX.

MORE LEAVING--DEEP DESIGNS--BUMPUS IN A NEW CAPACITY.


On the particular day of which we are writing, Alice Mason felt an
unusual depression of spirits. She had been told by her father of the
intended departure of the widow and her son, and had been warned not to
mention it to any one. In consequence of this, the poor child was
debarred her usual consolation of pouring her grief into the black bosom
of Poopy. It naturally followed, therefore, that she sought her next
favorite,--the tree.

Here, to her surprise and comfort, she found Corrie, seated on one of
its roots, with his head resting on the stem, and his hands clasped
before him. His general appearance was that of a human being in the
depths of woe. On observing Alice, he started up, and assuming a
cheerful look, ran to meet her.

"Oh! I'm so glad to find you here, Corrie," cried Alice, hastening
forward; "I'm in such distress! Do you know that--Oh! I forgot papa said
I was to tell nobody about it!"

"Don't let that trouble you, Alice," said Corrie, as they sat down
together under the tree. "I know what you were about to say,--Henry and
his mother are going away."

"How do you know that? I thought it was a great secret!"

"So it is, a _tremendous_ secret," rejoined Corrie, with a look that was
intended to be very mysterious; "and I know it, because I've been let
into the secret for reasons which I cannot tell even to you. But there
is another secret which you don't know yet, and which will surprise you
perhaps, _I_ am going away, too."

"You!" exclaimed the little girl, her eyes dilating to their full size.

"Aye--me!"

"You're jesting, Corrie."

"Am I? I wish I was; but it's a fact."

"But where are you going to?" said Alice, her eyes filling with tears.

"I don't know."

"Corrie!"

"I tell you, I don't know; and if I did know, I couldn't tell. Listen,
Alice; I will tell you as much as I am permitted to let out."

The boy became extremely solemn at this point, took the little girl's
hand, and gazed into her face as he spoke.

"You must know," he began, "that Henry and his mother and I go away
to-night--"

"To-night?" cried Alice, quickly.

"To-night," repeated the boy. "Bumpus and Jakolu go with us. I have said
that I don't know where we are going to, but I am pretty safe in
assuring you that we are going somewhere. Why we are going I am
forbidden to tell,--divulge, I think Henry called it; but what that
means I don't know. I can only guess it's another word for tell; and yet
it can't be that either, for you can speak of _telling_ lies, but you
can't speak of _divulging_ them. However, that don't matter. But I'm not
forbidden to tell you why I'm going away. In the first place, then, I'm
going to seek my fortune! Where I'm to find it remains to be seen. The
only thing I know is, that I mean to find it somewhere or other, and
then" (here Corrie because very impressive) "come back and live beside
you and your father,--not to speak of Poopy and Toozle."

Alice smiled sadly at this. Corrie looked graver than ever, and went on:

"Meanwhile, during my absence I will write letters to you, and you'll
write ditto to me. I am going away because I ought to go and be doing
something for myself. You know quite well that I would rather stop
beside you than go anywhere in this wide world, Alice; but that would be
stupid. I'm getting to be a man now, and mustn't go on showin' the
weaknesses of a boy. In the second, or third place,--I forget which, but
no matter,--I am going with Henry, because I could not go with a better
man; and in the fourth--if it's not the fifth--place, I'm going because
Uncle Ole Thorwald has long wished me to go to sea; and, to tell you the
truth, I would have gone long ago had it not been for you, Alice.
There's only one thing that bothers me." Here Corrie looked at his fair
companion with a perplexed air.

"What is that?" asked Alice, sympathetically.

"It is that I must go without saying good-by to Uncle Ole. I am _very_
sorry about it. It will look so ungrateful to him; but it _can't_ be
helped."

"Why not?" inquired Alice. "If he has often said he wished you to go
sea, would he not be delighted to hear that you are going?"

"Yes; but he must not know that I am going to-night, and with Henry
Stuart."

"Why not?"

"Ah! that's the point. Mystery! Alice--mystery! What a world of mystery
this is!" observed the precocious Corrie, shaking his head with
profound solemnity. "I've been involved (I think that's the word),
rolled up, drowned, and buried in mystery for more than three weeks, and
I'm beginning to fear that I'll never again git into the unmysteriously
happy state in which I lived before this abominable man-of-war came to
the island. No, Alice: I dare not say anything more on that point, even
to you _just now_. But _won't_ I give it you all in my first letter? and
_won't_ you open your eyes until they look like two blue saucers?"

Further conversation between the friends was interrupted at this point
by the inrushing of Toozle, followed up by Poopy, and a short time
after, by Mr. Mason, who took Alice away with him, and left poor Corrie
disconsolate.

While this was going on, John Bumpus was fulfilling his mission to Ole
Thorwald.

He found that obstinate individual in his own parlor, deep in the
investigation of the state of his books of business, which had been
allowed to fall into arrears during his absence.

"Come in, Bumpus. So I hear you were half-hanged when we were away."

Ole wheeled round on his stool, and hooked his thumbs into the armholes
of his vest, as he said this, leaned his back against his desk, and
regarded the seaman with a facetious look.

"_Half_-hanged, indeed!" said Bumpus, indignantly. "I was more than
half--three-quarters, at least. Why, the worst of it's over w'en the
rope's round your neck."

"That is a matter which you can't speak to, John Bumpus, seeing that
you've never gone beyond the putting of the rope round your neck."

"Well, I'm content with wot I does happen to know about it," remarked
Jo, making a wry face; "an' I hope that I'll never git the chance of
knowin' more. But I comed here on business, Mr. Thorwald" (here John
became mysterious, and put his finger to his lips.) "I've comed here,
Mr. Thorwald, to--_split_."

As Ole did not quite understand the meaning of this word, and did not
believe that the seaman actually meant to rend himself from head to
foot, he said, "Why, Bumpus! what d'ye mean?"

"I mean as how that I've comed to split on my comrades; w'ich means, I'm
goin' to tell upon 'em."

"Oh!" exclaimed Ole, eying the man with a look of distrust.

"Yes," pursued Bumpus; "I'm willin' to tell ye all about it, and prevent
his escape, if you'll only promise, on your word as a gin'lmun, that ye
won't tell nobody else but six niggers, who are more than enough to
sarve your turn."

"Prevent whose escape?" said Thorwald, with an excited look.

"Gascoyne's."

Ole jumped off his stool, and hit his left palm a sounding blow with his
right fist.

"I knew it!" he exclaimed, staring into the face of the seaman. "I was
sure of it! I said it! But how d'ye know, my man?"

"Ah! I'll not say another word if ye don't promise to let me go free,
and only take six niggers with ye."

"Well, Bumpus, I do promise, on the word of a true Norseman, which is
much better than that of a gentleman, that no harm shall come to you if
you tell me all you know of this matter. But I will promise nothing
more; because if you won't tell me, you have told me enough to enable
me to take such measures as will prevent Gascoyne from escaping."

"No, ye can't prevent it," said Bumpus, with an air of indifference. "If
you don't choose to come to my way o' thinkin', ye can take yer own
coorse. But, let me tell you, there's more people on the island that
will take Gascoyne's part than ye think of. There's the whole crew of
the Talisman, whose cap'n he saved, and a lot besides; an' if ye do come
to a fight about it, ye'll have a pretty tough scrimmage. There'll be
blood spilt, Mr. Thorwald, an' it was partly to prevent that as I comed
here for. But you know best. You better take yer own way, an' I'll take
mine."

The cool impudence of manner with which John Bumpus said this had its
effect on Ole, who, although fond enough of fighting against enemies,
had no sort of desire to fight against friends, especially for the sake
of a pirate.

"Come, Bumpus," said he, "you and I understand each other. Let us talk
the thing over calmly. I've quite as much objection to see unnecessary
bloodshed as you have. We have had enough of that lately. Tell me what
you know, and I promise to do what you recommend as far as I can in
reason."

"Do you promise to let no one else know wot I tell ye?"

"I do."

"An' d'ye promise to take no more than six niggers to prewent this
escape?"

"Will six be enough?"

"Plenty; but, if that bothers ye, say twelve,--I'm not partic'lar,--say
twelve. That's more than enough; for they'll only have four to fight
with."

"Well, I promise that too."

"Good. Now I'll tell ye all about it," said Bumpus. "You see, although
I'm splittin', I don't want to get my friends into trouble, and so I got
you to promise; an' I trust to yer word, Mr. Thorwald--you being a
gen'lmun. This is how it is: Young Henry Stuart thinks that although
Gascoyne is a pirate, or rather _was_ a pirate, he don't deserve to be
hanged. Cause why? Firstly, he never committed no murder; secondly, he
saved the lives o' some of your people--Alice Mason among the rest; and,
thirdly, he is an old friend o' the family as has done 'em good sarvice
long ago. So Henry's made up his mind that, as Gascoyne's sure to be
hanged if he's tried, it's his duty to prewent that there from happenin'
of. Now, ye see, Gascoyne is quite willin' to escape--"

"Ha! the villain!" exclaimed Ole; "I was sure of that. I knew well
enough that all his smooth-tongued humility was hypocrisy. I'm sorry for
Henry, and don't wish to thwart him; but it's clearly my duty to prevent
this escape if I can."

"So I think, sir," said Bumpus; "so I think. That's just w'at I said to
meself w'en I made up my mind for to split. Gascoyne bein' willin',
then, Henry has bribed the jailer, and he intends to open the jail door
for him at twelve o'clock this night, and he'll know w'at to do with his
legs w'en he's got 'em free."

"But how am I to prevent his escape if I do not set a strong guard over
the prison?" exclaimed Ole, in an excited manner. "If he once gets into
the mountains, I might as well try to catch a hare."

"All fair and softly, Mr. Thorwald. Don't take on so. It ain't two
o'clock yet; we've lots o' time. Henry has arranged to get a boat ready
for him. At twelve o'clock to-night the doors will be opened, and he'll
start for the boat. It will lie concealed among the rocks off the Long
Point. There's no mistakin' the spot, just west of the village; an' if
you place your niggers there, you'll have as good chance as need be to
nab 'em. Indeed, there's _two_ boats to be in waitin' for the pirate
captain and his friends--set 'em up!"

"And where is the second boat to be hidden?" asked Ole.

"I'm not sure of the exact spot; but it can't be very far off from the
tother, cer'nly not a hundred miles," said Bumpus, with a grin. "Now,
wot I want is, that if ye get hold of the pirate ye'll be content, an'
not go an' peach on Henry an' his comrades. They'll be so ashamed o'
themselves at bein' nabbed in the wery act that they'll give it up as a
bad job. Besides, ye can then go an' give him in charge of Capting
Montague. But if ye try to _prewent_ the escape bein' attempted, Henry
will take the bloody way of it; for I tell _you_, his birse is up, an'
no mistake."

"How many men are to be with Gascoyne?" asked Thorwald, who, had he not
been naturally a stupid man, must have easily seen through this clumsy
attempt to blind him.

"Just four," answered Bumpus; "an' I'm to be one of 'em."

"Well, Bumpus, I'll take your advice. I shall be at the Long Point
before twelve, with a dozen niggers, and I'll count on you lending us a
hand."

"No, ye mustn't count on that, Mr. Thorwald. Surely, it's enough if I
run away and leave the others to fight."

"Very well; do as you please," said Thorwald, with a look of contempt.

"Good day, Mr. Thorwald. You'll be sure to be there?"
