to the little town of Menouville, where also many wounded lie. They are
less well supplied with doctors and nurses than we are here. Dr. Delorme
goes also with a small detachment as escort. I have asked that you,
Monsieur Jean the Scott, be sent with them. Our brave Picard goes too.
Menouville is about eight miles from here, and it's not much out of the
way to the front. So you will not be kept long from your Strangers,
John."

"I go willingly," said John, "and I'm glad, Philip, that you've seen fit
to consider me worth while as a part of the escort."

He spoke quietly, but his glance wandered to Julie Lannes. It may have
been a chance, but hers turned toward him at the same time, and the
eyes, the blue and the gray, met. Again the girl's brilliant color
deepened a little, and she looked quickly away. Only the watchful and
grim Suzanne saw.

"Do you have to go away at once, Philip?" asked Julie.

"In one hour, my sister. There is not much rest for the _Arrow_ and me
these days, but they are such days as happen perhaps only once in a
thousand years, and one must do his best to be worthy. I'm not
preaching, little sister, don't think that, but I must answer to every
call."

The twilight had spread from east to west. The heavy shadows in the east
promised a dark night, but out of the shadows, as always, came that
sullen mutter of the ruthless guns. Julie shivered a little, and glanced
at the dim sky.

"Must you go up there in the cold dark?" she said. "It's like leaving
the world. It's dangerous enough in the day, but you have a bright sky
then. In the night it's terrible!"

"Don't you fear for me, little sister," said Lannes. "Why, I like the
night for some reasons. You can slip by your enemies in the dark, and if
you're flying low the cannon don't have half the chance at you. Besides,
I've the air over these regions all mapped and graded now. I know all
the roads and paths, the meeting places of the clouds, points suitable
for ambush, aerial fields, meadows and forests. Oh, it's home up there!
Don't you worry, and do you write, too, to Madame, my mother, in Paris,
that I'm perfectly safe."

Lannes kissed her and went away abruptly. John was sure that an attempt
to hide emotion caused his brusque departure.

"Believe everything he tells you, Mademoiselle Julie," he said. "I've
come to the conclusion that nothing can ever trap your brother. Besides
courage and skill he has luck. The stars always shine for him."

"They're not shining tonight," said Picard, looking up at the dusky sky.

"But I believe, Mr. Scott, that you are right," said Julie.

"He'll certainly come to us at Menouville tomorrow night," said John,
speaking in English--all the conversation hitherto had been in French,
"and I think we'll have a pleasant ride through the forest in the
morning, Miss Lannes. You'll let me call you Miss Lannes, once or twice,
in my language, won't you? I like to hear the sound of it."

"I've no objection, Mr. Scott," she replied also in English. She did not
blush, but looked directly at him with bright eyes. John was conscious
of something cool and strong. She was very young, she was French, and
she had lived a sheltered life, but he realized once more that human
beings are the same everywhere and that war, the leveler, had broken
down all barriers.

"I've not heard who is to be our commander, Miss Lannes," he continued
in English, "but I'll be here early in the morning. May I wish you happy
dreams and a pleasant awakening, as they say at home?"

"But you have two homes now, France and America."

"That's so, and I'm beginning to love one as much as the other. Any
way, to the re-seeing, Miss Lannes, which I believe is equivalent to _au
revoir_."

He made a very fine bow, one that would have done credit to a trained
old courtier, and withdrew. The fierce and watchful eyes of Suzanne
followed him.

John was up at dawn, as strong and well as he had ever been in his life.
As he was putting on his uniform an orderly arrived with a note from
Lieutenant Hector Legare, telling him to report at once for duty with a
party that was going to Menouville.

The start was made quickly. John found that the women with surgical
supplies were traveling in carts. The soldiers, about twenty in number,
walked. John and the doctor walked with them. All the automobiles were
in use carrying troops to the front, but the carts were strong and
comfortable and John did not mind. It ought to be a pleasant trip.




CHAPTER XIII

THE MIDDLE AGES


The little party moved away without attracting notice. In a time of such
prodigious movement the going or coming of a few individuals was a
matter of no concern. The hood that Julie Lannes had drawn over her hair
and face, and her plain brown dress might have been those of a nun. She
too passed before unseeing eyes.

Lieutenant Legare was a neutral person, arousing no interest in John who
walked by the side of the gigantic Picard, the stalwart Suzanne being in
one of the carts beside Julie. The faint throbbing of the guns, now a
distinct part of nature, came to them from a line many miles away, but
John took no notice of it. He had returned to the world among pleasant
people, and this was one of the finest mornings in early autumn that he
had ever seen.

The country was much more heavily forested than usual. At points, the
woods turned into what John would almost have called a real forest. Then
they could not see very far ahead or to either side, but the road was
good and the carts moved forward, though not at a pace too great for the
walkers.

Picard carried a rifle over his shoulders, and John had secured an
automatic. All the soldiers were well armed. John felt a singular
lightness of heart, and, despite the forbidding glare of Suzanne, who
was in the last cart, he spoke to Julie.

"It's too fine a morning for battle," he said in English. "Let's pretend
that we're a company of troubadours, minnesingers, jongleurs, acrobats
and what not, going from one great castle to another."

"I suppose Antoine there is the chief acrobat?"

"He might do a flip-flap, but if he did the earth would shake."

"Then you are the chief troubadour. Where is your harp or viol, Sir
Knight of the Tuneful Road?"

"I'm merely imagining character, not action. I haven't a harp or a viol,
and if I had them I couldn't play on either."

"Do you think it right to talk In English to the strange young American,
Mademoiselle? Would Madame your mother approve?" said Suzanne in a
fierce whisper.

"It is sometimes necessary in war, Suzanne, to talk where one would not
do so in peace," replied Julie gravely, and then she said to John again
in English:

"We cannot carry out the pretense, Mr. Scott. The tuneful or merry folk
of the Middle Ages did not travel with arms. They had no enemies, and
they were welcome everywhere. Nor did they travel as we do to the
accompaniment of war. The sound of the guns grows louder."

"So it does," said John, bending an ear--he had forgotten that a battle
was raging somewhere, "but we're behind the French lines and it cannot
touch us."

"It was a wonderful victory. Our soldiers are the bravest in the world
are they not, Mr. Scott?"

John smiled. They were still talking English. He liked to hear her
piquant pronunciation of it, and he surmised too that the bravest of
hearts beat in the bosom of this young girl whom war had suddenly made a
woman. How could the sister of such a man as Lannes be otherwise than
brave? The sober brown dress, and the hood equally sober, failed to hide
her youthful beauty. The strands of hair escaping from the hood showed
pure gold in the sunshine, and in the same sunshine the blue of her eyes
seemed deeper than ever.

John was often impressed by the weakness of generalities, and one of
them was the fact that so many of the French were so fair, and so many
of the English so dark. He did not remember the origin of the Lannes
family, but he was sure that through her mother's line, at least, she
must be largely of Norman blood.

"What are you thinking of so gravely, Mr. Scott?" she asked, still in
English, to the deep dissatisfaction of Suzanne, who never relaxed her
grim glare.

"I don't know. Perhaps it was the contrast of our peaceful journey to
what is going on twelve or fifteen miles away."

"It is beautiful here!" she said.

Truly it was. The road, smooth and white, ran along the slopes of hills,
crested with open forest, yet fresh and green. Below them were fields of
chequered brown and green. Four or five clear brooks flowed down the
slopes, and the sheen of a little river showed in the distance. Three
small villages were in sight, and, clean white smoke rising from their
chimneys, blended harmoniously into the blue of the skies. It reminded
John of pictures by the great French landscape painters. It was all so
beautiful and peaceful, nor was the impression marred by the distant
mutter of the guns which he had forgotten again.

Julie and Suzanne, her menacing shadow, dismounted from the wagon
presently and walked with John and Picard. Lieutenant Legare was stirred
enough from his customary phlegm to offer some gallant words, but war,
the great leveler, had not quite leveled all barriers, so far as he was
concerned, and, after her polite reply, he returned to his martial
duties. John had become the friend of the Lannes family through his
association with Philip in dangerous service, and his position was
recognized.

The road ascended and the forest became deeper. No houses were now in
sight. As the morning advanced it had grown warmer under a brilliant
sun, but it was pleasant here in the shade. Julie still walked, showing
no sign of a wish for the cart again. John noticed that she was very
strong, or at least very enduring. Suddenly he felt a great obligation
to take care of her for the sake of Lannes. The sister of his
comrade-in-arms was a precious trust in his hands, and he must not
fail.

The wind shifted and blew toward the east, no longer bringing the sound
of guns. Instead they heard a bird now and then, chattering or singing
in a tree. The illusion of the Middle Ages returned to John. They were a
peaceful troupe, going upon a peaceful errand.

"Don't tell me there isn't a castle at Menouville," he said. "I know
there is, although I've never been there, and I never heard of the place
before. When we arrive the drawbridge will be down and the portcullis
up. All the men-at-arms will have burnished their armor brightly and
will wait respectfully in parallel rows to welcome us as we pass
between. His Grace, the Duke of Light Heart, in a suit of red velvet
will be standing on the steps, and Her Graciousness, the Duchess, in a
red brocade dress, with her hair powdered and very high on her head,
will be by his side to greet our merry troupe. Behind them will be all
the ducal children, and the knights and squires and pages, and ladies. I
think they will all be very glad to see us, because in these Middle Ages
of ours, life, even in a great ducal castle, is somewhat lonely.
Visitors are too rare, and there is not the variety of interest that
even the poor will have in a later time."

"You make believe well, Mr. Scott," she said.

"There is inspiration," he said, glancing at her. "We are here in the
deeps of an ancient wood, and perhaps the stories and legends of these
old lands move the Americans more than they do the people who live here.
We're the children of Europe and when we look back to the land of our
fathers we often see it through a kind of glorified mist."

"The wind is shifting again," she said. "I hear the cannon once more."

"So do I, and I hear something else too! Was that the sound of hoofs?"

John turned in sudden alarm to Legare, who heard also and stiffened at
once to attention. They were not alone on the road. The rapid beat of
hoofs came, and around a corner galloped a mass of Uhlans, helmets and
lances glittering. Picard with a shout of warning fired his rifle into
the thick of them. Legare snatched out his revolver and fired also.

But they had no chance. The little detachment was ridden down in an
instant. Legare and half of the men died gallantly. The rest were taken.
Picard had been brought to his knees by a tremendous blow from the butt
of a lance, and John, who had instinctively sprung before Julie, was
overpowered. Suzanne, who endeavored to reach a weapon, fought like a
tigress, but two Uhlans finally subdued her.

It was so swift and sudden that it scarcely seemed real to John, but
there were the dead bodies lying ghastly in the road, and there stood
Julie, as pale as death, but not trembling. The leader of the Uhlans
pushed his helmet back a little from his forehead, and looked down at
John, who had been disarmed but who stood erect and defiant.

"It is odd, Mr. Scott," said Captain von Boehlen, "how often the
fortunes of this war have caused us to meet."

"It is, and sometimes fortune favors one, sometimes the other. You're
in favor now."

Von Boehlen looked steadily at his prisoner. John thought that the
strength and heaviness of the jaw were even more pronounced than when he
had first seen the Prussian in Dresden. The face was tanned deeply, and
face and figure alike seemed the embodiment of strength. One might
dislike him, but one could not despise him. John even found it in his
heart to respect him, as he returned the steady gaze of the blue eyes
with a look equally as firm.

"I hope," said John, "that you will send back Mademoiselle Lannes and
the nurses with her to her people. I take it that you're not making war
upon women."

Von Boehlen gave Julie a quick glance of curiosity and admiration. But
the eyes flashed for only a moment and then were expressionless.

"I know of one Lannes," he said, "Philip Lannes, the aviator, a name
that fame has brought to us Germans."

"I am his sister," said Julie.

"I can wish, Mademoiselle Lannes," said von Boehlen, politely in French,
"that we had captured your brother instead of his sister."

"But as I said, you will send them back to their own people? You don't
make war upon women?" repeated John.

"No, we do not make war upon women. We are making war upon Frenchmen,
and I do not hesitate to say in the presence of Mademoiselle Lannes that
this war is made upon very brave Frenchmen. Yet we cannot send the
ladies back. The presence of our cavalry here within the French lines
must not be known to our enemies. Moreover, I obey the orders of
another, and I am compelled to hold them as prisoners--for a while at
least."

Von Boehlen's tone was not lacking in the least in courtesy. It was more
than respectful when he spoke directly to Julie Lannes, and John's
feeling of repugnance to him underwent a further abatement--he was a
creation of his conditions, and he believed in his teachings.

"You will at least keep us all as prisoners together?" said John.

"I know of no reason to the contrary," replied von Boehlen briefly. Then
he acted with the decision that characterized all the German officers
whom John had seen. The women and the prisoners were put in the carts.
Dismounted Uhlans took the place of the drivers and the little
procession with an escort of about fifty cavalry turned from the road
into the woods, von Boehlen and the rest, about five hundred in number,
rode on down the road.

John was in the last cart with Julie, Suzanne and Picard, and his soul
was full of bitter chagrin. He had just been taking mental resolutions
to protect, no matter what came, Philip Lannes' sister, and, within a
half hour, both she and he were prisoners. But when he saw the face of
Antoine Picard he knew that one, at least, in the cart was suffering as
much as he. The gigantic peasant was the only one whose arms were bound,
and perhaps it was as well. His face expressed the most ferocious anger
and hate, and now and then he pulled hard upon his bonds. John could see
that they were cutting into the flesh. He remembered also that Picard
was not in uniform. He was in German eyes only a _franc tireur_, subject
to instant execution, and he wondered why von Boehlen had delayed.

"Save your strength, Antoine," he whispered soothingly. "We'll need it
later. I've been a prisoner before and I escaped. What's been done once
