"You do look queer," he said; "your eyes are bigger than ever, and
they stare so. What's the matter, Di?"

"Nothing," said Diana.

"Aren't you going to eat your supper?"

"I's wather sick," said Diana; "I don't want to eat. You had best eat
all you can, Orion."

"Yes, I had best," answered Orion, "'cos I won't have strength to run
away if I hasn't plenty of food."

He began to eat up his own basin of bread and milk, and, as it was not
too large, he thought he might attack Diana's also; then he gave her
an anxious glance. She was sitting strangely still, her hands lying
idly in her lap, her eyes staring straight at the opposite wall.

"'Member we is going away, and that you promised," he said. "Isn't it
time for us to be off?"

"Yes, Orion," she answered.

"Well, drink off this teeny drop of milk; it will strengthen you." He
brought the bowl to Diana, who sipped of a few spoonfuls; but then she
shook her head.

"I's sick," she said; "it aren't good to eat when you is sick."

"Well, do come now," said Orion. "If you don't go at once they will
find us; and you promised, and you never broke your word yet."

"I underland," said Diana; "I would not bweak my word; that would be
mean."

"Well, let us go now."

Diana slipped off the little bench on which she had seated herself.
She was still in her circus dress; her little bow was hung at her
side, her arrow slung round her neck. Orion was also in his pretty
dress, with his tiny sword and belt, his blue jacket and little white
knickers.

"Let's put on our shoes," he said; "we can't go far in bare feet."

"We can't go far in bare foots," echoed Diana, in a dreary sort of
voice. "I's s'eepy. Shall we wun away in the morning, Orion?"

"No; to-night! to-night!" he said, in terror. "You'll break your
promise if we don't go to-night."

"All wight," she answered.

He brought her shoes, slipped them on her feet, buttoned them, and put
on his own; then he took her hand in his. They opened the door of
their bedroom and ran down a long passage, at the end of which was
another door; it was on the latch. Orion opened it, and the little
children found themselves at the back of the stage. There were no
people about to see them, even Aunt Sarah was far away in one of the
wings.

"There! we is safe," said Orion. "We has runned away, and we are
safe."

"We has wunned away and we is safe," echoed Diana, in that dreary
little voice. "But, Orion, I's drefful s'eepy."

"Never mind," said Orion; "we'll sleep in the fields."

"We'll s'eep in the fields," echoed Diana, in a vague manner.

Orion took her hand; they ran as fast as they could down a shady lane,
for the great circus tent had been put outside the town.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE MILKMAN.


It was a lovely summer's night, and as the children ran, Orion looked
up at the stars.

"Why, it's a starful night!" he cried, in a joyful voice, "and there's
me. Do look at me, Di! There I am up in the sky, ever so big and
'portant."

"So you is," said Diana, laughing and then checking herself. "Is it
far to----"

"To where, Di?"

"To the garding," said Diana; "to the dead-house where Rub-a-Dub is.
Let's go and sit on the little bench and see the dead 'uns--let's
count 'em; I wonder how many there is!" She stopped suddenly and gazed
around her.

"What do you mean?" said Orion, in some alarm. "We are nowhere near
the garden. Don't you know where we are, Diana?"

"Yes, I do now, course," she answered, with a laugh. "I think I was
dweaming; it's my head; it's keer. I want to s'eep awfu'."

"Well, here are the fields," said Orion; "here's a beautiful green
field, and the moon is shining on it. Oh, and there's a hole in the
hedge; let's creep in."

"Let's k'eep in," said Diana.

They pushed their way through the hole and found themselves in a
clover field. The clover, slightly wet with dew, felt very refreshing
to their hot little feet.

"Isn't this 'licious?" said Diana. "Let's lie down on the g'een
g'ass; let's s'eep here; I's awfu' s'eepy."

"It's very near the circus," said Orion. "I'm rather frightened for
fear Uncle Ben will find us."

"No, he won't; it's all wight," said Diana.

She allowed her little brother to lead her as far as the hedge, and
then nothing would persuade her to go any further. Down on the damp
grass she flung herself, and then next moment was fast asleep.

Orion, aged six, did not think it wrong for Diana to sleep on the wet
grass. The moon shone all over her bare little legs. She folded her
arms when she lay down, and now there was not a stir, nor a movement
from her.

Far away, or at least it seemed far away to little Orion, he could see
the blinking lights of the town, and when he stood on tiptoe he could
also see the lights of the merry-go-rounds and the other
accompaniments of the great circus. He knew that he was dreadfully
near his tyrants, and he longed beyond words to awaken Diana and make
her go farther away; but she was asleep--dead tired. He never could
master her. There was nothing, therefore, but for him to lie down
also, close to her.

Accordingly, he flung himself on the grass, laid his head on her
shoulder, nestling up close to her for warmth and protection, and in a
few moments he had also forgotten his fears, and was calmly living in
the blessed land of dreams. The great Orion overhead looked down on
his tiny namesake, and the little boy dreamt that he was a giant in
very truth, and that he and Diana were fighting their way through the
world.

The children slept, and presently the creatures of the night came
out--the owls, and the bats, and the night moths--and looked with
wonder at the queer little pair lying prone amongst the green clover.
Thousands of wonderful night noises also began to awaken in all
directions--the merry chirp of the cricket, the whir of the bat on its
circling flight, the hum of the moths--but the children heard nothing,
although the creatures of the night were curious about these strange
little beings who, by good rights, ought not to be sharing their
kingdom.

At last, just when the first peep of dawn began to tinge the east,
little Orion opened his eyes and rubbed them hard. With a great rush
memory returned to him. He had run away; he had ridden Greased
Lightning and had not fallen from his back; his terrible life in the
circus was at an end. Uncle Ben was nowhere near to chide him. He and
Diana had got off; but it was true that they had not put a great
distance between themselves and Uncle Ben. Perhaps Uncle Ben, who had
promised that he might go away if he did his part well, might change
his mind in the morning. It was most important that he and his sister
should go farther away as quickly as possible.

Accordingly, he proceeded to wake Diana. Diana was very sound asleep
indeed. He could see her face distinctly, for the first faint return
of day was spreading a tender glow over it. She did not look pale;
there was a hot spot on either cheek--a spot of vivid rose.

"I am cold enough," thought the little fellow, "but Diana seems warm.
Wake up, Di; wake up!" he said. "We has runned away, but we has not
run far enough. Wake up, Di, and let's go on."

Diana did not stir at all at his first summons. He spoke loudly,
looking around him as he did so in some terror. A night owl,
preparing to go home, was seated on a tree near by. The owl looked at
Orion and hooted in a very melancholy manner. His voice seemed to say:

"I never saw two greater little fools than you children in all my
life."

Orion felt rather afraid of the owl. Having failed to awaken Diana by
words, he proceeded to shake her. This device succeeded. She opened
her great, big, sleepy eyes and stared around her in bewilderment.

"So you is our little mother now, Iris?" she said. "All wight; I's
coming."

She sat up on her grassy bed and rubbed her eyes, then stared at Orion
and burst out laughing.

"What are you laughing at?" said Orion. "We are in awful danger here.
Uncle Ben may catch us any minute."

"Who's Uncle Ben?" asked Diana.

"Why, Di! how very queer you are. Don't you remember Uncle Ben, the
awful man who has the circus?"

"No, I don't," said Diana. "Is it true that Rub-a-Dub's dead?"

"Oh, Di! Rub-a-Dub died weeks ago. What does it matter about a mouse?
I'm frightened about Uncle Ben. If he catches us he'll change his
mind, perhaps, and I cannot ride Greased Lightning again. Don't speak
so queer, Di. Do rouse yourself. We must get out of this as fast as we
can."

"As fast as we can," echoed Diana. "All wight, Orion; I's k'ite
sati'fied."

"Well, come, then," said Orion; "get up."

"I don't think I care to."

"But we can't run away if you are lying there."

"No more we can," said Diana. She laughed again. "Isn't it fun?" she
said. "And so Rub-a-Dub isn't dead after all?"

"Yes; of course he is."

"Orion, look!" said the child; "look!"

"Look at what?" answered the little fellow. "Oh, Diana! don't say it's
Uncle Ben!"

"I don't know nothing 'bout no Uncle Ben; but didn't you see something
flash there?--something white, just over there? I know who it was; it
was mother. Mother has gone to the angels, but she has come back.
Mother! mother! come here! Call her, Orion; call her, call her!"

"Mother! mother!" said the little boy; "mother, come here!"

But there was no answer to this cry, which, on the part of Orion at
least, was full of agony. No answer either from the heaven above or
the earth beneath.

"It was a mistake, I s'pect," said Diana. "Mother is in heaven; she's
a beautiful angel, singing loud. Well, let's come 'long." She
staggered to her feet, and, supported by Orion, began to walk across
the field. "Let's go into the garding," she said.

Poor little Orion was quite in despair.

"We are miles from the garden," he said. "I think you have gone
silly."

"S'pect I has," said Diana. "What fun!"

"And you have got such a queer look on your face."

"A k'eer look on my face?" repeated Diana.

"Yes; and your eyes, they are ever so big; they frighten me."

"My eyes k'ite fwighten you, poor little boy," said Diana. "Well,
let's wun; let's get to the garding. Why, it's the day mother went
away to the angels, and we has got no lessons. Where's Iris? I want
Iris."

"So do I," said Orion. "Oh, Di! what is to become of us? You frighten
me."

"K'ite fwighten poor little boy," echoed Diana. "I's sossy, but I
can't help it. I's giddy in my head. Does this way lead to garding,
Orion?"

"No. What are we to do?" said Orion. "Oh, I am so frightened!" He
really was. Diana's strange behavior was more than he could
understand. "Oh, I'm so bitter hungry!" he cried. He flung himself on
the grass.

Diana stood and looked at him with a puzzled expression on her face.

"Why, you is a poor little boy," she said. "Now, if you'll take my
hand we'll go indoors, and Fortune will give us a lovely bekfus. Come,
Orion; don't be fwightened, poor little boy."

They walked across the field. By this time the sun was up and the
place felt warm and dry. Little Orion, shivering in his queer circus
dress, was glad of this, and a faint degree of returning courage came
into his heart.

Diana did not seem to feel anything at all. She walked along, singing
as she walked.

"We's going to the dead-house," she said. "Rub-a-Dub's dead."

    "You'll never know fear any more,
               Little dear;
    Good-by, Rub-a-Dub."

"Oh, don't Di! You make me feel so frightened," said Orion. "Why do
you talk like that? Can't you 'member nothing?"

"Course I 'member," said Diana. "Rub-a-Dub's dead."

    "Never know fear,
      Little dear;
    Rub-a-Dub's dead."

"Come this way," said Orion, taking her hand.

She was quite willing to follow him, although she did not in the least
know where she was going.

"S'pect I aren't well," she said at last. "Don't be fwightened, poor
little boy. S'pect I aren't k'ite well."

"I's so hungry," moaned Orion.

"Well, let's go into the house; let's have bekfus. Where's Fortune?
Come 'long, Orion; come 'long."

