him. It may be that he regards us as rivals, and was only trying to
find out where we intended to stop, and whether we were likely to
spoil his trade. That was why I said what I did, so that he might
perceive that we were not likely to interfere with him.

"Then again, Surajah, I remembered my uncle's warning against joining
other travellers, as these Thugs, who, they say, commit so many
murders, generally travel in bands, disguised sometimes as traders,
sometimes as men seeking work, sometimes as disbanded soldiers.
Anyhow, it is as well to be careful. We have each got a brace of
double-barrelled pistols in our girdles, in addition to these old
single-barrelled Indian ones that we carry for show, and our swords
are leaning against the tree behind us, so we can get hold of them in
a moment. I know, of course, that the betting is all in favour of
these people being peaceful traders, but I don't want to leave
anything to chance, and there is nothing like being prepared for
whatever may happen."

Presently Dick got up and sauntered across to Ibrahim, who was engaged
in cooking.

"Ibrahim," he said, "don't look round while I speak to you, but go on
with your cooking. I don't like the look of the leader of this party.
He may be a respectable trader, he may be a Dacoit or a Thug. I want
you to keep a sharp lookout, without seeming to do so. See that your
pistols will come out of your girdle easily. Keep your sword handy for
use. If you see anything suspicious, come over and tell me, and if
there is not time for that, shout."

"I will watch, Sahib," Ibrahim said. "But they seem to me peaceable
men like ourselves. Of course they carry weapons. No one would travel
about, with merchandise, without doing so."

"They may be all right, Ibrahim, but I have a sort of feeling that
they are not, and at any rate, it is best to be cautious."

The other party did not light a fire, but sat down and ate some
provisions they carried with them. When Surajah and Dick had finished
their meal, the leader again strolled over to them. He asked whether
they intended to sleep, and on hearing that they did not, he again sat
down with them. He proceeded to discuss trading matters, to describe
the goods he carried, the places where he had purchased them, and the
prices he had given.

As he talked, Dick noticed that three or four of the others came
across. They did not sit down, but stood round listening to the
conversation, and sometimes joining in. Dick's feeling of uneasiness
increased, and thrusting one hand carelessly into his girdle, he
grasped the butt of one of his hidden pistols.

Suddenly a loud cry came from Ibrahim. At the same moment something
passed before Dick's face. He threw himself backwards, drawing his
pistol as he did so, and fired into the body of the man behind him. A
second later he shot another, who was in the act of throwing a twisted
handkerchief round Surajah's neck. Then he leapt to his feet,
delivering, as he did so, a heavy blow, with the barrel of his pistol,
on the head of the trader who had been sitting between him and
Surajah.

It had all passed in a few seconds, and the other men started back, in
their surprise at this unexpected failure of their plan.

Surajah was on his feet almost as quickly as Dick. Even yet, he did
not understand what had happened. At this moment there was the crack
of another pistol, and then Ibrahim came running towards them, having
shot a man who had suddenly drawn his sword, and tried to cut him
down. At his heels came the six men who had, up to this point, been
standing in a group near their horses.

Without hesitation, Dick drew out one of his single-barrelled pistols
and shot the pretended trader, whose turban had saved him from the
effect of the blow, and who, shouting loudly to his companions, was
struggling to his feet. The remaining eight men had all drawn their
swords, and were rushing upon them.

"Fire, Surajah!" Dick shouted. "Are you asleep, man?"

Surajah was not asleep, but he was confused by the suddenness of the
fray, and was still doubtful whether Dick had not made an entirely
unprovoked attack upon the strangers. However, he perceived that it
was now too late to discuss that point, and was a question of fighting
for his life. Accordingly, he fired both barrels of one of his
pistols. One of the men dropped.

"Your sword, Surajah!" Dick exclaimed, as he grasped the scabbard of
his own weapon in his left hand, while in his right he held his other
double-barrelled pistol.

Their antagonists, with yells of fury, were now upon them. Dick shot
one, but the next man he aimed at darted suddenly aside when he fired.
Dick dropped his pistol, and grasped the hilt of his sword just in
time to ward off a blow aimed at his head. Blow after blow was
showered upon him, so quickly that he could do no more than ward them
off and wait his opportunity. He heard Surajah fire two more shots in
quick succession; then Ibrahim suddenly dashed forward and cut down
his opponent, and then furiously engaged another, who was on the point
of attacking him from behind. Dick drew his remaining pistol, and shot
the man through the head.

He had then time to look round.

Both Surajah's shots had told, and he was now defending himself
against the assaults of two others, who were pressing him hard, while
a third stood irresolute a short distance away. Dick rushed to
Surajah's assistance. As he did so, the third man fled.

"After him, Ibrahim!" Dick shouted. "Not one of them must get away."

The two Thugs defended themselves, with cries of fanatical fury, but
their opponents were far better swordsmen, and, fighting coolly, were
not long before they cut them both down.

"What on earth is it all about, Dick?" Surajah asked, as, panting with
his exertions, he looked round after cutting down his opponent.

"Thugs," Dick said briefly.

"Are you sure, Dick?" Surajah asked presently. "It may be a terrible
business for us, if there is any mistake."

For answer, Dick pointed to the bodies of the two men he had first
shot. One still grasped the roomal, or twisted silk sash, while a like
deadly implement lay by the side of the other.

"Thank Heaven!" Surajah ejaculated. "I was afraid there might have
been a mistake, Dick, but I see that you were right, and that it was a
party of Thugs. If it had not been that you were on the watch for
them, and had your pistol ready, we should have lost our lives."

"It was a close shave as it was, Surajah. One second later, and you
and I should both have been strangled. I had my hand on my pistol, and
felt so sure that an attack was intended that, the moment something
passed before my face, although I had no idea what it was, I threw
myself back and fired at the man behind me, with an instinctive
feeling that my life depended on my speed. But it was only when, on
looking at you, I saw a man in the act of throwing a noose round your
neck, that I knew exactly what I had escaped."

"It was fortunate that they had not pistols," Surajah said. "We should
have had no chance against them, if they had had firearms."

"No; they could have shot us the moment I first fired. But Uncle said,
when he was talking to me one day, that he had heard that the
Stranglers did not carry firearms, because the reports might attract
attention; and that it was a matter of religion, with them, to kill
their victims by strangling; but that if the Strangler failed, which
he very seldom did, the other men would then despatch the victims with
their swords and knives.

"Ah! here comes Ibrahim."

"I caught him just outside the trees, Sahib. He will strangle no more
travellers."

"Well, what had we better do?" asked Surajah.

"I should say we had better make off, as fast as we can. Of course, if
we were really traders, able to prove who we are, we should go back to
the town and report the affair; but as we can't do that, we had better
be moving on at once, before any other party of travellers comes up.
That was why, when we had killed several of them, I was anxious that
none should get away, for they might have gone and accused us of
slaughtering their companions."

"That would be too unlikely a story to be believed. No one would
credit that three men would attack twelve."

"But there would be no one to prove that there were only three. The
fellows would naturally swear that there were a score of us, and that,
after murdering their companions, the rest made off with the booty.

"Ibrahim, load the pack animals, at once. We will saddle the horses.

"I think, Surajah, we had better leave everything just as it is. It is
now getting on for the afternoon. It is likely enough that no other
travellers will enter the grove today. By tomorrow, at the latest,
someone will come in, and will of course go and report at once, in
Bangalore, what he has found; and they will send out here to examine
into it. When they find that the men have all fallen, sword in hand,
that two of them are evidently Stranglers, and that their girdles have
not been searched, nor the packs on their horses opened, it will be
seen that it was not the work of robbers. I don't suppose they will
know what to make of it, but I should think they would most likely
conclude that these men have been attacked by some other party, and
that it is a matter of some feud or private revenge--though, even
then, the fact that the bodies have not been searched for valuables,
or the baggage or animals carried off, will beat them altogether."

By this time, the horses were ready for the start, and after looking
up and down the long, straight road, to see that no one was in sight,
they issued from the wood and continued their journey. Being anxious,
now, to get away as far as possible from the scene of the struggle,
instead of going on to Magree as they had intended, they turned off by
the first country road on the left-hand side, and made for Savandroog,
which they could see towering up above the plain. When within three
miles of it, they halted in a large wood. Here, as soon as the horses
had been unsaddled, and the fire lighted, their talk naturally turned
to the fight they had gone through.

"I cannot make out how you came to suspect them, Dick."

"I can hardly account for it myself, but, as I told you, I did not
like the look of that man, and I had an uneasy sort of feeling, which
I could not explain even to myself, that there was danger in the air."

"But what made you think of these Stranglers? I had heard some talk
about them, but never anything for certain."

"The Rajah told me, when he was warning me against joining parties of
travellers, that although very little was known about the
organisation, it was certain that there was a sect who strangled and
robbed travellers in great numbers. He said that he was aware that
complaints had been made, to princes all over India, of numbers of
persons being missing; and that it was certain that these murders were
not the work of ordinary dacoits, but of some secret association; and
that even powerful princes were afraid to take any steps against it,
as one or two, who had made efforts to investigate the affair, had
been found strangled in their beds. Therefore, no one cared to take
any steps to search into the matter. It was not known whether these
Stranglers, scattered as they were very widely, obeyed one common
chief, or whether they acted separately; but all were glad to leave
this mysterious organisation alone, especially as they preyed only on
travellers, and in no case meddled in any way with rajahs, or
officials, who did not interfere with them. Consequently, the idea
occurred to me, directly, that these men who seemed like traders might
be a party of these Stranglers; and when the others came up, while the
leader was sitting talking to us, I felt as if cold water was running
down my back, and that someone was whispering to me, 'Be on your
guard, be on your guard!' Therefore, the moment something passed
before my face, I threw myself back and fired at the man behind me,
without a moment's thought as to what it was."

"Well, certainly you saved our lives by doing so, Dick; for I suppose,
if that man behind me had once got his silk scarf round my neck, he
would have choked me before I had time to so much as lift my hand."

"I have not the least doubt that he would, and I feel thankful,
indeed, that I had such a strange feeling that these men were
dangerous. Do you know, Surajah, it seems to me that it was just the
same sort of feeling that my mother tells me she has, whenever my
father is in danger; and I shall be curious to know, when we get back,
whether she had the same feeling about me. Anyhow, I shall, in future,
have even more faith than I had before, in her confidence that she
would have certainly known if any evil had happened to my father."



Chapter 19: Found At Last.


The next morning, early, Dick and Surajah set to work to perfect their
disguises. They had, before, appeared simply as two young traders,
well to do, and of a class above the ordinary peddling merchant. They
now fitted on the ample beards that had been made at Tripataly. These
were attached so firmly to their faces, by an adhesive wax, that they
could not be pulled off without the use of a good deal of force. With
the same stuff, small patches of hair were fastened on, so as to hide
the edge of the foundation of the beard. Tufts of short grey hair were
attached to their eyebrows; a few grey lines were carefully drawn at
the corner of the eyes, and across the foreheads; and when this was
done, they felt assured that no one was likely to suspect the
disguise.

Ibrahim, who had assisted in the operation, declared that he should
take them for men of sixty-five, and as, before beginning it, both of
them had darkened their faces several shades, they felt confident that
no one at the fort was likely to recognise them. When Surajah had put
on the padded undergarment, and converted himself into a
portly-looking old man, and Dick the great horn spectacles, they
indulged in a burst of laughter at their changed appearance, while
Ibrahim fairly shouted with amusement.

He was to stay behind in the wood, when they went on, for it would but
have added to the risk had he accompanied them, as, unless also
completely disguised, he would have been recognised by the soldiers
with whom he had talked, during his twenty-four hours' stay inside the
Tower walls. He was, in the evening, to proceed along the road, to
encamp in the last grove he came to, at a distance of a quarter of a
mile from the gates, and to remain there until they returned.

Under his garments Dick had wound a thin, but very strong, silken cord
that he had purchased at Bangalore. It was four hundred feet in
length, and considerably increased his apparent bulk, although he was
still far from emulating the stoutness of Surajah. The halters of the
pack horses were attached to the cruppers of the riding ponies, and
after a final instruction to Ibrahim that if at the end of four days
they had not returned, he was to endeavour to find out what had
happened to them, and was then to carry the news to Tripataly, they
started for the fort. When they approached the gate they were, as
before, hailed by the sentry.

"We are merchants," Surajah said, "and we have with us a rich
assortment of goods of all descriptions--silks and trinkets for the
ladies of the governor's harem, and handkerchiefs, scarves, silver
ornaments, and things of all kinds suitable for the wives of those of
lower rank. We pray for permission to enter and exhibit our wares,
which have been collected by us in the cities where they were
manufactured, and which we can therefore sell at prices hitherto
unheard of."

"I will send word up to the governor," the officer said. "It is a long
time since we have been visited by traders, and maybe he will grant
you permission. You had best go back to the shade of those trees. It
will be a good hour before the answer comes."

"I think it likely they will let us in," Dick said, as they moved away
towards the trees. "It is but a short time since things were
sufficiently settled for traders to venture up here, and as Savandroog
lies altogether off the roads between large towns, it is possible that
none with such goods as we have have come this way, since the garrison
took over Savandroog from the British detachment that occupied it."

In little over an hour there was a shout from the walls, and on
approaching the gate again, they were told that the governor had given
permission for them to enter.

"You are to be blindfolded," the officer said, as the gate closed
behind them. "No one may ascend the rock, unless he consents to this.
Your horses will be led, and beware that you do not attempt to remove
the bandages, until you have permission to do so."

It took nearly an hour to mount the steep road, and when they came to
a standstill, and the sub-officer who had accompanied them told them
they could now remove their bandages, they found themselves in front
of a small building, close to the commander's quarters. The packs
were, by the order of the officer, taken off the horses by the
soldiers who had led them up, and carried into the house. The horses
were fastened in the shade to rings in the wall, and on Surajah
pointing out the packs containing goods he wished to show to the
ladies, two of the soldiers carried them across to the governor's
house. The old officer himself came to the door.

"Enter, my friends," he said. "You are the first traders who have come
up here since we took over the fort, some six months ago, and methinks
you will do a brisk business if your wares are, as you sent up to say,
good and cheap."

The bales were taken into a room, the soldiers retired, and in a
minute the commander's wife, accompanied by three or four other
ladies, entered. Dick and Surajah, after salaaming profoundly to the
veiled figures, at once began to unpack their bales.

The assortment had been very judiciously made, and to women who had,
for more than six months, been deprived of the pleasure of shopping,
the display was irresistible. In their desire to examine the goods,
the ladies speedily lifted their veils, and, seating themselves on
cushions they had brought in with them, chattered unrestrainedly;
examining the quality of the silks which Surajah and Dick, squatting
behind their wares, handed for their inspection; comparing the
colours, asking each other's advice, and endeavouring to beat down the
terms Surajah named.

In the first place, he asked the prices marked on small labels
attached to each article, but suffered himself, after the proper
amount of reluctance, and protests that he should be a ruined man, to
abate his terms considerably, although the ladies were evidently well
satisfied that the goods were indeed bargains.

It was a long time before the ladies could make up their minds which
to choose, among the many silks exhibited for their selections. When
this had been settled, the pack containing delicate muslins was
opened, and the same scene gone through. It was, altogether, four
hours before the purchases were all made, and even then the boxes of
trinkets remained unopened, the governor's wife saying:

"No, we will not look at them. We have ruined ourselves already.
Tomorrow, when our husbands know how much we have spent, you can show
the trinkets to them, and try your best to get them to buy. These
things we have been getting are our own affair. It is for them to make
us presents of ornaments, if they are disposed to.

"This evening you must come in again. The ladies from the other fort
will be here, then."

The purchases made were paid for, the bales again fastened up, and
carried across to their room. The governor met them as they went out.

"I suppose you have been ruining us all?" he said good humouredly.
"Well, it is a dull life up here, and the ladies have but few chances
of spending money."

"We are to see the ladies from the other fort this evening, my lord,"
Surajah said. "Have we your permission, in the meantime, to go and
sell in the soldiers' quarters? We have goods suited to the needs of
their wives also, as well as those for the ladies."

"Certainly. You can go about as you please up here. It is only as to
the approaches that we have to be careful. But wait in your room for a
short time. I will have food sent over to you."

In a few minutes a servant brought across a large dish of pillau, and
several cakes of sweetmeats, the latter being, as he informed them,
the special gift of the governor's wife. There was no occasion for
them to start, as they had intended, after their meal, for the news of
their coming had spread, and by the time they had finished, a number
of women were waiting outside. Until sunset they were busily engaged
in selling their goods--for the most part bright cotton cloths, red
silk handkerchiefs, and cheap silver trinkets. Soldiers sauntered in
and out. For these they had provided a store of pipes, tobacco,
tobacco boxes, knives, and muslins for turbans; and as the news spread
that these were to be obtained, the number of soldiers increased,
until the room was quite crowded with them, as well as by many natives
engaged in the work of rebuilding the fortifications.

Surajah did the selling, while Dick's part of the work was receiving
the money and giving change. As he was stooping over a tray in front
of him, piled with copper, picking up the change for silver coin, he
heard a man ask Surajah for a pound of his best tobacco and a pipe.

There was something in the accent that caused him to look up sharply.
As he did so, he started. The blood rushed to his head so violently
that a mist seemed to pass across his eyes, and his hand shook so that
he dropped the coins he was counting. Forgetful of the dark stain on
his face, he bent forward over the tray again to conceal his emotion,
forced himself to pick out the right change, and then, handing it to
its owner, again looked up.

The man who was standing before Surajah was broader and taller than
those around him. The sun had darkened his face, until its shade
approached those of his companions, and yet there was no mistaking the
fact that he was a European. A heavy moustache and beard, streaked
with grey, concealed the lower part of his face. Dick dared not gaze
on the man too earnestly, and could see no likeness to the picture on
the wall at Shadwell; but, allowing for the effects of hardship and
suffering, he judged him to be about the age of his father.

The man was evidently on good terms with the soldiers, one or two of
whom were chaffing him on his purchase.

"Will nothing but the best tobacco satisfy you?" one laughed.

"Nothing; and even that won't really satisfy me. This stuff is good
enough, when rolled up, for cigars, and it does well enough in
hookahs; but I would give all this pound for a couple of pipes of
pigtail, which is the tobacco we smoked at sea."

Again Dick's heart beat rapidly. This man must have been a sailor. He
could not restrain himself from speaking.

"Have you been a sailor, then?" he asked.

"Ay, I was a sailor, though it is many years ago, now, since I saw the
sea."

"We got some English tobacco at Madras," Dick said, not hesitating for
once at telling an untruth. "We sold most of it to the Feringhee
soldiers, on our way up, but I think I have got a little of it still
left somewhere in the pack. I am too busy to look for it now, and we
shall soon be going to show our goods to the officers' wives; but if
you can come here at nine o'clock, I may have looked it out for you."

"I can't come at nine," the man said, "for at half-past eight I am
shut up for the night."

"Come at eight, then," Dick said. "If I am not back, come the first
thing in the morning, before we get busy."

"I will come, sure enough," the man said. "I would walk a hundred
miles, if they would let me, for half a pound of pigtail."

"Get rid of them, Surajah," Dick whispered, as the man shouldered his
way through the crowd. "Make some excuse to send them off."

"Now, my friends," Surajah said, "you see it is getting dusk. It will
soon be too dark to see what you are buying, and we have been selling
for eight hours, and need rest. At eight o'clock tomorrow we will open
our packs again, and everyone shall be served; but I pray you excuse
us going on any longer now. As you see, we are not as young as we once
were, and are both sorely weary."

As time was no object, and the work of purchasing would relieve the
tedium of the following day, the crowd good humouredly dispersed.
Surajah rose and closed the door after the last of them, and then
turned to Dick. He had, himself, been too busily engaged in satisfying
the demands of the customers to look up, and had not noticed that one
of them was a white man.

"What is it?" he asked, as he looked round. "Has the heat upset you?"

Then, as his eye fell on Dick, his voice changed, and he hurried
towards him, exclaiming anxiously:

"What is it, Dick? What has happened?"

For Dick was leaning against a bale by the side of him, and had hidden
his face in his arms. Surajah saw that his whole frame was shaking
with emotion.

"My dear lord," Surajah said, as he knelt beside him and laid his arm
across his shoulder, "you frighten me. Has aught gone wrong? Are you
ill?"

Dick slightly shook his head, and, lifting one of his hands, made a
sign to Surajah that he could not, at present, speak. A minute or two
later, he raised his head.

"Did you not see him, Surajah?"

