stuff down his pipe, resumed.

"Likewise one of their line-o'-battle ships was a huge four-decker,
called the _Santissima Trinidad_, and they had some of the best Tyrolese
riflemen that could be got scattered throughout the fleet, as we
afterwards came to find out to our cost.

"Soon after daylight Nelson came on deck.  I see him as plain as if he
was before me at this moment, for, bein' stationed in the mizzen-top o'
the _Victory_--that was Nelson's ship, you know--I could see everything
quite plain.  He stood there for a minute or so, with his admiral's
frock-coat covered with orders on the left breast, and his empty right
sleeve fastened up to it; for you must know he had lost his right arm in
action before that, and also his right eye, but the arm and eye that
were left were quite enough for him to work with.  After a word or two
with the officers, he signalled to bear down on the enemy in two lines.

"Then it seemed to have occurred to him that the smoke of battle might
render the signals difficult or impossible to make out, for he
immediately made one that would serve for everything.  It was this: `if
signals can't be seen, no captain can do wrong if he places his ship
alongside an enemy.'  Of coorse we all knew that he meant to win that
battle; but, for the matter of that, every soul in the fleet, from the
admiral to the smallest powder-monkey, meant--"

"Boasting not allowed," said Dan McCoy, displaying his fine teeth from
ear to ear.

The seaman looked at him with a heavy frown.

"You young slip of a pump-handle, what d'ye mean?"

"The king's orders," said Dan, pointing to Adams, while the rest of the
Pitcairners seemed awestruck by his presumption.

The frown slowly left the visage of Jack Brace.  He shut his eyes,
smiled benignly, and delivered a series of heavy puffs from the
starboard side of his mouth.

Then a little squeak that had been bottled up in the nose of Otaheitan
Sally forced a vent, and the whole party burst into hilarious laughter.

"Just so," resumed Brace, when they had recovered, "that is exactly what
we did in the mizzen-top o' the _Victory_ when we made out the signal,
only we stuck a cheer on to the end o' the laugh.  After that came
another signal, just as we were about to go into action, `England
expects that every man will this day do his duty.'  The effect of that
signal was just treemendious, _I_ tell you.

"I noticed at this time that some of Nelson's officers were botherin'
him,--tryin' to persuade him, so to speak, to do somethin' he didn't
want to.  I afterwards found out that they were tryin' to persuade him
not to wear his orders, but he wouldn't listen to 'em.  Then they tried
to convince him it would be wise for him to keep out of action as long
as possible.  He seemed to give in to this, for he immediately signalled
the _Temeraire_ and _Leviathan_, which were abreast of us, to pass
ahead; but in _my_ opinion this was nothin' more than a sly joke of the
Admiral, for he kept carrying on all sail on the _Victory_, so that it
wasn't possible for these ships to obey the order.

"We made the attack in two lines.  The _Victory_ led the weather-line of
fourteen ships, and Collingwood, in the _Royal Sovereign_, led the
lee-line of thirteen ships.

"As we bore down, the enemy opened the ball.  We held our breath, for,
as no doubt you know, messmate, just before the beginnin' of a fight,
when a man is standin' still an' doin' nothin', he's got time to think;
an' he _does_ think, too, in a way, mayhap, that he's not much used to
think."

"That's true, Jack Brace," responded Adams, with a grave nod; "an', d'ye
know, it strikes me that it would be better for all of us if we'd think
oftener in that fashion when we've got time to do it."

"You're right, John Adams; you're right.  Hows'ever, we hadn't much time
to think that morning, for the shot soon began to tell.  One round shot
came, as it seemed, straight for my head, but it missed me by a shave,
an' only took off the hat of a man beside me that was about a fut
shorter than myself.

"`You see the advantage,' says he, `o' bein' a little feller.'  `That's
so,' says I, but I didn't say or think no more that I knows on after
that, for we had got within musket range, and the small bullets went
whistling about our heads, pickin' off or woundin' a man here an' there.

"It was just then that I thought it time to put my pipe in my pocket,
for, you see, I had been havin' a puff on the sly as we was bearin'
down; an' I put up my fore-finger to shove the baccy down, when one o'
them stingin' little things comes along, whips my best cutty out o' my
mouth, an' carries the finger along with it.  Of coorse I warn't goin'
below for such a small matter, so I pulls out my hankerchief, an' says I
to the little man that lost his hat, `Just take a round turn here, Jim,'
says I, `an' I'll be ready for action again in two minutes.'  Jim, he
tied it up, but before he quite done it, the round shot was pitchin'
into us like hail, cuttin' up the sails and riggin' most awful.

"They told me afterwards that Nelson gave orders to steer straight for
the bow of the great _Santissima Trinidad_, and remarked, `It's too warm
work to last long,' but he did not return a single shot, though about
fifty of our men had been killed and wounded.  You see, he never was
fond of wastin' powder an' shot.  He generally reserved his fire till it
could be delivered with stunnin' effect.

"Just then a round shot carried away our main-topmast with all her
stun-s'ls an' booms.  By good luck, however, we were close alongside o'
the enemy's ship _Redoubtable_ by that time.  Our tiller ropes were shot
away too, but it didn't matter much now.  The word was given, and we
opened with both broadsides at once.  You should have felt the _Victory_
tremble, John Adams.  We tackled the _Redoubtable_ with the starboard
guns, and the _Bucentaur_ and _Santissima Trinidad_ with the port guns.
Of course they gave it us hot and strong in reply.  At the same time
Captain Hardy, in the _Temeraire_, fell on board the _Redoubtable_ on
her other side, and the _Fougueux_, another o' the enemy, fell on board
the _Temeraire_; so there we were four ships abreast--a compact tier--
blazin' into each other like mad, with the muzzles of the guns touchin'
the sides when they were run out, an' men stationed with buckets at the
ports, to throw water into the shot-holes to prevent their takin' fire.

"It was awful work, I tell you, with the never-stopping roar of great
guns and rattle of small arms, an' the smoke, an' the decks slippery
with blood.  The order was given to depress our guns and load with light
charges of powder, to prevent the shot going right through the enemy
into our own ship on the other side.

"The _Redoubtable_ flew no colours, so we couldn't tell when she struck,
and twice the Admiral, wishing to spare life, gave orders to cease
firing, thinking she had given in.  But she had not done so, and soon
after a ball from her mizzen-top struck Nelson on the left shoulder, and
he fell.  They took him below at once.

"Of course we in the mizzen-top knew nothing of this, for we couldn't
see almost anything for the smoke, only here and there a bit of a mast,
or a yard-arm, or a bowsprit, while the very air trembled with the
tremendous and continuous roar.

"We were most of us wounded by that time, more or less, but kept blazing
away as long as we could stand.  Then there came cheers of triumph
mingling with the shouts and cries of battle.  The ships of the enemy
were beginning to strike.  One after another the flags went down.
Before long the cry was, `Five have struck!' then `Ten, hurrah!' then
fifteen, then twenty, hurrah!"

"Hurrah!  Old England for ever!" cried Adams, starting to his feet and
waving his hat in a burst of irrepressible excitement, which roused the
spirits of the youths around, who, leaping up with flushed faces and
glittering eyes, sent up from the groves of Pitcairn a vigorous British
cheer in honour of the great victory of Trafalgar.

"But," continued Jack Brace, when the excitement had abated, "there was
great sorrow mingled with our triumph that day, for Nelson, the hero of
a hundred fights, was dead.  The ball had entered his spine.  He lived
just long enough to know that our victory was complete, and died
thanking God that he had done his duty."

"That was truly a great battle," said Adams, while Brace, having
concluded, was refilling his pipe.

"Right you are, John," said the other; "about the greatest victory we
ever gained.  It has settled the fleets of France and Spain, I guess,
for the next fifty years."

"But what was it all for?" asked Bessy Mills, looking up in the sailor's
face with much simplicity.

"What was it for?" repeated Brace, with a perplexed look.  "Why, my
dear, it was--it was for the honour and glory of Old England, to be
sure."

"No, no, Jack, not quite that," interposed Adams, with a laugh, "it was
to clap a stopper on the ambition of the French, as far as I can make
out; or rather to snub that rascal Napoleon Bonnypart, an' keep him
within bounds."

"But he ain't easy to keep within bounds," said Brace, putting his pipe
in his pocket and rising; "for he's been knockin' the lobsters of Europe
over like ninepins of late years.  Hows'ever, we'll lick him yet on
land, as we've licked him already on the sea, or my name's not--"

He stopped abruptly, having caught sight of Dan McCoy's twinkling eye.

"Now, John Adams, I must go, else the Cap'n'll think I've deserted
altogether."

"Oh, _don't_ go yet; please don't!" pleaded Dolly Young, as she grasped
and fondled the seaman's huge hand.

Dolly was at that time about nine years of age, and full of enthusiasm.
She was seconded in her entreaties by Dinah Adams, who seized the other
hand, while several of the older girls sought to influence him by words
and smiles; but Jack Brace was not to be overcome.

"I'll be ashore again to-morrow, p'r'aps, with the Captain, if he
lands," said Brace, "and spin you some more yarns about the wars."

With this promise they were obliged to rest content.  In a few minutes
the visitor was carried over the surf by Toc and Charlie in their canoe,
and soon put on board the _Topaz_, which stood inshore to receive him.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

ADAMS AND THE GIRLS.

Great was the interest aroused on board the _Topaz_ when Jack Brace
narrated his experiences among the islanders, and Captain Folger
resolved to pay them a visit.  He did so next day, accompanied by the
Englishman and some of the other men, the sight of whom gladdened the
eyes and hearts of Adams and his large family.

Besides assuring himself of the truth of Brace's statements, the Captain
obtained additional proof of the truth of Adams's account of himself and
his community in the form of the chronometer and azimuth compass of the
_Bounty_.

"How many did you say your colony consists of?" asked Folger.

"Thirty-five all told, sir," answered Adams; "but I fear we shall be
only thirty-four soon."

"How so?"

"One of our lads, a dear boy of about eight years of age, is dying, I
fear," returned Adams, sadly.

"I'm sorry to hear it, and still more sorry that I have no doctor in my
ship," said Folger, "but I have a smatterin' of doctors' work myself.
Let me see him."

Adams led the way to the hut where poor James Young lay, tenderly nursed
by Mary Christian.  The boy was lying on his bed as they entered, gazing
wistfully out at the little window which opened from the side of it like
the port-lights or bull's-eyes of a ship's berth.  His young nurse sat
beside him with the _Bounty_ Bible open on her knees.  She shut it and
rose as the strangers entered.

The poor invalid was too weak to take much interest in them.  He was
extremely thin, and breathed with great difficulty.  Nevertheless his
face flushed, and a gleam of surprise shot from his eyes as he turned
languidly towards the Captain.

"My poor boy," said Folger, taking his hand and gently feeling his
pulse, "do you suffer much?"

"Yes,--very much," said little James, with a sickly smile.

"Can you rest at all?" asked the Captain.

"I am--always--resting," he replied, with a pause between each word;
"resting--on Jesus."

The Captain was evidently surprised by the answer.

"Who told you about Jesus?" he asked.

"God's book--and--the Holy--Spirit."

It was obvious that the exertion of thinking and talking was not good
for poor little James.  Captain Folger therefore, after smoothing the
hair on his forehead once or twice very tenderly, bade him good-bye, and
went out.

"Doctors could do nothing for the child," he said, while returning with
Adams to his house; "but he is rather to be envied than pitied.  I would
give much for the _rest_ which he apparently has found."

"_Give_ much!" exclaimed Adams, with an earnest look.  "Rest in the Lord
is not to be purchased by gifts.  Itself is the grand free gift of God
to man, to be had for the asking."

"I know it," was the Captain's curt reply, as he entered Adams's house.
"Where got you the chronometer and azimuth compass?" he said, on
observing these instruments.

"They belonged to the _Bounty_.  You are heartily welcome to both of
them if you choose; they are of no use to me."  [See Note.]

Folger accepted the gift, and promised to write to England and acquaint
the Government with his discovery of the colony.

"You see, sir," said Adams, with a grave look, while hospitably
entertaining his visitor that afternoon, "we are increasing at a great
rate, and although they may perhaps take me home and swing me up to the
yard-arm, I think it better to run the risk o' that than to leave all
these poor young things here unprotected.  Why, just think what might
happen if one o' them traders which are little better than pirates were
to come an' find us here."

He looked at the Captain earnestly.

"Now, if we were under the protection o' the British flag--only just
recognised, as it were,--that would go a long way to help us, and
prevent mischief."

At this point the importunities of some of the young people to hear
about the outside world prevailed, and Folger began, as Jack Brace had
done the day before, to tell them some of the most stirring events in
the history of his own land.

But he soon found out that the mental capacity of the Pitcairners was
like a bottomless pit.  However much they got, they wanted more.
Anecdote after anecdote, story after story, fact after fact, was thrown
into the gulf, and still the cry was, "More! more!"

At last he tore himself away.

"Good-bye, and God bless you all," he said, while stepping into the
canoe which was to carry him off.  "I won't forget my promise."

"And tell 'em to send us story-books," shouted Daniel McCoy, as the
canoe rose on the back of the breakers.

The Captain waved his hand.  Most of the women and children wiped their
eyes, and then they all ran to the heights to watch the _Topaz_ as she
sailed away.  They watched her till she vanished over that mysterious
horizon which seemed to the Pitcairners the utmost boundary of the
world, and some of them continued to gaze until the stars came out, and
the gulls retired to bed, and the soft black mantle of night descended
like a blessing of tranquillity on land and sea.

Before bidding the _Topaz_ farewell, we may remark that Captain Folger
faithfully fulfilled his promise.  He wrote a letter to England giving a
full account of his discovery of the retreat of the mutineers, which
aroused much interest all over the land; but at that time the stirring
events of warfare filled the minds of men in Europe so exclusively, that
the lonely island and its inhabitants were soon forgotten--at least no
action was taken by the Government--and six years elapsed before another
vessel sailed out of the great world into the circle of vision around
Pitcairn.

Meanwhile the Pitcairners, knowing that, even at the shortest, a long,
long time must pass before Folger could communicate with the "old
country," continued the even tenor of their innocent lives.

The school prospered and became a vigorous institution.  The church not
less so.  More children were born to Thursday October, insomuch that he
at last had one for every working-day in the week; more yam-fields were
cultivated, and more marriages took place--but hold, this is
anticipating.

We have said that the school prospered.  The entire community went to
it, male and female, old and young.  John Adams not only taught his
pupils all he knew, but set himself laboriously to acquire all the
knowledge that was to be obtained by severe study of the Bible, the
Prayer-book.  Carteret's Voyages, and by original meditation.  From the
first mine he gathered and taught the grand, plain, and blessed truths
about salvation through Jesus, together with a few tares of error
resulting from misconception and imperfect reasoning.  From the second
he adopted the forms of worship of the Church of England.  From the
third he gleaned and amplified a modicum of nautical, geographical, and
general information; and from the fourth he extracted a flood of
miscellaneous, incomplete, and disjointed facts, fancies, and fallacies,
