of books, at the opinions of other people, and at what is going forward
in the world: don't you think so, Buttar?"

Buttar, though a clever fellow, had not as yet thought much about the
matter.  He remarked, however, that if he could get information by
talking, or rather by hearing others talk, that it would be much
pleasanter often than having to pore over books.  But that was not what
Ernest meant.  "Ah, but there must be a fair exchange of ideas and
information, to make social intercourse as pleasant as it is capable of
being.  You must give as much as you take."

"Well, I never before thought of that," remarked Gregson.  "I have never
yet fallen in with people willing to talk of my favourite subjects.
Perhaps if I was to meet them I should enjoy their conversation as much
as you suppose you would those of literary characters or other
well-informed persons."

"Oh, I am not alluding to literary characters, as you call them," said
Ernest.  "I mean well-informed, intelligent, unprejudiced persons; or,
what would be still more agreeable, would be to collect people who have
devoted themselves to different branches of science, and who are yet
fully capable of understanding each other's peculiar subjects."

So the schoolboys talked on as they walked briskly towards the scene
they proposed for their sport.

"But do not let us forget Hodge," said Ernest.  "Hereabouts he dwells, I
believe.  Let us inquire at this cottage."  An old woman came forth from
the door where they knocked, and told them that John Hodge lived better
nor a quarter of a mile down the road, and he, poor man, was sure to be
at home, for he had met with an accident, and, she had heard say, was
very ill, and had been out of work for many a long day.  They thanked
her and hurried on.

"Ought we to go and trouble him?" asked Buttar.

"Certainly, he may want assistance," was Ernest's thoughtful reply.

A little child pointed to a neat cottage door.  That was where John
Hodge lived.  They knocked, and were told to come in.  They started back
with surprise on seeing Ellis seated on a chair, reading earnestly to
the man they had come to see, while a woman stood by, with her apron to
her eyes, and five small children were playing about the humble
brick-floored room.  How changed was poor Hodge!  Thin and pale in the
extreme, with an expression of care on his countenance, he sat propped
up in an old oak chair.  It was evident that he could not move, or
indeed breathe, without pain.  Ellis was so absorbed in his occupation
that he did not perceive at first the entrance of his schoolfellows.
They stopped at the threshold, unwilling to interrupt him.  He was
reading the Bible, and having read some verses he began to explain their
meaning.  At last he finished.

"Sit down, young gentlemen, sit down, pray," said Mrs Hodge, offering
them some three-legged stools, which she wiped mechanically with her
apron.

Her words made Ellis look up.  The colour came into his cheeks when he
saw the new-comers.  They nodded kindly to him, and then explained that
they had come in consequence of an invitation they had received long
ago, and that they were sorry to find their host in so bad a state.
John Hodge said that he recollected them, that he was glad to see them,
but he made no complaint, or spoke even of the cause of his illness.
After they had sat and talked a short time, Ellis got up to go away;
Buttar and Gregson accompanied him, but Ernest lingered behind, and
taking out the contents of his purse, offered it to the dame.

"Thank ye kindly, sir," she replied, motioning him to keep it; "but that
young gentleman has given us all we want for some time.  He says he gets
it from his friends; that we are not robbing him; and we couldn't be
taking it from you or from any one, unless we wanted it very badly.  Ah,
sir, if ever there was an angel on earth he is one; of that I'm
certain."

"Well, well, when you do want you mustn't mind taking it from me.  I owe
your husband some money as it is," answered Ernest, putting out his hand
to the poor woman, and then to Hodge.  He took up the children, and gave
a kiss to a little rosy boy, who smiled in his face, and then saying he
would come back soon, turned after his companions.  He felt much
gratified at hearing such an account of Ellis.  At once an idea struck
him.  In the story Selby had told him about Ellis, it appeared that one
of the causes of suspicion against him was his being possessed of a
considerable sum of money.  Might not that have been given to him for
the purpose of being bestowed in charity, as he undoubtedly had lately
been furnished with funds for the same object?  Ernest, though not over
precipitate usually, at once jumped at this conclusion.  It was very
delightful to be able to think so, and the conviction that he had
wronged Ellis in his thoughts caused him to be doubly anxious to make
ample amends without delay, and this added considerably to the warmth of
his manner when he overtook him.  He pressed him, as Buttar and Gregson
had been doing, to accompany them on their fishing excursion.  At length
he said that he should like to go, but pleaded want of rod and
fishing-tackle.

Gregson laughed.  "Oh, I can supply you with all you require," he
observed.  "My rod you can have, and I can replace it with one to suit
my purpose in ten minutes.  I have two spare tops, and tackle enough to
fit out a dozen fishermen.  Come along, you have no excuse."

Ellis agreed, and with light steps the party proceeded towards the broad
stream they had fixed on.  The day was warm and slightly overcast, and
the water was not too clear, so that they had a fair prospect of
success.  They were not disappointed.  Never before had they caught so
many fish.  They kept pulling them up one after the other.  Many were
very fine trout.  Ellis had never caught such in his life before.  They
all agreed that fishing was one of the most delightful of occupations.
Their hearts as they walked homewards opened more than ever towards each
other.  Ernest at last spoke out:--

"Ellis, my dear fellow, we have been doing you great wrong,--that is,
Buttar and I,--I don't think Gregson has.  We were certain that you were
very sorry, and were quite changed, but we thought you might have been
guilty of the thing they talked about; now we are certain you were not.
The money you were known to possess was given you for a good object--to
bestow in charity.  One proof of your guilt falls to the ground."

"Oh, Bracebridge, I am glad to hear you say so," answered Ellis.  "You
are right.  I promised not to say from whom I received it, and so I
could not.  No one accused me to my face.  The Master knew that I was
innocent.  What could I do?  I now feel sure that all will turn up right
in the end.  I am so happy."



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE SUMMER HOLIDAYS--A PIC-NIC AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

An event which made us all very sad took place at the end of that
half-year.  I remember it as well as if it were yesterday.  It was the
departure from the school of Monsieur Malin; yet for his sake we ought
not to have been sorry.  He was going to quit a position which was
undoubtedly very irksome to a gentleman, and to return to La Belle
France to take possession of a property which had unexpectedly been left
him.  He announced the fact to each of the classes as they came up to
him during the morning, and all heard the information with signs of
evident sorrow.  Ellis burst into tears.

"Going away, Monsieur Malin; you, my kindest friend, going!" he
exclaimed, and his whole look and manner showed that he had an
affectionate and grateful heart.

The feeling was infectious.  A number of the little fellows, who did not
even learn French, and had very little to do with Monsieur Malin, cried.
Some, however, had reason to be sorry at his going away, for often had
his watchful eye saved them from being bullied by the big boys; they,
too, felt that they were about to lose a friend and protector.  Why, it
may well be asked, should the French master have gained so much more
influence among the boys, and be so much more generally liked than any
of the English masters?  It was simply because he exhibited so much more
sympathy for others.  He made himself one of them.  It was not that he
now and then played a grand game of cricket with them, but that he
entered into all their minor sports and amusements.  He could show them
how to make models of all sorts; he manufactured carriages with
cardboard, or cut out boats, or carved animals in wood, or made little
grottoes with shells; indeed it is impossible to describe all the
ingenious things he could do, and how kindly and patiently he taught the
boys how to do them.  It made some of the English masters quite jealous
when they observed the sorrow which Monsieur Malin's departure caused
among the boys.  The Doctor remarked upon it, and said that it was the
best compliment any master could desire to have paid him, and he trusted
that whoever succeeded him might as richly deserve it.

"Bracebridge, I wonder that you are not more sorry than you appear to be
at Monsieur Malin's going," observed Buttar, the day that the event was
announced; "I thought that you were always one of his greatest
favourites."

"I believe that there are no fellows like him better than I do,"
answered Ernest; "I am very, very sorry, for my own sake, that he is
going; but really, when we come to consider that he is going away from
the bother, and trouble, and noise of a school, to go and live on a
beautiful property of his own, in a delightful climate like that of
France, I cannot but be truly glad to hear of his good fortune.  He has
been telling me all about the place, and how happy his mother and sister
will be to go and live with him; and he has invited me, during some
holidays, or when I leave school, to go and pay him a visit; and when I
told him that I was afraid he would forget me, he assured me that he
would not.  Really he is a kind-hearted, good-natured fellow, and I do
feel excessively happy at his good fortune."

Buttar agreed that Ernest saw the matter in its true light, and so did
Ellis, and then they bethought them how they could show him their
regard.  Unfortunately, as it was the end of the half, none of them had
any store of pocket-money remaining; so one proposed offering him a
penknife, and another a pocket-comb, and a third an inkstand; indeed,
there was no end of the number of small gifts which Monsieur Malin had
pressed upon him.  He was in a dilemma about the matter.

"You see, my dear young friends, that I do not like to refuse, and I do
not like to deprive you of these things; yet I am truly grateful to you
for this mark of your regard.  What I will do is this; I will make a
list of your names, and of all the things you desire to give me.  You
shall keep the articles, all of which you can use, but I could not; and
I will keep the list, and when I look at it, I shall be fully reminded
of you all, of your generosity, and of your kindly regard towards me."

Monsieur Malin had to go away a week or so before the school broke up.
Just about that time Ernest wrote home, giving an account of the story
he had heard about Ellis, of the injustice that he felt that he himself
had done him, of the strong evidence he had discovered in his favour,
and consequently of his wish to make him all the amends in his power.
By return of post he received a letter from his father, enclosing one to
Ellis, warmly inviting him to spend a portion of his holidays at Oakland
Ellis could not fail to be gratified, as were his parents, who gave him
leave to accept the invitation.  Buttar's family were spending the
summer in the neighbourhood; and curiously enough, Tom Bouldon and
Gregson had been invited to visit some friends living not far off.  The
schoolfellows thus found themselves near together during the early part
of the summer holidays.  No long time passed before they all met.  How
they did talk of fishing expeditions, of cricket-matches, of boating, of
pic-nics, of riding, of archery meetings, of bathing, of sports of all
sorts, in the water and out of the water, on sea and on land!  Ellis
talked a great deal of yachting also, but they were too far from the sea
to have any hopes of indulging in the amusement.  He was much more at
home in a boat than on horseback, for riding was not an accomplishment
which he had enjoyed any opportunity of practising.  One of the first
amusements which Mrs Bracebridge had arranged for her young guest, and
the other friends of her son, was a pic-nic to Barton Forest, a large
and picturesque wood in the neighbourhood.  There were long open glades,
and green shady walks, through which the deer alone were in general wont
to pass, except on such an occasion as that at present in contemplation,
or when an adventurous couple strayed into its retired precincts.  I
ought to have spoken of the cordial way in which Ellis was received, not
only by Mr Bracebridge, but by Mrs Bracebridge and all the family, and
the wish they exhibited of placing him at his ease, and making him quite
at home.  He showed how much he valued their kindness by looking far
more lively and happy than he had done for a long time.  The day of the
proposed pic-nic broke bright and fair, with every prospect of the
continuance of fine weather.  Several families joined in it from far and
near, and all sorts of vehicles were put in requisition: barouches, and
pony carriages, and gigs, and even carts and waggons.  The merriest, and
certainly the most noisy party, went in a long spring waggon, and to
their charge were entrusted several hampers, containing part of the
provender for the rural feast.  Ellis, Bouldon, Buttar, and others were
of this party.  Ernest, with his brother Charles, rode, and frequently
came up alongside to have a talk with their friends.  The boys gave way
heartily to the excitement of the scene; they laughed they sang, they
shouted to their heart's content--no one hindering them.  Never,
perhaps, have a merrier party ever collected in a waggon.  Tom Bouldon,
and one or two others, only regretted that they had not pea-shooters
with them, as he said, to pepper the passengers in their progress, but
Ellis cried out against this.

"No, no!" he exclaimed; "it may, or may not, be all very well on a high
road, where people expect such things when they see a parcel of
schoolboys together, and if they don't like it, will not stand on
ceremony about heaving stones in return; but in a country district they
take us for young gentlemen, and would never dream of throwing anything
at us in return.  The cottagers would only wonder what had come over
us--perhaps would think us gone mad; at all events it would be very
cowardly to attack them."

Buttar agreed with Ellis, and they soon won over the rest to their view
of the case.  They, however, found plenty to amuse them as they drove
along.  The early days of the holidays are generally very jolly days--
all the fun is to come; the amusements in store are almost uncountable;
and though they may have been disappointed during a former summer, they
are sure, so they think, not to be this.  If they are, they will make
amends for it next year.  At last the pic-nickers reached the ground.
Carriages drove up, and ladies and gentlemen, the fathers and mothers,
and elder brothers and sisters of the schoolboys.  Some ladies and
gentlemen came on horseback and ponyback, and several even, besides the
boys, in waggons, while the provisions and servants arrived in
spring-carts and dog-carts, and altogether there was a very vast
assemblage.  It was arranged that, having walked about a little, and
seen some of the views which the wood afforded, and some old ruins
within its borders, the party should dine, and then that various sports
should take place, pony races, archery, quoits, nine-pins, skittles,
throw-sticks or batons, single-stick; indeed, more than I can well
remember; while swings were hung up between the trees, and two or three
long planks had been placed on some felled trees, to serve as see-saws,
so that all ranks and ages could find amusement.  Never were better
arrangements made.  People may wander the world around and not find more
pleasing, heart-enlivening scenery than England affords--scenery more
rich or full of fertile spots, or which should make its inhabitants
grateful to Heaven for having placed them in such a land.  There were
fields already waving with corn, and bright green meadows full of fine
cattle, some grazing, others standing under trees chewing the cud, or in
shallow bends of the river, or in reedy ponds; there were sheep
scattered thickly over sunny hills, and still further off downs; and
there were copses of hazel, and alder, and willow, and woods of beech,
and oak, and birch, and tall elms dividing fields and orchards
innumerable, among which peeped many a white-washed cottage; and here
and there were pretty hamlets, with their village green or common; there
was a bright sparkling stream, swelling as it advanced into the
dimensions of a river, and high hills, and valleys, and glens branching
off in all directions.

"A fair and truly attractive scene," said Ellis, turning to Ernest, who
cordially agreed with him as they gazed at it together.

A gentleman who stood by turned round and watched the countenance of the
speaker.  "That is not a common boy, I am certain," he observed to a
friend.  "He is capable of doing much in the world, and I suspect will
do it."

Ellis could not help hearing the last remark, and it gave him great
encouragement.

Now came the time to prepare for the rural banquet.  It was great fun
unpacking the hampers, and carrying their contents to the tablecloths
which had been spread on the grass.  What number of chicken-pies, and
veal-pies, and rounds of beef, and hams and tongues, and cold chickens
and veal, and fruit-tarts and pies, and cakes of all shapes and sorts,
and what heaps of fruit, strawberries and gooseberries, and currants and
raspberries! indeed there was no lack of anything; and what was most
wonderful, nothing was forgotten, and there was a fair proportion of
each joint or dish.  I have been at a pic-nic where, from want of a
preconcerted plan, everybody brought veal-pies, or chicken-pies, or
hams, and there was no bread, or salt, or mustard.  Somebody had a
French horn or cornopean, and at its sound people came trotting pretty
quickly in from all directions through the woodland glades and up the
avenues leading from the ruins, or bypaths coming from the side of the
stream.  The long drive and the exercise they had since taken had given
them good appetites, and none lingered behind.  The boys, especially,
were in good time, and in the course of a few minutes everybody was
seated in every possible attitude convenient for carrying food down
their throats.  Not that anybody sat quiet many minutes together.
Somebody was always jumping up to help somebody else, or to go in search
of some tongue for their chicken, or some chicken for their tongue, or
for a glass of ale or wine, or for a piece of bread, or for some mustard
or salt; indeed it seemed wonderful how many things were wanted to make
