Here, after two or three vibrations, he clutched a limb and held fast.
This movement was executed adroitly, just at the culminating point of
the "swing", in order to save the intermediate links from the violence
of a too sudden jerk.

The chain was now fast at both ends, forming a complete
suspension-bridge, over which the whole troop, to the number of four or
five hundred, passed with the rapidity of thought.

It was one of the most comical sights I ever beheld, to witness the
quizzical expression of countenances along that living chain.  To see
the mothers, too, making the passage, with their tiny infants clinging
to their backs, was a sight at once comical and curious.

The monkeys that formed the chain kept up an incessant talking, and, as
we fancied, _laughing_, and frequently they would bite at the legs of
the individuals passing over, as if to hurry them on!

The troop was soon on the other side; but how were the animals forming
the bridge to get themselves over?  This was the question that suggested
itself.  Manifestly, thought we, by number one letting go his tail.  But
then the _point d'appui_ on the other side was much lower down, and
number one, with half a dozen of his neighbours, would be dashed against
the opposite bank, or soused into the water.

Here, then, was a problem, and we waited with some curiosity for its
solution.

It was soon solved.  A monkey was now seen attaching his tail to the
lowest on the bridge; another girdled him in a similar manner, and
another, and so on until a dozen more were added to the string.  These
last were all powerful fellows; and running up to a high limb, they
lifted the bridge into a position almost horizontal.

Then a scream from the last monkey of the new formation warned the _tail
end_ that all was ready; and the next moment the whole chain was swung
over, and landed safely on the opposite bank!

The lowermost links now dropped off to the ground, while the higher ones
leaped to the branches and came down by the trunk.  The whole troop then
scampered off into the chaparral and disappeared.

"Aw, be the powers of Moll Kelly! iv thim little crayteurs hasn't more
sinse than the humans av these parts!  It's a quare counthry, anyhow.
Be me sowl! it bates Banagher intirely!"

A general laugh followed the Irishman's remarks; and we all sprang to
our feet, refreshed by our sleep, and lighter in spirits.

The storm had disappeared, and the sun, now setting, gleamed in upon us
through the broad leaves of the palms.  The birds were abroad once
more--brilliant creatures--uttering their sweet songs.  Parrots and
trogons, and tanagers flashed around our heads; and the great-billed and
silly-looking toucans sat silent in the branches above.

The stream had become fordable, and leaving our "lair", we crossed over,
and struck into the woods on the opposite side.



CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

THE JARACHOS.

We headed towards the National Bridge.  Raoul had a friend half-way on
the route--an old comrade upon whom he could depend.  His rancho was in
a secluded spot, near the road that leads to the rinconada [Note 1] of
San Martin.  We should find refreshment there; and, if not a bed, "at
least", said Raoul, "a roof and a petate."  We should not be likely to
meet anyone, as it was ten miles off, and it would be late when we
reached it.

It _was_ late--near midnight--when we dropped in upon the
contrabandista, for such was the friend of Raoul; but he and his family
were still astir, under the light of a very dull wax candle.

Jose Antonio--that was his name--was a little "sprung" at the five
bareheaded apparitions that burst so suddenly upon him; but, recognising
Raoul, we were cordially welcomed.

Our host was a spare, bony old fellow, in leathern jacket and
_calzoneros_ (breeches), with a keen, shrewd eye, that took in our
situation at a single glance, and saved the Frenchman a great deal of
explanation.  Notwithstanding the cordiality with which his friend
received him, I noticed that Raoul seemed uneasy about something as he
glanced around the room; for the rancho, a small cane structure, had
only one.

There were two women stirring about--the wife of the contrabandista, and
his daughter, a plump, good-looking girl of eighteen or thereabout.

"_No han cenado, caballeros_?"  (You have not supped, gentlemen),
inquired, or rather affirmed, Jose Antonio, for our looks had answered
the question before it was asked.

"_Ni comido--ni almorzado_!"  (Nor dined--nor breakfasted!) replied
Raoul, with a grin.

"_Carambo!  Rafaela!  Jesusita_!" shouted our host, with a sign, such
as, among the Mexicans, often conveys a whole chapter of intelligence.
The effect was magical.  It sent Jesusita to her knees before the
tortilla-stones; and Rafaela, Jose's wife, seized a string of tassajo,
and plunged it into the olla.  Then the little palm-leaf fan was
handled, and the charcoal blazed and crackled, and the beef boiled, and
the black beans simmered, and the chocolate frothed up, and we all felt
happy under the prospect of a savoury supper.

I had noticed that, notwithstanding all this, Raoul seemed uneasy.  In
the corner I discovered the cause of his solicitude in the shape of a
small, spare man, wearing the shovel-hat and black _capote_ of a priest.
I knew that my comrade was not partial to priests, and that he would
sooner have trusted Satan himself than one of the tribe; and I
attributed his uneasiness to this natural dislike of the clerical
fraternity.

"Who is he, Antone?"  I heard him whisper to the contrabandista.

"The cure of San Martin," was the reply.

"He is new, then?" said Raoul.

"_Hombre de bien_," (A good man), answered the Mexican, nodding as he
spoke.

Raoul seemed satisfied, and remained silent.

I could not help noticing the "_hombre de bien_" myself; and no more
could I help fancying, after a short observation, that the rancho was
indebted for the honour of his presence more to the black eyes of
Jesusita than to any zeal on his part regarding the spiritual welfare of
the contrabandista or his family.

There was a villainous expression upon his lips as he watched the girl
moving over the floor; and once or twice I caught him scowling upon
Chane, who, in his usual Irish way, was "blarneying" with Jesusita, and
helping her to fan the charcoal.

"Where's the padre?" whispered Raoul to our host.

"He was in the _rinconada_ this morning."

"In the _rinconada_!" exclaimed the Frenchman, starting.

"They're gone down to the Bridge.  The band has had a fandango with your
people and lost some men.  They say they have killed a good many
stragglers along the road."

"So he was in the _rinconada_, you say? and this morning, too?" inquired
Raoul, in a half-soliloquy, and without heeding the last remark of the
contrabandista.

"We've got to look sharp, then," he added, after a pause.

"There's no danger," replied the other, "if you keep from the road.
Your people have already reached El Plan, and are preparing to attack
the Pass of the Cerro.  `_El Cojo_,' they say, has twenty thousand men
to defend it."

During this dialogue, which was carried on in whispers, I had noticed
the little padre shifting about uneasily in his seat.  At its conclusion
he rose up, and bidding our host "_buenas noches_," was about to
withdraw, when Lincoln, who had been quietly eyeing him for some time
with that sharp, searching look peculiar to men of his kidney, jumped
up, and, placing himself before the door, exclaimed in a drawling,
emphatic tone:

"_No, yer don't_!"

"_Que cosa_?"  (What's the matter?) asked the padre indignantly.

"Kay or no kay--cosser or no cosser--yer don't go out o' hyur afore we
do.  Rowl, axe yur friend for a piece o' twine, will yer?"

The padre appealed to our host, and he in turn appealed to Raoul.  The
Mexican was in a dilemma.  He dared not offend the cure, and on the
other hand he did not wish to dictate to his old comrade Raoul.
Moreover, the fierce hunter, who stood like a huge giant in the door,
had a voice in the matter; and therefore Jose Antonio had three minds to
consult at one time.

"It ain't Bob Linkin 'd infringe the rules of hospertality," said the
hunter; "but this hyur's a peculiar case, an' I don't like the look of
that 'ar priest, nohow yer kin fix it."

Raoul, however, sided with the contrabandista, and explained to Lincoln
that the padre was the peaceable cure of the neighbouring village, and
the friend of Don Antonio; and the hunter, seeing that I did not
interpose--for at the moment I was in one of those moods of abstraction,
and scarcely noticed what was going on--permitted the priest to pass
out.  I was recalled to myself more by some peculiar expression which I
heard Lincoln muttering after it was over than by the incidents of the
scene itself.

The occurrence had rendered us all somewhat uneasy; and we resolved upon
swallowing our suppers hastily, and, after pushing forward some
distance, to sleep in the woods.

The tortillas were by this time ready, and the pretty Jesusita was
pouring out the chocolate; so we set to work like men who had appetites.

The supper was soon despatched, but our host had some _puros_ in the
house--a luxury we had not enjoyed lately; and, hating to hurry away
from such comfortable quarters, we determined to stay and take a smoke.

We had hardly lit our cigars when Jesusita, who had gone to the door,
came hastily back, exclaiming:

"_Papa--papa! hay gente fuera_!"  (Papa, there are people outside!)

As we sprang to our feet several shadows appeared through the open
walls.  Lincoln seized his rifle and ran to the door.  The next moment
he rushed back, shouting out:

"I told yer so!"  And, dashing his huge body against the back of the
rancho, he broke through the cane pickets with a crash.

We were hastening to follow him when the frail structure gave way; and
we found ourselves buried, along with our host and his women, under a
heavy thatch of saplings and palm-leaves.

We heard the crack of our comrade's rifle without--the scream of a
victim--the reports of pistols and escopettes--the yelling of savage
men; and then the roof was raised again, and we were pulled out and
dragged down among the trees, and tied to their trunks and taunted and
goaded, and kicked and cuffed, by the most villainous-looking set of
desperadoes it has ever been my misfortune to fall among.  They seemed
to take delight in abusing us--yelling all the while like so many demons
let loose.

Our late acquaintance--the cure--was among them; and it was plain that
he had brought the party on us.  His "reverence" looked high and low for
Lincoln; but, to his great mortification, the hunter had escaped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Rinconada.  Literally _corner_; here it means a village.



CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

PADRE JARAUTA.

We were not long in learning into whose hands we had fallen; for the
name "Jarauta" was on every tongue.  _They were the dreaded "Jarochos"
of the bandit priest_.

"We're in for it now," said Raoul, deeply mortified at the part he had
taken in the affair with the cure.  "It's a wonder they have kept us so
long.  Perhaps _he's_ not here himself, and they're waiting for him."

As Raoul said this the clatter of hoofs sounded along the narrow road;
and a horseman came galloping up to the rancho, riding over everything
and everybody with a perfect recklessness.

"That's Jarauta," whispered Raoul.  "If he sees _me_--but it don't
matter much," he added, in a lower tone: "we'll have a quick shrift all
the same: he can't more than _hang_--and that he'll be sure to do."

"Where are these Yankees?" cried Jarauta, leaping out of his saddle.

"Here, Captain," answered one of the Jarochos, a hideous-looking griffe
[Note 1] dressed in a scarlet uniform, and apparently the lieutenant of
the band.

"How many?"

"Four, Captain."

"Very well--what are you waiting for?"

"To know whether I shall _hang_ or _shoot_ them."

"Shoot them, by all means!  _Carambo_! we have no time for
neck-stretching!"

"There are some nice trees here, Captain," suggested another of the
band, with as much coolness as if he had been conversing about the
hanging of so many dogs.  He wished--a curiosity not uncommon--to
witness the spectacle of hanging.

"_Madre de Dios_! stupid!  I tell you we haven't time for such silly
sport.  Out with you there!  Sanchez!  Gabriel!  Carlos! send your
bullets through their Saxon skulls!  Quick!"

Several of the Jarochos commenced unslinging their carbines, while those
who guarded us fell back, to be out of range of the lead.

"Come," exclaimed Raoul, "it can't be worse than this--we can only die;
and I'll let the padre know whom he has got before I take leave of him.
I'll give him a _souvenir_ that won't make him sleep any sounder
to-night.  _Oyez, Padre Jarauta_!" continued he, calling out in a tone
of irony; "have you found Marguerita yet?"

We could see between us and the dim rushlight that the Jarocho started,
as if a shot had passed through his heart.

"Hold!" he shouted to the men, who were about taking aim; "drag those
scoundrels hither!  A light there!--fire the thatch!  _Vaya_!"

In a moment the hut of the contrabandista was in flames, the dry
palm-leaves blazing up like flax.

"Merciful Heaven! _they are going to roast us_!"

With this horrible apprehension, we were dragged up towards the burning
pile, close to which stood our fierce judge and executioner.

The bamboos blazed and crackled, and under their red glare we could now
see our captors with a terrible distinctness.  A more demon-like set, I
think, could not have been found anywhere out of the infernal regions.

Most of them were zamboes and mestizoes, and not a few pure Africans of
the blackest hue, maroons from Cuba and the Antilles, many of them with
their fronts and cheeks tattooed, adding to the natural ferocity of
their features.  Their coarse woolly hair sticking out in matted tufts,
their white teeth set in savage grins, their strange armour and
grotesque attitudes, their wild and picturesque attire, formed a _coup
d'oeil_ that might have pleased a painter in his studio, but which at
the time had no charm for us.

There were Pintoes among them, too--spotted men from the tangled forests
of Acapulco--pied and speckled with blotches of red, and black, and
white, like hounds and horses.  They were the first of this race I had
ever seen, and their unnatural complexions, even at that fearful moment,
impressed me with feelings of disgust and loathing.

A single glance at this motley crew would have convinced us, had we not
been quite sure of it already, that we had no favour to expect.  There
was not a countenance among them that exhibited the slightest trait of
grace or mercy.  No such expression could be seen around us, and we felt
satisfied that our time had come.

The appearance of their leader did not shake this conviction.  Revenge
and hatred were playing upon his sharp sallow features, and his thin
lips quivered with an expression of malice, plainly habitual.  His nose,
like a parrot's beak, had been broken by a blow, which added to its
sinister shape; and his small black eyes twinkled with metallic
brightness.

He wore a purplish-coloured manga, that covered his whole body, and his
feet were cased in the red leather boots of the country, with heavy
silver spurs strapped over them.  A black sombrero, with its band of
gold bullion and tags of the same material, completed the _tout
ensemble_ of his costume.  He wore neither beard nor moustache; but his
hair, black and snaky, hung down trailing over the velvet embroidery of
his _manga_.  [See Note 2].

Such was the Padre Jarauta.

Raoul's face was before him, upon which he looked for some moments
without speaking.  His features twitched as if under galvanic action,
and we could see that his fingers jerked in a similar manner.

They were painful memories that could produce this effect upon a heart
of such iron devilry, and Raoul alone knew them.  The latter seemed to
enjoy the interlude; for he lay upon the ground, looking up at the
Jarocho with a smile of triumph upon his reckless features.

We were expecting the next speech of the padre to be an order for
flinging us into the fire, which now burned fiercely.  Fortunately, this
fancy did not seem to strike him just then.

"Ha, monsieur!" exclaimed he at length, approaching Raoul.  "I dreamt
that you and I would meet again; I dreamt it--ha! ha! ha!--it was a
pleasant dream, but not half so pleasant as the reality--ha! ha! ha!
Don't _you_ think so?" he added, striking our comrade over the face with
a mule quirt.  "Don't _you_ think so?" he repeated, lashing him as
before, while his eyes sparkled with a fiendish malignity.

"Did _you_ dream of meeting Marguerita again?" inquired Raoul, with a
satirical laugh, that sounded strange, even fearful, under the
circumstances.

I shall never forget the expression of the Jarocho at that moment.  His
sallow face turned black, his lips white, his eyes burned like a
demon's, and, springing forward with a fierce oath, he planted his
iron-shod heel upon the face of our comrade.  The skin peeled off, and
the blood followed.

There was something so cowardly--so redolent of a brutal ferocity--in
the act, that I could not remain quiet.  With a desperate wrench I freed
my hands, skinning my wrists in the effort, and, flinging myself upon
him, I clutched at the monster's throat.

He stepped back; my ankles were tied, and I fell upon my face at his
feet.

"Ho! ho!" cried he, "what have we here?  An officer, eh?  Come!" he
continued, "rise up from your prayers and let me look at you.  Ha! a
captain?  And this?--a lieutenant!  Gentlemen, you're too dainty to be
shot like common dogs; we'll not let the wolves have you; we'll put you
out of their reach; ha! ha! ha!  Out of reach of wolves, do you hear!
And what's this?" continued he, turning to Chane and examining his
