There was a silence for some time, and I supposed Jack had dozed off,
but he began again presently.  "Tom!"

"What?"

"Hadn't we better go on the jetty?"

"Why?"

"There might be a wreck, you know."

"So there might."

Next moment we were out of bed and dressing quietly.

We need not have minded about the noise, for the roar of the storm
outside would have prevented any one from hearing sounds twenty times
louder than those we made, as we crept into our clothes and pulled on
our boots.

"All ready, Jack?"

"Yes; mind how you go down."

We crept downstairs, past grandfather's room, where a light was burning,
down into the hall, and through the passage to the back door.  We pulled
the bolts and opened it carefully.  Fortunately, it was on the sheltered
side of the house.  Had it been the front, the blast that would have
rushed in would certainly have discovered our retreat.

We stepped cautiously out and closed the door behind us.  We were
surprised to find how still it seemed at first, compared with what we
had imagined.  But next moment, as we got past the back of the house and
came suddenly into the full force of the wind, we knew that the storm
was even fiercer than we supposed.  At first we could barely stand, as
with heads down and knees bent we struggled forward.  But we got more
used to it in a little while, and once in Harbour Street we were again
in shelter.

Harbour Street was empty.  No one saw us as we glided down it towards
the jetty.  We heard the church clock strike half-past eleven, the
chimes being swept past us on the wind.

As we turned out of Harbour Street on to the jetty the force of the gale
once more staggered us, and we had almost to crawl forward.  There were
lights and the cheery glow of a fire in the "look-out," and we knew
there must be plenty of sailors there.  But somehow at this time of
night we did not care to be discovered even by our friends the sailors.
So we kept on, holding on to the chains, towards where the red light
burned at the jetty-head.

We were too excited to be afraid.  One of those strange spirits of
adventure had seized upon us which make boys ready for anything, and the
thought of standing alone at midnight at the pier-head in a storm like
that did not even dismay us.

But before we were half-way along we found that it was not the easy
thing we imagined.  A huge wave struck the jetty behind the wall under
which we crept, and next moment a deluge of spray and foam shot up and
fell, drenching us to the skin.  And almost before we knew what had
happened another and another followed.

We turned instinctively towards the "look-out," but as we did so a
fourth wave, huger than all the rest, swept the jetty from end to end,
and but for the chain, on to which we clung, we should have been washed
off.

Our only chance was to run for the nearest shelter, and that was the lee
of the tarpaulin-covered lifeboat, which lay up on its stocks, out of
the reach of the spray, and seeming to us to offer as much protection
ashore as it could do afloat.

Half a dozen staggering steps brought us to it.  But even in this short
space another wave had drenched us.  We were thankful to creep under its
friendly shelter, and once there we wondered for the first time how we
were ever to get back.  Our hearts were beginning to fail us at last.
We were cold and shivering, and wet through, and now the rain came in
gusts, to add to our misery.

"Couldn't we get inside?" said Jack, with chattering teeth.

As he spoke a shower of salt spray leapt over the boat and deluged us.
Yes; why not get inside under the tarpaulin, where we could shelter at
once from the cold, and the wet, and the wind?  Nobody could see us, and
if any one came we could jump out, and presently, perhaps, the storm
might quiet down, and we could get back to bed.

Jack had already clambered up the side, and lifted a corner of the
tarpaulin.  I followed, and in a minute we were snugly stowed away, in
almost as good shelter as if we had never left our bedroom.

Then we sat and listened drowsily to the wind raging all round, and
heard the spray falling with heavy thuds on the tarpaulin above us.

"It must be past twelve, Jack," said I; "a Merry Christmas to you."

But Jack was fast asleep.

Chapter II.  The Rescue.

How long Jack and I had lain there, curled up under the bows of the
"Dreadnought" that stormy Christmas morning, I never knew.  For I, like
him, had succumbed to the drowsy influence of the cold and wet, and
fallen asleep.

I remember, just before dropping off, thinking the storm must be
increasing rather than otherwise, and vaguely wondering whether the wind
could possibly capsize the boat up here in the top of its runners.
However, my sleepiness was evidently greater than my fears on this
point, and I dropped off, leaving the question to decide itself.

The next thing I was conscious of was a strange noise overhead, and a
sudden dash of water on to the floor of the boat just beside me.  Then,
before I could rub my eyes, or recollect where I was, the "Dreadnought"
seemed suddenly alive with people, some shouting, some cheering, while
the loud bell at the pierhead close by mingled its harsh voice with the
roar of the storm.

"Stand by--cut away there!" shouted a hoarse voice from the boat.  Then
it flashed across me!  The "Dreadnought" was putting out in this fearful
storm to some wreck, and--horrors!--Jack and I were in her!

"Wait, I say, wait!  Jack and I are here.  Let us out!"  I cried.

In the noise, and darkness, and confusion, not even the nearest man
noticed me as I sprang up with this terrified shout.

I shook Jack wildly and shouted again, trying at the same time to make
my way to the stern of the boat.

But before I had crossed the first bench, before the two men seated
there with oars up, ready for the launch, perceived us, there was a
cheer from the jetty, the great boat gave a little jolt and then began
to slide, slowly at first, but gaining speed as she went on, and I knew
she was off.

That short, swift descent seemed to me like an eternity.  The lights on
the jetty went out, the cheers were drowned, and--

A rough hand caught me where I stood half across the bench and drove me
back down beside Jack, who was yet too dazed to stir.  Next instant with
a rush and a roar we plunged into the tempest, and all was blackness!

It seemed to me as if that first plunge was to be the last for the
gallant boat and all in her.  The bows under which we crouched, clinging
for dear life to a ring on the floor, were completely submerged.  The
water rushed over us and around us, nearly stunning us with its violence
and deafening us with its noise.

But presently we rose suddenly, and the boat shot up till it seemed to
stand on end, so that, where we sat, we could see every inch of it from
stem to stern, and the dim outline of Kingstairs jetty behind.  At the
same moment the ten oars dropped into their rowlocks, the coxswain, with
his sou'-wester pulled down tight on his head, and a hand raised to
screen his eyes from the sleet, shouted something--the boat soared
wildly up the wave, and once again all was darkness for us.

How the brave boat ever got through that first half-mile of surf is a
mystery to me.  Every wave seemed as though it would pitch it like a
plaything across to the next.  Now we shot up till we looked down on the
coxswain below us as from the top of a mast, and next instant we looked
up at him till it seemed a marvel how he held to his place, and did not
drop on to us.  All the while the men tugged doggedly at the oars,
heeding neither the waves that broke over them and flooded the boat, nor
the surf that often nearly knocked the oars from their hands.

And what of Jack and me?  We crouched there, close together, clutching
fast at the friendly ring, looking out in mute terror on to this fearful
scene, too stupefied to speak, or move, or almost to think.  Had any one
seen us? or had the hand which drove me down at the launch saved me from
my danger by accident?  I began to think this must be so, when the man
nearest us, whom even in his cork jacket and sou'-wester I recognised as
the hero of the shark story in the "look-out," turned towards us.

He was not one of the rowers, but had been busily drawing in and coiling
a line close beside us during those first terrific plunges of the boat
after she had taken the water.  But now he turned hurriedly to where we
sat, and without a word seized me roughly by the arm and drew me to my
feet.  I made sure I was to be cast overboard like Jonah into that
fearful sea.  But no.  All he did was to throw a cork jacket round me,
and then thrust me down again to my old place, just as a great wave
broke over the prows and seemed almost to fill the boat.  As soon as
this had passed and the water swirled out from the boat, he seized Jack
and equipped him in the same way.  Then throwing a tarpaulin coat over
us, he left us to ourselves, while he mounted his watch in the bows and
kept a look-out ahead.

The cork jackets, if of no other use, helped to warm us a bit, as also
did the coat, and thankful for the comfort, however small, we settled
down to see the end of our adventure and hope for the best.

Settled down, did I say?  How could any one settle down in an open boat
on a sea like that, with every wave breaking over our heads and half
drowning us, and each moment finding the boat standing nearly
perpendicular either on its stem or its stern?  How the rowers kept
their seats and, still more, held on to their oars and pulled through
the waves, I can still scarcely imagine.  But for the friendly ring on
to which Jack and I held like grim death, I am certain we should have
been pitched out of the boat at her first lurch.

The "Dreadnought" ploughed on.  Not a word was spoken save an occasional
shout between the coxswain and our friend in the bows as to our course.
I could see by the receding lights of Kingstairs, which came into sight
every time we mounted to the top of a wave, that we were not taking a
straight course out, but bearing north, right in the teeth of the wind;
and I knew enough of boats, I remember, to wonder with a shudder what
would happen if we should chance to get broadside on to one of these
waves.  Presently the man by us shouted--"You're right now.  Bill!"

The coxswain gave some word of command, and we seemed to come suddenly
into less broken water.  The men shipped their oars, and springing to
their feet, as if by one motion, hoisted a mast and unfurled a
triangular sail.

For a moment the flapping of the canvas half deafened us.  Then suddenly
it steadied, and next minute the boat heeled over, gunwale down on the
water, and began to hiss through the waves at a tremendous speed.

"Pass them younkers down here!" shouted Bill, when this manoeuvre had
been executed.

Jack and I were accordingly sent crawling down to the stern under the
benches, and presented ourselves in a pitiable condition before the
coxswain.

He was not a man of many words at the best of times, and just now, when
everything depended on the steering, he had not one to waste.

"Stow 'em away, Ben," he said, not looking at us, but keeping his eyes
straight ahead.

Ben, another of our acquaintance, dragged us up beside him on the
weather bulwarks, and here we had to stand, holding on to a rail, while
the boat, with her sail lying almost on the water, rushed through the
waves.

We were no longer among the breaking surf through which we had had to
straggle at starting, although the sea still rolled mountains high, and
threatened to turn us over every moment as we sailed across it.  But the
gallant boat, thanks to the skilful eye and hand of the coxswain, kept
her head up, and presently even we got used to the situation, and were
able to do the same.

Where was the wreck?  I summoned up courage to ask Ben, who, no longer
having to row, was standing composedly against the bulwarks by our side.

"Not far now.  Straight ahead."

We strained our eyes eagerly forward.  For a long time nothing was
visible in the darkness, but presently a bright flash of light shot
upward, followed almost immediately by a blaze on the surface of the
water and a dull report.

"They're firing again!" said Ben; "we'll be up to them in a jiffey!"

"What are we to do?" asked Jack dismally.

"Hold on where you are," said Ben; "and if we upset stay quiet in the
water till you're picked up."

With which consoling piece of advice Jack and I subsided, and asked no
more questions.

The sight of a column of lurid flame and smoke made us wonder for a
moment whether the vessel in distress was not on fire as well as
wrecked.  But I recollected that the "Wolf King" had burned tar-barrels
all night long as a signal of distress, and this we rightly concluded
was what was taking place on board "our" wreck.

Ben's "jiffey" seemed a good while coming to an end, and long before it
did we passed once more into broken water, and the perils of the start
were repeated, with the aggravation that we were now across the wind
instead of being head on.  Wave after wave burst over us, and time after
time, as we hung suspended on the crest of some great billow, it seemed
as if we never could right ourselves.  But we did.

"Stand by!" cried the coxswain, when at last a great dim black outline
appeared on our starboard.

Instantly the men were in their seats; oars were put out; the mast and
sail came down, and the clank of the anchor being got ready for use fell
on our ears from the bows.

The wreck was now right between us and the shore, we being some distance
to the windward of it.  My knowledge of the story of the wreck of the
"Wolf King" gave me a pretty good notion of what was going on, and even
in the midst of our peril I found myself whispering to Jack--

"They're going to drop the anchor, you know, and blow down on to her--"

"Hope they've got rope enough," said Jack.  For in the case of the "Wolf
King" it took three attempts to get within the right distance.  The
coxswain of the "Dreadnought" was evidently determined not to fall into
his old error this time, and, with her head to the wind and the oars
holding the water, he allowed her to drift to within about eighty yards
of the wreck.  Then he shouted--

"Pay away, there!" and instantly we heard the cable grinding over the
gunwale.

Would it hold?  Even to inexperienced boys like Jack and me the suspense
was dreadful as the cable ran out, and the rowers kept the boat's head
carefully up.

The grinding ceased.  There was a moment's pause, then came a welcome
"Ay, ay!" from the bows, and we knew it was all right.

It didn't take the wind long to drive us back on our cable, stern
foremost, on to the wreck, which now loomed out huge and ghostly on the
wild water.  As we drifted down under her stern we were conscious,
amidst the smoke of the burning tar-barrels and the spray of the waves
which broke over her, of a crowd of faces looking over her sides, and
fancied we heard a faint cheer too.  Our men still kept their oars out,
and when, always holding on to our cable, we had drifted some twenty
yards or so on to the lee side of the wreck, the order was given to pull
alongside.

It was no easy task in the face of the wind; but the men who had taken
the "Dreadnought" through the surf off Kingstairs jetty were not likely
to fail now.  A few powerful strokes brought us close under the lee of
the wreck, ropes were thrown out fore and aft, and in a few minutes we
lay tossing and kicking, but safely moored within a yard or two of the
ill-starred vessel.

Half a dozen of our men were up her sides and on board in a moment, and
we could hear the cheers with which they were greeted as they sprang on
deck.  No time was to be lost.  The wreck was creaking in every timber,
and each wave that burst over her, deluging us on the other side,
threatened to break her in pieces.  One mast already was broken short,
and hung helplessly down, held only by her rigging to the deck.  The
other looked as though it might go any moment, and perhaps carry the
wreck with it.

If she were to capsize now, what would become of us?

It seemed ages before our men reappeared.

One of them shouted down--

"There's twenty.  Germans."

"Any women?"

"Two."

"Look sharp with them."

We could see a cloaked figure lifted on to the bulwarks of the wreck and
held there.  A wave had just passed.  As the next came and lifted us up
with a lurch towards her, some one cried "Jump!" and she obeyed wildly--
almost too wildly, for she nearly overleaped us.  Mercifully there were
stout arms to catch her and place her in safety.  The other woman
followed; and then one after another the crew, until, with thankful
hearts, we counted twenty on board.

Our work was done.  No!  There was a report like a crack of thunder over
our heads, a shout, a shriek, as the mainmast of the wreck gave way with
a crash, and swayed towards us.

"Jump!" shouted the coxswain to our men, who were waiting for the next
wave to bring the boat to them.  "Cut away for'ard, there!"

Another moment and the mast would be on us and overwhelm us!  They
jumped, although we were down in the trough of the wave, yards below
them.  At the same moment the rope in the stern was cut loose, and the
boat swung round wildly, just in time to clear the mast as it fell with
a terrific crash overboard.  But our men?  Four of them landed safely in
our midst; but the others?  Oh! how our hearts turned cold as we saw
that two were missing, and knew that they mast be in that boiling,
furious water!  We sprang wildly to the side, in the mad hope of seeing
them, or perhaps even reaching them a hand but a stern order from the
coxswain sent us back to our places.

A minute of awful suspense followed.  The oars were put up, and, still
held by her stern cable, the boat was brought up again alongside.  In a
minute a shout from the prow proclaimed that one at least of the missing
ones was discovered, and presently a dripping form clambered over the
side of the boat close to us and coolly sat down to his oar, as if
nothing had happened.

Another shout--this time not from the boat, but from the water.  Our
other man had been carried the wrong side of us by the wave, and could
not reach us.  But a rope dexterously pitched reached him where he
floated, and we had the unspeakable joy of seeing him at last hauled
safely on board, exhausted, but as unconcerned as if drowning were an
ordinary occurrence with him.

How thankfully we saw the last cable which held us to the wreck cast
loose, and found ourselves at length, with our twenty rescued souls on
board, heading once more for Kingstairs!  Little was said on that short
voyage home.  Sail and oar carried us rapidly through the storm.  The
waves that broke over us from behind were as nothing to those that had
broken over us from in front.  And as if in recognition of the gallant
exploit of the tough old "Dreadnought," the very surf off Kingstairs
