be to scrape through with a pass, and not take honours at all."

At this point Mr Smith looked in to wish Jack joy before he started,
and greatly to my relief Billy entered at the same time.

The latter visitor was quite unexpected.

"Well, Billy, what's up?"  I inquired.

"Ga on!  As if you didn't know," replied the grinning youth.

"I don't know."

"What," said Billy, jerking his head towards Jack, "ain't he goin' to
'is 'sam, then?"

"Yes, he's going to his examination this morning."

"And I are a-goin' to give him a proper shine afore he goes," replied
the boy, almost fiercely.

"Of course you are, Billy," said Jack.  "I believe I should come to
grief altogether if I went without having my boots polished."

"In corse you would," said the delighted Billy, commencing operations
forthwith.

"I say, governor," said he, looking up, halfway through his task, "I
give the animal a topper last night."

"What animal?" inquired Jack.

"That there 'Orksbury, so I did.  Him and 'is pal comes along and twigs
me a-sottin' on my box.  `That's the kid.  Mashing,' says 'Orksbury.
Mashing he up to me, and says he, `Would you like a shillin', my boy?'
says he.  `You're 'avin' a lark with me,' says I.  `No, I ain't,' says
'e, 'oldin' it out.  `What do yer want?' says I.  `You know Smith?' says
'Orksbury.  `That ain't no concarn of yourn,' says I.  `You ain't got no
concarn with my governor,' says I.  `Oh, then you don't want the
shillin'?' says he.  `No, I don't,' says I, seein' they was up to games.
`What do you mean by it?' says Mashing, a-pullin' my ear.  (Bless you,
'e don't know the way to pull a cove's ear; my old gal can do it
proper.) `No one is going to do anything to Smith,' says 'e.  `We only
want you to give him this,' says he, pullin' out a bit of paper.  `Don't
give it 'im,' says 'Orksbury; `he's a young thief,' says 'e, `and 'e'll
only spoil it all.'  `I will so,' says I, `and I'll spoil you too,' says
I, aimin' a brush at his 'ed.  They gives me a wipin' for it, but there,
they can't 'arf do it.  And they says if I want my shillin' I can go and
get it from that cantin' son of a thief--meanin' you, governor--what
kep' me.  Bless you, they did jaw, them two, but I give that 'Orksbury a
topper, which I owed 'im one afore."

This spirited address on the part of our young friend I need hardly say
interested us all deeply.  We all resented the outrage which had been
offered to him, and admired the spirit with which he had stood to his
colours during the interview.

This little episode served to smooth the way for Mr Smith's interview
with Jack.  It gave him time to compose himself, and get over the
emotion which the first sight of his lost son since last night's
discovery naturally roused.

When he did speak it was steadily and cheerily as ever.

"Just popped up," he said, "to wish you success, my boy.  Keep your head
during the _viva-voce_, and remember that rule about the second aorist."

"All serene," said Jack, laughing.  "I say, Mr Smith," added he, "if I
don't pass I shall feel myself the most ungrateful brute out."

"So you will be," replied Mr Smith, nodding pleasantly as he left the
room.

I wondered at his nerve, and admired the self-control which could thus
enable him to talk and even jest at such a time.

I had time to walk round with Jack to the place of examination before
business, and give him my final benediction at the door.

Then I hurried off to Hawk Street.

It was a long, dull day there without him.  Hawk Street had long since
ceased to be exciting.  The fellows I liked--and they were very few--did
not obtrude their affections on me during business hours, and the
fellows I disliked had given up the pastime of baiting me as a bad job.
I had my own department of work to attend to, and very little
communication with any one else in the doing of it, except with
Doubleday, who, as the reader knows, usually favoured me when anything
specially uninviting wanted doing.

Of Hawkesbury I now saw and heard less than any one.  He had been
promoted to a little glazed-in box of his own, where in stately solitude
he managed the petty-cash, kept the correspondence, and generally worked
as hard as one who is a cut above a clerk and a cut below a partner is
expected to do.

On the day in question I was strongly tempted to break in upon his
solitude and demand an explanation of his conduct to Billy on the
preceding evening.  But a moment's reflection convinced me of the folly
of such a course.  It was not likely, if I got any answer at all, I
should get a satisfactory one, while to reopen communications at all
after what had occurred might be unwise and mischievous.  For ever since
Hawkesbury and I had ceased to be on talking terms at the office I had
been more comfortable there, and involved in fewer troubles than ever
before.

So I let well alone.

During the day an important telegram arrived at the office, which kept
the partners closeted together in the inner-room for an hour, in earnest
conference, at the end of which time Hawkesbury was sent for.

Doubleday, who had seen the telegram, told me it was to say that a
vessel reported lost had turned up, with a cargo which was now double
the value in the market it would have been had she arrived when
expected.  However, there were points connected with the insurance and
other matters which would require the presence of one of the firm at
Liverpool, and this was evidently the object of the present
confabulation.

"A year ago," said Doubleday, "they would have sent me.  But now the
darling comes in for all the trips."

Which proved to be the case now.  Hawkesbury emerged from the inner-room
with an important face, and told the junior clerk (I no longer held that
distinguished post), to fetch a hansom immediately.  Doubleday nudged
me.

"If it was you or me, I fancy we'd fetch our own hansoms, eh!  Never
mind, we've neither of us got uncles."

"Haven't we?" said I, laughing.  "I have."

"Ah--so have I, for the matter of that.  Three--all as poor as church
mice too.  I mean we've not got uncles in the firm.  But what puzzles me
is, what is to become of the petty-cash?  I suppose I'm to be favoured
with that job during his lordship's absence.  I shall certainly cover
the book with crape."

"Batchelor," called Hawkesbury at that moment, just putting his head out
of the door of his box, "will you step here, please?"

Doubleday nudged me again, harder than ever.

"I say," said he, with glee, "you're to be sent too to carry his bag--
see if you aren't."

However, Doubleday was wrong for once.  The honour he prophesied was not
reserved for me.  But another was, almost as surprising.

"Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, almost in his old wheedling tone, "I shall
be away for three or four days.  I'll get you to keep the petty-cash
accounts till I return.  I won't leave the regular book out, as I have
not time to balance it.  You can enter anything on a separate paper,
which I will copy in when I return.  There is L3 in the cash-box now.
You had better keep it locked up in your desk."

I could not help being surprised that he should fix on me of all persons
to undertake this responsibility for him during his absence.  It seemed
so much more naturally to devolve on its former guardian that I could
not help asking, "Don't you think Doubleday had better--"

"I prefer you should do it, please," said Hawkesbury, decisively,
bustling off to another desk at the same moment, and so cutting short
further parley.

So I had nothing for it but to take up the cash-box, and, after making
sure it contained exactly the L3 he had mentioned, transfer it to my own
desk.

When I told Doubleday that afternoon what had happened he waxed very
facetious on the head of it.  He was undoubtedly a little hurt that I
should be selected for the charge instead of him.  But we were too good
friends to misunderstand one another in the matter.

"I expect he's left it with you because you're a young hand, and he
thinks you're sure to make a mess of it.  That would just suit him."

"I'll do my best to deprive him of the luxury of putting me right," said
I.

"If you do get up a tree," said Doubleday, "I'm your man.  But I hope
you won't, for I don't want to have anything to do with it."

After all it was not such very alarming work.  A few people dropped in
during the day and paid small amounts in cash, which I received, and
carefully entered on my sheet.  And a few demands came from various
quarters for small disbursements in the way of postage-stamps,
telegrams, cab fares, and the like, all which I also carefully entered
on the other side of my account.

Before I left in the evening I balanced the two sides, and found the
cash in my box tallying exactly with the amount that appeared on my
sheet.  Whereat I rejoiced exceedingly, and, locking-up my desk, thought
the keeping of the petty-cash was ridiculously simple work.

That evening when I reached the lodgings I found Jack had arrived before
me.  I was eager to hear of his success or otherwise at the examination,
and he was prepared to gratify my curiosity.

He had got on well, he thought.  The _viva-voce_ portion, which he had
dreaded most, had been easy, or, at any rate, the questions which fell-
to him had been such as he could readily answer.  As for the written
part, all he could say was that he had replied to all the questions, and
he believed correctly, although time prevented him from doing one or two
as full justice as they deserved.  In fact, after talking it over, we
both came to the conclusion that the day's effort had been a success,
and if to-morrow turned out as well, all doubt as to the result might be
dispensed with.

Then I told him of my adventures, which did not seem altogether to
overjoy him.

"I don't know why it is," said he, "but Hawkesbury is a fellow I cannot
but mistrust."

"But," said I, "I don't see what there can possibly be to suspect in his
handing over this simple account to me to keep."

"All I can say is," said he, "I wish he hadn't done it.  Why didn't he
hand it over to Doubleday?"

"I wondered at that," said I, "but there's no love lost between those
two.  Doubleday says he thinks he did it because I am a bit of a fool,
and he wants the pleasure of seeing me in a mess over the account."

Jack laughed.

"Doubleday is always flattering somebody," said he.  "Never mind; it may
be only fancy on my part after all."

Jack wanted to get to his books that evening, but I dissuaded him.

"It can do no good," said I, "and it may just muddle you for to-morrow.
Take an easy evening now, and go to bed early.  You'll be all the
fresher for it to-morrow."

So, instead of study, we fell-to talking, and somehow got on to the
subject of the home at Packworth.

"By the way, Fred," said Jack, "I got a letter from you the other day."

"From me?"  I cried; "I haven't written to you for months."

"It _was_ from you, though, but it had been a good time on the road, for
it was written from Stonebridge House just after I had left."

"What! the letter you never called for at the post-office?"

"The letter you addressed to `J.' instead of `T.' my boy; But I'm glad
to have it now.  It is most interesting."

"But however did you come by it?"  I asked.

"If you will stop runaway horses when your hands are full you must
expect to lose things.  This letter was picked up by Mrs Shield after
that little adventure, and only came to light out of the lining of her
bag last week.  She remembered seeing it lying on the road, she says,
and picking it up, along with Mary's shawl and handkerchief, which had
also fallen.  But she was too flurried to think anything of it, and
until it mysteriously turned up the other day she had forgotten its
existence.  So there's a romantic story belonging to your letter."

I could not be satisfied till the interesting document was produced and
conned over.  We laughed a good deal in the reading, over the
reminiscences it brought up, and the change that had come over both our
lives since then.

"Mrs Shield says Mary insisted it belonging to her, and that she had no
right to send it to me," said Jack, laughing.  "What do you think of
that?"

"It's very kind of her," said I, "to think anything about it.  I say,
Jack," I added, blushing a little, "got that photo about you?"

Jack handed out his treasure, and we fell-to talking a good deal about
the original of the picture, which interested me quite as much as it did
Jack.

"Do you know, Fred," said he, presently, "she doesn't know anything
about--about father?  She believes she is an orphan, and that I am the
only relation she has."

"I'm sure," said I, "it's far better so."

"Yes," said Jack, sadly.  "At present it is.  But some day she ought to
know."

"Why?" said I.

"If he ever--but we're not going to talk of that.  What do you say to
turning in?  That's half-past ten striking by the church."

So ended the first day of suspense.

I regret to say that my last act that day was one of petty larceny!

During our talk about Mary I had held the photograph in my hand, looking
at it occasionally, and occasionally laying it down on my knee.  When
Jack rose and proposed turning in for the night he gathered together the
other papers he had taken from his pocket and replaced them.  But,
strangely enough, he forgot to look for the photograph, or else supposed
it was with the other papers.

It wasn't, for it lay under my hand all the while, and presently, when
his back was turned, it lay in my pocket.

Later on, when the lights were out and all was quiet, it lay under my
pillow for greater security!

No wonder the reader is shocked!  If ever there was a clear case of
purloining this was.  I know it, dear reader.  I knew it at the time,
and yet I did it.

For I had a motive, which perhaps the reader can guess.

The picture which had lain first under my hand, then in my pocket, then
under my pillow, experienced yet another change of situation that night.

Just as the first streak of dawn struggled through the window I heard a
door close and a footstep in the room below.  Mr Smith had come home.

Lightly and silently I crept from my bed, and with my treasure in my
hand sped down the stairs and slipped into his room.

And for an hour after that the picture lay in a hand which had never
touched it before, and the bright laughing eyes looked up and met the
tearful eyes of a father!



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

HOW SEVERAL VISITORS CALLED AT OUR LODGINGS.

Billy arrived punctually as we were dressing next morning in great good-
humour.

"What cheer, covies?" cried he before he was well in the room.  "She's
come back!"

"Who--your mother?" said Jack.

"Yaas," said Billy; "worn't she jolly neither?  She give me a wipin'
last night same as I never got."

And when we came to look at our queer visitor he bore about his face and
person undoubted marks of the truth of this story.

"What a shame it is!"  I said to Jack.  "Can't anything be done to stop
it?  He'll be murdered right out one day."

"'Taint no concern of yourn!" said Billy.  "But I say, governor," added
he, turning to Jack, "she are a rum 'un, she are!  She was a-sayin' you
was makin' a idle young dorg of me, she says, and she'll wait upon you,
she says, and know the reason why, she says.  And she says ef she
ketches me messin' about any more with my ABC, she says she'll knock the
'ed off me.  But don't you mind 'er, she's on'y a-jawing!"

Jack looked a good deal troubled.  He had taken upon himself the welfare
of this happy family in the court, and it seemed likely to cost him many
an uneasy moment.  Only a short time before, he had told me, he had
called with Mr Hawkesbury and seen Billy's mother, just after her
release from prison, and tried to plead with her on Billy's behalf, but,
he said, you might as well talk to a griffin.

Billy appeared to be oppressed with no cares on the subject.  "It's that
there penny bang," said he, "as she's got her back up agin.  I told her
as I was a shovin' my coppers in there, and she says she'll shove you
in, governor, she says.  She did swear at you, governor!  It's a game to
hear her."

"When you learn better, Billy," said Jack, quite sternly, "you won't
talk like that of your mother."

Billy's face overclouded suddenly.  He looked first at me, then at Jack,
and finally at the boot in his hand, which he fell-to polishing till it
dazzled.  But Jack's tone and look had effectually damped his spirits,
and when he spoke again it was with a half whine.

"I _are_ a larning better, governor, do you hear?  I knows my letters.
You ask this 'ere bloke," pointing to me with his brush.  "And them
Aggers, too.  I writ 'em all up on my slate, didn't I?  You tell the
governor if I didn't!"

"Yes," I said; "you did."

"There you are!  Do you hear, governor?  I'm larnin' better.  I writ all
them there Aggers, I did; and I can say my d-o-g, dorg, proper, can't I,
pal?  And I've shove my coppers in the bang, and I am larnin'."

"I know you are," said Jack, kindly.  "Come, it's time I got on my
boots.  Are they done?"

Billy in the delight of his heart took one more furious turn at the
boots.  He breathed hard upon them till he was nearly black in the face,
and polished them till it was a wonder any leather at all was left.
And, to complete all, he polished up the tags of the laces with the
sleeve of his own coat, and then deposited the boots with an air of
utmost pride and jubilation.

"I shall be done the examination to-day," said Jack, as the boy started
to go; "I'll come down and see you in the evening."

Billy's face was nearly as bright as the boots he had polished as he
grinned his acknowledgments and went on his way rejoicing.

Mr Smith did not put in an appearance before it was time for Jack to
start.  He had told me he would not.  He was afraid of betraying his
secret prematurely, and deemed it wisest to stay away.  And I was just
as glad he did so, for it was all I could do not to show by my manner
that something of serious moment was in the wind.

However, by an effort, I tried to appear as if nothing unusual had
occurred.

"By the way, Jack," said I, as we walked down to the examination hall,
"you're a nice fellow to take care of a photograph!  Do you know you
left this at my mercy all night?"

"What!" he exclaimed, "I thought I put it back in my pocket with the
other papers.  What a go if I'd lost it!"

"What a go if I'd kept it!" said I.  "The next time I will."

"To prevent which," said Jack, "take your last look, for you shall never
see it again!  Good-bye, old man.  It will be all over when I see you
next."

"All over!" mused I, as I walked back to the office.  "It will be only
beginning."

I never made a more rash promise in all my life than when I under took
to Mr Smith to break the news of his discovery to Jack.

It had appeared so simple at the time, but when the moment came the task
seemed to be one bristling with difficulties on every hand.  All that
day the sense of the coming ordeal haunted me, and even the custody of
the petty-cash could not wholly divert my mind.

I was therefore quite relieved that evening, on returning to the
lodgings, to hear as I ascended the stairs voices speaking in our room,
and to find that Jack had a visitor.  I should, at least, get some time
to recover the wits which the near approach of my ordeal had scattered.

For a moment I wondered whether Jack's visitor could be Mr Smith
himself.  It was a man's voice, and unless it were Mr Smith or Mr
Hawkesbury, I was at a loss to guess who it could be.

To my astonishment I found, on entering the room, that the visitor was
no other than my uncle!

Whatever had brought him here?

Jack looked as if his _tete-a-tete_ had not been a very cheerful one,
for he jumped up at my arrival with evident joy, and cried, "Oh, here
you are at last!  Here's your uncle, Fred, come to see you.  He was
afraid he would have to go before you got back."

This, at least, was a comfort.  My uncle was not going to stay all
night.

I went up in a most dutiful manner to my relative, and hoped he was
well.

"Yes," he replied, in his usual frigid way.  "You seem surprised to see
me.  But as I had business in town I found out this place, and came to
look you up."

"It was very kind of you," said I.

"You shouldn't say that when you don't mean it," said my uncle.  "And as
I am going in a few minutes you need not look so alarmed."

"I hope you will have a cup of tea before you go," said I, hoping to
change the subject.

"No, thank you.  Your friend here asked me that already.  Now, what
about your debts, Fred?"

"Oh," said I, "they are all paid by this time.  An old schoolfellow
advanced me the money, kindly, and I have all but repaid him out of my
weekly allowance."

"Humph!" said my uncle.  "That scrape will be a lesson to you, I hope.
Boys who make fools of themselves like that must suffer the
consequences."

"I had been very foolish I know," I replied, humbly.

"But Fred's as steady as a judge now," said Jack, interposing for my
relief.

"It's nearly time he was," replied my uncle, "unless he has made up his
mind to ruin himself.  He's given up all his wild friends, I hope?"

"Oh yes, every one," said I; "haven't I, Jack?"

"Yes, he's nothing to do with them now," said Jack.

"And he spends his evenings in something better than drinking and
gambling and that sort of thing?"

This was pleasant for me.  As the question appeared to be addressed to
Jack, I allowed him to answer it for me.

"Well," said my uncle, after a few more similar inquiries had been
satisfactorily answered, "I hope what you tell me is true.  It may seem
as if I did not care much what became of you, Fred.  And as long as you
went on in the way you did, no more I did.  You had chosen your friends,
and you might get on the best you could with them.  But now, if you have
done what you say you have and given them up--"

At that moment there was a sudden tumult on the stairs outside, which
made us all start.  It was a sound of scuffling and laughter and
shouting, in the midst of which my uncle's voice was drowned.  Whoever
the visitors were, they appeared not to be quite sure of their quarters,
for they were trying every door they came to on their way up.  At length
they came nearer, and a voice, the tones of which were only too
familiar, shouted, "Come on, you fellows.  We'll smoke him out.
Batchelor ahoy there!  Wonder if he lives on the roof."

It was Whipcord's voice, whom I had not seen since my accident, and who
now had fixed on this evening of all others to come with his friends and
pay me a visit!

"It's Whipcord," I said to Jack; "he mustn't come in!  Let's barricade
the door, anything to keep them out."

Jack, who looked fully as alarmed as I did, was quite ready to agree,
but my uncle, who had hitherto been an astounded witness of the
interruption, interfered, and said, "No--they shall come in.  These are
some of your reformed friends, I suppose, Mr Fred.  I'd like to see
them.  Let them come in."

"Oh no, uncle," I cried, in agitation, "they mustn't come in, indeed
they mustn't, they are--"

As I spoke the shouting outside increased twofold, and at the same
moment the door was flung open, and Whipcord, Crow, the Field-Marshal,
the Twins, Daly, and Masham, burst into the room!

Is it any wonder if, as I looked first at them, then at my uncle, a
feeling of utter despair took possession of me?

They were all, evidently, in a highly festive state of mind and ready
for any diversion.

"Here he is," cried Whipcord, who appeared to be leader of the party.
"Here you are, Batch, my boy--we got your address at the police-station
and came to look you up, and oh, I say, what a glorious old codger!"

This last note of admiration was directed to my uncle, who sat sternly
back in his chair, gazing at the intruders with mingled wrath and
astonishment.

"I say, introduce us, Batch," said the Field-Marshal, "and to the other
aristocrat, too, will you?"

"Why, that's Bull's-eye," cried Crow.  "You know, Twins, the fellow I
told you about who's--"

"Oh, that's the Botany Bay hero, is it?" cried Masham.  "I must shake
hands with him.  One doesn't get the chance of saying how d'ye do to a
real gaol-bird every day.  How are you, Treadmill?"

Jack, whose face was very pale, and whose eyes flashed fiercely,
remained motionless, and with an evident effort, as Masham held out his
hand.

"What--thinks we aren't good enough for him, does he?" said Masham.

"So used to the handcuffs," said Abel, "doesn't know how to use his
hands, that's it."

"But we don't know yet who this old weathercock is," cried Whipcord,
turning again to my uncle.  "What do they call you at home, old Stick-
in-the-mud?" and he nudged him in the ribs by way of emphasis.
