
This was the commencement of that series of events which, as we have
stated at the beginning of this chapter, were brought about by that
wonderful baby--the baby Maggot.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

DESCRIBES SETTING-DAY AT THE MINE, ETCETERA.

That very evening, while Maggot was smoking his pipe by the fireside,
his son Zackey referred to the bunch of copper which Penrose had
discovered in the mine.  After a short conversation, Maggot senior went
to the wounded man to talk about it.

"'Twas a keenly lode, did 'ee say?" asked Maggot, after he had inquired
as to the health of his friend.

"Yes, and as I shall not be able to work there again," said Penrose
sadly, "I would advise you to try it.  Zackey is entitled to get the
benefit of the discovery, for he was with me at the time, and, but for
his aid, dear boy, I should have been suffocated."

Maggot said no more on that occasion about the mine, being a man of few
words, but, after conversing a short time with the wounded man, and
ascertaining that no hope was held out to him of the recovery of his
sight, he went his way to the forge to work and meditate.

Setting-day came--being the first Saturday in the month, and no work was
done on that day in Botallack, for the men were all above ground to have
their "pitches" for the next month fixed, and to receive their wages--
setting-day being also pay day.

Some time before the business of the day commenced, the miners began to
assemble in considerable numbers in the neighbourhood of the
account-house.  Very different was their appearance on that occasion
from the rusty-red fellows who were wont to toil in the dark chambers
far down in the depths below the spot where they stood.  Their
underground dresses were laid aside, and they now appeared in the
costume of well-off tradesmen.  There was a free-and-easy swing about
the movements of most of these men that must have been the result of
their occupation, which brings every muscle of the body into play, and
does not--as is too much the case in some trades--over-tax the powers of
a certain set of muscles to the detriment of others.

Some there were, however, even among the young men, whose hollow cheeks
and bloodless lips, accompanied with a short cough, told of evil
resulting from bad air and frequent chills; while, on the other hand, a
few old men were to be seen with bright eyes and ruddy cheeks which
indicated constitutions of iron.  Not a few were mere lads, whose broad
shoulders and deep chests and resolute wills enabled them to claim the
title, and do the work, of men.

There were some among them, both young and old, who showed traces of
having suffered in their dangerous employment.  Several were minus an
eye, and one or two were nearly blind, owing to blast-holes exploding in
their faces.  One man in particular, a tall and very powerful fellow,
had a visage which was quite blue, and one of his eyes was closed--the
blue colour resulting from unburnt grains of powder having been blown
into his flesh.  He had been tattooed, in fact, by a summary and
effective process.  This man's family history was peculiar.  His father,
also a miner, had lived in a lonely cottage on a moor near St. Just, and
worked in Balaswidden Mine.  One night he was carried home and laid at
his wife's feet, dead--almost dashed to pieces by a fall.  Not long
afterwards the son was carried to the same cottage with his right eye
destroyed.  Some time later a brother dislocated his foot twice within
the year in the mine; and a few months after that another brother fell
from a beam, descended about twenty-four feet perpendicularly, where he
struck the side of the mine with his head, and had six or seven of his
teeth knocked out; glancing off to one side, he fell twenty feet more on
the hard rock, where he was picked up insensible.  This man recovered,
however, under the careful nursing of his oft and sorely tried mother.

Maggot was present on this setting-day, with a new cap and a new blue
cloth coat, looking altogether a surprisingly respectable character.  A
good deal of undertoned chaffing commenced when he appeared.

"Hallo!" exclaimed one, "goin' to become an honest man, Maggot?"

"Thinkin' 'bout it," replied the smith, with a good-humoured smile.

"Why, if I didn't knaw that the old wuman's alive," said another, "I'd
say he was agoin' to get married again!"

"Never fear," exclaimed a third, "Maggot's far too 'cute a cunger to be
caught twice."

"I say, my dear man," asked another, "have 'ee bin takin' a waalk 'pon
the clifts lately?"

"Iss, aw iss," replied the smith with much gravity.

"Did 'ee find any more daws 'pon clift?" asked the other, with a leer.

There was a general laugh at this, but Maggot replied with
good-humour,--"No, Billy, no--took 'em all away last time.  But I'm
towld there's some more eggs in the nest, so thee'll have a chance some
day, booy."

"I hope the daws ain't the worse of their ducking?" asked Billy, with an
expression of anxious interest.

"Aw, my dear," said Maggot, looking very sad, and shaking his head
slowly, "didn't 'ee hear the noos?"

"No, not I."

"They did catch the noo complaint the doctor do spaik of--bronkeetis I
think it is--and although I did tie 'em up wi' flannel round their
necks, an' water-gruel, besides 'ot bottles to their feet, they're all
gone dead.  I mean to have 'em buried on Monday.  Will 'ee come to the
berryin, Billy?"

"P'raps I will," replied Billy, "but see that the gravedigger do berry
'em deep, else he'll catch a blowin' up like the gravedigger did in
Cambourne last week."

"What was that, booy?  Let us hear about it, Billy," exclaimed several
voices.

"Well, this is the way of it," said Billy: "the owld gravedigger in
Cambourne was standin' about, after mittin' was over, a-readin' of the
tombstones, for he'd got a good edjication, had owld Tom.  His name was
Tom--the same man as put a straw rope to the bell which the cows did eat
away, so that he cudn't ring the people to mittin'.  Well, when he was
studdyin' the morials on the stones out comes Captain Rowe.  He was wan
o' the churchwardens, or somethin' o' that sort, but I don't knaw
nothin' 'bout the church, so I ain't sure--an' he calls owld Tom into
the vestry.

"`Now look here, Tom,' says the captain, very stern, `they tell me thee
'rt gettin' lazy, Tom, an' that thee do dig the graves only four fut
deep.  Now, Tom, I was over to St. Just t'other day to a berryin', and I
see that they do dig their graves six fut or more deeper than you do.
That won't do, Tom, I tell 'ee.  What's the meanin' of it?'

"This came somewhat suddent on owld Tom, but he wor noways put out.

"`Well, you do see, Cap'n Rowe,' says he, `I do it apurpose, for I do
look at the thing in two lights.'"

"`How so?' asked the captain.

"`Why, the people of St. Just only think of the berryin', but _I_ do
think of the resurrection; the consekince is that they do dig too deep,
an' afore the St. Just folk are well out of their graves, _ours_ will be
a braave way up to heaven!'"

The laugh with which this anecdote was received had scarcely subsided
when the upper half of one of the account-house windows opened, and the
fine-looking head and shoulders of old Mr Cornish appeared.

The manager laid an open book on the window-sill, and from this elevated
position, as from a pulpit, he read out the names, positions, etcetera,
of the various "pitches" that were to be "sett" for the following month.
One of the mine captains stood at his elbow to give any required
information--he and his three brother captains being the men who had
gone all over the mine during the previous month, examined the work,
measured what had been done by each man or "pare" of men, knew the
capabilities of all the miners, and fixed the portion that ought to be
offered to each for acceptance or refusal.

The men assembled in a cluster round the window, and looked up while Mr
Cornish read off as follows:--

"John Thomas's pitch at back of the hundred and five.  By two men.  To
extend from the end of tram-hole, four fathom west, and from back of
level, five fathom above."

For the enlightenment of the reader, we may paraphrase the above
sentence thus:--

"The pitch or portion of rock wrought last month by John Thomas is now
offered anew--in the first place, to John Thomas himself if he chooses
to continue working it at our rate of pay, or, if he declines, to any
other man who pleases to offer for it.  The pitch is in the back (or
roof) of the level, which lies one hundred and five fathoms deep.  It
must be wrought by two men, and must be excavated lengthwise to an
extent of four fathoms in a westerly direction from a spot called the
tram-hole.  In an upward direction, it may be excavated from the roof of
the level to an extent of five fathoms."

John Thomas, being present, at once offered "ten shillings," by which he
meant that, knowing the labour to be undergone, and the probable value
of the ore that would have to be excavated, he thought it worth while to
continue at that piece of work, or that "pitch," if the manager would
give him ten shillings for every twenty shillings' worth of mineral sent
to the surface by him; but the captain also knew the ground and the
labour that would be required, and his estimate was that eight shillings
would be quite sufficient remuneration, a fact which was announced by
Mr Cornish simply uttering the words, "At eight shillings."

"Put her down, s'pose," said John Thomas after a moment's consideration.

Perhaps John knew that eight shillings was really sufficient, although
he wanted ten.  At all events he knew that it was against the rules to
dispute the point at that time, as it delayed business; that if he did
not accept the offer, another man might do so; and that he might not get
so good a pitch if he were to change.

The pitch was therefore sett to John Thomas, and another read off:--"Jim
Hocking's pitch at back of the hundred and ten.  By one man.  To
extend," etcetera.

"Won't have nothin' to do with her," said Jim Hocking.

Jim had evidently found the work too hard, and was dissatisfied with the
remuneration, so he declined, resolving to try his chance in a more
promising part of the mine.

"Will any one offer for this pitch?" inquired Mr Cornish.

Eight and six shillings were sums immediately named by men who thought
the pitch looked more promising than Jim did.

"Any one offer more for this pitch?" asked the manager, taking up a
pebble from a little pile that lay at his elbow, and casting it into the
air.

While that pebble was in its flight, any one might offer for the pitch,
but the instant it touched the ground, the bargain was held to be
concluded with the last bidder.

A man named Oats, who had been in a hesitating state of mind, here
exclaimed "Five shillings" (that is, offered to work the pitch for five
shillings on every twenty shillings' worth sent to grass); next instant
the stone fell, and the pitch was sett to Oats.

Poor James Penrose's pitch was the next sett.

"James Penrose's _late_ pitch," read the manager, giving the details of
it in terms somewhat similar to those already sett, and stating that the
required "pare," or force to be put on it, was two men and a boy.

"Put me down for it," said Maggot.

"Have you got your pare?" asked Mr Cornish.

"Iss, sur."

"Their names?"

"David Trevarrow and my son Zackey."

The pitch was allocated in due form at the rate of fifteen shillings per
twenty shillings' worth of mineral sent up--this large sum being given
because it was not known to be an unusually good pitch--Penrose having
been too ill to speak of his discovery since his accident, and the
captain having failed to notice it.  When a place is poor looking, a
higher sum is given to the miner to induce him to work it.  When it is
rich, a lower sum is given, because he can make more out of it.

Thus the work went on, the sums named varying according to the nature of
the ground, and each man saying "Naw," or "Put me down," or "That won't
do," or "I won't have her," according to circumstances.

While this was going on at the window, another and perhaps more
interesting scene was taking place in the office.  This apartment
presented a singular appearances.  There was a large table in the centre
of it, which, with every available inch of surface on a side-table, and
on a board at the window, was completely covered with banknotes and
piles of gold, silver, and copper.  Each pile was placed on a little
square piece of paper containing the account-current for the month of
the man or men to whom it belonged.  Very few men laboured singly.  Many
worked in couples, and some in bands of three, five, or more.  So much
hard cash gave the place a wealthy appearance, and in truth there was a
goodly sum spread out, amounting to several hundreds of pounds.

The piles varied very much in size, and conveyed a rough outline of the
financial history of the men they belonged to.  Some large heaps of
silver, with a few coppers and a pile of sovereigns more than an inch
high, lying on two or more five-pound notes indicated successful labour.
Nevertheless, the evidence was not absolutely conclusive, because the
large piles had in most cases to be divided between several men who had
banded together; but the little square account-papers, with a couple of
crowns on them, told of hard work and little pay, while yonder square
with two shillings in the centre of it betokened utter failure, only to
be excelled by another square, on which lay _nothing_.

You will probably exclaim in your heart, reader, "What! do miners
sometimes work for a month, and receive only two shillings, or _nothing_
as wages?"

Ay, sometimes; but it is their own seeking if they do; it is not forced
upon them.

There are three classes of miners--those who work on the surface,
dressing ore, etcetera, who are paid a weekly wage; those who work on
"tribute," and those who work at "tut-work."  Of the first we say
nothing, except that they consist chiefly of balmaidens and children--
the former receiving about 18 shillings a month, and the latter from 8
shillings to 20 shillings, according to age and capacity.

In regard to "tributers" and "tut-workers," we may remark that the work
of both is identical in one respect--namely, that of hewing, picking,
boring, and blasting the hard rock.  In this matter they share equal
toils and dangers, but they are not subjected to the same remunerative
vicissitudes.

When a man works on "tribute" he receives so many shillings for every
twenty shillings' worth of ore that he raises during the month, as
already explained.  If his "pitch" turns out to be rich in ore, his
earnings are proportionably high; if it be poor, he remains poor also.
Sometimes a part of the mineral lode becomes so poor that it will not
pay for working, and has to be abandoned.  So little as a shilling may
be the result of a "tributer's" work for a month at one time, while at
another time he may get a good pitch, and make 100 pounds or 200 pounds
in the same period.

The "tutman" (or piecework man), on the other hand, cuts out the rock at
so much per fathom, and obtains wages at the rate of from 2 pounds, 10
shillings to 3 pounds a month.  He can never hope to make a fortune, but
so long as health and strength last, he may count on steady work and
wages.  Of course there is a great deal of the work in a mine which is
not directly remunerative, such as "sinking" shafts, opening up and
"driving" (or lengthening) levels, and sinking "winzes."  On such work
tutmen are employed.

The man who works on "tribute" is a speculator; he who chooses
"tut-work" is a steady labourer.  The tributer experiences all the
excitement of uncertainty, and enjoys the pleasures of hope.  He knows
something, too, about "hope deferred;" also can tell of hope
disappointed; has his wits sharpened, and, generally, is a smart fellow.
The tut-worker knows nothing of this, his pay being safe and regular,
though small.  Many quiet-going, plodding men prefer and stick to
tut-work.

In and about the counting-room the men who had settled the matter of
their next month's work were assembled.  These--the cashier having
previously made all ready--were paid in a prompt and businesslike
manner.

First, there came forward a middle-aged man.  It was scarcely necessary
for him to speak, for the cashier knew every man on the mine by name,
and also how much was due to him, and the hundreds of little square
accounts-current were so arranged that he could lay his hands on any one
in an instant.  Nevertheless, being a hearty and amiable man, he
generally had a word to say to every one.

"How's your son, Matthew?" he inquired of the middle-aged man, putting
the square paper with its contents into his hand.

"He's braave, sir.  The doctor do say he'll be about again in a week."

Matthew crumpled up his account-current--notes, gold, silver, copper and
all--in his huge brown hand, and, thrusting the whole into his breeches
pocket, said "Thank 'ee," and walked away.
