well-known that one black sheep spoils a flock.  We must weed them all
out, Blunt, and get our garden into as tidy a condition as possible; it
is beginning to do us credit already, but that Gorton Station has
remained too long in a bad state; we must harrow it up a little.  Well,
let's hear what you have found out.  They never suspected you, I
suppose?"

"Never had the least suspicion," replied Blunt with a slight approach to
a smile.  "I've lived with 'em, now, for a considerable time, and the
general opinion of 'em about me is that I'm a decent enough fellow, but
too slow and stupid to be trusted, so they have not, up to this time,
thought me worthy of being made a confidant.  However, that didn't
matter much, 'cause I managed to get round one o' their wives at last,
and she let out the whole affair--in strict confidence, of course, and
as a dead secret!

"In fact I have just come from a long and interesting conversation with
her.  She told me that all the men at the station, with one or two
exceptions, were engaged in it, and showed me two of the missing bales
of cloth--the cloth, you remember, sir, of which there was such a large
quantity stolen four weeks ago, and for which the company has had to
pay.  I find that the chief signalman, Davis, is as bad as the rest.  It
was his wife that gave me the information in a moment of
over-confidence."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Sharp, in some surprise; "and what of Sam Natly and
Garvie?"

"They're both of 'em innocent, sir," said Blunt.  "I did suspect 'em at
one time, but I have seen and heard enough to convince me that they have
no hand in the business.  Natly has been goin' about the station a good
deal of late, because the wife of one of the men is a friend of his
wife, and used to go up to nurse her sometimes when she was ill.  As to
Garvie, of course he knows as well as everybody else that some of the
men there must be thieves, else goods would not disappear from that
station as they do, but _his_ frequent visits there are for the purpose
of reclaiming Davis, who, it seems, is an old playmate of his."

"Reclaiming Davis!" exclaimed Sharp.

"Yes, an' it's my opinion that it'll take a cleverer fellow than him to
reclaim Davis, for he's one of the worst of the lot; but Garvie is real
earnest.  I chanced to get behind a hedge one day when they were
together, and overheard 'em talkin' about these robberies and other
matters, and you would have thought, sir, that the fireman was a regular
divine.  He could quote Scripture quite in a stunnin' way, sir; an'
_did_ seem badly cut up when his friend told him that it was of no use
talkin', for it was too late for _him_ to mend."

"Has Garvie, then, been aware all this time that Davis is one of the
thieves, and kept it secret?" asked Sharp.

"No, sir," replied Blunt.  "Davis denied that he had any hand in the
robberies when Garvie asked him.  It was about drink that he was
pleadin' with him so hard.  You know we have suspected him of that too,
of late; but from what I heard he must be a regular toper.  Garvie was
tryin' to persuade him to become a total abstainer.  Says he to him,
`You know, Davis, that whatever may be true as to the general question
of abstaining from strong drink, _your_ only chance of bein' delivered
lies in total abstinence, because the thing has become a _disease_.  I
know and believe that Christianity would save you from the power of
drink, but, depend upon it, that it would do so in the way of inducin'
you of your own free will to "touch not, taste not, handle not, that
which" _you_ "will perish by the using."'  Seems to me as if there was
something in that, sir?" said Blunt, inquiringly.

Sharp nodded assent.

"Then Garvie does not suspect him of being connected with the
robberies?" he asked.

"No," replied Blunt; "but he's a deep file is Davis, and could throw a
sharper man than Garvie off the scent."

After a little further conversation on the subject Mr Sharp dismissed
the pretended porter to his station, and called upon the superintendent
of the police force of Clatterby, from whom he received an addition to
his force of men.

That night he led his men to Gorton station, and when he thought a
suitable hour had arrived, he caused them to surround the block of
buildings in which the men of the station resided.  Then, placing Blunt
and two or three men in front of Davis's house, he went up to the door
alone and knocked.

Mrs Davis opened it.  She gave the least possible start on observing by
the light of her lobby lamp who her visitor was--for she knew him well.
Mr Sharp took note of the start!

"Good-evening, Mrs Davis," he said.

"Good-evening, sir; this is an unexpected pleasure, Mr Sharp."

"Most of my visits are unexpected, Mrs Davis, but it is only my friends
who count them a pleasure.  Is your husband within?"

"He is, sir; pray, walk this way; I'm sure he will be delighted to see
you.  Can you stay to supper with us? we are just going to have it."

"No, thank you, Mrs Davis, I'm out on duty to-night," said Sharp,
entering the parlour, where Davis was engaged in reading the newspaper.
"Good-evening, Mr Davis."

Davis rose with a start.  Mr Sharp took note of that also.

"Good-evening, Mr Sharp," he said; "sit down, sir; sit down."

"Thank you, I can't sit down.  I'm on duty just now.  The fact is, Mr
Davis, that I am come to make a search among your men, for we have
obtained reliable information as to who are the thieves at this station.
As, no doubt, _some_ of the men are honest, and might feel hurt at
having their houses searched, I have thought that the best way to
prevent any unpleasant feeling is to begin at the top of the free and go
downwards.  They can't say that I have made fish of one and flesh of
another, if I begin, as a mere matter of form, Mr Davis, with
yourself."

"Oh, certainly--certainly, Mr Sharp, by all means," replied Davis.

He spoke with an air of candour, but it was quite evident that he was
ill at ease.

Calling in one of his men, Mr Sharp began a rigorous search of the
house forthwith.  Mr Davis suggested that he would go out and see that
the men were in their residences; but Mr Sharp said that there was no
occasion for that, and that he would be obliged by his remaining and
assisting in the search of his own house.

Every hole and corner of the ground-floor was examined without any
discovery being made.  Mrs Davis, observing that her visitors were
particular in collecting every shred of cloth that came in their way,
suddenly asked if it was cloth they were in search of.  Mr Sharp
thought the question and the tone in which it was put told of a guilty
conscience, but he replied that he was in search of many things--cloth
included.

Immediately after, and while they were busy with a dark closet, Mrs
Davis slipped quietly out of the room.  Mr Sharp was stooping at the
time with his back towards her, but the two back buttons of his coat
must have been eyes, for he observed the movement and at once followed
her, having previously ordered Mr Davis to move a heavy chest of
drawers, in order to keep him employed.  Taking off his shoes he went
up-stairs rapidly, and seeing an open door, peeped in.

There he saw a sight that would have surprised any man except a
superintendent of police.  Mrs Davis was engaged in throwing bales of
cloth over the window with the energy of a coal-heaver and the haste of
one whose house is on fire!  The poor woman was not robust, yet the easy
way in which she handled those bales was quite marvellous.

Being a cool and patient man, Sharp allowed her to toss over five bales
before interrupting her.  When she was moving across the room with the
sixth and last he entered.  She stopped, turned pale, and dropped the
bale of cloth.

"You seem to be very busy to-night Mrs Davis" he observed, inquiringly;
"can I assist you?"

"Oh, Mr Sharp!" exclaimed Mrs Davis, covering her face with her hands.

She could say no more.

Mr Sharp took her gently by the arm and led her down-stairs.  They
reached the room below just in time to see Blunt enter, holding the
ejected bales with both arms to his bosom.  Blunt had happened to take
his stand just underneath the window of Mrs Davis's bedroom, and when
that energetic woman tossed the bales out she pitched them straight into
Blunt's willing arms.  The accommodating man waited until he had
received all that appeared likely to be delivered to him, and then with
a quiet chuckle bore them, as we have seen, into Davis's parlour.

"This is a bad business, Davis," said Sharp, as he slipped a pair of
manacles on his prisoner.

Davis made no reply.  He was very pale, but looked defiant.  Mrs Davis
sat down on a chair and sobbed.

Leaving them in charge of Blunt, Mr Sharp then paid a visit to all the
men of the place, and ere long succeeded in capturing all who had been
engaged in the recent robberies, with the various proofs of their
guilt--in the shape of cloth, loaves of sugar, fruit, boxes of tea,
etcetera, in their apartments.

It had cost Mr Sharp and his men many weary hours of waiting and
investigation, but their perseverance was at length well rewarded, for
the "nest" was thoroughly "harried;" the men were dismissed and
variously punished, and that portion of the Grand National Trunk Railway
was, for the time, most effectually purified.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

THE DIAMOND RING AND THE RAILWAY CLEARING-HOUSE.

Let us turn now, for a brief space, to Edwin Gurwood.  He is seated
before a desk in one of the rooms of that large building in Seymour
Street, Euston Square, London, where a perfect army of clerks--about a
thousand--clear up many of the mysteries, and overcome a number of the
difficulties, incident to the railway traffic of the kingdom.

At the particular time we write of, Edwin was frowning very hard at a
business-book and thinking of Emma Lee.  The cause of his frown, no
doubt, was owing to the conflict between duty and inclination that
happened to rage in his bosom just then.  His time belonged to the
railways of the United Kingdom; to Emma belonged his heart.  The latter
was absent without leave, and the mind, thus basely forsaken, became
distracted, and refused to make good use of time.

That day Edwin met with a coincidence, he made what he believed to be a
discovery, and almost at the same moment received an inquiry as to the
subject of that discovery.  While endeavouring, without much success, to
fix his attention on a case of lost-luggage which it was his duty to
investigate, and frowning as we have said, at the business-book, his eye
was suddenly arrested by the name of "Durby."

"Durby!" he muttered.  "Surely that name is familiar?  Durby! why, yes--
that's the name of Tipps's old nurse."

Reading on, he found that the name of Durby was connected with a diamond
ring.

"Well, now, that _is_ strange!" he muttered to himself.  "At the first
glance I thought that this must be the brown paper parcel that I made
inquiry about at the station of the Grand National Trunk Railway long
ago, but the diamond ring puts that out of the question.  No nurse, in
her senses, would travel with a diamond ring tied up in a brown paper
parcel the size of her head."

We may remind the reader here that, when the brown paper parcel was
found and carried to the lost-luggage office of one of our western
railways, a note of its valuable contents was sent to the Clearing-House
in London.  This was recorded in a book.  As all inquiries after lost
property, wheresoever made throughout the kingdom, are also forwarded to
the Clearing-House, it follows that the notes of losses and notes of
inquiries meet, and thus the lost and the losers are brought together
and re-united with a facility that would be impracticable without such a
central agency.  In the case of our diamond ring, however, no proper
inquiry had been made, consequently there was only the loss recorded on
the books of the Clearing-House.

While Edwin was pondering this matter, a note was put into his hands by
a junior clerk.  It contained an inquiry after a diamond ring which had
been wrapped up in a large brown paper parcel, with the name Durby
written on it in pencil, and was lost many months before between
Clatterby and London.  The note further set forth, that the ring was the
property of Mrs Tipps of Eden Villa, and enclosed from that lady a
minute description of the ring.  It was signed James Noble, M.D.

"Wonderful!" exclaimed Edwin.  "The most singular coincidence I ever
experienced."

Having thus delivered himself, he took the necessary steps to have the
ring sent to London, and obtained leave (being an intimate friend of the
Tipps family) to run down by train and deliver it.

While he is away on this errand, we will take the opportunity of
mounting his stool and jotting down a few particulars about the
Clearing-House, which are worth knowing, for that establishment is not
only an invaluable means of effecting such happy re-unions of the lost
and the losers, as we have referred to, but is, in many other ways, one
of the most important institutions in the kingdom.

The Railway Clearing-House is so named, we presume, because it clears up
railway accounts that would, but for its intervention, become
inextricably confused, and because it enables all the different lines in
the country to interchange facilities for through-booking traffic, and
clears up their respective accounts in reference to the same.

Something of the use and value of the Clearing-House may be shown at a
glance, by explaining that, before the great schemes of amalgamation
which have now been carried out, each railway company booked passengers
and goods only as far as its own rails went, and at this point fresh
tickets had to be taken out and carriages changed, with all the
disagreeable accompaniments and delays of shifting luggage, etcetera.
Before through-booking was introduced, a traveller between London and
Inverness was compelled to renew his ticket and change luggage four
times; between Darlington and Cardiff six times.  In some journeys no
fewer than nine or ten changes were necessary!  This, as traffic
increased, of course became intolerable, and it is quite certain that
the present extent of passenger and goods traffic could never have been
attained if the old system had continued.  It was felt to be absolutely
necessary that not only passengers, but carriages and goods, must be
passed over as many lines as possible, at straight "through" to their
destinations, with no needless delays, and without "breaking bulk."  But
how was this to be accomplished?  There were difficulties in the way of
through-booking which do not appear at first sight.  When, for instance,
a traveller goes from London to Edinburgh by the East Coast route, he
passes over three different railways of unequal length, or mileage.  The
Great Northern furnishes his ticket, and gives him station accommodation
besides providing his carriage, while the North-Eastern and North
British permit him to run over their lines; and the latter also
furnishes station accommodation, and collects his ticket.  To ascertain
precisely how much of that traveller's fare is due to each company
involves a careful and nice calculation.  Besides this, the _whole_ fare
is paid to the Great Northern, and it would be unjust to expect that
that company should be saddled with the trouble of making the
calculation, and the expense of remitting its share to each of the other
companies.  So, too, with goods--one company furnishing the waggon and
tarpaulin, besides undertaking the trouble of loading and furnishing
station-accommodation and the use of its line, while, it may be, several
other companies give the use of their lines only, and that to a variable
extent.  In addition to all this, the company providing its carriages or
waggons is entitled to "demurrage" for every day beyond a certain time
that these are detained by the companies to which they do not belong.

Now, if all this be unavoidable even in the case of a single fare, or a
small parcel, it must be self-evident that in lines where the
interchange of through-traffic is great and constant, it would have been
all but impossible for the railway companies to manage their business,
and the system would have given rise to endless disputes.

In order to settle accounts of this description, it was soon seen to be
absolutely necessary that some sort of arrangement must be come to, and,
accordingly, the idea of a central office was conceived, and a system
established without delay, which, for minute detail and comprehensive
grasp, is unrivalled by any other institution.  At first only a few of
the railway companies united in establishing the Clearing-House in 1842,
but by degrees, as its immense value became known, other companies
joined, and it now embraces all the leading companies in the kingdom.
It is said to be not inferior to the War Office, Colonial Office, and
Admiralty in regard to the amount of work it gets through in a year!
Its accounts amount to some twelve millions sterling, yet they always
must, and do, balance to a fraction of a farthing.  There must never be
a surplus, and never a deficiency, in its funds, for it can make no
profits, being simply a thoroughly honest and disinterested and
perfectly correct go-between, which adjusts the mutual obligations of
railways in a quick and economical manner.  Its accounts are balanced
every month, and every pound, shilling, and penny can be accounted for.
It annually receives and dispenses a revenue greater than that of many
