
Phil Briant and Gurney dealt in the purely comic line.  They remarked--
generally in an undertone--that they left poetry and prose to Glynn and
the captain; and it was as well they did, for their talents certainly
did not lie in either of these directions.  They came out strong after
meals, when the weather was fine, and formed a species of light and
agreeable interlude to the more weighty efforts of the captain and the
brilliant sallies of Glynn.

Gurney dealt in _experiences_ chiefly, and usually endeavoured by
asseveration and iteration to impress his hearers with the truth of
facts said to have been experienced by himself, which, if true, would
certainly have consigned him to a premature grave long ago.  Briant, on
the other hand, dealt largely in ghost stories, which he did not vouch
for the truth of, but permitted his hearers to judge of for themselves--
a permission which they would doubtless have taken for themselves at any
rate.

But tales and stories occupied, after all, only a small portion of the
men's time during that long voyage.  Often, very often, they were too
much exhausted to talk or even to listen, and when not obliged to labour
at the oars they tried to sleep; but "Nature's sweet restorer" did not
always come at the first invitation, as was his wont in other days, and
too frequently they were obliged to resume work unrefreshed.  Their
hands became hard and horny in the palms at last, like a man's heel, and
their backs and arms ached from constant work.

Ailie kept in good health, but she, too, began to grow weak from want of
proper nourishment.  She slept better than the men, for the comfortable
sleeping-box that Glynn had constructed for her sheltered her from the
heat, wet, and cold, to which the former were constantly exposed.  She
amused herself, when not listening to stories or asleep, by playing with
her favourite, and she spent a good deal of time in reading her Bible--
sometimes to herself, at other times, in a low tone, to her father as he
sat at the helm.  And many a time did she see a meaning in passages
which, in happier times, had passed meaningless before her eyes, and
often did she find sweet comfort in words that she had read with
comparative indifference in former days.

It is in the time of trial, trouble, and sorrow that the Bible proves to
be a friend indeed.  Happy the Christian who, when dark clouds overwhelm
his soul, has a memory well stored with the comforting passages of the
Word of God.

But Ailie had another occupation which filled up much of her leisure,
and proved to be a source of deep and engrossing interest at the time.
This was the keeping of a journal of the voyage.  On the last trip made
to the wreck of the _Red Eric_, just before the great storm that
completed the destruction of that ship, the captain had brought away in
his pocket a couple of note-books.  One of these he kept to himself to
jot down the chief incidents of the intended voyage; the other he gave
to Ailie, along with a blacklead pencil.  Being fond of trying to write,
she amused herself for hours together in jotting down her thoughts about
the various incidents of the voyage, great and small; and being a very
good drawer for her age, she executed many fanciful and elaborate
sketches, among which were innumerable portraits of Jacko and several
caricatures of the men.  This journal, as it advanced, became a source
of much interest and amusement to every one in the boat; and when, in an
hour of the utmost peril, it, along with many other things, was lost,
the men, after the danger was past, felt the loss severely.

Thus they spent their time--now pleasantly, now sadly--sometimes
becoming cheerful and hopeful, at other times sinking almost into a
state of despair as their little stock of food and water dwindled down,
while the _Maid of the Isle_ still held on her apparently endless course
over the great wide sea.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

THE CALM AND THE STORM--A SERIOUS LOSS AND GREAT GAIN--BIRD-CATCHING
EXTRAORDINARY--SAVED AT LAST.

One day a deep death-like calm settled down upon the ocean.  For some
days before, the winds had been light and uncertain, and the air had
been excessively warm.  The captain cast uneasy glances around him from
time to time, and looked with a sadder countenance than usual on the
haggard faces of the men as they laboured slowly and silently at the
oars.

"I don't know what this will turn to, doctor," he said, in a low tone;
"I don't like the look of it."

The doctor, who was perusing Ailie's journal at the moment, looked up
and shook his head.

"It seems to me, captain, that whatever happens, matters cannot be made
much worse."

"You are wrong, doctor," replied the captain quietly; "we have still
much to be thankful for."

"Did you not tell me a few minutes ago that the water was almost done?"

The doctor said this in a whisper, for the men had not yet been made
aware of the fact.

"Yes, I did; but it is not _quite_ done; that is matter for
thankfulness."

"Oh, according to that principle," observed the doctor, somewhat
testily, "you may say we have cause to be thankful for _everything_, bad
as well as good."

"So we have! so we have!  If everything good were taken from us, and
nothing left us but our lives, we would have reason to be thankful for
that--thankful that we were still above ground, still in the land of
hope, with salvation to our immortal souls through Jesus Christ freely
offered for our acceptance."

The doctor made no reply.  He thought the captain a little weak in the
matter of religion.  If religion is false, his opinion of the captain no
doubt, was right, but if true, surely the weakness lay all the other
way.

That morning the captain's voice in prayer was more earnest, if
possible, than usual, and he put up a special petition for _water_,
which was observed by the men with feelings of great anxiety, and
responded to with a deep amen.  After morning worship the scales were
brought, and the captain proceeded to weigh out the scanty meal, while
the men watched his every motion with an almost wolfish glare, that told
eloquently of the prolonged sufferings they had endured.  Even poor
Ailie's gentle face now wore a sharp, anxious expression when food was
being served out, and she accepted her small portion with a nervous
haste that was deeply painful and touching to witness.  She little knew,
poor child, that that portion of bread and meat and water, small though
it was, was larger than that issued to the men, being increased by a
small quantity deducted from the captain's own allowance and an equal
amount from that of Glynn.  The latter had noticed the captain's habit
of regularly calling off the child's attention during the distribution
of each meal, for the purpose of thus increasing her portion at the
expense of his own, and in a whispering conversation held soon after he
insisted that a little of his allowance should also be transferred to
her.  At first the captain firmly refused, but Glynn said that if he did
not accede to his wish he would hand over the whole of his portion in
future to the monkey, let the result be what it might!  As Glynn never
threatened without a full and firm resolve to carry out his threats, the
captain was compelled to give in.

When the water came to be served out that morning the captain paused,
and looking round at the anxious eyes that were riveted upon him, said--

"My lads, it has pleased the Almighty to lay His hand still heavier on
us.  May He who has said that He will not suffer men to be tempted above
what they are able to bear, give us strength to stand it.  Our water is
almost done.  We must be content with a quarter of our usual allowance."

This information was received in deep silence--perhaps it was the
silence of despair, for the quantity hitherto served out had been barely
sufficient to moisten their parched throats, and they _knew_ that they
could not exist long on the reduced allowance.

Jacko came with the rest as usual for his share, and held out his little
hand for the tin cup in which his few drops of water were wont to be
handed to him.  The captain hesitated and looked at the men; then he
poured out a few drops of the precious liquid.  For the first time a
murmur of disapproval was heard.

"It's only a brute beast; the monkey must die before _us_," said a voice
which was so hollow and changed that it could scarcely be recognised as
that of Tarquin, the steward.

No one else said a word.  The captain did not even look up to see who
had spoken.  He felt the justice as well as the harshness of the remark,
and poured the water back into the jar.

Jacko seems puzzled at first, and held out his hand again; then he
looked round on the men with that expression of unutterable woe which is
peculiar to some species of the monkey tribe.  He seemed to feel that
something serious was about to happen to him.  Looking up in the sad
face of his young mistress, he uttered a very gentle and plaintive
"oo-oo-ee!"

Ailie burst into a passionate flood of tears, and in the impulse of the
moment handed her own cup, which she had not tasted, to Jacko, who
drained it in a twinkling--before the captain could snatch it from his
hands.

Having emptied it, Jacko went forward as he had been taught to do, and
handed back the cup with quite a pleased expression of countenance--for
he was easily satisfied, poor thing!

"You should not have done that, my darling," said the captain, as he
gave Ailie another portion.

"Dear papa, I couldn't help it," sobbed the child; "indeed I couldn't--
and you need not give me any.  I can do without it to-day."

"Can you?  But you shan't," exclaimed Glynn, with a degree of energy
that would have made every one laugh in happier times.

"No, no, my own pet," replied the captain.  "You shan't want it.  Here,
you _must_ drink it, come."

From that day Jacko received his allowance regularly as long as a drop
of water was left, and no one again murmured against it.  When it was
finished he had to suffer with the rest.

The calm which had set in proved to be of longer duration than usual,
and the sufferings of the crew of the little boat became extreme.  On
the third day after its commencement the last drop of water was served
out.  It amounted to a couple of teaspoonfuls per man each meal, of
which there were three a day.  During the continuance of the calm, the
sun shone in an almost cloudless sky and beat down upon the heads of the
men until it drove them nearly mad.  They all looked like living
skeletons, and their eyes glared from their sunken sockets with a dry
fiery lustre that was absolutely terrible to behold.  Had each one in
that boat possessed millions of gold he would have given all, gladly,
for one drop of fresh water; but, alas! nothing could purchase water
there.  Ailie thought upon the man who, in the Bible, is described as
looking up to heaven from the depths of hell and crying for one drop of
water to cool his tongue, and she fancied that she could now realise his
agony.  The captain looked up into the hot sky, but no blessed cloud
appeared there to raise the shadow of a hope.  He looked down at the
sea, and it seemed to mock him with its clear blue depths, which looked
so sweet and pleasant.  He realised the full significance of that
couplet in Coleridge's _Ancient Mariner_--

  "Water, water, everywhere,
  But not a drop to drink."

and, drawing Ailie to his breast, he laid his cheek upon hers and
groaned aloud.

"We shall soon be taken away, dear papa!" she said--and she tried to
weep, but the tears that came unbidden and so easily at other times to
her bright blue eyes refused to flow now.

The men had one by one ceased to ply their useless oars, and the captain
did not take notice of it, for he felt that unless God sent relief in
some almost miraculous way, their continuing to row would be of no
avail.  It would only increase their agony without advancing them more
than a few miles on the long, long voyage that he knew still lay before
them.

"O God, grant us a breeze!" cried Mr Millons, in a deep, tremulous tone
breaking a silence that had continued for some hours.

"Messmates," said Tim Rokens, who for some time had leaned with both
elbows on his oar and his face buried in his hands, "wot d'ye say to a
bath?  I do believe it 'ud do us good."

"P'haps it would," replied King Bumble; but he did not move, and the
other men made no reply, while Rokens again sank forward.

Gurney and Tarquin had tried to relieve their thirst the day before by
drinking sea-water, but their inflamed and swollen throats and lips now
showed that the relief sought had not been obtained.

"It's time for supper," said the captain, raising his head suddenly, and
laying Ailie down, for she had fallen into a lethargic slumber; "fetch
me the bread and meat can."

Dick Barnes obeyed reluctantly, and the usual small allowance of salt
junk was weighed out, but there were no eager glances now.  Most of the
crew refused to touch food--one or two tried to eat a morsel of biscuit
without success.

"I'll try a swim," cried Glynn, suddenly starting up with the intention
of leaping overboard.  But his strength was more exhausted than he had
fancied, for he only fell against the side of the boat.  It was as well
that he failed.  Had he succeeded in getting into the water he could not
have clambered in again, and it is doubtful whether his comrades had
sufficient strength left to have dragged him in.

"Try it this way, lad," said Tim Rokens, taking up a bucket, and dipping
it over the side.  "P'raps it'll do as well."

He raised the bucket with some difficulty and poured its contents over
Glynn's head.

"Thank God!" said Glynn, with a deep, long-drawn sigh.  "Do it again,
Tim, do it again.  That's it,--again, again!  No, stop; forgive my
selfishness; here, give me the bucket, I'll do it to you now."

Tim Rokens was quickly drenched from head to foot, and felt great and
instantaneous relief.  In a few minutes every one in the boat, Jacko
included, was subjected to this species of cold bath, and their spirits
rose at once.  Some of them even began to eat their food, and Briant
actually attempted to perpetrate a joke, which Gurney seconded promptly,
but they failed to make one, even a bad one, between them.

Although the cold bathing seemed good for them at first, it soon proved
to be hurtful.  Sitting and lying constantly night and day in saturated
clothes had the effect of rendering their skins painfully sensitive, and
a feverish feeling was often alternated with cold shivering fits, so
they were fain to give it up.  Still they had found some slight relief,
and they bore their sufferings with calm resignation--a state of mind
which was fostered, if not induced, by the blessed words of comfort and
hope which the captain read to them from the Bible as frequently as his
strength would permit, and to which they listened with intense,
all-absorbing interest.

It is ever thus with men.  When death approaches, in almost all
instances, we are ready--ay, anxious--to listen with the deepest
interest to God's message of salvation through His Son, and to welcome
and long for the influences of the Holy Spirit.  Oh! how happy should we
be in life and in death, did we only give heartfelt interest to our
souls' affairs _before_ the days of sorrow and death arrive.

On the fifth morning after the water had been exhausted the sun arose in
the midst of dark clouds.  The men could scarcely believe their eyes.
They shouted and, in their weakness, laughed for joy.

The blessing was not long delayed.  Thick vapours veiled the red sun
soon after it emerged from the sea, then a few drops of rain fell.
Blessed drops!  How the men caught at them!  How they spread out oiled
cloths and tarpaulins and garments to gather them!  How they grudged to
see them falling around the boat into the sea, and being lost to them
for ever.  But the blessing was soon sent liberally.  The heavens above
grew black, and the rain came down in thick heavy showers.  The
tarpaulins were quickly filled, and the men lay with their lips to the
sweet pools, drinking-in new life, and dipping their heads and hands in
the cool liquid when they could drink no more.  Their thirst was slaked
at last, and they were happy.  All their past sufferings were forgotten
in that great hour of relief, and they looked, and laughed, and spoke to
each other like men who were saved from death.  As they stripped off
their garments and washed the encrusted salt from their shrunken limbs,
all of them doubtless felt, and some of them audibly expressed,
gratitude to the "Giver of every good and perfect gift."

So glad were they, and so absorbed in their occupation, that they
thought not of and cared not for the fact that a great storm was about
to break upon them.  It came upon them almost before they were aware,
and before the sails could be taken in the boat was almost upset.

"Stand-by to lower the sails!" shouted the captain, who was the first to
see their danger.

The old familiar command issued with something of the old familiar voice
and energy caused every one to leap to his post, if not with the agility
of former times, at least with all the good will.

"Let go!"

The halyards were loosed, and the sails came tumbling down; at the same
moment the squall burst on them.  The _Maid of the Isle_ bent over so
quickly that every one expected she would upset; the blue water curled
in over the edge of the gunwale, and the foam burst from her bows at the
rude shock.  Then she hissed through the water as she answered the helm,
righted quickly, and went tearing away before the wind at a speed that
she had not known for many days.  It was a narrow escape.  The boat was
nearly filled with water, and, worst of all, the provision can, along
with Ailie's sleeping-box, were washed overboard and lost.

It was of no use attempting to recover them.  All the energies of the
crew were required to bale out the water and keep the boat afloat, and
during the whole storm some of them were constantly employed in baling.
For three days it blew a perfect hurricane, and during all that time the
men had nothing whatever to eat; but they did not suffer so much as
might be supposed.  The gnawing pangs of hunger do not usually last
beyond a few days when men are starving.  After that they merely feel
ever-increasing weakness.  During the fall of the rain they had taken
care to fill their jars, so that they had now a good supply of water.

After the first burst of the squall had passed, the tarpaulins were
spread over the boat, and under one of these, near the stern, Ailie was
placed, and was comparatively sheltered and comfortable.  Besides
forming a shelter for the men while they slept, these tarpaulins threw
off the waves that frequently broke over the boat, and more than once
bid fair to sink her altogether.  These arose in enormous billows, and
the gale was so violent that only the smallest corner of the foresail
could be raised--even that was almost sufficient to tear away the mast.

At length the gale blew itself out, and gradually decreased to a
moderate breeze, before which the sails were shaken out, and on the
fourth morning after it broke they found themselves sweeping quickly
over the waves on their homeward way, but without a morsel of food, and
thoroughly exhausted in body and in mind.

