"Then again, I shall want my own clothes if I have to take passage
in a neutral, to Lisbon. So I should say that I had better go down
to the town, and get a sort of trader's suit, and a fisherman's, at
one of the low slop shops. Then I will go as a trader, to start
with; and carry the other two suits in a bag."

"That will be a very good plan, Bob. You are not likely to be
noticed much, when you land. There are always ships anchored there,
waiting for a wind to carry them out. They must be accustomed to
sailors, of all sorts of nationalities, in the streets. However, I
hope you will find no occasion for any clothes, after you land, but
your own. The Moors have always been good friends of ours; and the
emperor must know that the Spaniards are very much more dangerous
neighbours than we are, and I can hardly believe he will be fool
enough to throw us over.

"I will go down with you, to buy these things."

Bob had no difficulty in procuring the clothes he required at a
secondhand shop, and then took the lot home with him. Carrie had,
by this time, become more reconciled to what could not be avoided;
and she laughed when Dr. Burke came in.

"You are like a bad penny, Teddy Burke. It is no use trying to get
rid of you."

"Not the least bit in the world, Mrs. O'Halloran. Fortunately, I
know that, however hard you are upon me, you don't mean what you
say."

"I do mean it, very much; but after you are gone I say to myself,
'It is only Teddy Burke,' and think no more of it."

That evening, at nine o'clock, Bob embarked on board the fishing
boat, at the New Mole. One of the governor's aides-de-camp
accompanied him, to pass him through all the guards; and orders had
been sent, to the officers in command of the various batteries,
that the boat was not to be challenged. It was to show a light from
a lantern, as it went along, in order that it might be known. The
other two passengers and the boatmen had been sitting there since
before gunfire, and they were glad enough when Bob came down and
took his seat in the stern, taking the tiller ropes.

The oars had been muffled, and they put off noiselessly. When they
got past Europa Point they found a light breeze blowing, and at
once laid in their oars, and hoisted sail. A vigilant lookout was
kept. Once or twice they thought they made out the hulls of
anchored vessels, but they gave these a wide berth and, when the
morning broke, were halfway across the Strait, heading directly for
Tangiers. In another six hours they entered the port. There were
half a dozen vessels lying in the harbour. Four of these were
flying Spanish colours, one was a Dane, and the other a Dutchman.

From the time morning broke, Bob had been narrowly examining his
fellow passengers, and the boatmen; and came to the conclusion that
none of them were to be trusted. As soon as he stepped ashore, with
his bag in his hand, he walked swiftly away and, passing through
the principal streets, which were crowded with Moors, held steadily
on, without speaking to anyone, until he reached the outskirts of
the town; and then struck off among the hedges and gardens.



Chapter 15: Bob's Mission.


As soon as he found a secluded spot, he stripped off the clothes he
wore and put on those of a Spanish sailor; and then, placing the
others in the bag, buried it in the sandy soil--taking particular
note of its position, in regard to trees and surrounding objects,
so as to be able to find it again. Then he turned to the right, and
skirted the town till he came down to the seashore again; and then
strolled quietly back to the quays. In passing by the ships at
anchor he had noticed the names of the four Spaniards and, after
wandering about for a short time, he entered a wine shop and seated
himself at a table, near one at which three Spanish sailors sat
drinking.

From their talk, he learned that the British were shortly to be
turned out of Tangiers; that the town was to be given up to the
Spaniards; and that the British consul had, the day before, been
taken to Sallee, where the emperor now was. The English in the town
had not yet been made prisoners, but it was believed that they
would be seized and handed over to the Spaniards, without delay.

Having obtained this information, Bob saw that--at any rate, for
the present--he might, if he chose, appear in his own character;
and regretted that he had buried his clothes, before knowing how
matters stood. However, there was no help for it but to go back
again, to the place where he had hidden them. This he did and,
having put on his own clothes, he went straight to the consulate,
which was a large house facing the port. A clerk was sitting in the
office.

"I understand Mr. Logie is away," Bob said.

The clerk looked surprised, for he knew the whole of the small body
of British residents well, and he could not understand how Bob
could have arrived.

"I am the bearer of letters to him, from Governor Eliott," Bob
said. "I came across by boat, and landed two hours ago; but I was
in disguise, not knowing how matters stood here, and have but now
ascertained that, so far, the English are not prisoners."

"Not at present," the clerk said. "But will you come into the
house, sir? We may be disturbed here."

"In the first place," Bob asked, when they were seated in an inner
room, "when do you expect Mr. Logie back, and what is the real
situation? My orders are, if I cannot see Mr. Logie himself, that I
am to obtain as accurate a statement as possible as to how matters
are going on here; as it is important that the governor should be
able to inform vessels sailing from Gibraltar, east, whether they
can or can not put safely into the Moorish ports. Of course, we
know that vessels have been several times taken by the Spaniards,
while at anchor close to the towns; but they might risk that, if
there were no danger from the Moors, themselves. But if the reports
last sent by Mr. Logie are confirmed, the Moors would be openly at
war with us; and would, themselves, seize and make prizes of
vessels anchoring. The danger would, of course, be vastly greater
than that of merely running the risk of capture, if a Spanish
vessel of war happened to come into a port where they were at
anchor. Of course, I am merely expressing the views of the
governor."

"I am sorry to say," the clerk said, "that there is no doubt the
Moors are about to join the Spaniards in formal alliance against
us. Englishmen are liable to insult as they go through the street.
This, however, would not go for much, by itself; but last week a
number of soldiers rushed into the office, seized Mr. Logie,
violently assaulted him, spat upon him, and otherwise insulted
him--acting, as they said, by the express order of the emperor,
himself. He is now practically a prisoner, having been taken under
an escort to Sallee and, at any moment, the whole of the British
colony here may be seized, and thrown into prison; and if you know
what Moorish prisons are, you would know that that would mean death
to most of them--certainly, I should say, to all the ladies."

"But can they not leave, in neutral vessels?"

"No. The strictest orders have been issued against any Englishman
leaving; they are, in fact, so far prisoners, although nominally at
liberty to move about the town.

"I believe that the greater part of the Moors regret, extremely,
the course their emperor has taken. Many have come in here, after
dark, to assure Mr. Logie how deeply averse they were to this
course; for that the sympathies of the population, in general, were
naturally with the English in their struggle against the Spaniards
who had, for all time, been the deadly foe of the Moors.
Unfortunately, the emperor has supreme power, and anyone who
ventured to murmur against his will would have his head stuck up
over a gate, in no time; so that the sympathy of the population
does not count for much."

"How many English are there, altogether?"

"A hundred and four. We made up the list last week. Of course that
includes men, women, and children. There are some ten merchants,
most of whom have one or two clerks. The rest of the men are small
traders, and shopkeepers. Some of them make their living by
supplying ships that put in here with necessaries. A few, at
ordinary times, trade with the Rock in livestock. Half a dozen or
so keep stores, where they sell English goods to the natives."

"I have a mission to discharge to a Mrs. Colomb, or at least to a
young lady living with her."

"Mrs. Colomb, I regret to say, died three weeks ago," the clerk
said. "Miss Harcourt--who is, I suppose, the young lady you
mean--is now, with Mrs. Colomb's servant, staying here. Mr. Logie
had placed them in lodgings in the house of a Moorish trader, just
outside the town; but the young lady could not remain there, alone,
after Mrs. Colomb's death. I will ring the bell, and tell the
servant to inform her that you are here."

Two minutes later, Bob was shown into a large sitting room on the
first floor, with a verandah overlooking the sea.

"Oh, Bob Repton, I am glad to see you!" Amy Harcourt exclaimed,
coming forward impulsively, with both hands held out. "It is
dreadfully lonely here. Mr. Logie is away, and poor Mrs. Colomb is
dead and, as for Mrs. Williams, she does nothing but cry, and say
we are all going to be shut up, and starved, in a Moorish prison.

"But first, how are father and mother, and everyone at the Rock?"

"They are all quite well, Amy; though your mother has been in a
great state of anxiety about you, since she got your letter saying
how ill Mrs. Colomb was. Here is a letter she has given me, for
you."

He handed the girl the letter, and went out on to the verandah
while she read it.

"Mamma says I am to act upon Mr. Logie's advice; and that, if by
any means he should not be in a position to advise me, I am to take
your advice, if Mrs. Colomb is dead."

"I don't think I am in a position to give you advice, Amy. What did
Mr. Logie say about the state of affairs, before he went away?"

"He seemed to think things were going on very badly. You know the
soldiers rushed in here and assaulted him, one day last week. They
said they had orders from the emperor to do so; and Mr. Logie said
they certainly would not have dared to molest the British consul,
if it hadn't been by the emperor's orders. He was talking to me
about it, the day before they took him away to Sallee; and he said
he would give anything, if he could get me away to the Rock, for
that the position here was very precarious; and that the emperor
might, at any moment, order all the English to be thrown into
prison, and I know that the servants expect we shall all be killed,
by the populace.

"They have frightened Mrs. Williams nearly out of her senses. I
never saw such a foolish woman. She does nothing but cry. She is
the wife, you know, of Captain Colomb's soldier servant.

"Well, what do you advise, Bob?"

"I am sure I don't know what to advise, Amy. This seems a regular
fix, doesn't it?"

"But you are just as badly off as I am," she said. "If they seize
everyone else, of course they will seize you, now you are here."

"Oh, I could get away, easily enough," Bob said. "I should dress
myself up as a Spanish sailor. I have got the clothes here, and
should boldly go on board one of the Spanish ships, and take
passage across to any port they are going to; and then manage to
work round into Gibraltar, again. But of course, you can't do
that."

"I couldn't go as a Spanish sailor, of course," the girl said, "but
I might dress up and go, somehow. Anything would be better than
waiting here, and then being thrown into one of their dreadful
prisons. They say they are awful places.

"Do take me, Bob Repton. I do so want to get back to father and
mother again, and I am quite well and strong now--as well as ever I
was."

Bob looked at the girl, with a puzzled expression of face. He had
promised her mother to do the best thing he could for her. The
question was, 'What was the best thing?' It certainly seemed that
the position here was a very perilous one. If he left her here, and
harm befell her, what would her parents say to him? But, on the
other hand, how on earth was he to get her away?

"I tell you what, Amy," he said, after a time. "Who were the ladies
Mrs. Colomb saw most of? I suppose she knew some of the people
here?"

"Oh, yes, she knew several; but she was most intimate with Mrs.
Hamber. She is the wife of one of the principal merchants, and is
very kind. She offered to take me in, when Mrs. Colomb died; but
her husband lives out of the town, and Mr. Logie had promised Mrs.
Colomb that he would look after me, until he could send me
across--besides, Mrs. Hamber's child is very ill, with fever--and
so he brought me here."

"Well, I will go and consult her," Bob said. "I daresay the clerk
downstairs will send a man with me, to show me her house."

Mrs. Hamber listened to Bob's account of his mission; asking a
question now and again, in a straightforward and decided way, which
gave Bob an idea that she was a resolute sort of woman, with plenty
of common sense.

"Well, Mr. Repton," she said, when he had finished, "it is a
difficult matter for anyone but the girl's mother to form an
opinion upon. I remember hearing, from Mrs. Colomb, about your
going out and bringing in fruit when the scurvy was so bad, two
months ago. She had received the news, no doubt, from her husband
and, therefore, it seems to me that you must be a very capable
young gentleman, with plenty of courage and coolness. The fact that
Mrs. Harcourt gave you such a message as she did, regarding her
daughter, shows that she has every confidence in you. If the girl
were a year or two older, I should say it would be quite out of the
question for her to attempt to make her way back to Gibraltar,
under your protection; but as she is still a mere child, and as you
possess her mother's confidence, I don't see that this matters so
much.

"If you are both taken prisoners, there is no reason for supposing
that she would not be treated honourably by the Spaniards. They
must have taken numbers of women, in the vessels they have captured
lately, and I suppose the girl would be placed with them. She
would, at any rate, be far better off in a Spanish prison than in a
Moorish one. Besides, I really consider that all our lives are in
danger, here. After the assault on Mr. Logie, it is just as likely
the emperor may order us all to be massacred, as thrown into
prison; or he might sell us as slaves, as they do at Algiers. There
is no saying. I think that, if I were in the position of the girl's
mother at Gibraltar, I should say that it was better for her to run
the risk of capture, with you; than to remain here, where there is
no saying what may happen--she having every confidence in your
honour, young gentleman."

"I thank you, Mrs. Hamber. I have no idea, at present, what plan I
shall form. I may not see any possible way of getting out but, if I
do, we will certainly attempt it. Major Harcourt belongs to the
same regiment as my brother-in-law, and his wife and my sister are
great friends; which is why, I suppose, she has confidence in me. I
have known Amy, now, for a year and a half; and she is very often
at my sister's. I will take care of her just the same as if she
were a young sister of my own. I don't see how I could go back and
tell her mother that I left her here, with things in the state they
are. I only hope they may not turn out so badly as you fear; and
that, at the worst, the Moors will only hand you over as prisoners
to the Spaniards."

Bob went back to the consulate, and told Amy the result of his
conversation with Mrs. Hamber.

"I consider that has taken the responsibility off my shoulders,
Amy. You referred me to Mrs. Hamber as the lady you knew best here.
She is of opinion that, if she were your mother, she would advise
your trying to get away with me. So, now, we have only to decide
how it is to be done--that is, if you still wish to try."

"Certainly I do," the girl said. "Anything is better than waiting
here; expecting the Moors to rush in, as they did the other day,
and carry one off to prison, or kill one.

"Mr. Parrot--that is the gentleman you saw downstairs--said that
you would stay here, and ordered a room to be prepared for you; and
dinner is ready. I am sure you must be terribly hungry."

Bob remembered, now, that he had had nothing to eat--save some
biscuits on board the boat, and a piece of bread at the wine
shop--since he left Gibraltar, and that he really was desperately
hungry. Amy had already had her dinner; but she sat by him, and
they talked about their friends at the Rock.

"Now," he said, when he had finished, "let us have a regular
council of war. It was my intention to get a passage to Malaga, if
I could, because I know something of the road back from there; but
I could not do that, with you."

"Why not, Bob?"

"Because the voyage is too long. Someone would be certain to speak
to you before you got across and, as you can't talk Spanish, the
cat would be out of the bag, directly. If possible, we must manage
to cross to Tarifa. It is only a few hours across to there, even if
we go in an open boat and, now that the Spaniards are friends with
the Moors, there ought to be no difficulty in getting a passage
across there, or to Algeciras.

"Of course, you can't go as you are," he said, looking at her
rather ruefully.

"No, of course not," she said. "I am not so silly as that. I should
think I had better dress up like a boy, Bob."

"That would be a great deal the best plan, if you would not mind
it," Bob said, greatly relieved that the suggestion came from her.
"It is the only thing that I can think of. There didn't seem any
story one could invent, to account for a Spanish girl being over
here; but a ship's boy will be natural enough. If asked questions,
of course, our story will be that we had been left behind here.
There could be lots of reasons for that. Either we might have been
on shore, and the vessel gone on without us; or you might have been
sent ashore ill, and I might have been left to nurse you. That
wouldn't be a bad story.

"What we must do, when we get to the other side, must depend upon
where we land. I mean, whether we try to get straight in by boat,
or to wait about until a chance comes. Once over there, you will
have to pretend to be deaf and dumb; and then you can dress up as a
Spanish girl--of course, a peasant--which will be much more
pleasant than going about as a boy, and better in lots of ways. So
if I were you, I should take a bundle of things with me, so that we
should have nothing to buy there. It is all very well buying
disguises for myself, but I could never go into a shop to ask for
all sorts of girls' clothes."

Amy went off in a fit of laughter, at the thought of Bob having to
purchase feminine garments.

"It is all very well to laugh," Bob said. "These are the sort of
little things that are so difficult to work in. It is easy enough
to make a general plan, but the difficulty is to get everything to
fit in.

"I will have a talk with Mr. Parrot, in the morning, about the
boats. He will know what boats have been trading with the Rock, and
what men to trust."

"You can talk to him now, if you like," the girl said. "He and Mr.
Logie's other clerk have the top storey of the house."

"Oh, then I will go up and see him, at once; the sooner it is
arranged, the better. If things are in the state that everyone
says, you might all be seized and imprisoned, any day."

Bob went up at once to Mr. Parrot's rooms, and had a long talk with
him. The clerk quite agreed that anything would be better than for
a young girl to be shut up in a Moorish prison, but he did not see
how it was possible for them to find their way across to Gibraltar.

"Many of our fishermen are most courageous fellows, and have run
great risks in taking letters from Mr. Logie across to Gibraltar. I
do not suppose that the blockade is very much more strict than it
was; and indeed, the fact that you got through shows that, with
good luck, the thing is possible enough. But that is not the
difficulty. The strictest order has been issued that no boat is to
take Englishmen across to the Rock, or is to cross the Straits on
any pretence, whatever; and that anyone evading this law will be
executed, and his goods forfeited to the state. That is how it is
Mr. Logie has been able to send no letters, for the last month; and
why none of the merchants, here, have tried to get across to the
Rock. No bribe would be sufficient to tempt the boatmen. It would
mean not only death to themselves, if they ever returned; but the
vengeance of the authorities would fall on their relations, here. I
am afraid that there is nothing to be done, that way, at all."

"There are the three men who brought me across, this morning," Bob
said. "They might be bribed to take us back. The governor
authorized me to offer a hundred pounds. I own that I don't like
their looks."

"You would have some difficulty in finding them, to begin with,"
Mr. Parrot said; "and I don't think a hundred pounds would be
likely to tempt them to run the risk."

"I would not mind giving them two hundred more," Bob said. "I have
got that money, of my own, at Gibraltar; and I am sure, if it were
necessary, Major Harcourt would gladly pay as much more to get his
daughter back."

"Three hundred would be ample. If they would not run the risk for a
hundred apiece, nothing would tempt them. I should say your best
plan would be to go down, early tomorrow, and see if you can find
one of them. They are likely to be loitering about by the quays, as
they have their boat there.

"The question is, are they to be trusted? They know that you have
been sent out by the governor, and that you are here on some
special business; and they may very well think that the Spaniards
will give a higher reward, for you, than you can give to be taken
back. They will, by this time, know of the order against boats
crossing; and might betray you to the Moors. If you were going by
yourself, of course, you could take all sorts of risks; but with
this young lady under your protection, it would be different."

"Yes, I see that, Mr. Parrot. Rather than run any risk, I should
prefer being put ashore at any Spanish port, by one of the ships in
the harbour. If you give me the name of any Spanish merchantman who
was here, say, a fortnight ago; my story that we were left behind,
owing to one of us being ill, would be so simple that there need be
no suspicion, whatever, excited. Tarifa or Algeciras would, of
course, be the best places, as we should only be on board a few
hours; and Miss Harcourt could very well pretend to be still ill
and weak, and could lie down in a corner, and I could cover her up
with a blanket till we got there.

"Once across, I don't so much mind. Even if we were detected, we
should simply be two fugitives from here, trying to make our way to
Gibraltar; and I don't think there would be any question of my
being a spy. We should probably be sent to wherever they keep the
English prisoners they have taken in ships; and there would be
nothing very dreadful in that, even for her. We should probably be
exchanged, before long. There have been several batches sent in to
the Rock, in exchange for prisoners taken in prizes brought in by
privateers."

"Well, I really think that that would be the best way, Mr. Repton.
As you say, there will be nothing very dreadful in detention for a
while, with the Spaniards; while there is no saying what may happen
here. If you like, I will send one of the consulate servants out,
the first thing in the morning, to inquire what ports the Spanish
craft are bound for, and when they are likely to sail. They seldom
