ceiling; other men sat back in their seats and stared with knitted brows
at the paper before them; others buried their fingers in their hair and
looked the picture of despair.  But still my master wrote on.  It wanted
half an hour to the time of closing when he reached the last question on
the paper.  I saw his lips curl into a smile as he dashed his pen into
the ink and began to write.  Then suddenly it dropped from his fingers,
and his hands were clasped to his forehead.  He made no motion and
uttered no cry; men went on with their work on each side of him, and
professors at their desks never turned his way.  I looked wildly towards
Jim; he sat there, biting the end of his pen and scowling at the
question before him, but for a long time never looked our way.  At last
his head turned, and in an instant he was at his friend's side.  Others
came round too and offered help.  Among them my poor master was borne
from the hall and carried to his rooms, and that evening it was known
all over the University that Reader, of George's, had been taken ill
during the Tripos examination, and now lay delirious in his rooms in
college.

Every one believed the attack was but a slight one, but I feared the
worst; I knew how systematically and fatally my master's constitution
had been undermined by the work of the last three years, and felt sure
it could never rally from the fierce fever which had laid him low.  And
it never did.  The fever left him in due time, and his mind ceased to
wander, but every hour his strength failed him.  His parents and Jim,
and sometimes his old friend the rector, would constantly be about his
bed, and to all of them it soon became evident what little hope there
was of his recovery.  Indeed, he must have guessed it too!

One day, as Jim sat with him, a faint shout was heard below in the
quadrangle.

"What's that?" inquired George.

"I'll see," said Jim, and he went lightly from the room.

Presently he returned with a face almost beaming.

"It's good news," he said; "they were reading the result of the Tripos."

"And where are you?" asked George.

"_You_ are first!" said Jim, proudly.

"Where are you?" repeated George.

"I am twelfth."

"In the first class?"

"Yes."

"That is good news, old fellow!"

"That shout was in your honour, you know; our college is as proud as
anything to have the first man."

George smiled feebly, and for a long time both were silent.

Then George said,--

"You were right, Jim, after all.  If I had listened to you I should have
been wiser."

"Never mind, old man, you'll know better another time."

"I shall never have the chance, Jim."

"Don't say that, George; every one hopes you'll get better."

George smiled again, then said,--

"Jim, you will look after my father and mother, won't you?  You know
I've got a little money now, and they will be comfortably off, but
you'll go and see them now and then?"

Jim laid his hand on the wasted hand of his friend.

"And, Jim, I want you to take my watch when I'm gone.  I always valued
it as much as anything, and I'd like you to have it."

Poor Jim could say nothing, he only gave another pressure of his
friend's hand.

Then presently Mrs Reader returned to the room, and he slipped away.

The end was not long in coming.  One afternoon as the four friends he
loved most stood round his bed, George opened his eyes, and said,--

"Listen!"

"What is it, lad?" whispered the father.

"An organ--somewhere--open the window."

They opened the window, but the only music out there was the chirping of
birds in the trees, and the distant footfalls of passers-by.

"Listen, there it is!" he said again.

"What is it playing?" asked the clergyman.

"A new tune."

And almost as he spoke the words, he closed his eyes for the last time
on earth.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

HOW I FALL INTO THE HANDS OF AN OLD FRIEND.

Boys may imagine with what astonishment Jim Halliday discovered, on
receiving the legacy bequeathed him by his dead friend, that I was the
very watch which years before he had known so familiarly as the property
of Charlie Newcome.  At first he could not believe it, and marvelled how
any two watches could be so much alike.  Then he discovered the "C.N."
scratched long ago inside, which he well remembered.  And further
inquiries enabling him to trace me back to the Muggerbridge silversmith,
and from him to the pawnbroker's sale in London, he had no doubt left
that I was actually the watch of which nothing had been heard since Tom
Drift owned me.

My new master did not long remain in Cambridge after the death of his
friend.  He left the University in many respects a more thoughtful and
earnest man than he had entered it, and in leaving it set himself
honestly and faithfully to the work for which he had prepared, and on
which his heart was fixed.

I shall not follow him through all the labours of his first village
curacy, which lasted a year, during which time many people learned to
love the manly, open-hearted young clergyman, and to bless the day when
he had been sent among them.

At the end of a year he was removed to the charge of a church in a
distant large seaport, where everything was in strangest contrast with
the scenes he had just left.  Instead of simple villagers and rustics,
his work now lay amongst labourers and artisans of the poorest and
lowest class.  Instead of fresh country air he had now to breathe the
vitiated air of close courts and ill-kept streets; and instead of an
atmosphere of repose and innocence, he had now to move in an atmosphere
of vice and disorder, from which very often his soul turned with a deep
disgust.  Still he worked manfully at his post with a bold heart, ready
to face any hardship in the service of his Master, and never weary of
striving by the Spirit's help to bring into the hard lives around him
the elevating joys which they alone know who can call Christ the Saviour
theirs.  One day an adventure befell him which had a strange bearing on
my own fortunes, and the fortunes of more than one of my several
masters.

The gaol chaplain at Seatown had recently died, and during the interval
necessary for appointing a successor Jim was asked and undertook to add
to his other labours that of visiting the prisoners confined there.  It
was melancholy, and on the whole monotonous work, for the persons whom
he thus attended, were mostly stupid, ignorant beings on whose hardened
souls it was difficult indeed to make the slightest impression.  They
listened sulkily to what the chaplain had to say, but to all appearance
neither understood nor cared about a single word, and he had the
disappointment of noticing, week after week, and month after month,
scarcely a sign of good rising out of his labours in the case of any one
of them.

One day the governor met him as he was about to pay his customary
visits.

"Oh, good-morning, sir.  You'll find a new customer to-day."

The gaol governor, you will observe, spoke about his prisoners in a very
commercial sort of way.

"Yes, and a queer one too," he added; "he doesn't look like one of our
regular customers."

"What is he imprisoned for?"

"He was drunk, and quarrelled with a sailor on the quay, and pushed him
into the water, I believe."

"Was the sailor drowned?"

"No, they fished him out, but this gentleman has got six months for it.
He seems very down about it, so I'd like you to see him."

"All right; I will make a point of visiting his cell.  Good-morning."

And Jim went on his round, thinking very little about the governor's
communication.

Presently he came to the gallery in which the new prisoner's cell was,
and asked the turnkey to show him the door.

"No use you a-going in there," muttered that functionary.

"Why?" asked Jim.

"He do swear so as I never hear a cove swear afore."

"Ah," said Jim, "and I suppose you've heard a good deal too in your
time."

"So you may say, but this here young fellow comes out with it as if he'd
skin you alive."

"Well, I must see him.  Let me in, please."

When the door was opened the prisoner's back was turned, nor did he
alter his position as Jim entered the cell.

There was undoubtedly something unusual about the man.  His figure was
not that of a labourer or a rough, nor was his attitude one of stolid
brutishness, such as the chaplain had grown only too familiar with.

Jim stood a moment irresolute, and then said,--

"May I speak to you, friend?"

The man turned himself, and without raising his eyes from the stone
floor, poured out a volley of curses which fully justified the turnkey's
description.

Jim started, and uttered a quick exclamation.  But it was not at the
curses, terrible as they were.  No, his amazement was of another kind
altogether; for in the face and voice of this unhappy speaker he was
forcibly reminded of one he once knew in very different scenes.  As the
man went on he watched him keenly and earnestly.  He heeded not the
oaths, or the taunts, or the threats which flowed from his lips; but as
word followed word, and gesture gesture, and look look, he became
gradually convinced that the resemblance was more than imaginary--that,
indeed, this blaspheming convict was one whom he had once known and
still remembered.

Walking up to him, and laying his hand on his shoulder, Jim said,
quietly,--

"Tom Drift, do you remember me?"

The man started as for an instant he raised his eyes.  Then, letting
them drop once more, he growled,--

"That's not my name; I don't know you.  Let me alone!"

Jim, more convinced than ever, now did the wisest thing he could in
leaving the cell without another word.

"Well," said the turnkey, with a half-triumphant grin, as they turned to
leave the gallery, "wasn't I right?  Didn't he give you half a dozen as
pretty bits of language as you ever heard?"

"Do not speak to me about it, please," replied Jim, more tartly than he
had been ever known to speak to any one.

He did not return to the gaol for a week; and then the first visit he
paid was to the new prisoner's cell.

He entered it anxiously, and not without misgivings.  Tom Drift was
sitting on his little bench with his head in his hands.

"May I come in?" said Jim, nervously.

Tom neither spoke nor raised his head; and Jim quietly stepped in.  It
was evident the interview of a week ago had had its effect on Tom Drift.
He seemed as he sat there like a man who would fain lose himself if he
only knew how.  He never once raised his head from his hands or uttered
a syllable while Jim sat and talked to him.  The latter knew better than
to return to the topic which had so startled the prisoner a week ago,
and contented himself with mere kindly talk and the reading of a short
passage of Scripture.  All this Tom suffered without interruption,
stirring neither head nor foot all the time.

"Now, good-bye," said Jim, rising; "don't get to think you have no
friends."

The man fidgeted impatiently, and next moment Jim was out in the
gallery.

"What's that man's name?" he inquired of the turnkey.

"Dykes; and I tell you what, Mr Halliday, he--"

"Open this door, please, my man," interrupted Jim, by way of cutting him
short.

During the week which followed Jim was restless and out of spirits.  He
seemed unable to settle down to anything, and it was evident his heart
was ill at ease--why, it was easy to guess.  He had found Tom Drift, and
there was a chance of rescuing him.  But how to do it?  How to approach
one who was ashamed of his own name, and who repelled with an oath every
offer of help?

Long and earnestly did my master think over the matter.  He also wrote a
long letter to Charlie, telling him all, and promising to do all that
could be done for the poor prodigal.  During the days that intervened
before his next visit, too, he made as careful and full inquiries about
Tom as it was possible to do.

The poor fellow had come to Seatown a month before, and very shortly
became a familiar loafer on the quays.  No one knew where he came from
or why he was in Seatown, unless indeed he expected to be able to
conceal himself on some vessel going abroad.  Jim found out the lodging-
house where he he had lived, but was unable to hear anything there to
throw light on what he had been doing, or whence he had come.  One man
said he had found him once down by the water's edge, looking as though
he intended to throw himself in--and the man who gave him drink at the
public-house remembered him--and the man whom he had assaulted--but that
was all.

Wretched enough was the picture it presented of a hopeless, friendless
vagabond, weary of life, yet not daring to die, and finding his only
solace in deeper degradation.

Tom was walking to and fro in his cell the next time Jim called.  It was
almost the first time I had been able to get a view of his face.  And
oh! how changed it was.  Not merely that it looked pale and worn, with
bloodshot eyes and hectic cheeks, but there was a scared despairing look
there which fairly shocked me.  Dissipation, and shame, and want, had
all set their mark there.  Alas! how soon may the likeness of God be
degraded and defaced!  He continued to walk to and fro as Jim sat down
and began to read, but I could see he more than once darted a quick
glance from under his clouded eyebrows at my master.  I could tell by
the beating of the latter's heart that he had made up his mind not to
leave this morning without an effort to speak to Tom of old times, and I
trembled for the result of his venture.
