that we should never give way to despair in any undertaking, however
difficult it may seem--always supposing, however, that our cause is a
good one, and that we can ask the Divine blessing on it.

Although, therefore, we could now manage our sails easily, we
nevertheless found that my pulleys were of much service to us in some
things, though Jack did laugh heartily at the uncouth arrangement of
ropes and blocks, which had, to a sailor's eye, a very lumbering and
clumsy appearance.  But I will not drag my reader through the details of
this voyage.  Suffice it to say that, after an agreeable sail of about
three weeks, we arrived off the island of Mango, which I recognised at
once from the description that the pirate Bill had given me of it during
one of our conversations.

As soon as we came within sight of it, we hove the ship to and held a
council of war.

"Now, boys," said Jack as we seated ourselves beside him on the cabin
skylight, "before we go further in this business we must go over the
pros and cons of it; for although you have so generously consented to
stick by me through thick and thin, it would be unfair did I not see
that you thoroughly understand the danger of what we are about to
attempt."

"Oh, bother the danger!" cried Peterkin.  "I wonder to hear you, Jack,
talk of danger!  When a fellow begins to talk about it, he'll soon come
to magnify it to such a degree that he'll not be fit to face it when it
comes--no more than a suckin' baby."

"Nay, Peterkin," replied Jack gravely, "I won't be jested out of it.  I
grant you that when we've once resolved to act, and have made up our
minds what to do, we should think no more of danger.  But before we have
so resolved, it behoves us to look it straight in the face, and examine
into it, and walk round it; for if we flinch at a distant view, we're
sure to run away when the danger is near.--Now, I understand from you,
Ralph, that the island is inhabited by thorough-going, out-and-out
cannibals, whose principal law is, `Might is right, and the weakest goes
to the wall?'"

"Yes," said I; "so Bill gave me to understand.  He told me, however,
that at the southern side of it the missionaries had obtained a footing
amongst an insignificant tribe.  A native teacher had been sent there by
the Wesleyans, who had succeeded in persuading the chief at that part to
embrace Christianity.  But instead of that being of any advantage to our
enterprise, it seems the very reverse; for the chief Tararo is a
determined heathen, and persecutes the Christians--who are far too weak
in numbers to offer any resistance--and looks with dislike upon all
white men, whom he regards as propagators of the new faith."

"'Tis a pity," said Jack, "that the Christian tribe is so small, for we
shall scarcely be safe under their protection, I fear.  If Tararo takes
it into his head to wish for our vessel, or to kill ourselves, he could
take us from them by force.  You say that the native missionary talks
English?"

"So I believe."

"Then, what I propose is this," said Jack.  "We will run round to the
south side of the island, and cast anchor off the Christian village.  We
are too far away just now to have been descried by any of the savages,
so we shall get there unobserved, and have time to arrange our plans
before the heathen tribes know of our presence.  But in doing this we
run the risk of being captured by the ill-disposed tribes, and being
very ill-used, if not--a--"

"Roasted alive and eaten!" cried Peterkin.  "Come, out with it, Jack!
According to your own showing, it's well to look the danger straight in
the face."

"Well, that _is_ the worst of it, certainly.  Are you prepared, then, to
take your chance of that?"

"I've been prepared and had my mind made up long ago," cried Peterkin,
swaggering about the deck with his hands thrust into his breeches
pockets.  "The fact is, Jack, I don't believe that Tararo will be so
ungrateful as to eat us, and I'm quite sure that he'll be too happy to
grant us whatever we ask; so the sooner we go in and win the better."

Peterkin was wrong, however, in his estimate of savage gratitude, as the
sequel will show.

The schooner was now put before the wind, and after making a long run to
the southward, we put about and beat up for the south side of Mango,
where we arrived before sunset, and hove-to off the coral reef.  Here we
awaited the arrival of a canoe, which immediately put off on our
rounding-to.  When it arrived, a mild-looking native, of apparently
forty years of age, came on board, and taking off his straw hat, made us
a low bow.  He was clad in a respectable suit of European clothes; and
the first words he uttered, as he stepped up to Jack and shook hands
with him, were:

"Good-day, gentlemen.  We are happy to see you at Mango.  You are
heartily welcome."

After returning his salutation, Jack exclaimed, "You must be the native
missionary teacher of whom I have heard--are you not?"

"I am.  I have the joy to be a servant of the Lord Jesus at this
station."

"You're the very man I want to see, then," replied Jack; "that's lucky.
Come down to the cabin, friend, and have a glass of wine.  I wish
particularly to speak with you.  My men there"--pointing to Peterkin and
me--"will look after your people."

"Thank you," said the teacher as he followed Jack to the cabin; "I do
not drink wine or any strong drink."

"Oh! then there's lots of water, and you can have biscuit."

"Now, 'pon my word, that's cool!" said Peterkin; "his _men_, forsooth!
Well, since we are to be men, we may as well come it as strong over
these black chaps as we can.--Hallo, there!" he cried to the half-dozen
of natives who stood upon the deck, gazing in wonder at all they saw,
"here's for you;" and he handed them a tray of broken biscuit and a can
of water.  Then thrusting his hands into his pockets, he walked up and
down the deck with an enormous swagger, whistling vociferously.

In about half-an-hour Jack and the teacher came on deck, and the latter,
bidding us a cheerful good-evening, entered his canoe and paddled to the
shore.  When he was gone, Peterkin stepped up to Jack, and touching his
cap, said:

"Well, captain, have you any communications to make to your _men_?"

"Yes," cried Jack: "ready about, mind the helm, and clew up your tongue,
while I con the schooner through the passage in the reef.  The teacher,
who seems a first-rate fellow, says it's quite deep, and good anchorage
within the lagoon close to the shore."

While the vessel was slowly advancing to her anchorage, under a light
breeze, Jack explained to us that Avatea was still on the island, living
amongst the heathens; that she had expressed a strong desire to join the
Christians; but Tararo would not let her, and kept her constantly in
close confinement.

"Moreover," continued Jack, "I find that she belongs to one of the
Samoan Islands, where Christianity had been introduced long before her
capture by the heathens of a neighbouring island; and the very day after
she was taken she was to have joined the church which had been planted
there by that excellent body, the London Missionary Society.  The
teacher tells me, too, that the poor girl has fallen in love with a
Christian chief, who lives on an island some fifty miles or so to the
south of this one, and that she is meditating a desperate attempt at
escape.  So, you see, we have come in the nick of time.--I fancy that
this chief is the fellow whom you heard of, Ralph, at the island of
Emo.--Besides all this, the heathen savages are at war among themselves,
and there's to be a battle fought the day after to-morrow, in which the
principal leader is Tararo; so that we'll not be able to commence our
negotiations with the rascally chief till the day after."

The village off which we anchored was beautifully situated at the head
of a small bay, from the margin of which trees of every description
peculiar to the tropics rose in the richest luxuriance to the summit of
a hilly ridge, which was the line of demarcation between the possessions
of the Christians and those of the neighbouring heathen chief.

The site of the settlement was an extensive plot of flat land,
stretching in a gentle slope from the sea to the mountain.  The cottages
stood several hundred yards from the beach, and were protected from the
glare of the sea by the rich foliage of rows of large Barringtonia and
other trees which girt the shore.  The village was about a mile in
length, and perfectly straight, with a wide road down the middle, on
either side of which were rows of the tufted-topped ti-tree, whose
delicate and beautiful blossoms, hanging beneath their plume-crested
tops, added richness to the scene.  The cottages of the natives were
built beneath these trees, and were kept in the most excellent order,
each having a little garden in front, tastefully laid out and planted,
while the walks were covered with black and white pebbles.

Every house had doors and Venetian windows, painted partly with
lamp-black made from the candle-nut, and partly with red ochre, which
contrasted powerfully with the dazzling coral lime that covered the
walls.  On a prominent position stood a handsome church, which was quite
a curiosity in its way.  It was a hundred feet long by fifty broad, and
was seated throughout to accommodate upwards of two thousand persons.
It had six large folding-doors, and twelve windows with Venetian blinds;
and although a large and substantial edifice, it had been built, we were
told by the teacher: in the space of two months!  There was not a single
iron nail in the fabric, and the natives had constructed it chiefly with
their stone and bone axes and other tools, having only one or two axes
or tools of European manufacture.  Everything around this beautiful spot
wore an aspect of peace and plenty; and as we dropped our anchor within
a stone's-cast of the substantial coral wharf, I could not avoid
contrasting it with the wretched village of Emo, where I had witnessed
so many frightful scenes.  When the teacher afterwards told me that the
people of this tribe had become converts only a year previous to our
arrival, and that they had been living before that in the practice of
the most bloody system of idolatry, I could not refrain from exclaiming,
"What a convincing proof that Christianity is of God!"

On landing from our little boat we were received with a warm welcome by
the teacher and his wife, the latter being also a native, clothed in a
simple European gown and a straw bonnet.  The shore was lined with
hundreds of natives, whose persons were all more or less clothed with
native cloth.  Some of the men had on a kind of poncho formed of this
cloth, their legs being uncovered; others wore clumsily fashioned
trousers, and no upper garment except hats made of straw and cloth.
Many of the dresses, both of women and men, were grotesque enough, being
very bad imitations of the European garb; but all wore a dress of some
sort or other.  They seemed very glad to see us, and crowded round us as
the teacher led the way to his dwelling, where we were entertained, in
the most sumptuous manner, on baked pig and all the varieties of fruits
and vegetables that the island produced.  We were much annoyed, however,
by the rats: they seemed to run about the house like domestic animals.
As we sat at table, one of them peeped up at us over the edge of the
cloth, close to Peterkin's elbow, who floored it with a blow on the
snout from his knife, exclaiming as he did so:

"I say, Mister Teacher, why don't you set traps for these brutes?
Surely you are not fond of them!"

"No," replied the teacher with a smile.  "We would be glad to get rid of
them if we could; but if we were to trap all the rats on the island, it
would occupy our whole time."

"Are they, then, so numerous?" inquired Jack.

"They swarm everywhere.  The poor heathens on the north side eat them,
and think them very sweet.  So did my people formerly; but they do not
eat so many now, because the missionary who was last here expressed
disgust at it.  The poor people asked if it was wrong to eat rats; and
he told them that it was certainly not wrong, but that the people of
England would be much disgusted were they asked to eat rats."

We had not been an hour in the house of this kind-hearted man when we
were convinced of the truth of his statement as to their numbers; for
the rats ran about the floors in dozens, and during our meal two men
were stationed at the table to keep them off!

"What a pity you have no cats!" said Peterkin; and he aimed a blow at
another reckless intruder, and missed it.

"We would indeed be glad to have a few," rejoined the teacher, "but they
are difficult to be got.  The hogs, we find, are very good rat-killers;
but they do not seem to be able to keep the numbers down.  I have heard
that they are better than cats."

As the teacher said this, his good-natured black face was wrinkled with
a smile of merriment.  Observing that I had noticed it, he said:

"I smiled just now when I remembered the fate of the first cat that was
taken to Rarotonga.  This is one of the stations of the London
Missionary Society.  It, like our own, is infested with rats, and a cat
was brought at last to the island.  It was a large black one.  On being
turned loose, instead of being content to stay among men, the cat took
to the mountains and lived in a wild state, sometimes paying visits
during the night to the houses of the natives; some of whom, living at a
distance from the settlement, had not heard of the cat's arrival, and
were dreadfully frightened in consequence, calling it a `monster of the
deep,' and flying in terror away from it.  One night the cat--feeling a
desire for company, I suppose--took its way to the house of a chief who
had recently been converted to Christianity, and had begun to learn to
read and pray.  The chief's wife, who was sitting awake at his side
while he slept, beheld with horror two fires glistening in the doorway,
and heard with surprise a mysterious voice.  Almost petrified with fear,
she awoke her husband, and began to upbraid him for forsaking his old
religion and burning his god, who, she declared, was now come to be
avenged of them.  `Get up and pray! get up and pray!' she cried.  The
chief arose, and on opening his eyes, beheld the same glaring lights and
heard the same ominous sound.  Impelled by the extreme urgency of the
case, he commenced, with all possible vehemence, to vociferate the
alphabet, as a prayer to God to deliver them from the vengeance of
Satan!  On hearing this, the cat, as much alarmed as themselves, fled
precipitately away, leaving the chief and his wife congratulating
themselves on the efficacy of their prayer."

We were much diverted with this anecdote, which the teacher related in
English so good that we certainly could not have supposed him a native
but for the colour of his face and the foreign accent in his tone.  Next
day we walked out with this interesting man, and were much entertained
and instructed by his conversation as we rambled through the cool, shady
groves of bananas, citrons, limes, and other trees, or sauntered among
the cottages of the natives, and watched them while they laboured
diligently in the taro-beds or manufactured the tapa, or native cloth.
To some of these Jack put questions, through the medium of the
missionary; and the replies were such as to surprise us at the extent of
their knowledge.  Indeed, Peterkin very truly remarked that "they seemed
to know a considerable deal more than Jack himself!"

Among other pieces of interesting information that we obtained was the
following, in regard to coral formations:

"The islands of the Pacific," said our friend, "are of three different
kinds or classes.  Those of the first class are volcanic, mountainous,
and wild--some shooting their jagged peaks into the clouds at an
elevation of ten and fifteen thousand feet.  Those of the second class
are of crystallised limestone, and vary in height from one hundred to
five hundred feet.  The hills on these are not so wild or broken as
those of the first class, but are richly clothed with vegetation, and
very beautiful.  I have no doubt that the Coral Island on which you were
wrecked was one of this class.  They are supposed to have been upheaved
from the bottom of the sea by volcanic agency; but they are not
themselves volcanic in their nature, neither are they of coral
formation.  Those of the third class are the low coralline islands,
usually having lagoons of water in their midst.  They are very numerous.

"As to the manner in which coral islands and reefs are formed, there are
various opinions on this point.  I will give you what seems to me the
most probable theory--a theory, I may add, which is held by some of the
good and scientific missionaries.  It is well known that there is much
lime in salt water; it is also known that coral is composed of lime.  It
is supposed that the polypes, or coral insects, have the power of
attracting this lime to their bodies, and with this material they build
their little cells or habitations.  They choose the summit of a volcano,
or the top of a submarine mountain, as a foundation on which to build,
for it is found that they never work at any great depth below the
surface.  On this they work.  The polypes on the mountain-top, of
course, reach the surface first; then those at the outer edges reach the
top sooner than the others between them and the centre, thus forming the
coral reef surrounding the lagoon of water and the central island.
After that, the insects within the lagoon cease working.  When the
surface of the water is reached, these myriads of wonderful creatures
die.  Then birds visit the spot, and seeds are thus conveyed thither,
which take root and spring up and flourish.  Thus are commenced those
coralline islets of which you have seen so many in these seas.  The
reefs round the large islands are formed in a similar manner.  When we
consider," added the missionary, "the smallness of the architects used
by our heavenly Father in order to form those lovely and innumerable
islands, we are filled with much of that feeling which induced the
ancient king to exclaim, `How manifold, O Lord, are Thy works! in wisdom
hast Thou made them all.'"

We all heartily agreed with the missionary in this sentiment, and felt
not a little gratified to find that the opinions which Jack and I had
been led to form, from personal observation on our Coral Island, were
thus to a great extent corroborated.

The missionary also gave us an account of the manner in which
Christianity had been introduced among them.  He said: "When
missionaries were first sent here, three years ago, a small vessel
brought them; and the chief, who is now dead, promised to treat well the
two native teachers who were left with their wives on the island.  But
scarcely had the boat which landed them returned to the ship than the
natives began to maltreat their guests, taking away all they possessed,
and offering them further violence, so that when the boat was sent in
haste to fetch them away, the clothes of both men and women were torn
