interested, affected, and influenced the savages far more powerfully
than any of the tales, whether true or fanciful, with which he had
previously entertained them.  While doing this a new spirit seemed to
actuate himself, and to influence his whole being.

While Harold was thus led, almost unconsciously, to become a sower of
the blessed seed of God's Word, Marizano was working his way through the
country, setting forth, in the most extreme manner, the ultimate results
of man's sinful nature, and the devil's lies.

One of his first deeds was to visit a village which was beautifully
situated on the banks of a small but deep river.  In order to avoid
alarming the inhabitants, he approached it with only about thirty of his
men, twenty of whom were armed.  Arrived at the outskirts, he halted his
armed men, and advanced with the other ten, calling out cheerfully, "We
have things for sale! have you anything to sell?"  The chief and his
warriors, armed with their bows and arrows and shields, met him, and
forbade him to pass within the hedge that encircled the village, but
told him to sit down under a tree outside.  A mat of split reeds was
placed for Marizano to sit on; and when he had explained to the chief
that the object of his visit was to trade with him for ivory--in proof
of which he pointed to the bales which his men carried,--he was well
received, and a great clapping of hands ensued.  Presents were then
exchanged, and more clapping of hands took place, for this was
considered the appropriate ceremony.  The chief and his warriors, on
sitting down before Marizano and his men, clapped their hands together,
and continued slapping on their thighs while handing their presents, or
when receiving those of their visitors.  It was the African "thank you."
To have omitted it would have been considered very bad manners.

Soon a brisk trade was commenced, in which the entire community became
ere long deeply and eagerly absorbed.

Meanwhile Marizano's armed men were allowed to come forward.  The women
prepared food for the strangers; and after they had eaten and drunk of
the native beer heartily, Marizano asked the chief if he had ever seen
fire-arms used.

"Yes," replied the chief, "but only once at a great distance off.  It is
told to me that your guns kill very far off--much further than our bows.
Is that so?"

"It is true," replied Marizano, who was very merry by this time under
the influence of the beer, as, indeed, were also his men and their
entertainers.  "Would you like to see what our guns can do?" asked the
half-caste.  "If you will permit me, I shall let you hear and see them
in use."

The unsuspecting chief at once gave his consent.  His visitors rose;
Marizano gave the word; a volley was poured forth which instantly killed
the chief and twenty of his men.  The survivors fled in horror.  The
young women and children were seized; the village was sacked--which
means that the old and useless members of the community were murdered in
cold blood, and the place was set on fire--and Marizano marched away
with his band of captives considerably augmented, leaving a scene of
death and horrible desolation behind him.  [See Livingstone's _Zambesi
and its Tributaries_, pages 201, 202.]

Thus did that villain walk through the land with fire and sword
procuring slaves for the supply of the "domestic institution" of the
Sultan of Zanzibar.

By degrees the murderer's drove of black "cattle" increased to such an
extent that when he approached the neighbourhood of the village in which
Harold and Disco sojourned, he began to think that he had obtained about
as many as he could conveniently manage, and meditated turning his face
eastward, little dreaming how near he was to a thousand dollars' worth
of property, in the shape of ransom for two white men!

He was on the point of turning back and missing this when he chanced to
fall in with a villager who was out hunting, and who, after a hot chase,
was captured.  This man was made much of, and presented with some yards
of cloth as well as a few beads, at the same time being assured that he
had nothing to fear; that the party was merely a slave-trading one; that
the number of slaves required had been made up, but that a few more
would be purchased if the chief of his village had any to dispose of.

On learning from the man that his village was a large one, fully two
days' march from the spot where he stood, and filled with armed men,
Marizano came to the conclusion that it would not be worth his while to
proceed thither, and was about to order his informant to be added to his
gang with a slave-stick round his neck, when he suddenly bethought him
of inquiring as to whether any white men had been seen in these parts.
As he had often made the same inquiry before without obtaining any
satisfactory answer, it was with great surprise that he now heard from
his captive of two white men being in the very village about which he
had been conversing.

At once he changed his plan, resumed his march, and, a couple of days
afterwards, presented himself before the astonished eyes of Harold
Seadrift and Disco Lillihammer, while they were taking a walk about a
mile from the village.

Disco recognised the slave-trader at once, and, from the troubled as
well as surprised look of Marizano, it was pretty evident that he
remembered the countenance of Disco.

When the recollection of Marizano's cruelty at the time of their first
meeting flashed upon him, Disco felt an almost irresistible desire to
rush upon and strangle the Portuguese, but the calm deportment of that
wily man, and the peaceful manner in which he had approached, partly
disarmed his wrath.  He could not however, quite restrain his tongue.

"Ha!" said he, "you are the blackguard that we met and pretty nigh shot
when we first came to these parts, eh?  Pity we missed you, you
black-hearted villain!"

As Marizano did not understand English, these complimentary remarks were
lost on him.  He seemed, however, to comprehend the drift of them, for
he returned Disco's frown with a stare of defiance.

"Whatever he was, or whatever he is," interposed Harold, "we must
restrain ourselves just now, Disco, because we cannot punish him as he
deserves, however much we may wish to, and he seems to have armed men
enough to put us and our entertainers completely in his power.  Keep
quiet while I speak to him."

Jumbo and Antonio, armed with bows and arrows,--for they were in search
of small game wherewith to supply the pot--came up, looking very much
surprised, and the latter a good deal frightened.

"Ask him, Antonio," said Harold, "what is his object in visiting this
part of the country."

"To procure slaves," said Marizano, curtly.

"I thought so," returned Harold; "but he will find that the men of this
tribe are not easily overcome."

"I do not wish to overcome them," said the half-caste.  "I have procured
enough of slaves, as you see," (pointing to the gang which was halted
some hundred yards or so in rear of his armed men), "but I heard that
you were prisoners here, and I have come to prove to you that even a
slave-trader can return good for evil.  _You_ did this," he said,
looking at Disco, and pointing to his old wound in the arm; "I now come
to deliver you from slavery."

Having suppressed part of the truth, and supplemented the rest of it
with this magnificent lie, Marizano endeavoured to look magnanimous.

"I don't believe a word of it," said Disco, decidedly.

"I incline to doubt it too," said Harold; "but he may have some good
reason of his own for his friendly professions towards us.  In any case
we have no resource left but to assume that he speaks the truth."

Turning to Marizano, he said:--

"We are not prisoners here.  We are guests of the chief of this
village."

"In that case," replied the half-caste, "I can return to the coast
without you."

As he said this a large band of the villagers, having discovered that
strangers had arrived, drew near.  Marizano at once advanced, making
peaceful demonstrations, and, after the requisite amount of clapping of
hands on both sides, stated the object for which he had come.  He made
no attempt to conceal the fact that he was a slave-trader, but said
that, having purchased enough of slaves, he had visited their village
because of certain rumours to the effect that some white men had been
lost in these regions, and could not find their way back to the coast.
He was anxious, he said, to help these white men to do so, but, finding
that the white men then at the village were _not_ the men he was in
search of, and did not want to go to the coast, he would just stay long
enough with the chief to exchange compliments, and then depart.

All this was translated to the white men in question by their faithful
ally Antonio, and when they retired to consult as to what should be
done, they looked at each other with half amused and half perplexed
expressions of countenance.

"Werry odd," said Disco, "how contrairy things turns up at times!"

"Very odd indeed," assented Harold, laughing.  "It is quite true that we
are, in one sense, lost and utterly unable to undertake a journey
through this country without men, means, or arms; and nothing could be
more fortunate than that we should have the chance, thus suddenly thrown
in our way, of travelling under the escort of a band of armed men;
nevertheless, I cannot bear the idea of travelling with or being
indebted to a slave-trader and a scoundrel like Marizano."

"That's w'ere it is, sir," said Disco with emphasis, "I could stand
anything a'most but that."

"And yet," pursued Harold, "it is our only chance.  I see quite well
that we may remain for years here without again having such an
opportunity or such an escort thrown in our way."

"There's no help for it, I fear," said Disco.  "We must take it like a
dose o' nasty physic--hold our nobs, shut our daylights, an' down with
it.  The only thing I ain't sure of is your ability to travel.  You
ain't strong yet."

"Oh, I'm strong enough now, or very nearly so, and getting stronger
every day.  Well, then, I suppose it's settled that we go?"

"Humph!  I'm agreeable, an' the whole business werry disagreeable," said
Disco, making a wry face.

Marizano was much pleased when the decision of the white men was made
known to him, and the native chief was naturally much distressed, for,
not only was he about to lose two men of whom he had become very fond,
but he was on the point of being bereft of his story-teller, the opener
up of his mind, the man who, above all others, had taught him to think
about his Maker and a future state.

He had sense enough, however, to perceive that his guests could not
choose but avail themselves of so good an opportunity, and, after the
first feeling of regret was over, made up his mind to the separation.

Next day Harold and Disco, with feelings of strong revulsion, almost of
shame, fell into the ranks of the slave-gang, and for many days
thereafter marched through the land in company with Marizano and his
band of lawless villains.

Marizano usually walked some distance ahead of the main body with a few
trusty comrades.  Our adventurers, with their two followers, came next
in order of march, the gang of slaves in single file followed, and the
armed men brought up the rear.  It was necessarily a very long line, and
at a distance resembled some hideous reptile crawling slowly and
tortuously through the fair fields and plains of Africa.

At first there were no stragglers, for the slaves were as yet, with few
exceptions, strong and vigorous.  These exceptions, and the lazy, were
easily kept in the line by means of rope and chain, as well as the rod
and lash.

Harold and Disco studiously avoided their leader during the march.
Marizano fell in with their humour and left them to themselves.  At
nights they made their own fire and cooked their own supper, as far
removed from the slave camp as was consistent with safety, for they
could not bear to witness the sufferings of the slaves, or to look upon
their captors.  Even the food that they were constrained to eat appeared
to have a tendency to choke them, and altogether their situation became
so terrible that they several times almost formed the desperate
resolution of leaving the party and trying to reach the coast by
themselves as they best might, but the utter madness and hopelessness of
such a project soon forced itself on their minds, and insured its being
finally abandoned.

One morning Marizano threw off his usual reserve, and, approaching the
white men, told them that in two hours they would reach the lake where
his employer was encamped.

"And who is your master?" asked Harold.

"A black-faced or yellow-faced blackguard like himself, I doubt not,"
growled Disco.

Antonio put Harold's question without Disco's comment, and Marizano
replied that his master was an Arab trader, and added that he would push
on in advance of the party and inform him of their approach.

Soon afterwards the lake was reached.  A large dhow was in readiness,
the gang was embarked and ferried across to a place where several rude
buildings and barracoons, with a few tents, indicated that it was one of
the inland headquarters of the trade in Black Ivory.

The moment our travellers landed Marizano led them to one of the nearest
buildings, and introduced them to his master.

"Yoosoof!" exclaimed Disco in a shout of astonishment.

It would have been a difficult question to have decided which of the
three faces displayed the most extreme surprise.  Perhaps Disco's would
have been awarded the palm, but Yoosoof was undoubtedly the first to
regain his self-possession.

"You be surprised," he said, in his _very_ broken English, while his
pale-yellow visage resumed its placid gravity of expression.

"Undoubtedly we are," said Harold.

"Bu'stin'!" exclaimed Disco.

"You would be not so mush surprised,--did you know dat I comes to here
every year, an' dat Engleesh consul ask me for 'quire about you."

"If that be so, how comes it that _you_ were surprised to see us?" asked
Harold.

"'Cause why, I only knows dat some white mans be loss theirselfs--not
knows _what_ mans--not knows it was _you_."

"Well now," cried Disco, unable to restrain himself as he turned to
Harold, "did ever two unfortnits meet wi' sitch luck?  Here have we bin'
obliged for days to keep company with the greatest Portugee villian in
the country, an' now we're needcessitated to be under a obligation to
the greatest Arab scoundrel in Afriky."

The scoundrel in question smiled and shrugged his shoulders.

"Yoosoof," cried Disco, clenching his fist and looking full in the
trader's eyes, "when I last saw yer ugly face, I vowed that if ever I
seed it again I'd leave my mark on it pretty deep, I did; and now I does
see it again, but I haven't the moral courage to touch sitch a poor,
pitiful, shrivelled-up package o' bones an' half-tanned leather.
Moreover, I'm goin' to be indebted to 'ee!  Ha! ha!"  (he laughed
bitterly, and with a dash of wild humour in the tone), "to travel under
yer care, an' eat yer accursed bread, and--and--oh! there ain't no sitch
thing as shame left in my corpus.  I'm a low mean-spirited boastful
idiot, that's wot _I_ am, an' I don't care the fag-end of a hunk o'
gingerbread who knows it."

After this explosion the sorely tried mariner brought his right hand
down on his thigh with a tremendous crack, turned about and walked away
to cool himself.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

PROGRESS OF THE SLAVE-RUN--THE DEADLY SWAMP, AND THE UNEXPECTED RESCUE.

We will now leap over a short period of time--about two or three weeks--
during which the sable procession had been winding its weary way over
hill and dale, plain and swamp.

During that comparatively brief period, Harold and Disco had seen so
much cruelty and suffering that they both felt a strange tendency to
believe that the whole must be the wild imaginings of a horrible dream.
Perhaps weakness, resulting from illness, might have had something to do
with this peculiar feeling of unbelief, for both had been subject to a
second, though slight, attack of fever.  Nevertheless, coupled with
their scepticism was a contradictory and dreadful certainty that they
were not dreaming, but that what they witnessed was absolute verity.

It is probable that if they had been in their ordinary health and vigour
they would have made a violent attempt to rescue the slaves, even at the
cost of their own lives.  But severe and prolonged illness often
unhinges the mind as well as the body, and renders the spirit all but
impotent.

One sultry evening the sad procession came to a long stretch of swamp,
and prepared to cross it.  Although already thinned by death, the
slave-gang was large.  It numbered several hundreds, and was led by
Marizano; Yoosoof having started some days in advance in charge of a
similar gang.

Harold and Disco were by that time in the habit of walking together in
front of the gang, chiefly for the purpose of avoiding the sight of
cruelties and woes which they were powerless to prevent or assuage.  On
reaching the edge of the swamp, however, they felt so utterly wearied
and dis-spirited that they sat down on a bank to rest, intending to let
the slave-gang go into the swamp before them and then follow in rear.
Antonio and Jumbo also remained with them.

"You should go on in front," said Marizano significantly, on observing
their intention.

