
"We have fair interest," Ralph said calmly, "as apparently you
have, yourself. Each of us have, you see, used our interest in the
way most pleasing to us. We have used ours to enable us to go with
the army in the field, instead of being forced to remain inactive
in Paris. You, upon your part, have used yours to get away from the
army in the field, and to remain inactive, here."

These words were spoken with such an air of boyish frankness, and
an apparent innocence of any desire to say anything unpleasant,
that everyone within hearing was ready to burst with laughter at
Ralph's hit--which happened to be thoroughly well deserved.

The officer turned white; and would have burst out into a violent
answer, had not a couple of friends at his elbow begged him to
restrain himself. The boy evidently meant nothing; besides, he was
only a boy, and what could be done with him? Besides which, again,
one of them put in, though he was only a boy, he looked an awkward
customer. This latter argument weighed more with the lieutenant
than any other.

Ralph was not yet seventeen, and looked much younger than a French
lad of the same age would do; but in point of size he was
considerably taller than the officer of Mobiles, and his broad
shoulders gave promise of unusual strength. There was, too, a look
of fearlessness and decision about his face which marked him
emphatically as an "awkward customer." Seeing this, the lieutenant
burst into a constrained fit of laughter; and said that it was
"very good--really very good, for a boy."

Everyone else was so occupied in the endeavor to stifle their
laughter that the lieutenant again took up the part of questioner.

"I suppose, young gentleman, that you come from Saint Cyr or the
Polytechnic; although I should hardly imagine that you have
completed your studies, in either of them?"

"I have not the advantage of having been at either of the military
academies," Ralph said quietly. "Have you?"

Again there was a laugh and, by this time, most of those in the
room had gathered round.

"May I ask to which arm of the service you belong?" the officer
asked, with difficulty keeping his temper.

"You may ask, certainly; and I have no objection to answer," Ralph
said. "My brother and myself both belong to the general staff."

The officer looked surprised.

"Have you served already, sir, or has your service yet to
commence?"

"I have seen some little service already," Ralph said.

"May I ask what general has had the benefit of your assistance?"
the lieutenant said, with an affectation of politeness.

At this moment the Sous Prefect pushed forward.

"Silence, sir!" he said to the officer. "There has been too much of
this. These gentlemen have performed a great service to France, and
are my guests; and I look upon it as a personal attack upon
myself."

"Excuse me, sir," Ralph said, rising from his seat for the first
time. "I am grateful to you, for your interference in my behalf;
but I can make no claim, upon the present occasion, to have
rendered any service to France. I had nothing to do with the
dispatches, nothing to do with the balloon. I came out as a
passenger, upon my private desire and pleasure, at the risk of
course of being killed. Undoubtedly I nearly was killed; and I look
upon the entertainment that you have given us as a kind
congratulation upon our not having broken our necks.

"Kindly, then, permit me to answer this officer for myself. I think
I can hold my own."

The Sous Prefect shrugged his shoulders; to signify that, in that
case, he washed his hands of the whole business.

"Now, sir," Ralph said, "I will answer the question. The general
upon whose staff my brother and myself served was General
Cambriels."

The officer shrugged his shoulders.

"Since that time," Ralph said, more sternly than he had yet spoken,
"my brother and myself have had the offer of posts upon the staffs
of General Trochu, General Ducrot, and General Vinoy."

"Oh, come now," the lieutenant said, with a laugh of derision,
"that is a little too strong. Imagine a scramble upon the part of
Trochu, Ducrot, and Vinoy for the services of these very young
officers."

This time the speaker had the laugh with him, for no one could
believe that Ralph could be speaking the truth. Ralph grew a little
pale.

"Monsieur Teclier," he said, "do me the favor to introduce my
brother and myself to this lieutenant of Mobiles, in due form."

The matter had now become so serious that there was a dead hush in
the room, while Monsieur Teclier advanced. He had once or twice
already made a motion of coming forward, to take Ralph's part; but
a motion from the latter had arrested him. He was aware of the
furore which the gallant and successful expedition of the Barclays
had created, in Paris; and he had been greatly struck and pleased
by the calmness of the boys in a great--and to them altogether
new--peril. He now advanced slowly.

"May I ask your name, sir, and regiment?" he said to the officer.

"Lieutenant Desmaret, of the Mobiles of Vienne," the officer said,
frowning.

"Lieutenant Desmaret of the Mobiles of Vienne, I beg to introduce
you to--"

"No, sir," the officer said, passionately, "you introduce them to
me, not me to them. The inferior rank is introduced to the
superior."

"I know perfectly well what I am doing, sir, and require no lesson
from you," Monsieur Teclier said, quietly. "I repeat, I introduce
you--Lieutenant Desmaret, of the Mobiles of Vienne--to Captain
Ralph Barclay, and Captain Percy Barclay, staff officers, and
commanders of the legion of honor."

There was a dead silence of surprise throughout the room.

"Is it possible?" the Sous Prefect said, coming forward again,
"that these gentlemen are the Captains Barclay, of whom the Paris
papers--which we received three days since--were full, as having
passed through the German lines, and having swam the Seine at
night, under fire? They had previously been decorated for great
acts of bravery, in the Vosges; and were now made commanders of the
Legion.

"Is it possible that you are those officers, gentlemen?"

"It is so, monsieur," Ralph said. "We had the good fortune to
distinguish ourselves but, as we did not wish to make ourselves
conspicuous by new uniforms, and new ribbons, we have put aside our
uniforms until required for service; and asked Monsieur Teclier to
be silent upon the subject. Of course, we could not guess that,
upon our way, we should meet so rude and unmannerly a person as
Monsieur the Lieutenant of the Mobiles of Vienne."

The lieutenant stamped his feet furiously.

"You shall answer to me, sir," he said, "for this insult."

"Stop, sir," Ralph said, in a steady voice--which silenced those
who were about to interfere. "You have asked me questions, with
rare freedom. I have answered them. I am now going to give you my
opinion of you, and my advice to you, equally freely.

"If you mean, by what you have said, that you are going to
challenge me to a duel, I tell you at once that I shall not accept
it. I have, sir," and he raised his head proudly, "proved my
courage; and France has recognized it, in the rank and honor she
has given me. We English--for I am English--do not fight duels.

"But I will make an exception. When you, Monsieur Desmaret, come to
me decorated as I am; or having, in any signal way, proved your
courage and devotion to France, I will meet you. At present I see
that you--an officer in the French army, well in health--are
staying here in idleness, instead of being in the field. Go and
fight the enemies of France, first, Monsieur Desmaret; and after
that talk, if you like, about fighting her friends."

There was a loud exclamation of applause and satisfaction, at these
words, from those who had been looking on at this unpleasant scene;
and the Sous Prefect warmly shook Ralph by the hand.

"Well said, Captain Barclay; well said, indeed. I believe I may say
that everyone here agrees with you, entirely. There are too many
officers continually absent from the army upon 'private affairs;'
and those of Monsieur Desmaret have taken longer to arrange than
usual, for he has been staying here for five weeks now.

"However," he said, significantly, "he will hardly prolong his stay
in the island.

"Enough upon that subject," he said, as Monsieur Desmaret left the
room, pale and furious. "I am glad--I am proud, sir--to make the
acquaintance of yourself and your brother; and I can really, at
heart, feel grateful to that fellow, for having forced you to
declare who you are. Had he not done so, you would have left
without our knowing that we had you among us."

There was now quite an ovation to the boys. The ladies, especially,
would hardly conceive that it was possible that these quiet-looking
young fellows had performed feats of such daring. They now begged
to hear the details of the adventures but, at this moment, word was
brought that steam was up, and the vessel ready to start; and as
Monsieur Teclier was most anxious to get on, and as Percy was quite
done up, Ralph was glad to seize the excuse, and to make his
apologies for leaving at once. The Sous Prefect, all the breakfast
party, and a large proportion of the population of the little place
accompanied them thence to the landing place; and then, amidst
hearty cheering, the little steamer--carrying the voyagers, the
dispatches, and the remains of the balloon--started for the
mainland.



Chapter 18: A Day Of Victory.


After traveling all night, the Barclays arrived at Tours at ten
o'clock, on the morning of the day after that upon which they had
left Belle Isle. At the station they said adieu to Monsieur
Teclier; who went at once to Gambetta, with the dispatches; while
the Barclays turned away to Colonel Tempe's lodgings and, to their
great surprise as well as delight, found him in.

The colonel gave quite a shout of joy, when he saw them.

"Ah, my brave boys, my brave boys, I am glad to see you," and he
took them in his arms, and kissed them as heartily and as earnestly
as if he had been their father.

"I am glad to see you," he repeated, wiping his eyes with his
handkerchief. "I was sure you would do it. I never really
doubted--I told Gambetta it was as good as done--but I could not
help being nervous, horribly nervous; and when the news came, five
days ago, by the balloon which left three days after you got in, I
almost lost my head. I laughed, I cheered, I shook everyone by the
hand--ma foi, I don't know what I did, I was so pleased.

"Your Irishman was the funniest thing. He was not surprised, or
pleased, or even interested. I explained to him over and over
again, thinking he did not understand; but he only shook his head
and said, in his strange English:

"'Sure, colonel, I never doubted them for a moment. Aren't they
clever enough to decaive the ould gintleman, himself? It was as
sartin as peas is peas that they would slip in, somehow; and if
they did get into a scrape, that they were the boys for getting
themselves out of it. It's the coming out I am afraid of.'

"I looked surprised, naturally enough, and he went on:

"'And doesn't your honor know that they are talking of coming out
in a balloon? Only to think of it, colonel, flying through the
clouds, shut up in a big ball of silk! It's just flying in the face
of Providence. What's the use of scheming, or of courage? You can't
decaive a cloud, though it's as aisy as dancing to take in a
German. When you tell me, colonel, that they're safe out of the
balloon; then I'll shout, as loud as you like.'

"Yesterday, when the telegram from Teclier came--saying that he had
fallen in Belle Isle, had had a narrow escape of being driven into
the sea, but had avoided that by running the risk of breaking his
neck--and mentioned that you were with him; and had, like himself,
escaped with a few bruises, Tim went nearly out of his mind with
joy. He has been cleaning his sword and accouterments, this
morning.

"I am off tomorrow, and you are only just come in time to see the
fighting.

"But you are looking ill, Percy; far too ill for service, just at
present."

"Yes, he has been very ill," Ralph said. "He had a touch of brain
fever, the night we got into Paris; and was delirious for two days.
He has picked up quickly, but that balloon descent was not the
thing for an invalid. The doctor in Paris ordered a month, at
least, of absolute rest; and has given him a sick certificate."

"He needs rest, certainly," Colonel Tempe said, "but he cannot go
home, at present. The Prussians hold Dijon in considerable
strength. There are far too many people in the town who have heard
of your connection with the franc tireurs. Some spy or other would
be certain to peach."

"Yes," Ralph assented, "we have been talking it over, and quite
agree that Percy could not go back as--although he would willingly
run the risk, himself--it would bring such serious consequences
upon them at home, if he were found there, that he has determined
to go down to Nice for a while, and rejoin as soon as he gains
strength again."

"Yes," Colonel Tempe said, "but above all things, do not let him be
in a hurry.

"You have gone through an immense deal, Percy; and have done a
great deal more than your share for France, and have gained great
honor and credit. Be content with that. You might ruin your
constitution for life, by further exertions."

"But about yourself colonel, where are you going?"

"I am starting, tomorrow, to join General Chanzy's staff."

"I have not heard his name before," Ralph said.

"He commands the Sixteenth Corps. He has not had much opportunity
yet, but he is a good soldier. If you like, Ralph, I will go with
you at once, to Freysinet, and get you attached with me."

"Thank you very much, colonel. I should like it of all things."

"Come along, then; Freysinet is in his office."

Percy accompanied them, to obtain a signature to his leave of
absence, and left next day for the south. An hour later, Colonel
Tempe and Ralph were in the train, upon their way to Orleans--Tim,
again in his hussar uniform, and half wild with delight--being,
with Colonel Tempe's orderly, in charge of the horses.

Colonel Tempe, as Ralph was not mounted, had offered to lend him
one of his own; but Ralph had refused it, unless the colonel would
sell it, as he said he should be always afraid of getting the
animal shot, unless it was his own. Seeing that Ralph was
determined upon this score, the colonel had reluctantly agreed to
take the sum he had paid for the horse. Ralph's only other purchase
in Tours was a fur greatcoat.

"And now, colonel," Ralph said, when the train had started, "we
have time to talk--tell me, what chances have we of success?"

"Between ourselves, Barclay," Colonel Tempe said, "I do not think that
our prospects are brilliant. In my opinion, Aurelles de Paladine--or
rather Gambetta, for it was he who ordered the advance--made an immense
mistake in attacking Von der Tann when he did. Of course, he drove him
back, and took Orleans; but what was the use of that? Absolutely nothing.
He was not strong enough to push his advantage; but the movement served
to draw the attention of the Germans to his force, and Prince Frederick
Charles--who was marching south from Metz--has been hurried towards
Orleans, and has now united his forces with those of Von der Tann and
the Duke of Mecklenburg; so that, although we have received large
reinforcements--for the whole of the army of the east is up, now--the
Germans have been equally reinforced, and are quite as strong as we are.

"We ought never to have attacked, until we were ready to follow up
our advantage at once. It was nothing short of madness; yet what
can you expect, with a civilian acting as commander-in-chief? I
believe that we shall make a tough fight of it, but I can hardly
hope that our new levies can prove a match for the veterans of
Frederick Charles."

"When do we begin, do you think?"

"In two or three days at latest. You have not seen a great battle
yet, Barclay."

"No," Ralph said, "nor shall I see much of it, now; for the country
is so perfectly flat that it will be impossible to get anything
like a general view of it. Do you know, colonel, I feel a good deal
more comfortable than I did during my last journey between Tours
and Orleans; for although I thought that we should manage, somehow,
to get through into Paris; still, I could not conceal from myself
that it was a very serious undertaking.

"How bitterly cold it is."

"It is, indeed," Colonel Tempe assented. "Being upon the staff we
shall, no doubt, manage to get a roof of some sort over our heads;
but for the sentries it must be terrible. The tents d'abri--if the
men can scrape away the snow, and get an armful of straw to lie
on--are snug enough; the men lie close together, and share their
blankets."

Half an hour after arriving at Orleans, Colonel Tempe and Ralph
were riding out upon the north road; followed by Tim Doyle, and the
colonel's orderly. The frost was keen, but the afternoon was bright
and clear; and as they cantered along the road--beaten flat and
hard, with the enormous traffic--their spirits rose, and Ralph
regretted that Percy was not there to share in his enjoyments.

Colonel Tempe shook his head when the wish was mentioned.

"No, no, Barclay, it is far better as it is. You are young enough,
in all conscience, for this iron work of war; your brother has done
far more than a man's share already, and will find it difficult
enough to go back as a schoolboy. He has escaped thus far, almost
by a miracle; but he was looking shaken, and worn. I am glad that
he is not here."

Three hours' riding took them to the little village near which
General Chanzy was quartered. The Sixteenth Corps lay to the left
of the French army, facing the Germans; who held the line of
villages of Guillonville, Terminiers, and Conier. It was already
dark when they arrived. The general's quarters were in a chateau, a
quarter of a mile distant from the village. When they reached it,
they were at once shown in; and found General Chanzy leaning over a
map, which he was trying to examine by the light of a solitary
candle.

"How are you, colonel?" he asked, shaking hands with him
heartily--for they were old friends. "I am very glad you have come.
There is plenty to do, and few to do it; at least, very few indeed
who know anything about their work.

"Who have you here?"

"Allow me to introduce Captain Barclay, general. Freysinet has
attached him to your staff. He served with me in the Vosges,
distinguished himself greatly, and won his lieutenancy and the
Cross. Since then he has been into Paris. No doubt you saw the
account of his swimming the Seine, with his brother."

"Of course, of course," General Chanzy said, warmly. "I am very
glad to have you with me, Captain Barclay. You will not be long
before you are at work, for the affair is just beginning. I have
just got news that there has been some sharp fighting, today, at
Beaurre la Rolande."

"With what results, sir?" Colonel Tempe asked.

"We gained a great deal of ground, in the morning," General Chanzy
said; "but they brought up reinforcements, and no material
advantage is claimed.

"And now," the general went on, "as to quarters, you must shift for
yourselves. Beds are out of the question; but you will find some
empty rooms upstairs and, fortunately, there is a little straw in
the stable. The outhouses are extensive, and you will be able to
