"You see how careful I am of you," said the elder girl.

"All the girls are careful of me like that," said little Agnes. "I don't
exactly know why. Am I so very, very precious?"

"I expect you are to those who love you," said Lucy, coming more and
more under the glamour of little Agnes's strange power of inspiring
affection.

"When you look at me like that you seem quite kind, but sometimes you
don't look very kind; and then, you are not fond of my darling Irene and
my dearest Rosamund. I wonder why?"

"Shall I tell you?"

Lucy bent close to the little girl.

"Oh! if it is anything nasty I would rather not know."

"But I think you ought to know about your Irene. Nobody loved her at
all--nobody could bear her--until----Why, what is the matter, child?"

"Don't--don't go on; I won't listen," said little Agnes.

Her face was as white as death; her eyes were dilated.

"But I will tell you," said Lucy. "She was the dreadful girl who nearly
drowned poor Miss Carter, one of her governess, who is now at the
Singletons'. She was the terrible, terrible girl who made your own dear
sister swallow live insects instead of pills; she was the awful girl who
used to put toads into the bread-pan; and--oh! I can't tell you all the
terrific things she did. She is only biding her time to do the same to
you. Some people say she isn't a girl at all, but a sort of fairy; and
fairies always fascinate people, and when they have made them love them
like anything they will turn them into wicked fairies, or something else
awful. What is the matter, child?"

For little Agnes was trembling all over. After a minute she got up and
made a great effort to steady herself.

"I don't think you should have told me that story," she said. "And I
don't believe you."

"You don't believe me, you little wretch!" said Lucy, reddening with
anger. "How dare you say such things? Do you think I, the daughter of
Professor Ralph Merriman, would tell lies?"

"Well, you've told one now," said Agnes stoutly; "for I don't believe my
darling Irene ever did such naughty--such very naughty--things."

"You ask Miss Frost--your dear Emily, as you call her. Here she comes
walking along the bank. You go up and ask her, and if she tells you that
I am wrong, then I will confess that some one told me lies. There, go at
once and do it."

Miss Frost approached the pair to take little Agnes off Lucy's hands,
for it did not occur to her as possible that a girl of Lucy Merriman's
type could be really interested in her little sister. When she saw the
white face and trembling lips, and the anxious eyes, she stopped
suddenly, her own heart beating violently.

"What is it, Aggie? What is wrong, darling?" she said; and she bent down
and touched the little one on the shoulder.

"Oh, Emmie, it isn't true--it can't be true!" said little Agnes.

"I have been telling her one or two things," said Lucy. "I have thought
it best to put her on her guard. You have done an exceedingly silly
thing to allow her to sleep in the room with that changeling sort of
girl, Irene Ashleigh. Some day little Agnes will get a great fright. She
says that she doesn't believe me; but you can tell her the truth, can't
you? You did swallow wood-lice, did you not?"

"I--I would rather not speak of it," said Miss Frost. "It is all over
now." But she shuddered as she spoke.

"Nevertheless, you must tell her. The child will not believe me."

"It was a long time ago, darling. Oh, Lucy, what have you done? What
mischief you have done! How could you be so unkind?"

For little Agnes, in a perfect agony of weeping, had thrown herself into
her sister's arms.

"I--I don't believe it!" she said. "Irene! Dearest, dearest Irene! She
couldn't do anything of that sort."

"She couldn't now, Aggie. Oh, Lucy, do go away! Leave her to me--leave
her to me," said Miss Frost, in the greatest distress.

Having accomplished her mission--and, as she said to herself, brought
gunpowder into the enemy's camp--Lucy retired, wondering that she did
not feel more satisfied. Agnes and her sister had a very long talk, the
end of which was that they returned home a short time after Irene and
Rosamund had come back from The Follies.

Irene began at once to call for Agnes.

"Aggie! Where's my Aggie? Aggie, I have brought you something
back--something ever so pretty!"

But there was no response, and Irene felt a queer sensation at her
heart.

"Where is the child?" she said. "Where is my little Agnes?"

After a time Agnes was seen running towards her. She did not come quite
as fast as usual, and there was a change in her face. Irene did not know
when she saw that change why a sudden sense of fear stole over her. It
was as though some one had snatched the heart out of a gem, the glory
out of a flower. It was as though little Agnes was no longer the
beautiful Agnes she loved. She could not analyze her own feelings. She
herself had returned in the best of spirits. Rosamund had been so
bright, so cheery, so brave; her mother had been so pleased at the
reports which Irene's different masters and mistresses had given her.
All seemed going prosperously and well, and on the way home Rosamund had
spoken of Agnes, and said how glad she was that Irene should have the
little one to look after, to love and to guide and to cherish.
Altogether, Irene was in her most softened mood, and she had brought
back to Sunnyside several old toys of her own which she had rooted out
of a cupboard in the long-disused nursery. They would charm little
Agnes; they had never had any fascination for her.

She thrust the parcel into the child's hands.

"They are for you," she said.

Little Agnes took the parcel, but not in her usual frank, enthusiastic,
and open delight, but timidly.

"They're not--they're not toads?" she said.

"Toads!" cried Irene; and then she colored crimson. "Don't take them
unless you want them," she said; and she snatched the parcel away from
the child.

Little Agnes burst out crying.

"Irene, what do you mean?--Surely, Agnes, you are not silly!" exclaimed
Rosamund. "See, let me open the parcel."

"I don't want her to have it unless she really wishes for it," said
Irene. "I wouldn't force my gifts on any one, not even little Agnes."
But there was an imploring note in her voice.

Little Agnes, however, was still full of the horrors with which she had
been crammed. Rosamund went on one knee and opened the ungainly parcel.
It contained a Noah's Ark, a box of bricks, some soldiers (the very best
of their kind), and other toys of the sort that would ravish children.
At another moment little Agnes would have been all delight, but now she
seemed to see--behind the marching soldiers, and the fascinating bricks
which could raise such marvelous architectural edifices, and the Noah's
Ark with its quaint animals--toads and lizards and newts, and wasps and
bees. Oh, why was she so frightened, she who had never really been
frightened before? And she did love Irene. She looked up into her face
now with piteous terror, and yet a piteous love mingling in her eyes.

"I will take them; they are beautiful," she said; and she clasped them
in her arms. Then she put her face up for Irene to kiss, and then she
went away staggering under the weight of her new treasures.

Irene turned to Rosamund.

"What is the matter?" she said. "Something has happened to the child.
She was so jolly when we went out--so like her dearest, sweetest
self--and now she is quite altered. What can have happened?"

"I can't tell," said Rosamund. "You had better take no notice, Irene."

Irene could scarcely promise to do that, and she was sulky and disturbed
during the rest of the evening; and although little Agnes sat in her
usual place at supper, she hardly spoke to her.

After supper Agnes flew up to Miss Frost and whispered something in her
ear.

"May I--may I--sleep in your bed to-night? I want to," she said.

"Certainly," replied Miss Frost, intensely gratified. "But what will
Irene say?"

"I can't help it. I daren't stay in her room. I am frightened."

Miss Frost whispered again to the child, who went off presently to her
studies, which always took about a quarter of an hour before she retired
to bed. Miss Frost insisted on always seeing her little sister to bed
herself, and after the first night or two at Sunnyside no one interfered
with this arrangement. Irene had her own happy time afterwards, when she
went to bed herself, and could look at the dear little face smiling in
its sleep, when she could now and again hear the happy murmured words,
"Dear Irene! darling Irene!" and when she knew she had constituted
herself the little one's guardian--a sort of guardian angel over
her--to fight to the death for her against all that was evil, all that
was frightening. She was busy as usual to-night over her tasks, and took
no notice when little Agnes and Miss Frost left the room together.
Agnes, being the youngest pupil in the school, was always put to bed
before the others. By-and-by the time came when all the girls were to
retire for the night. Lucy had made herself delightfully inconspicuous
this evening. She had scarcely spoken to any one. Even Mademoiselle
Omont, with whom she had struck up a sort of friendship, developing
rapidly a very sound knowledge of the French language, had scarcely been
addressed by the loquacious young lady; while as to Miss Archer and Miss
Frost, Lucy disdained even to speak to them.

By-and-by Rosamund too went up to her room. It was next to the room
occupied by the two girls, Irene and Agnes.

"I won't come into your room to-night," said Irene. But she hesitated
for a moment. "Have you found out anything to account for little Agnes's
strange behavior?"

"No--nothing. If I were you I would take no notice. Perhaps the child
was tired."

"Perhaps some one has told her things that she ought not to know," was
Irene's response.

Rosamund was silent. She had much the same fear at her heart.

"Did you, or did you not, notice how quiet Lucy Merriman has been all
the evening--a sort of hush about her which is not usual? I expect her
conscience has been pricking her. Well, if she dares to interfere with
me and Agnes she'll rue it, that's all I can say. Goodnight, Rosamund. I
am sleepy."

Irene went into her room. She longed beyond words to find Agnes
sufficiently awake to put her arms round her neck and kiss her as of
yore. She wanted to tempt the little one to come into her bed. She felt,
more than she cared to own, the acute pang at her heart with regard to
little Agnes when she brought back the toys. Now, these were placed
tidily away on a shelf just beside little Agnes's bed, but the bed
itself was empty. The little night-dress had been removed; the brush and
comb that always stood on the small dressing-table were also conspicuous
by their absence. The little blue felt slippers which looked so sweet on
her tiny feet were gone, as was also the blue dressing-gown. But none of
these things mattered. It was the absence of little Agnes herself that
Irene noticed. Agnes was not in the room. She stood quite still,
clasping her hands, while a sensation of rage such as she had never
before experienced--such as, with all her tempestuous nature, she had
never believed could sweep over her--now visited her.

"Agnes!" she said once, and she went up to the empty bed and turned down
the clothes as though she might even find Agnes beneath.

But the bed was quite empty; the child was gone.

Scarcely knowing what she was doing, Irene burst into Rosamund's room.

"There's something up, and you might find it out. I won't go to bed
until I know. They have taken Agnes away from me. She is not in my room.
What is the matter? You must find out."

"I will," said Rosamund very gently. "Just sit down and keep as quiet as
you can. I will go at once and see Miss Frost. She can't have gone to
bed yet."

"Let me come with you."

"No, no; stay where you are, dear; and try to be calm, I beseech you. By
your love for me, and by your love for Agnes, try now to control
yourself."

Irene made a mighty effort. She sank into a chair. Tears came close to
her eyes, but they did not fall, though she was trembling from head to
foot.

Rosamund went quickly down the corridor. At the farther end she met
Lucy, who was returning to her own room. Rosamund stopped her.

"What have you been doing to little Agnes Frost while we were away?" she
said.

"I?" said Lucy, starting and turning very pale. "Nothing. What should I
have done?"

"You know you have done something. You have frightened her, telling her
dreadful stories about Irene. You know it. You are mean and cowardly.
You ought not to have anything to do with any respectable school. I
cannot tell you how I despise you. Think how much I have given up to
save Irene, who never had a chance until she knew me, and yet you now
destroy every effort that I have made for her good. Oh, I despise you! I
cannot help it."

Lucy was absolutely speechless. Rosamund walked along the corridor until
she came to Miss Frost's room. She tapped very gently with her knuckles.
Miss Frost came out.

"Frosty dear, is little Agnes sleeping with you to-night?" she said.

Miss Frost shut the door and came on to the landing. She put her finger
to her lips.

"Hush!" she said. "She is with me; she is in my bed. She is very
nervous, starting every moment. Lucy Merriman told her dreadful stories
while she was out to-day. The child told me about them. Lucy had no
right to tell her. She is afraid of Irene now."

"She need never be afraid of Irene. I wonder if she has pluck enough to
go back to her? If she has, all will be safe. If not, Irene's character
will be spoiled for ever. Is she asleep?"

"Scarcely asleep; very nervous and restless. You won't take her back to
Irene to-night? You know what the effect of nervous fear is upon a
delicate, tenderly nurtured child. You could not be so cruel."

"Agnes is not so delicate as all that. She can stand it. When I think of
Irene, who has almost been saved, who has almost been turned into the
paths of goodness and righteousness, and mostly by little Agnes herself,
and when I think of that cruel, wicked, unscrupulous girl, I have no
patience. Frosty, I have helped you--you must let little Agnes help
Irene now. Don't be frightened. I shall be next door to them, and
nothing can possibly happen to the child; but she must come back."

Miss Frost stood aside.

"Really, Rosamund," she said, "I do admit the strength of your words. I
know how good--how more than good--you have been; but, at the same
time, I feel she is my little sister, and Irene has taken her away."

"For the present, I grant it, and I am sorry; but not for always. Let
her have her back now, for a time at least--to-night at any rate."

"Very well, you must manage it your own way."

Poor Miss Frost wrung her hands in nervous terror. She thought of that
awful moment when she had swallowed the wood-lice. She thought of the
terrible appearance of James when the wasps had stung him. She
remembered another occasion when she had found a leech in her bed. Oh,
how terrible Irene had been! And there was Miss Carter, who had nearly
lost her life in the boat. Then there was Hughie--something very queer
had happened to Hughie on one occasion, only Hughie was no coward. He
was brave and practical. But then, again, there was Irene herself--Irene
so altered, so sweet to little Agnes, so kind about Hughie. Poor Miss
Frost was so torn between her diverse emotions that she scarcely knew
what to do.

Meanwhile Rosamund had gone into the room. She made a slight noise, and
Agnes, only half-asleep, opened her dark eyes and fixed them on
Rosamund's face.

"What is it? Is there a toad in the room?" she said.

"Don't be silly, Agnes," said Rosamund. "I really have no patience with
you. Now, what is the matter? Sit up in bed and tell me."

Rosamund did not mean to be unkind, nor did she speak in an unkind way,
although her words sounded somewhat determined.

"I want to speak to you, Agnes," she said. "You were told stories--and
very exaggerated they doubtless were--by Lucy Merriman when Irene and I
were at The Follies to-day."

"I was told frightful stories all about Irene."

"Then do you mean to tell me you don't love her any more?"

"I shall always love her; but if she were to do such a thing to me it
would kill me."

"She would never do such a thing to you. Now, I will tell you something
about her. She used to be a wild and very naughty child. People were
afraid of her, and she had nothing else to occupy her time but to add to
their terrors. Then I came across her path, and I was not a bit afraid
of her. In short, I think I helped her not to be so naughty. But I did
not do half the good you have done."

"I?" said little Agnes, in amazement.

"Yes, you, Aggie--you; for you loved her, and you helped her to be good
by simply trusting her, and by clinging to her and thinking her all that
is good and beautiful. Between us--you and me--we were softening her,
and she will be a splendid woman some day, not a poor, miserable wretch,
