Your whole tribe would appear but as a handful of dust in the eyes of
the Hova army."

"I would that we were a handful of dust!" snorted the chief, "and we'd
dash ourselves into the eyes of the Hova army and kill them while they
wept!"

"But there is nothing to prevent us from going forth to meet our
friends," rejoined Laihova, "and we can take our spears.  If they stand
in need of help we may give it."

This proposition fell in entirely with the war-like Voalavo's views,
and, a band of the young hunters and fruit-gatherers entering the cave
at that moment, he urged them to make haste with their dinner and get
ready for the war-path.

Ever-ready--as young blades usually are--for fighting, these youths
threw down their loads quickly.

And, truly, judging from the contents of the cavern larder that day,
there was no prospect of famine before the persecuted people.  In one
part of that larder there was abundance of beef and pork, also of game,
such as guinea-fowl, pheasants, partridges, peacocks, turkeys, geese,
ducks, pigeons, turtle-doves, and snipe.  In another place the vegetable
and fruit-gatherers had piled up little mounds of bread-fruit,
pine-apples, cocoa-nuts, yams, plantains, bananas, manioc-root, melons,
etcetera, much of which had been gathered from regions at a considerable
distance from their place of abode.  Thus they had laid up store for
many days, and felt somewhat elated.

But there were two hearts there which found it impossible to rejoice,
and very hard to submit to God.  Reni and Ramatoa retired to a dark
recess in the cave, and mingled their tears and prayers together.

"Oh! it would have been better if he had died!" sobbed Reni, "for then
he would have been with Jesus; but now it is awful to think of the
life-long slavery; and we shall never more see him on earth."

"Nay, mother, do not think thus.  Whatever God does _must_ be best,"
returned Ramatoa in a tremulous voice.  "Let us try to say `Thy will
be--'"

She broke down and finished the sentence with prayer for strength and
for a submissive spirit.

Meanwhile the war-like expedition, on which Voalavo and his youths were
only too ready to enter was rendered needless by the sudden appearance
of Ravonino himself, with Rafaravavy and Sarah!  After encountering
innumerable hardships and dangers those three had at last arrived at
their forest stronghold in safety.

"So then," remarked Laihova to Ra-Ruth, after the first enthusiastic
reception was over, "I have only over-shot them by a few hours after
all!"

"We were just going to sally forth to look for you--and fight if need
be," said Voalavo.

"There was no need for that," returned Ravonino, "the Lord was our
protector."

"Where is Reni-Mamba?  Have you heard, mother, about your son?"

Reni and Ramatoa, who had pressed forward, looked surprised, for their
friend did not speak like a man who had bad news to tell.

"Laihova has told me, truly," replied Reni, still whimpering, "that my
dear boy is worse than dead."

"Not so, mother," said Ravonino, taking the poor woman's hand, "be of
good cheer; Mamba is not dead.  I know not indeed where he is at this
moment, having been pressed in my own flight, but I know that the Queen
has set him free--this much I learned from our white friend, Mark
Breezy.  More I cannot tell, but is not this cause for joy and
gratitude?  Come, let us return thanks to our Father."

Most of those present were glad to give vent to their feelings in prayer
and praise, though some there were who, having been led to join the band
by the mere force of circumstances, had little heart in the matter.
Certainly Voalavo was not among these last, for the enthusiasm which
inclined him to fight with violence also induced him to pray with
vigour.

When this appropriate act of worship was over, food was prepared for the
wearied travellers, and in a short time the whole party was seated round
the cooking-fire, illuminated by the torches on the wall, and listening
eagerly to Ravonino as he recounted his adventures.

"I fear much," he said in conclusion, "that another dark season is about
to fall on us.  It may be like the last--or worse."

Ravonino here referred, (and with bated breath), to the terrible
outbreak of persecution which had occurred several years previously,
when, at the lowest estimate, about two thousand men and women were
severely punished, and many tortured and slain, because they professed
or favoured the religion of Jesus.

As, one after another, various members of the party detailed the sad
sufferings or deaths of relatives and friends, the feelings of all
became deeply affected with grief, those of some with a considerable
dash also of indignation.  Among the latter of course was Voalavo.

"Why," he cried suddenly, giving his hands the accustomed pistol-shot
clap that betrayed his inability to contain himself, "why do we suffer
all this?  Why not assemble the tribes, go up at once to Antananarivo,
take it, cut off the Queen's head, and put Prince Rakota on the throne?"

"Ay, why not?" demanded several of the more fiery young men.

"Because the Lord tells us to overcome evil with good," answered
Ravonino, quietly.  Then, wishing to draw attention from the subject, he
inquired for the messenger who had brought news of his own escape.

All looked round as if expecting the man to answer for himself, but no
one replied.

Search was made, and then it was discovered that the messenger had
hastily taken his departure from the place.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

DOCTOR BREEZY PRESCRIBES FOR THE QUEEN, AND ATTAINS TO TEMPORARY AND
"PERFIK F'LICITY."

While these events were taking place in the forest, Queen Ranavalona was
keeping her Court Physician and his comrades in a state of considerable
uneasiness, not only with reference to the safety of their own heads,
but because of her violent edicts regarding her Christian subjects.

She renewed her commands as to the necessity of every one coming
forward, on pain of instant death in the event of disobedience, and
accusing themselves, with the reiterated assurance that if they failed
to comply and they were afterwards accused by others they should be
subjected to the ordeal of the Tangena, and slain or reduced to
perpetual slavery if found guilty.

The whole city was in a panic.  No one felt safe.  Under the influence
of fear some accused themselves, expecting, no doubt, that their
punishment would be lightened.  Others remained quiet, hoping that they
might escape detection, while many were accused by false friends as well
as by enemies, and fell victims under the poison ordeal.  Others, again,
stood firm, and boldly proclaimed their faith in the Lord Jesus and
their readiness to die if need be for His cause.

After the accusations, trials, and investigations, sentences were read
which deprived four hundred officers and nobles of their honours, and
levied fines on the remainder to the number of about two thousand.  One
would have thought that the mere necessity for such widespread
punishment would have shown the Queen how deeply the new religion had
taken root, and how hopeless it was to attempt its suppression, but she
did not see it in that light.  On the contrary, she issued a mandate
requiring all books to be delivered up to her officers, and threatening
death against any who should keep back or hide even a single leaf.  She
also commanded her subjects never again even to "think of the Christian
lessons they had learned, but to blot them from their memories for
ever!"

Among those who boldly held to their opinions was the Queen's own son
Rakota, who, however, as we have seen, did not run quite so much risk as
others, owing to his mother's affection for him.  The Prime Minister's
son, also, and Prince Ramonja, made no effort to conceal their opinions,
though they were wise enough to refrain from exasperating the angry
Queen by asserting them openly.

One morning the Prime Minister sent a message to the Court Physician,
requiring his immediate attendance at the palace.  Mark was seated in
his own room at the time, talking with Hockins and Ebony about the
gloomy state of affairs.  A slight feeling of dismay fluttered the heart
of each when the message came, for death-warrants were much in the air
at that time.

"Oh, massa, p'r'aps dey're a-goin' to kill you!" was the negro's
comforting suggestion.

"More likely they want him to cure the Queen," said Hockins.

"Couldn't you, massa," whispered Ebony, with a terribly solemn
countenance, "mix a spoonful--a bery small spoonful--ob prussic acid, or
creosote, or suffin ob dat sort, wid 'er physic?"

Mark laughed, and shook his head as he went out.

He found Rainiharo, with a tremendous frown on his face and deep lines
of care on his brow, seated in front of our friend the Secretary, who
had an open book on his knee.  Three other officers of the palace sat
beside them.  These constituted a court of inquiry into the contents of
the suspected books, and the Secretary, being the only literary
character among them, was the appointed reader.

"Come here.  Sit down," said Rainiharo, sternly pointing to a seat; "we
want you to explain your books.  The Queen commands us to examine them,
and, if we find anything contrary to her wishes in them, to condemn them
to the flames.  But it seems to us that there is nothing in them but
rubbish which we cannot understand."

Strange, is it not, that in barbaric as well as in civilised lands,
people are apt to regard as rubbish that which they do not understand?

So thought the Court Physician, but he wisely held his tongue and sat
down.

"This book," said the Prime Minister, pointing with a look of mingled
contempt and exasperation to the volume on the Secretary's knee, "is
worse than the last.  The one we condemned yesterday was what you call
your Bible.  We began with it because it was the biggest book.  Being
practical men we began at the beginning, intending to go straight
through and give it a fair hearing.  We began at Gen--Gen--what was it?"

"Genesis," answered the Secretary.

"Genzis--yes.  Well, we found nothing to object to in the first verse,
but in the second--the very second--we found the word `darkness.'  This
was sufficient!  Queen Ranavalona does not like darkness, so we
condemned it at once--unanimously--for we could not for a moment
tolerate anything with _darkness_ in it."

Mark felt an almost irresistible desire to laugh outright, but as the
gratification of that desire might have cost him his head he did resist
it successfully.

"Now," continued the Prime Minister, with a darker frown, "we have got
to the Pil--Pil--what is it?"

"_Pilgrim's Progress_," answered the Secretary.  "Just so--the _Pilgim's
Progress_.  Well, we agreed that we would give the _Pil--Pilgim's
Progress_ a better chance, so we opened it, as it were, anyhow, and what
do we come on--the very first thing--but a man named Obstinate!  Now, if
there is one thing that the Queen hates more than another it is an
obstinate man.  She cannot abide obstinate men.  In fact, she has none
such about her, for the few men of that sort that have turned up now and
then have invariably lost their heads.  But we wanted to be fair, so we
read on, and what do we find as one of the first things that Obstinate
says?  He says, `Tush! away with your book!'  Now, if the man himself
condemns the book, is our Queen likely to spare it?  But there are some
things in the book which we cannot understand, so we have sent for you
to explain it.  Now," added Rainiharo, turning to the Secretary,
"translate all that to the maker of physic and tell me what he has to
answer."

It was a strange and difficult duty that our young student was thus
unexpectedly and suddenly called to perform, and never before had he
felt so deeply the difference between knowing a subject and expounding
it.  There was no escape, however, from the situation.  He was not only
bound by fear of his life, but by Scripture itself, "to give a reason of
the hope that was in him," and he rose to the occasion with vigour,
praying, mentally, for guidance, and also blessing his mother for having
subjected him in childhood--much against his will!--to a pretty stiff
and systematic training in the truths of Scripture as well as in the
story of the _Pilgrim's Progress_.

But no exposition that he could give sufficed to affect the foregone
conclusion that both the Bible and the Pilgrim, containing as they did
matter that was offensive to the Queen, were worthy of condemnation,
and, therefore, doomed to the flames.

Having settled this knotty point in a statesmanlike manner, Rainiharo
bade Mark and the Secretary remain with him, and dismissed his three
colleagues.

"You see," he said, after some moments of anxious thought, "although I
agree with the Queen in her desire to stamp out the Christian religion,
I have no desire that my son and my nephew should be stamped out along
with it; therefore I wish to have your assistance, doctor, in turning
the mind of Ranavalona away from persecution to some extent for in her
present mood she is dangerous alike to friend and foe.  Indeed I would
not give much for your own life if she becomes more violent.  How is
this to be done, think you?"

The question was indeed a puzzler, for it amounted to this--

"How are we to manage a furious, blood-thirsty woman with the reins
loose on her neck and the bit fast in her teeth?"

"I know not," said Mark at last, "but I will think the matter over and
talk with you again."

"If I may be allowed to speak," said the Secretary.

"You are allowed," returned the Premier.

"Then I would advise that the Queen should arrange a grand journey--a
procession--all over the country, with thousands of her soldiers.  This
will let her have plenty of fresh air and exercise, change of scene, and
excitement, and will give her something to do till her blood cools.  At
the same time it will show the people her great power and perhaps induce
them to be cautious how they resist her will."

"The idea is good," said Mark, with animation, "so good that I would
advise its being carried out immediately--even before another week
passes."

Rainiharo shook his head.  "Impossible.  There is to be a great
bull-fight this week, and you know Ranavalona will allow nothing to
interfere with that.  Besides, it takes time to get up such an
expedition as you suggest.  However, I like the notion well.  Go.  I
will think over it and see you again."

The bull-fighting to which the Premier referred was a favourite
amusement with this blood-thirsty woman, and the spectacle usually took
place in the royal court-yard.  Rainiharo was right when he said the
Queen would not forego it, but she was so pleased with the plan of a
royal progress through the country that she gave orders to make ready
for it at once in an extensive scale.

"You will of course accompany me," she said to Mark, when he was
summoned to a subsequent audience, "I may be ill, or my bearers may fall
and I may be injured."

"Certainly," he replied, "nothing would afford the Court Physician
greater pleasure than to attend upon her Majesty on such an expedition.
But I would ask a favour," continued Mark.  "May my black servant
accompany me?  He is very useful in assisting me with my medicines,
and--"

"Yes, yes," interrupted the Queen, "let him go with you by all means.
He shall have bearers if you choose.  And take yon other man also--with
his music.  I love his little pipe!"

In some excitement Mark went off to tell his comrades the news--which
Hockins received with a grunt of satisfaction, and the negro with a
burst of joy.  Indeed the anxieties and worries they had recently
experienced in the city, coupled with the tyranny and bloodshed which
they witnessed, had so depressed the three friends that the mere idea of
getting once again into the fresh free open plains and forests afforded
them pleasure somewhat akin to that of the school-boy when he obtains an
unexpected holiday.

Great was the excitement all over the country when the Queen's intention
was made known.  The idea was not indeed a novelty.  Malagasy sovereigns
had been in the habit of making such progresses from time to time in
former years.  The wise King Radama the First frequently went on hunting
expeditions with more or less of display.  But knowing as they did, only
too well, the cruel character of Ranavalona the First, the people feared
that the desire to terrify and suppress had more to do with the event
than pleasure or health.

At last, everything being complete, the Queen left the capital, and
directed her course to the south-westward.  Her enormous retinue
consisted of the members of the Government, the principal military and
civil officers and their wives, six thousand soldiers, and a host of
slaves, bearers, and other attendants; the whole numbering about 40,000
souls.

Great preparations had been made for the journey in the way of providing
large stores of rice, herds of cattle, and other provisions, but those
who knew the difficulties of the proposed route, and the thinly
populated character of the country, looked with considerable
apprehension on the prospects of the journey.  Some there were, no
doubt, who regarded these prospects with a lively hope that the Queen
might never more return to her capital!

Of course such a multitude travelled very slowly, as may well be
believed when it is said that they had about 1500 palanquins in the
host, for there was not a wheeled vehicle in Madagascar at that time.
The soldiers were formed in five divisions; one carrying the tents, one
the cooking apparatus and spears, and one the guns and sleeping-mats.
The other two had always to be in readiness for any service required
about the Queen.  The camp was divided into four parts; the Queen being
in the middle, in a blue tent, surrounded, wherever she halted for the
night, by high palisades, and near to this was pitched a tent containing
the idols of the royal family.  The tent of the Prime Minister, with the
Malagasy flag, was pitched to the north of that of the Queen.  East,
west, and south, were occupied by other high officers of State, and
among the latter was the tent of our friends, Mark, Hockins, and Ebony.

"Now," said the first of these, as he sat in the door of the tent one
evening after supper, watching the rich glow of sunshine that flooded a
wide stretch of beautiful country in front of him, "this would be
perfect felicity if only we had freedom to move about at our own
pleasure and hunt up the treasures in botany, entomology, etcetera, that
are scattered around us."

