were--but they reached it without having observed the slightest trace of
animal life.

"Up the hill!" cried Lucien, beckoning to the others, and cheering them
with his weak voice, "Up the hill!"

On they went, up the steep declivity--Marengo toiling on after them.
The dog looked downcast and despairing.  He really appeared to know the
conditions that had been made for his life.  His masters, as they crept
upward, looked sharply before them.  Every tuft that appeared above the
snow was scrutinised, and every inch of the ground, as it came into
view, was examined.

At length they crossed the escarpment of the hill, and stood upon the
summit.  They gazed forward with disappointed feelings.  The hill-top
was a sort of table plain, of about three hundred yards in diameter.  It
was covered with snow, nearly a foot in depth.  A few heads of withered
grass were seen above the surface, but not enough to subdue the uniform
white that prevailed all over.  There was no creature upon it; that was
evident.  A bird as big as a sparrow, or a quadruped as large as a
shrew-mouse, could have been seen upon any part of it.  A single glance
satisfied all of them that no living thing was there.

They halted without proceeding farther.  Some of them could not have
gone another mile, and all of them were tottering in their tracks.
Marengo had arrived upon the summit, and stood a little to one side,
with the sledge behind him.

"_You_ must do it!" said Basil, speaking to Norman in a hoarse voice,
and turning his head away.  Lucien and Francois stepped aside at the
same time, and stood as if looking down the hill.  The countenances of
all three betokened extreme sorrow.  There was a tear in Basil's eye
that he was trying to wipe away with his sleeve.

The sharp click of Norman's gun was heard behind them, and they were all
waiting for the report, when, at that moment, a dark shadow passing over
the white declivity arrested their attention!  It was the shadow of a
bird upon the wing.  The simultaneous exclamation of all three stayed
Norman's finger--already pressing upon the trigger--and the latter,
turning round, saw that they were regarding some object in the air.  It
was a bird of great size--almost as large as an eagle, but with the
plumage of a swan.  It was white all over--both body and wings--white as
the snow over which it was sailing.  Norman knew the bird at a glance.
Its thick short neck and large head--its broad-spreading wings, of milky
whiteness, were not to be mistaken.  It was the "great snowy owl" of the
Arctic regions.

Its appearance suddenly changed the aspect of affairs.  Norman let the
butt of his rifle fall to the ground, and stood, like the rest, watching
the bird in its flight.

The snowy owl (_Strix nyctea_) is, perhaps, the most beautiful, as it is
one of the most powerful birds of its genus--of which there are more
than a dozen in North America.  It is a bird of the Polar regions--even
the most remote--and in the dead of winter it is found within the Arctic
circle, on both Continents--although at the same season it also wanders
farther south.  It dwells upon the Barren Grounds as well as in wooded
districts.  In the former it squats upon the snow, where its peculiar
colour often prevents it from being noticed by the passing hunter.
Nature has furnished it with every protection from the cold.  Its
plumage is thick, closely matted, and downy, and it is feathered to the
very eyes--so that its legs appear as large as those of a good-sized
dog.  The bill, too, is completely hidden under a mass of feathers that
cover its face, and not even a point of its whole body is exposed.

The owl is usually looked upon as a night-bird, and in Southern
latitudes it is rarely seen by day; but the owls of the Northern regions
differ from their congeners in this respect.  They hunt by day, even
during the bright hours of noon.  Were it not so, how could they exist
in the midst of an Arctic summer, when the days are months in duration?
Here we have another example of the manner in which Nature trains her
wild creatures to adapt themselves to their situation.

At least a dozen species of owls frequent the territory of the Hudson's
Bay Company--the largest of which is the cinereous owl, whose wings have
a spread of nearly five feet.  Some species migrate south on the
approach of winter; while several, as the snowy owl, remain to prey upon
the ptarmigan, the hares, and other small quadrupeds, who, like
themselves, choose that dreary region for their winter home.

Our travellers, as I have said, stood watching the owl as it soared
silently through the heavens.  Francois had thrown his gun across his
left arm, in hopes he might get a shot at it; but the bird--a shy one at
all times--kept away out of range; and, after circling once or twice
over the hill, uttered a loud cry and flew off.

Its cry resembled the moan of a human being in distress; and its effect
upon the minds of our travellers, in the state they then were, was far
from being pleasant.  They watched the bird with despairing looks, until
it was lost against the white background of a snow-covered hill.

They had noticed that the owl appeared to be just taking flight when
they first saw it.  It must have risen up from the hill upon which they
were; and they once more ran their eyes along the level summit, curious
to know where it had been perched that they had not seen it.  No doubt,
reflected they, it had been near enough, but its colour had rendered it
undistinguishable from the snow.

"What a pity!" exclaimed Francois.

While making these reflections, and sweeping their glances around, an
object caught their eyes that caused some of them to ejaculate and
suddenly raise their guns.  This object was near the centre of the
summit table, and at first sight appeared to be only a lump of snow; but
upon closer inspection, two little round spots of a dark colour, and
above these two elongated black marks, could be seen.  Looking steadily,
the eye at length traced the outlines of an animal, that sat in a
crouching attitude.  The round spots were its eyes, and the black marks
above them were tips of a pair of very long ears.  All the rest of its
body was covered with a soft white fur, hardly to be distinguished from
the snow upon which it rested.

The form and colour of the animal, but more especially its long erect
ears, made it easy for them to tell what it was.  All of them saw it was
a hare.

"Hush!" continued Norman, as soon as he saw it, "keep still all of you--
leave it to me."

"What shall we do?" demanded Basil.  "Can we not assist you?"

"No," was the reply, uttered in a whisper, "stay where you are.  Keep
the dog quiet.  I'll manage puss, if the owl hasn't scared her too
badly.  That scream has started her out of her form.  I'm certain she
wasn't that way before.  Maybe she'll sit it out.  Lucky the sun's
high--don't move a step.  Have the dog ready, but hold him tight, and
keep a sharp look out if she bolts."

After giving these instructions, that were all uttered quickly and in an
under tone, Norman moved off, with his gun carried across his arm.  He
did not move in the direction of the hare, but rather as if he was going
from her.  His course, however, bent gradually into a circle of which
the hare was the centre--the diameter being the full breadth of the
summit level, which was about three hundred yards.  In this circle he
walked round and round, keeping his eye fixed upon the crouching animal.
When he had nearly completed one circumference, he began to shorten the
diameter--so that the curve which he was now following was a spiral one,
and gradually drawing nearer to the hare.  The latter kept watching him
as he moved--curiosity evidently mingling with her fears.  Fortunately,
as Norman had said, the sun was nearly in the vertex of the heavens, and
his own body cast very little shadow upon the snow.  Had it been
otherwise, the hare would have been frightened at the moving shadow, and
would have sprung out of her form, before he could have got within
range.

When he had made some four or five circuits, Norman moved slower and
slower, and then stopped nearly opposite to where the others were.
These stood watching him with beating hearts, for they knew that the
life of Marengo, and perhaps their own as well, depended on the shot.
Norman had chosen his place, so that in case the hare bolted, she might
run towards them, and give them the chance of a flying shot.  His gun
was already at his shoulder--his finger rested on the trigger, and the
boys were expecting the report, when again the shadow of a bird flitted
over the snow, a loud human-like scream sounded in their ears, and the
hare was seen to spring up, and stretch her long legs in flight.  At the
same instant the great snowy owl was observed wheeling above, and
threatening to pounce upon the fleeing animal!

The hare ran in a side-direction, but it brought her as she passed
within range of the party by the sledge.  The owl kept above her as she
ran.  A dozen leaps was all the hare ever made.  A loud crack was heard,
and she was seen to spring up and fall back upon the snow, dead as a
doornail.  Like an echo another crack followed--a wild scream rang
through the air, and the great white owl fell fluttering to the earth.
The reports were not of a rifle.  They were the louder detonations of a
shot-gun.  All eyes were turned towards Francois, who, like a little
god, stood enveloped in a halo of blue smoke.  Francois was the hero of
the hour.

Marengo rushed forward and seized the struggling owl, that snapped its
bill at him like a watch-man's rattle.  But Marengo did not care for
that; and seizing its head in his teeth, gave it a crunch that at once
put an end to its flapping.

Marengo was reprieved, and he seemed to know it, as he bounded over the
snow, waving his tail, and barking like a young fool.

They all ran up to the hare, which proved to be the "Polar hare" (_Lepus
glacialis_), and one of the largest of its species--not less than
fifteen pounds in weight.  Its fur, soft and white like swan-down, was
stained with red blood.  It was not quite dead.  Its little heart yet
beat faintly, and the light of life was still shining from its beautiful
honey-coloured eyes.  Both it and the owl were taken up and carried to
the sledge, which was once more attached to Marengo, as the party
intended to go forward and halt under the shelter of the hill.

"There must be some wood in this quarter," remarked Norman: "I never
knew this sort of hare far from timber."

"True," said Lucien, "the Polar hare feeds upon willows, arbutus, and
the Labrador tea-plant.  Some of these kinds must be near."

While they were speaking, they had reached the brow of the hill, on the
opposite side from where they had ascended.  On looking into the valley
below, to their great joy they beheld some clumps of willows, and
good-sized trees of poplar, birch, and spruce-pine (_Pinus alba_), and
passing down the hill, the travellers soon stood in their midst.
Presently was heard the chipping sound of an axe and crash of falling
timber, and in a few moments after a column of smoke was seen soaring up
out of the valley, and curling cheerfully towards the bright blue sky.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

THE JUMPING MOUSE AND THE ERMINE.

Large as the hare was, she would have made but a meal for our four
hungry voyageurs, had they eaten at will.  By Lucien's advice, however,
they restrained themselves, and half of her was left for supper, when
the "cook" promised to make them hare-soup.  The head, feet, and other
spare bits, fell to Marengo's share.  The owl, whose flesh was almost as
white as its plumage, and, as Norman well knew, most delicate eating,
was reserved for to-morrow's breakfast.

They had pitched their tent with the intention of remaining at that
place all night, and continuing their journey next day; but, as it still
wanted several hours of sunset, and the strength of all was considerably
recruited, they resolved to hunt about the neighbourhood as long as they
had light.  It was of great importance that they should procure more
game.  The owl would make but a spare breakfast, and after that where
was the next meal to come from?  They had had a temporary relief, and
while their strength lasted, they must use every effort to procure a
further supply.  The valley in which their new camp was placed looked
well for game.  It was a sort of oasis in the Barren Grounds.  There was
a lake and a considerable skirting of timber around it--consisting, as
we have said, of willows, poplars, spruce-pine, and dwarf birch-trees
(_Betula nana_).  The Alpine arbutus, whose berries are the food of many
species of animals, also grew upon the side of the hills; and the
Labrador tea-plant (_Ledum palustre_) was found upon the low ground
around the lake.  The leaves of this last is a favourite food of the
Polar hare, and our voyageurs had no doubt but that there were many of
these animals in the neighbourhood.  Indeed, they had better evidence
than conjecture, for they saw numerous hare-tracks in the snow.  There
were tracks of other animals too, for it is a well-known fact that where
one kind exists, at least two or three others will be found in the same
habitat--all being connected together by a "chain of destruction."

A singular illustration of this was afforded to Lucien, who remained at
the camp while the rest went out hunting.  He had gathered some of the
leaves of the Labrador tea, and was drying them over the coals,
intending to cheer his comrades with a cup of this beverage after
supper.  The hare-soup was boiling, and the "cook" sat listening to the
cheerful sounds that issued from the pot--now and then taking off the
lid to examine its savoury contents, and give them a stir.  He would
then direct his attention to the tea-leaves that were parching in the
frying-pan; and, having shifted them a little, felt himself at liberty
to look about for a minute or two.

On one of these occasions, while glancing up, his attention was
attracted to an object which appeared upon the snow at a short distance
from where he sat.  A wreath of snow, that had formed under the shelter
of the hill, extended all around its base, presenting a steep front in
every direction.  This front was only two or three feet in height; but
the top surface of the wreath was many yards wide--in fact, it extended
back until it became blended with the slope of the hill.  It was smooth
and nearly level, but the hill above was steep, and somewhat rough and
rocky.  The steep front of the wreath came down within half-a-dozen
paces of the fire where Lucien was seated; and it was upon the top or
scarpment of it that the object appeared that had drawn his attention.
It was a small creature, but it was in motion, and thus had caught his
eye.

A single glance showed him that the little animal was a mouse, but of a
somewhat singular species.  It was about the size of the common mouse,
but quite different in colour.  The upper half of its body was of a
light mahogany tint, while the lower half, including the legs and feet,
were of a milky whiteness.  It was, in fact, the "white-footed mouse"
(_Mus leucopus_), one of the most beautiful of its kind.

Here and there above the surface of the snow protruded the tops of
arbutus-trees; and the little creature was passing from one of these to
the other, in search, no doubt, of the berries that remain upon these
trees all the winter.  Sometimes it ran from point to point like any
other mouse, but now and then it would rear itself on its hind-legs, and
leap several feet at a single bound!  In this it evidently assisted
itself by pressing its tail--in which it possesses muscular power--
against the snow.  This peculiar mode of progression has obtained for it
the name of the "jumping mouse," and among the Indians "deer"-mouse,
because its leap reminds them of the bounding spring of the deer.  But
there are still other species of "jumping mice" in America that possess
this power to a greater degree even than the _Mus leucopus_.

Lucien watched its motions without attempting to interfere with it,
until it had got nearly out of sight.  He did not desire to do injury to
the little creature, nor was he curious to obtain it, as he had already
met with many specimens, and examined them to his satisfaction.  He had
ceased to think of it, and would, perhaps, never have thought of it
again, but, upon turning his eyes in the opposite direction, he observed
another animal upon the snow.  This creature had a far different aspect
from the mouse.  Its body was nearly a foot in length, although not much
thicker than that of the other!  Its legs were short, but strong, and
its forehead broad and arched convexly.  It had a tail more than half
the length of the body, hairy, and tapering like that of a cat.  Its
form was the well-known form of the weasel, and it was, in fact, a
species of weasel.  It was the celebrated _ermine (Mustela erminea_),
celebrated for its soft and beautiful fur, so long prized as an ornament
for the robes of the rich.  It was white all over, with the exception of
its tail; and that, for about an inch or so at the tip, was covered with
black silky hair.  On some parts of the body, too, the white was tinged
with a primrose yellow; but this tinge is not found in all animals of
this species, as some individuals are pure white.  Of course it was now
in its winter "robes;" but in the summer it changes to a colour that
does not differ much from that of the common weasel.

When Lucien first saw it, it was running along the top of the wreath,
and coming from the same direction from which the mouse had come.  Now
