
"No'n 't all," replied the old African, somewhat curtly.

"De p'ints er dat tale, honey," said Uncle Remus, covering the
brusqueness of Daddy Jack with his own amiability, "is des 'bout lak
dis, dat dey ain't no use er dodgin' w'iles dey's a big fuss gwine on,
but you better take'n hide out w'en dey ain't no racket; mo' speshually
w'en you see Miss Sally lookin' behine de lookin'-glass fer dat ar
peach-lim' w'at she tuck'n make me kyar up dar day 'fo' yistiddy; yit
w'en she fine it don't you git too skeer'd, 'kaze I tuck'n make some
weak places in dat ar switch, en Miss Sally won't mo'n strak you wid it
'fo' hit'll all come onjinted."

Parts of this moral the little boy understood thoroughly, for he
laughed, and ran to the big house, and not long afterwards the light
went out in Uncle Remus's cabin; but the two old negroes sat and nodded
by the glowing embers for hours afterwards, dreaming dreams they never
told of.


FOOTNOTE:

[74] One gun two times is a double-barrelled gun.




LVIII

THE ORIGIN OF THE OCEAN


"Uncle Remus," said the little boy, one night shortly after Daddy Jack's
story of the lion's sad predicament, "mamma says there are no lions in
Georgia, nor anywhere in the whole country."

"Tooby sho'ly not, honey; tooby sho'ly not!" exclaimed Uncle Remus. "I
dunner who de name er goodness bin a-puttin' dat kinder idee in yo'
head, en dey better not lemme fine um out, needer, 'kaze I'll take en
put Mars John atter um right raw en rank, dat I will."

"Well, you know Daddy Jack said that Brother Rabbit met the Lion coming
down the road."

"Bless yo' soul, honey! dat's 'way 'cross de water whar ole man Jack
tuck'n come fum, en a mighty long time ergo at dat. Hit's away off yan,
lots furder dan Ferginny yit. We-all er on one side de water, en de
lions en mos' all de yuther servigous creeturs, dey er on t'er side.
Ain't I never tell you how come dat?"

The little boy shook his head.

"Well, _sir_! I dunner w'at I bin doin' all dis time dat I ain't tell
you dat, 'kaze dat's whar de wussest kinder doin's tuck'n happen.
Yasser! de wussest kinder doin's; en I'll des whirl in en gin it out
right now 'fo' ole man Jack come wobblin' in.

"One time way back yander, 'fo' dey wuz any folks a-foolin' 'roun', Mr.
Lion, he tuck'n tuck a notion dat he'd go huntin', en nothin' 'ud do 'im
but Brer Rabbit must go wid 'im. Brer Rabbit, he 'low dat he up fer any
kinder fun on top side er de groun'. Wid dat dey put out, dey did, en
dey hunt en hunt clean 'cross de country.

"Mr. Lion, he'd lam aloose en miss de game, en den Brer Rabbit, he'd lam
aloose en fetch it down. No sooner is he do dis dan Mr. Lion, he'd
squall out:--

"'Hit's mine! hit's mine! I kilt it!'

"Mr. Lion sech a big man dat Brer Rabbit skeer'd ter 'spute 'long wid
'im, but he lay it up in he min' fer to git even wid 'im. Dey went on en
dey went on. Mr. Lion, he'd lam aloose en miss de game, en ole Brer
Rabbit, he'd lam aloose en hit it, en Mr. Lion, he'd take'n whirl in en
claim it.

"Dey hunt all day long, en w'en night come, dey 'uz sech a fur ways fum
home dat dey hatter camp out. Dey went on, dey did, twel dey come ter a
creek, en w'en dey come ter dat, dey tuck'n scrape away de trash en
built um a fire on de bank, en cook dey supper.

"Atter supper dey sot up dar en tole tales, dey did, en Brer Rabbit, he
tuck'n brag 'bout w'at a good hunter Mr. Lion is, en Mr. Lion, he leant
back on he yelbow, en feel mighty biggity. Bimeby, w'en dey eyeleds git
sorter heavy, Brer Rabbit, he up'n 'low:--

"'I'm a monst'us heavy sleeper, Mr. Lion, w'en I gits ter nappin', en I
hope en trus' I ain't gwine 'sturb you dis night, yit I got my doubts.'

"Mr. Lion, he roach he ha'r back outen he eyes, en 'low:--

"'I'm a monst'us heavy sleeper myse'f, Brer Rabbit, en I'll feel mighty
glad ef I don't roust you up in de co'se er de night.'

"Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n change his terbacker fum one side he mouf ter de
yuther, he did, en he up'n 'low:--

"'Mr. Lion, I wish you be so good ez ter show me how you sno' des' fo'
you git soun' asleep.'

"Mr. Lion, he tuck'n draw in he breff sorter hard, en show Brer Rabbit;
den Brer Rabbit 'low:--

"'Mr. Lion, I wish you be so good ez ter show me how you sno' atter yo
done git soun' asleep.'

"Mr. Lion, he tuck'n suck in he breff, en eve'y time he suck in he breff
it soun' des lak a whole passel er mules w'en dey whinney atter fodder.
Brer Rabbit look 'stonish'. He roll he eye en 'low:--

"'I year tell youer mighty big man, Mr. Lion, en you sho'ly is.'

"Mr. Lion, he hol' he head one side en try ter look 'shame', but all de
same he ain't feel 'shame'. Bimeby, he shot he eye en 'gun ter nod, den
he lay down en stretch hisse'f out, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he 'gun ter
sno' lak he sno' w'en he ain't sleepin' soun'.

"Brer Rabbit, he lay dar. He ain't sayin' nothin'. He lay dar wid one
year h'ist up en one eye open. He lay dar, he did, en bimeby Mr. Lion
'gun ter sno' lak he sno' w'en he done gone fas' ter sleep.

"W'en ole Brer Rabbit year dis, he git up fum dar, en sprinkle hisse'f
wid de cole ashes 'roun' de fier, en den he tuck'n fling er whole passel
der hot embers on Mr. Lion. Mr. Lion, he jump up, he did, en ax who done
dat, en Brer Rabbit, he lay dar en kick at he year wid he behime foot,
en holler '_Ow!_'

"Mr. Lion see de ashes on Brer Rabbit, en he dunner w'at ter t'ink. He
look all 'roun', but he ain't see nothin'. He drap he head en lissen,
but he ain't year nothin'. Den he lay down 'g'in en drap off ter sleep.
Atter w'ile, w'en he 'gun ter sno' lak he done befo', Brer Rabbit, he
jump up en sprinkle some mo' cole ashes on hisse'f, en fling de hot
embers on Mr. Lion. Mr. Lion jump up, he did, en holler:--

"'Dar yo is 'g'in!'

"Brer Rabbit, he kick en squall, en 'low:--

"'You oughter be 'shame' yo'se'f, Mr. Lion, fer ter be tryin' ter bu'n
me up.'

"Mr. Lion hol' up he han's en des vow 't ain't him. Brer Rabbit, he look
sorter jubous, but he ain't say nothin'. Bimeby he holler out:--

"'Phewee! I smells rags a-bu'nin'!'

"Mr. Lion, he sorter flinch, he did, en 'low:--

"''T ain't no rags, Brer Rabbit; hit's my ha'r a-sinjin'.'

"Dey look all 'roun', dey did, but dey ain't see nothin' ner nobody.
Brer Rabbit, he say he gwine do some tall watchin' nex' time, 'kaze he
boun' ter ketch de somebody w'at bin playin' dem kinder pranks on um.
Wid dat, Mr. Lion lay down 'g'in, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he drap ter
sleep.

"Well, den," continued Uncle Remus, taking a long breath, "de ve'y same
kinder doin's tuck'n happen. De cole ashes fall on Brer Rabbit, en de
hot embers fall on Mr. Lion. But by de time Mr. Lion jump up, Brer
Rabbit, he holler out:--

"'I seed um, Mr. Lion! I seed um! I seed de way dey come fum 'cross de
creek! Dey mos' sho'ly did!'

"Wid dat Mr. Lion, he fetch'd a beller en he jumped 'cross de creek. No
sooner is he do dis," Uncle Remus went on in a tone at once impressive
and confidential, "no sooner is he do dis dan Brer Rabbit cut de string
w'at hol' de banks togedder, en, lo en beholes, dar dey wuz!"

"What was, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked, more amazed than he had
been in many a day.

"Bless yo' soul, honey, de banks! Co'se w'en Brer Rabbit tuck'n cut de
string, de banks er de creek, de banks, dey fall back, dey did, en Mr.
Lion can't jump back. De banks dey keep on fallin' back, en de creek
keep on gittin' wider en wider, twel bimeby Brer Rabbit en Mr. Lion
ain't in sight er one er n'er, en fum dat day to dis de big waters bin
rollin' 'twix' um."

"But, Uncle Remus, how could the banks of a creek be tied with a
string?"

"I ain't ax um dat, honey, en darfo' yo'll hatter take um ez you git um.
Nex' time de tale-teller come 'roun' I'll up'n ax 'im, en ef you ain't
too fur off, I'll whirl in en sen' you wud, en den you kin go en see fer
yo'se'f. But 't ain't skacely wuth yo' w'ile fer ter blame me, honey,
'bout de creek banks bein' tied wid a string. Who put um dar, I be bless
ef _I_ knows, but I knows who onloose um, dat w'at I knows!"

It is very doubtful if this copious explanation was satisfactory to the
child, but just as Uncle Remus concluded, Daddy Jack came shuffling in,
and shortly afterwards both Aunt Tempy and 'Tildy put in an appearance,
and the mind of the youngster was diverted to other matters.




LIX

BRER RABBIT GETS BRER FOX'S DINNER


After the new-comers had settled themselves in their accustomed places,
and 'Tildy had cast an unusual number of scornful glances at Daddy Jack,
who made quite a pantomime of his courtship, Uncle Remus startled them
all somewhat by breaking into a loud laugh.

"I boun' you," exclaimed Aunt Tempy, grinning with enthusiastic
sympathy, "I boun' you Brer Remus done fine out some mo' er Brer Rabbit
funny doin's; now I boun' you dat."

"You hit it de fus' clip, Sis Tempy, I 'clar' ter gracious ef you
ain't. You nailed it! You nailed it," Uncle Remus went on, laughing as
boisterously as before, "des lak ole Brer Rabbit done."

The little boy was very prompt with what Uncle Remus called his
"inquirements," and the old man, after the usual "hems" and "haws,"
began.

"Hit run'd 'cross my min' des lak a rat 'long a rafter, de way ole Brer
Rabbit tuk'n done Brer Fox. 'Periently, atter Brer Rabbit done went en
put a steeple on top er he house, all de yuther creeturs wanter fix up
dey house. Some put new cellars und' um, some slapped on new
winder-blines, some one thing and some er n'er, but ole Brer Fox, he
tuck a notion dat he'd put some new shingles on de roof.

"Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n year tell er dis, en nothin'd do but he mus'
rack 'roun' en see how ole Brer Fox gittin' on. W'en he git whar Brer
Fox house is, he year a mighty lammin' en a blammin' en lo en beholes,
dar 'uz Brer Fox settin' straddle er de comb er de roof nailin' on
shingles des hard ez he kin.

"Brer Rabbit cut he eye 'roun' en he see Brer Fox dinner settin' in de
fence-cornder. Hit 'uz kivered up in a bran new tin pail, en it look so
nice dat Brer Rabbit mouf 'gun ter water time he see it, en he 'low ter
hisse'f dat he bleedz ter eat dat dinner 'fo' he go 'way fum dar.

"Den Brer Rabbit tuck'n hail Brer Fox, en ax 'im how he come on. Brer
Fox 'low he too busy to hol' any confab. Brer Rabbit up en ax 'im w'at
is he doin 'up dar. Brer Fox 'low dat he puttin' roof on he house 'g'in
de rainy season sot in. Den Brer Rabbit up en ax Brer Fox w'at time is
it, en Brer Fox, he 'low dat hit's wukkin time wid him. Brer Rabbit, he
up en ax Brer Fox ef he ain't stan' in needs er some he'p. Brer Fox, he
'low he did, dat ef he does stan' in needs er any he'p, he dunner whar
in de name er goodness he gwine to git it at.

"Wid dat, Brer Rabbit sorter pull he mustarsh, en 'low dat de time wuz
w'en he 'uz a mighty handy man wid a hammer, en he ain't too proud fer
to whirl in en he'p Brer Fox out'n de ruts.

"Brer Fox 'low he be mighty much erblige, en no sooner is he say dat dan
Brer Rabbit snatched off he coat en lipt up de ladder, en sot in dar en
put on mo' shingles in one hour dan Brer Fox kin put on in two.

"Oh, he 'uz a rattler--ole Brer Rabbit wuz," Uncle Remus exclaimed,
noticing a questioning look in the child's face. "He 'uz a rattler, mon,
des ez sho' ez youer settin' dar. Dey wa'n't no kinder wuk dat Brer
Rabbit can't put he han' at, en do it better dan de nex' man.

"He nailed on shingles plum twel he git tired, Brer Rabbit did, en all
de time he nailin', he study how he gwine git dat dinner. He nailed en
he nailed. He 'ud nail one row, en Brer Fox 'ud nail 'n'er row. He
nailed en he nailed. He kotch Brer Fox en pass 'im--kotch 'im en pass
'im, twel bimeby w'iles he nailin' 'long Brer Fox tail git in he way.

"Brer Rabbit 'low ter hisse'f, he did, dat he dunner w'at de name er
goodness make folks have such long tails fer, en he push it out de way.
He ain't no mo'n push it out'n de way, 'fo' yer it come back in de way.
Co'se," continued Uncle Remus, beginning to look serious, "w'en dat's de
case dat a soon man lak Brer Rabbit git pester'd in he min', he bleedz
ter make some kinder accidents some'rs.

"Dey nailed en dey nailed, en, bless yo' soul! 't wa'n't long 'fo' Brer
Fox drap eve'yt'ing en squall out:--

"'Laws 'a' massy, Brer Rabbit! You done nail my tail. He'p me, Brer
Rabbit, he'p me! You done nail my tail!'"

Uncle Remus waved his arms, clasped and unclasped his hands, stamped
first one foot and then the other, and made various other demonstrations
of grief and suffering.

"Brer Rabbit, he shot fus' one eye en den de yuther en rub hisse'f on
de forrerd, en 'low:--

"'Sho'ly I ain't nail yo' tail, Brer Fox; sho'ly not. Look right close,
Brer Fox, be keerful. Fer goodness sake don' fool me, Brer Fox!'

"Brer Fox, _he_ holler, _he_ squall, _he_ kick, _he_ squeal.

"'Laws 'a' massy, Brer Rabbit! You done nailed my tail. Onnail me, Brer
Rabbit, onnail me!'

"Brer Rabbit, he make fer de ladder, en w'en he start down, he look at
Brer Fox lak he right down sorry, en he up'n 'low, he did:--

"'Well, well, well! Des ter t'ink dat I should er lamm'd aloose en nail
Brer Fox tail. I dunner w'en I year tell er anyt'ing dat make me feel so
mighty bad; en ef I had n't er seed it wid my own eyes I would n't er
bleev'd it skacely--dat I would n't!'

"Brer Fox holler, Brer Fox howl, yit 't ain't do no good. Dar he wuz wid
he tail nail hard en fas'. Brer Rabbit, he keep on talkin' w'iles he
gwine down de ladder.

"'Hit make me feel so mighty bad,' sezee, 'dat I dunner w'at ter do.
Time I year tell un it, hit make a empty place come in my stomach,' sez
Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"By dis time Brer Rabbit done git down on de groun', en w'iles Brer Fox
holler'n, he des keep on a-talkin'.

"'Dey's a mighty empty place in my stomach,' sezee, 'en ef I ain't run'd
inter no mistakes dey's a tin-pail full er vittles in dish yer
fence-cornder dat'll des 'bout fit it,' sez ole Brer Rabbit, sezee.

"He open de pail, he did, en he eat de greens, en sop up de 'lasses, en
drink de pot-liquor, en w'en he wipe he mouf 'pun he coat-tail, he up'n
'low:--

"'I dunner w'en I bin so sorry 'bout anything, ez I is 'bout Brer Fox
nice long tail. Sho'ly, sho'ly my head mus' er bin wool-getherin' w'en I
tuck'n nail Brer Fox fine long tail,' sez ole Brer Rabbit, sezee.

    [Illustration: "'I DUNNER W'EN I BIN SO SORRY 'BOUT ANYTHING,
    EZ I IS 'BOUT BRER FOX NICE LONG TAIL'"]

"Wid dat, he tuck'n skip out, Brer Rabbit did, en 't wa'n't long 'fo'
he 'uz playin' he pranks in some yuther parts er de settlement."

"How did Brother Fox get loose?" the little boy asked.

"Oh, you let Brer Fox 'lone fer dat," responded Uncle Remus. "Nex' ter
Brer Rabbit, ole Brer Fox wuz mos' de shiftiest creetur gwine. I boun'
you he tuck'n tuck keer hisse'f soon ez Brer Rabbit git outer sight en
year'n."





[Illustration: How the Bear nursed the Little Alligator]

LX

HOW THE BEAR NURSED THE LITTLE ALLIGATORS


While the negroes were talking of matters which the little boy took
little or no interest in, he climbed into Uncle Remus's lap, as he had
done a thousand times before. Presently the old man groaned, and said:--

"I be bless ef I know w'at de marter, honey. I dunner whe'er I'm
a-gittin' fibble in de lim's, er whe'er youer outgrowin' me. I lay I'll
hatter sen' out en git you a nuss w'at got mo' strenk in dey lim's dan
w'at I is."

The child protested that he was n't very heavy, and that he would n't
have any nurse, and the old man was about to forget that he had said
anything about nurses, when Daddy Jack, who seemed to be desirous of
appearing good-humored in the presence of 'Tildy, suddenly exclaimed:--

"Me bin yeddy one tale 'bout da tam w'en da lil Bear is bin nuss da
'Gator chilluns. 'E bin mek fine nuss fer true. 'E stan' by dem lilly
'Gator tel dey no mo' fer stan' by."

Seeing that Daddy Jack manifested symptoms of going to sleep, the little
boy asked if he would n't tell the story, and, thus appealed to, the old
African began:--

"One tam dey is bin one ole Bear; 'e big un 'e strong. 'E lif way in da
swamp; 'e hab nes' in da holler tree. 'E hab one, two lilly Bear in da
nes'; 'e bin lub dem chillun berry ha'd. One day, 'e git honkry; 'e tell
'e chillun 'e gwan 'way off fer git-a some bittle fer eat; 'e tell dem
dey mus' be good chillun un stay wey dey lif. 'E say 'e gwan fer fetch
dem one fish fer dey brekwus. Dun 'e gone off.

"Da lil Bear chillun hab bin 'sleep till dey kin sleep no mo'. Da sun,
'e der shine wom, 'e mekky lilly Bear feel wom. Da lil boy Bear, 'e rub
'e y-eye, 'e say 'e gwan off fer hab some fun. Da lil gal Bear, 'e
say:--

"'Wut will we mammy say?'

"Lil boy Bear, 'e der lahff. 'E say:--

"'Me gwan down by da crik side fer ketch some fish 'fo' we mammy come.'

"Lil gal Bear, 'e look skeer; 'e say:--

"'We mammy say somet'ing gwan git-a you. Min' wut 'e tell you.'

"Lil boy Bear, 'e keep on lahff. 'E say:--

"'Shuh-shuh! 'E yent nebber know less you tell um. You no tell um, me
fetch-a you one big fish.'

"Lil boy Bear, 'e gone! 'E gone by da crik side, 'e tek 'e hook, 'e tek
'e line, 'e is go by da crik side fer ketch one fish. Wun 'e come
dey-dey, 'e see somet'ing lay dey in de mud. 'E t'ink it bin one big
log. 'E lahff by 'ese'f; 'e say:--

"''E one fine log fer true. Me 'tan' 'pon da log fer ketch-a da fish fer
me lil titty.'[75]

"Lil boy Bear, 'e der jump down; 'e git 'pon da log; 'e fix fer fish; 'e
fix 'e hook, 'e fix 'e line. Bumbye da log moof. Da lil boy Bear
holler:--

"'Ow ma Lordy!'

"'E look down; 'e skeer mos' dead. Da log bin one big 'Gator. Da 'Gator
'e swim 'way wit' da lil boy Bear 'pon 'e bahck. 'E flut 'e tail, 'e
knock da lil boy Bear spang in 'e two han'. 'E grin _wide_, 'e feel da
lil boy Bear wit' 'e nose; 'e say:--

"'I tekky you wey me lif; me chillun is hab you fer dey brekwus.'

"Da 'Gator, 'e bin swim toze da hole in da bank wey 'e lif. 'E come by
da hole, 'e ca' da lil boy Bear in dey. 'E is call up 'e chillun; 'e
say:--

"'Come see how fine brekwus me bin brung you.'

"Da ole 'Gator, 'e hab seben chillun in 'e bed. Da lil boy Bear git
skeer; 'e holler, 'e cry, 'e beg. 'E say:--

"'_Please_, Missy 'Gator, gib me chance fer show you how fine nuss me
is--_please_, Missy 'Gator. Wun you gone 'way, me min' dem chillun, me
min' um well.'

"Da 'Gator flut 'e tail; 'e say:--

"'I try you dis one day; you min' dem lil one well, me luf you be.'

"Da ole 'Gator gone 'way; 'e luf da lil boy Bear fer min' 'e chillun. 'E
gone git somet'ing fer dey brekwus. Da lil boy Bear, 'e set down
dey-dey; 'e min' dem chillun; 'e wait en 'e wait. Bumbye, 'e is git
honkry. 'E wait en 'e wait. 'E min' dem chillun. 'E wait en 'e wait. 'E
'come so honkry 'e yent mos' kin hol' up 'e head. 'E suck 'e paw. 'E
wait en 'e wait. Da 'Gator no come. 'E wait en 'e wait. Da 'Gator no
come some mo'. 'E say:--

"'Ow! me no gwan starf mese'f wun da planty bittle by side er me!'

"Da lil boy Bear grab one da lil 'Gator by 'e neck; 'e tek um off in da
bush side; 'e der eat um up. 'E no leaf 'e head, 'e no leaf 'e tail; 'e
yent leaf nuttin' 't all. 'E go bahck wey da turrer lil 'Gator bin
