
"But you are not to study at all, so you won't want those great
dictionaries," cried Jill, busily packing her new travelling-basket with
all sorts of little rolls, bags, and boxes.

"They are not dics, but my Encyclopedia. We shall want to know heaps
of things, and this tells about everything. With those books, and a
microscope and a telescope, you could travel round the world, and learn
all you wanted to. Can't possibly get on without them," said Frank,
fondly patting his favorite work.

"My patience! What queer cattle boys are!" exclaimed Mrs. Pecq, while
they all laughed. "It can't be done, Mr. Frank; all the boxes are brim
full, and you'll have to leave those fat books behind, for there's no
place anywhere."

"Then I'll carry them myself;" and Frank tucked one under each arm, with
a determined air, which settled the matter.

"I suppose you'll study cockleology instead of boating, and read up
on polywogs while we play tennis, or go poking round with your old
spy-glass instead of having a jolly good time," said Jack, hauling away
on the strap till all was taut and ship-shape with the bundle.

"Tadpoles don't live in salt water, my son, and if you mean conchology,
you'd better say so. I shall play as much as I wish, and when I want to
know about any new or curious thing, I shall consult my Cyclo, instead
of bothering other people with questions, or giving it up like a dunce;"
with which crushing reply Frank departed, leaving Jill to pack and
unpack her treasures a dozen times, and Jack to dance jigs on the lids
of the trunks till they would shut.

A very happy party set off the next day, leaving Mrs. Pecq waving her
apron on the steps. Mrs. Minot carried the lunch, Jack his precious
bundle with trifles dropping out by the way, and Jill felt very elegant
bearing her new basket with red worsted cherries bobbing on the outside.
Frank actually did take the Encyclopedia, done up in the roll of shawls,
and whenever the others wondered about anything--tides, lighthouses,
towns, or natural productions--he brought forth one of the books and
triumphantly read therefrom, to the great merriment, if not edification,
of his party.

A very short trip by rail and the rest of the journey by boat, to Jill's
great contentment, for she hated to be shut up; and while the lads roved
here and there she sat under the awning, too happy to talk. But Mrs.
Minot watched with real satisfaction how the fresh wind blew the color
back into the pale cheeks, how the eyes shone and the heart filled with
delight at seeing the lovely world again, and being able to take a share
in its active pleasures.

The Willows was a long, low house close to the beach, and as full as a
beehive of pleasant people, all intent on having a good time. A great
many children were swarming about, and Jill found it impossible to sleep
after her journey, there was such a lively clatter of tongues on the
piazzas, and so many feet going to and fro in the halls. She lay down
obediently while Mrs. Minot settled matters in the two airy rooms and
gave her some dinner, but she kept popping up her head to look out of
the window to see what she could see. Just opposite stood an artist's
cottage and studio, with all manner of charming galleries, towers,
steps, and even a sort of drawbridge to pull up when the painter wished
to be left in peace. He was absent now, and the visitors took possession
of this fine play-place. Children were racing up and down the galleries,
ladies sitting in the tower, boys disporting themselves on the roof, and
young gentlemen preparing for theatricals in the large studio.

"What fun I'll have over there," thought Jill, watching the merry scene
with intense interest, and wondering if the little girls she saw were as
nice as Molly and Merry.

Then there were glimpses of the sea beyond the green bank where a path
wound along to the beach, whence came the cool dash of waves, and now
and then the glimmer of a passing sail.

"Oh, when can I go out? It looks _so_ lovely, I can't wait long," she
said, looking as eager as a little gull shut up in a cage and pining for
its home on the wide ocean.

"As soon as it is a little cooler, dear, I'm getting ready for our trip,
but we must be careful and not do too much at once. 'Slow and sure' is
our motto," answered Mrs. Minot, busily collecting the camp-stools, the
shawls, the air-cushions, and the big parasols.

"I'll be good, only do let me have my sailor-hat to wear, and my new
suit. I'm not a bit tired, and I do want to be like other folks right
off," said Jill, who had been improving rapidly of late, and felt much
elated at being able to drive out nearly every day, to walk a little,
and sit up some hours without any pain or fatigue.

To gratify her, the blue flannel suit with its white trimming was put
on, and Mamma was just buttoning the stout boots when Jack thundered at
the door, and burst in with all sorts of glorious news.

"Do come out, mother, it's perfectly splendid on the beach! I've found
a nice place for Jill to sit, and it's only a step. Lots of capital
fellows here; one has a bicycle, and is going to teach us to ride. No
end of fun up at the hotel, and every one seems glad to see us. Two
ladies asked about Jill, and one of the girls has got some shells all
ready for her, Gerty Somebody, and her mother is so pretty and jolly,
I like her ever so much. They sit at our table, and Wally is the
boy, younger than I am, but very pleasant. Bacon is the fellow in
knickerbockers; just wish you could see what stout legs he's got! Cox
is the chap for me, though: we are going fishing to-morrow. He's got a
sweet-looking mother, and a sister for you, Jill. Now, then, _do_ come
on, I'll take the traps."

Off they went, and Jill thought that very short walk to the shore the
most delightful she ever took; for people smiled at the little invalid
as she went slowly by leaning on Mrs. Minot's arm, while Jack pranced in
front, doing the honors, as if he owned the whole Atlantic. A new world
opened to her eyes as they came out upon the pebbly beach full of people
enjoying their afternoon promenade. Jill save one rapturous "Oh!" and
then sat on her stool, forgetting everything but the beautiful blue
ocean rolling away to meet the sky, with nothing to break the wide
expanse but a sail here and there, a point of rocks on one hand, the
little pier on the other, and white gulls skimming by on their wide
wings.

While she sat enjoying herself, Jack showed his mother the place he had
found, and a very nice one it was. Just under the green bank lay an old
boat propped up with some big stones. A willow drooped over it, the tide
rippled up within a few yards of it, and a fine view of the waves could
be seen as they dashed over the rocks at the point.

"Isn't it a good cubby-house? Ben Cox and I fixed it for Jill, and she
can have it for hers. Put her cushions and things there on the sand the
children have thrown in--that will make it soft; then these seats will
do for tables; and up in the bow I'm going to have that old rusty tin
boiler full of salt-water, so she can put seaweed and crabs and all
sorts of chaps in it for an aquarium, you know," explained Jack, greatly
interested in establishing his family comfortably before he left them.

"There couldn't be a nicer place, and it is very kind of you to get it
ready. Spread the shawls and settle Jill, then you needn't think of us
any more, but go and scramble with Frank. I see him over there with his
spy-glass and some pleasant-looking boys," said Mamma, bustling about in
great spirits.

So the red cushions were placed, the plaids laid, and the little
work-basket set upon the seat, all ready for Jill, who was charmed with
her nest, and cuddled down under the big parasol, declaring she would
keep house there every day.

Even the old boiler pleased her, and Jack raced over the beach to begin
his search for inhabitants for the new aquarium, leaving Jill to make
friends with some pretty babies digging in the sand, while Mamma sat on
the camp-stool and talked with a friend from Harmony Village.

It seemed as if there could not be anything more delightful than to lie
there lulled by the sound of the sea, watching the sunset and listening
to the pleasant babble of little voices close by. But when they went to
tea in the great hall, with six tables full of merry people, and half a
dozen maids flying about, Jill thought that was even better, because it
was so new to her. Gerty and Wally nodded to her, and their pretty mamma
was so kind and so gay, that Jill could not feel bashful after the first
few minutes, and soon looked about her, sure of seeing friendly faces
everywhere. Frank and Jack ate as if the salt air had already improved
their appetites, and talked about Bacon and Cox as if they had been
bosom friends for years. Mamma was as happy as they, for her friend,
Mrs. Hammond, sat close by; and this rosy lady, who had been a
physician, cheered her up by predicting that Jill would soon be running
about as well as ever.

But the best of all was in the evening, when the elder people gathered
in the parlors and played Twenty Questions, while the children looked
on for an hour before going to bed, much amused at the sight of grown
people laughing, squabbling, dodging, and joking as if they had all
become young again; for, as every one knows, it is impossible to help
lively skirmishes when that game is played. Jill lay in the sofa corner
enjoying it all immensely; for she never saw anything so droll, and
found it capital fun to help guess the thing, or try to puzzle the
opposite side. Her quick wits and bright face attracted people, and
in the pauses of the sport she held quite a levee, for everybody was
interested in the little invalid. The girls shyly made friends in their
own way, the mammas told thrilling tales of the accidents their darlings
had survived, several gentlemen kindly offered their boats, and the
boys, with the best intentions in life, suggested strolls of two or
three miles to Rafe's Chasm and Norman's Woe, or invited her to tennis
and archery, as if violent exercise was the cure for all human ills. She
was very grateful, and reluctantly went away to bed, declaring, when she
got upstairs, that these new friends were the dearest people she ever
met, and the Willows the most delightful place in the whole world.

Next day a new life began for the young folks--a very healthy, happy
life; and all threw themselves into it so heartily, that it was
impossible to help getting great good from it, for these summer weeks,
if well spent, work miracles in tired bodies and souls. Frank took a
fancy to the bicycle boy, and, being able to hire one of the breakneck
articles, soon learned to ride it; and the two might be seen wildly
working their long legs on certain smooth stretches of road, or getting
up their muscle rowing about the bay till they were almost as brown and
nautical in appearance and language as the fishermen who lived in nooks
and corners along the shore.

Jack struck up a great friendship with the sturdy Bacon and the
agreeable Cox: the latter, being about his own age, was his especial
favorite; and they soon were called Box and Cox by the other fellows,
which did not annoy them a bit, as both had played parts in that
immortal farce. They had capital times fishing, scrambling over the
rocks, playing ball and tennis, and rainy days they took possession of
the studio opposite, drew up the portcullis, and gallantly defended
the castle, which some of the others besieged with old umbrellas for
shields, bats for battering-rams, and bunches of burrs for cannon-balls.
Great larks went on over there, while the girls applauded from the
piazza or chamber-windows, and made a gay flag for the victors to
display from the tower when the fight was over.

But Jill had the best time of all, for each day brought increasing
strength and spirits, and she improved so fast it was hard to believe
that she was the same girl who lay so long almost helpless in the Bird
Room at home. Such lively letters as she sent her mother, all about her
new friends, her fine sails, drives, and little walks; the good times
she had in the evening, the lovely things people gave her, and she was
learning to make with shells and sea-weed, and what splendid fun it was
to keep house in a boat.

This last amusement soon grew quite absorbing, and her "cubby," as she
called it, rapidly became a pretty grotto, where she lived like a little
mermaid, daily loving more and more the beauty of the wonderful sea.
Finding the boat too sunny at times, the boys cut long willow boughs and
arched them over the seats, laying hemlock branches across till a green
roof made it cool and shady inside. There Jill sat or lay among
her cushions reading, trying to sketch, sorting shells, drying gay
sea-weeds, or watching her crabs, jelly-fish, and anemones in the old
boiler, now buried in sand and edged about with moss from the woods.

Nobody disturbed her treasures, but kindly added to them, and often when
she went to her nest she found fruit or flowers, books or bon-bons, laid
ready for her. Every one pitied and liked the bright little girl who
could not run and frisk with the rest, who was so patient and cheerful
after her long confinement, ready to help others, and so grateful
for any small favor. She found now that the weary months had not been
wasted, and was very happy to discover in herself a new sort of strength
and sweetness that was not only a comfort to her, but made those about
her love and trust her. The songs she had learned attracted the babies,
who would leave their play to peep at her and listen when she sung over
her work. Passers-by paused to hear the blithe voice of the bird in the
green cage, and other invalids, strolling on the beach, would take heart
when they saw the child so happy in spite of her great trial.

The boys kept all their marine curiosities for her, and were always
ready to take her a row or a sail, as the bay was safe and that sort
of travelling suited her better than driving. But the girls had capital
times together, and it did Jill good to see another sort from those she
knew at home. She had been so much petted of late, that she was getting
rather vain of her small accomplishments, and being with strangers
richer, better bred and educated than herself, made her more humble in
some things, while it showed her the worth of such virtues as she could
honestly claim. Mamie Cox took her to drive in the fine carriage of her
mamma, and Jill was much impressed by the fact that Mamie was not a bit
proud about it, and did not put on any airs, though she had a maid to
take care of her. Gerty wore pretty costumes, and came down with pink
and blue ribbons in her hair that Jill envied very much; yet Gerty liked
her curls, and longed to have some, while her mother, "the lady from
Philadelphia," as they called her, was so kind and gay that Jill quite
adored her, and always felt as if sunshine had come into the room when
she entered. Two little sisters were very interesting to her, and made
her long for one of her own when she saw them going about together and
heard them talk of their pleasant home, where the great silk factories
were. But they invited her to come and see the wonderful cocoons, and
taught her to knot pretty gray fringe on a cushion, which delighted her,
being so new and easy. There were several other nice little lasses, and
they all gathered about Jill with the sweet sympathy children are so
quick to show toward those in pain or misfortune. She thought they would
not care for a poor little girl like herself, yet here she was the queen
of the troupe, and this discovery touched and pleased her very much.

In the morning they camped round the boat on the stones with books, gay
work, and merry chatter, till bathing-time. Then the beach was full of
life and fun, for every one looked so droll in the flannel suits, it was
hard to believe that the neat ladies and respectable gentlemen who
went into the little houses could be the same persons as the queer,
short-skirted women with old hats tied down, and bareheaded, barefooted
men in old suits, who came skipping over the sand to disport themselves
in the sea in the most undignified ways. The boys raced about, looking
like circus-tumblers, and the babies were regular little cupids, running
away from the waves that tried to kiss their flying feet.

Some of the young ladies and girls were famous swimmers, and looked very
pretty in their bright red and blue costumes, with loose hair and gay
stockings, as they danced into the water and floated away as fearlessly
as real mermaidens. Jill had her quiet dip and good rubbing each fine
day, and then lay upon the warm sand watching the pranks of the others,
and longing to run and dive and shout and tumble with the rest. Now that
she was among the well and active, it seemed harder to be patient than
when shut up and unable to stir. She felt so much better, and had so
little pain to remind her of past troubles, it was almost impossible to
help forgetting the poor back and letting her recovered spirits run away
with her. If Mrs. Minot had not kept good watch, she would have been
off more than once, so eager was she to be "like other girls" again, so
difficult was it to keep the restless feet quietly folded among the red
cushions.

One day she did yield to temptation, and took a little voyage which
might have been her last, owing to the carelessness of those whom she
trusted. It was a good lesson, and made her as meek as a lamb during the
rest of her stay. Mrs. Minot drove to Gloucester one afternoon, leaving
Jill safely established after her nap in the boat, with Gerty and Mamie
making lace beside her.

"Don't try to walk or run about, my dear. Sit on the piazza if you get
tired of this, and amuse yourself quietly till I come back. I'll not
forget the worsted and the canvas," said Mamma, peeping over the bank
for a last word as she waited for the omnibus to come along.

"Oh, _don't_ forget the Gibraltars!" cried Jill, popping her head out of
the green roof.

"Nor the bananas, please!" added Gerty, looking round one end.

"Nor the pink and blue ribbon to tie our shell-baskets," called Mamie,
nearly tumbling into the aquarium at the other end.

Mrs. Minot laughed, and promised, and rumbled away, leaving Jill to an
experience which she never forgot.

For half an hour the little girls worked busily, then the boys came for
Gerty and Mamie to go to the Chasm with a party of friends who were
to leave next day. Off they went, and Jill felt very lonely as the gay
voices died away. Every one had gone somewhere, and only little Harry
Hammond and his maid were on the beach. Two or three sand-pipers ran
about among the pebbles, and Jill envied them their nimble legs so much,
that she could not resist getting up to take a few steps. She longed to
run straight away over the firm, smooth sand, and feel again the delight
of swift motion; but she dared not try it, and stood leaning on her tall
parasol with her book in her hand, when Frank, Jack, and the bicycle boy
came rowing lazily along and hailed her.

"Come for a sail, Jill? Take you anywhere you like," called Jack,
touched by the lonely figure on the beach.

"I'd love to go, if you will row. Mamma made me promise not to go
sailing without a man to take care of me. Would it spoil your fun to
have me?" answered Jill, eagerly.

"Not a bit; come out on the big stones and we'll take you aboard," said
Frank, as they steered to the place where she could embark the easiest.

"All the rest are gone to the Chasm. I wanted to go, because I've never
seen it; but, of course, I had to give it up, as I do most of the fun;"
