thought of us.  We've blown through the countries as if we had been
grains of dust."

Marco's head was bared, too, and his face was still shining. "God be
thanked!" he said.  "Let us begin to climb."

They pushed their way through the ferns and wandered in and out through
trees until they found the little path.  The hill was thickly clothed
with forest and the little path was sometimes dark and steep; but they
knew that, if they followed it, they would at last come out to a place
where there were scarcely any trees at all, and on a crag they would
find the tiny church waiting for them.  The priest might not be there.
They might have to wait for him, but he would be sure to come back for
morning Mass and for vespers, wheresoever he wandered between times.

There were many stars in the sky when at last a turn of the  path
showed them the church above them.  It was little and built of rough
stone.  It looked as if the priest himself and his scattered flock
might have broken and carried or rolled bits of the hill to put it
together.  It had the small, round, mosque-like summit the Turks had
brought into Europe in centuries past.  It was so tiny that it would
hold but a very small congregation--and close to it was a shed-like
house, which was of course the priest's.

The two boys stopped on the path to look at it.

"There is a candle burning in one of the little windows," said Marco.

"There is a well near the door--and some one is beginning to draw
water," said The Rat, next.  "It is too dark to see who it is.  Listen!"

They listened and heard the bucket descend on the chains, and splash in
the water.  Then it was drawn up, and it seemed some one drank long.
Then they saw a dim figure move forward and stand still.  Then they
heard a voice begin to pray aloud, as if the owner, being accustomed to
utter solitude, did not think of earthly hearers.

"Come," Marco said.  And they went forward.

Because the stars were so many and the air so clear, the priest heard
their feet on the path, and saw them almost as soon as he heard them.
He ended his prayer and watched them coming.  A lad on crutches, who
moved as lightly and easily as a bird--and a lad who, even yards away,
was noticeable for a bearing of his body which was neither haughty nor
proud but set him somehow aloof from every other lad one had ever seen.
A magnificent lad--though, as he drew near, the starlight showed his
face thin and his eyes hollow as if with fatigue or hunger.

"And who is this one?" the old priest murmured to himself. "WHO?"

Marco drew up before him and made a respectful reverence.  Then he
lifted his black head, squared his shoulders and uttered his message
for the last time.

"The Lamp is lighted, Father," he said.  "The Lamp is lighted."

The old priest stood quite still and gazed into his face.  The next
moment he bent his head so that he could look at him closely.  It
seemed almost as if he were frightened and wanted to make sure of
something.  At the moment it flashed through The Rat's mind that the
old, old woman on the mountain-top had looked frightened in something
the same way.

"I am an old man," he said.  "My eyes are not good.  If I had a
light"--and he glanced towards the house.

It was The Rat who, with one whirl, swung through the door and seized
the candle.  He guessed what he wanted.  He held it himself so that the
flare fell on Marco's face.

The old priest drew nearer and nearer.  He gasped for breath. "You are
the son of Stefan Loristan!" he cried.  "It is HIS SON who brings the
Sign."

He fell upon his knees and hid his face in his hands.  Both the boys
heard him sobbing and praying--praying and sobbing at once.

They glanced at each other.  The Rat was bursting with excitement, but
he felt a little awkward also and wondered what Marco would do.  An old
fellow on his knees, crying, made a chap feel as if he didn't know what
to say.  Must you comfort him or must you let him go on?

Marco only stood quite still and looked at him with understanding and
gravity.

"Yes, Father," he said.  "I am the son of Stefan Loristan, and I have
given the Sign to all.  You are the last one.  The Lamp is lighted.  I
could weep for gladness, too."

The priest's tears and prayers ended.  He rose to his feet--a
rugged-faced old man with long and thick white hair which fell on his
shoulders--and smiled at Marco while his eyes were still wet.

"You have passed from one country to another with the message?" he
said.  "You were under orders to say those four words?"

"Yes, Father," answered Marco.

"That was all?  You were to say no more?"

"I know no more.  Silence has been the order since I took my oath of
allegiance when I was a child.  I was not old enough to fight, or
serve, or reason about great things.  All I could do was to be silent,
and to train myself to remember, and be ready when I was  called.  When
my father saw I was ready, he trusted me to go out and give the Sign.
He told me the four words. Nothing else."

The old man watched him with a wondering face.

"If Stefan Loristan does not know best," he said, "who does?"

"He always knows," answered Marco proudly.  "Always."  He waved his
hand like a young king toward The Rat.  He wanted each man they met to
understand the value of The Rat.  "He chose for me this companion," he
added.  "I have done nothing alone."

"He let me call myself his aide-de-camp!" burst forth The Rat. "I would
be cut into inch-long strips for him."

Marco translated.

Then the priest looked at The Rat and slowly nodded his head. "Yes," he
said.  "He knew best.  He always knows best.  That I see."

"How did you know I was my father's son?" asked Marco.  "You have seen
him?"

"No," was the answer; "but I have seen a picture which is said to be
his image--and you are the picture's self.  It is, indeed, a strange
thing that two of God's creatures should be so alike. There is a
purpose in it."  He led them into his bare small house and made them
rest, and drink goat's milk, and eat food. As he moved about the
hut-like place, there was a mysterious and exalted look on his face.

"You must be refreshed before we leave here," he said at last. "I am
going to take you to a place hidden in the mountains where there are
men whose hearts will leap at the sight of you.  To see you will give
them new power and courage and new resolve. To-night they meet as they
or their ancestors have met for centuries, but now they are nearing the
end of their waiting. And I shall bring them the son of Stefan
Loristan, who is the Bearer of the Sign!"

They ate the bread and cheese and drank the goat's milk he gave them,
but Marco explained that they did not need rest as they had slept all
day.  They were prepared to follow him when he was ready.

The last faint hint of twilight had died into night and the stars were
at their thickest when they set out together.  The white-haired old man
took a thick knotted staff in his hand and led the way.  He  knew it
well, though it was a rugged and steep one with no track to mark it.
Sometimes they seemed to be walking around the mountain, sometimes they
were climbing, sometimes they dragged themselves over rocks or fallen
trees, or struggled through almost impassable thickets; more than once
they descended into ravines and, almost at the risk of their lives,
clambered and drew themselves with the aid of the undergrowth up the
other side.  The Rat was called upon to use all his prowess, and
sometimes Marco and the priest helped him across obstacles with the aid
of his crutch.

"Haven't I shown to-night whether I'm a cripple or not?" he said once
to Marco.  "You can tell HIM about this, can't you? And that the
crutches helped instead of being in the way?"

They had been out nearly two hours when they came to a place where the
undergrowth was thick and a huge tree had fallen crashing down among it
in some storm.  Not far from the tree was an outcropping rock.  Only
the top of it was to be seen above the heavy tangle.

They had pushed their way through the jungle of bushes and young
saplings, led by their companion.  They did not know where they would
be led next and were supposed to push forward further when the priest
stopped by the outcropping rock.  He stood silent a few minutes--quite
motionless--as if he were listening to the forest and the night.  But
there was utter stillness.  There was not even a breeze to stir a leaf,
or a half-wakened bird to sleepily chirp.

He struck the rock with his staff--twice, and then twice again.

Marco and The Rat stood with bated breath.

They did not wait long.  Presently each of them found himself leaning
forward, staring with almost unbelieving eyes, not at the priest or his
staff, but at THE ROCK ITSELF!

It was moving!  Yes, it moved.  The priest stepped aside and it slowly
turned, as if worked by a lever.  As it turned, it gradually revealed a
chasm of darkness dimly lighted, and the priest spoke to Marco.  "There
are hiding-places like this all through Samavia," he said.  "Patience
and misery have waited long in them.  They are the caverns of the
Forgers of the Sword. Come!"



XXVII

"IT IS THE LOST PRINCE! IT IS IVOR!"

Many times since their journey had begun the boys had found their
hearts beating with the thrill and excitement of things.  The story of
which their lives had been a part was a pulse-quickening experience.
But as they carefully made their way down the steep steps leading
seemingly into the bowels of the earth, both Marco and The Rat felt as
though the old priest must hear the thudding in their young sides.

"'The Forgers of the Sword.'  Remember every word they say," The Rat
whispered, "so that you can tell it to me afterwards. Don't forget
anything!  I wish I knew Samavian."

At the foot of the steps stood the man who was evidently the sentinel
who worked the lever that turned the rock.  He was a big burly peasant
with a good watchful face, and the priest gave him a greeting and a
blessing as he took from him the lantern he held out.

They went through a narrow and dark passage, and down some more steps,
and turned a corner into another corridor cut out of rock and earth.
It was a wider corridor, but still dark, so that Marco and The Rat had
walked some yards before their eyes became sufficiently accustomed to
the dim light to see that the walls themselves seemed made of arms
stacked closely together.

"The Forgers of the Sword!"  The Rat was unconsciously mumbling to
himself, "The Forgers of the Sword!"

It must have taken years to cut out the rounding passage they threaded
their way through, and longer years to forge the solid, bristling
walls.  But The Rat remembered the story the stranger had told his
drunken father, of the few mountain herdsmen who, in their savage grief
and wrath over the loss of their prince, had banded themselves together
with a solemn oath which had been handed down from generation to
generation.  The Samavians were a long-memoried people, and the fact
that their passion must be smothered had made it burn all the more
fiercely.  Five hundred years ago they had first sworn their oath; and
kings had come and gone, had died or been murdered, and dynasties had
changed, but the Forgers of the Sword had not changed or forgotten
their oath or wavered in their belief that some time--some time, even
after the long dark years--the soul of their Lost Prince would be among
them once more, and that they would kneel at the feet and kiss the
hands of him for whose body that soul had been reborn.  And for the
last hundred years their number and power and their hiding places had
so increased that Samavia was at last honeycombed with them.  And they
only waited, breathless,--for the Lighting of the Lamp.

The old priest knew how breathlessly, and he knew what he was bringing
them.  Marco and The Rat, in spite of their fond boy-imaginings, were
not quite old enough to know how fierce and full of flaming eagerness
the breathless waiting of savage full-grown men could be.  But there
was a tense-strung thrill in knowing that they  who were being led to
them were the Bearers of the Sign.  The Rat went hot and cold; he
gnawed his fingers as he went.  He could almost have shrieked aloud, in
the intensity of his excitement, when the old priest stopped before a
big black door!

Marco made no sound.  Excitement or danger always made him look tall
and quite pale.  He looked both now.

The priest touched the door, and it opened.

They were looking into an immense cavern.  Its walls and roof were
lined with arms--guns, swords, bayonets, javelins, daggers, pistols,
every weapon a desperate man might use.  The place was full of men, who
turned towards the door when it opened.  They all made obeisance to the
priest, but Marco realized almost at the same instant that they started
on seeing that he was not alone.

They were a strange and picturesque crowd as they stood under their
canopy of weapons in the lurid torchlight.  Marco saw at once that they
were men of all classes, though all were alike roughly dressed.  They
were huge mountaineers, and plainsmen young and mature in years.  Some
of the biggest were men with white hair but with bodies of giants, and
with determination in their strong jaws.  There were many of these,
Marco saw, and in each man's eyes, whether he were young or old, glowed
a steady unconquered flame.  They had been beaten so often, they had
been oppressed and robbed, but in the eyes of each one was this
unconquered flame which, throughout all the long tragedy of years had
been handed down from father to son.  It was this which had gone on
through centuries, keeping its oath and forging its swords in the
caverns of the earth, and which to-day was--waiting.

The old priest laid his hand on Marco's shoulder, and gently pushed him
before him through the crowd which parted to make way for them.  He did
not stop until the two stood in the very midst of the circle, which
fell back gazing wonderingly.  Marco looked up at the old man because
for several seconds he did not speak. It was plain that he did not
speak because he also was excited, and could not.  He opened his lips
and his voice seemed to fail him.  Then he tried again and spoke so
that all could hear--even the men at the back of the gazing circle.

"My children," he said, "this is the son of Stefan Loristan, and he
comes to bear the Sign.  My son," to Marco, "speak!"

Then Marco understood what he wished, and also what he felt.  He felt
it himself, that magnificent uplifting gladness, as he spoke, holding
his black head high and lifting his right hand.

"The Lamp is Lighted, brothers!" he cried.  "The Lamp is Lighted!"

Then The Rat, who stood apart, watching, thought that the strange world
within the cavern had gone mad!  Wild smothered cries broke forth, men
caught each other in passionate embrace, they fell upon their knees,
they clutched one another sobbing, they wrung each other's hands, they
leaped into the air.  It was as if they could not bear the joy of
hearing that the end of their waiting had come at last.  They rushed
upon Marco, and fell at his feet. The Rat saw big peasants kissing his
shoes, his hands, every scrap of his clothing they could seize.  The
wild circle swayed and closed upon him until The Rat was afraid.  He
did not know that, overpowered by this frenzy of emotion, his own
excitement was making him shake from head to foot like a leaf, and that
tears were streaming down his cheeks.  The swaying crowd hid Marco from
him, and he began to fight his way towards him because his excitement
increased with fear.  The ecstasy-frenzied crowd of men seemed for the
moment to have almost ceased to be sane. Marco was only a boy.  They
did not know how fiercely they were pressing upon him and keeping away
the very air.

"Don't kill him!  Don't kill him!" yelled The Rat, struggling forward.
"Stand back, you fools!  I'm his aide-de-camp!  Let me pass!"

And though no one understood his English, one or two suddenly
remembered they had seen him enter with the priest and so gave way.
But just then the old priest lifted his hand above the crowd, and spoke
in a voice of stern command.

"Stand back, my children!" he cried.  "Madness is not the homage you
must bring to the son of Stefan Loristan.  Obey! Obey!"  His voice had
a power in it that penetrated even the wildest herdsmen.  The frenzied
mass swayed back and left space about Marco, whose face The Rat could
at last see.  It was very white with emotion, and in his eyes there was
a look which was like awe.

The Rat pushed forward until he stood beside him.  He did not know that
he almost sobbed as he spoke.

"I'm your aide-de-camp," he said.  "I'm going to stand here! Your
father sent me!  I'm under orders!  I thought they'd crush you to
death."

He glared at the circle about them as if, instead of worshippers
distraught with adoration, they had been enemies.  The old priest
seeing him, touched Marco's arm.

"Tell him he need not fear," he said.  "It was only for the first few
moments.  The passion of their souls drove them wild. They are your
slaves."

"Those at the back might have pushed the front ones on until they
trampled you under foot in spite of themselves!" The Rat persisted.

"No," said Marco.  "They would have stopped if I had spoken."


"Why didn't you speak then?" snapped The Rat.

"All they felt was for Samavia, and for my father," Marco said, "and
for the Sign.  I felt as they did."

The Rat was somewhat softened.  It was true, after all.  How could he
have tried to quell the outbursts of their worship of Loristan--of the
country he was saving for them--of the Sign which called them to
freedom?  He could not.

Then followed a strange and picturesque ceremonial.  The priest went
about among the encircling crowd and spoke to one man after
another--sometimes to a group.  A larger circle was formed.  As the
pale old man moved about, The Rat felt as if some religious ceremony
were going to be performed.  Watching it from first to last, he was
thrilled to the core.

At the end of the cavern a block of stone had been cut out to look like
an altar.  It was covered with white, and against the wall above it
hung a large picture veiled by a curtain.  From the roof there swung
before it an ancient lamp of metal suspended by chains.  In front of
the altar was a sort of stone dais.  There the priest asked Marco to
stand, with his aide-de-camp on the lower level in attendance.  A knot
of the biggest herdsmen went out and returned.  Each carried a huge
sword which had perhaps been of the earliest made in the dark days gone
by.  The bearers formed themselves into  a line on either side of
Marco.  They raised their swords and formed a pointed arch above his
