hopeless, in my mind men are justified in surrendering. However, I can
only obey the orders I have received, and tomorrow must send you and
your men to the mines."

As Malchus had seen the Iberian captives sent to labour as slaves in the
mines in Spain, the fate thus announced to him did not appear surprising
or barbarous. In those days captives taken in war were always made
slaves when they were not put to death in cold blood, and although
Hannibal had treated with marked humanity and leniency the Roman and
Italian captives who had fallen into his hands, this had been the result
of policy, and was by no means in accordance with the spirit in which
war was then conducted. Accordingly, the next day the Carthaginians
were, under a strong guard, marched away to the mines, which lay on the
other side of the island, some forty miles due west of the port, and
three miles from the western sea coast of the island. The road lay for
some distance across a dead flat. The country was well cultivated and
thickly studded with villages, for Rome drew a heavy tribute in corn
annually from the island.

After twenty miles' march they halted for the night, pursuing their way
on the following morning. They had now entered a wide and fertile valley
with lofty hills on either side. In some places there were stagnant
marshes, and the officer in charge of the guard informed Malchus that in
the autumn a pestilential miasma rose from these, rendering a sojourn in
the valley fatal to the inhabitants of the mainland. The native people
were wild and primitive in appearance, being clad chiefly in sheepskins.
They lived in beehive shaped huts. The hills narrowed in towards the
end of the day's march, and the valley terminated when the party arrived
within half a mile of their destination. Here stood a small town named
Metalla, with a strong Roman garrison, which supplied guards over the
slaves employed in working the mines. This town is now called Iglesias.

The principal mine was situated in a narrow valley running west from the
town down to the sea coast. The officer in command of the escort handed
over Malchus and his companions to the charge of the officer at the head
mining establishment.

Malchus was surprised at the large number of people gathered at the
spot. They lived for the most part in low huts constructed of boughs or
sods, and ranged in lines at the bottom of the valley or along the lower
slopes of the hill. A cordon of Roman sentries was placed along the
crest of the hill at either side, and a strong guard was posted in a
little camp in the centre of the valley, in readiness to put down any
tumult which might arise.

The great majority of the slaves gathered there were Sards, men
belonging to tribes which had risen in insurrection against the Romans.
There were with them others of their countrymen who were not like them
slaves, though their condition was but little better except that they
received a nominal rate of payment. These were called free labourers,
but their labour was as much forced as was that of the slaves--each
district in the island being compelled to furnish a certain amount
of labourers for this or the mines further to the north. The men so
conscripted were changed once in six months. With the Sards were mingled
people of many nations. Here were Sicilians and members of many Italian
tribes conquered by the Romans, together with Gauls from the northern
plains and from Marseilles.

There were many mines worked in different parts of the island, but
Metalla was the principal. The labour, in days when gunpowder had not
become the servant of man, was extremely hard. The rocks had to be
pierced with hand labour, the passages and galleries were of the
smallest possible dimensions, the atmosphere was stifling; consequently
the mortality was great, and it was necessary to keep up a constant
importation of labour.

"If these people did but possess a particle of courage," Trebon said,
"they would rise, overpower the guard, and make for the forests. The
whole island is, as the officer who brought us here told us, covered
with mountains with the exception of the two broad plains running
through it; as we could see the hills are covered with woods, and the
whole Roman army could not find them if they once escaped."

"That is true enough," Malchus said, "but there must be at least five or
six thousand slaves here. How could these find food among the mountains?
They might exist for a time upon berries and grain, but they would in
the end be forced to go into the valleys for food, and would then be
slaughtered by the Romans. Nevertheless a small body of men could no
doubt subsist among the hills, and the strength of the guard you see on
the heights shows that attempts to escape are not rare. Should we find
our existence intolerable here, we will at any rate try to escape. There
are fifty of us, and if we agreed in common action we could certainly
break through the guards and take to the hills. As you may see by their
faces, the spirit of these slaves is broken. See how bent most of them
are by their labour, and how their shoulders are wealed by the lashes of
their taskmasters!"

The officer in charge of the mines told Malchus that he should not put
him and the other two officers to labour, but would appoint them as
overseers over gangs of the men, informing them that he had a brother
who was at present a captive in the hands of Hannibal; and he trusted
that Malchus, should he have an opportunity, would use his kind offices
on his behalf.

One of the lines of huts near the Roman camp was assigned to the
Carthaginians, and that evening they received rations of almost black
bread similar to those served out to the others. The following morning
they were set to work. Malchus and his two friends found their tasks by
no means labourious, as they were appointed to look after a number of
Sards employed in breaking up and sorting the lead ore as it was brought
up from the mine. The men, however, returned in the evening worn out
with toil. All had been at work in the mines. Some had had to crawl long
distances through passages little more than three feet high and one foot
wide, until they reached the broad lode of lead ore.

Here some of the party had been set to work, others had been employed in
pushing on the little galleries, and there had sat for hours working
in a cramped position, with pick, hammer, and wedge. Others had been
lowered by ropes down shafts so narrow that when they got to the bottom
it was only with extreme difficulty that they were able to stoop to work
at the rock beneath their feet. Many, indeed, of these old shafts have
been found in the mines of Montepone, so extremely narrow that it is
supposed that they must have been bored by slaves lowered by ropes, head
foremost, it appearing absolutely impossible for a man to stoop to work
if lowered in the ordinary way.

The Carthaginians, altogether unaccustomed to work of this nature,
returned to their huts at night utterly exhausted, cramped, and aching
in every limb. Many had been cruelly beaten for not performing the tasks
assigned to them. All were filled with a dull despairing rage. In the
evening a ration of boiled beans, with a little native wine, was served
out to each, the quantity of the food being ample, it being necessary to
feed the slaves well to enable them to support their fatigues.

After three days of this work five or six of the captives were so
exhausted that they were unable to take their places with the gang when
ordered for work in the morning. They were, however, compelled by blows
to rise and take their places with the rest. Two of them died during the
course of the day in their stifling working places; another succumbed
during the night; several, too, were attacked by the fever of the
country. Malchus and his friends were full of grief and rage at the
sufferings of their men.

"Anything were better than this," Malchus said. "A thousand times better
to fall beneath the swords of the Romans than to die like dogs in the
holes beneath that hill!"

"I quite agree with you, Malchus," Halco, the other officer with the
party, said, "and am ready to join you in any plan of escape, however
desperate."

"The difficulty is about arms," Trebon observed. "We are so closely
watched that it is out of the question to hope that we should succeed in
getting possession of any. The tools are all left in the mines; and as
the men work naked, there is no possibility of their secreting any.
The stores here are always guarded by a sentry; and although we might
overpower him, the guard would arrive long before we could break through
the solid doors. Of course if we could get the other slaves to join us,
we might crush the guard even with stones."

"That is out of the question," Malchus said. "In the first place, they
speak a strange language, quite different to the Italians. Then, were
we seen trying to converse with any of them, suspicions might be roused;
and even could we get the majority to join us, there would be many who
would be only too glad to purchase their own freedom by betraying the
plot to the Romans. No, whatever we do must be done by ourselves alone;
and for arms we must rely upon stones, and upon the stoutest stakes we
can draw out from our huts. The only time that we have free to ourselves
is the hour after work is over, when we are allowed to go down to the
stream to wash and to stroll about as we will until the trumpet sounds
to order us to retire to our huts for the night.

"It is true that at that time the guards are particularly vigilant, and
that we are not allowed to gather into knots; and an Italian slave I
spoke to yesterday told me that he dared not speak to me, for the place
swarms with spies, and that any conversation between us would be sure
to be reported, and those engaged in it put to the hardest and cruelest
work. I propose, therefore, that tomorrow--for if it is to be done, the
sooner the better, before the men lose all their strength--the men shall
on their return from work at once eat their rations; then each man,
hiding a short stick under his garment and wrapping a few heavy stones
in the corner of his robe, shall make his way up towards the top of the
hill above the mine.

"No two men must go together--all must wander as if aimlessly among the
huts. When they reach the upper line on that side and see me, let all
rapidly close up, and we will make a sudden rush at the sentries above.
They cannot get more than five or six together in time to oppose us, and
we shall be able to beat them down with our stones. Once through them,
the heavy armed men will never be able to overtake us till we reach the
forest, which begins, I believe, about half a mile beyond the top."

The other two officers at once agreed to the plan; and when the camp was
still Malchus crept cautiously from hut to hut, telling his men of the
plan that had been formed and giving orders for the carrying of it out.

All assented cheerfully; for although the stronger were now becoming
accustomed to their work, and felt less exhausted than they had done the
first two days, there was not one but felt that he would rather suffer
death than endure this terrible fate. Malchus impressed upon them
strongly that it was of the utmost consequence to possess themselves of
the arms of any Roman soldiers they might overthrow, as they would to
a great extent be compelled to rely upon these to obtain food among the
mountains.

Even the men who were most exhausted, and those stricken with fever,
seemed to gain strength at once at the prospect of a struggle for
liberty, and when the gang turned out in the morning for work none
lagged behind.



CHAPTER XX: THE SARDINIAN FORESTS


The Carthaginians returned in the evening in groups from the various
scenes of their labour and without delay consumed the provisions
provided for them. Then one by one they sauntered away down towards
the stream. Malchus was the last to leave, and having seen that all his
followers had preceded him, he, too, crossed the stream, paused a moment
at a heap of debris from the mine, and picking up three or four pieces
of rock about the size of his fist, rolled them in the corner of his
garment, and holding this in one hand moved up the hill.

Here and there he paused a moment as if interested in watching the
groups of slaves eating their evening meal, until at last he reached the
upper line of little huts. Between these and the hill top upon which
the sentries stood was a distance of about fifty yards, which was kept
scrupulously clear to enable them to watch the movements of any man
going beyond the huts. The sentries were some thirty paces apart, so
that, as Malchus calculated, not more than four or five of them could
assemble before he reached them, if they did not previously perceive
anything suspicious which might put them on the alert.

Looking round him Malchus saw his followers scattered about among the
slaves at a short distance. Standing behind the shelter of the hut he
raised his hand, and all began to move towards him. As there was nothing
in their attire, which consisted of one long cloth wound round them,
to distinguish them from the other slaves, the movement attracted no
attention from the sentries, who were, from their position, able to
overlook the low huts.

When he saw that all were close, Malchus gave a shout and dashed up the
hill, followed by his comrades.

The nearest sentry, seeing a body of fifty men suddenly rushing towards
him, raised a shout, and his comrades from either side ran towards him;
but so quickly was the movement performed that but five had gathered
when the Carthaginians reached them, although many others were running
towards the spot. The Carthaginians, when they came close to their
levelled spears, poured upon them a shower of heavy stones, which
knocked two of them down and so bruised and battered the others that
they went down at once when the Carthaginians burst upon them.

The nearest Romans halted to await the arrival of their comrades coming
up behind them, and the Carthaginians, seizing the swords, spears, and
shields of their fallen foes, dashed on at full speed. The Romans soon
followed, but with the weight of their weapons, armour, and helmets
they were speedily distanced, and the fugitives reached the edge of the
forest in safety and dashed into its recesses.

After running for some distance they halted, knowing that the Romans
would not think of pursuing except with a large force. The forests which
covered the mountains of Sardinia were for the most part composed of
evergreen oak, with, in some places, a thick undergrowth of shrubs and
young trees. Through this the Carthaginians made their way with some
difficulty, until, just as it became dark, they reached the bottom of a
valley comparatively free of trees and through which ran a clear stream.

"Here we will halt for the night," Malchus said; "there is no fear of
the Romans pursuing at once, if indeed they do so at all, for their
chance of finding us in these mountains, covered with hundreds of square
miles of forests, is slight indeed; however, we will at once provide
ourselves with weapons."

The five Roman swords were put into requisition, and some straight
young saplings were felled, and their points being sharpened they were
converted into efficient spears, each some fourteen feet long.

"It is well we have supped," Malchus said; "our breakfast will depend
on ourselves. Tomorrow we must keep a sharp lookout for smoke rising
through the trees; there are sure to be numbers of charcoal burners in
the forest, for upon them the Romans depend for their fuel. One of the
first things to do is to obtain a couple of lighted brands. A fire is
essential for warmth among these hills, even putting aside its uses for
cooking."

"That is when we have anything to cook," Halco said laughingly.

"That is certainly essential," Malchus agreed; "but there is sure to be
plenty of wild boar and deer among these forests. We have only to find a
valley with a narrow entrance, and post ourselves there and send all the
men to form a circle on the hills around it and drive them down to us;
besides, most likely we shall come across herds of goats and pigs, which
the villagers in the lower valleys will send up to feed on the acorns. I
have no fear but we shall be able to obtain plenty of flesh; as to corn,
we have only to make a raid down into the plain, and when we have found
out something about the general lay of the country, the hills and the
extent of the forest, we will choose some spot near its centre and
erect huts there. If it were not for the peasants we might live here
for years, for all the Roman forces in Sardinia would be insufficient to
rout us out of these mountains; but unfortunately, as we shall have to
rob the peasants, they will act as guides to the Romans, and we shall be
obliged to keep a sharp lookout against surprise. If it gets too hot for
us we must make a night march across the plain to the mountains on the
eastern side. I heard at Caralis that the wild part there is very much
larger than it is on this side of the island, and it extends without a
break from the port right up to the north of the island."

Safe as he felt from pursuit Malchus posted four men as sentries, and
the rest of the band lay down to sleep, rejoicing in the thought that on
the morrow they should not be wakened to take their share in the labours
in the mine.

At daybreak all were on the move, and a deep spot having been found
in the stream, they indulged in the luxury of a bath. That done they
started on the march further into the heart of the forest. The hills
were of great height, with bare crags often beetling up among the trees
hundreds of feet, with deep valleys and rugged precipices. In crossing
one of these valleys Nessus suddenly lifted his hand.

"What is it?" Malchus asked.

"I heard a pig grunt," Nessus replied, "on our right there."

Malchus at once divided the band in two and told them to proceed as
quietly as possible along the lower slopes of the hill, leaving a man at
every fifteen paces.

When all had been posted, the ends of the line were to descend until
they met in the middle of the valley, thus forming a circle. A shout
was to tell the rest that this was done, and then all were to move down
until they met in the centre. One officer went with each party, Malchus
remained at the spot where he was standing. In ten minutes the signal
was heard, and then all moved forward, shouting as they went, and
keeping a sharp lookout between the trees to see that nothing passed
them. As the narrowing circle issued into the open ground at the bottom
of the valley there was a general shout of delight, for, huddled down
by a stream, grunting and screaming with fright, was a herd of forty
or fifty pigs, with a peasant, who appeared stupefied with alarm at the
sudden uproar.

On seeing the men burst out with their levelled spears from the wood,
the Sard gave a scream of terror and threw himself upon his face. When
the Carthaginians came up to him Malchus stirred him with his foot, but
he refused to move; he then pricked him with the Roman spear he held,
and the man leaped to his feet with a shout. Malchus told him in Italian
that he was free to go, but that the swine must be confiscated for the
use of his followers. The man did not understand his words, but, seeing
by his gestures that he was free to go, set off at the top of his speed,
hardly believing that he could have escaped with his life, and in no
way concerned at the loss of the herd. This was, indeed, the property of
various individuals in one of the villages at the foot of the hills--it
being then, as now, the custom for several men owning swine to send them
together under the charge of a herdsman into the mountains, where for
months together they live in a half wild state on acorns and roots, a
villager going up occasionally with supplies of food for the swineherd.

No sooner had the peasant disappeared than a shout from one of the men
some fifty yards away called the attention of Malchus.

"Here is the man's fire, my lord."

A joyous exclamation rose from the soldiers, for, the thought of all
this meat and no means of cooking it was tantalizing every one. Malchus
hurried to the spot, where, indeed, was a heap of still glowing embers.
Some of the men at once set to work to collect dried sticks, and in a
few minutes a great fire was blazing. One of the pigs was slaughtered
and cut up into rations, and in a short time each man was cooking his
portion stuck on a stick over the fire.

A smaller fire was lit for the use of the officers a short distance
away, and here Nessus prepared their share of the food for Malchus
and his two companions. After the meal the spears were improved by the
points being hardened in the fire. When they were in readiness to march
two of the men were told off as fire keepers, and each of these took two
blazing brands from the fire, which, as they walked, they kept crossed
before them, the burning points keeping each other alight. Even with one
man there would be little chance of losing the fire, but with two such a
misfortune could scarcely befall them.

A party of ten men took charge of the herd of swine, and the whole
then started for the point they intended to make to in the heart of
the mountains. Before the end of the day a suitable camping place was
selected in a watered valley. The men then set to work to cut down
boughs and erect arbours. Fires were lighted and another pig being
killed those who preferred it roasted his flesh over the fire, while
others boiled their portions, the Roman shields being utilized as pans.

"What do you think of doing, Malchus?" Halco asked as they stretched
themselves out on a grassy bank by the stream when they had finished
their meal. "We are safe here, and in these forests could defy the
Romans to find us for months. Food we can get from the villages at the
foot of the hills, and there must be many swine in the forest beside
this herd which we have captured. The life will not be an unpleasant
one, but--" and he stopped.

"But you don't wish to end your days here," Malchus put in for him, "nor
do I. It is pleasant enough, but every day we spend here is a waste of
our lives, and with Hannibal and our comrades combating the might of
Rome we cannot be content to live like members of the savage tribes
here. I have no doubt that we shall excite such annoyance and alarm by
our raids among the villages in the plains that the Romans will ere long
make a great effort to capture us, and doubtless they will enlist the
natives in their search. Still, we may hope to escape them, and there
are abundant points among these mountains where we may make a stand
and inflict such heavy loss upon them that they will be glad to come to
terms. All I would ask is that they shall swear by their gods to treat
us well and to convey us as prisoners of war to Rome, there to remain
until exchanged. In Rome we could await the course of events patiently.
