
"There ain't no fog can lose me," she answered, shuffling along by his
side; "'sides, it's goin' to lift. Look at that man comin' to'ards us."

It was true that they could see through the orange-colored mist the
approaching figure of a man who was at a yard's distance from them. Yes,
it was lifting slightly--at least enough to allow of one's making a
guess at the direction in which one moved.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"Apple Blossom Court," she answered.  "The cawfee-stand's in a street
near it--and there's a shop where I can buy things."

"Apple Blossom Court!" he ejaculated.  "What a name!"

"There ain't no apple-blossoms there," chuckling; "nor no smell of 'em.
'T ain't as nice as its nime is--Apple Blossom Court ain't."

"What do you want to buy?  A pair of shoes?"  The shoes her naked feet
were thrust into were leprous-looking things through which nearly all
her toes protruded.  But she chuckled when he spoke.

"No, I 'm goin' to buy a di'mond tirarer to go to the opery in," she
said, dragging her old sack closer round her neck.  "I ain't ad a noo un
since I went to the last Drorin'-room."

It was impudent street chaff, but there was cheerful spirit in it, and
cheerful spirit has some occult effect upon morbidity.  Antony Dart did
not smile, but he felt a faint stirring of curiosity, which was, after
all, not a bad thing for a man who had not felt an interest for a year.

"What is it you are going to buy?"

"I'm goin' to fill me stummick fust," with a grin of elation.  "Three
thick slices o' bread an' drippin' an' a mug o' cawfee.  An' then I'm
goin' to get sumethin' 'earty to carry to Polly.  She ain't no good,
pore thing!"

"Who is she?"

Stopping a moment to drag up the heel of her dreadful shoe, she answered
him with an unprejudiced directness which might have been appalling if
he had been in the mood to be appalled.

"Ain't eighteen, an' tryin' to earn 'er livin' on the street.  She ain't
made for it.  Little country thing, allus frightened to death an' ready
to bust out cryin'.  Gents ain't goin' to stand that.  A lot of 'em
wants cheerin' up as much as she does. Gent as was in liquor last night
knocked 'er down an' give 'er a black eye.  'T wan't ill feelin', but he
lost his temper, an' give 'er a knock casual.  She can't go out
to-night, an' she's been 'uddled up all day cryin' for 'er mother."

"Where is her mother?"

"In the country--on a farm. Polly took a place in a lodgin'-'ouse an'
got in trouble.  The biby was dead, an' when she come out o' Queen
Charlotte's she was took in by a woman an' kep'.  She kicked 'er out in
a week 'cos of her cryin'. The life didn't suit 'er.  I found 'er cryin'
fit to split 'er chist one night--corner o' Apple Blossom Court--an' I
took care of 'er."

"Where?"

"Me chambers," grinning; "top loft of a 'ouse in the court.  If anyone
else 'd 'ave it I should be turned out.  It's an 'ole, I can tell yer--
but it's better than sleepin' under the bridges."

"Take me to see it," said Antony Dart.  "I want to see the girl."

The words spoke themselves.  Why should he care to see either cockloft
or girl?  He did not.  He wanted to go back to his lodgings with that
which he had come out to buy. Yet he said this thing.  His companion
looked up at him with an expression actually relieved.

"Would yer tike up with 'er?" with eager sharpness, as if confronting a
simple business proposition. "She's pretty an' clean, an' she won't
drink a drop o' nothin'.  If she was treated kind she'd be cheerfler.
She's got a round fice an' light 'air an' eyes.  'Er 'air's curly.
P'raps yer'd like 'er."

"Take me to see her."

"She'd look better to-morrow," cautiously, "when the swellin's gone
down round 'er eye."

Dart started--and it was because he had for the last five minutes
forgotten something.

"I shall not be here to-morrow," he said.  His grasp upon the thing in
his pocket had loosened, and he tightened it.

"I have some more money in my purse," he said deliberately.  "I meant to
give it away before going. I want to give it to people who need it very
much."

She gave him one of the sly, squinting glances.

"Deservin' cases?"  She put it to him in brazen mockery.

"I don't care," he answered slowly and heavily.  "I don't care a damn."

Her face changed exactly as he had seen it change on the bridge when she
had drawn nearer to him. Its ugly hardness suddenly looked human.  And
that she could look human was fantastic.

"'Ow much 'ave yer?" she asked. "'Ow much is it?"

"About ten pounds."

She stopped and stared at him with open mouth.

"Gawd!" she broke out; "ten pounds 'd send Apple Blossom Court to
'eving.  Leastways, it'd take some of it out o' 'ell."

"Take me to it," he said roughly. "Take me."

She began to walk quickly, breathing fast.  The fog was lighter, and it
was no longer a blinding thing.

A question occurred to Dart.

"Why don't you ask me to give the money to you?" he said bluntly.

"Dunno," she answered as bluntly. But after taking a few steps farther
she spoke again.

"I 'm cheerfler than most of 'em," she elaborated.  "If yer born
cheerfle yer can stand things.  When I gets a job nussin' women's bibies
they don't cry when I 'andles 'em. I gets many a bite an' a copper 'cos
o' that.  Folks likes yer.  I shall get on better than Polly when I'm
old enough to go on the street."

The organ of whose lagging, sick pumpings Antony Dart had scarcely been
aware for months gave a sudden leap in his breast.  His blood actually
hastened its pace, and ran through his veins instead of crawling--a
distinct physical effect of an actual mental condition.  It was produced
upon him by the mere matter-of-fact ordinariness of her tone.  He had
never been a sentimental man, and had long ceased to be a feeling one,
but at that moment something emotional and normal happened to him.

"You expect to live in that way?" he said.

"Ain't nothin' else fer me to do. Wisht I was better lookin'.  But I've
got a lot of 'air," clawing her mop, "an' it's red.  One day,"
chuckling, "a gent ses to me--he ses:  'Oh! yer'll do.  Yer an ugly
little devil--but ye ARE a devil.'"

She was leading him through a narrow, filthy back street, and she
stopped, grinning up in his face.

"I say, mister," she wheedled, "let's stop at the cawfee-stand. It's up
this way."

When he acceded and followed her, she quickly turned a corner. They were
in another lane thick with fog, which flared with the flame of torches
stuck in costers' barrows which stood here and there--barrows with
fried fish upon them, barrows with second-hand-looking vegetables and
others piled with more than second-hand-looking garments. Trade was not
driving, but near one or two of them dirty, ill-used looking women, a
man or so, and a few children stood.  At a corner which led into a black
hole of a court, a coffee-stand was stationed, in charge of a burly
ruffian in corduroys.

"Come along," said the girl. "There it is.  It ain't strong, but it's
'ot."

She sidled up to the stand, drawing Dart with her, as if glad of his
protection.

"'Ello, Barney," she said.  "'Ere's a gent warnts a mug o' yer best.
I've 'ad a bit o' luck, an' I wants one mesself."

"Garn," growled Barney.  "You an' yer luck!  Gent may want a mug, but
y'd show yer money fust."

"Strewth!  I've got it.  Y' aint got the chinge fer wot I 'ave in me
'and 'ere.  'As 'e, mister?"

"Show it," taunted the man, and then turning to Dart.  "Yer wants a mug
o' cawfee?"

"Yes."

The girl held out her hand cautiously--the piece of gold lying upon its
palm.

"Look 'ere," she said.

There were two or three men slouching about the stand.  Suddenly a hand
darted from between two of them who stood nearest, the sovereign was
snatched, a screamed oath from the girl rent the thick air, and a
forlorn enough scarecrow of a young fellow sprang away.

The blood leaped in Antony Dart's veins again and he sprang after him in
a wholly normal passion of indignation.  A thousand years ago--as it
seemed to him--he had been a good runner.  This man was not one, and
want of food had weakened him. Dart went after him with strides which
astonished himself.  Up the street, into an alley and out of it, a dozen
yards more and into a court, and the man wheeled with a hoarse, baffled
curse.  The place had no outlet.

"Hell!" was all the creature said.

Dart took him by his greasy collar. Even the brief rush had left him
feeling like a living thing--which was a new sensation.

"Give it up," he ordered.

The thief looked at him with a half-laugh and obeyed, as if he felt the
uselessness of a struggle.  He was not more than twenty-five years old,
and his eyes were cavernous with want.  He had the face of a man who
might have belonged to a better class.  When he had uttered the
exclamation invoking the infernal regions he had not dropped the
aspirate.

"I 'm as hungry as she is," he raved.

"Hungry enough to rob a child beggar?" said Dart.

"Hungry enough to rob a starving old woman--or a baby," with a defiant
snort.  "Wolf hungry--tiger hungry--hungry enough to cut throats."

He whirled himself loose and leaned his body against the wall, turning
his face toward it.  Suddenly he made a choking sound and began to sob.

"Hell!" he choked.  "I'll give it up!  I'll give it up!"

What a figure--what a figure, as he swung against the blackened wall,
his scarecrow clothes hanging on him, their once decent material making
their pinning together of buttonless places, their looseness and rents
showing dirty linen, more abject than any other squalor could have made
them. Antony Dart's blood, still running warm and well, was doing its
normal work among the brain-cells which had stirred so evilly through
the night. When he had seized the fellow by the collar, his hand had
left his pocket.  He thrust it into another pocket and drew out some
silver.

"Go and get yourself some food," he said.  "As much as you can eat. Then
go and wait for me at the place they call Apple Blossom Court.  I don't
know where it is, but I am going there.  I want to hear how you came to
this.  Will you come?"

The thief lurched away from the wall and toward him.  He stared up into
his eyes through the fog.  The tears had smeared his cheekbones.

"God!" he said.  "Will I come? Look and see if I'll come."  Dart looked.

"Yes, you'll come," he answered, and he gave him the money.  "I 'm
going back to the coffee-stand."

The thief stood staring after him as he went out of the court.  Dart was
