Finally Mr. Lake appeared to have an idea.

"Have you got five dollars, Philip?" he said familiarly.

"Yes, sir," answered Philip slowly.

"Then I'll make a proposal. Lend it to me and I will give you this ring
as security. It is worth twenty-five dollars easily."

He drew from his vest-pocket a neat gold ring, with some sort of a stone
in the setting.

"There!" said Mr. Lake, "I'll give you this ring and my address, and you
can bring it to my office to-morrow morning. I'll give you back the
five dollars and one dollar for the accommodation. That's good interest,
isn't it?"

"But I might keep the ring and sell it," suggested Phil.

"Oh, I am not afraid. You look honest. I will trust you," said the young
man, in a careless, off-hand manner. "Say, is it a bargain?"

"Yes," answered Phil.

It occurred to him that he could not earn a dollar more easily. Besides,
he would be doing a favor to this very polite young man.

"All right, then!"

Five dollars of Phil's scanty hoard was handed to Mr. Lake, who, in
return, gave Phil the ring, which he put on his finger.

He also handed Phil a scrap of paper, on which he penciled:


"LIONEL LAKE, No. 237 Broadway."


"I'm ever so much obliged," he said. "Good-by. I get out at the next
station."

Phil was congratulating himself on his good stroke of business, when the
conductor entered the car, followed by a young lady. When they came to
where Phil was seated, the young lady said:

"That is my ring on that boy's finger?"

"Aha! we've found the thief, then!" said the conductor. "Boy, give up
the ring you stole from this young lady!"

As he spoke he placed his hand on Phil's shoulder.

"Stole!" repeated Phil, gasping. "I don't understand you."

"Oh, yes, you do!" said the conductor roughly.



CHAPTER V.

AN OVERBEARING CONDUCTOR

No matter how honest a boy may be, a sudden charge of theft is likely to
make him look confused and guilty.

Such was the case with Phil.

"I assure you," he said earnestly, "that I did not steal this ring."

"Where did you get it, then?" demanded the conductor roughly.

He was one of those men who, in any position, will make themselves
disagreeable. Moreover, he was a man who always thought ill of others,
when there was any chance of doing so. In fact, he preferred to credit
his fellows with bad qualities rather than with good.

"It was handed me by a young man who just left the car," said Phil.

"That's a likely story," sneered the conductor.

"Young men are not in the habit of giving valuable rings to strangers."

"He did not give it to me, I advanced him five dollars on it."

"What was the young man's name?" asked the conductor incredulously.

"There's his name and address," answered Phil, drawing from his pocket
the paper handed him by Mr. Lake.

"Lionel Lake, 237 Broadway," repeated the conductor. "If there is any
such person, which I very much doubt, you are probably a confederate of
his."

"You have no right to say this," returned Phil indignantly.

"I haven't, haven't I?" snapped the conductor.

"Do you know what I am going to do with you?"

"If you wish me to return the ring to this young lady, I will do so, if
she is positive it is hers."

"Yes, you must do that, but it won't get you out of trouble. I shall
hand you over to a policeman as soon as we reach New York."

Phil was certainly dismayed, for he felt that it might be difficult for
him to prove that he came honestly in possession of the ring.

"The fact is," added the conductor, "your story is too thin."

"Conductor," said a new voice, "you are doing the boy an injustice."

The speaker was an old man with gray hair, but of form still robust,
though he was at least sixty five. He sat in the seat just behind Phil.

"Thank you, sir," said Phil gratefully.

"I understand my business," said the conductor impertinently, "and don't
need any instructions from you."

"Young man," said the old gentleman, in a very dignified tone, "I have
usually found officials of your class polite and gentlemanly, but you
are an exception."

"Who are you?" asked the conductor rudely. "What right have you to put
in your oar?"

"As to who I am, I will answer you by and by. In reference to the boy,
I have to say that his story is correct. I heard the whole conversation
between him and the young man from whom he received the ring, and I can
testify that he has told the truth."

"At any rate he has received stolen property."

"Not knowing it to be stolen. The young man was an entire stranger to
him, and though I suspected that he was an unscrupulous adventurer, the
boy has not had experience enough to judge men."

"Very well. If he's innocent he can prove it when he's brought to
trial," said the conductor. "As for you, sir, it's none of your
business."

"Young man, you asked me a short time since who I am. Do you want to
know?"

"I am not very particular."

"Then, sir, I have to inform you that I am Richard Grant, the president
of this road."

The conductor's face was a curious and interesting study when he heard
this announcement. He knew that the old man whom he had insulted had
a right to discharge him from his position, and bully as he had shown
himself, he was now inclined to humble himself to save his place.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said in a composed tone. "If I had known
who you were I wouldn't have spoken as I did."

"I had a claim to be treated like a gentleman, even if I had no
connection with the road," he said.

"If you say the boy's all right, I won't interfere with him," continued
the conductor.

"My testimony would clear him from any charge that might be brought
against him," said the president. "I saw him enter the car, and know he
has had no opportunity to take the ring."

"If he'll give me back the ring, that's all I want," said the young
lady.

"That I am willing to do, though I lose five dollars by it," said
Philip.

"Do so, my boy," said the president. "I take it for granted that the
young lady's claim is a just one."

Upon this Philip drew the ring from his finger and handed it to the
young lady, who went back to the car where her friends were sitting.

"I hope, sir," said the conductor anxiously, "that you won't be
prejudiced against me on account of this affair."

"I am sorry to say that I can't help feeling prejudiced against you,"
returned the president dryly; "but I won't allow this feeling to injure
you if, upon inquiring, I find that you are otherwise an efficient
officer."

"Thank you, sir."

"I am glad that my presence has saved this boy from being the victim of
an injustice. Let this be a lesson to you in future."

The conductor walked away, looking quite chop-fallen, and Philip turned
to his new friend.

"I am very much indebted to you, sir," he said. "But for you I should
have found myself in serious trouble."

"I am glad to have prevented an injustice, my lad. I am sorry I could
not save you from loss also. That enterprising rogue has gone off with
five dollars belonging to you. I hope the loss will not be a serious one
to you."

"It was more than a third part of my capital, sir," said Phil, rather
ruefully.

"I am sorry for that. I suppose, however, you are not dependent upon
your own resources?"

"Yes, sir, I am."

"Have you no parents, then?" asked Mr. Grant, with interest.

"No, sir; that is, I have a step-mother."

"And what are your plans, if you are willing to tell me?"

"I am going to New York to try to make a living."

"I cannot commend your plan, my young friend, unless there is a good
reason for it."


"I think there is a good reason for it, sir."

"I hope you have not run away from home?"

"No, sir; I left home with my step-mother's knowledge and consent."

"That is well. I don't want wholly to discourage you, and so I will tell
you that I, too, came to New York at your age with the same object in
view, with less money in my pocket than you possess."

"And now you are the president of a railroad!" said Phil hopefully.

"Yes; but I had a hard struggle before I reached that position."

"I am not afraid of hard work, sir."

"That is in your favor. Perhaps you may be as lucky as I have been. You
may call at my office in the city, if you feel inclined."

As Mr. Grant spoke he put in Phil's hand a card bearing his name and
address, in Wall Street.

"Thank you, sir," said Phil gratefully. "I shall be glad to call. I may
need advice."

"If you seek advice and follow it you will be an exception to the
general rule," said the president, smiling. "One thing more--you have
met with a loss which, to you, is a serious one. Allow me to bear it,
and accept this bill."

"But, sir, it is not right that you should bear it," commenced Phil.
Then, looking at the bill, he said: "Haven't you made a mistake? This is
a TEN-dollar bill."

"I know it. Accept the other five as an evidence of my interest in you.
By the way, I go to Philadelphia and Washington before my return to New
York, and shall not return for three or four days. After that time you
will find me at my office.

"I am in luck after all," thought Phil cheerfully, "in spite of the mean
trick of Mr. Lionel Lake."



CHAPTER VI.

SIGNOR ORLANDO.

So Phil reached New York in very fair spirits. He found himself, thanks
to the liberality of Mr. Grant, in a better financial position than when
he left home.

As he left the depot and found himself in the streets of New York, he
felt like a stranger upon the threshold of a new life. He knew almost
nothing about the great city he had entered, and was at a loss where to
seek for lodgings.

"It's a cold day," said a sociable voice at his elbow.

Looking around, Phil saw that the speaker was a sallow-complexioned
young man, with black hair and mustache, a loose black felt hat, crushed
at the crown, giving him rather a rakish look.

"Yes, sir," answered Phil politely.

"Stranger in the city, I expect?"

"Yes, sir."

"Never mind the sir. I ain't used to ceremony. I am Signor Orlando."

"Signor Orlando!" repeated Phil, rather puzzled.

"Are you an Italian?"

"Well, yes," returned Signor Orlando, with a wink, "that's what I am, or
what people think me; but I was born in Vermont, and am half Irish and
half Yankee."

"How did you come by your name, then?"

"I took it," answered his companion. "You see, dear boy, I'm a
professional."

"A what?"

"A professional--singer and clog-dancer. I believe I am pretty well
known to the public," continued Signor Orlando complacently. "Last
summer I traveled with Jenks & Brown's circus. Of course you've heard of
THEM. Through the winter I am employed at Bowerman's Varieties, in the
Bowery. I appear every night, and at two matinees weekly."

It must be confessed that Phil was considerably impressed by the
professional character of Signor Orlando. He had never met an actor,
or public performer of any description, and was disposed to have a high
respect for a man who filled such a conspicuous position. There was not,
to be sure, anything very impressive about Signor Orlando's appearance.
His face did not indicate talent, and his dress was shabby. But for all
that he was a man familiar with the public--a man of gifts.

"I should like to see you on the stage," said Phil respectfully.

"So you shall, my dear boy--so you shall. I'll get you a pass from Mr.
Bowerman. Which way are you going?"

"I don't know," answered Phil, puzzled. "I should like to find a cheap
boarding-house, but I don't know the city."

"I do," answered Signor Orlando promptly. "Why not come to my house?"

"Have you a house?"

"I mean my boarding-house. It's some distance away. Suppose we take a
horse-car?"

"All right!" answered Phil, relieved to find a guide in the labyrinth of
the great city.

"I live on Fifth Street, near the Bowery--a very convenient location,"
said Orlando, if we may take the liberty to call him thus.

"Fifth Avenue?" asked Phil, who did not know the difference.

"Oh, no; that's a peg above my style. I am not a Vanderbilt, nor yet an
Astor."

"Is the price moderate?" asked Phil anxiously. "I must make my money
last as long as I can, for I don't know when I shall get a place."

"To be sure. You might room with me, only I've got a hall bedroom.
Perhaps we might manage it, though."

"I think I should prefer a room by myself," said Phil, who reflected
that Signor Orlando was a stranger as yet.

"Oh, well, I'll speak to the old lady, and I guess she can accommodate
you with a hall bedroom like mine on the third floor."

"What should I have to pay?"

"A dollar and a quarter a week, and you can get your meals where you
please."

"I think that will suit me," said Phil thoughtfully.

After leaving the car, a minute's walk brought them to a shabby
three-story house of brick. There was a stable opposite, and a group of
dirty children were playing in front of it.

"This is where I hang out," said Signor Orlando cheerfully. "As the poet
says, there is no place like home."

If this had been true it was not much to be regretted, since the home in
question was far from attractive.

Signor Orlando rang the bell, and a stout woman of German aspect
answered the call.

"So you haf come back, Herr Orlando," said this lady. "I hope you haf
brought them two weeks' rent you owe me."

"All in good time, Mrs. Schlessinger," said Orlando. "But you see I have
brought some one with me."

"Is he your bruder now?" asked the lady.

"No, he is not, unfortunately for me. His name is----"

Orlando coughed.

"Philip Brent," suggested our hero.

"Just so--Philip Brent."

"I am glad to see Mr. Prent," said the landlady.

"And is he an actor like you, Signor Orlando?"

"Not yet. We don't know what may happen. But he comes on business, Mrs.
Schlessinger. He wants a room."

The landlady brightened up. She had two rooms vacant, and a new lodger
was a godsend.

"I vill show Mr. Prent what rooms I haf," she said. "Come up-stairs, Mr.
Prent."

The good woman toiled up the staircase panting, for she was asthmatic,
and Phil followed. The interior of the house was as dingy as the
exterior, and it was quite dark on the second landing.

She threw open the door of a back room, which, being lower than the
hall, was reached by a step.

"There!" said she, pointing to the faded carpet, rumpled bed, and cheap
pine bureau, with the little six-by-ten looking-glass surmounting it.
"This is a peautiful room for a single gentleman, or even for a man and
his wife."

"My friend, Mr. Brent, is not married," said Signor Orlando waggishly.

Phil laughed.

"You will have your shoke, Signor Orlando," said Mrs. Schlessinger.

"What is the price of this room?" asked Phil.

"Three dollars a week, Mr. Prent, I ought to have four, but since you
are a steady young gentleman----"

"How does she know that?" Phil wondered.

"Since you are a steady young gentleman, and a friend of Signor Orlando,
I will not ask you full price."
