emperor.

One thing, however, held him back from this step which day by day he saw
more clearly was the only one possible. His new overlord would demand
the service of one of his sons. And the old emperor had no son; only
three daughters.

Look on which side he would, nothing but ruin seemed to lie before him,
and he became so gloomy, that his daughters were frightened, and did
everything they could think of to cheer him up, but all to no purpose.

At length one day when they were at dinner, the eldest of the three
summoned up all her courage and said to her father:

'What secret grief is troubling you? Are your subjects discontented? or
have we given you cause for displeasure? To smooth away your wrinkles,
we would gladly shed our blood, for our lives are bound up in yours; and
this you know.'

'My daughter,' answered the emperor, 'what you say is true. Never have
you given me one moment's pain. Yet now you cannot help me. Ah! why is
not one of you a boy!'

'I don't understand,' she answered in surprise. 'Tell us what is wrong:
and though we are not boys, we are not quite useless!'

'But what can you do, my dear children? Spin, sew, and weave--that is
all your learning. Only a warrior can deliver me now, a young giant who
is strong to wield the battle-axe: whose sword deals deadly blows.'

'But WHY do you need a son so much at present? Tell us all about it! It
will not make matters worse if we know!'

'Listen then, my daughters, and learn the reason of my sorrow. You have
heard that as long as I was young no man ever brought an army against
me without it costing him dear. But the years have chilled my blood and
drunk my strength. And now the deer can roam the forest, my arrows will
never pierce his heart; strange soldiers will set fire to my houses and
water their horses at my wells, and my arm cannot hinder them. No, my
day is past, and the time has come when I too must bow my head under the
yoke of my foe! But who is to give him the ten years' service that is
part of the price which the vanquished must pay?'

'_I_ will,' cried the eldest girl, springing to her feet. But her father
only shook his head sadly.

'Never will I bring shame upon you,' urged the girl. 'Let me go. Am I
not a princess, and the daughter of an emperor?'

'Go then!' he said.

The brave girl's heart almost stopped beating from joy, as she set about
her preparations. She was not still for a single moment, but danced
about the house, turning chests and wardrobes upside down. She set
aside enough things for a whole year--dresses embroidered with gold and
precious stones, and a great store of provisions. And she chose the most
spirited horse in the stable, with eyes of flame, and a coat of shining
silver.

When her father saw her mounted and curvetting about the court, he gave
her much wise advice, as to how she was to behave like the young man she
appeared to be, and also how to behave as the girl she really was. Then
he gave her his blessing, and she touched her horse with the spur.

The silver armour of herself and her steed dazzled the eyes of the
people as she darted past. She was soon out of sight, and if after a few
miles she had not pulled up to allow her escort to join her, the rest of
the journey would have been performed alone.

But though none of his daughters were aware of the fact, the old emperor
was a magician, and had laid his plans accordingly. He managed, unseen,
to overtake his daughter, and throw a bridge of copper over a stream
which she would have to cross. Then, changing himself into a wolf, he
lay down under one of the arches, and waited.

He had chosen his time well, and in about half an hour the sound of a
horse's hoofs was heard. His feet were almost on the bridge, when a big
grey wolf with grinning teeth appeared before the princess. With a deep
growl that froze the blood, he drew himself up, and prepared to spring.

The appearance of the wolf was so sudden and so unexpected, that the
girl was almost paralysed, and never even dreamt of flight, till the
horse leaped violently to one side. Then she turned him round, and
urging him to his fullest speed, never drew rein till she saw the gates
of the palace rising before her.

The old emperor, who had got back long since, came to the door to meet
her, and touching her shining armour, he said, 'Did I not tell you, my
child, that flies do not make honey?'

The days passed on, and one morning the second princess implored her
father to allow her to try the adventure in which her sister had made
such a failure. He listened unwillingly, feeling sure it was no use, but
she begged so hard that in the end he consented, and having chosen her
arms, she rode away.

But though, unlike her sister, she was quite prepared for the appearance
of the wolf when she reached the copper bridge, she showed no greater
courage, and galloped home as fast as her horse could carry her. On the
steps of the castle her father was standing, and as still trembling with
fright she knelt at his feet, he said gently, 'Did I not tell you, my
child, that every bird is not caught in a net?'

The three girls stayed quietly in the palace for a little while,
embroidering, spinning, weaving, and tending their birds and flowers,
when early one morning, the youngest princess entered the door of the
emperor's private apartments. 'My father, it is my turn now. Perhaps I
shall get the better of that wolf!'

'What, do you think you are braver than your sisters, vain little one?
You who have hardly left your long clothes behind you!' but she did not
mind being laughed at, and answered,

'For your sake, father, I would cut the devil himself into small bits,
or even become a devil myself. I think I shall succeed, but if I fail, I
shall come home without more shame than my sisters.'

Still the emperor hesitated, but the girl petted and coaxed him till at
last he said,

'Well, well, if you must go, you must. It remains to be seen what I
shall get by it, except perhaps a good laugh when I see you come back
with your head bent and your eyes on the ground.'

'He laughs best who laughs last,' said the princess.

Happy at having got her way, the princess decided that the first thing
to be done was to find some old white-haired boyard, whose advice she
could trust, and then to be very careful in choosing her horse. So she
went straight to the stables where the most beautiful horses in the
empire were feeding in the stalls, but none of them seemed quite what
she wanted. Almost in despair she reached the last box of all, which was
occupied by her father's ancient war-horse, old and worn like himself,
stretched sadly out on the straw.

The girl's eyes filled with tears, and she stood gazing at him. The
horse lifted his head, gave a little neigh, and said softly, 'You look
gentle and pitiful, but I know it is your love for your father which
makes you tender to me. Ah, what a warrior he was, and what good times
we shared together! But now I too have grown old, and my master has
forgotten me, and there is no reason to care whether my coat is dull or
shining. Yet, it is not too late, and if I were properly tended, in a
week I could vie with any horse in the stables!'

'And how should you be tended?' asked the girl.

'I must be rubbed down morning and evening with rain water, my barley
must be boiled in milk, because of my bad teeth, and my feet must be
washed in oil.'

'I should like to try the treatment, as you might help me in carrying
out my scheme.'

'Try it then, mistress, and I promise you will never repent.'

So in a week's time the horse woke up one morning with a sudden shiver
through all his limbs; and when it had passed away, he found his skin
shining like a mirror, his body as fat as a water melon, his movement
light as a chamois.

Then looking at the princess who had come early to the stable, he said
joyfully,

'May success await on the steps of my master's daughter, for she has
given me back my life. Tell me what I can do for you, princess, and I
will do it.'

'I want to go to the emperor who is our over-lord, and I have no one
to advise me. Which of all the white-headed boyards shall I choose as
counsellor?'

'If you have me, you need no one else: I will serve you as I served your
father, if you will only listen to what I say.'

'I will listen to everything. Can you start in three days?'

'This moment, if you like,' said the horse.

The preparations of the emperor's youngest daughter were much fewer and
simpler than those of her sisters. They only consisted of some boy's
clothes, a small quantity of linen and food, and a little money in case
of necessity. Then she bade farewell to her father, and rode away.

A day's journey from the palace, she reached the copper bridge, but
before they came in sight of it, the horse, who was a magician, had
warned her of the means her father would take to prove her courage.

Still in spite of his warning she trembled all over when a huge wolf, as
thin as if he had fasted for a month, with claws like saws, and mouth
as wide as an oven, bounded howling towards her. For a moment her heart
failed her, but the next, touching the horse lightly with her spur, she
drew her sword from its sheath, ready to separate the wolf's head from
its body at a single blow.

The beast saw the sword, and shrank back, which was the best thing it
could do, as now the girl's blood was up, and the light of battle in her
eyes. Then without looking round, she rode across the bridge.

The emperor, proud of this first victory, took a short cut, and waited
for her at the end of another day's journey, close to a river, over
which he threw a bridge of silver. And this time he took the shape of a
lion.

But the horse guessed this new danger and told the princess how to
escape it. But it is one thing to receive advice when we feel safe and
comfortable, and quite another to be able to carry it out when some
awful peril is threatening us. And if the wolf had made the girl quake
with terror, it seemed like a lamb beside this dreadful lion.

At the sound of his roar the very trees quivered and his claws were so
large that every one of them looked like a cutlass.

The breath of the princess came and went, and her feet rattled in the
stirrups. Suddenly the remembrance flashed across her of the wolf whom
she had put to flight, and waving her sword, she rushed so violently on
the lion that he had barely time to spring on one side, so as to avoid
the blow. Then, like a flash, she crossed this bridge also.

Now during her whole life, the princess had been so carefully brought
up, that she had never left the gardens of the palace, so that the sight
of the hills and valleys and tinkling streams, and the song of the larks
and blackbirds, made her almost beside herself with wonder and delight.
She longed to get down and bathe her face in the clear pools, and pick
the brilliant flowers, but the horse said 'No,' and quickened his pace,
neither turning to the right or the left.

'Warriors,' he told her, 'only rest when they have won the victory. You
have still another battle to fight, and it is the hardest of all.'

This time it was neither a wolf nor a lion that was waiting for her at
the end of the third day's journey, but a dragon with twelve heads, and
a golden bridge behind it.

The princess rode up without seeing anything to frighten her, when a
sudden puff of smoke and flame from beneath her feet, caused her to
look down, and there was the horrible creature twisted and writhing, its
twelve heads reared up as if to seize her between them.

The bridle fell from her hand: and the sword which she had just grasped
slid back into its sheath, but the horse bade her fear nothing, and with
a mighty effort she sat upright and spurred straight on the dragon.

The fight lasted an hour and the dragon pressed her hard. But in the
end, by a well-directed side blow, she cut off one of the heads, and
with a roar that seemed to rend the heavens in two, the dragon fell back
on the ground, and rose as a man before her.

Although the horse had informed the princess the dragon was really her
own father, the girl had hardly believed him, and stared in amazement at
the transformation. But he flung his arms round her and pressed her to
his heart saying, 'Now I see that you are as brave as the bravest, and
as wise as the wisest. You have chosen the right horse, for without his
help you would have returned with a bent head and downcast eyes. You
have filled me with the hope that you may carry out the task you have
undertaken, but be careful to forget none of my counsels, and above all
to listen to those of your horse.'

When he had done speaking, the princess knelt down to receive his
blessing, and they went their different ways.

The princess rode on and on, till at last she came to the mountains
which hold up the roof of the world. There she met two Genii who had
been fighting fiercely for two years, without one having got the least
advantage over the other. Seeing what they took to be a young man
seeking adventures, one of the combatants called out, 'Fet-Fruners!
deliver me from my enemy, and I will give you the horn that can be
heard the distance of a three days' journey;' while the other cried,
'Fet-Fruners! help me to conquer this pagan thief, and you shall have my
horse, Sunlight.'

Before answering, the princess consulted her own horse as to which offer
she should accept, and he advised her to side with the genius who was
master of Sunlight, his own younger brother, and still more active than
himself.

So the girl at once attacked the other genius, and soon clove his skull;
then the one who was left victor begged her to come back with him to his
house and he would hand her over Sunlight, as he had promised.

The mother of the genius was rejoiced to see her son return safe and
sound, and prepared her best room for the princess, who, after so much
fatigue, needed rest badly. But the girl declared that she must first
make her horse comfortable in his stable; but this was really only an
excuse, as she wanted to ask his advice on several matters.

But the old woman had suspected from the very first that the boy who
had come to the rescue of her son was a girl in disguise, and told the
genius that she was exactly the wife he needed. The genius scoffed, and
inquired what female hand could ever wield a sabre like that; but, in
spite of his sneers, his mother persisted, and as a proof of what she
said, laid at night on each of their pillows a handful of magic flowers,
that fade at the touch of man, but remain eternally fresh in the fingers
of a woman.

It was very clever of her, but unluckily the horse had warned the
princess what to expect, and when the house was silent, she stole very
softly to the genius's room, and exchanged his faded flowers for those
she held. Then she crept back to her own bed and fell fast asleep.

At break of day, the old woman ran to see her son, and found, as she
knew she would, a bunch of dead flowers in his hand. She next passed
on to the bedside of the princess, who still lay asleep grasping the
withered flowers. But she did not believe any the more that her guest
was a man, and so she told her son. So they put their heads together and
laid another trap for her.

After breakfast the genius gave his arm to his guest, and asked her to
come with him into the garden. For some time they walked about looking
at the flowers, the genius all the while pressing her to pick any she
fancied. But the princess, suspecting a trap, inquired roughly why they
were wasting the precious hours in the garden, when, as men, they should
be in the stables looking after their horses. Then the genius told his
mother that she was quite wrong, and his deliverer was certainly a man.
But the old woman was not convinced for all that.

She would try once more she said, and her son must lead his visitor
into the armoury, where hung every kind of weapon used all over the
world--some plain and bare, others ornamented with precious stones--and
beg her to make choice of one of them. The princess looked at them
closely, and felt the edges and points of their blades, then she hung at
her belt an old sword with a curved blade, that would have done credit
to an ancient warrior. After this she informed the genius that she would
start early next day and take Sunlight with her.

And there was nothing for the mother to do but to submit, though she
still stuck to her own opinion.

The princess mounted Sunlight, and touched him with her spur, when the
old horse, who was galloping at her side, suddenly said:

'Up to this time, mistress, you have obeyed my counsels and all has gone
well. Listen to me once more, and do what I tell you. I am old, and--now
that there is someone to take my place, I will confess it--I am afraid
that my strength is not equal to the task that lies before me. Give me
leave, therefore, to return home, and do you continue your journey under
the care of my brother. Put your faith in him as you put it in me, and
you will never repent. Wisdom has come early to Sunlight.'

'Yes, my old comrade, you have served me well; and it is only through
your help that up to now I have been victorious. So grieved though I am
to say farewell, I will obey you yet once more, and will listen to your
brother as I would to yourself. Only, I must have a proof that he loves
me as well as you do.'

'How should I not love you?' answered Sunlight; 'how should I not be
proud to serve a warrior such as you? Trust me, mistress, and you
shall never regret the absence of my brother. I know there will be
difficulties in our path, but we will face them together.'

Then, with tears in her eyes, the princess took leave of her old horse,
who galloped back to her father.

She had ridden only a few miles further, when she saw a golden curl
lying on the road before her. Checking her horse, she asked whether it
would be better to take it or let it lie.

'If you take it,' said Sunlight, 'you will repent, and if you don't, you
will repent too: so take it.' On this the girl dismounted, and picking
up the curl, wound it round her neck for safety.

They passed by hills, they passed by mountains, they passed through
valleys, leaving behind them thick forests, and fields covered with
flowers; and at length they reached the court of the over-lord.

He was sitting on his throne, surrounded by the sons of the other
emperors, who served him as pages. These youths came forward to greet
their new companion, and wondered why they felt so attracted towards
him.

However, there was no time for talking and concealing her fright.

The princess was led straight up to the throne, and explained, in a low
voice, the reason of her coming. The emperor received her kindly, and
declared himself fortunate at finding a vassal so brave and so charming,
and begged the princess to remain in attendance on his person.

She was, however, very careful in her behaviour towards the other pages,
whose way of life did not please her. One day, however, she had been
amusing herself by making sweetmeats, when two of the young princes
looked in to pay her a visit. She offered them some of the food which
was already on the table, and they thought it so delicious that they
even licked their fingers so as not to lose a morsel. Of course they did
not keep the news of their discovery to themselves, but told all their
