would object."

"But he knows you are honest, and that nothing but the hard times would
have brought you to such a pass."

"It may be, Mary. At any rate you have lightened my heart a little. I
feel as if there was some hope left."

"We ought always to feel so, Timothy. There was one thing that Mr.
Colman said that didn't sound so well, coming from his lips; but it's
true, for all that."

"What do you mean, Mary?"

"I mean that about not distrusting Providence. Many a time have I
been comforted by reading the verse, 'Never have I seen the righteous
forsaken, or his seed begging bread.' As long as we try to do what is
right, Timothy, God will not suffer us to want."

"You are right, Mary. He is our ever-present help in time of need.
Let us put away all anxious cares, fully confiding in his gracious
promises."

They retired to rest thoughtfully, but not sadly.

The fire upon the hearth flickered, and died out at length. The last
sands of the old year were running out, and the new morning ushered in
its successor.



CHAPTER IV. THE NEW YEAR'S PRESENT.



"HAPPY New Year!" was Jack's salutation to Aunt Rachel, as, with an
unhappy expression of countenance, she entered the sitting-room.

"Happy, indeed!" she repeated, dismally. "There's great chance of its
being so, I should think. We don't any of us know what the year may
bring forth. We may all be dead before the next New Year."

"If that's the case," said Jack, "we'll be jolly as long as it lasts."

"I don't know what you mean by such a vulgar word," said Aunt Rachel,
disdainfully. "I've heard of drunkards and such kind of people being
jolly; but, thank Providence, I haven't got to that yet."

"If that was the only way to be jolly," said Jack, stoutly, "then I'd
be a drunkard; I wouldn't carry round such a long face as you do, Aunt
Rachel, for any money."

"It's enough to make all of us have long faces, when you are brazen
enough to own that you mean to be a drunkard."

"I didn't say any such thing," said Jack, indignantly.

"Perhaps I have ears," remarked Aunt Rachel, sententiously, "and perhaps
I have not. It's a new thing for a nephew to tell his aunt that she
lies. They didn't use to allow such things when I was young.--But the
world's going to rack and ruin, and I shouldn't much wonder if the
people are right that says it's comin' to an end."

Here Mrs. Crump happily interposed, by asking Jack to go round to the
grocery, in the next street, and buy a pint of milk.

Jack took his cap and started, with alacrity, glad to leave the dismal
presence of Aunt Rachel.

He had scarcely opened the door when he started back in surprise,
exclaiming, "By hokey, if there isn't a basket on the steps!"

"A basket!" repeated Mrs. Crump, in surprise. "Can it be a New Year's
present? Bring it in, Jack."

It was brought in immediately, and the cover being lifted there appeared
a female child, of apparently a year old. All uttered exclamations of
surprise, each in itself characteristic.

"What a dear, innocent little thing!" said Mrs. Crump, with true
maternal instinct.

"Ain't it a pretty 'un?" said Jack, admiringly.

"Poor thing!" said the cooper, compassionately.

"It's a world of iniquity!" remarked Rachel, lifting up her eyes,
dismally. "There isn't any one you can trust. I didn't think a brother
of mine would have such a sin brought to his door."

"Good heavens, Rachel!" said the honest cooper, in amazement, "what can
you mean?"

"It isn't for me to explain," said Rachel, shaking her head; "only it's
strange that it should have been brought to _this_ house, that's all I
say."

"Perhaps it was meant for you, Aunt Rachel," said Jack, with thoughtless
fun.

"Me!" exclaimed Rachel, rising to her feet, while her face betrayed the
utmost horror at the suggestion. She fell back in her seat, and made a
violent effort to faint.

"What have I said?" asked Jack, a little frightened at the effect of his
words. "Aunt Rachel takes one up so."

"He didn't mean anything," said Mrs. Crump. "How could you suspect such
a thing? But here's a letter. It looks as if there was something in it.
Here, Timothy, it is directed to you."

Mr. Cooper opened the letter, and read as follows:--

"For reasons which it is unnecessary to state, the guardians of this
child find it expedient to (sic) intrust it to others to be brought up.
The good opinion which they have formed of you, has led them to select
you for that charge. No further explanation is necessary, except that
it is by no means their object to make this a service of charity. They
therefore (sic) inclose a certificate of deposits on the Broadway Bank,
of three hundred dollars, the same having been made in your name. Each
year, while the child remains in your charge, the same sum will in like
manner be placed to your credit at the same bank It may be as well to
state, farther, that all attempts to fathom whatever of mystery may
attach to this affair, will prove useless."

This letter was read in silent amazement.

The certificate of deposits, which had fallen to the floor, was handed
to Timothy by his wife.

Amazement was followed by a feeling of gratitude and relief.

"What could be more fortunate?" exclaimed Mrs. Crump. "Surely, Timothy,
our faith has been rewarded."

"God has listened to our cry," said the cooper, devoutly; "and, in the
hour of our need, He has remembered us."

"Isn't it prime?" said Jack, gleefully; "three hundred dollars! Ain't we
rich, Aunt Rachel?"

"Like as not," observed Rachel, "the certificate isn't genuine. It
doesn't look natural it should be. I've heard of counterfeits before.
I shouldn't be surprised at all if Timothy got taken up for presenting
it."

"I'll risk that," said Mr. Crump, who did not look very much depressed
by this suggestion.

"Now you'll be able to pay the rent, Timothy," said Mrs. Crump,
cheerfully.

"Yes; and it's the last quarter I shall pay to Mr. Colman, if I can help
it."

"Why, where are you going?" inquired Jack.

"To the corner house belonging to Mr. Harrison, that is, if it is not
already engaged. I think I will go and see about it at once. If Mr.
Colman should come in while I am gone, tell him I will be back directly;
I don't wish you to tell him of the change in our circumstances."

The cooper found Mr. Harrison at home.

"I called to inquire," commenced the cooper, "whether you had let that
house of yours on the corner of the street."

"Not as yet," was the reply.

"What rent do you ask?"

"Twenty dollars a quarter," said Mr. Harrison; "that I consider
reasonable."

"It is satisfactory to me," was the cooper's reply, "and, if you have no
objections to me as a tenant, I will engage it at once."

"Far from having any objections, Mr. Crump," was the courteous reply, "I
shall be glad to secure so good a tenant. Will you go over and look at
the house?"

"Not now, sir; I am somewhat in haste. When can we move in?"

"To-day, if you like."

His errand satisfactorily accomplished, the cooper returned home.
Meanwhile the landlord had called.

He was a little surprised to find that Mrs. Crump, instead of looking
depressed, looked cheerful, rather than otherwise.

"I was not aware you had a child so young," he remarked, looking at the
baby.

"It isn't mine," said Mrs. Crump, briefly.

"The child of a neighbor, I suppose," thought Colman.

Meanwhile he scrutinized closely, without appearing to do so, the
furniture in the room.

At this point Mr. Crump opened the outer door.

"Good-morning," said Colman, affably. "A fine morning."

"Quite so," answered his tenant, shortly.

"I have called, Mr. Crump, to know if you are ready with your quarter's
rent."

"I think I told you, last night, how I was situated. Of course I am
sorry----"

"So am I," said the landlord, "for I may be obliged to have recourse to
unpleasant measures."

"You mean that we must leave the house!"

"Of course, you cannot expect to remain in it if you are unable to pay
the rent. Of course," added Colman, making an inventory with his
eyes, of the furniture, "you will leave behind a sufficient amount of
furniture to cover your bill----"

"Surely, you would not deprive us of our furniture!"

"Is there any hardship in requiring payment of honest debts?"

"There are cases of that description. However, I will not put you to
that trouble. I am ready to pay you your dues."

"You have the money?" said Colman, hastily.

"I have, and something over; as you will see by this document. Can you
give me the two hundred and eighty dollars over?"

It would be difficult to picture the amazement of Colman. "Surely, you
told me a different story last night," he said.

"Last night and this morning are different times. Then I could not pay
you; now, luckily, I am able. If you cannot change this amount, and will
accompany me to the bank, I will place the money in your hands."

"My dear sir, I am not at all in haste," said the landlord, with a
return of his former affability. "Any time within a week will do. I
hope, by the way, you will continue to occupy this house."

"As I have already engaged Mr. Harrison's house, at the corner of the
street, I shall be unable to remain. Besides, I do not want to interfere
with the family who are so desirous of moving in."

Mr. Colman was silenced. He regretted, too late, the hasty course which
had lost him a good tenant. The family referred to had no existence;
and, it may be remarked, the house remained vacant for several months,
when he was glad to rent it at the old price.



CHAPTER V. A LUCKY RESCUE.



THE opportune arrival of the child inaugurated a season of comparative
prosperity in the home of Timothy Crump. To persons accustomed to live
in their frugal way, three hundred dollars seemed a fortune. Nor, as
might have happened in some cases, did this unexpected windfall tempt
the cooper or his wife to extravagances.

"Let us save something against a rainy day," said Mrs. Crump.

"We can, if I get work soon," answered her husband. "This little one
will add but little to our expenses, and there is no reason why we
should not save up at least half of it."

"There's no knowing when you will get work, Timothy," said Rachel, in
her usual cheerful way; "it isn't well to crow before you're out of the
woods."

"Very true, Rachel. It isn't your failing to look too much at the sunny
side of the picture."

"I'm ready to look at it when I can see it anywhere," said his sister,
in the same enlivening way.

"Don't you see it in the unexpected good fortune which came with this
child?" asked Timothy.

"I've no doubt it seems bright enough, now," said Rachel, gloomily, "but
a young child's a great deal of trouble."

"Do you speak from experience, Aunt Rachel?" inquired Jack, demurely.

"Yes;" said his aunt, slowly; "if all babies were as cross as you were
when you were an infant, three hundred dollars wouldn't begin to pay for
the trouble of having one round."

Mr. Crump and his wife laughed at this sally at Jack's expense, but
the latter had his wits about him sufficiently to answer, "I've always
heard, Aunt Rachel, that the crosser a child is the pleasanter he will
grow up. What a very pleasant baby you must have been!"

"Jack!" said his mother, reprovingly; but his father, who looked upon it
as a good joke, remarked, good-humoredly, "He's got you there, Rachel."

The latter, however, took it as a serious matter, and observed that,
when she was young, children were not allowed to speak so to their
elders. "But, I don't know as I can blame 'em much," she continued,
wiping her eyes with the corner of her apron, "when their own parents
encourage 'em in it."

Timothy was warned, by experience, that silence was his best (sic)
defence. Since anything he might say would only be likely to make
matters worse.

Aunt Rachel sank into a fit of deep despondency, and did not say another
word till dinner time. She sat down to the table with a profound sigh,
as if there was little in life worth living for. Notwithstanding this,
it was observed that she had a good appetite. Indeed, Rachel seemed to
thrive on her gloomy views of life and human nature. She was, it must
be acknowledged, perfectly consistent in all her conduct, as far as this
peculiarity was concerned. Whenever she took up a newspaper, she always
looked first to the space appropriated to deaths, and next in order to
