Shortly after midnight, when the robbers saw that no light was burning
in the house and that all seemed quiet, the captain of the band said:
'We were fools to let ourselves be so easily frightened away;' and,
turning to one of his men, he ordered him to go and see if all was safe.

The man found everything in silence and darkness, and going into the
kitchen he thought he had better strike a light. He took a match, and
mistaking the fiery eyes of the cat for two glowing coals, he tried to
light his match with them. But the cat didn't see the joke, and sprang
at his face, spitting and scratching him in the most vigorous manner.
The man was terrified out of his life, and tried to run out by the back
door; but he stumbled over the greyhound, which bit him in the leg.
Yelling with pain he ran across the courtyard only to receive a kick
from the donkey's hind leg as he passed him. In the meantime the cock
had been roused from his slumbers, and feeling very cheerful he called
out, from the shelf where he was perched, 'Kikeriki!'

Then the robber hastened back to his captain and said: 'Sir, there is a
dreadful witch in the house, who spat at me and scratched my face with
her long fingers; and before the door there stands a man with a long
knife, who cut my leg severely. In the courtyard outside lies a black
monster, who fell upon me with a huge wooden club; and that is not all,
for, sitting on the roof, is a judge, who called out: "Bring the rascal
to me." So I fled for dear life.'

After this the robbers dared not venture into the house again, and they
abandoned it for ever. But the four street musicians were so delighted
with their lodgings that they determined to take up their abode in the
robbers' house, and, for all I know to the contrary, they may be living
there to this day.

[From the German, Kletke.]




The Twin Brothers


Once there was a fisherman who had plenty of money but no children.
One day an old woman came to his wife and said: 'What use is all your
prosperity to you when you have no children?'

'It is God's will,' answered the fisherman's wife.

'Nay, my child, it is not God's will, but the fault of your husband;
for if he would but catch the little gold-fish you would surely have
children. To-night, when he comes home, tell him he must go back and
catch the little fish. He must then cut it in six pieces--one of these
you must eat, and your husband the second, and soon after you will have
two children. The third piece you must give to the dog, and she will
have two puppies. The fourth piece give to the mare, and she will have
two foals. The fifth piece bury on the right of the house door, and the
sixth on the left, and two cypress trees will spring up there.'

When the fisherman came home at evening his wife told him all that
the old woman had advised, and he promised to bring home the little
gold-fish. Next morning, therefore, he went very early to the water, and
caught the little fish. Then they did as the old woman had ordered, and
in due time the fisherman's wife had two sons, so like each other that
no one could tell the difference. The dog had two puppies exactly alike,
the mare had two foals, and on each side of the front door there sprang
up two cypress trees precisely similar.

When the two boys were grown up, they were not content to remain at
home, though they had wealth in plenty; but they wished to go out into
the world, and make a name for themselves. Their father would not allow
them both to go at once, as they were the only children he had. He said:
'First one shall travel, and when he is come back then the other may
go.'

So the one took his horse and his dog, and went, saying to his brother:
'So long as the cypress trees are green, that is a sign that I am alive
and well; but if one begins to wither, then make haste and come to me.'
So he went forth into the world.

One day he stopped at the house of an old woman, and as at evening he
sat before the door, he perceived in front of him a castle standing on
a hill. He asked the old woman to whom it belonged, and her answer was:
'My son, it is the castle of the Fairest in the Land!'

'And I am come here to woo her!'

'That, my son, many have sought to do, and have lost their lives in the
attempt; for she has cut off their heads and stuck them on the post you
see standing there.'

'And the same will she do to me, or else I shall be victor, for
to-morrow I go there to court her.'

Then he took his zither and played upon it so beautifully that no one in
all that land had ever heard the like, and the princess herself came to
the window to listen.

The next morning the Fairest in the Land sent for the old woman and
asked her, 'Who is it that lives with you, and plays the zither so
well?'

'It is a stranger, princess, who arrived yesterday evening,' answered
the old woman.

And the princess then commanded that the stranger should be brought to
her.

When he appeared before the princess she questioned him about his home
and his family, and about this and that; and confessed at length that
his zither-playing gave her great pleasure, and that she would take him
for her husband. The stranger replied that it was with that intent he
had come.

The princess then said: 'You must now go to my father, and tell him you
desire to have me to wife, and when he has put the three problems before
you, then come back and tell me.'

The stranger then went straight to the king, and told him that he wished
to wed his daughter.

And the king answered: 'I shall be well pleased, provided you can do
what I impose upon you; if not you will lose your head. Now, listen; out
there on the ground, there lies a thick log, which measures more than
two fathoms; if you can cleave it in two with one stroke of your sword,
I will give you my daughter to wife. If you fail, then it will cost you
your head.'

Then the stranger withdrew, and returned to the house of the old woman
sore distressed, for he could believe nothing but that next day he must
atone to the king with his head. And so full was he of the idea of how
to set about cleaving the log that he forgot even his zither.

In the evening came the princess to the window to listen to his playing,
and behold all was still. Then she called to him: 'Why are you so cast
down this evening, that you do not play on your zither?'

And he told her his trouble.

But she laughed at it, and called to him: 'And you grieve over that?
Bring quickly your zither, and play something for my amusement, and
early to-morrow come to me.'

Then the stranger took his zither and played the whole evening for the
amusement of the princess.

Next morning she took a hair from her locks and gave it to him, saying:
'Take this hair, and wind it round your sword, then you will be able to
cleave the log in two.'

Then the stranger went forth, and with one blow cleft the log in two.

But the king said: 'I will impose another task upon you, before you can
wed my daughter.'

'Speak on,' said the stranger.

'Listen, then,' answered the king; 'you must mount a horse and ride
three miles at full gallop, holding in each hand a goblet full of water.
If you spill no drop then I shall give you my daughter to wife, but
should you not succeed then I will take your life.'

Then the stranger returned to the house of the old woman, and again he
was so troubled as to forget his zither.

In the evening the princess came to the window as before to listen to
the music, but again all was still; and she called to him: 'What is the
matter that you do not play on your zither?'

Then he related all that the king had ordered him to do, and the
princess answered: 'Do not let yourself be disturbed, only play now, and
come to me to-morrow morning.'

Then next morning he went to her, and she gave him her ring, saying:
'Throw this ring into the water and it will immediately freeze, so that
you will not spill any.'

The stranger did as the princess bade him, and carried the water all the
way.

Then the king said: 'Now I will give you a third task, and this shall be
the last. I have a negro who will fight with you to-morrow, and if you
are the conqueror you shall wed my daughter.'

The stranger returned, full of joy, to the house of the old woman, and
that evening was so merry that the princess called to him; 'You seem
very cheerful this evening; what has my father told you that makes you
so glad?'

He answered: 'Your father has told me that to-morrow I must fight with
his negro. He is only another man like myself, and I hope to subdue him,
and to gain the contest.'

But the princess answered: 'This is the hardest of all. I myself am
the black man, for I swallow a drink that changes me into a negro of
unconquerable strength. Go to-morrow morning to the market, buy twelve
buffalo hides and wrap them round your horse; fasten this cloth round
you, and when I am let loose upon you to-morrow show it to me, that I
may hold myself back and may not kill you. Then when you fight me you
must try to hit my horse between the eyes, for when you have killed it
you have conquered me.'

Next morning, therefore, he went to the market and bought the twelve
buffalo hides which he wrapped round his horse. Then he began to fight
with the black man, and when the combat had already lasted a long time,
and eleven hides were torn, then the stranger hit the negro's horse
between the eyes, so that it fell dead, and the black man was defeated.

Then said the king: 'Because you have solved the three problems I take
you for my son-in-law.'

But the stranger answered: 'I have some business to conclude first; in
fourteen days I will return and bring the bride home.'

So he arose and went into another country, where he came to a great
town, and alighted at the house of an old woman. When he had had supper
he begged of her some water to drink, but she answered: 'My son, I have
no water; a giant has taken possession of the spring, and only lets us
draw from it once a year, when we bring him a maiden. He eats her up,
and then he lets us draw water; just now it is the lot of the king's
daughter, and to-morrow she will be led forth.'

The next day accordingly the princess was led forth to the spring, and
bound there with a golden chain. After that all the people went away and
she was left alone.

When they had gone the stranger went to the maiden and asked her what
ailed her that she lamented so much, and she answered that the reason
was because the giant would come and eat her up. And the stranger
promised that he would set her free if she would take him for her
husband, and the princess joyfully consented.

When the giant appeared the stranger set his dog at him, and it took him
by the throat and throttled him till he died; so the princess was set
free.

Now when the king heard of it he gladly consented to the marriage, and
the wedding took place with great rejoicings. The young bridegroom abode
in the palace one hundred and one weeks. Then he began to find it
too dull, and he desired to go out hunting. The king would fain have
prevented it, but in this he could not succeed. Then he begged his
son-in-law at least to take sufficient escort with him, but this, too,
the young man evaded, and took only his horse and his dog.

He had ridden already a long way, when he saw in the distance a hut, and
rode straight towards it in order to get some water to drink. There
he found an old woman from whom he begged the water. She answered that
first he should allow her to beat his dog with her little wand, that it
might not bite her while she fetched the water. The hunter consented;
and as soon as she had touched the dog with her wand it immediately
turned to stone. Thereupon she touched the hunter and also his horse,
and both turned to stone. As soon as that had happened, the cypress
trees in front of his father's house began to wither. And when the other
brother saw this, he immediately set out in search of his twin. He came
first to the town where his brother had slain the giant, and there fate
led him to the same old woman where his brother had lodged. When she saw
him she took him for his twin brother, and said to him: 'Do not take
it amiss of me, my son, that I did not come to wish you joy on your
marriage with the king's daughter.'

The stranger perceived what mistake she had made, but only said: 'That
does not matter, old woman,' and rode on, without further speech, to
the king's palace, where the king and the princess both took him for
his twin brother, and called out: 'Why have you tarried so long away? We
thought something evil had befallen you.'

When night came and he slept with the princess, who still believed him
to be her husband, he laid his sword between them, and when morning came
he rose early and went out to hunt. Fate led him by the same way which
his brother had taken, and from a distance he saw him and knew that he
was turned to stone. Then he entered the hut and ordered the old woman
to disenchant his brother. But she answered: 'Let me first touch your
dog with my wand, and then I will free your brother.'

He ordered the dog, however, to take hold of her, and bite her up to
the knee, till she cried out: 'Tell your dog to let me go and I will set
your brother free!'

But he only answered: 'Tell me the magic words that I may disenchant him
myself;' and as she would not, he ordered his dog to bite her up to the
hip.

Then the old woman cried out: 'I have two wands, with the green one I
turn to stone, and with the red one I bring to life again.'

So the hunter took the red wand and disenchanted his brother, also his
brother's horse, and his dog, and ordered his own dog to eat the old
woman up altogether.

While the brothers went on their way back to the castle of the king, the
one brother related to the other how the cypress tree had all at once
dried up and withered, how he had immediately set out in search of his
twin, and how he had come to the castle of his father-in-law, and had
claimed the princess as his wife. But the other brother became furious
on hearing this, and smote him over the forehead till he died, and
returned alone to the house of his father-in-law.

When night came and he was in bed the princess asked him: 'What was the
matter with you last night, that you never spoke a word to me?'

Then he cried out: 'That was not me, but my brother, and I have slain
him, because he told me by the way that he had claimed you for his
wife!'

'Do you know the place where you slew him?' asked the princess, 'and can
you find the body?'

'I know the place exactly.'

'Then to-morrow we shall ride thither,' said the princess. Next morning
accordingly they set out together, and when they had come to the place,
the princess drew forth a small bottle that she had brought with her,
and sprinkled the body with some drops of the water so that immediately
he became alive again.

When he stood up, his brother said to him: 'Forgive me, dear brother,
that I slew you in my anger.' Then they embraced and went together to
the Fairest in the Land, whom the unmarried brother took to wife.

Then the brothers brought their parents to live with them, and all dwelt
together in joy and happiness.




Cannetella


There was once upon a time a king who reigned over a country called
'Bello Puojo.' He was very rich and powerful, and had everything in the
world he could desire except a child. But at last, after he had been
married for many years, and was quite an old man, his wife Renzolla
presented him with a fine daughter, whom they called Cannetella.

She grew up into a beautiful girl, and was as tall and straight as a
young fir-tree. When she was eighteen years old her father called her to
him and said: 'You are of an age now, my daughter, to marry and settle
down; but as I love you more than anything else in the world, and desire
nothing but your happiness, I am determined to leave the choice of a
husband to yourself. Choose a man after your own heart, and you are sure
to satisfy me.' Cannetella thanked her father very much for his kindness
and consideration, but told him that she had not the slightest wish to
marry, and was quite determined to remain single.

The king, who felt himself growing old and feeble, and longed to see an
heir to the throne before he died, was very unhappy at her words, and
begged her earnestly not to disappoint him.

When Cannetella saw that the king had set his heart on her marriage, she
said: 'Very well, dear father, I will marry to please you, for I do not
wish to appear ungrateful for all your love and kindness; but you must
find me a husband handsomer, cleverer, and more charming than anyone
else in the world.'

The king was overjoyed by her words, and from early in the morning
till late at night he sat at the window and looked carefully at all the
passers-by, in the hopes of finding a son-in-law among them.

One day, seeing a very good-looking man crossing the street, the king
called his daughter and said: 'Come quickly, dear Cannetella, and look
at this man, for I think he might suit you as a husband.'

They called the young man into the palace, and set a sumptuous feast
before him, with every sort of delicacy you can imagine. In the middle
of the meal the youth let an almond fall out of his mouth, which,
however, he picked up again very quickly and hid under the table-cloth.

When the feast was over the stranger went away, and the king asked
Cannetella: 'Well, what did you think of the youth?'

'I think he was a clumsy wretch,' replied Cannetella. 'Fancy a man of
his age letting an almond fall out of his mouth!'

When the king heard her answer he returned to his watch at the window,
