strong arms, if a campaign is to be carried out successfully. The
Bishop of Norwich is young and fiery, and he hath many like himself
round him, so that he frets openly at this delay. Moreover, Sir Thomas
Trivet and Sir William Helmon are too full of ardour to act with
discretion, and are ready enough to back up the bishop in his hot
desire to be doing something. I regret that this army is not, like the
army which fought at Crecy and Poictiers, composed of men well inured
to war, with a great number of good archers and led by experienced
warriors, instead of a hasty gathering of men, who have been fired by
the exhortations of the priests and the promises of the pope.

"We are but a small gathering. We may take some castles, and defeat the
forces that the nobles here gather against us, but more than that we
cannot do unless England arms in earnest. I foresaw this, and spoke to
the council when they prayed me to go with the bishop; but when they
pointed out that what I said made it all the more needful that one of
grave experience and years should go with him, and prayed me to accept
the office, I consented."

On the 4th of May the Bishop of Norwich took advantage of Sir Hugh's
absence--he having gone for two days to see a cousin who was commander
of Guines--to call the other leaders together, and said that it was
time they did some deed of arms, and rightly employed the money with
which the Church had furnished them. All agreed with him, and the
bishop then proposed that instead of entering France they should march
to Flanders, which was now a portion of France. To this Sir Thomas
Trivet and Sir William Helmon cordially agreed.

When Sir Hugh returned another council was called, and the matter was
laid before him. Sir Hugh opposed it altogether. In the first place,
they had given their word to the king to wait for a month for the
promised reinforcements; in the second place, they had not come over as
Englishmen to fight the French, but as followers of Pope Urban to fight
those of Clement, and the men of Flanders were, like themselves,
followers of Urban. The bishop answered him very hotly, and as the
other knights and all present agreed with the bishop, Sir Hugh
reluctantly gave way, and said that if they were determined upon going
to Flanders he would ride with them. Accordingly notice was given
through the town that the force would march the next morning. All
assembled at the order to the number of three thousand, and marched
from Calais to Gravelines.

No preparations for defence had been made there, for there was no war
between England and Flanders. However, the burghers defended the place
for a short time, and then withdrew, with their wives and families, to
the cathedral, which was a place of strength. Here they defended
themselves for two days. The church was then stormed, and all its
defenders put to the sword. The news excited the greatest surprise and
indignation in Flanders, and the earl at once sent two English knights
who were with him to Gravelines to protest, and with orders to obtain
from the bishop a safe-conduct to go to England to lay the matter
before the English king and his council.

When they arrived at Gravelines the bishop refused their request for a
safe-conduct, but told them to tell the earl that he was not warring
against Flanders, nor was his army an army of England, but of Pope
Urban, and that, although the greater portion of Flanders was Urbanist,
the Lord of Bar--in whose dominion Gravelines stood--was for Clement,
and so were his people. If he and they would acknowledge Pope Urban, he
would march away without doing damage and paying for all he took, but
unless they did so he would force them to submit. The people of Artois,
however, who were French rather than Flemings, took the matter in their
own hands, and twelve thousand men, under some knights from Nieuport
and other towns, marched to Dunkirk and then to Mardyck, a large
village not far from Gravelines.

Edgar and Albert had taken no part in the attack upon the cathedral,
but remained with Sir Hugh Calverley in the house that he occupied as
soon as resistance of the entry to the town had ended.

"On the field I will fight with the rest," he said, "but I will have no
hand in this matter. There has been no defiance sent to the Earl of
Flanders nor received from him, and 'tis not my habit to fight burghers
against whom we have no complaint, and who are but defending their
homes against us."

The two young knights were well pleased with this decision. It was an
age when quarter was but seldom given, and wholesale slaughters
followed battles, so that they had, naturally, the ideas common to the
time. Still, they both felt that this attack was wholly unprovoked and
altogether beyond the scope of the expedition, and were well pleased
that their leader would have naught to do with it. It was, however, a
different matter when they heard that an army twelve thousand strong
was coming out against them, and they were quite ready to take their
share in the fight.

While waiting at Gravelines several other knights had joined the army,
among them Sir Nicholas Clifton and Sir Hugh's cousin, the commander of
Guines, Sir Hugh Spencer, nephew of the bishop, and others.

The force consisted of six hundred mounted men, sixteen hundred
archers, and the rest foot-men. They found that the Flemings had fallen
back to Dunkirk, and had taken up a position in front of that town. The
bishop, on approaching them, sent forward a herald, to ask them whether
they were for Pope Urban or Clement, and that if they were for Urban he
had no quarrel with them. As soon, however, as the herald approached,
the Flemings fell upon him and killed him. This excited the most lively
indignation among the English, for among all civilized people the
person of a herald was held to be sacred.

The bishop and knights at once drew up the force in order of battle.
The men on foot were formed into a wedge. The archers were placed on
the two flanks of the unmounted men-at-arms, while the cavalry prepared
to charge as soon as opportunity offered. The army was preceded by the
standard of the Church. The trumpets on both sides sounded, and as they
came within range the English archers poured flights of arrows among
the Flemings. These advanced boldly to the attack of the foot-men.
Again and again the horsemen charged down upon them, but were unable to
break their solid lines, and for a time the battle was doubtful, but
the English archers decided the fate of the day. The Flemings, although
they resisted firmly the charge of the men-at-arms, were unable to
sustain the terrible and continuous rain of arrows, and their front
line fell back.

As soon as they did so the second line wavered and broke. Then the
bishop with his knights and men-at-arms charged furiously down upon
them, and the battle was over. The Flemings broke and fled in wild
disorder, but the English pursued them so hotly that they entered
Dunkirk with them. Here again and again they attempted to make a stand,
but speedily gave way before the onslaught of the English. No one
distinguished themselves in the battle more than did the priests and
monks who were fighting on the side of the bishop, and it was said
among the others that these must have mistaken their vocation, and that
had they entered the army instead of the Church they would have made
right valiant knights.

The English loss was four hundred, that of the Flemings was very much
heavier. There died, however, among them no knights or persons of
quality, for the rising was one of the people themselves, and as yet
the Earl of Flanders was waiting for the King of England's reply to the
message he had sent by the two knights from Sluys. The English,
however, considered that the absence of any horsemen or knights was due
to the fact that these remembered what terrible havoc had been made
among the chivalry of France at Crecy and Poictiers, and cared not to
expose themselves to that risk.




CHAPTER XVII

PRISONERS


After the capture of Dunkirk all the seaports as far as Sluys were
taken by the English, who then marched to Ypres, to which town they at
once laid siege, and were joined by twenty thousand men from Ghent.
Their own number had swollen considerably by the arrival from England
of many knights and men-at-arms, besides numbers of foot-men, attracted
as much by the news of the great spoil that had been captured in the
Flemish towns as by the exhortations and promises of the clergy.

Ypres had a numerous garrison, commanded by several knights of
experience. The works were very strong, and every assault was repulsed
with heavy loss. One of these was led by Sir Hugh Calverley. The force
crossed the ditches by throwing in great bundles of wood with which
each of the foot-men had been provided, and having reached the wall, in
spite of a hail of cross-bow bolts and arrows, ladders were planted,
and the leaders endeavoured to gain the ramparts. Sir Hugh Calverley
succeeded in obtaining a footing, but for a time he stood almost alone.
Two or three other knights, however, sprang up. Just as they did so one
of the ladders broke with the weight upon it, throwing all heavily to
the ground.

Edgar and Albert were with a party of archers who were keeping up a
rain of arrows. Seeing that the situation was bad they now ran forward,
followed by four of their men-at-arms, the others having charge of the
horses in the camp. A few more men-at-arms had gained the ramparts by
the time they arrived at the foot of the ladders, where numbers waited
to take their turns to ascend.

"There is not much broken off this one, Sir Edgar," Hal Carter said;
"not above three feet, I should say. We might make a shift to get up
with that."

"Pick it up, Hal, and bring it along a short distance. Possibly we may
be able to mount unobserved, for the fight is hot above, and the
attention of the enemy will be fixed there."

Followed by their own men-at-arms, and by a few others who saw what
their intentions were, they kept along at the foot of the wall until
they reached an angle some thirty yards away. Searching about they
found several stones that had been dislodged from the battlements
during the siege. With these they built up a platform, and raising the
ladder on this, they found that it reached to within a foot of the top.

"Now," Edgar said, "follow us as quickly as you can, but do not try the
ladder too heavily; it has broken once, so the wood cannot be
over-strong."

Then, followed closely by Albert and the men-at-arms, he ascended the
walls. So intent were the defenders upon the strife going on round Sir
Hugh Calverley that Edgar was not noticed until, putting his hands upon
the wall, he vaulted over it. He held his sword between his teeth, and
betaking himself to this fell so fiercely and suddenly upon the enemy,
that several were cut down and the rest recoiled so far that Albert and
the four men-at-arms were able to join him before the enemy rallied.
Every moment added to the strength of the party, and as soon as some
twenty had gathered behind him, Edgar flung himself upon the enemy with
a shout of "_St. George! St. George!_" and, in spite of the opposition
of the defenders, fought his way along the wall until he joined Sir
Hugh and the little group who were defending themselves against
tremendous odds.

Sir Hugh himself was seriously wounded. Two or three of his knights lay
dead beside him, and had it not been for the arrival of the
reinforcement the fight would speedily have terminated, for the English
were so penned up against the wall that there was no footing for more
to join them. The suddenness of the attack drove the enemy back some
little distance, and this enabled a score of those upon the ladders to
make their way onto the rampart.

"Bravely done!" Sir Hugh Calverley said, as he leant against the wall,
utterly exhausted by his efforts and loss of blood. A moment later he
would have fallen had not Albert sprung to his side.

"We must save Sir Hugh at all risks," he said to two of the knight's
companions, who were also wounded. "Will you, sir knights, aid in
lowering him down the ladder, and see that he is carried off? You have
done your share. It is our turn now, and we can at least hold the
rampart until he is in safety."

Leaning over, he shouted to the men on one of the ladders to descend
and leave the ladder clear, as Sir Hugh was to be lowered down.

"Methinks I can carry him, Sir Albert," Hal Carter said. "I have
carried two sacks of wheat on my shoulder before now, and methinks that
I can carry one knight and his armour."

He took his place on the ladder, and Sir Hugh was lowered to him, and
laying him on his shoulder Hal carried him safely down. The two wounded
knights followed, and then Hal sprang up the ladder again. While this
was being done Edgar and his party had been holding the enemy at bay.
Hal was followed by some of the men-at-arms, and others poured up by
the other ladders. Edgar saw that they were now strong enough to take
the offensive, and as the English numbered nearly a hundred, he fell
upon the enemy to the right, while Albert led another party to the left.

For some time the fury with which the English fought drove the enemy
before them on either hand. Every moment they were joined by fresh men,
who were now able to pour in a steady stream up the ladders. The enemy,
too, were harassed by the English archers, who, advancing to the edge
of the ditch, sent their shafts thick and fast among them. The town
bells were clanging fiercely, drums beating, and horns sounding as the
alarm spread that the besiegers had gained a footing on the walls, and
great numbers of the garrison could be seen pouring along the streets
leading to the threatened point.

Had there been more ladders, so that reinforcements could have arrived
more rapidly, the place might have been won. As it was, it was evident
that success was impossible. Edgar's party still gained ground slowly,
but he saw that Albert was being pressed backwards.

"Fall back, men!" he shouted, "slowly, and keeping your face to the
enemy. The odds are too heavy for us."

Foot by foot, fighting silently and obstinately, the English fell back
until their party joined that of Albert, at the spot where the wall had
been won. Their exulting foes pressed hotly upon them, but Edgar's
sword and the heavy long-handled mace wielded by Hal Carter did such
terrible execution that the rest were able to retreat in good order.

"Jump down, my men!" Edgar shouted. "You will break the ladders if you
try to go by them. The ground is but soft, and the wall of no great
height. Do not hurry. We will cover you and then follow."

Gradually the number of the party on the walls was lessened, as by
threes and fours they leapt down; while many, getting onto the ladders,
slipped rapidly to the ground. When there were but half a dozen left,
Hal suddenly exclaimed: "Sir Albert has fallen--wounded!"

Edgar freed himself from his opponent of the moment by a sweeping blow,
and then with a spring placed himself astride of his friend. Hal Carter
joined him. The rest of their followers remaining on the wall either
jumped over or were cut down. Fortunately Albert had fallen close to
the parapet, and his two defenders could not be attacked from behind.
For some minutes the fight continued, and then for a moment the enemy
drew back astonished at the manner in which two men kept them at bay;
then one of the assailants lowered his sword.

"Sir knight," he said, "you have done enough for honour. Never have I
seen a stouter fighter. I pray you, then, to surrender, on promise of
good treatment and fair terms of ransom to you, to the knight at your
feet, and to this stout man-at-arms. I am Sir Robert De Beaulieu."

"Then I yield to you," Edgar said. "I am Sir Edgar Ormskirk, and this
knight is my brother-in-arms, Sir Albert De Courcy. I yield in his name
and my own, and am glad that, as fortune has declared against us, it
should be to so good a knight as Sir Robert De Beaulieu that I
surrender my sword."

"Keep it, Sir Edgar, for never have I seen one better wielded. No small
damage, indeed, has it done us."

"The stout man-at-arms is my own retainer, and I prythee, sir knight,
suffer him to remain with us."

[Illustration: SIR EDGAR AT LAST SURRENDERS TO SIR ROBERT DE BEAULIEU.]

"Assuredly he shall do so."

As soon as the parley began Hal Carter laid down his weapon, and
kneeling beside Albert, unlaced his helmet.

"He lives, Sir Edgar!" he said; "he is but stunned, methinks, with the
blow of a mace, which has deeply dinted his casque, though, indeed, he
has other wounds."

By Sir Robert De Beaulieu's orders, four men now formed a litter with
their spears. Albert was laid on it, and Sir Robert, Edgar, and Hal
Carter walking in front, and half a score of men-at-arms accompanying
them, they made their way to a large house where the knight lodged. Sir
Robert had sent on for a leech to be in attendance, and he was there
when they arrived. Hal at once took off Albert's armour.

"'Tis well for him that this armour was good," Sir Robert said. "Had it
not been, it would have gone hard with him. It must be steel of proof
indeed, for I saw the blow struck, and there are but few helmets that
would not have been crushed by it."

"He has a deep gash near the neck," the leech said. "The lacings and
straps of the helmet and gorget must have been cut by a sharp sword,
and another blow has fallen on the same spot. Methinks he has dropped
as much from loss of blood as from the blow on the head."

Edgar had by this time taken off his own helmet. As soon as he did so,
Sir Robert De Beaulieu, who was somewhat grizzled with age, said:

"In truth, sir knight, you and your companion are young indeed to have
fought so doughtily as you have done to-day; you are young to be
knights, and yet you have shown a courage and a skill such as no knight
could have surpassed. We had thought the affair finished when that
stout knight, Sir Hugh Calverley, was down with two others, and but
three or four remained on their feet. Then suddenly your party burst
upon us, coming from we knew not where, and had you but been reinforced
more rapidly the town would have been lost."

Edgar made no reply, for at the moment Hal Carter leant heavily against
him.

"I can do no more, Sir Edgar," he murmured; "I am spent."

Edgar caught the brave fellow in his arms and supported him, while two
men-at-arms, who had assisted to carry Albert in, unstrapped Hal's
armour and gently laid him down on a couch. He was bleeding from half a
dozen wounds, and his face was pale and bloodless. Edgar knelt by his
side and raised his head.

"I will see to him, sir knight," the surgeon said. "I have bandaged
your comrade's injuries, and methinks that he will soon come round."

Then he examined Hal's wounds.

"He will do," he said. "Assuredly there are none of them that are
mortal; 'tis but loss of blood that ails him. I will but bandage them
hastily now, for there are many other cases waiting for me, and
methinks, sir, that you yourself need looking to."

"I am unhurt," Edgar said, in surprise.

"Your doublet is stained with blood from the shoulder to the wrist,"
Sir Robert said. "A spear-head has penetrated at the shoulder-joint and
torn a gash well-nigh to the neck. 'Tis well that it is not worse."

Two of his men-at-arms had by this time taken off Sir Robert's armour
also.

"You have ruined my helmet, Sir Edgar, and cut so deep a notch in it
that I know not how my head escaped. You have gashed a hole in my
gorget and dinted the armour in half a dozen places, and I failed to
make a single mark on yours. Never was I engaged with so good a
swordsman. I could scarcely believe my eyes when you lifted your vizor,
for it seemed to me that you must be in the prime of your manhood, and
possessed of strength altogether out of the common."

"I have practised a good deal," Edgar said, quietly, "having indeed
little else to do, so it is not surprising that my muscles are hard."

At the knight's order a servant now brought in two goblets of wine. Sir
Robert and Edgar then drank to each other, both draining the cups to
the bottom.

Albert was not long before he opened his eyes. He looked round in
wonder, and smiled faintly when he saw Edgar, who hastened to his side.

"We are out of luck this time, Albert; we are both prisoners. Still,
things might have been worse. You were struck down with a mace, but the
leech says that the wound on your head is of no great consequence, and
that you fainted rather from loss of blood from other gashes than from
the blow on the head. I have got off with a scratch on the shoulder.
Hal Carter, who fought like a tiger over your body, has come off worst,
