
"No, senor. The man I bought the powder of was a little surprised at
the amount I wanted; but I said that I might be absent many weeks in
the mountains, and might want to drive a level in any lode that I might
discover. I led him to believe that I had seen a spot in the mountains
that gave good indications, and that two of my comrades were waiting
there for my return to begin work at it. I sold the llamas to a man who
carries goods from Ancon up to Canta, and got the same price that you
gave for them."

Harry then told him the work on which he had been engaged since he had
been away.

"Of course there is no hurry about the brackets, but as we could do
nothing else without the powder and drills, it was just as well to get
them out, as otherwise we might have been delayed when we had done our
other work. We think that they weigh twenty pounds each, so that
altogether they will be worth nearly four thousand pounds. Not a bad
start. I am afraid we sha'n't make such quick work down below."

"We shall see," Dias said cheerfully, for now that his fear of the
demons had passed he was as eager as Harry himself to begin the search
for the treasure.

"Has Maria seen any more bats?"

"Yes, she has seen some more bats," his wife said, "but no demons.
Dias, what do you think? Don Harry suggested that we might eat the
bats."

"I have heard of their being eaten," Dias said, "and a man who ate them
raw told me that he had never enjoyed anything more. But I should not
like to try it myself, unless I were driven to it as he was."

"How was that, Dias?"

"He was a muleteer, senor, and was up in the mountains. He had a cargo
of silver on his mule, and during the day he had seen some men who he
doubted not were brigands on the top of the ravine he passed through.
He knew of a cavern where he had once taken refuge with the animals
during a storm. It lay on the hillside some twenty or thirty yards away
from the road. The entrance was hidden by bushes, and he had first
noticed it by seeing a bear come out as he was passing along. He had
his pistols, and thought that it was better to risk meeting a bear than
a brigand. He arrived opposite the cave just as it became dark, and at
once led the mules up there. He first lighted a torch--the muleteers
always carry these with them--and then went in with his pistols ready,
but there were no signs of a bear anywhere near the entrance.

"He drove the mules in and put out his torch. The entrance had been
only wide enough for the laden animals to pass, but it widened out a
great deal inside. He took off the loads, piled them up in the narrow
part to make a barricade, and then sat down at the entrance and
listened. He soon heard five or six men come down the road talking.
They were walking fast, and one was saying that he could not be more
than half a mile ahead, and that they should soon catch him. When they
had gone, he went some distance in the cave and relighted his torch. He
went on and on. The cave was a very large one, and when he had gone, as
he thought, four or five hundred yards, it branched off into three. He
took the middle one, and followed it for a long way. At last it opened
into a large chamber from which there were several passages. Here he
found a large number of things that had evidently been stolen from
muleteers. There were at least a dozen mule loads of silver; goods of
all kinds that had been brought up from the coast; the ashes of fires,
and a great many bones and skins of llamas, and some sacks of flour.

"He thought he would now return to the mules; but apparently he entered
the wrong passage, for he went on till he felt sure he ought to be in
the chamber where he had left the animals, and he was turning to go
back when he tripped over a stone and fell, and his torch went out.
Then he felt in his pocket for his box of matches, and to his horror
found that it had gone. It must have dropped out when he was examining
the passages. He did not think much of it at first, but he had passed
several openings on his way, and in the dark he probably turned down
one of these. At any rate he lost his way somehow, and wandered about,
he thinks, for hours; but it might have been much less, for he told me
that he quite lost his head. At last he came out into a place where he
could only feel the rock on one side of him, and knew that he must be
in a large chamber.

"Looking up he saw, to his joy, a faint light, and moving a little,
caught sight of a star. He was utterly worn out, and threw himself
down. He was awakened by a strange rustling sound, and looking up saw
that daylight was breaking, and that a stream of bats was pouring in
through a hole, which was about three feet wide. He made several
efforts to climb up to it, but failed. The bats hung thickly from every
projecting point in the rocks. He hurt himself badly in one of the
attempts to get up, and twisted his foot. All day he lay there. Then
the idea struck him that he would kill a bat, cut it open, and use it
as a poultice to his foot. The creatures did not move when he touched
them, and he cut off the head of one of them and split it open. He did
this three or four times during the day, and felt that the application
was easing the pain of his ankle.

"When it became dusk the bats flew out again, and he knew his only
chance was to keep his ankle perfectly rested. In the morning he killed
some more bats. He was by this time tortured with thirst, and sucked
the blood of one of them, and in the afternoon ate one raw. Another
night passed, and in the morning he felt so much better that he could
make another trial. He ate another bat to give him strength, and in the
middle of the day made a fresh attempt. He had while lying there
carefully examined the wall of rock, at the top of which was the
opening, and had made up his mind at what point would be best to try.
This time he succeeded. He made his way down the hillside, and found
that he was a quarter of a mile higher up the pass than the spot at
which he had left the mules. He hobbled down, and to his delight found
his animals still in the cavern.

"He had when he first got there opened their sack of grain in order to
ensure their keeping quiet. There was still some remaining at the
bottom. He lost no time in loading them and leading them out, and made
his way down the pass without seeing anything of the robbers.
Afterwards he went back there with a good supply of torches, found his
way to the cave, and brought down two mule-loads of silver. Gradually
he brought the rest of the goods down, and today he is a rich man."

"Well, I think under those circumstances, Dias, I would have eaten bats
myself. It was certainly a clever idea of his to convert them into
poultices, though the general opinion is that cold bandages are the
best for a sprained ankle."

Then they discussed their plans for the next day. "I know nothing about
blasting, senor. You give me instructions, and I will do my best to
carry them out; but it is useless for me to talk of what I know nothing
about."

"There is a lot of common sense in that, and yet in every work, Dias,
sometimes while a skilled man is puzzling how to do a thing a looker-on
will suggest a satisfactory plan. That treasure has been buried there I
have no doubt whatever. They would never have gone to the labour of
paving those cellars as carefully as they have done unless for some
special purpose. The floor was undoubtedly made when the house was
built, and if we find treasure-chambers there they will be those of the
old people. Of course they may have been discovered by the Incas, and
when they in turn wanted to bury treasure this place might occur to
them as being particularly well fitted to escape search by Spaniards.
However, to-morrow we shall learn something more about them. The first
thing to do in the morning, when we have brought up the rest of the
goods, is to sweep the floors of those chambers carefully. When we have
done that we will determine where to set to work."

Two trips brought up the powder and instruments.

"We will take one of the kegs of powder down with us," said Harry, "and
leave the other five in the empty room behind this. It is just as well
not to have them in this room; the sparks fly about, and some things
might catch fire. I don't think there is any real danger, but, at the
same time, it is best to be on the safe side."

"There are a dozen pounds of candles in this bundle, senor. You did not
tell me to get them, but I thought they might be useful."

"Thank you, Dias! they certainly will be useful. What are
they?--tallow?"

"Yes, senor."

"Then before we go down we will get a couple of pieces of flat wood,
and drive a peg into each, sharpened at the upper end. Candles stuck on
these will stand upright, and we can put them down close to where we
are working. They will give a better light than a torch, and leave us
all free to use the tools. Did you think of buying some more tinder?"

"Yes, senor, I have five boxes, and half a dozen more flints."

They carried the keg of powder, the sledges, drills, and wedges
downstairs, and then Dias and Jose set to work to sweep out the two
chambers. The work was easy, but they were obliged to stop several
times, being almost choked with the light dust. Harry and Bertie
offered to take their turn, but the others would not hear of it, and
they were glad to go up to what they called their drawing-room until
the work was done and the dust had settled a little. Then they examined
the pavement carefully with their torches. They had hoped that they
might find either copper rings, or at least holes where rings had been
fastened, but there were no signs whatever of such things in either of
the chambers.

"We will begin to work half-way down," Harry said. "Of course the
treasure may lie near the cistern end, but the depth below the floor
would be very shallow there. More likely the chambers would be at the
deep end. If we begin in the middle we may be pretty sure that we have
not passed them. We will begin rather nearer the passage wall than the
other, as the depth there will be greater. It does not matter which
stone we take, one is as likely as another. Step ten paces from the
cistern, Bertie, and the stone you stop on we will try first."

When Bertie came to a stand-still they carefully examined the pavement.
"You are standing on one of the cracks, Bertie; I will stay there while
you all bring the tools along."

"Shall I open the powder?" Bertie asked.

"No. It is no good doing that until we have quite decided what we are
going to do. The wedges certainly won't go into this crack. I think our
best plan will be to sink a bore-hole about two inches from the crack.
We will drive it in in a slanting direction towards the edge, and in
that way it will have more chance of blowing a piece out. First of all,
we must make a slight indentation with a pick, otherwise we sha'n't get
the bore to work. I will begin."

He took a pick and struck several blows.

"It is very hard stone," he said. "I have scarcely made a mark upon it."

He worked for some time, and then let Bertie take the pick. The lad
struck a blow with all his strength, and then dropped the pick with a
loud cry, wringing his hands as he did so.

"You have jarred your hands, Bertie; you should not hold the haft so
tightly."

"It did sting!" Bertie said. "I feel as if I had taken hold of a
red-hot poker. It has jarred my arm up to the shoulder; I can't go on
at present."

"You try, Dias."

Dias went more carefully to work, knelt down on one knee, and proceeded
to give a number of what seemed light blows.

"That is better than I did, Dias. The stone is crumbling into dust, and
we shall be able to use the borer in a short time. Perhaps it will be
better after all to drive the hole down straight. It will be easier to
begin with; when we see how thick the stone is we shall know better how
to proceed."

In ten minutes Dias had made a hole a quarter of an inch deep.

"Now, give me one of the borers--that one about two and a half feet
long. I will hold it, and you strike to begin with, Dias, only mind my
fingers. Keep your eye fixed on the top of the borer, and take one or
two gentle strokes to begin with; then, when you know the distance you
have to stand from it, do your best. You needn't really be afraid of
striking my fingers. I shall hold the drill at least a foot from the
top."

Dias began very carefully, gradually adding to the strength of the
blows as he got the right distance, and was soon striking hard. After
each blow Harry turned the borer a slight distance round. When he heard
the native's breath coming fast he told Jose to take a turn. The lad
was nervous; the first blow he struck only grazed the top of the borer,
and narrowly missed Harry's fingers. Jose dropped the sledge. "I can't
do it, senor; I am afraid of hitting your fingers. I will sit down and
hold it; it does not matter if you hit me."

"It would matter a good deal, Jose. No, no; you have got to learn."

"Would it not be well, senor," Dias said, "to take the borers and three
hammers outside, and try them in soft ground? We could work them there
till we all got accustomed always to hit them fair. There would be no
occasion for them to be held, and we should get confident. I could have
hit twice as hard as I did, if I hadn't been afraid of missing it."

"I think that is a very good plan, Dias. The loss of a day or two will
make no difference. We shall make up for it afterwards."

Accordingly the drills and hammers were all taken up, and they were
soon at work. Two or three gentle taps were given to the borers, to
make them stand upright, and then all four began work. At first they
often either missed the heads of the borers or struck them unevenly.

"It is well, Dias, that we carried out your suggestion, as I see I
should have had an uncommonly good chance of getting my fingers
smashed, or a wrist broken. I have missed as often as any of you."

They stopped frequently for breath, and at the end of an hour were glad
to lay down their hammers. Dias was comparatively fresh; his practice
as a woodsman now did him good service.

"I should have thought from the number of trees that I have helped to
cut down," Bertie said, "that I could hit pretty hard, but this is a
great deal stiffer work. I should say that this hammer is at least
twice the weight of the axe, and it is the lightest of the four. I ache
a good deal worse than I did when I first chopped that tree down."

"So do I, Bertie. We will stick at this till we get accustomed to the
work. By doing so we shall gain strength as well as skill."

"I will get some grease, senor, from Maria, and then I will rub your
shoulders, and arms; that will do you a great deal of good."

"Thank you, Dias! It would be a good plan."

Dias did this to Jose as well as to the brothers, and then Jose in turn
rubbed him.

They waited half an hour, and then Harry said: "Let us have another
spell." This time a quarter of an hour sufficed. "It is of no use,
Harry; I can't go on any longer," Bertie said. "I feel as if my
shoulders were broken."

"I am beginning to feel the same, Bertie. However, we are all hitting
straighter now. We will go up into the shade and take it quietly for
two or three hours; then we will have a spell again."

However, after the rest, they all agreed that it would be useless to
try again, for they could not lift their arms over their heads without
feeling acute pain. Three days were spent at this exercise, and at the
end of that time they had gained confidence, and the heads of the
drills were no longer missed.

After the first day they only worked for a quarter of an hour at a
time, taking an hour's rest. The pain in their arms had begun to abate.
On the following day they practised striking alternately, three
standing round one borer. They found this at first awkward, but by the
end of the day they were able to strike in regular order, the blows
falling faster after each other on to the drill.

"I think we shall do now," said Bertie. "No doubt we shall hit harder
with a fortnight's practice, and shall be able to keep it up longer.
However, I think that even now we have sufficient confidence in
striking to be able to hold the borer without any fear of an accident."

The next day they began work early in the cellar. Jose volunteered to
take the first turn to hold the drill.

"You understand, Jose, you must turn it round a little after each
stroke, and in that way it will cut the hole regularly."

Harry took his place on one side of Jose, who sat with a leg on each
side of the drill. Dias stood facing Harry, Bertie behind Jose holding
the torch so that its light fell strongly on the head of the drill. At
first the two men struck gently, but gradually, as they grew confident,
increased the weight of their strokes until they were hitting with
their full power. After ten minutes they stopped. "Let us look at the
hole," Harry said. "How far has it got down?"

Jose moved his position and Harry examined the hole. "About an eighth
of an inch," he said. "Let us scrape the dust out of it."

"Shall we take a spell now, Harry?" Bertie said.

"No, we will wait five minutes and then go on again, and after that we
will change places with you, relieving each other every twenty minutes."

The work went on, and at the end of two hours the hole was three inches
deep. Another hour and a half and the drill suddenly went down.

"We are through it," Bertie said, "and I am not sorry."

"Now I will lift the drill up gently, Bertie; do you kneel down, and
when I stop, take hold of it close to the floor, so that we may see the
thickness of the stone."

"Five inches," he said as he measured it. "Now put on a little grease,
Dias. I will lower it again, and we shall be perhaps able then to get
some idea of what is underneath."

He lowered the drill and turned it round two or three times, and then
carefully raised it. Some sand and little stones were sticking to it.

"Sand and gravel," he said. "That settles that point. Now we have done
a good morning's work, and let us go up and have breakfast."

Maria looked enquiringly at them. "I was just coming down for you.
Well, what have you done?"

"We have drilled one hole, Maria, and none of us have got our fingers
smashed, so I think we have every reason to be satisfied with our first
experience at the work."

As they breakfasted they talked matters over. Harry said that he was
certain that the thickness of the stone was not sufficient for them to
break it up by blasting. "We shall have to try some other plan. It is
equally certain that we cannot smash the stone with the sledge-hammers,
and I don't think that the wedges would break it. Of course if we got
one stone out it would be comparatively easy to lift the next, as we
could put the crowbars under it. If we can do it in no other way, we
must drill a line of holes close to each other right across the stone,
and we might then break off the piece between them and the crack and
get our crowbars under the slab. It might be worth while to drill holes
a foot apart, from the point where we have begun to the other end of
the room. Of course if we found that gravel and stones were everywhere
under the slabs we should learn nothing; but the opening to the
chambers is probably covered by another stone, and if we found that, we
could put in one or two more holes so as to be sure that it was flat,
in which case we might smash it somehow. Of course, if we don't come
upon a flat stone we shall conclude that they put a layer of sand and
fine gravel over the slabs covering the vaults, and must then, as I
say, get up one stone and gradually lift all the rest, clearing out the
gravel as we go to the depth of a foot or so. In that way we shall make
sure that we shall not miss any chamber there may be.

"I think that would certainly be the best plan. At present we are
groping altogether in the dark, and it will take us a fortnight at
least to make that row of holes close to each other, as you propose."




CHAPTER XVIII

DISAPPOINTMENT


Six more days were spent in driving holes according to Harry's plan.
The result was in all cases the same. Sand and small stones were
brought up attached to the grease. They had now sunk the holes at a
much more rapid rate than at first, for they were accustomed to the
work, their muscles had hardened, and they were able to strike more
frequently and with greater force. They would have got on still more
quickly had it not been for the trouble in sharpening the drills. These
were heated in the small blacksmith's fire Dias had brought. They were
first placed in the fire, but this was not sufficiently hot to raise
them beyond a dull red glow. When this was done a shovelful of glowing
fragments was taken from the fire and placed on the hearth, and among
these the small bellows raised the ends of the drills to a white heat,
when of course they were easily worked. At first they had some
difficulty in tempering them. Sometimes, when cooled, the points were
too soft, at other times too brittle; but at the end of a week they had
arrived at the proper medium. But one of the party had to work steadily
to keep the drills in good order.

Bertie was daily employed at this work, as Jose generally failed to
give the proper temper to the tools. Bertie, however, generally managed
to get in two or three hours' work below. Although perfectly ready to
do his share, he was by no means sorry to be otherwise employed for a
part of the day, and as he was now able to talk Spanish with perfect
fluency he and Donna Maria maintained a lively conversation whenever
they were together. All the party, however, were glad when Sunday came
round and gave them a day of complete rest; then they would bathe,
fish, shoot pigeons, or lie in the shade, each according to his fancy,
and recommence work with fresh vigour the next morning.

Just a fortnight after they had begun work they were about to begin a
hole in a fresh stone. Talking it over, they had come to the conclusion
that this was the most likely spot in the cellar for the situation of
an underground chamber. Farther on there would scarce be width for one,
for it was here but eight feet across. Where they had already tried
there would scarcely have been depth enough. This seemed to them to be
the happy medium.

Before setting to work Dias passed his torch over the stone. Presently
he stopped. "Will you light two of the candles, senor; the torch
flickers too much to see very plainly."

Somewhat surprised, for no such close examination had been made before,
the candles were lighted and handed to him. Dias knelt down, and, with
his face close to the stone, moved about carefully, examining it for
some minutes without speaking.
