woman that you have seen your father, and that he will supply her with
what she requires. Make some excuse, if you can, to see the prisoner.
Say you are curious to see the white woman who has bewitched the Nana,
and if you get the opportunity whisper in her ear these words, 'Do not
despair, friends are working for you.'"

Rabda repeated the English words several times over until she had them
perfect; then she made her way back to the palace, while Bathurst and
his companion proceeded at once to the spot where they had left their
vehicle.

They had but little difficulty in finding what they required. Many of
the shops displayed garments, weapons, jewelry, and other things, the
plunder of the intrenchments of Cawnpore. Rujub entered several shops
where drugs were sold, and finally one of the traders said, "I have a
large black box full of drugs which I bought from a Sepoy for a rupee,
but now that I have got it I do not know what to do with it. Some of the
bottles doubtless contain poisons. I will sell it you for two rupees,
which is the value of the box, which, as you see, is very strong and
bound with iron. The contents I place no price upon."

"I will take it," Rujub said. "I know some of the English medicines, and
may find a use for them."

He paid the money, called in a coolie, and bade him take up the chest
and follow him, and they soon arrived at the juggler's house.

The box, which was a hospital medical chest, was filled with drugs of
all kinds. Bathurst put a stick of caustic into a small vial, and half
filled another, which had a glass stopper, with nitric acid, filled it
up with water, and tried the effect of rubbing a few drops on his arm.

"That is strong enough for anything," he said, with a slight exclamation
at the sharp pain. "And now give me a piece of paper and pen and ink."

Then sitting down he wrote:

"My Dear Miss Hannay: Rujub, the juggler, and I will do what we can to
rescue you. We are powerless to effect anything as long as you remain
where you are. The bearer, Rujub's daughter, will give you the bottles,
one containing lunar caustic, the other nitric acid. The mistress of
the zenana, who wants to get rid of you, as she fears you might obtain
influence over the Nana, has asked the girl to obtain from her father a
philter which will make you odious to him. The large bottle is perfectly
harmless, and you can drink its contents without fear. The caustic is
for applying to your lips; it will be painful, but I am sure you will
not mind that, and the injury will be only of a temporary nature.
I cannot promise as much for the nitric acid; pray apply it very
carefully, merely moistening the glass stopper and applying it with
that. I should use it principally round the lips. It will burn and
blister the skin. The Nana will be told that you have a fever, which is
causing a terrible and disfiguring eruption. I should apply it also to
the neck and hands. Pray be very careful with the stuff; for, besides
the application being exceedingly painful, the scars may possibly remain
permanently. Keep the two small bottles carefully hidden, in order to
renew the application if absolutely necessary. At any rate, this will
give us time, and, from what I hear, our troops are likely to be here
in another ten days' time. You will be, I know, glad to hear that Wilson
has also escaped.

"Yours,

"R. Bathurst."

A large bottle was next filled with elder flower water. The trap was
brought around, and they drove back to Bithoor. Rabda was punctual to
her appointment.

"I have seen her," she said, "and have given her the message. I could
see that she understood it, but as there were other women round, she
made no sign. I told the mistress of the zenana that you had given me
some magic words that I was to whisper to her to prepare the way for the
philter, so she let me in without difficulty, and I was allowed to go
close up to her and repeat your message. I put my hands on her before
I did so, and I think she felt that it was the touch of a friend. She
hushed up when I spoke to her. The mistress, who was standing close by,
thought that this was a sign of the power of the words I had spoken to
her. I did not stay more than a minute. I was afraid she might try to
speak to me in your tongue, and that would have been dangerous."

"There are the bottles,"' Bathurst said; "this large one is for her to
take, the other two and this note are to be given to her separately.
You had better tell the woman that the philter must be given by your own
hands, and that you must then watch alone by her side for half an hour.
Say that after you leave her she will soon go off to sleep; and must
then be left absolutely alone till daybreak tomorrow, and it will then
be found that the philter has acted. She must at once tell the Nana
that the lady is in a high fever, and has been seized with some terrible
disease that has altogether disfigured her, and that he can see for
himself the state she is in."

Rabda's whisper had given new life and hope to Isobel Hannay. Previous
to that her fate had seemed to her to be sealed, and she had only prayed
for death; the long strain of the siege had told upon her; the scene in
the boat seemed a species of horrible nightmare, culminating in a
number of Sepoys leaping on board the boat as it touched the bank, and
bayoneting her uncle and all on board except herself, Mrs. Hunter, and
her daughter, who were seized and carried ashore. Then followed a night
of dull despairing pain, while she and her companions crouched together,
with two Sepoys standing on guard over them, while the others, after
lighting fires, talked and laughed long into the night over the success
of their attack.

At daybreak they had been placed upon a limber and driven into Cawnpore.
Her spirit had risen as they were assailed by insults and imprecations
by the roughs of the town, and she had borne up bravely till, upon their
arrival at the entrance to what she supposed was the prison, she was
roughly dragged from the limber, placed in a close carriage, and driven
off. In her despair she had endeavored to open the door in order to
throw herself under the wheels, but a soldier stood on each step and
prevented her from doing so.

Outside of the town she soon saw that she was on the road to Bithoor,
and the fate for which she was reserved flashed upon her. She remembered
now the oily compliments of Nana Sahib, and the unpleasant thrill she
had felt when his eyes were fixed upon her; and had she possessed a
weapon of any kind she would have put an end to her life. But her pistol
had been taken from her when she landed, and in helpless despair she
crouched in a corner of the carriage until they reached Bithoor.

As soon as the carriage stopped a cloth was thrown over her head. She
was lifted out and carried into the palace, through long passages and
up stairs; then those who carried her set her on her feet and retired.
Other hands took her and led her forward till the cloth was taken off
her head, and she found herself surrounded, by women, who regarded her
with glances of mixed curiosity and hostility. Then everything seemed to
swim round, and she fainted.

When she recovered consciousness all strength seemed to have left her,
and she lay in a sort of apathy for hours, taking listlessly the drink
that was offered to her, but paying no attention to what was passing
around, until there was a gentle pressure on her arm, the grasp
tightening with a slight caressing motion that seemed to show sympathy;
then came the English words softly whispered into her ear, while the
hand again pressed her arm firmly, as if in warning.

It was with difficulty that she refrained from uttering an exclamation,
and she felt the blood crimson her cheeks, but she mastered the impulse
and lay perfectly quiet, glancing up into the face bent down close to
hers--it was not familiar to her, and yet it seemed to her that she had
seen it somewhere; another minute and it was gone.

But though to all appearances Isobel's attitude was unchanged, her mind
was active now. Who could have sent her this message? Who could this
native girl be who had spoken in English to her? Where had she seen the
face?

Her thoughts traveled backwards, and she ran over in her mind all
those with whom she had come in contact since her arrival in India; her
servants and those of her acquaintances passed before her eyes. She
had scarcely spoken to another native woman since she had landed. After
thinking over all she had known in Cawnpore, she thought of Deennugghur.
Whom had she met there?

Suddenly came the remembrance of the exhibition by the juggler, and
she recalled the face and figure of his daughter, as, seated, upon the
growing pole, she had gone up foot by foot in the light of the lamps and
up into the darkness above. The mystery was solved; that was the face
that had just leaned over her.

But how could she be interested in her fate? Then she remembered that
this was the girl whom Bathurst had saved from the tiger. If they
were interested in her, it must be through Bathurst. Could he too have
survived the attack of the night before? She had thought of him, as of
all of them, as dead, but possibly he might have escaped. Even during
the long night's waiting, a captive to the Sepoys, the thought that he
had instantly sprung from beside her and leaped overboard had been
an added pang to all her misery. She had no after remembrance of him;
perhaps he had swum to shore and got off in safety. In that case he must
be lingering in Cawnpore, had learned what had become of her, and was
trying to rescue her. It was to the juggler he would naturally have gone
to obtain assistance. If so, he was risking his life now to save hers;
and this was the man whom she despised as a coward.

But what could he do? At Bithoor, in the power of this treacherous
Rajah, secure in the zenana, where no man save its master ever
penetrated, how could he possibly help her? Yet the thought that he was
trying to do so was a happy one, and the tears that flowed between her
closed lids were not painful ones. She blamed herself now for having
felt for a moment hurt at Bathurst's desertion of her. To have remained
in the boat would have been certain death, while he could have been of
no assistance to her or anyone else. That he should escape, then, if he
could, now seemed to her a perfectly natural action; she hoped that
some of the others had done the same, and that Bathurst was not working
alone.

It did not occur to her that there could be any possibility of the
scheme for her rescue succeeding; as to that she felt no more hopeful
than before, but it seemed to take away the sense of utter loneliness
that she before felt that someone should be interesting himself in her
fate. Perhaps there would be more than a mere verbal message next time;
how long would it be before she heard again? How long a respite had she
before that wretch came to see her? Doubtless he had heard that she was
ill. She would remain so. She would starve herself. Her weakness seemed
to her her best protection.

As she lay apparently helpless upon the couch she watched the women move
about the room. The girl who had spoken to her was not among them. The
women were not unkind; they brought her cooling drinks, and tried to
tempt her to eat something; but she shook her head as if utterly unable
to do so, and after a time feigned to be asleep.

Darkness came on gradually; some lamps were lighted in the room. Not for
a moment had she been left alone since she was brought in--never less
than two females remaining with her.

Presently the woman who was evidently the chief of the establishment
came in accompanied by a girl, whom Isobel recognized at once as the
juggler's daughter. The latter brought with her a tray, on which were
some cakes and a silver goblet. These she set down on an oak table by
the couch. The girl then handed her the goblet, which, keeping up the
appearance of extreme feebleness, she took languidly. She placed it to
her lips, but at once took it away. It was not cool and refreshing like
those she had tasted before, it had but little flavor, but had a faint
odor, which struck her as not unfamiliar. It was a drug of some sort
they wished her to drink.

She looked up in the girl's face. Rabda made a reassuring gesture, and
said in a low whisper, as she bent forward, "Bathurst Sahib."

This was sufficient; whatever it was it would do her no harm, and she
raised the cup to her lips and emptied it. Then the elder woman said
something to the other two, and they all left the room together, leaving
her alone with Rabda.

The latter went to the door quietly and drew the hangings across it,
then she returned to the couch, and from the folds of her dress produced
two vials and a tiny note. Then, noiselessly, she placed a lamp on the
table, and withdrew to a short distance while Isobel opened and read the
note.

Twice she read it through, and then, laying it down, burst into tears of
relief. Rabda came and knelt down beside the couch, and, taking one
of her hands, pressed it to her lips. Isobel threw her arms round the
girl's neck, drew her close to her, and kissed her warmly.--Rabda then
drew a piece of paper and a pencil from her dress and handed them to
her. She wrote:

"Thanks a thousand times, dear friend; I will follow your instructions.
Please send me if you can some quick and deadly poison, that I may take
in the last extremity. Do not fear that I will flinch from applying the
things you have sent me. I would not hesitate to swallow them were there
no other hope of escape. I rejoice so much to know that you have escaped
from that terrible attack last night. Did Wilson alone get away? Do you
know they murdered my uncle and all the others in the boat, except Mrs.
Hunter and Mary? Pray do not run any risks to try and rescue me. I think
that I am safe now, and will make myself so hideous that if the wretch
once sees me he will never want to see me again. As to death, I have no
fear of it. If we do not meet again, God bless you.

"Yours most gratefully,

"Isobel."

Rabda concealed the note in her garment, and then motioned to Isobel
that she should close her eyes and pretend to be asleep. Then she gently
drew back the curtains and seated herself at a distance from the couch.

Half an hour later the mistress of the zenana came in. Rabda rose and
put her finger to her lips and left the room, accompanied by the woman.

"She is asleep," she said; "do not be afraid, the potion will do its
work. Leave her alone all night. When she wakes in the morning she will
be wild with fever, and you need have no fear that the Rajah will seek
to make her the queen of his zenana."



CHAPTER XX.


Prepared as the mistress of the zenana was to find a great change in the
captive's appearance, she was startled when, soon after daybreak, she
went in to see her. The lower part of her face was greatly swollen, her
lips were covered with white blotches. There were great red scars
round the mouth and on her forehead, and the skin seemed to have been
completely eaten away. There were even larger and deeper marks on her
neck and shoulders, which were partly uncovered, as if by her restless
tossing. Her hands and arms were similarly marked. She took no notice
of her entrance, but talked to herself as she tossed restlessly on the
couch.

There was but little acting in this, for Isobel was suffering an agony
of pain. She had used the acid much more freely than she had been
instructed to do, determined that the disfigurement should be complete.
All night she had been in a state of high fever, and had for a time been
almost delirious. She was but slightly more easy now, and had difficulty
in preventing herself from crying out from the torture she was
suffering.

There was no tinge of pity in the face of the woman who looked at her,
but a smile of satisfaction at the manner in which the potion had done
its work.

"The Nana can see her now," she said to herself; "there will be no
change in the arrangements here."

She at once sent out word that as soon as the Rajah was up he was to be
told that she begged him to come at once.

An hour later he came to the door of the zenana.

"What is it, Poomba?" he asked; "nothing the matter with Miss Hannay, I
hope?"

"I grieve to say, your highness, that she has been seized with some
terrible disease. I know not what it is, for never did I see a woman so
smitten. It must be an illness contracted from confinement and bad air
during the siege, some illness that the Europeans have, for never did I
see aught like it. She is in a high state of fever, and her face is in a
terrible state. It must be a sort of plague."

"You have been poisoning her," the Nana said roughly; "if so, beware,
for your life shall be the forfeit. I will see her for myself."

"She has had no poison since she came here, though I know not but what
she may have had poison about her, and may have taken it after she was
captured."

"Take me to her," the Rajah said. "I will see for myself."

"It may be a contagious disease, your highness. It were best that you
should not go near her."

The Rajah made an impatient gesture, and the woman, without another
word, led him into the room where Isobel was lying. The Nana was
prepared for some disfigurement of the face he had so admired, but he
shrank back from the reality.

"It is horrible," he said, in a low voice. "What have you been doing to
her?" he asked, turning furiously to the woman.

"I have done nothing, your highness. All day yesterday she lay in a
torpor, as I told you in the evening when you inquired about her, and I
thought then she was going to be ill. I have watched her all night.
She has been restless and disturbed, but I thought it better not to go
nearer lest I should wake her, and it was not until this morning, when
the day broke, that I perceived this terrible change. What shall we do
with her? If the disease is contagious, everyone in the palace may catch
it."

"Have a closed palanquin brought to the door, wrap her up, and have
her carried down to the Subada Ke Kothee. Let her give it to the women
there. Burn all the things in this room, and everything that has been
worn by those who have entered it. I will inquire into this matter later
on, and should I find that there has been any foul play, those concerned
in it shall wish they had never been born."

As soon as he had left the woman called Rabda in.

"All has gone well," she said; "your father's philter is powerful
indeed. Tell him whenever he needs any service I can render he has but
to ask it. Look at her; did you ever see one so disfigured? The Rajah
has seen her, and is filled with loathing. She is to be sent to the
Subada Ke Kothee. Are you sure that the malady is not contagious? I have
persuaded the Rajah that it is; that is why he is sending her away."

"I am sure it is not," Rabda said; "it is the result of the drugs. It is
terrible to see her; give me some cooling ointment."

"What does it matter about her now that she is harmless?" Poomba said
scornfully. Being, however, desirous of pleasing Rabda, she went away
and brought a pot of ointment, which the girl applied to the sores, the
tears falling down her cheeks as she did so.

The salve at once afforded relief from the burning pain, and Isobel
gratefully took a drink prepared from fresh limes.

She had only removed her gown when she had lain down, having done this
in order that it should not be burned by the acid, and that her neck
and shoulders might be seen, and the belief induced that this strange
eruption was all over her. Rabda made signs for her to put it on again,
and pointing in the direction of Cawnpore, repeated the word several
times, and Isobel felt with a thrill of intense thankfulness that the
stratagem had succeeded, and that she was to be sent away at once,
probably to the place where the other prisoners were confined. Presently
the woman returned.

"Rabda, you had best go with her. It were well that you should leave
for the present. The Rajah is suspicious; he may come back again and ask
questions; and as he knows you by sight, and as you told me your father
was in disfavor with him at present, he might suspect that you were in
some way concerned in the matter."

"I will go," Rabda said. "I am sorry she has suffered so much. I did not
think the potion would have been so strong. Give me a netful of fresh
limes and some cooling lotion, that I may leave with her there."

In a few minutes a woman came up to say that the palanquin was in
readiness at the gate of the zenana garden. A large cushion was taken
off a divan, and Isobel was laid upon it and covered with a light
shawl. Six of the female attendants lifted it and carried it downstairs,
accompanied by Rabda and the mistress off the zenana, both closely
veiled. Outside the gate was a large palanquin, with its bearers and
four soldiers and an officer. The cushion was lifted and placed in the
palanquin, and Rabda also took her place there.

"Then you will not return today," the woman said to her, in a voice loud
enough to be heard by the officers "You will remain with her for a time,
and afterwards go to see your friends in the town. I will send for you
when I hear that you wish to return."

The curtains of the palanquin were drawn down; the bearers lifted it and
started at once for Cawnpore.

On arrival at the large building known as the Subada Ke Kothee the
gates were opened at once at the order of the Nana's officer, and the
palanquin was carried across the courtyard to the door of the building
which was used as a prison for the white women and children. It was
taken into the great arched room and set down. Rabda stepped out, and
the bearers lifted out the cushion upon which Isobel lay.

"You will not be wanted any more," Rabda said, in a tone of authority.
"You can return to Bithoor at once!"

As the door closed behind them several of the ladies came round to
see this fresh arrival. Rabda looked round till her eye fell upon Mrs.
Hunter, who was occupied in trying to hush a fractious child. She put
her hand on her arm and motioned to her to come along. Surprised at the
summons, Mrs. Hunter followed her. When they reached the cushion Rabda
lifted the shawl from Isobel's face. For a moment Mrs. Hunter failed to
recognize her, but as Isobel opened her eyes and held out her hand she
knew her, and with a cry of pity she dropped on her knees beside her.

"My poor child, what have these fiends been doing to you?"

"They have been doing nothing, Mrs. Hunter," she whispered. "I am not
so bad as I seem, though I have suffered a great deal of pain. I was
carried away to Bithoor, to Nana Sahib's zenana, and I have burnt my
face with caustic and acid; they think I have some terrible disease, and
have sent me here."

"Bravely done, girl! Bravely and nobly done! We had best keep the secret
to ourselves; there are constantly men looking through the bars of the
window, and some of them may understand English."

Then she looked up and said, "It is Miss Hannay, she was captured with
us in the boats; please help me to carry her over to the wall there, and
my daughter and I will nurse her; it looks as if she had been terribly
burnt, somehow."

Many of the ladies had met Isobel in the happy days before the troubles
began, and great was the pity expressed at her appearance. She was
carried to the side of the wall, where Mary and Mrs. Hunter at once made
her as comfortable as they could. Rabda, who had now thrown back her
veil, produced from under her dress the net containing some fifty small
limes, and handed to Mrs. Hunter the pot of ointment and the lotion.

"She has saved me," Isobel said; "it is the daughter of the juggler who
performed at your house, Mrs. Hunter; do thank her for me, and tell her
how grateful I am."

Mrs. Hunter took Rabda's hand, and in her own language thanked her for
her kindness to Isobel.

"I have done as I was told," Rabda said simply; "the Sahib Bathurst
saved my life, and when he said the lady must be rescued from the hands
of the Nana, it was only right that I should do so, even at the risk of
my life."

"So Bathurst has escaped," Mrs. Hunter said, turning to Isobel. "I am
glad of that, dear; I was afraid that all were gone."

"Yes, I had a note from him; it is by his means that I got away from
Bithoor. He sent me the caustic and acid to burn my face. He told me
Mr. Wilson had also escaped, and perhaps some others may have got away,
though he did not seem to know it."

"But surely there could be no occasion to burn yourself as badly as you
have done, Isobel."

"I am afraid I did put on too much acid," she said. "I was so afraid
of not burning it enough; but it does not matter, it does not pain me
nearly so much since I put on that ointment; it will soon get well."

Mrs. Hunter shook her head regretfully.

"I am afraid it will leave marks for a long time."

"That is of no consequence at all, Mrs. Hunter; I am so thankful at
being here with you, that I should mind very little if I knew that it
was always to be as bad as it is now. What does it matter?"

"It does not matter at all at present, my dear; but if you ever get out
of this horrible place, some day you may think differently about it."

"I must go now," Rabda said. "Has the lady any message to send to the
sahib?" and she again handed a paper and pencil to Isobel.

The girl took them, hesitating a little before writing:

"Thank God you have saved me. Some day, perhaps, I may be able to tell
you how grateful I am; but, if not, you will know that if the worst
happens to us, I shall die blessing you for what you have done for me.
Pray do not linger longer in Cawnpore. You may be discovered, and if I
am spared, it would embitter my life always to know that it had cost you
yours. God bless you always.

"Yours gratefully,

"Isobel."

She folded up the paper and gave it to Rabda, who took her hand and
kissed it; and then, drawing her veil again over her face, went to the
door, which stood open for the moment.

Some men were bringing in a large cauldron of rice. The sentries offered
no opposition to her passing out, as the officer with the palanquin
had told them that a lady of the Rajah's zenana would leave shortly.
A similar message had been given to the officer at the main gate, who,
however, requested to see her hand and arm to satisfy him that all was
right. This was sufficient to assure him that it was not a white woman
passing out in disguise, and Rabda at once proceeded to her father's
house.

As she expected, he and Bathurst were away, for she had arranged to meet
them at eight o'clock in the garden. They did not return until eleven,
having waited two hours for her, and returning home in much anxiety at
her non-appearance.

"What has happened? Why did you not meet us, Rabda?" her father
exclaimed, as he entered.

Rabda rapidly repeated the incidents that had happened since she had
parted from him the evening before, and handed to Bathurst the two notes
she had received from Isobel.

"Then she is in safety with the others!" he exclaimed in delight. "Thank
God for that, and thank you, Rabda, indeed, for what you have done."
