
"We ought to, and if I can do anything, we will. Sergeant, you've done a
great service at a great risk, and all of us owe you thanks. I shall see
General McCook at once."

The sergeant, forgetting that he was wet to the skin, stretched himself
in the dry grass near Dick and his comrades, and soon fell fast asleep,
while his clothes dried upon him. But Colonel Winchester went to General
McCook's tent and insisted upon awakening him. The general received him
eagerly and listened with close attention.

"This man Whitley is trustworthy?" he said.

"Absolutely. He has had years of experience on the plains, fighting
Sioux, Cheyennes and other Indians, and he has been with me through most
of the war so far. There is probably no more skillful scout, and none
with a clearer head and better judgment in either army."

"Then, Colonel, we owe him thanks, and you thanks for letting him go.
We'll certainly bring on a battle to-morrow, and we ought to have all
our army present. I shall send a messenger at once to General Buell with
your news. Messengers shall also go to Crittenden, Rousseau, and the
other generals. But you recognize, of course, that General Buell is
the commander-in-chief, and that it is for him to make the final
arrangements."

"I do, sir," said the colonel, as he saluted and retired. He went back
to the point where his own little regiment lay. He knew every man and
boy in it, and he had known them all in the beginning, when they were
many times more. But few of the splendid regiment with which he had
started south a year and a half before remained. He looked at Dick and
Warner and Pennington and the sergeant and wondered if they would be
present to answer to the roll the next night, or if he himself would be
there?

The colonel cherished no illusions. He was not sanguine that the whole
Union army would come up, and even if it came, and if victory should be
won it would be dark and bloody. He knew how the Southerners fought, and
here more so than anywhere else, it would be brother against brother.
This state was divided more than any other, and, however the battle
went, kindred would meet kindred. Colonel Kenton, Dick's uncle, a man
whom he liked and admired, was undoubtedly across those ridges, and they
might meet face to face in the coming battle.

It was far into the morning now and the colonel did not sleep again. He
saw the messengers leaving the tent of General McCook, and he knew that
the commander of the division was active. Just what success he would
have would remain for the morrow to say. The colonel saw the dawn come.
The dry fields and forests reddened with the rising sun, and then the
army rose up from its sleep. The cooks had already prepared coffee and
food.

"Show me the enemy," said Pennington fiercely, "and as soon as I finish
this cup of coffee, I'll go over and give him the thrashing he needs."

"He's just across those ridges, sir, and on the banks of the far creek,"
said Sergeant Whitley.

"How do you know?"

"I made a call on him last night."

"You did? And what did he say?"

"I didn't send in my card. I just took a look at his front door and came
away. He's at home, waiting and willing to give us a fight."

"Well, it's a fine day for a battle anyway. Look what a splendid sun is
rising! And you can see the soft haze of fall over the hills and woods."

"It's not as fine a fall as usual in Kentucky," said Dick, in an
apologetic tone to Warner and Pennington. "It's been so dry that the
leaves are falling too early, and the reds, the yellows and the browns
are not so bright."

"Never mind, Dickie, boy," said Warner consolingly. "We'll see it in a
better year, because Pennington and I are both coming back to spend
six months with you when this war is over. I've already accepted the
invitation. So get ready for us, Dick."

"It's an understood thing now," said Dick sincerely. "There go the
trumpets, and they mean for us to get in line."

A large portion of the division was already on the way, having started
at five o'clock, and the little Winchester regiment was soon marching,
too. The day was again hot. October, even, did not seem able to break
that singular heat, and the dust was soon billowing about them in
columns, stinging and burning them. The sergeant the night before had
taken a short cut through the hills, but the brigades, needing wide
spaces, marched along the roads and through the fields. A portion of
their own army was hidden from them by ridges and forest, and Dick did
not know whether Buell with the other half of the army had come up.

After a long and exhausting march they stopped, and the Winchester
regiment and the Ohio lads concluded that they had been wrong after
all. No battle would be fought that day. They were willing now, too, to
postpone it, as they were almost exhausted by heat and thirst, and that
stinging, burning dust was maddening. A portion of their line rested
on the first creek, and they drank eagerly of the muddy water. Dick saw
before him fields in which the corn stood thick and heavy. The fields
were divided by hedges which cut off the view somewhat and which the
sergeant said would furnish great ambush for sharpshooters.

The men were now allowed to lie down, but most of them were still
panting with the heat. The three boys on horseback rode with Colonel
Winchester to the crest of a low hill, just beyond the first creek. From
that point they clearly saw the enemy gathered in battle array along the
second stream. Dick, with his glasses, saw the batteries, and could even
mark the sun-browned faces of the men.

"Has General Buell come?" he asked Colonel Winchester.

"He has not. Not half of our army is here."

The answer was made with emphasis and chagrin. There was a report that
Buell did not intend to attack until the following day, when he would
have his numbers well in hand.

"Under the circumstances," said the colonel, "we have to wait. Better
get off your horses, boys, and hunt the shade."

They rode back and obeyed. It was now getting well along into the
afternoon. Thousands of soldiers lay on the grass in the shadiest places
they could find. Many were asleep. Overhead the sun burned and burned in
a sky of absolute blazing white.

A cannon boomed suddenly and then another. The artillery of the two
armies watching one another had opened at long range, but the fire was
so distant that it did no harm. Dick and his comrades watched the shells
in their flight, noting the trails of white smoke they left behind, and
then the showers of earth that flew up when they burst. It was rather a
pleasant occupation to watch them. In a way it broke the monotony of a
long summer day.

They did not know that Polk, the bishop-general, was arriving at that
moment in the Southern camp with five thousand men. Bragg had come, too,
but he left the command to Polk, who outranked Hardee, and the three
together listened to the long-range cannonade, while they also examined
with powerful glasses the Union army which was now mostly lying on the
ground.

Dick himself felt a strong temptation to sleep. The march through the
heat that morning had been dusty and tiresome, and the warm wind that
blew over him made his eyelids very heavy. The cannonade itself was
conducive to slumber. The guns were fired at regular intervals, which
created a sort of rhythm. The shells with their trailing white smoke
ceased to interest him, and his eyelids grew heavier. It was now about
2:30 o'clock and as his eyes were about to close a sudden shout made him
open them wide and then spring to his feet.

"Look out! Look out!" cried Sergeant Whitley, "The Johnnies are coming!"

The Union forces in an instant were in line, rifles ready and eager.
The gray masses were already charging across the fields and hills, while
their cannon made a sudden and rapid increase in the volume of fire.
Their batteries were coming nearer, too, and the shells hitherto
harmless were now shrieking and hissing among their ranks, killing and
wounding.

Dick looked around him. The members of the slim Winchester regiment were
all veterans; but thousands of the Ohio lads were recruits who had never
seen battle before. Now shell and shot were teaching them the terrible
realities. He saw many a face grow pale, as his own had often grown
pale, in the first minutes of battle, but he did not see any one flinch.

The Northern cannon posted in the intervals and along the edges of
the woods opened with a mighty crash, and as the enemy came nearer the
riflemen began to send a hail of bullets. But the charge did not break.
It was led by Buckner, taken at Donelson, but now exchanged, and some of
the best troops of the South followed him.

"Steady! Steady!" shouted Colonel Winchester. The ranks were so close
that he and all of his staff, having no room for their horses, had
dismounted, and they stood now in the front rank, encouraging the men to
meet the charge. But the rush of the Southern veterans was so sudden
and fierce that despite every effort of valor the division gave way,
suffering frightful losses.

Two of the Union generals seeking to hold their men were killed. Each
side rushed forward reinforcements. A stream of Confederates issued from
a wood and flung themselves upon the Union flank. Dick was dazed with
the suddenness and ferocity with which the two armies had closed in
mortal combat. He could see but little. He was half blinded by the
smoke, the flash of rifles and cannon and the dust. Officers and
men were falling all around him. The numbers were not so great as
at Antietam, but it seemed to him that within the contracted area of
Perryville the fight was even more fierce and deadly than it had been on
that famous Maryland field.

But he was conscious of one thing. They were being borne back. Tears of
rage ran down his face. Was it always to be this way? Were their numbers
never to be of any avail? He heard some one shout for Buell, and he
heard some one else shout in reply that he was far away, as he had been
at Shiloh.

It was true. The wind blowing away from him, Buell had not yet heard
a sound from the raging battle, which for its numbers and the time it
lasted, was probably the fiercest ever fought on the American continent.
The larger Union force, divided by ridges and thick woods from the
field, had not heard the fire of a single cannon, and did not know that
two armies were engaged in deadly combat so near.

Dick kept close to Colonel Winchester and Warner and Pennington were
by his side. The sergeant was also near. There was no chance to give
or send orders, and the officers, snatching up the rifles of the fallen
soldiers, fought almost as privates. The Winchester regiment performed
prodigies of valor on that day, and the Ohio lads strove desperately for
every inch of ground.

It seemed to Dick once that they would hold fast, when he heard in front
a tremendous cry of: "On, my boys!" As the smoke lifted a little he saw
that it was Colonel Kenton leading his own trained and veteran regiment.
Colonel Winchester and Colonel Kenton, in fact, had met face to face,
but the Southern regiment was the more numerous and the stronger.
Winchester's men were gradually borne back and the colonel gasped to
Dick:

"Didn't I see your uncle leading on his regiment?"

"Yes, it was he. It was his regiment that struck us, but he's hidden now
by the smoke."

The Southern rush did not cease. McCook's whole division, between the
shallow creeks was driven back, sustaining frightful losses, and it
would have been destroyed, but the artillery of Sheridan on the flank
suddenly opened upon the Southern victors. The Southerners whirled and
charged Sheridan, but his defense was so strong, and so powerful was his
artillery that they were compelled to recoil every time with shattered
ranks.

The decimated Ohio regiments beyond the creek were gathering themselves
anew for the battle, and so were the men of Colonel Winchester, now
reduced to half their numbers again. Then a great shout arose. A fresh
brigade had come up to their relief, and aided by these new men they
made good the ground upon which they stood.

Another shout arose, telling that Buell was coming, and, two hours after
the combat had opened, he arrived with more troops. But night was now at
hand, and the sun set over a draw like that at Antietam. Forty thousand
men had fought a battle only about three hours long, and eight thousand
of them lay dead or wounded upon the sanguinary field. One half the
Union army never reached the field in time to fight.

As both sides drew off in the darkness, Dick shouted in triumph,
thinking they had won a victory. A bullet fired by some retiring
Southern skirmisher glanced along his head. There was a sudden flash of
fire before him and then darkness. His body fell on a little slope and
rolled among some bushes.


The close hot night came down upon the field, and the battle, the most
sanguinary ever fought on Kentucky soil, had closed. Like so many other
terrible struggles of the Civil War, it had been doubtful, or almost,
so far as the fighting was concerned. The Northern left wing had been
driven back, but the Northern right wing had held firm against every
attack of the enemy.

Pennington, when he lay panting on the ground with the remnant of the
Winchesters, knew little about the result of the combat. He knew that
their own division had suffered terribly. The Ohio recruits had been cut
almost to pieces, and the Winchester regiment had been reduced by half
again. He was so tired that he did not believe he could stir for a long
time. He felt no wound, but every bone ached from weariness, and his
throat and mouth seemed to burn with smoke and dust.

Pennington did not see either Dick or Warner, but as soon as he got a
little strength into his limbs he would look for them. No doubt they
were safe. A special providence always watched over those fellows. It
was true that Warner had been wounded at the Second Manassas, but a
hidden power had guided Dick to him, and he got well so fast that he was
able to fight soon afterward at Antietam.

Pennington lay still, and he heard all around him the deep breathing of
men who, like himself, were so worn that they could scarcely move. The
field in front of him darkened greatly, but he saw lights moving there,
and he knew that they belonged to little parties from either army
looking for the wounded. He began to wonder which side had won the
battle.

"Ohio," he said to one of the Ohio lads who lay near, "did we lick the
Johnnies, or did the Johnnies lick us?"

"Blessed if I know, and I don't care much, either. Four fellows that I
used to play with at school were killed right beside me. It was my first
battle, and, Oh, I tell you, it was awful!"

He gulped suddenly and began to cry. Pennington, who was no older than
he, patted him soothingly on the shoulder.

"I know that you were the bravest of the brave, because I saw you," he
said.

"I don't know about that, but I do know that I can never get used to
killing men and seeing them killed."

Pennington was surprised that Dick and Warner had not appeared. They
would certainly rejoin their own regiment, and he began to feel uneasy.
The last shot had been fired, the night was darkening fast and a
mournful wind blew over the battlefield. But up and down the lines they
were lighting the cooking fires.

Pennington rose to his feet. He saw Colonel Winchester, standing a
little distance away, and he was about to ask him for leave to look for
his comrades, when he was startled by the appearance of a woman, a woman
of thirty-eight or nine, tall, slender, dressed well, and as Pennington
plainly saw, very beautiful. But now she was dusty, her face was pale,
and her eyes shone with a terrible anxiety. Women were often seen in the
camps at the very verge or close of battle, saying good-bye or looking
for the lost, but she was unusual.

The soldiers stood aside for her respectfully, and she looked about,
until her gaze fell upon the colonel. Then she ran to him, seized him by
the arm, and exclaimed:

"Colonel Winchester! Colonel Winchester!"

"Good heavens, Mrs. Mason! You! How did you come?"

"I was at Danville, not so far from here. Of course I knew that the
armies were about to meet for battle! And it was only two days ago that
I heard the Winchester regiment had come west to join General Buell's
army."

A stalwart and powerful colored woman emerged from the darkness and put
her arm around Mrs. Mason's waist.

"Don't you get too much excited, chile," she said soothingly.

Juliana stood beside her mistress, a very tower of defense, glaring at
the soldiers about them as if she would resent their curiosity.

"I thought I would come and try to see Dick," continued Mrs. Mason. "My
relatives sought to persuade me not to do it. They were right, I know,
but I wanted to come so badly that I had to do it. We slipped away
yesterday, Juliana and I. We stayed at a farmhouse last night, and this
morning we rode through the woods. We expected to be in the camp this
afternoon, but as we were coming to the edge of the forest we heard the
cannon and then the rifles. Through three or four dreadful hours, while
we shook there in the woods, we listened to a roar and thunder that I
would have thought impossible."

"The battle was very fierce and terrible," said Colonel Winchester.
