and he might have to get acquainted with himself all over again.

He told Dorothy he had brushed his shaggy hair and whiskers; but she
thought he must have brushed them the wrong way, for they were quite as
shaggy as before.

As for the company of foxes assembled to dine with the strangers, they
were most beautifully costumed, and their rich dresses made Dorothy's
simple gown and Button-Bright's sailor suit and the shaggy man's shaggy
clothes look commonplace.  But they treated their guests with great
respect and the King's dinner was a very good dinner indeed.  Foxes, as
you know, are fond of chicken and other fowl; so they served chicken
soup and roasted turkey and stewed duck and fried grouse and broiled
quail and goose pie, and as the cooking was excellent the King's guests
enjoyed the meal and ate heartily of the various dishes.

The party went to the theater, where they saw a play acted by foxes
dressed in costumes of brilliantly colored feathers.  The play was
about a fox-girl who was stolen by some wicked wolves and carried to
their cave; and just as they were about to kill her and eat her a
company of fox-soldiers marched up, saved the girl, and put all the
wicked wolves to death.

"How do you like it?" the King asked Dorothy.

"Pretty well," she answered.  "It reminds me of one of Mr. Aesop's
fables."

"Don't mention Aesop to me, I beg of you!" exclaimed King Dox.  "I hate
that man's name.  He wrote a good deal about foxes, but always made
them out cruel and wicked, whereas we are gentle and kind, as you may
see."

"But his fables showed you to be wise and clever, and more shrewd than
other animals," said the shaggy man, thoughtfully.

"So we are.  There is no question about our knowing more than men do,"
replied the King, proudly.  "But we employ our wisdom to do good,
instead of harm; so that horrid Aesop did not know what he was talking
about."

They did not like to contradict him, because they felt he ought to know
the nature of foxes better than men did; so they sat still and watched
the play, and Button-Bright became so interested that for the time he
forgot he wore a fox head.

Afterward they went back to the palace and slept in soft beds stuffed
with feathers; for the foxes raised many fowl for food, and used their
feathers for clothing and to sleep upon.

Dorothy wondered why the animals living in Foxville did not wear just
their own hairy skins as wild foxes do; when she mentioned it to King
Dox he said they clothed themselves because they were civilized.

"But you were born without clothes," she observed, "and you don't seem
to me to need them."

"So were human beings born without clothes," he replied; "and until
they became civilized they wore only their natural skins.  But to
become civilized means to dress as elaborately and prettily as
possible, and to make a show of your clothes so your neighbors will
envy you, and for that reason both civilized foxes and civilized humans
spend most of their time dressing themselves."

"I don't," declared the shaggy man.

"That is true," said the King, looking at him carefully; "but perhaps
you are not civilized."

After a sound sleep and a good night's rest they had their breakfast
with the King and then bade his Majesty good-bye.

"You've been kind to us--'cept poor Button-Bright," said Dorothy, "and
we've had a nice time in Foxville."

"Then," said King Dox, "perhaps you'll be good enough to get me an
invitation to Princess Ozma's birthday celebration."

"I'll try," she promised; "if I see her in time."

"It's on the twenty-first, remember," he continued; "and if you'll just
see that I'm invited I'll find a way to cross the Dreadful Desert into
the marvelous Land of Oz.  I've always wanted to visit the Emerald
City, so I'm sure it was fortunate you arrived here just when you did,
you being Princess Ozma's friend and able to assist me in getting the
invitation."

"If I see Ozma I'll ask her to invite you," she replied.

The Fox-King had a delightful luncheon put up for them, which the
shaggy man shoved in his pocket, and the fox-captain escorted them to
an arch at the side of the village opposite the one by which they had
entered.  Here they found more soldiers guarding the road.

"Are you afraid of enemies?" asked Dorothy.

"No; because we are watchful and able to protect ourselves," answered
the captain.  "But this road leads to another village peopled by big,
stupid beasts who might cause us trouble if they thought we were afraid
of them."

"What beasts are they?" asked the shaggy man.

The captain hesitated to answer.  Finally, he said:

"You will learn all about them when you arrive at their city.  But do
not be afraid of them.  Button-Bright is so wonderfully clever and has
now such an intelligent face that I'm sure he will manage to find a way
to protect you."

This made Dorothy and the shaggy man rather uneasy, for they had not so
much confidence in the fox-boy's wisdom as the captain seemed to have.
But as their escort would say no more about the beasts, they bade him
good-bye and proceeded on their journey.




5.  The Rainbow's Daughter


Toto, now allowed to run about as he pleased, was glad to be free again
and able to bark at the birds and chase the butterflies.  The country
around them was charming, yet in the pretty fields of wild-flowers and
groves of leafy trees were no houses whatever, or sign of any
inhabitants.  Birds flew through the air and cunning white rabbits
darted amongst the tall grasses and green bushes; Dorothy noticed even
the ants toiling busily along the roadway, bearing gigantic loads of
clover seed; but of people there were none at all.

They walked briskly on for an hour or two, for even little
Button-Bright was a good walker and did not tire easily.  At length as
they turned a curve in the road they beheld just before them a curious
sight.

A little girl, radiant and beautiful, shapely as a fairy and
exquisitely dressed, was dancing gracefully in the middle of the lonely
road, whirling slowly this way and that, her dainty feet twinkling in
sprightly fashion.  She was clad in flowing, fluffy robes of soft
material that reminded Dorothy of woven cobwebs, only it was colored in
soft tintings of violet, rose, topaz, olive, azure, and white, mingled
together most harmoniously in stripes which melted one into the other
with soft blendings.  Her hair was like spun gold and flowed around her
in a cloud, no strand being fastened or confined by either pin or
ornament or ribbon.

Filled with wonder and admiration our friends approached and stood
watching this fascinating dance.  The girl was no taller than Dorothy,
although more slender; nor did she seem any older than our little
heroine.

Suddenly she paused and abandoned the dance, as if for the first time
observing the presence of strangers.  As she faced them, shy as a
frightened fawn, poised upon one foot as if to fly the next instant,
Dorothy was astonished to see tears flowing from her violet eyes and
trickling down her lovely rose-hued cheeks.  That the dainty maiden
should dance and weep at the same time was indeed surprising; so
Dorothy asked in a soft, sympathetic voice:

"Are you unhappy, little girl?"

"Very!" was the reply; "I am lost."

"Why, so are we," said Dorothy, smiling; "but we don't cry about it."

"Don't you?  Why not?"

"'Cause I've been lost before, and always got found again," answered
Dorothy simply.

"But I've never been lost before," murmured the dainty maiden, "and I'm
worried and afraid."

"You were dancing," remarked Dorothy, in a puzzled tone of voice.

"Oh, that was just to keep warm," explained the maiden, quickly.  "It
was not because I felt happy or gay, I assure you."

Dorothy looked at her closely.  Her gauzy flowing robes might not be
very warm, yet the weather wasn't at all chilly, but rather mild and
balmy, like a spring day.

"Who are you, dear?" she asked, gently.

"I'm Polychrome," was the reply.

"Polly whom?"

"Polychrome.  I'm the Daughter of the Rainbow."

"Oh!" said Dorothy with a gasp; "I didn't know the Rainbow had
children.  But I MIGHT have known it, before you spoke.  You couldn't
really be anything else."

"Why not?" inquired Polychrome, as if surprised.

"Because you're so lovely and sweet."

The little maiden smiled through her tears, came up to Dorothy, and
placed her slender fingers in the Kansas girl's chubby hand.

"You'll be my friend--won't you?" she said, pleadingly.

"Of course."

"And what is your name?"

"I'm Dorothy; and this is my friend Shaggy Man, who owns the Love
Magnet; and this is Button-Bright--only you don't see him as he really
is because the Fox-King carelessly changed his head into a fox head.
But the real Button-Bright is good to look at, and I hope to get him
changed back to himself, some time."

The Rainbow's Daughter nodded cheerfully, no longer afraid of her new
companions.

"But who is this?" she asked, pointing to Toto, who was sitting before
her wagging his tail in the most friendly manner and admiring the
pretty maid with his bright eyes.  "Is this, also, some enchanted
person?"

"Oh no, Polly--I may call you Polly, mayn't I?  Your whole name's awful
hard to say."

"Call me Polly if you wish, Dorothy."

"Well, Polly, Toto's just a dog; but he has more sense than
Button-Bright, to tell the truth; and I'm very fond of him."

"So am I," said Polychrome, bending gracefully to pat Toto's head.

"But how did the Rainbow's Daughter ever get on this lonely road, and
become lost?" asked the shaggy man, who had listened wonderingly to all
this.

"Why, my father stretched his rainbow over here this morning, so that
one end of it touched this road," was the reply; "and I was dancing
upon the pretty rays, as I love to do, and never noticed I was getting
too far over the bend in the circle.  Suddenly I began to slide, and I
went faster and faster until at last I bumped on the ground, at the
very end.  Just then father lifted the rainbow again, without noticing
me at all, and though I tried to seize the end of it and hold fast, it
melted away entirely and I was left alone and helpless on the cold,
hard earth!"

"It doesn't seem cold to me, Polly," said Dorothy; "but perhaps you're
not warmly dressed."

"I'm so used to living nearer the sun," replied the Rainbow's Daughter,
"that at first I feared I would freeze down here.  But my dance has
warmed me some, and now I wonder how I am ever to get home again."

"Won't your father miss you, and look for you, and let down another
rainbow for you?"

"Perhaps so, but he's busy just now because it rains in so many parts
of the world at this season, and he has to set his rainbow in a lot of
different places.  What would you advise me to do, Dorothy?"

"Come with us," was the answer.  "I'm going to try to find my way to
the Emerald City, which is in the fairy Land of Oz.  The Emerald City
is ruled by a friend of mine, the Princess Ozma, and if we can manage
to get there I'm sure she will know a way to send you home to your
father again."

"Do you really think so?" asked Polychrome, anxiously.

"I'm pretty sure."

"Then I'll go with you," said the little maid; "for travel will help
keep me warm, and father can find me in one part of the world as well
as another--if he gets time to look for me."

"Come along, then," said the shaggy man, cheerfully; and they started
on once more.  Polly walked beside Dorothy a while, holding her new
friend's hand as if she feared to let it go; but her nature seemed as
light and buoyant as her fleecy robes, for suddenly she darted ahead
and whirled round in a giddy dance.  Then she tripped back to them with
sparkling eyes and smiling cheeks, having regained her usual happy mood
and forgotten all her worry about being lost.

They found her a charming companion, and her dancing and laughter--for
she laughed at times like the tinkling of a silver bell--did much to
enliven their journey and keep them contented.




6.  The City Of Beasts


When noon came they opened the Fox-King's basket of luncheon, and found
a nice roasted turkey with cranberry sauce and some slices of bread and
butter.  As they sat on the grass by the roadside the shaggy man cut up
the turkey with his pocket-knife and passed slices of it around.

"Haven't you any dewdrops, or mist-cakes, or cloudbuns?" asked
Polychrome, longingly.

"'Course not," replied Dorothy.  "We eat solid things, down here on the
earth.  But there's a bottle of cold tea.  Try some, won't you?"

The Rainbow's Daughter watched Button-Bright devour one leg of the
turkey.

"Is it good?" she asked.

He nodded.

"Do you think I could eat it?"

"Not this," said Button-Bright.

"But I mean another piece?"

"Don't know," he replied.

"Well, I'm going to try, for I'm very hungry," she decided, and took a
thin slice of the white breast of turkey which the shaggy man cut for
her, as well as a bit of bread and butter.  When she tasted it
Polychrome thought the turkey was good--better even than mist-cakes;
but a little satisfied her hunger and she finished with a tiny sip of
cold tea.

"That's about as much as a fly would eat," said Dorothy, who was making
a good meal herself.  "But I know some people in Oz who eat nothing at
all."

"Who are they?" inquired the shaggy man.

"One is a scarecrow who's stuffed with straw, and the other a woodman
made out of tin.  They haven't any appetites inside of 'em, you see; so
they never eat anything at all."

"Are they alive?" asked Button-Bright.

"Oh yes," replied Dorothy; "and they're very clever and very nice, too.
If we get to Oz I'll introduce them to you."

"Do you really expect to get to Oz?" inquired the shaggy man, taking a
drink of cold tea.

"I don't know just what to 'spect," answered the child, seriously; "but
I've noticed if I happen to get lost I'm almost sure to come to the
Land of Oz in the end, somehow 'r other; so I may get there this time.
But I can't promise, you know; all I can do is wait and see."

"Will the Scarecrow scare me?" asked Button-Bright.

"No; 'cause you're not a crow," she returned.  "He has the loveliest
smile you ever saw--only it's painted on and he can't help it."

Luncheon being over they started again upon their journey, the shaggy
man, Dorothy and Button-Bright walking soberly along, side by side, and
the Rainbow's Daughter dancing merrily before them.

Sometimes she darted along the road so swiftly that she was nearly out
of sight, then she came tripping back to greet them with her silvery
laughter.  But once she came back more sedately, to say:

"There's a city a little way off."

"I 'spected that," returned Dorothy; "for the fox-people warned us
there was one on this road.  It's filled with stupid beasts of some
sort, but we musn't be afraid of 'em 'cause they won't hurt us."

"All right," said Button-Bright; but Polychrome didn't know whether it
was all right or not.

"It's a big city," she said, "and the road runs straight through it."

"Never mind," said the shaggy man; "as long as I carry the Love Magnet
every living thing will love me, and you may be sure I shan't allow any
of my friends to be harmed in any way."

This comforted them somewhat, and they moved on again.  Pretty soon
they came to a signpost that read:

"HAF A MYLE TO DUNKITON."


"Oh," said the shaggy man, "if they're donkeys, we've nothing to fear
at all."

"They may kick," said Dorothy, doubtfully.

"Then we will cut some switches, and make them behave," he replied.  At
the first tree he cut himself a long, slender switch from one of the
branches, and shorter switches for the others.

"Don't be afraid to order the beasts around," he said; "they're used to
it."

Before long the road brought them to the gates of the city.  There was
a high wall all around, which had been whitewashed, and the gate just
before our travelers was a mere opening in the wall, with no bars
across it.  No towers or steeples or domes showed above the enclosure,
nor was any living thing to be seen as our friends drew near.

Suddenly, as they were about to boldly enter through the opening, there
arose a harsh clamor of sound that swelled and echoed on every side,
until they were nearly deafened by the racket and had to put their
fingers to their ears to keep the noise out.

It was like the firing of many cannon, only there were no cannon-balls
or other missiles to be seen; it was like the rolling of mighty
thunder, only not a cloud was in the sky; it was like the roar of
countless breakers on a rugged seashore, only there was no sea or other
water anywhere about.

They hesitated to advance; but, as the noise did no harm, they entered
through the whitewashed wall and quickly discovered the cause of the
turmoil.  Inside were suspended many sheets of tin or thin iron, and
against these metal sheets a row of donkeys were pounding their heels
with vicious kicks.

The shaggy man ran up to the nearest donkey and gave the beast a sharp
blow with his switch.

"Stop that noise!" he shouted; and the donkey stopped kicking the metal
sheet and turned its head to look with surprise at the shaggy man.  He
switched the next donkey, and made him stop, and then the next, so that
gradually the rattling of heels ceased and the awful noise subsided.
The donkeys stood in a group and eyed the strangers with fear and
trembling.

"What do you mean by making such a racket?" asked the shaggy man,
sternly.

"We were scaring away the foxes," said one of the donkeys, meekly.
"Usually they run fast enough when they hear the noise, which makes
them afraid."

"There are no foxes here," said the shaggy man.

"I beg to differ with you.  There's one, anyhow," replied the donkey,
sitting upright on its haunches and waving a hoof toward Button-Bright.
"We saw him coming and thought the whole army of foxes was marching to
attack us."

"Button-Bright isn't a fox," explained the shaggy man.  "He's only
wearing a fox head for a time, until he can get his own head back."

"Oh, I see," remarked the donkey, waving its left ear reflectively.
"I'm sorry we made such a mistake, and had all our work and worry for
nothing."

The other donkeys by this time were sitting up and examining the
strangers with big, glassy eyes.  They made a queer picture, indeed;
for they wore wide, white collars around their necks and the collars
had many scallops and points.  The gentlemen-donkeys wore high pointed
caps set between their great ears, and the lady-donkeys wore sunbonnets
with holes cut in the top for the ears to stick through.  But they had
no other clothing except their hairy skins, although many wore gold and
silver bangles on their front wrists and bands of different metals on
their rear ankles.  When they were kicking they had braced themselves
with their front legs, but now they all stood or sat upright on their
hind legs and used the front ones as arms.  Having no fingers or hands
the beasts were rather clumsy, as you may guess; but Dorothy was
surprised to observe how many things they could do with their stiff,
heavy hoofs.

Some of the donkeys were white, some were brown, or gray, or black, or
spotted; but their hair was sleek and smooth and their broad collars
and caps gave them a neat, if whimsical, appearance.

"This is a nice way to welcome visitors, I must say!" remarked the
shaggy man, in a reproachful tone.

"Oh, we did not mean to be impolite," replied a grey donkey which had
not spoken before.  "But you were not expected, nor did you send in
your visiting cards, as it is proper to do."

"There is some truth in that," admitted the shaggy man; "but, now you
are informed that we are important and distinguished travelers, I trust
you will accord us proper consideration."

These big words delighted the donkeys, and made them bow to the shaggy
man with great respect.  Said the grey one:

"You shall be taken before his great and glorious Majesty King
Kik-a-bray, who will greet you as becomes your exalted stations."

"That's right," answered Dorothy.  "Take us to some one who knows
something."

"Oh, we all know something, my child, or we shouldn't be donkeys,"
asserted the grey one, with dignity.  "The word 'donkey' means
'clever,' you know."

"I didn't know it," she replied.  "I thought it meant 'stupid'."

"Not at all, my child.  If you will look in the Encyclopedia Donkaniara
you will find I'm correct.  But come; I will myself lead you before our
splendid, exalted, and most intellectual ruler."

All donkeys love big words, so it is no wonder the grey one used so
many of them.




7.  The Shaggy Man's Transformation


They found the houses of the town all low and square and built of
bricks, neatly whitewashed inside and out.  The houses were not set in
rows, forming regular streets, but placed here and there in a haphazard
manner which made it puzzling for a stranger to find his way.

"Stupid people must have streets and numbered houses in their cities,
to guide them where to go," observed the grey donkey, as he walked
before the visitors on his hind legs, in an awkward but comical manner;
"but clever donkeys know their way about without such absurd marks.
Moreover, a mixed city is much prettier than one with straight streets."

Dorothy did not agree with this, but she said nothing to contradict it.
Presently she saw a sign on a house that read: "Madam de Fayke,
Hoofist," and she asked their conductor:

"What's a 'hoofist,' please?"

"One who reads your fortune in your hoofs," replied the grey donkey.

"Oh, I see," said the little girl.  "You are quite civilized here."

"Dunkiton," he replied, "is the center of the world's highest
civilization."

They came to a house where two youthful donkeys were whitewashing the
wall, and Dorothy stopped a moment to watch them.  They dipped the ends
of their tails, which were much like paint-brushes, into a pail of
whitewash, backed up against the house, and wagged their tails right
and left until the whitewash was rubbed on the wall, after which they
dipped these funny brushes in the pail again and repeated the
performance.

"That must be fun," said Button-Bright.

"No, it's work," replied the old donkey; "but we make our youngsters do
all the whitewashing, to keep them out of mischief."

"Don't they go to school?" asked Dorothy.

"All donkeys are born wise," was the reply, "so the only school we need
is the school of experience.  Books are only for those who know
nothing, and so are obliged to learn things from other people."

"In other words, the more stupid one is, the more he thinks he knows,"
observed the shaggy man.  The grey donkey paid no attention to this
speech because he had just stopped before a house which had painted
over the doorway a pair of hoofs, with a donkey tail between them and a
rude crown and sceptre above.

"I'll see if his magnificent Majesty King Kik-a-bray is at home," said
he.  He lifted his head and called "Whee-haw! whee-haw! whee-haw!"
