together.

"This is serious news indeed," Edwin said when they had perused it. "So
Harold of Norway is on his way hither with five hundred warships and half
the males of Norway. Since the news has come from Denmark he must already
have been nigh a fortnight at sea, and if he had sailed hitherwards we
should have heard long ere this of his being within sight of our shores. As
we have heard nought of him it may be that his object has been misreported,
and that it is not against us that his fleet is bound."

"I fear that it can have no other destination," Wulf said; "though it may
be that it has sailed first to Scotland to obtain assistance from Malcolm.
There, too, he will find Tostig, whom the king fears is in alliance with
him."

"Then assuredly it is against us that he comes," Morcar said, "and unless
the winds shatter his fleet we shall hear of him before long. But he may
land anywhere from the border of Scotland to the Humber, and it is useless
our trying to hinder him along so great a line. He may delay his coming as
William of Normandy has done, and our men, like those of Harold, will not
remain under arms for months doing nothing. With so great an army he must
move slowly and we shall have plenty of time to gather our forces to meet
him. Harold urges us to call out the levies at once, but he does not know
the Northumbrians as we do. They will fight, and stoutly, but they will
scatter as soon as their term expires. It is but six weeks since we called
them under arms to repulse Tostig, and unless they themselves see the
danger presses they will not leave their homes again after so short an
interval. I am glad to see by the king's letter that he has charged you to
stay with us for a while. We shall be glad of your presence, both as the
agent of our royal brother and as one who has already proved himself a
valiant and skilful soldier."

Apartments were at once assigned to Wulf in the palace, and he was treated
as an honoured guest. He had been furnished by the royal chamberlain with
an ample sum of money, and every two or three days despatched messengers to
London. He was greatly disturbed in mind, for the earls made no preparation
whatever to meet the coming storm, but continued to hunt or to hawk, to
give entertainments, and to pass their time as if the news of a mighty
invasion had never reached them. The first attempts he made to urge them to
follow Harold's counsel were dismissed so curtly that he felt it useless to
persevere.

A fortnight passed by, and then a messenger rode into York with the news
that a vast fleet had entered the Tyne, and that the Norsemen were harrying
and burning the country. Harold Hardrada had first sailed to the Isles of
Shetland and Orkney, which, with the northern districts of the mainland,
formed a powerful Scandinavian province. Paul and Erning, the two young
earls of the state, and a large number of their subjects, joined the fleet,
as did a Scotch contingent sent by Malcolm and commanded by Tostig, who
also had with him the force he had brought from Flanders. Iceland, then a
great Norwegian colony, sent ships and men, as did an Irish sovereign of
Danish descent.

Roused to action at last the northern earls sent out summonses in all
directions for the levies to assemble. The invaders were next heard of at
Scarborough, which made a brave resistance, but the Norsemen took post on
the steep hill overhanging the town, and gathering there a vast pile of
wood set it on fire, and hurled blazing timbers down on the place. Many of
the houses caught fire, and this spread rapidly. The inhabitants
surrendered, but the greater portion was slaughtered and the town given up
to plunder. Holderness, like Scarborough, bravely but unsuccessfully
resisted the attack, and the great fleet sailing south entered the Humber.
Hour by hour messengers rode into York bringing news of the progress of the
invaders; hour by hour the Northumbrian levies poured into the capital.

Much as he had disapproved of their previous carelessness and delay, Wulf
acknowledged that the two northern earls now bore themselves as men. They
saw to the defences of the town, mustered all the inhabitants capable of
bearing arms, arranged for the feeding and disposition of the levies, and
did all that was possible at so short a notice to get them to take the
field. But he saw, too, that this raw militia was but little calculated to
stand before the assault of the Norsemen. There was no body of seasoned
troops like the housecarls to serve as a nucleus, and to bear the chief
brunt of the battle. All alike were raw, inexperienced, and badly armed,
save for the axe, which was the favourite weapon of the English.

The great fleet made no stay but sailed up the Humber, packing closely in
the river as it narrowed, till it seemed well-nigh covered from shore to
shore with the crowded ships. It passed the little village of Selby, and
cast anchor beside the left bank of the Ouse, near the village of Riccall,
but nine miles' march from York. Olaf, the king's son, the two earls of
Orkney, and the bishop of those islands remained on board to guard the
ships, for the Northumbrian fleet, which was far too small to encounter so
great an armament, had taken refuge up the Wharfe, and might descend and
attack the Norse vessels were they left unguarded. The main body of the
great army under the king and Tostig landed and prepared to march upon
York. Sudden as the call had been there was no lack of spirit or
patriotism in the English levies. Among their ranks were many priests and
monks, who felt that it was their duty to aid in the defence of the land
against the semi-heathen host that invaded it. The memory of the past
invasion of the Norsemen, when the churches had been sacked and the priests
slain on the altar, inspired them, and they and the monks responded as
readily as did the laymen to the summons of the earls. These had not
hesitated to consult Wulf as to the post where they had best station
themselves to give battle, and the disposition of their forces. One who had
distinguished himself under Duke William of Normandy, and under Harold in
Wales, had, young though he was, more experience of war than any of the
northern thanes, and as the representative of Harold all these were ready
to listen with respect to his advice. He had already spent four or five
days in surveying the ground in the direction from which the Norsemen were
likely to advance, and had decided that a place known as Gate Fulford, two
miles from the city, was best calculated for defence, it being situated on
a narrow ridge, having the river and its swampy banks on one side, and a
flat marshy country on the other. Thither the army of the earls marched to
take up its position.




CHAPTER XIX.


STAMFORD BRIDGE.

Owing to the difficulty of getting the levies formed up and set in motion,
the Norsemen had arrived on the ground and had taken up a defensive
position before the English reached it. Had the force contained a strong
body of housecarls, Wulf, who had talked the matter over with the earls,
would have advised that they should fight on the defensive and allow the
Norsemen to attack; but with freshly-raised troops, ready and eager for
battle, but wanting the discipline that alone enables trained soldiers to
endure patiently a long series of attacks, he thought that there was more
chance of victory in attacking the enemy. Morcar commanded on the left,
Edwin on the right. Wulf took up his position by the side of Morcar, and
exchanged a few words with Osgod before advancing to the charge.

"This will be a right royal contest, master," the latter said as he
fingered his heavy axe. "Never before have I seen a set battle like this."

"Do you keep close to me, Osgod."

"That I am sure to do, master," the latter broke in.

"Yes, I know that while we fight you will be by my side, but it may be that
we shall have to fly. The Norsemen outnumber us greatly, and their king is
a host in himself. This is a good position to defend, but a bad one to fly
from. The king's last words were a charge to me not to throw away my life,
and therefore while I shall fight as long as fighting can avail, I shall
also do my best to save myself if we are defeated. As we came along I kept
near to the edge of the swamp, and some hundred yards back I marked a spot
where, as it seemed to me, there was a sort of path, worn either by broken
men and outlaws, who may dwell somewhere in its recesses, or by men from a
village beyond it. For this point, then, I shall make if we are defeated.
It may be that it was not a path, but at least it offers a chance of
escape. So when I give you the word, keep close to my side."

Osgod nodded. His confidence in Wulf was absolutely boundless, and though
he revolted at the thought of retreat he knew well that so long as a chance
of victory remained Wulf would not quit the field. When within two or three
hundred yards of the enemy, Morcar advanced to the front of the line with
his standard-bearer beside him.

"On men!" he shouted, and with a yell the English poured down to the attack
The line of the Norsemen was on this side less strong than it was near the
river where their king had posted himself, and the Norsemen gave way before
the furious attack of the English. Morcar and many of his thanes fought in
the front rank. Wulf was close beside him, and before their swords and the
terrible axe of Osgod the invaders fell back foot by foot, and shouts of
triumph rose from the English; but it was not for long. On the left Edwin
could make no impression on the shield-wall of the enemy, and presently
their king caused his horns to blow the signal for attack, and his line,
hitherto immovable, flung itself on the English. The king, a head taller
than any of his men, fought in their front rank, his terrible two-handed
sword hewing down every man who opposed him. As the English gave way the
assault became more and more impetuous, and in a few minutes the English
broke and fled all along the line.

"All is lost, Osgod," Wulf said; as after fighting to the last he turned
his back on the foe. The scene on the ridge was now terrible; the exulting
Norsemen followed hard upon the flying English, uttering their shouts of
victory and cutting down all they overtook. Hampered by the crowd in front
of them great numbers of the English fell beneath the weapons of their
pursuers, others turned to the right or left, and hundreds were smothered
in the swamp by the river or in that on the other side. Once the flight
began, Osgod placed himself in front of his master, his powerful figure and
his weight enabling him to push his way through the crowd of fugitives.
Wulf kept close behind him, and they followed the edge of the swamp until
Wulf saw the faint indication of a path he had before noticed.

"Turn off here, Osgod; this is the place I spoke of. Let me go first, I am
lightest."

The ground shook beneath their feet, the slime oozed up to their ankles,
but, moderating their pace now, they sprang from tussock to tussock until
two or three hundred yards from the edge of the swamp. Then they paused and
looked round. The work of slaughter was still proceeding. Along the edge
of the swamp numbers of English could be seen, some half immerged, some
fast disappearing. In the din of the struggle none heard or heeded their
cries, each man was occupied solely with the thought of flight or
slaughter. Some half-dozen of the fugitives, seeing the two men were making
their way across the swamp, had followed in their footsteps.

Slowly and cautiously Wulf moved forward again. Sometimes a treacherous
tuft gave way and he slipped waist-deep into the mire, but Osgod was always
close at hand, and his long arm enabled him to reach forward to his master
from a firmer spot and to draw him from the bog. After an hour's painful
work the ground began to be firmer, and before long they were safe in the
forest beyond the swamp. Here for a while the party threw themselves down
exhausted. After an hour's rest the others asked Wulf what they had best
do.

"There is but one thing to be done," he replied; "make off to your homes.
The remnant of the army will reach York, and the Norsemen will doubtless
surround the city and lay siege to it. For the present our cause is lost,
and there is nought for us to do but to try and save our lives, which have
been spared well-nigh by a miracle."

Keeping south through the forest Wulf and his follower were several hours
before they emerged from its shade. Another three miles' walking brought
them to a village, where they learned they were six miles west of Selby.
Here they obtained some food, and then bearing off so as to strike the
south road arrived soon after nightfall at the house of the thane who had
supplied them with their last change of horses on their way north. The news
they brought excited the greatest consternation, but their host saw at once
that the only hope now was that Harold might bring help, and at once placed
the two horses which they had ridden to his house at their disposal. Wulf
and Osgod mounted at once, and travelled southwards at a speed equal to
that at which they had journeyed north.

When within a few miles of Peterborough they received news that seemed
almost too good to be true. Harold at the head of a great army had already
reached that town, and was pressing north at the top of his speed. From
east and west he was being joined by the levies of the thanes. Riding
forward to Peterborough they found the town crowded with troops, who, as
they learned, were to march forward again in half an hour. Wulf at once
made his way to the monastery, in which Harold was lodged.

"I need not ask your news, Wulf," Harold said, as, covered with dust and
mire, and almost reeling with exhaustion, the young thane entered his
private closet.

"The army of the northern earls has been well-nigh destroyed two miles from
York. Whether the earls themselves escaped I know not, for I left the field
while the slaughter was still going on. York will be at once besieged, and
as most of its fighting men went out to the battle and a large proportion
must have been slain, I fear that it can resist but a short time the attack
of the Norsemen. It was good news indeed when I heard that you were
advancing north."

"It is bad tidings that you bring, Wulf, but not unexpected. Directly I
heard that the enemy's fleet were off our northern coast and were burning
and pillaging unopposed, I speedily gathered what force I could in the
South, and sending on messengers ahead to summon the levies of East Anglia
to join me on the way, started north. Yesterday the news reached me that
the great fleet of Norway had sailed up the Humber, and I saw that I should
be too late to join Edwin and Morcar before they were forced to give battle
before York. Now tell me of the fight, and how you managed to escape, for
I see by your mail-coat and helmet, which are dinted and frayed and the
steel rings shorn off in many places, that you were in the thick of it."

Wulf related the story of the battle, and the manner in which he had
escaped.

"You did wisely, Wulf, to mark a way of retreat before the battle
commenced. A good general should ever be prepared for defeat as well as for
victory. So the levies fought well?"

"They did, my lord. They engaged the Norsemen gallantly and well--much
better, indeed, than I had looked for them to do, and the day went
favourably until the King of Norway with his picked men threw themselves
upon them. Even after that they fought sturdily for a short time, and had
there been but a body of housecarls to form a shield-wall, behind which
they could have rallied, the day might still have been theirs. But you
look ill, my lord."

"I was on a bed of sickness when the news came; but it was no time for
lying abed. For the first two or three days' marches I was carried on a
litter, but I am now well enough to sit my horse. It cost me a sore
struggle to leave the South unguarded simply because my orders were not
obeyed here in the North. But there was no help for it, and we have been
marching well-nigh night and day in hopes that we might bring this matter
to a close, and return south before the Norman fleet appears off the coast.
We have already marched farther than would seem possible in the time, but
the men are all in good heart and eager to meet the Norsemen, and I have
addressed them and shown them the urgent necessity for speed. We shall set
forward again in half an hour. They have had six hours for rest, so they
can do another fifty miles before they halt again. You can tarry here for a
day to rest yourself, and can then ride on and overtake us."

"I will go down and take a plunge in the river," Wulf said, "and shall be
ready to mount again by the time that the rearguard is in motion. I could
have kept on to London had it been needful, and shall be quite ready to
proceed with the army."

They were within a day's march of York when the news came that the city had
surrendered without waiting for an assault. The King of Norway had offered
favourable terms; a local Gemot had been held, and it had been agreed to
make peace with Harold of Norway, and not only to receive him as king but
to join him in his warfare against the South. Hostages were given for their
fidelity to their new lord, who in return gave hostages to York for the
good conduct of his troops. It was the city only that had so treacherously
behaved, and the surrender by no means included the whole province. It was
arranged, however, by the earls, that hostages should be given for
Northumbria at large, and they promised that a hundred and fifty of these
should be handed over at Stamford Bridge, eight miles north-east of the
city.

Here there was a palace of the old Northumbrian kings. The spot was
favourable for the encampment of an army, for the country round was fertile
and the bridge across the Derwent afforded facilities for the collection of
provisions over a large area. The bridge was a wooden one, the country on
either side of the river was flat, but considerably elevated above the
stream, with a slope down to it on both sides of the bridge.

The news of the surrender of York made no change in Harold's plans. He had
come to give battle to the Norsemen, whether he did so under the walls of
the northern capital or elsewhere; accordingly he pressed rapidly forward.

In a few hours the army arrived in sight of York, which, had it resisted
but a day longer, would have been saved the humiliation of the surrender
and treaty. The invaders had all marched to Stamford Bridge, and the people
opened its gates and received with rejoicing the king, whose authority they
had the day before cast off. Beyond a short pause for food there was no
delay. Harold's thoughts were on the South, and he grudged every hour that
delayed his return to his post there. The men of the city and the
survivors of the army defeated at Fulford joined the force, which kept on
its way east to Stamford Bridge. The invaders, believing that Northumbria
lay at their feet, and without a thought that Harold was advancing, were
encamped in careless security on the low ground by the river. The greater
portion of their host had crossed the bridge; their king, Tostig, and many
of the great chiefs had taken up their abode in the royal palace at Aldby,
and were preparing to return to York, where the king was to hold his court
and formally to assume the government and to proclaim the laws for his new
kingdom.

Already the cortege had set out, clad not in warlike armour but in court
habiliments, when on the long road leading gently down to the river a cloud
of dust and the sparkle of arms was seen. There was little room for doubt
as to the nature of the arriving force. Northumbria could gather no array
that would venture thus to approach the army that had but five days before
crushed the levies of the North. It could only be Harold himself who, with
the men of the South, had thus unexpectedly arrived. Tostig at once
proposed a retreat to the ships at Riccall, so that the whole army might be
gathered together, but Harold Hardrada strove to marshal his army for the
battle, at the same time sending off mounted messengers to summons the
party left at the ships. But while all was in confusion among the main body
of the invaders on the eastern bank of the river, while men were buckling
on their armour and gathering in their ranks, the cloud of war rolled
rapidly down the descent, and with a mighty shout the English vanguard fell
upon the Norsemen on the western bank.

Valiantly they fought, but there was no resisting the solid array of the
English housecarls, or Thingmen as they were also called. Taken altogether
unprepared, and for the most part without their defensive armour, the
Norsemen could offer no successful resistance to the English host. Great
numbers were killed; others were driven headlong across the bridge or were
drowned in the stream, which is said to have been literally choked with
dead. But for a time the advance of the English was stayed; for one
Norseman, a man of great stature and prodigious strength, took post in the
middle of the narrow bridge and barred the way to the English host. But one
foe could attack him at a time, and so great was his strength and prowess
that it is said forty Englishmen fell under the mighty blows of his
two-handed sword, and at last he was only over-powered by one who made his
way along beneath the timbers of the bridge and stabbed him with his spear
from below.

His gallant stand, however, had sufficed to give his countrymen time to
complete their preparations, and the shield-wall of the Norsemen stretched
across the gentle ascent from the bridge. With his hands raised aloft, as a
sign that his mission was a peaceful one, an English thane with twenty
mounted horsemen rode across the bridge. He was met by the king, Tostig,
and his chiefs. Raising his voice the thane addressed Tostig, "I bring to
Tostig the greeting and message of his brother King Harold. Let him return
to his allegiance and he shall again have the earldom of Northumberland;
nay, he shall have a third of the kingdom to rule together with the king."

"What, then," Tostig asked, "shall be given to King Harold of Norway?"

"Seven feet of English ground!" the thane said sternly, "or more,
perchance, seeing he is taller than other men."

"Return to King Harold of England," Tostig said, "and bid him make ready
for the battle. Never shall men say in Norway that I brought their king
hither to England and then went over to his foes."

Harold's ambassador returned with his men across the river with Tostig's
message, and then in solid array the English Thingmen moved forward to the
attack. Had the King of Norway advanced to the end of the bridge a battle
would have been impossible, for the English could never have forced their
way across. But the kings were equally anxious for a battle. Harold of
Norway knew as well as the King of England that the host of Normandy was on
the point of sailing, and it was as essential for him to crush the English
army before the Normans landed as it was for Harold of England to dispose
at once of the Norse invaders. There were three claimants for the English
crown, and both kings felt the necessity of having their hands free to meet
the Normans. Harold of Norway may well have believed that his host of tried
warriors was capable of disposing of an army that, save for its small body
of regular troops, was wholly unused to war; therefore, he held his array
immovable while the English army crossed the bridge and formed up for
battle.

Steadily and firmly the solid line of the housecarls moved up the ascent,
and then as Harold's trumpet gave the signal of attack, flung themselves
upon the shield-wall of the Norsemen. The conflict was a terrible one. The
heavy two-handed axes of the English clashed against the long two-handed
swords of the Norsemen. Against such terrible weapons wielded by such
powerful arms, helmet and hauberk afforded but a poor defence. Casques and
the heads beneath them were cleft like egg-shells under the terrible blows;
but the gaps thus made in the ranks were at once filled from behind, and
for hours the struggle continued with unabated vigour on both sides. Harold
himself with a body of his thanes fought in the front line, his position
marked to his followers by his standard kept flying close behind him. His
great strength and height made him so formidable an assailant that his
standard generally flew well in advance of his fighting line, while on the
other side the still greater height and strength of the King of Norway
rendered him equally conspicuous. At last the obstinate valour of the
English housecarls prevailed over the resistance of the fierce Norsemen,
and the invading host was driven backward step by step up the ascent until
the level ground was reached.

Here the battle again raged as fiercely as ever. In vain did Harold of
Norway, followed by his bravest warriors, hurl himself upon the ranks of
the English, his terrible sword carrying death in its path. In vain did his
followers again and again strive to take the offensive. The English line
ever bore up against their attacks. The battle was still undecided when, as
the sun was going down, an English arrow pierced the throat of the giant
King of Norway. How Tostig, who had throughout the day fought by his side,
fell, we know not, but he died, as did the Irish prince who had brought his
followers to share in the plunder of England. There fell, too, most of the
bravest warriors of Norway, the last of the sea-kings who had carried the
banner, known as the land-waster, far and wide over Europe.

The slaughter was terrible, and at nightfall the Norsemen who survived
broke and fled to the shelter of their ships. Never in the history of
England was there a harder fought battle; never were English valour and
endurance more splendidly shown. Terrible, too, had been the losses on
their side. Many of the king's bravest thanes had fallen, and the ranks of
the housecarls were fearfully thinned. Complete as had been the victory,
absolute as had been the destruction of their foes, there was but little
rejoicing in the English camp that night. So exhausted were the troops by
