gale. I don't know as ever I've been in a worse one."

"What's the use of turning out?" Pearson asked. "We can't do nothing,
and it's warmer here a sight than it is outside."

"I tell ye ye've got to go. The ice is breaking up fast and it's
level with the top of the island already. Unless I'm mistaken
there'll be forty foot of ice piled over this island afore an hour."

This was, indeed, alarming news. And in a minute the occupants of the
hut were all in the open air.

"You can call in your scouts, Seneca. There aint no fear of an attack
to-night. No mortal soul--not even an Injun--could stand the force of
the wind out on the lake."

A very short examination sufficed to show the truth of Peter's
anticipations.

Already the upper part of the bank was sliding over the rock, and it
was clear that in a very short time the whole would be covered.

"What is to be done, Peter?" Harold shouted.

"We must take to the canoe. There's clear water on the other side."

Harold crossed the island and saw that what Peter said was correct. A
broad strip of black water stretched away in the darkness toward the
shore. The whole ice-sheet was moving bodily before the wind, and as
the island stood up in its course the ice to windward of it was
forced up over it, while under its lee the lake was clear. Not a
moment was lost. The canoe was got out, carried over the rocks, and
carefully lowered into the water under shelter of the island. All the
stores and provisions were lowered into it. A deerskin was spread on
the bottom, and the girls, having been helped down into the boat,
were told to lie down and were then covered with blankets. The men
wrapped themselves up in skins and blankets and took their places in
the canoe, the four Indians taking paddles.

Quickly as the preparations had been made, there were but a few feet
of the island uncovered by the ice, as the last man descended into
the boat and they pushed off and, after a couple of strokes, lay with
the boat's head facing toward the island at a distance of fifty yards
from it. Although somewhat sheltered from the wind, the Indians were
obliged to paddle hard to maintain their position. Harold wondered at
first that they had not kept closer to the island, but he soon
understood their reason for keeping at a distance. The massive blocks
of ice, pressed forward by, the irresistible force behind, began to
shoot from the top of the island into the water, gliding far on
beneath the surface with the impetus of the fall, and then shooting
up again with a force which would have destroyed the canoe at once
had they touched it.

Soon a perfect cataract of ice was falling. Peter and Pearson took
their places on each side of the bow of the canoe, with poles to push
off the pieces as they drifted before the gale toward the shore. The
work required the utmost strength and care. One touch from the
sharp-edged blocks would have ripped open the side of the bark canoe
like a knife, and in the icy cold water, encumbered by floating
fragments of ice, even the best swimmer could not have gained the
solid ice. The peril was great, and it needed all the strength and
activity of the white men and the skill of the paddlers to avoid the
danger which momentarily threatened them. So quickly did the blocks
float down upon them that Pearson thought it might be impossible to
avoid them all. The skins, therefore, were hung round the boat,
dropping some inches into the water, and these, although they could
not have prevented the boat from being stove in, by the larger
fragments, yet protected its sides from the contact of the smaller
ones.

For upward of an hour the struggle continued, and Harold felt
something like despair at the thought of a long night passed in such
a struggle. Presently sounds like the booming of cannon were heard
above the gale.

"What is that?" he shouted to the Seneca chief, next to whom he was
sitting.

"Ice break up," the chief replied. "Break up altogether."

This proved to be the case. As the ice was driven away from the
further side of the lake the full force of the wind played upon the
water there, and as the streak widened a heavy sea soon got up. The
force of the swell extended under the ice, aiding the effect of the
wind above, and the vast sheet began to break up. The reports
redoubled in strength, and frequently the ice was seen to heave and
swell. Then, with a sound like thunder, it broke and great cakes were
forced one on the top of another, and soon, instead of a level plain
of ice, a chaos of blocks were tossing about on the waves.

Harold watched the change with anxiety. No longer was the channel on
either side marked by regular defined lines, but floating pieces
encroached upon it, and, looking toward the shore, the channel
appeared to be altogether lost. The danger was overwhelming, but the
Indians, paddling with increased strength, urged the boat forward
until within a few yards of the island.

A few minutes before such an approach would have assured the
immediate destruction of the boat. But Harold saw with surprise that,
almost simultaneously with the breaking up of the ice-sheet, the fall
of blocks from the island had ceased. A moment's reflection showed
him the reason of this phenomenon. With the break-up of the ice-field
the pressure from behind had suddenly ceased. No longer were the
blocks piled on the island pushed forward by the tremendous pressure
of the ice-field. The torrent was stayed and they could approach the
island with safety. As soon as they were assured that this was so the
canoe was brought close to the rocks.

Pearson leaped ashore, climbed the rocks and the ice piled twenty
feet above them, and with his pole convinced himself that at this
point there were no loose blocks likely to fall. Having satisfied
himself on this head, he descended again and took his place in the
boat. This was moored by a rope a few feet long to a bush growing
from a fissure in the rock close to the water's edge. He and Peter
remained on watch with their poles, to fend off any pieces of ice
which might be brought round by the waves, while the rest of the
crew, wrapping themselves up in their blankets, lay down at the
bottom of the boat.

The next morning the storm still raged, and the lake presented the
appearance of an angry sea. Sheltered under the lee of the island,
the party were protected from its effects, although the light canoe
rose and fell on the heavy swell. The ice had wholly disappeared from
the lake, the pieces having been ground to atoms against each other
in the storm. Along the line of shore there was a great bank of ice
as high as the tree-tops.

"The ways of the Lord are won'erful," Duncan Cameron said. "The storm
which threatened to be our destruction has proved our salvation. When
it abates we shall be able to paddle down the lake without fear of
interruption."

"Yes," Peter said, "the varmints are not likely to follow us. In the
first place, unless they thought of taking their canoes into the
forest when the storm first began, which aint likely, as they was
a-thinking only of cutting off our escape, they'd 've been smashed
into tinder. In the second place, they couldn't ketch us if they had
canoes, for, as we've eight paddles, counting them we made out of the
seats when we was on shore, we'd be able to laugh at 'em. And lastly,
they've had such a taste of the quality of our rifles that, even if
they had a dozen canoes on hand, I doubt if they'd care to attack us.
No, sir; when this storm's over we have nothing to do but paddle down
to the settlements at the other end of the lake."

Toward the afternoon the storm abated, and next morning the sun was
shining brilliantly and the waves had gone down sufficiently to
enable the canoe to start on her voyage.

"Now, boys," Pearson said cheerfully, "ef ye don't want to git froze
up again you'd best be sharp, for I can tell ye about thirty-six
hours of this weather and the lake'll be solid again."

Five minutes later the canoe with its eight sturdy paddlers started
on its way, speeding like an arrow from the ice-covered island which
had done them such good service in their greatest need.

"Now, Jake," Peter said, "the more strength you put into that paddle
of yourn the sooner you'll have a piece of meat atween your jaws."

The negro grinned.

"Don't talk ob him, Massa Peter; don't say a word about him until I
see him. Fish bery good when dere's noting else to eat, but Jake
never want to see him again. He hab eat quite enough for the rest ob
his life."

Cameron, who was not accustomed to the use of the paddle, sat in the
stern with the two girls; but the others were all used to the
exercise, and the boat literally bounded along at each stroke from
the sinewy arms, and by nightfall they had reached the opposite
shore. After some hours' work together two of them had rested, and
from that time they took it by turns, six paddles being kept
constantly going.

Without any adventure they arrived safely at the end of the lake. The
clearing where Nelly had lived so long, and where her father and
mother had been killed, was passed in the night, much to Harold's
satisfaction, as he was afraid that she would have been terribly
upset at the many sad memories which the sight of the place could not
but call up. On their way down they had seen many gaps in the forest
caused by the gale, but it was not until they reached their landing
place that the full effect of its destructive force was visible.
Several scows and other boats lay wrecks upon the shore, every house
in the little village was leveled to the ground, the orchards were
ruined, palings and fences torn down, and the whole place strewn with
fragments.

A few people were moving among the ruins. They gazed with a dull
apathy upon the new-comers, apparently dazed by the misfortune that
had befallen them. Harold learned, on questioning them, that
twenty-seven persons had been killed and the majority of the
survivors more or less seriously injured. With the exception of the
few whom they saw, about all the survivors had been taken off to the
town in boats down the river, or in wagons lent by neighbors whose
villages, sheltered in the woods, had escaped the ravages of the
gale. After a few hours' halt, having obtained meat and other stores,
they proceeded on their way to Detroit.

Here Nelly had several friends, who had long believed her to have
fallen at the massacre at the farm. By them she was gladly received,
and she took up her abode in a family with some daughters of her own
age. Harold found that there was a considerable sum of money in the
bank in her father's name, and from this, after a consultation with
her, a sum of money sufficient to provide the Seneca and his
followers with blankets, powder, and Indian finery for years was
drawn and bestowed upon them.

A day or two afterward the Indians left for their own country, highly
gratified with the success of the expedition and proud of the
numerous scalps which hung from each of their girdles.

Harold learned that there was but little fighting going on along the
Canadian frontier. The winter had set in again with extreme severity;
the St. Lawrence would be frozen, and he would have no means of
leaving Canada; he was therefore well content to settle down until
the spring at Detroit, where he received numerous and hearty
invitations to stay, for any time, from the various friends of his
cousins. Jake, of course, remained with him. Peter went up to
Montreal, where he had some relatives residing; Harold promising to
call for him on his way East in the spring. Pearson, after a few
days' stay in Detroit, started again with a comrade on a hunting
expedition. Cameron and his daughter also spent the winter at
Detroit.

The months passed very pleasantly to Harold. Since the war began he
had had no period of rest or quiet, and he now entered with zest into
the various amusements, sleighing, and dancing, which helped to while
away the long winter in America. He also joined in many hunting
parties, for in those days game abounded up to the very edge of the
clearings. Moose were abundant, and the hunt of these grand deer was
full of excitement. Except when the snow is on the ground these
animals can defy their pursuers, but the latter with their snowshoes
go lightly over the frozen snow, in which the moose sink heavily.

There were many discussions as to the future of Nelly. Several of her
friends would gladly have adopted her as a member of their family,
but Harold warmly urged that she should go to England and take up her
abode with his mother, who was her nearest relative, and Nelly,
somewhat to the surprise of her friends, finally agreed to this
proposal. A purchaser was readily found for the farm, which was an
excellent one, and the proceeds of the sale, with the amount of
savings in the bank, gave her a little fortune of some twenty-five
hundred pounds.

When the spring came and the navigation of the lake was open, Harold,
Nelly, the Camerons, and Jake started in a ship for Montreal. There
they were joined by Peter and sailed down to Quebec, where Nelly and
the Camerons took passage for England. Very deep was the gratitude
which Duncan expressed to the friends who had restored his daughter
to him. He had had enough of the colonies, and intended to spend the
rest of his life among his own people in Scotland. Harold, Peter, and
Jake sailed to join the English army in the South.




CHAPTER XVIII.


THE SIEGE OF SAVANNAH.

After the surrender of General Burgoyne at Saratoga the English
Parliament made another effort to obtain peace, and passed an act
renouncing all rights to tax the colonists and yielding every point
as to which they had been in dispute. Commissioners were sent over
with full authority to treat, and had the colonists been ready
nominally to submit to England, a virtual independence, similar to
that possessed by Canada and the Australian colonies at the present
time, would have been granted. As a very large body of the Americans
had from the first been desirous of coming to terms, and as the
paralyzed state of trade caused great and general distress, it is
probable that these terms might have been accepted had it not been
for the intervention of France. That power had all along encouraged
the rebellion. She had smarted under the loss of Canada, and although
her rule in her own colonies was far more arbitrary than that of
England in America, she was glad to assist in any movement which
could operate to the disadvantage of this country. Hitherto,
nominally she had remained neutral, but now, fearing that the offers
of the English would induce the colonists to make peace, she came
forward, recognized their independence, and engaged herself to
furnish a large fleet for their assistance.

The colonists joyfully accepted the offer, seeing that the
intervention of France in the struggle would completely alter its
conditions. Heretofore the British had been enabled to send over men
and stores at will, but were they blockaded by a French fleet their
difficulties would be immensely increased.

As there had been no cause of quarrel between England and France,
this agreement was an act of wanton hostility on the part of the
latter. On obtaining information of the signature of the treaty
between France and the colonies, the English ambassador was recalled
from Paris and both countries prepared vigorously for war.

The first result was that the English deemed it prudent to evacuate
Philadelphia and retreat to New York. Washington endeavored to cut
off their retreat, and a battle took place at Freehold Court House,
in which the Americans were worsted. Washington drew off his army,
and the British army continued its march to New York without further
opposition. Early in May the French sent off a fleet of twelve ships
of the line and six frigates, carrying a large number of troops
commanded by Count D'Estaing. An English fleet, under Admiral Byron,
was lying at Portsmouth, and this sailed on June 9 in pursuit; for it
was not until that time that information was received of the intended
destination of the French fleet.

D'Estaing reached the American coast upon the very day on which the
English army re-entered New York, and after making a demonstration
before that town the French fleet sailed for Rhode Island to expel
the British troops, under Sir Robert Pigott, who held it.

Lord Howe sailed with the fleet from New York to give battle to that
of D'Estaing. For two days the fleets maneuvered in sight of each
other. Howe, being inferior in force, wished to gain the
weather-gauge before fighting. Failing to do this, on the third day
he offered battle, but a tremendous storm prevented the engagement
and dispersed both fleets. The French vessels retired to Boston and
the English to New York.

Taking advantage of the departure of the French fleet, Sir Robert
attacked the American force, which had crossed to Rhode Island to act
with the French, and drove them from it. While crossing the Atlantic
the fleet under Admiral Byron had met with a tremendous storm, which
had entirely dispersed it, and the vessels arrived singly at New
York. When their repairs were completed the whole set out to give
battle to the French, but D'Estaing, finding that by the junction of
the two English fleets he was now menaced by a superior force, sailed
away to the West Indies.

After his departure an expedition was sent down along the coast to
Georgia and East Florida. This met with great success. Savannah was
captured and the greater part of South Carolina was occupied. The
majority of the inhabitants joyfully welcomed the troops and many
companies of volunteers were raised.

Harold had arrived in New York early in the spring. He had been
offered a commission, but he preferred remaining with his two
comrades in the position of scout. In this way he had far greater
independence, and while enjoying pay and rations sufficient for his
maintenance, he was to a great extent master of his own movements. At
an earlier period of the war he was offered by General Howe a
commission in the army, and his father would have been glad had he
accepted it. Harold, however, although determined to fight until the
struggle between the colonists and the mother country came to an end
one way or the other, had no great liking for the life of an officer
in the regular army, but had resolved at the conclusion of the war to
settle down upon a farm on the lakes--a life for which he felt far
more fitted than for the strict discipline and regularity of that of
an officer in the army.

As, with the exception of the attack by the French fleet and American
army upon Rhode Island, both parties remained quiet all through the
summer of 1778, the year passed uneventfully to him, and the duties
of the scouts were little more than nominal. During the winter
fighting went on in the Carolinas and Georgia with varied success.

In the spring of 1779 Harold and his comrades were, with a party of
scouts, sent down to Georgia, where constant skirmishes were going on
and the services of a body of men accustomed to outpost duty were
required. They were landed in May and joined General Prevost's force
on the island of St. John, situated close to the mainland and
connected with it by a bridge of boats, at the end of which on the
mainland a post had been erected. Shortly afterward General Prevost
left for Savannah, taking with him most of the troops, which were
carried away in the sloops which had formed the bridge of boats. On
the American side General Lincoln commanded a considerable army,
which had been dispatched by Congress to drive the English from that
State and the Carolinas.

Lieutenant Colonel Maitland, who commanded the post on the mainland,
was left with only a flat-boat to keep up his communication with the
island. He had under his command the first battalion of the
Seventy-first Highlanders, now much weakened in numbers, part of a
Hessian regiment, some provincial volunteers, and a detachment of
artillery, the whole not exceeding 500 effective men. Hearing that
General Lincoln was advancing against him, Colonel Maitland sent all
his sick, baggage, and horses across to the island, and placed the
post as far as possible in a defensive position. Most of the scouts
who had come down from New York had accompanied General Prevost to
Savannah, but Harold, with Peter Lambton, Jake, and three or four
others, had been ordered to remain with Colonel Maitland, and were
sent out to reconnoiter when the enemy were known to be approaching.

"This is something like our old work, Peter, upon Lake Champlain,"
Harold said, as with his two comrades he took his way in the
direction from which the enemy were advancing.

"Ay, lad, but they've none of the redskins with 'em, and there'll be
no great difficulty in finding out all about 'em. Besides, we've got
