
"Don't do that, not being a white kitten."

"I wish I were--I wish I were anything but what I am."

"And you can't make yourself any different, nor can I do it either. You
must be content to stay just what you are."

The little old woman said this--very firmly, but gently, too--with her
arms round his neck and her lips on his forehead. It was the first
time the boy had ever heard any one talk like this, and he looked up in
surprise--but not in pain, for her sweet manner softened the hardness of
her words.

"Now, my Prince,--for you are a prince, and must behave as such,--let us
see what we can do; how much I can do for you, or show you how to do for
yourself. Where is your traveling-cloak?"

Prince Dolor blushed extremely. "I--I put it away in the cupboard; I
suppose it is there still."

"You have never used it; you dislike it?"

He hesitated, no; wishing to be impolite. "Don't you think it's--just a
little old and shabby for a prince?"

The old woman laughed--long and loud, though very sweetly.

"Prince, indeed! Why, if all the princes in the world craved for it,
they couldn't get it, unless I gave it them. Old and shabby! It's the
most valuable thing imaginable! Very few ever have it; but I thought
I would give it to you, because--because you are different from other
people."

"Am I?" said the Prince, and looked first with curiosity, then with a
sort of anxiety, into his godmother's face, which was sad and grave,
with slow tears beginning to steal down.

She touched his poor little legs. "These are not like those of other
little boys."

"Indeed!--my nurse never told me that."

"Very likely not. But it is time you were told; and I tell you, because
I love you."

"Tell me what, dear godmother?"

"That you will never be able to walk or run or jump or play--that your
life will be quite different from most people's lives; but it may be a
very happy life for all that. Do not be afraid."

"I am not afraid," said the boy; but he turned very pale, and his lips
began to quiver, though he did not actually cry--he was too old for
that, and, perhaps, too proud.

Though not wholly comprehending, he began dimly to guess what his
godmother meant. He had never seen any real live boys, but he had seen
pictures of them running and jumping; which he had admired and tried
hard to imitate but always failed. Now he began to understand why he
failed, and that he always should fail--that, in fact, he was not like
other little boys; and it was of no use his wishing to do as they did,
and play as they played, even if he had had them to play with. His was a
separate life, in which he must find out new work and new pleasures for
himself.

The sense of THE INEVITABLE, as grown-up people call it--that we cannot
have things as we want them to be, but as they are, and that we must
learn to bear them and make the best of them--this lesson, which
everybody has to learn soon or late--came, alas! sadly soon, to the poor
boy. He fought against it for a while, and then, quite overcome, turned
and sobbed bitterly in his godmother's arms.

She comforted him--I do not know how, except that love always comforts;
and then she whispered to him, in her sweet, strong, cheerful voice:
"Never mind!"

"No, I don't think I do mind--that is, I WON'T mind," replied he,
catching the courage of her tone and speaking like a man, though he was
still such a mere boy.

"That is right, my Prince!--that is being like a prince. Now we know
exactly where we are; let us put our shoulders to the wheel and----"

"We are in Hopeless Tower" (this was its name, if it had a name), "and
there is no wheel to put our shoulders to," said the child sadly.

"You little matter-of-fact goose! Well for you that you have a godmother
called----"

"What?" he eagerly asked.

"Stuff-and-nonsense."

"Stuff-and-nonsense! What a funny name!"

"Some people give it me, but they are not my most intimate friends.
These call me--never mind what," added the old woman, with a soft
twinkle in her eyes. "So as you know me, and know me well, you may give
me any name you please; it doesn't matter. But I am your godmother,
child. I have few godchildren; those I have love me dearly, and find me
the greatest blessing in all the world."

"I can well believe it," cried the little lame Prince, and forgot
his troubles in looking at her--as her figure dilated, her eyes grew
lustrous as stars, her very raiment brightened, and the whole room
seemed filled with her beautiful and beneficent presence like light.

He could have looked at her forever--half in love, half in awe; but she
suddenly dwindled down into the little old woman all in gray, and, with
a malicious twinkle in her eyes, asked for the traveling-cloak.

"Bring it out of the rubbish cupboard, and shake the dust off it,
quick!" said she to Prince Dolor, who hung his head, rather ashamed.
"Spread it out on the floor, and wait till the split closes and
the edges turn up like a rim all round. Then go and open the
skylight,--mind, I say OPEN THE SKYLIGHT,--set yourself down in the
middle of it, like a frog on a water-lily leaf; say 'Abracadabra, dum
dum dum,' and--see what will happen!"

The Prince burst into a fit of laughing. It all seemed so exceedingly
silly; he wondered that a wise old woman like his godmother should talk
such nonsense.

"Stuff-and-nonsense, you mean," said she, answering, to his great alarm,
his unspoken thoughts. "Did I not tell you some people called me by that
name? Never mind; it doesn't harm me."

And she laughed--her merry laugh--as child-like as if she were the
Prince's age instead of her own, whatever that might be. She certainly
was a most extraordinary old woman.

"Believe me or not, it doesn't matter," said she. "Here is the cloak:
when you want to go traveling on it, say 'Abracadabra, dum, dum, dum';
when you want to come back again, say 'Abracadabra, tum tum ti.' That's
all; good-by."

A puff of most pleasant air passing by him, and making him feel for the
moment quite strong and well, was all the Prince was conscious of. His
most extraordinary godmother was gone.

"Really now, how rosy your Royal Highness' cheeks have grown! You seem
to have got well already," said the nurse, entering the room.

"I think I have," replied the Prince very gently--he felt gently and
kindly even to his grim nurse. "And now let me have my dinner, and go
you to your sewing as usual."

The instant she was gone, however, taking with her the plates and
dishes, which for the first time since his illness he had satisfactorily
cleared, Prince Dolor sprang down from his sofa, and with one or two
of his frog-like jumps reached the cupboard where he kept his toys, and
looked everywhere for his traveling-cloak.

Alas! it was not there.

While he was ill of the doldrums, his nurse, thinking it a good
opportunity for putting things to rights, had made a grand clearance of
all his "rubbish"--as she considered it: his beloved headless horses,
broken carts, sheep without feet, and birds without wings--all the
treasures of his baby days, which he could not bear to part with. Though
he seldom played with them now, he liked just to feel they were there.

They were all gone and with them the traveling-cloak. He sat down on the
floor, looking at the empty shelves, so beautifully clean and tidy, then
burst out sobbing as if his heart would break.

But quietly--always quietly. He never let his nurse hear him cry. She
only laughed at him, as he felt she would laugh now.

"And it is all my own fault!" he cried. "I ought to have taken better
care of my godmother's gift. Oh, godmother, forgive me! I'll never be so
careless again. I don't know what the cloak is exactly, but I am sure
it is something precious. Help me to find it again. Oh, don't let it be
stolen from me--don't, please!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed a silvery voice. "Why, that traveling-cloak is
the one thing in the world which nobody can steal. It is of no use to
anybody except the owner. Open your eyes, my Prince, and see what you
shall see."

His dear old godmother, he thought, and turned eagerly round. But no;
he only beheld, lying in a corner of the room, all dust and cobwebs, his
precious traveling-cloak.

Prince Dolor darted toward it, tumbling several times on the way, as
he often did tumble, poor boy! and pick himself up again, never
complaining. Snatching it to his breast, he hugged and kissed it,
cobwebs and all, as if it had been something alive. Then he began
unrolling it, wondering each minute what would happen. What did happen
was so curious that I must leave it for another chapter.



CHAPTER V

If any reader, big or little, should wonder whether there is a meaning
in this story deeper than that of an ordinary fairy tale, I will own
that there is. But I have hidden it so carefully that the smaller
people, and many larger folk, will never find it out, and meantime the
book may be read straight on, like "Cinderella," or "Blue-Beard," or
"Hop-o'my-Thumb," for what interest it has, or what amusement it may
bring.

Having said this, I return to Prince Dolor, that little lame boy whom
many may think so exceedingly to be pitied. But if you had seen him as
he sat patiently untying his wonderful cloak, which was done up in
a very tight and perplexing parcel, using skillfully his deft little
hands, and knitting his brows with firm determination, while his eyes
glistened with pleasure and energy and eager anticipation--if you had
beheld him thus, you might have changed your opinion.

When we see people suffering or unfortunate, we feel very sorry for
them; but when we see them bravely bearing their sufferings and making
the best of their misfortunes, it is quite a different feeling. We
respect, we admire them. One can respect and admire even a little child.

When Prince Dolor had patiently untied all the knots, a remarkable thing
happened. The cloak began to undo itself. Slowly unfolding, it laid
itself down on the carpet, as flat as if it had been ironed; the split
joined with a little sharp crick-crack, and the rim turned up all round
till it was breast-high; for meantime the cloak had grown and grown, and
become quite large enough for one person to sit in it as comfortable as
if in a boat.

The Prince watched it rather anxiously; it was such an extraordinary,
not to say a frightening, thing. However, he was no coward, but a
thorough boy, who, if he had been like other boys, would doubtless have
grown up daring and adventurous--a soldier, a sailor, or the like. As
it was, he could only show his courage morally, not physically, by being
afraid of nothing, and by doing boldly all that it was in his narrow
powers to do. And I am not sure but that in this way he showed more real
valor than if he had had six pairs of proper legs.

He said to himself: "What a goose I am! As if my dear godmother would
ever have given me anything to hurt me. Here goes!"

So, with one of his active leaps, he sprang right into the middle of the
cloak, where he squatted down, wrapping his arms tight round his knees,
for they shook a little and his heart beat fast. But there he sat,
steady and silent, waiting for what might happen next.

Nothing did happen, and he began to think nothing would, and to feel
rather disappointed, when he recollected the words he had been told to
repeat--"Abracadabra, dum dum dum!"

He repeated them, laughing all the while, they seemed such nonsense. And
then--and then----

Now I don't expect anybody to believe what I am going to relate, though
a good many wise people have believed a good many sillier things. And as
seeing's believing, and I never saw it, I cannot be expected implicitly
to believe it myself, except in a sort of a way; and yet there is truth
in it--for some people.

The cloak rose, slowly and steadily, at first only a few inches, then
gradually higher and higher, till it nearly touched the skylight. Prince
Dolor's head actually bumped against the glass, or would have done so
had he not crouched down, crying "Oh, please don't hurt me!" in a most
melancholy voice.

Then he suddenly remembered his godmother's express command--"Open the
skylight!"

Regaining his courage at once, without a moment's delay he lifted up
his head and began searching for the bolt--the cloak meanwhile remaining
perfectly still, balanced in the air. But the minute the window was
opened, out it sailed--right out into the clear, fresh air, with nothing
between it and the cloudless blue.

Prince Dolor had never felt any such delicious sensation before. I can
understand it. Cannot you? Did you never think, in watching the rooks
going home singly or in pairs, soaring their way across the calm evening
sky till they vanish like black dots in the misty gray, how pleasant it
must feel to be up there, quite out of the noise and din of the world,
able to hear and see everything down below, yet troubled by nothing and
teased by no one--all alone, but perfectly content?

Something like this was the happiness of the little lame Prince when he
got out of Hopeless Tower, and found himself for the first time in the
pure open air, with the sky above him and the earth below.

True, there was nothing but earth and sky; no houses, no trees, no
rivers, mountains, seas--not a beast on the ground, or a bird in the
air. But to him even the level plain looked beautiful; and then there
was the glorious arch of the sky, with a little young moon sitting in
the west like a baby queen. And the evening breeze was so sweet and
fresh--it kissed him like his godmother's kisses; and by and by a few
stars came out--first two or three, and then quantities--quantities! so
that when he began to count them he was utterly bewildered.

By this time, however, the cool breeze had become cold; the mist
gathered; and as he had, as he said, no outdoor clothes, poor Prince
Dolor was not very comfortable. The dews fell damp on his curls--he
began to shiver.

"Perhaps I had better go home," thought he.

But how? For in his excitement the other words which his godmother
had told him to use had slipped his memory. They were only a little
different from the first, but in that slight difference all the
importance lay. As he repeated his "Abracadabra," trying ever so
many other syllables after it, the cloak only went faster and faster,
skimming on through the dusky, empty air.

The poor little Prince began to feel frightened. What if his wonderful
traveling-cloak should keep on thus traveling, perhaps to the world's
end, carrying with it a poor, tired, hungry boy, who, after all, was
beginning to think there was something very pleasant in supper and bed!

"Dear godmother," he cried pitifully, "do help me! Tell me just this
once and I'll never forget again."

Instantly the words came rushing into his head--"Abracadabra, tum
tum ti!" Was that it? Ah! yes--for the cloak began to turn slowly. He
repeated the charm again, more distinctly and firmly, when it gave a
gentle dip, like a nod of satisfaction, and immediately started back, as
fast as ever, in the direction of the tower.

He reached the skylight, which he found exactly as he had left it, and
slipped in, cloak and all, as easily as he had got out. He had
scarcely reached the floor, and was still sitting in the middle of his
traveling-cloak,--like a frog on a water-lily leaf, as his godmother had
expressed it,--when he heard his nurse's voice outside.

"Bless us! what has become of your Royal Highness all this time? To
sit stupidly here at the window till it is quite dark, and leave the
skylight open, too. Prince! what can you be thinking of? You are the
silliest boy I ever knew."

"Am I?" said he absently, and never heeding her crossness; for his only
anxiety was lest she might find out anything.

She would have been a very clever person to have done so. The instant
Prince Dolor got off it, the cloak folded itself up into the tiniest
possible parcel, tied all its own knots, and rolled itself of its own
accord into the farthest and darkest corner of the room. If the nurse
had seen it, which she didn't, she would have taken it for a mere bundle
of rubbish not worth noticing.

Shutting the skylight with an angry bang, she brought in the supper and
lit the candles with her usual unhappy expression of countenance. But
Prince Dolor hardly saw it; he only saw, hid in the corner where nobody
else would see it, his wonderful traveling-cloak. And though his supper
was not particularly nice, he ate it heartily, scarcely hearing a word
of his nurse's grumbling, which to-night seemed to have taken the place
of her sullen silence.

"Poor woman!" he thought, when he paused a minute to listen and look at
her with those quiet, happy eyes, so like his mother's. "Poor woman! she
hasn't got a traveling-cloak!"

And when he was left alone at last, and crept into his little bed, where
he lay awake a good while, watching what he called his "sky-garden," all
planted with stars, like flowers, his chief thought was--"I must be up
very early to-morrow morning, and get my lessons done, and then I'll go
traveling all over the world on my beautiful cloak."

So next day he opened his eyes with the sun, and went with a good heart
to his lessons. They had hitherto been the chief amusement of his dull
life; now, I am afraid, he found them also a little dull. But he tried
to be good,--I don't say Prince Dolor always was good, but he generally
tried to be,--and when his mind went wandering after the dark, dusty
corner where lay his precious treasure, he resolutely called it back
again.

"For," he said, "how ashamed my godmother would be of me if I grew up a
stupid boy!"

But the instant lessons were done, and he was alone in the empty room,
he crept across the floor, undid the shabby little bundle, his fingers
trembling with eagerness, climbed on the chair, and thence to the table,
so as to unbar the skylight,--he forgot nothing now,--said his magic
charm, and was away out of the window, as children say, "in a few
minutes less than no time."

Nobody missed him. He was accustomed to sit so quietly always that
his nurse, though only in the next room, perceived no difference. And
besides, she might have gone in and out a dozen times, and it would have
been just the same; she never could have found out his absence.

For what do you think the clever godmother did? She took a quantity of
moonshine, or some equally convenient material, and made an image, which
she set on the window-sill reading, or by the table drawing, where it
looked so like Prince Dolor that any common observer would never have
guessed the deception; and even the boy would have been puzzled to know
which was the image and which was himself.

And all this while the happy little fellow was away, floating in the air
on his magic cloak, and seeing all sorts of wonderful things--or they
seemed wonderful to him, who had hitherto seen nothing at all.

First, there were the flowers that grew on the plain, which, whenever
the cloak came near enough, he strained his eyes to look at; they were
very tiny, but very beautiful--white saxifrage, and yellow lotus, and
ground-thistles, purple and bright, with many others the names of which
I do not know. No more did Prince Dolor, though he tried to find them
out by recalling any pictures he had seen of them. But he was too far
off; and though it was pleasant enough to admire them as brilliant
patches of color, still he would have liked to examine them all. He was,
as a little girl I know once said of a playfellow, "a very examining
boy."

"I wonder," he thought, "whether I could see better through a pair of
glasses like those my nurse reads with, and takes such care of. How I
would take care of them, too, if I only had a pair!"

Immediately he felt something queer and hard fixing itself to the bridge
of his nose. It was a pair of the prettiest gold spectacles ever seen;
and looking downward, he found that, though ever so high above the
ground, he could see every minute blade of grass, every tiny bud and
flower--nay, even the insects that walked over them.

"Thank you, thank you!" he cried, in a gush of gratitude--to anybody or
everybody, but especially to his dear godmother, who he felt sure had
given him this new present. He amused himself with it for ever so long,
with his chin pressed on the rim of the cloak, gazing down upon the
grass, every square foot of which was a mine of wonders.

Then, just to rest his eyes, he turned them up to the sky--the blue,
bright, empty sky, which he had looked at so often and seen nothing.

Now surely there was something. A long, black, wavy line, moving on
in the distance, not by chance, as the clouds move apparently, but
deliberately, as if it were alive. He might have seen it before--he
almost thought he had; but then he could not tell what it was. Looking
at it through his spectacles, he discovered that it really was alive;
being a long string of birds, flying one after the other, their wings
moving steadily and their heads pointed in one direction, as steadily as
if each were a little ship, guided invisibly by an unerring helm.

"They must be the passage-birds flying seaward!" cried the boy, who had
read a little about them, and had a great talent for putting two and
two together and finding out all he could. "Oh, how I should like to see
them quite close, and to know where they come from and whither they are
going! How I wish I knew everything in all the world!"

A silly speech for even an "examining" little boy to make; because, as
we grow older, the more we know the more we find out there is to know.
And Prince Dolor blushed when he had said it, and hoped nobody had heard
him.

Apparently somebody had, however; for the cloak gave a sudden bound
forward, and presently he found himself high in the air, in the very
middle of that band of aerial travelers, who had mo magic cloak to
travel on--nothing except their wings. Yet there they were, making their
fearless way through the sky.

Prince Dolor looked at them as one after the other they glided past him;
and they looked at him--those pretty swallows, with their changing
necks and bright eyes--as if wondering to meet in mid-air such an
extraordinary sort of bird.

"Oh, I wish I were going with you, you lovely creatures! I'm getting so
tired of this dull plain, and the dreary and lonely tower. I do so want
to see the world! Pretty swallows, dear swallows! tell me what it looks
like--the beautiful, wonderful world!"

But the swallows flew past him--steadily, slowly pursuing their course
as if inside each little head had been a mariner's compass, to guide
them safe over land and sea, direct to the place where they wished to
go.

The boy looked after them with envy. For a long time he followed with
his eyes the faint, wavy black line as it floated away, sometimes
changing its curves a little, but never deviating from its settled
course, till it vanished entirely out of sight.

Then he settled himself down in the center of the cloak, feeling quite
sad and lonely.

"I think I'll go home," said he, and repeated his "Abracadabra, tum tum
ti!" with a rather heavy heart. The more he had, the more he wanted;
and it is not always one can have everything one wants--at least, at the
exact minute one craves for it; not even though one is a prince, and has
a powerful and beneficent godmother.

He did not like to vex her by calling for her and telling her how
unhappy he was, in spite of all her goodness; so he just kept his
trouble to himself, went back to his lonely tower, and spent three days
in silent melancholy, without even attempting another journey on his
traveling-cloak.



CHAPTER VI

The fourth day it happened that the deaf-mute paid his accustomed visit,
after which Prince Dolor's spirits rose. They always did when he got the
new books which, just to relieve his conscience, the King of Nomansland
regularly sent to his nephew; with many new toys also, though the latter
were disregarded now.

"Toys, indeed! when I'm a big boy," said the Prince, with disdain,
and would scarcely condescend to mount a rocking-horse which had
come, somehow or other,--I can't be expected to explain things very
exactly,--packed on the back of the other, the great black horse, which
stood and fed contentedly at the bottom of the tower.

Prince Dolor leaned over and looked at it, and thought how grand it must
be to get upon its back--this grand live steed--and ride away, like the
pictures of knights.

"Suppose I was a knight," he said to himself; "then I should be obliged
to ride out and see the world."

But he kept all these thoughts to himself, and just sat still, devouring
his new books till he had come to the end of them all. It was a repast
not unlike the Barmecide's feast which you read of in the "Arabian
Nights," which consisted of very elegant but empty dishes, or that
supper of Sancho Panza in "Don Quixote," where, the minute the smoking
dishes came on the table, the physician waved his hand and they were all
taken away.

Thus almost all the ordinary delights of boy-life had been taken away
from, or rather never given to this poor little prince.

"I wonder," he would sometimes think--"I wonder what it feels like to
