passion left her stiffer and shyer than ever. Blinding tears rushed to
Priscilla's eyes, and her terror was that they would drop on to her
plate. Suppose some of those horrid girls saw her crying? Hateful
thought. She would rather die than show emotion before them.

At this moment a soft, plump little hand was slipped into hers and the
sweetest of voices said:

"I am so sorry anything has seemed unkind to you. Believe me, we are
not what you imagine. We have our fun and our prejudices, of course,
but we are not what you think we are."

Priscilla could not help smiling, nor could she resist slightly
squeezing the fingers which touched hers.

"You are not unkind, I know," she answered; and she ate the rest of
her dinner in a comforted frame of mind.

After dinner one of the lecturers who resided at Heath Hall, a
pleasant, bright girl of two- or three-and-twenty, came and introduced
herself, and presently took Priscilla with her to her own room, to
talk over the line of study which the young girl proposed to take up.
This conference lasted some little time, and then Priscilla, in the
lecturer's company, returned to the hall for tea.

A great many girls kept coming in and out. Some stayed to have tea,
but most helped themselves to tea and bread and butter and took them
away to partake of in their own private rooms.

Maggie Oliphant and Nancy Banister presently rushed in for this
purpose. Maggie, seeing Priscilla, ran up to her.

"How are you getting on?" she asked brightly. "Oh, by-the-by, will you
cocoa with me to-night at half-past ten?"

"I don't know what you mean," answered Priscilla. "But I'll do it,"
she added, her eyes brightening.

"All right, I'll explain the simple ceremony when you come. My room is
next to yours, so you'll have no difficulty in finding me out. I don't
expect to have any one present except Miss Banister," nodding her head
in Nancy's direction, "and perhaps one other girl. By-by, I'll see you
at half-past ten."

Maggie turned to leave the hall, but Nancy lingered for a moment by
Priscilla's side.

"Wouldn't you like to take your tea up to your room?" she asked. "We
most of us do it. You may, you know."

"I don't think I wish to," answered Priscilla in an uncertain voice.

Nancy half turned to go, then came back.

"You are going to unpack by and by, aren't you?" she asked.

"Oh, yes, when I get back to my room."

"Perhaps you ought to know beforehand; the girls will be coming to
call."

Priscilla raised her eyes.

"What girls?" she asked, alarm in her tone.

"Oh, most of the students in your corridor. They always call on a
fresher the first night in her room. You need not bother yourself
about them; they'll just talk for a little while and then go away.
What is the matter, Miss Peel? Maggie has told me your name, you see."

"What you tell me sounds so very-- very formal."

"But it isn't-- not really. Shall I come and help you to entertain
them?"

"I wish----" began Priscilla. She hesitated; the words seemed to stick
in her throat.

"What did you say?" Nancy bent forward a little impatiently.

"I wish-- yes, do come," with a violent effort.

"All right, you may expect me."

Nancy flew after Maggie Oliphant, and Priscilla went slowly up the
wide, luxurious stairs. She turned down the corridor which led to her
own room. There were doors leading out of this corridor at both sides,
and Priscilla caught glimpses of luxurious rooms bright with flowers
and electric light. Girls were laughing and chatting in them; she saw
pictures on the walls and lounges and chairs scattered about. Her own
room was at the far end of the corridor. The electric light was also
brightening it, but the fire was unlit, and the presence of the
unpacked trunk, taking up a position of prominence on the floor, gave
it a very unhomelike feel. In itself the room was particularly
picturesque. It had two charming lattice windows, set in deep square
bays. One window faced the fireplace, the other the door. The effect
was slightly irregular, but for that very reason all the more
charming. The walls of the room were painted light blue; there was a
looking-glass over the mantel-piece set in a frame of the palest, most
delicate blue. A picture-rail ran round the room about six feet from
the ground, and the high frieze above had a scroll of wild roses
painted on it in bold, free relief.

The panels of the doors were also decorated with sprays of wild
flowers in picturesque confusion. Both the flowers and the scroll were
boldly designed, but were unfinished, the final and completing touches
remaining yet to be given.

Priscilla looked hungrily at these unexpected trophies of art. She
could have shouted with glee as she recognized some of her dear, wild
Devonshire flowers, among the groups on the door panels. She wondered
if all the rest of the students were treated to these artistic
decorations and grew a little happier and less homesick at the
thought.

Priscilla could have been an artist herself had the opportunity
arisen, but she was one of those girls all alive with aspiration and
longing who never up to the present had come in the way of special
culture in any style.

She stood for some time gazing at the groups of wild flowers, then
remembering with horror that she was to receive visitors that night,
she looked round the room to see if she could do anything to make it
appear homelike and inviting.

It was a nice room, certainly. Priscilla had never before in her whole
life occupied such a luxurious apartment, and yet it had a cold,
dreary, uninhabited feel. She had an intuition that none of the other
students' rooms looked like hers. She rushed to light the fire, but
could not find the matches, which had been removed from their place on
the mantel-piece, and felt far too shy to ring the electric bell. It
was Priscilla's fashion to clasp her hands together when she felt a
sense of dismay, and she did so now as she looked around the pretty
room, which yet with all its luxuries looked to her cold and dreary.

The furniture was excellent of its kind. A Turkey carpet covered the
center of the floor, the boards round the edge were stained and
brightly polished. In one corner of the room was a little bed, made to
look like a sofa by day, with a Liberty cretonne covering. A curtain
of the same shut away the wardrobe and washing apparatus. Just under
one of the bay windows stood a writing-table, so contrived as to form
a writing-table, and a bookcase at the top, and a chest of drawers to
hold linen below. Besides this there was a small square table for tea
in the room and a couple of chairs. The whole effect was undoubtedly
bare.

Priscilla was hesitating whether to begin to unpack her trunk or not
when a light knock was heard at her door. She said "Come in," and two
girls burst rather noisily into the apartment.

"How do you do?" they said, favoring the fresh girl with a brief nod.
"You came to-day, didn't you? What are you going to study? Are you
clever?"

These queries issued rapidly from the lips of the tallest of the
girls. She had red hair, tousled and tossed about her head. Her face
was essentially commonplace; her small restless eyes now glanced at
Priscilla, now wandered over the room. She did not wait for a reply to
any of her queries, but turned rapidly to her companion.

"I told you so, Polly," she said. "I was quite sure that she was going
to be put into Miss Lee's room. You see, I'm right; this is Annabel
Lee's old room; it has never been occupied since."

"Hush!" said the other girl.

The two walked across the apartment and seated themselves on
Priscilla's bed.

There came a fresh knock at the door, and this time three students
entered. They barely nodded to Priscilla and then rushed across the
room with cries of rapture to greet the girls who were seated on the
bed.

"How do you do, Miss Atkins? How do you do, Miss Jones?"

Miss Jones and Miss Atkins exchanged kisses with Miss Phillips, Miss
Marsh and Miss Day. The babel of tongues rose high, and every one had
something to say with regard to the room which had been assigned to
Priscilla.

"Look," said Miss Day, "it was in that corner she had her
rocking-chair. Girls, do you remember Annabel's rocking-chair, and how
she used to sway herself backward and forward in it and half-shut her
lovely eyes?"

"Oh, and don't I just seem to see that little red tea-table of hers
near the fire," burst from Miss Marsh. "That Japanese table, with the
Japanese tea-set-- oh dear, oh dear! those cups of tea-- those cakes!
Well, the room was luxurious, was worth coming to see in Annabel's
time."

"It's more than it is now," laughed Miss Jones in a harsh voice. "How
bare the walls look without her pictures. It was in that recess the
large figure of Hope by Burne-Jones used to hang, and there, that
queer, wild, wonderful head looking out of clouds. You know she never
would tell us the artist's name. Yes, she had pretty things
everywhere! How the room is altered! I don't think I care for it a bit
now."

"Could any one who knew Annabel Lee care for the room without her?"
asked one of the girls. She had a common, not to say vulgar, face, but
it wore a wistful expression as she uttered these words.

All this time Priscilla was standing, feeling utterly shy and
miserable. From time to time other girls came in; they nodded to her
and then rushed upon their companions. The eager talk began afresh,
and always there were looks of regret and allusions, accompanied by
sighs, to the girl who had lived in the room last.

"Well," said one merry little girl, who was spoken to by the others as
Ada Hardy, "I have no doubt that by and by, when Miss----" She glanced
toward Priscilla.

"Peel," faltered Priscilla.

"When Miss Peel unpacks her trunk, she'll make the room look very
pretty, too."

"She can't," said Miss Day in a tragic voice; "she never could make
the room look at it used to-- not if she was to live till the age of
Methuselah. Of course you'll improve it, Miss Peel; you couldn't
possibly exist in it as it is now."

"I can tell you of a capital shop in Kingsdene, Miss Peel," said Miss
Marsh, "where you can buy tables and chairs, and pretty artistic
cloths, and little whatnots of all descriptions. I'd advise you to go
to Rigg's. He's in the High Street, No. 48."

"But Spilman has much the most recherche' articles, you know, Lucy,"
interposed Miss Day. "I'll walk over to Spilman's to-morrow with you,
if you like, Miss Peel."

Before Priscilla had time to reply there was again a knock at the
door, and this time Nancy Banister, looking flushed and pretty, came
in.

She took in the scene at a glance; numbers of girls making themselves
at home in Priscilla's room, some seated on her trunk, some on her
bureau, several curled up in comfortable attitudes on her bed and she
herself standing, meek, awkward, depressed, near one of the windows.

"How tired you look, Miss Peel!" said Nancy Banister.

Priscilla smiled gratefully at her.

"And your trunk is not unpacked yet?"

"Oh! there is time enough," faltered Priscilla.

"Are we in your way?" suddenly spoke Miss Marsh, springing to her
feet. "Good night. My name is Marsh, my room is thirty-eight."

She swung herself lazily and carelessly out of the room, followed, at
longer or shorter intervals, by the other girls, who all nodded to
Priscilla, told her their names and one or two the numbers of their
rooms. At last she was left alone with Nancy Banister.

"Poor thing! How tired and white you look!" said Nancy. "But now that
dreadful martyrdom is over, you shall have a real cozy time. Don't you
want a nice hot cup of cocoa? It will be ready in a minute or two. And
please may I help you to unpack?"

"Thank you," said Priscilla; her teeth were chattering. "If I might
have a fire?" she asked suddenly.

"Oh, you poor, shivering darling! Of course. Are there no matches
here? There were some on the mantel-piece before dinner. No, I declare
they have vanished. How careless of the maid. I'll run into Maggie's
room and fetch some."

Miss Banister was not a minute away. She returned with a box of
matches, and, stooping down, set a light to the wood, and a pleasant
fire was soon blazing and crackling merrily.

"Now, isn't that better?" said Nancy. "Please sit down on your bed and
give me the key of your trunk. I'll soon have the things out and put
all to rights for you. I'm a splendid unpacker."

But Priscilla had no desire to have her small and meager wardrobe
overhauled even by the kindest of St. Benet's girls.

"I will unpack presently myself, if you don't mind," she said. She
felt full of gratitude, but she could not help an almost surly tone
coming into her voice.

Nancy drew back, repulsed and distressed.

"Perhaps you would like me to go away?" she said. "I will go into
Maggie's room and let you know when cocoa is ready."

"Thank you," said Prissie. Miss Banister disappeared, and Priscilla
sat on by the fire, unconscious that she had given any pain or
annoyance, thinking with gratitude of Nancy, and with feelings of love
of Maggie Oliphant, and wondering what her little sisters were doing
without her at home to-night.

By and by there came a tap at her door. Priscilla ran to open it. Miss
Oliphant stood outside.

"Won't you come in?" said Priscilla, throwing the door wide open and
smiling with joy. It was already delightful to her to look at Maggie.
"Please come in," she added in a tone almost of entreaty.

Maggie Oliphant started and turned pale. "Into that room? No, no, I
can't," she said in a queer voice. She rushed back to her own, leaving
Priscilla standing in amazement by her open door.

There was a moment's silence. Then Miss Oliphant's voice, rich, soft
and lazy, was heard within the shelter of her own apartment.

"Please come in, Miss Peel; cocoa awaits you. Do not stand on
ceremony."
