when they had seen that there was plenty of hay in the loft to last the
horse through the Winter, they carried all their luggage down to the
seashore and got on to the boat.

The Cat's-meat-Man was there to see them off; and he brought a large
suet-pudding as a present for the Doctor because, he said he had been
told, you couldn't get suet-puddings in foreign parts.

As soon as they were on the ship, Gub-Gub, the pig, asked where the
beds were, for it was four o'clock in the afternoon and he wanted his
nap.  So Polynesia took him downstairs into the inside of the ship and
showed him the beds, set all on top of one another like book-shelves
against a wall.

"Why, that isn't a bed!" cried Gub-Gub. "That's a shelf!"

"Beds are always like that on ships," said the parrot.  "It isn't a
shelf.  Climb up into it and go to sleep.  That's what you call 'a
bunk.'"

"I don't think I'll go to bed yet," said Gub-Gub. "I'm too excited.  I
want to go upstairs again and see them start."

"Well, this is your first trip," said Polynesia. "You will get used to
the life after a while." And she went back up the stairs of the ship,
humming this song to herself,

  I've seen the Black Sea and the Red Sea;
       I rounded the Isle of Wight;
  I discovered the Yellow River,
       And the Orange too by night.
  Now Greenland drops behind again,
       And I sail the ocean Blue.
  I'm tired of all these colors, Jane,
       So I'm coming back to you.


They were just going to start on their journey, when the Doctor said he
would have to go back and ask the sailor the way to Africa.

But the swallow said she had been to that country many times and would
show them how to get there.

So the Doctor told Chee-Chee to pull up the anchor and the voyage began.



THE FIFTH CHAPTER

THE GREAT JOURNEY

NOW for six whole weeks they went sailing on and on, over the rolling
sea, following the swallow who flew before the ship to show them the
way.  At night she carried a tiny lantern, so they should not miss her
in the dark; and the people on the other ships that passed said that
the light must be a shooting star.

As they sailed further and further into the South, it got warmer and
warmer.  Polynesia, Chee-Chee and the crocodile enjoyed the hot sun no
end.  They ran about laughing and looking over the side of the ship to
see if they could see Africa yet.

But the pig and the dog and the owl, Too-Too, could do nothing in such
weather, but sat at the end of the ship in the shade of a big barrel,
with their tongues hanging out, drinking lemonade.

Dab-Dab, the duck, used to keep herself cool by jumping into the sea
and swimming behind the ship.  And every once in a while, when the top
of her head got too hot, she would dive under the ship and come up on
the other side. In this way, too, she used to catch herrings on
Tuesdays and Fridays--when everybody on the boat ate fish to make the
beef last longer.

When they got near to the Equator they saw some flying-fishes coming
towards them.  And the fishes asked the parrot if this was Doctor
Dolittle's ship.  When she told them it was, they said they were glad,
because the monkeys in Africa were getting worried that he would never
come.  Polynesia asked them how many miles they had yet to go; and the
flying-fishes said it was only fifty-five miles now to the coast of
Africa.

And another time a whole school of porpoises came dancing through the
waves; and they too asked Polynesia if this was the ship of the famous
doctor.  And when they heard that it was, they asked the parrot if the
Doctor wanted anything for his journey.

And Polynesia said, "Yes.  We have run short of onions."

"There is an island not far from here," said the porpoises, "where the
wild onions grow tall and strong.  Keep straight on--we will get some
and catch up to you."

So the porpoises dashed away through the sea.  And very soon the parrot
saw them again, coming up behind, dragging the onions through the waves
in big nets made of seaweed.

The next evening, as the sun was going down the Doctor said,

"Get me the telescope, Chee-Chee.  Our journey is nearly ended.  Very
soon we should be able to see the shores of Africa."

And about half an hour later, sure enough, they thought they could see
something in front that might be land.  But it began to get darker and
darker and they couldn't be sure. Then a great storm came up, with
thunder and lightning.  The wind howled; the rain came down in
torrents; and the waves got so high they splashed right over the boat.

Presently there was a big BANG!  The ship stopped and rolled over on
its side.

"What's happened?" asked the Doctor, coming up from downstairs.

"I'm not sure," said the parrot; "but I think we're ship-wrecked.  Tell
the duck to get out and see."

So Dab-Dab dived right down under the waves.  And when she came up she
said they had struck a rock; there was a big hole in the bottom of the
ship; the water was coming in; and they were sinking fast.

"We must have run into Africa," said the Doctor.  "Dear me, dear
me!--Well--we must all swim to land."

But Chee-Chee and Gub-Gub did not know how to swim.

"Get the rope!" said Polynesia.  "I told you it would come in handy.
Where's that duck? Come here, Dab-Dab.  Take this end of the rope, fly
to the shore and tie it on to a palm-tree; and we'll hold the other end
on the ship here.  Then those that can't swim must climb along the rope
till they reach the land.  That's what you call a 'life-line.'"

So they all got safely to the shore--some swimming, some flying; and
those that climbed along the rope brought the Doctor's trunk and
handbag with them.

But the ship was no good any more--with the big hole in the bottom; and
presently the rough sea beat it to pieces on the rocks and the timbers
floated away.

Then they all took shelter in a nice dry cave they found, high up in
the cliffs, till the storm was over.

When the sun came out next morning they went down to the sandy beach to
dry themselves.

"Dear old Africa!" sighed Polynesia.  "It's good to get back.  Just
think--it'll be a hundred and sixty-nine years to-morrow since I was
here!  And it hasn't changed a bit!  Same old palm-trees; same old red
earth; same old black ants!  There's no place like home!"

And the others noticed she had tears in her eyes--she was so pleased to
see her country once again.

Then the Doctor missed his high hat; for it had been blown into the sea
during the storm. So Dab-Dab went out to look for it.  And presently
she saw it, a long way off, floating on the water like a toy-boat.

When she flew down to get it, she found one of the white mice, very
frightened, sitting inside it.

"What are you doing here?" asked the duck. "You were told to stay
behind in Puddleby."

"I didn't want to be left behind," said the mouse.  "I wanted to see
what Africa was like--I have relatives there.  So I hid in the baggage
and was brought on to the ship with the hard-tack.  When the ship sank
I was terribly frightened--because I cannot swim far.  I swam as long
as I could, but I soon got all exhausted and thought I was going to
sink.  And then, just at that moment, the old man's hat came floating
by; and I got into it because I did not want to be drowned."

So the duck took up the hat with the mouse in it and brought it to the
Doctor on the shore. And they all gathered round to have a look.

"That's what you call a 'stowaway,'" said the parrot.

Presently, when they were looking for a place in the trunk where the
white mouse could travel comfortably, the monkey, Chee-Chee, suddenly
said,

"Sh!  I hear footsteps in the jungle!"

They all stopped talking and listened.  And soon a black man came down
out of the woods and asked them what they were doing there.

"My name is John Dolittle--M. D.," said the Doctor.  "I have been asked
to come to Africa to cure the monkeys who are sick."

"You must all come before the King," said the black man.

"What king?" asked the Doctor, who didn't want to waste any time.

"The King of the Jolliginki," the man answered.  "All these lands
belong to him; and all strangers must be brought before him.  Follow
me."

So they gathered up their baggage and went off, following the man
through the jungle.



THE SIXTH CHAPTER

POLYNESIA AND THE KING

WHEN they had gone a little way through the thick forest they came to a
wide, clear space; and they saw the King's palace which was made of mud.

This was where the King lived with his Queen, Ermintrude, and their
son, Prince Bumpo.  The Prince was away fishing for salmon in the
river.  But the King and Queen were sitting under an umbrella before
the palace door.  And Queen Ermintrude was asleep.

When the Doctor had come up to the palace the King asked him his
business; and the Doctor told him why he had come to Africa.

"You may not travel through my lands," said the King.  "Many years ago
a white man came to these shores; and I was very kind to him. But after
he had dug holes in the ground to get the gold, and killed all the
elephants to get their ivory tusks, he went away secretly in his
ship--without so much as saying 'Thank you.' Never again shall a white
man travel through the lands of Jolliginki."

Then the King turned to some of the black men who were standing near
and said, "Take away this medicine-man--with all his animals, and lock
them up in my strongest prison."

So six of the black men led the Doctor and all his pets away and shut
them up in a stone dungeon.  The dungeon had only one little window,
high up in the wall, with bars in it; and the door was strong and thick.

Then they all grew very sad; and Gub-Gub, the pig, began to cry.  But
Chee-Chee said he would spank him if he didn't stop that horrible
noise; and he kept quiet.

"Are we all here?" asked the Doctor, after he had got used to the dim
light.

"Yes, I think so," said the duck and started to count them.

"Where's Polynesia?" asked the crocodile. "She isn't here."

"Are you sure?" said the Doctor.  "Look again. Polynesia!  Polynesia!
Where are you?"

"I suppose she escaped," grumbled the crocodile. "Well, that's just
like her!--Sneaked off into the jungle as soon as her friends got into
trouble."

"I'm not that kind of a bird," said the parrot, climbing out of the
pocket in the tail of the Doctor's coat.  "You see, I'm small enough to
get through the bars of that window; and I was afraid they would put me
in a cage instead. So while the King was busy talking, I hid in the
Doctor's pocket--and here I am!  That's what you call a 'ruse,'" she
said, smoothing down her feathers with her beak.

"Good Gracious!" cried the Doctor. "You're lucky I didn't sit on you."

"Now listen," said Polynesia, "to-night, as soon as it gets dark, I am
going to creep through the bars of that window and fly over to the
palace.  And then--you'll see--I'll soon find a way to make the King
let us all out of prison."

"Oh, what can YOU do?" said Gub-Gub, turning up his nose and beginning
to cry again. "You're only a bird!"

"Quite true," said the parrot.  "But do not forget that although I am
only a bird, I CAN TALK LIKE A MAN--and I know these people."

So that night, when the moon was shining through the palm-trees and all
the King's men were asleep, the parrot slipped out through the bars of
the prison and flew across to the palace. The pantry window had been
broken by a tennis ball the week before; and Polynesia popped in
through the hole in the glass.

She heard Prince Bumpo snoring in his bed-room at the back of the
palace.  Then she tip-toed up the stairs till she came to the King's
bedroom.  She opened the door gently and peeped in.

The Queen was away at a dance that night at her cousin's; but the King
was in bed fast asleep.

Polynesia crept in, very softly, and got under the bed.

Then she coughed--just the way Doctor Dolittle used to cough.
Polynesia could mimic any one.

The King opened his eyes and said sleepily: "Is that you, Ermintrude?"
(He thought it was the Queen come back from the dance.)

Then the parrot coughed again--loud, like a man.  And the King sat up,
wide awake, and said, "Who's that?"

"I am Doctor Dolittle," said the parrot--just the way the Doctor would
have said it.

"What are you doing in my bedroom?" cried the King.  "How dare you get
out of prison! Where are you?--I don't see you."

But the parrot just laughed--a long, deep jolly laugh, like the
Doctor's.

"Stop laughing and come here at once, so I can see you," said the King.

"Foolish King!" answered Polynesia.  "Have you forgotten that you are
talking to John Dolittle, M.D.--the most wonderful man on earth? Of
course you cannot see me.  I have made myself invisible.  There is
nothing I cannot do. Now listen: I have come here to-night to warn you.
If you don't let me and my animals travel through your kingdom, I will
make you and all your people sick like the monkeys.  For I can make
people well: and I can make people ill--just by raising my little
finger.  Send your soldiers at once to open the dungeon door, or you
shall have mumps before the morning sun has risen on the hills of
Jolliginki."

Then the King began to tremble and was very much afraid.

"Doctor," he cried, "it shall be as you say. Do not raise your little
finger, please!"  And he jumped out of bed and ran to tell the soldiers
to open the prison door.

As soon as he was gone, Polynesia crept downstairs and left the palace
by the pantry window.

But the Queen, who was just letting herself in at the backdoor with a
latch-key, saw the parrot getting out through the broken glass.  And
when the King came back to bed she told him what she had seen.

Then the King understood that he had been tricked, and he was
dreadfully angry.  He hurried back to the prison at once

But he was too late.  The door stood open. The dungeon was empty.  The
Doctor and all his animals were gone.



THE SEVENTH CHAPTER

THE BRIDGE OF APES

QUEEN ERMINTRUDE had never in her life seen her husband so terrible as
he got that night.  He gnashed his teeth with rage.  He called
everybody a fool.  He threw his tooth-brush at the palace cat.  He
rushed round in his night-shirt and woke up all his army and sent them
into the jungle to catch the Doctor. Then he made all his servants go
too--his cooks and his gardeners and his barber and Prince Bumpo's
tutor--even the Queen, who was tired from dancing in a pair of tight
shoes, was packed off to help the soldiers in their search.

All this time the Doctor and his animals were running through the
forest towards the Land of the Monkeys as fast as they could go.

Gub-Gub, with his short legs, soon got tired; and the Doctor had to
carry him--which made it pretty hard when they had the trunk and the
hand-bag with them as well.

The King of the Jolliginki thought it would be easy for his army to
find them, because the Doctor was in a strange land and would not know
his way.  But he was wrong; because the monkey, Chee-Chee, knew all the
paths through the jungle--better even than the King's men did.  And he
led the Doctor and his pets to the very thickest part of the forest--a
place where no man had ever been before--and hid them all in a big
hollow tree between high rocks.
