in the evening. They were young men, Walter Stuart and James Cabell,
who had inherited great estates on the James and they shipped their
tobacco in their own vessels to London, and detecting in Robert a
somewhat kindred spirit they had received him with great friendliness.
Already they were old acquaintances in feeling, if not in time.

"Lennox, listen to this vain boaster!" exclaimed Cabell. "He has a
good horse, I admit, but his spirit has become unduly inflated about
it. You know, don't you, Lennox, that my colt, Cressy, has all
Virginia beaten in speed?"

"You know nothing of the kind, Lennox!" exclaimed Stuart, "but you do
know that my three year old Blenheim is the swiftest horse ever bred
in the colony. Now, don't you?"

"I can't give an affirmative to either of you," laughed Robert, "as
I've never seen your horses, but this I do say, I shall be very glad
to see the test and let the colts decide it for themselves."

"A just decision, O Judge!" said Stuart. "You shall have an honored
place as a guest when the match is run. What say you to tomorrow
morning at ten, James?"

"A fit hour, Walter. You ride Blenheim yourself, of course?"

"Truly, and you take the mount on Cressy?"

"None other shall ride him. I've black boys cunning with horses, but
since it's horse against horse it should also be master against
master."

"A match well made, and 'twill be a glorious contest. Come, Lennox,
you shall be a judge, and so shall be your friend Willet, and so shall
that splendid Indian, Tayoga."

Robert was delighted. He had thrown himself with his whole soul into
the Virginia life, and he was eager to see the race run. So were all
the others, and even the grave eyes of Tayoga sparkled when he heard
of it.

It was broad daylight when he went to bed, but he was up at noon, and
in the afternoon he went to the House of Burgesses to hear the
governor make a speech to the members on the war and its emergencies.
Dinwiddie, like Shirley, the governor of Massachusetts, appreciated
the extreme gravity of the crisis, and his address was solemn and
weighty.

He told them that the shadow in the north was black and menacing. The
French were an ambitious people, brave, tenacious and skillful. They
had won the friendship of the savages and now they dominated the
wilderness. They would strike heavy blows, but their movements were
enveloped in mystery, and none knew where or when the sword would
fall. The spirit animating them flowed from the haughty and powerful
court at Versailles that aimed at universal dominion. It became the
Virginians, as it became the people of all the colonies, to gather
their full force against them.

The members listened with serious faces, and Robert knew that the
governor was right. He had been to Quebec, and he had already met
Frenchmen in battle. None understood better than he their skill,
courage and perseverance, and the shadow in the north was very heavy
and menacing to him too.

But his depression quickly disappeared when he returned to the bright
sunshine, and met his young friends again. The Virginians were a
singular compound of gayety and gravity. Away from the House of
Burgesses the coming horse race displaced the war for a brief
space. It was the great topic in Williamsburg and the historic names,
Blenheim and Cressy, were in the mouths of everybody.

Robert soon discovered that the horses were well known, and each had
its numerous group of partisans. Their qualities were discussed by
the women and girls as well as the men and with intelligence. Robert,
filled with the spirit of it, laid a small wager on Blenheim, and
then, in order to show no partiality, laid another in another quarter,
but of exactly the same amount on Cressy.

The evening witnessed more arrivals in Williamsburg, drawn by the news
of the race, and young men galloped up and down the wide street in the
moonlight, testing their own horses, and riding improvised
matches. The rivalry was always friendly, the gentlemen's code that
there should be no ill feeling prevailed, and more than ever the
entire gathering seemed to Robert one vast family. Grosvenor was
intensely interested in the race, and also in the new sights he was
seeing.

"Still," he said, "if it were not for the colored people I could
imagine with ease that I was back at a country meeting at home. Do you
know anything, Lennox, about these horses, Blenheim and
Cressy--patriotic fellows their owners must be--and could you give a
chap advice about laying a small wager?"

"I know nothing about them except what Stuart and Cabell say."

"What do they say?"

"Stuart knows that Blenheim is the fastest horse in Virginia, and
Cabell knows that Cressy is, and so there the matter stands until the
race is run."

"I think I'll put a pound on Blenheim, nevertheless. Blenheim has a
much more modern sound than Cressy, and I'm all for modernity."

There was an excellent race track, the sport already being highly
developed in Virginia, and, the next day being beautiful, the seats
were filled very early in the morning. The governor with his wife and
daughters was present, and so were many other notables. Robert,
Tayoga and Grosvenor were in a group of nearly fifty young
Virginians. All about were women and girls in their best spring
dresses, many imported from London, and there were several men whom
Robert knew by their garb to be clergymen. Colored women, their heads
wrapped in great bandanna handkerchiefs, were selling fruits or
refreshing liquids.

The whole was exhilarating to the last degree, and all the youth and
imagination in Robert responded. Dangers befell him, but delights
offered themselves also, and he took both as they came. Several
preliminary races, improvised the day before, were run, and they
served to keep the crowd amused, while they waited for the great
match.

Robert and Tayoga then moved to advanced seats near the Governor,
where Willet was already placed, in order that they might fulfill
their honorable functions as judges, and the people began to stir with
a great breath of expectation. They were packed in a close group for a
long distance, and Robert's eye roved over them, noting that their
faces, ruddy or brown, were those of an open air race, like the
English. Almost unconsciously his mind traveled back to a night in
New York, when he had seen another crowd gather in a theater, and then
with a thrill he recalled the face that he had beheld there. He could
never account for it, although some connection of circumstances was
back of it, but he had a sudden instinctive belief that in this new
crowd he would see the same face once more.

It obsessed him like a superstition, and, for the moment, he forgot
the horses, the race, and all that had brought him there. His eye
roved on, and then, down, near the front of the seats he found him,
shaved cleanly and dressed neatly, like a gentleman, but like one in
poor circumstances. Robert saw at first only the side of his face, the
massive jaw, the strong, curving chin, and the fair hair crisping
slightly at the temples, but he would have known him anywhere and in
any company.

St. Luc sat very still, apparently absorbed in the great race which
would soon be run. In an ordinary time any stranger in Williamsburg
would have been noticed, but this was far from being an ordinary time.
The little town overflowed with British troops, and American visitors
known and unknown. Tayoga or Willet, if they saw him, might recognize
him, although Robert was not sure, but they, too, might keep silent.

For a little while, he wondered why St. Luc had come to the Virginia
capital, a journey so full of danger for him. Was he following him?
Was it because of some tie between them? Or was it because St. Luc was
now spying upon the Anglo-American preparations? He understood to the
full the romantic and adventurous nature of the Frenchman, and knew
that he would dare anything. Then he had a consuming desire for the
eyes of St. Luc to meet his, and he bent upon him a gaze so long, and
of such concentration, that at last the chevalier looked up.

St. Luc showed recognition, but in a moment or two he looked
away. Robert also turned his eyes in another direction, lest Tayoga or
Willet should follow his gaze, and when he glanced back again in a
minute or two St. Luc was gone. His roving eyes, traveling over the
crowd once more, could not find him, and he was glad. He believed now
that St. Luc had come to Williamsburg to discover the size and
preparations of the American force and its plan, and Robert felt that
he must have him seized if he could. He would be wanting in his
patriotism and duty if he failed to do so. He must sink all his liking
for St. Luc, and make every effort to secure his capture.

But there was a sudden murmur that grew into a deep hum of
expectation, punctuated now and then by shouts: "Blenheim!" "Cressy!"
"Cabell!"  "Stuart!" Horses and horsemen alike seemed to have their
partisans in about equal numbers. Ladies rose to their feet, and waved
bright fans, and men gave suggestions to those on whom they had laid
their money.

The race, for a space, crowded St. Luc wholly out of Robert's
mind. Stuart and Cabell, each dressed very neatly in jockey attire,
came out and mounted their horses, which the grooms had been leading
back and forth. The three year olds, excited by the noise and
multitude of faces, leaped and strained at their bits. Robert did not
know much of races, but it seemed to him that there was little to
choose between either horses or riders.

The circular track was a mile in length, and they would round it
twice, start and finish alike being made directly in front of the
judges' stand. The starter, a tall Virginian, finally brought the
horses to the line, neck and neck, and they were away. The whole crowd
rose to its feet and shouted approval as they flashed past. Blenheim
was a bay and Cressy was a sorrel, and when they began to turn the
curve in the distance Robert saw that bay and sorrel were still neck
and neck. Then he saw them far across the field, and neither yet had
the advantage.

Now, Robert understood why the Virginians loved the sport. The test of
a horse's strength and endurance and of a horseman's skill and
judgment was thrilling. Presently he found that he was shouting with
the shouting multitude, and sometimes he shouted Cressy and sometimes
he shouted Blenheim.

They came around the curve, the finish of the first mile being near,
and Robert saw the nose of the sorrel creeping past the nose of the
bay. A shout of triumph came from the followers of Cressy and Cabell,
but the partisans of Blenheim and Stuart replied that the race was not
yet half run. Cressy, though it was only in inches, was still
gaining. The sorrel nose crept forward farther and yet a little
farther. When they passed the judges' stand Cressy led by a head and a
neck.

Robert, having no favorite before, now felt a sudden sympathy for
Blenheim and Stuart, because they were behind, and he began to shout
for them continuously, until sorrel and bay were well around the curve
on the second mile, when the entire crowd became silent. Then a sharp
shout came from the believers in Blenheim and Stuart. The bay was
beginning to win back his loss. The Cressy men were silent and gloomy,
as Blenheim, drawing upon the stores of strength that had been
conserved, continued to gain, until now the bay nose was creeping past
the sorrel. Then the bay was a full length ahead and that sharp shout
of triumph burst now from the Blenheim people. Robert found his
feelings changing suddenly, and he was all for Cressy and Cabell.

The joy of the Blenheim people did not last long. The sorrel came
back to the side of the bay, the second mile was half done, and a
blanket would have covered the two. It was yet impossible to detect
any sign indicating the winner. The eyes of Tayoga, sitting beside
Robert, sparkled. The Indians from time unknown had loved ball games
and had played them with extraordinary zest and fire. As soon as they
came to know the horse of the white man they loved racing in the same
way. Their sporting instincts were as genuine as those of any country
gentleman.

"It is a great race," said Tayoga. "The horses run well and the men
ride well. Tododaho himself, sitting on his great and shining star,
does not know which will win."

"The kind of race I like to see," said Robert. "Stuart and Cabell
were justified in their faith in their horses. A magnificent pair,
Blenheim and Cressy!"

"It has been said, Dagaeoga, that there is always one horse that can
run faster than another, but it seems that neither of these two can
run faster than the other. Now, Blenheim thrusts his nose ahead, and
now Cressy regains the lead by a few inches. Now they are so nearly
even that they seem to be but one horse and one rider."

"A truly great race, Tayoga, and a prettily matched pair! Ah, the bay
leads! No, 'tis the sorrel! Now, they are even again, and the finish
is not far away!"

The great crowd, which had been shouting, each side for its favorite,
became silent as Blenheim and Cressy swept into the stretch. Stuart
and Cabell, leaning far over the straining necks, begged and prayed
their brave horses to go a little faster, and Blenheim and Cressy,
hearing the voices that they knew so well, responded but in the same
measure. The heads were even, as if they had been locked fast, and
there was still no sign to indicate the winner. Faster and faster
they came, their riders leaning yet farther forward, continually
urging them, and they thundered past the stand, matched so evenly that
not a hair's breadth seemed to separate the noses of the sorrel and
the bay.

"It's a dead heat!" exclaimed Robert, as the people, unable to
restrain their enthusiasm, swarmed over the track, and such was the
unanimous opinion of the judges. Yet it was the belief of all that a
finer race was never run in Virginia, and while the horses, covered
with blankets, were walked back and forth to cool, men followed them
and uttered their admiration.

Stuart and Cabell were eager to run the heat over, after the horses
had rested, but the judges would not allow it.

"No! No, lads!" said the Governor. "Be content!  You have two splendid
horses, the best in Virginia, and matched evenly. Moreover, you rode
them superbly. Now, let them rest with the ample share of honor that
belongs to each."

Stuart and Cabell, after the heat of rivalry was over, thought it a
good plan, shook hands with great warmth three or four times, each
swearing that the other was the best fellow in the world, and then
with a great group of friends they adjourned to the tavern where huge
beakers of punch were drunk.

"And mighty Todadaho himself, although he looks into the future, does
not yet know which is the better horse," said Tayoga. "It is
well. Some things should remain to be discovered, else the salt would
go out of life."

"That's sound philosophy," said Willet. "It's the mystery of things
that attracts us, and that race ended in the happiest manner
possible. Neither owner can be jealous or envious of the other;
instead they are feeling like brothers."

Then Robert's mind with a sudden rush, went back to St. Luc, and his
sense of duty tempted him to speak of his presence to Willet, but he
concluded to wait a little. He looked around for him again, but he did
not see him, and he thought it possible that he had now left the
dangerous neighborhood of Williamsburg.

As they walked back to their quarters at a tavern Willet informed them
that there was to be, two days later, a grand council of provincial
governors and high officers at Alexandria on the Potomac, where
General Braddock with his army already lay in camp, and he suggested
that they go too. As they were free lances with their authority
issuing from Governor Dinwiddie alone, they could do practically as
they pleased. Both Robert and Tayoga were all for it, but in the
afternoon they, as well as Willet, were invited to a race dinner to be
given at the tavern that evening by Stuart and Cabell in honor of the
great contest, in which neither had lost, but in which both had won.

"I suppose," said Willet, "that while here we might take our full
share of Virginia hospitality, which is equal to any on earth,
because, as I see it, before very long we will be in the woods where
so much to eat and drink will not be offered to us. March and battle
will train us down."

The dinner to thirty guests was spread in the great room of the tavern
and the black servants of Stuart and Cabell, well trained, dextrous
and clad in livery, helped those of the landlord to serve. The
abundance and quality of the food were amazing. Besides the resources
of civilization, air, wood and water were drawn upon for
game. Virginia, already renowned for hospitality, was resolved that
through her young sons, Stuart and Cabell, she should do her best that
night.

A dozen young British officers were present, and there was much
toasting and conviviality. The tie of kinship between the old country
and the new seemed stronger here than in New England, where the
England of Cromwell still prevailed, or in New York, where the Dutch
and other influences not English were so powerful. They had begun with
the best of feeling, and it was heightened by the warmth that food and
drink bring. They talked with animation of the great adventure, on
which they would soon start, as Stuart and Cabell and most of the
Virginians were going with Braddock. They drank a speedy capture of
Fort Duquesne, and confusion to the French and their red allies.

Robert, imitating the example of Tayoga, ate sparingly and scarcely
tasted the punch. About eleven o'clock, the night being warm,
unusually warm for that early period of spring, and nearly all the
guests having joined in the singing, more or less well, of patriotic
songs, Robert, thinking that his absence would not be noticed, walked
outside in search of coolness and air.

It was but a step from the lights and brilliancy of the tavern to the
darkness of Williamsburg's single avenue. There were no street
lanterns, and only a moon by which to see. He could discern the dim
bulk of William and Mary College and of the Governor's Palace, but
except near at hand the smaller buildings were lost in the dusk. A
breeze touched with salt, as if from the sea, was blowing, and its
touch was so grateful on Robert's face that he walked on, hat in hand,
while the wind played on his cheeks and forehead and lifted his
hair. Then a darker shadow appeared in the darkness, and St. Luc stood
before him.

"Why do you come here! Why do you incur such danger? Don't you know
that I must give warning of your presence?" exclaimed Robert
passionately.

The Frenchman laughed lightly. He seemed very well pleased with
himself, and then he hummed:

  "Hier sur le pont d'Avignon
   J'ai oui chanter la belle
        Lon, la."

"Your danger is great!" repeated Robert.

"Not as great as you think," said St. Luc. "You will not protect
me. You will warn the British officers that a French spy is here. I
read it in your face at the race today, and moreover, I know you
better than you know yourself. I know, too, more about you than you
know about yourself. Did I not warn you in New York to beware of
Mynheer Adrian Van Zoon?"

"You did, and I know that you meant me well."

