"I've warned Colonel de St. Luc that I mean to escape in due time. I
don't like to reject such noble hospitality as you're showing me, but
my duty to my country demands it."

Robert was now in a most excellent humor. His sanguine temperament
was asserting itself to the full. What he wished to see he saw. He was
slipping away from the French; and he was advancing with the English
and Americans to a great and brilliant victory. His face was flushed
and his eyes sparkled. De Galissonniere looked at him curiously, but
said nothing.

"I observe one very significant fact," continued Robert.

"What is that?"

"I see no Indians, who are usually so numerous about your camps. You
needn't tell me what has happened, but I've been among Indians a great
deal. I know their ways, and I'll tell you. They see that yours is a
lost cause, and they've deserted you. Now, isn't that so?"

The young Frenchman was silent, but it was the turn of his face to
flush.

"I didn't expect you to answer me in words," continued Robert,
triumphantly, "but I can see. The Indians never fight in a battle that
they consider lost before it's joined, and you know as well as I do,
Captain de Galissonniere, that if the Marquis de Montcalm awaits our
attack his army will be destroyed."

"I do not know it at all."

Then Robert felt ashamed because he had been led away by his
enthusiasm, and apologized for a speech that might have seemed
boastful to the young Frenchman, who had been so kind to him. But De
Galissonniere, with his accustomed courtesy, said it was nothing, and
when he left, presently, both were in the best of humors.

Robert, convinced that he had been right about the Indians, watched
for them as the morning went on, but he never saw a single warrior.
There could be no doubt now that they had gone, and while he could not
consider them chivalric they were at least wise.

The next familiar face that he beheld was one far from welcome to him.
It was that of a man who happened to pass near the enclosure and who
stopped suddenly when he caught sight of Robert. He was in civilian
dress, but he was none other than Achille Garay, that spy whose secret
message had been wrested from him in the forest by Robert and Tayoga.

The gaze that Garay bent upon Robert was baleful. His capture by the
three and the manner in which he had been compelled to disclose the
letter had been humiliating, and Robert did not doubt that the man
would seek revenge. He shivered a little, feeling that as a prisoner
he was in a measure helpless. Then his back stiffened.

"I'm glad to see, Garay, that you're where you belong--with the
French," he called out. "I hope you didn't suffer any more from hunger
in the woods when Willet, the Onondaga and I let you go."

The spy came closer, and his look was so full of venom that young
Lennox, despite himself, shuddered.

"Time makes all things even," he said. "I don't forget how you and
your friends held me in your power in the forest, but here you are a
prisoner. I have a good chance to make the score even."

Robert remembered also how this man had attempted his life in Albany,
for some reason that he could not yet fathom, and he felt that he
was now, and, in very truth, a most dangerous enemy. Nevertheless, he
replied, quietly:

"That was an act of war. You were carrying a message for the enemy.
We were wholly within our rights when we forced you to disclose the
paper."

"It makes no difference," said Garay. "I owe you and your comrades a
debt and I shall pay it."

Robert turned his back on him and walked to the other side of the
enclosure. When he turned around, five minutes later, Garay was gone.
But Robert felt uncomfortable. Here was a man who did not have the
gallantry and chivalry that marked so many of the French. If he could
he would strike some great blow.

He strove to dismiss Garay from his mind, and, in his interest in what
was going on about him, he finally succeeded. He saw Frenchmen and
Canadians leaving the camp and others returning. His knowledge of war
made him believe that those coming had been messengers sent forth to
watch the Anglo-American army, and those going were dispatched on the
same service. Their alarm must be great, he reflected pleasantly,
and none could bring to Montcalm any reassuring news. Once he saw
Montcalm, and once St. Luc, but neither spoke to him.

He and his comrades, the other prisoners, slept that night in the
open, the weather being warm. A blanket was allotted to every one by
their captors, and Robert, long used to unlimited fresh air, preferred
the outside to the inside of a tent. Nothing disturbed his slumbers,
but he expected that the French retreat would begin the next day. On
the contrary, Montcalm stayed in his camp, nor was there any sign of
withdrawal on the second and third days, or on others that came. He
inferred then that the advance of Abercrombie had been delayed,
and the French were merely hanging on until their retreat became
compulsory.

He had been in the camp about a week, and as he saw no more of Garay
he concluded that the man had been sent away on some errand. It
was highly probable that he was now in the south spying upon the
Anglo-American army. It was for just such duties that he was fitted.
Then he began to think of him less and less.

His old impatience and keen disappointment because he was a prisoner
when such great days were coming, returned with doubled vigor. He
chafed greatly and looked around again for an opportunity to escape,
but did not see the remotest possibility of it. After all, he must
reconcile himself. His situation could be far worse. He was well
treated, and some of the French leaders, while official enemies, were
personal friends.

His mind also dwelled upon the singular fact that the French army did
not retreat. He tried to glean something from De Galissonniere, who
talked with him several times, but the young captain would not depart
from generalities. He invariably shut up, tight, when they approached
any detail of the present military situation.

A dark night came with much wind and threat of rain. Robert thought
that he and his fellow captives would have to ask the shelter of
tents, but the rain passed farther to the west, though the heavy
darkness remained. He was glad, as the weather was now oppressively
warm, and he greatly preferred to sleep on a blanket in the open air.

The night was somewhat advanced when he lay down. The other prisoners
were asleep already. He had not found any kindred minds among them,
and, as they were apathetic, he had not talked with them much. Now,
he did not miss them at all as he lay on his blanket and watched the
wavering lights of the camp. It was still quite dark, with a moaning
wind, but his experience of weather told him that the chance of
rain was gone. Far in the west, lightning flickered and low thunder
grumbled there now and then, but in the camp everything was dry. Owing
to the warmth, the fires used for cooking had been permitted to burn
out, and the whole army seemed at peace.

Robert himself shared this feeling of rest. The storm, passing so far
away, soothed and lulled him. It was pleasant to lie there, unharmed,
and witness its course at a far point. He dozed a while, fell asleep,
and awoke again in half an hour. Nothing had changed. There was still
an occasional flicker of lightning and mutter of thunder and the
darkness remained heavy. He could dimly see the forms of his comrades
lying on their blankets. Not one of them stirred. They slept heavily
and he rather envied them. They had little imagination, and, when one
was in bad case, he was lucky to be without it.

The figure lying nearest him he took to be that of the hunter, a
taciturn man who talked least of them all, and again Robert felt envy
because he could lose all care so thoroughly and so easily in sleep.
The man was as still and unconcerned as one of the mountain peaks that
looked down upon them. He would imitate him, and although sleep might
be unwilling, he would conquer it. A resolute mind could triumph over
anything.

He shut his eyes and his will was so strong that he held them shut
a full ten minutes, although sleep did not come. When he opened them
again he thought that the hunter had moved a little. After all, the
man was mortal, and had human emotions. He was not an absolute log.

"Tilden!" he called--Tilden was the hunter's name.

But Tilden did not stir, nor did he respond in any way when he called
a second time. He had been mistaken. He had given the man too much
credit. He was really a log, a dull, apathetic fellow to whom the
extraordinary conditions around them made no appeal. He would not
speak to him again as long as they were prisoners together, and,
closing his eyes anew, he resolutely wooed slumber once more.

Robert's hearing was not so wonderfully keen as Tayoga's, but it was
very keen, nevertheless, and as he lay, eyes shut, something impinged
upon the drums of his ears. It was faint, but it did not seem to be a
part of the usual sounds of the night. His ear at once registered an
alarm on his brain.

His eyes opened. The man whom he had taken to be the hunter was
bending over him, and, dark though it was, he distinctly saw the gleam
of a knife in his hand. His first feeling, passing in a flash, was one
of vague wonderment that anybody should menace him in such a manner,
and then he saw the lowering face of Garay. He had been a fool to
forget him. With a convulsive and powerful effort he threw his body to
one side, and, when the knife fell, the blade missed him by an inch.

Then Robert sprang to his feet, but Garay, uttering an angry
exclamation at his missed stroke, did not attempt another. Instead,
agile as a cat, he ran lightly away, and disappeared in the darkness
of the camp. Robert sat down, somewhat dazed. It had all been an
affair of a minute, and it was hard for him to persuade himself that
it was real. His comrades still slept soundly, and the camp seemed as
peaceful as ever.

For a time Robert could not decide what to do. He knew that he had
been threatened by a formidable danger, and that instinct, more than
anything else, had saved him. He was almost prepared to believe that
Tayoga's Tododaho, looking down from his remote star, had intervened
in his behalf.

The question solved itself. Although he knew that Garay had made
a foul attempt upon his life he had no proof. His story would seem
highly improbable. Moreover, he was a prisoner, while Garay was one
of the French. Nobody would believe his tale. He must keep quiet and
watch. He was glad to see that the night was now lightening. Garay
would not come back then, at least. But Robert was sure that he would
repeat the attack some time or other. Revenge was a powerful motive,
and he undoubtedly had another as strong. He must guard against Garay
with all his five senses.

The night continued to brighten. The lightning ceased to flicker,
the storm had blown itself out in the distance, and a fine moon and a
myriad of stars came out. Things in the camp became clearly visible,
and, feeling that Garay would attempt nothing more at such a time,
Robert closed his eyes again. He soon slept, and did not awaken until
all the other prisoners were up.

"Mr. Tilden," he said to the hunter, "I offer you my sincere
apologies."

"Apologies," said the hunter in surprise. "What for?"

"Because I mistook a much worse man for you. You didn't know anything
about it at the time, but I did it, and I'm sorry I wronged you so
much, even in thought."

The hunter touched his forehead. Clearly the misfortunes of the young
prisoner were weighing too heavily upon him. One must endure captivity
better than that.

"Don't take it so hard, Mr. Lennox," he said. "It's not like being in
the hands of the Indians, and there is always the chance of escape."

De Galissonniere visited him again that morning, and Robert, true to
his resolution, said nothing of Garay. The captain did not speak of
the Anglo-American army, but Robert judged from his manner that he was
highly expectant. Surely, Abercrombie was about to advance, and
the retreat of Montcalm could not be more than a day away. De
Galissonniere stayed only ten minutes, and then Robert was left to his
own devices. He tried to talk to Tilden, but the hunter lapsed again
into an apathetic state, and, having little success, he fell back on
his own thoughts and what his eyes might behold.

In the afternoon he saw Montcalm at some distance, talking with St.
Luc and Bourlamaque, and then he saw a man whose appearance betokened
haste and anxiety approach them. Robert did not know it then, but it
was the able and daring French partisan, Langy, and he came out of the
forest with vital news.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Langy saluted Montcalm with the great respect that his
successes had won from all the French. When the Marquis turned his
keen eye upon him he knew at once that his message, whatever it might
be, was of supreme importance.

"What is it, Monsieur Langy?"

"A report on the movements of the enemy."

"Come to my tent and tell me of it fully, and do you, St. Luc and
Bourlamaque, come with me also. You should hear everything."

They went into the tent and all sat down. St. Luc's eyes never left
the partisan, Langy. He saw that the man was full of his news, eager
to tell it, and was impressed with its importance. He knew Langy even
better than Montcalm did. Few were more skillful in the forest, and he
had a true sense of proportion that did not desert him under stress.
His eyes traveled over the partisan's attire, and there his own great
skill as a ranger told him much. His garments were disarranged. Burrs
and one or two little twigs were clinging to them. Obviously he had
come far and in haste. The thoughts of St. Luc, and, in truth, the
thoughts of all of them, went to the Anglo-American army.

"Speak, Monsieur Langy," said Montcalm. "I can see that you have come
swiftly, and you would not come so without due cause."

"I wish to report to you, sir," said Langy, "that the entire army of
the enemy is now embarked on the Lake of the Holy Sacrament, and is
advancing against us."

Montcalm's eyes sparkled. His warlike soul leaped up at the thought of
speedy battle that was being offered. A flame was lighted also in
St. Luc's blood, and Bourlamaque was no less eager. It was no lack of
valor and enterprise that caused the French to lose their colonies in
North America.

"You know this positively?" asked the commander-in-chief.

"I have seen it with my own eyes."

"Tell it as you saw it."

"I lay in the woods above the lake with my men, and I saw the British
and Americans go into their boats, a vast flock of them. They are all
afloat on the lake at this moment, and are coming against us."

"Could you make a fair estimate of their numbers?"

"I obtained the figures with much exactitude from one or two
stragglers that we captured on the land. My eyes confirm these
figures. There are about seven thousand of the English regulars, and
about nine thousand of the American colonials."

"So many as that! Five to one!"

"You tell us they are all in boats," said St. Luc. "How many of these
