stomach. Jerry Muskrat had felt the spring fever in his bones and had
gone up and down the Laughing Brook, poking into all kinds of places
just for the fun of seeing new things. Little Joe Otter had been more
full of fun than ever, if that were possible. Mr. and Mrs. Redwing had
come back to the bulrushes from their winter home way down in the warm
Southland. Everybody was happy, just as happy as could be.

One sunny morning Jerry Muskrat sat on the Big Rock in the middle of the
Smiling Pool, just thinking of how happy everybody was and laughing at
Little Joe Otter, who was cutting up all sorts of capers in the water.
Suddenly Jerry's sharp eyes saw something that made him wrinkle his
forehead in a puzzled frown and look and look at the opposite bank.
Finally he called to Little Joe Otter.

"Hi, Little Joe! Come over here!" shouted Jerry.

"What for?" asked Little Joe, turning a somersault in the water.

"I want you to see if there is anything wrong with my eyes," replied
Jerry.

Little Joe Otter stopped swimming and stared up at Jerry Muskrat. "They
look all right to me," said he, as he started to climb up on the Big
Rock.

"Of course they look all right," replied Jerry, "but what I want to know
is if they see all right. Look over at that bank."

Little Joe Otter looked over at the bank. He stared and stared, but he
didn't see anything unusual. It looked just as it always did. He told
Jerry Muskrat so.

"Then it must be my eyes," sighed Jerry. "It certainly must be my eyes.
It looks to me as if the water does not come as high up on the bank as
it did yesterday."

Little Joe Otter looked again and his eyes opened wide. "You are right,
Jerry Muskrat!" he cried. "There's nothing the matter with your eyes.
The water is as low as it ever gets, even in the very middle of summer.
What can it mean?"

"I don't know," replied Jerry Muskrat. "It is queer! It certainly is
very queer! Let's go ask Grandfather Frog. You know he is very old and
very wise, so perhaps he can tell us what it means."

Splash! Jerry Muskrat and Little Joe Otter dived into the Smiling Pool
and started a race to see who could reach Grandfather Frog first. He
was sitting among the bulrushes on the edge of the Smiling Pool, for the
lily-pads were not yet big enough for him to sit on comfortably.

"Oh, Grandfather Frog, what's the matter with the Smiling Pool?" they
shouted, as they came up quite out of breath.

"Chugarum! There's nothing the matter with the Smiling Pool; it's the
best place in all the world," replied Grandfather Frog gruffly.

"But there is something the matter," insisted Jerry Muskrat, and then he
told what he had discovered.

"I don't believe it," said Grandfather Frog. "I never heard of such a
thing in the springtime."



CHAPTER VIII: Grandfather Frog Watches His Toes

Grandfather Frog sat among the bulrushes on the edge of the Smiling
Pool. Over his head Mr. Redwing was singing as if his heart would burst
with the very joy of springtime.

 "Tra-la-la-lee, see me!  See me!
  Happy am I as I can be!
  Happy am I the whole day long
  And so I sing my gladsome song."

Of course Mr. Redwing was happy. Why shouldn't he be? Here it was the
beautiful springtime, the gladdest time of all the year, the time when
happiness creeps into everybody's heart. Grandfather Frog listened. He
nodded his head. "Chugarum! I'm happy, too," said Grandfather Frog. But
even as he said it, a little worried look crept into his big goggly eyes
and then down to the corners of his big mouth, which had been stretched
in a smile. Little by little the smile grew smaller and smaller, until
there wasn't any smile. No, Sir, there wasn't any smile. Instead of
looking happy, as he said he felt, Grandfather Frog actually looked
unhappy.

The fact is he couldn't forget what Jerry Muskrat and Little Joe Otter
had told him--that there was something the matter with the Smiling
Pool. He didn't believe it, not a word of it. At least he tried to make
himself think that he didn't believe it. They had said that the water
in the Smiling Pool was growing lower and lower, just as it did in the
middle of summer, in the very hottest weather. Now Grandfather Frog is
very old and very wise, and he had never heard of such a thing happening
in the springtime. So he wouldn't believe it now. And yet--and yet
Grandfather Frog had an uncomfortable feeling that something was wrong.
Ha! he knew now what it was! He had been sitting up to his middle in
water, and now he was sitting with only his toes in the water, and he
couldn't remember having changed his position!

"Of course, I moved without thinking what I was doing," muttered
Grandfather Frog, but still the worried look didn't leave his face. You
see he just couldn't make himself believe what he wanted to believe, try
as he would.

"Chugarum! I know what I'll do; I'll watch my toes!" exclaimed
Grandfather Frog.

So Grandfather Frog waded out into the water until it covered his feet,
and then he sat down and began to watch his toes. Mr. Redwing looked
down and saw him, and Grandfather Frog looked so funny gazing at his own
toes that Mr. Redwing stopped singing long enough to ask: "What are you
doing, Grandfather Frog?"

"Watching my toes," replied Grandfather Frog gruffly.

"Watching your toes! Ho, ho, ho! Watching your toes! Who ever heard of
such a thing? Are you afraid that they will run away, Grandfather Frog?"
shouted Mr. Redwing.

Grandfather Frog didn't answer. He kept right on watching his toes.
Mr. Redwing flew away to tell everybody he met how Grandfather Frog had
become foolish and was watching his toes. The sun shone down warm and
bright, and pretty soon Grandfather Frog's big goggly eyes began to
blink. Then his head began to nod, and then--why, then Grandfather Frog
fell fast asleep.

By and by Grandfather Frog awoke with a start. He looked down at his
toes. They were not in the water at all! Indeed, the water was a good
long jump away.

"Chugarum! There is something wrong with the Smiling Pool!" cried
Grandfather Frog, as he made a long jump into the water and started to
swim out to the Big Rock.



CHAPTER IX: The Laughing Brook Stops Laughing

There was something wrong. Grandfather Frog knew it the very minute he
got up that morning. At first he couldn't think what it was. He sat
with just his head out of water and blinked his great goggly eyes, as
he tried to think what it was that was wrong. Suddenly Grandfather Frog
realized how still it was. It was a different kind of stillness from
anything he could ever remember. He missed something, and he couldn't
think what it was. It wasn't the song of Mr. Redwing. There were
many times when he didn't hear that. It was--Grand-father Frog gave a
startled jump out on to the shore. "Chugarum! It's the Laughing Brook!
The Laughing Brook has stopped laughing!" cried Grandfather Frog.

Could it be? Who ever heard of such a thing, excepting when Jack Frost
bound the Laughing Brook with hard black ice? Why, in the spring and in
the summer and in the fall the Laughing Brook had laughed--such a merry,
happy laugh--ever since Grandfather Frog could remember, and you know he
can remember way back in the long ago, for he is very old and very wise.
Never once in all that time had the Laughing Brook failed to laugh. It
couldn't be true now! Grandfather Frog put a hand behind one ear and
listened and listened, but not a sound could he hear.

"Chugarum! It must be me," said Grandfather Frog. "It must be that I am
growing old and deaf. I'll go over and ask Jerry Muskrat."

So Grandfather Frog dove into the water and swam out to the middle of
the Smiling Pool, on his way to Jerry Muskrat's house. It was then that
he first fully realized the truth of what Jerry Muskrat and Little Joe
Otter had told him the day before--that there was something very, very
wrong with the Smiling Pool. He stopped swimming to look around, and it
seemed as if his great goggly eyes would pop right out of his head. Yes,
Sir, it seemed as if those great goggly eyes certainly would pop right
out of Grandfather Frog's head. The Smiling Pool had grown so small that
there wasn't enough of it left to smile!

"Where are you going, Grandfather Frog?" asked a voice over his head.

Grandfather Frog looked up. Looking down on him from over the edge of
the Big Rock was Jerry Muskrat. The edge of the Big Rock was twice as
high above the water as Grandfather Frog had ever seen it before.

"I--I--was going to swim over to your house to see you," replied
Grandfather Frog.

"It's of no use," replied Jerry, "because I'm not there. Besides, you
couldn't swim there, anyway."

"Why not?" demanded Grandfather Frog in great surprise.

"Because it isn't in the water any longer; it's way up on dry land,"
said Jerry Muskrat in the most mournful voice.

"What's that you say?" cried Grandfather Frog, as if he couldn't believe
his own ears.

"It's just as true as that I'm sitting here," replied Jerry sadly.

"Listen, Jerry Muskrat, and tell me truly; is the Laughing Brook
laughing?" cried Grandfather Frog sharply.

"No," replied Jerry, "the Laughing Brook has stopped laughing, and the
Smiling Pool has stopped smiling, and I think the world is upside down."



CHAPTER X: Why The World Seemed Upside Down To Jerry Muskrat

Jerry Muskrat sat on the Big Rock in the Smiling Pool, which smiled
no longer, and held his head in both hands, for his head ached. He had
thought and thought and thought, until it seemed to him that his head
would split; and with all his thinking, he didn't understand things any
more now than he had in the beginning. You see, Jerry Muskrat's little
world was topsy-turvy. Yes, Sir, Jerry's world was upside down! Anyway,
it seemed so to him, and he couldn't understand it at all.

