Mester Colin, and I says, 'How did tha' make tha' muscles stick out
that way, Bob? Did tha' do anythin' extra to make thysel' so strong?'
An' he says 'Well, yes, lad, I did.  A strong man in a show that came
to Thwaite once showed me how to exercise my arms an' legs an' every
muscle in my body.  An' I says, 'Could a delicate chap make himself
stronger with 'em, Bob?' an' he laughed an' says, 'Art tha' th'
delicate chap?' an' I says, 'No, but I knows a young gentleman that's
gettin' well of a long illness an' I wish I knowed some o' them tricks
to tell him about.' I didn't say no names an' he didn't ask none.  He's
friendly same as I said an' he stood up an' showed me good-natured
like, an' I imitated what he did till I knowed it by heart."

Colin had been listening excitedly.

"Can you show me?" he cried.  "Will you?"

"Aye, to be sure," Dickon answered, getting up.  "But he says tha' mun
do 'em gentle at first an' be careful not to tire thysel'. Rest in
between times an' take deep breaths an' don't overdo."

"I'll be careful," said Colin.  "Show me! Show me! Dickon, you are the
most Magic boy in the world!"

Dickon stood up on the grass and slowly went through a carefully
practical but simple series of muscle exercises.  Colin watched them
with widening eyes.  He could do a few while he was sitting down.
Presently he did a few gently while he stood upon his already steadied
feet.  Mary began to do them also.  Soot, who was watching the
performance, became much disturbed and left his branch and hopped about
restlessly because he could not do them too.

From that time the exercises were part of the day's duties as much as
the Magic was.  It became possible for both Colin and Mary to do more
of them each time they tried, and such appetites were the results that
but for the basket Dickon put down behind the bush each morning when he
arrived they would have been lost.  But the little oven in the hollow
and Mrs. Sowerby's bounties were so satisfying that Mrs. Medlock and
the nurse and Dr. Craven became mystified again.  You can trifle with
your breakfast and seem to disdain your dinner if you are full to the
brim with roasted eggs and potatoes and richly frothed new milk and
oatcakes and buns and heather honey and clotted cream.

"They are eating next to nothing," said the nurse.  "They'll die of
starvation if they can't be persuaded to take some nourishment.  And
yet see how they look."

"Look!" exclaimed Mrs. Medlock indignantly.  "Eh! I'm moithered to
death with them.  They're a pair of young Satans.  Bursting their
jackets one day and the next turning up their noses at the best meals
Cook can tempt them with.  Not a mouthful of that lovely young fowl and
bread sauce did they set a fork into yesterday--and the poor woman fair
invented a pudding for them--and back it's sent.  She almost cried.
She's afraid she'll be blamed if they starve themselves into their
graves."

Dr. Craven came and looked at Colin long and carefully, He wore an
extremely worried expression when the nurse talked with him and showed
him the almost untouched tray of breakfast she had saved for him to
look at--but it was even more worried when he sat down by Colin's sofa
and examined him.  He had been called to London on business and had not
seen the boy for nearly two weeks.  When young things begin to gain
health they gain it rapidly.  The waxen tinge had left, Colins skin and
a warm rose showed through it; his beautiful eyes were clear and the
hollows under them and in his cheeks and temples had filled out.  His
once dark, heavy locks had begun to look as if they sprang healthily
from his forehead and were soft and warm with life.  His lips were
fuller and of a normal color.  In fact as an imitation of a boy who was
a confirmed invalid he was a disgraceful sight.  Dr. Craven held his
chin in his hand and thought him over.

"I am sorry to hear that you do not eat anything," he said.  "That will
not do.  You will lose all you have gained--and you have gained
amazingly.  You ate so well a short time ago."

"I told you it was an unnatural appetite," answered Colin.

Mary was sitting on her stool nearby and she suddenly made a very queer
sound which she tried so violently to repress that she ended by almost
choking.

"What is the matter?" said Dr. Craven, turning to look at her.

Mary became quite severe in her manner.

"It was something between a sneeze and a cough," she replied with
reproachful dignity, "and it got into my throat."

"But," she said afterward to Colin, "I couldn't stop myself.  It just
burst out because all at once I couldn't help remembering that last big
potato you ate and the way your mouth stretched when you bit through
that thick lovely crust with jam and clotted cream on it."

"Is there any way in which those children can get food secretly?" Dr.
Craven inquired of Mrs. Medlock.

"There's no way unless they dig it out of the earth or pick it off the
trees," Mrs. Medlock answered.  "They stay out in the grounds all day
and see no one but each other.  And if they want anything different to
eat from what's sent up to them they need only ask for it."

"Well," said Dr. Craven, "so long as going without food agrees with
them we need not disturb ourselves.  The boy is a new creature."

"So is the girl," said Mrs. Medlock.  "She's begun to be downright
pretty since she's filled out and lost her ugly little sour look.  Her
hair's grown thick and healthy looking and she's got a bright color.
The glummest, ill-natured little thing she used to be and now her and
Master Colin laugh together like a pair of crazy young ones.  Perhaps
they're growing fat on that."

"Perhaps they are," said Dr. Craven.  "Let them laugh."




CHAPTER XXV

THE CURTAIN


And the secret garden bloomed and bloomed and every morning revealed
new miracles.  In the robin's nest there were Eggs and the robin's mate
sat upon them keeping them warm with her feathery little breast and
careful wings.  At first she was very nervous and the robin himself was
indignantly watchful.  Even Dickon did not go near the close-grown
corner in those days, but waited until by the quiet working of some
mysterious spell he seemed to have conveyed to the soul of the little
pair that in the garden there was nothing which was not quite like
themselves--nothing which did not understand the wonderfulness of what
was happening to them--the immense, tender, terrible, heart-breaking
beauty and solemnity of Eggs.  If there had been one person in that
garden who had not known through all his or her innermost being that if
an Egg were taken away or hurt the whole world would whirl round and
crash through space and come to an end--if there had been even one who
did not feel it and act accordingly there could have been no happiness
even in that golden springtime air.  But they all knew it and felt it
and the robin and his mate knew they knew it.

At first the robin watched Mary and Colin with sharp anxiety.  For some
mysterious reason he knew he need not watch Dickon.  The first moment
he set his dew-bright black eye on Dickon he knew he was not a stranger
but a sort of robin without beak or feathers.  He could speak robin
(which is a quite distinct language not to be mistaken for any other).
To speak robin to a robin is like speaking French to a Frenchman.
Dickon always spoke it to the robin himself, so the queer gibberish he
used when he spoke to humans did not matter in the least.  The robin
thought he spoke this gibberish to them because they were not
intelligent enough to understand feathered speech.  His movements also
were robin.  They never startled one by being sudden enough to seem
dangerous or threatening.  Any robin could understand Dickon, so his
presence was not even disturbing.

But at the outset it seemed necessary to be on guard against the other
two.  In the first place the boy creature did not come into the garden
on his legs.  He was pushed in on a thing with wheels and the skins of
wild animals were thrown over him.  That in itself was doubtful.  Then
when he began to stand up and move about he did it in a queer
unaccustomed way and the others seemed to have to help him.  The robin
used to secrete himself in a bush and watch this anxiously, his head
tilted first on one side and then on the other.  He thought that the
slow movements might mean that he was preparing to pounce, as cats do.
When cats are preparing to pounce they creep over the ground very
slowly.  The robin talked this over with his mate a great deal for a
few days but after that he decided not to speak of the subject because
her terror was so great that he was afraid it might be injurious to the
Eggs.

When the boy began to walk by himself and even to move more quickly it
was an immense relief.  But for a long time--or it seemed a long time
to the robin--he was a source of some anxiety.  He did not act as the
other humans did.  He seemed very fond of walking but he had a way of
sitting or lying down for a while and then getting up in a
disconcerting manner to begin again.

One day the robin remembered that when he himself had been made to
learn to fly by his parents he had done much the same sort of thing.
He had taken short flights of a few yards and then had been obliged to
rest.  So it occurred to him that this boy was learning to fly--or
rather to walk.  He mentioned this to his mate and when he told her
that the Eggs would probably conduct themselves in the same way after
they were fledged she was quite comforted and even became eagerly
interested and derived great pleasure from watching the boy over the
edge of her nest--though she always thought that the Eggs would be much
cleverer and learn more quickly.  But then she said indulgently that
humans were always more clumsy and slow than Eggs and most of them
never seemed really to learn to fly at all.  You never met them in the
air or on tree-tops.

After a while the boy began to move about as the others did, but all
three of the children at times did unusual things.  They would stand
under the trees and move their arms and legs and heads about in a way
which was neither walking nor running nor sitting down.  They went
through these movements at intervals every day and the robin was never
able to explain to his mate what they were doing or tying to do.  He
could only say that he was sure that the Eggs would never flap about in
such a manner; but as the boy who could speak robin so fluently was
doing the thing with them, birds could be quite sure that the actions
were not of a dangerous nature.  Of course neither the robin nor his
mate had ever heard of the champion wrestler, Bob Haworth, and his
exercises for making the muscles stand out like lumps.  Robins are not
like human beings; their muscles are always exercised from the first
and so they develop themselves in a natural manner.  If you have to fly
about to find every meal you eat, your muscles do not become atrophied
(atrophied means wasted away through want of use).

When the boy was walking and running about and digging and weeding like
the others, the nest in the corner was brooded over by a great peace
and content.  Fears for the Eggs became things of the past.  Knowing
that your Eggs were as safe as if they were locked in a bank vault and
the fact that you could watch so many curious things going on made
setting a most entertaining occupation.  On wet days the Eggs' mother
sometimes felt even a little dull because the children did not come
into the garden.

But even on wet days it could not be said that Mary and Colin were
dull.  One morning when the rain streamed down unceasingly and Colin
was beginning to feel a little restive, as he was obliged to remain on
his sofa because it was not safe to get up and walk about, Mary had an
inspiration.

"Now that I am a real boy," Colin had said, "my legs and arms and all
my body are so full of Magic that I can't keep them still.  They want
to be doing things all the time.  Do you know that when I waken in the
morning, Mary, when it's quite early and the birds are just shouting
outside and everything seems just shouting for joy--even the trees and
things we can't really hear--I feel as if I must jump out of bed and
shout myself.  If I did it, just think what would happen!"

Mary giggled inordinately.

"The nurse would come running and Mrs. Medlock would come running and
they would be sure you had gone crazy and they'd send for the doctor,"
she said.

Colin giggled himself.  He could see how they would all look--how
horrified by his outbreak and how amazed to see him standing upright.

"I wish my father would come home," he said.  "I want to tell him
myself.  I'm always thinking about it--but we couldn't go on like this
much longer.  I can't stand lying still and pretending, and besides I
look too different.  I wish it wasn't raining today."

It was then Mistress Mary had her inspiration.

"Colin," she began mysteriously, "do you know how many rooms there are
in this house?"

"About a thousand, I suppose," he answered.

"There's about a hundred no one ever goes into," said Mary.  "And one
rainy day I went and looked into ever so many of them.  No one ever
knew, though Mrs. Medlock nearly found me out.  I lost my way when I
was coming back and I stopped at the end of your corridor.  That was
the second time I heard you crying."

Colin started up on his sofa.

"A hundred rooms no one goes into," he said.  "It sounds almost like a
secret garden.  Suppose we go and look at them.  Wheel me in my chair
and nobody would know we went."

"That's what I was thinking," said Mary.  "No one would dare to follow
us.  There are galleries where you could run.  We could do our
exercises.  There is a little Indian room where there is a cabinet full
of ivory elephants.  There are all sorts of rooms."

"Ring the bell," said Colin.

When the nurse came in he gave his orders.

"I want my chair," he said.  "Miss Mary and I are going to look at the
part of the house which is not used.  John can push me as far as the
picture-gallery because there are some stairs.  Then he must go away
and leave us alone until I send for him again."

Rainy days lost their terrors that morning.  When the footman had
wheeled the chair into the picture-gallery and left the two together in
obedience to orders, Colin and Mary looked at each other delighted.  As
soon as Mary had made sure that John was really on his way back to his
own quarters below stairs, Colin got out of his chair.

"I am going to run from one end of the gallery to the other," he said,
"and then I am going to jump and then we will do Bob Haworth's
exercises."

And they did all these things and many others.  They looked at the
portraits and found the plain little girl dressed in green brocade and
holding the parrot on her finger.

"All these," said Colin, "must be my relations.  They lived a long time
ago.  That parrot one, I believe, is one of my great, great, great,
great aunts.  She looks rather like you, Mary--not as you look now but
as you looked when you came here.  Now you are a great deal fatter and
better looking."

"So are you," said Mary, and they both laughed.

They went to the Indian room and amused themselves with the ivory
elephants.  They found the rose-colored brocade boudoir and the hole in
the cushion the mouse had left, but the mice had grown up and run away
and the hole was empty.  They saw more rooms and made more discoveries
than Mary had made on her first pilgrimage.  They found new corridors
and corners and flights of steps and new old pictures they liked and
weird old things they did not know the use of.  It was a curiously
entertaining morning and the feeling of wandering about in the same
house with other people but at the same time feeling as if one were
miles away from them was a fascinating thing.

"I'm glad we came," Colin said.  "I never knew I lived in such a big
queer old place.  I like it.  We will ramble about every rainy day.  We
shall always be finding new queer corners and things."

That morning they had found among other things such good appetites that
when they returned to Colin's room it was not possible to send the
luncheon away untouched.

When the nurse carried the tray down-stairs she slapped it down on the
kitchen dresser so that Mrs. Loomis, the cook, could see the highly
polished dishes and plates.

"Look at that!" she said.  "This is a house of mystery, and those two
children are the greatest mysteries in it."

"If they keep that up every day," said the strong young footman John,
"there'd be small wonder that he weighs twice as much to-day as he did
a month ago.  I should have to give up my place in time, for fear of
doing my muscles an injury."
