tension will cause beautiful figures to appear, which may be
reflected from the film directly on the screen.
--Contributed by Robt. E. Bradley, Winchester, Mass.



** A Home-Made Yankee Bobsled [408]

A good coasting sled, which I call a Yankee bob, can be made from
two hardwood barrel staves, two pieces of

[Illustration: Runners Made of Barrel Staves]

2 by 6-in. pine, a piece of hardwood for the rudder and a few
pieces of boards. The 2 by 6-in. pieces should be a little longer
than one-third the length of the staves, and each piece cut
tapering from the widest part, 6 in., down to 2 in., and then
fastened to the staves with large wood screws as shown in Fig. 1.
Boards 1 in. thick are nailed on top of the pieces for a seat and
to hold the runners together. The boards should be of such a
length as to make the runners about 18 in. apart.

A 2-in. shaft of wood, Fig. 2, is turned down to 1 in. on the ends
and put through holes that must be bored in the front ends of the
2 by 6-in. pieces. A small pin is put through each end of the
shaft to keep it in place. The rudder is a 1-1/2-in. hardwood
piece which should be tapered to 1/2 in. at the bottom and shod
with a thin piece of iron. A 1/2-in. hole is bored through the
center of the shaft and a lag screw put through and turned in the
rudder piece, making it so the rudder will turn right and left
and, also, up and down. Two cleats are nailed to the upper sides
of the runners and in the middle lengthways for the person's heels
to rest against.

Any child can guide this bob, as all he has to do is to guide the
rudder right and left to go in the direction named. If he wants to
stop, he pulls up on the handle and the heel of the rudder will
dig into the snow, causing too much friction for the sled to go
any further.
--Contributed by Wm. Algie, Jr., Little Falls, N. Y.



** How to Make a Small Microscope [408]

Theoretically a simple microscope can be made as powerful as a
compound microscope, but in practice the minute size required by
the simple lens to give the highest power makes it almost
impossible to be used. However, a lens having a reasonable
magnifying power can be made in a few minutes for almost nothing.
Take a piece of glass tubing, heat one place in a hot flame, hold
one end and pull on the other and draw the heated place down to a
fine string as shown in Fig. 1. Take about 3 in. of this fine tube
and heat one end which will form a glass bead as shown in Fig. 2.
This bead is the lens. When in this form it can be used only in an
artificial light coming from one direction, but if you take a
piece of

[Illustration: Lens Formed by Heat]

cardboard and bore a hole in it a little smaller than the bead on
the glass tube which is forced into the hole, Fig 3, you can use
this mounted lens in ordinary daylight. In this case a mirror must
be used to reflect the light up through the lens. It is difficult
to see anything at first, as the lens must be held very close to
the eye, but in practice you will soon learn to see the object as
it appears enlarged.

If you soak a little dried grass or hay in water for a few days
and look at a drop of this water, germs in various life forms can
be seen. The water must be put on the lens. One thing to remember
is that the smaller the lens, the greater the magnifying power.
--Contributed by Daniel Gray, Decatur, Illinois.



** Freezing Pipes [409]

The water in hot water supply pipes will freeze quicker than water
that has not been heated. This is because the air, which is a poor
conductor of heat, has been driven out by the heat.



** How to Carry Books [409]

Almost all school children carry their books with a strap put
around and b u c k led very tight. This will make dents in the
cover where the board overlaps the body of the book. If the strap
is left loose, the books are liable to slip out. Place the cover
of one book between the cover and fly leaf of its neighbor and the
difficulty will be remedied. This will place the books in
alternate directions. Books stacked in this manner do not require
the strap buckled tight, or, they can be carried without any strap
just as well.
--Contributed by Thos. De Loaf, Grand Rapids, Mich.

[Illustration: Stacking Books]



** Bottle Pushers [409]

[Illustration: BOTTLE PUSHERS. --This is a game in which the
competitors push bottles on the ice with hockey sticks. All the
bottles must be the same size and make. The persons participating
must keep their bottles upright at all times. The bottles are
lined up for the start and at the word "go," each person pushes a
bottle across the field for a distance that is agreed upon.]



** How to Make a Hammock [410]

Anyone can make a hammock as good as can be bought and that at a
cost so small that every member of the family can possess one
providing there are places enough for hanging them.

The materials required are a needle about 7 in. long, and with a
big eye, an iron ring for each end of the hammock, two long smooth
sticks on which to knit the hammock and two pounds of strong hemp
cord or twine. The twine may be colored in any color or
combination of colors desired. A Roman stripe at each end of the
hammock makes a pretty effect.

A hammock 45 in. wide will not be too large for solid comfort. To
knit it first thread the big needle and holding it in the left
hand, hold the cord in place with the thumb until you have looped
the cord over the tongue, then pass the cord under the needle to
the opposite side and catch it over the tongue. Repeat this
operation until the needle is full. Cut a 2-yd. length of cord and
make a loop and fasten to the door knob or to some other
convenient place. Tie the cord on the needle to this loop 3 in.
from the end of the loop. Place the small mesh stick under the
cord with the beveled edge close to the loop, and, with a thumb on
the cord to hold it in place, pass the needle around the stick and
then, point downward, pass it through the loop from the top, and
then bring it over the stick so forming the first half of the
knot.

Pull this tight and hold in place with a thumb while throwing the
cord over your hand, which forms the loop. Pass the needle from
under through the loops and draw fast to fasten the knot. Hold
this in place and repeat the operation.

Make 30 of these knots and then push them off the stick and
proceed in the same way with the next row, passing the needle
first through each of the 30 knots made for the first row. Make 30
rows and then tie the last loops to the other iron ring.
Stretchers may be made and put in place and the hammock, strong
and durable, is finished. The work must be carefully and evenly
done. One is apt to have a little trouble getting the first row
right, but after that the work proceeds quite rapidly.

How to Obtain Cheap Dry Batteries [410]

Not very many people realize that good, serviceable dry cells can
be obtained from an automobile garage very cheap. These cells
having been "run out" beyond the required number of amperes for
automobile use, will give excellent service, considering their
cost. Many of them will give two-thirds of their original
amperage. Six of such cells have been in use on my door-bell
circuit for nearly a year. They can be used for other purposes
just as well.
--Contributed by H. H. Cutter.



** How to Make a Water Telescope [410]

[Illustration: The Water Telescope]

Before you decide on a place to cast your hook it is best to look
into the water to see whether any fish are there. Yes, certainly,
you can look into the water and see the fish that are there
swimming about, if you have the proper equipment. What you need is
a water telescope. This is a device made of wood or metal with one
end of glass. When the glass end is submerged, by looking in at
the open end, objects in the water are made plainly visible to a
considerable depth. In Norway, the fishermen use the water
telescope regularly in searching for herring shoals or cod.

All that is necessary to make a wooden water telescope is a long
wooden box, a piece of glass for one

[Illustration: Wooden Water Telescope]

end and some paint and putty for making the seams watertight. Fix
the glass in one end of the box, and leave the other open to look
through.

A tin water telescope is more convenient than the wooden one, but
more difficult to make, The principal essential for this is a
circular piece of glass for the large end. A funnel shaped tin
horn will do for the rest. Solder in the glass at the large end
and the telescope is made. Sinkers consisting of strips of lead
should be soldered on near the bottom to counteract the buoyancy
of the air contained in the watertight funnel and also helps to
submerge the big end. The inside of the funnel should be painted
black to prevent the light from being reflected on the bright
surface of the tin. If difficulty is found in obtaining a circular
piece of glass, the bottom may be made square and square glass
used. Use plain, clear glass; not magnifying glass. To picnic
parties the water telescope is of great amusement, revealing
numerous odd sights in the water which many have never seen
before.



** How to Rid Your Yard of Cats [411]

The following is a description of a device I built at my home in
Brooklyn, which not only gave us relief from the

[Illustration: Electric Apparatus for Driving Away Cats]

nightly feline concerts, but also furnished much amusement to my
friends.

I first ran two bare copper wires along the top of the fence about
1 in. apart, fastening them down with small staples, care being
taken that they did not touch. To the ends of these wires I
fastened ordinary insulated bell wire, running them to the house
and connecting them to the upper binding-posts of an induction
coil; I then ran a wire from the lower binding-post of my coil
through the batteries back to the other lower binding-post of
coil, breaking the circuit by putting in an ordinary switch. The
more batteries used, the stronger the current. The switch should
always be left open, as it uses up the current very rapidly.

When "tabby" is well on the wires I close the switch and she goes
the length of the fence in bounds, often coming back to see what
the trouble is, thus receiving another shock.
--Contributed by Charles L. Pultz.



** Substitute for a Drill Bit [411]

A gouge may be used as a substitute bit if a proper sized bit is
not at hand. The gouge can be placed in the brace the same as a
bit.



** Drying Films [412]

The drying of photographic film in full lengths without scratching
or curling is quite difficult. Various devices are used to keep
the film straight, and

[Illustration: Pins Keep the Film Straight]

push pins or thumb tacks are supplied with almost all of them. The
illustration shows a simple and inexpensive device constructed of
common wood clothespins without any metal pins to come in contact
with the film and cause rust streaks. A pair of pins are fastened
at each end of the film by pushing one pin over the other which in
turn is clamped on the film. A string tied to the heads of one
pair of pins provides a way to hang the whole on a nail. The lower
pair of pins makes a weight to keep the film straight.
--Contributed by J. Mac Gregor, Montreal, Canada.



** Grooved Pulley Made from Sheet Tin [412]

A grooved pulley which will run true and carry a round belt may be
made without the use of other tools than a compass and pair of
shears, with a drill or punch for making two rivet holes.

Layoff a circle on the tin, of the diameter desired for the bottom
of the groove. Then layoff a concentric circle of 1/4 in. greater
radius. Cut out along the lines of the large circle. On the line
of the small circle mark with a prick punch or nail a series of
slight dents, about 1/4 in. apart, all the way around. Now make
cuts from the line of the large circle to these dents, stopping
when the shears give the little "click" on entering the dent. Bend
the little tongues thus formed alternately to the right and left,
then by shaping them with some care you will have a good running
surface for the belt. It will not make any difference if there are
more tongues on one side than the other, or if they are not
equally spaced, within reason.

For the hub, solder or rivet a "handle" across the center hole and
drill a hole through it of the same size as the center hole. With
the help of solder a grooved pulley which will answer almost every
experimental purpose may be made, and it is remarkable with how
slight care a perfectly true wheel may be made in this manner.

The same principle might in some way be applied to gear-wheels,
for light and temporary use.
--Contributed by C. W. Nieman, New York City.



** An Emergency Glass Funnel [412]

[Illustration: Cutting a Funnel]

Secure a glass bottle having a small neck and tie a string
saturated in kerosene around the outside at A and B as shown in
the sketch. Light the string and allow it to burn until the glass
is heated, then plunge the bottle quickly into water. The top or
neck will then come off easily. The sharp edges are ground or
filed off smooth. This will make a good emergency funnel which
serves the purpose well for filling wide necked bottles.
--Contributed by Jos. W. Sorenson, Everett, Wash.



** An Electrical Walking Stick [413]

A cane that will produce an electric shock when shaking hands is
one supplied with the electrical apparatus shown in the sketch. An
ordinary cane, 1 in. in diameter at the top and having a metal
band A, is bored about 8 in. deep, to receive the battery B and
induction coil C. One of the electrical connections is through the
metal tip D to the earth, the other is through the

[Illustration: Battery and Coil In Cane]

metal band A when the push button E is pressed.

The one using the cane merely holds the metal end D in contact
with the earth and while shaking hands with a friend he pushes the
button and starts the coil in operation.
--Contributed by Stanley Radcliffe, Laurel, Md.



** Convenient Shelf Arrangement [413]

A convenient device for crowded shelves and cupboards is shown in
the accompanying sketch. Halfway between shelves A and B is
installed a second shelf C which is only half as wide as the other
shelves. This

[Illustration: Shelf]

provides a convenient place for small articles and utensils, while
in a china closet it furnishes a splendid space for cups, sauce
dishes or other small pieces. It also adds a neat and pleasing
appearance.
--Contributed by E. M. Williams, Oberlin, Ohio.



** A Shoe Scraper [413]

On steps of public buildings, shops and dwellings is usually found
some sort of a mud scraper for the shoes. These remove the mud
from the sole of the shoe and leave it on the edge and sides. The
scraper shown in the sketch is of simple construction, and removes
the mud from the soles and

[Illustration: Scraper of Thin Steel]

sides of any size shoe in one operation. The scrapers spread and
bring pressure to bear on all sizes. The side scrapers must be
made of metal that will spring. The standard is of heavy sheet
metal with the thinner strips riveted to the projecting uprights
at the ends.



** Fastening a Shade to a Roller [413]

Tack the shade A in the usual manner and roll it as far back as
possible

[Illustration: Fastening a Shade]

and while in this position apply an ample quantity of glue near
the tacks, as shown at B. A shade attached in this manner will not
come loose from the roller.



** Vegetable Slicer [413]

The slicer is made of a knife blade, screw and pin handle. The
screw is soldered into the end of the knife blade. As the screw
feeds into the vegetable

[Illustration: Slicer In Vegetable]

or fruit, the blade will slice it in a curl of even thickness.
--Contributed by H. C. Roufeldt, Toledo, O.



** How to Make an Etched Copper Picture Frame [414]

Secure a heavy piece of copper about 8 or 10 gauge, cut to 7 by
7-3/4 in. Make a design on a piece of paper. The accompanying
sketch offers a suggestion.

[Illustration: Etched Copper Picture Frame]

If the design is to be symmetrical, draw a line down the middle of
the paper, make one-half the fold and trace the remaining half by
placing a piece of double-surfaced carbon paper between the
halves. Fasten this design with a little paste on the copper at
two of its corners and trace it on the copper by means of the
carbon paper.

Remove the paper, and, with a small brush and black varnish or
asphaltum paint, cover the part not to be eaten by the acid of the
bath into which the metal is to be immersed. Two or three coats
will be necessary to withstand the acid. The conventional trees,
the border as shown in the illustration, and the back are covered
with the varnish or asphaltum.

The etching solution should be put in a stone vessel of some kind
and care should be taken not to allow it to get on the hands or
clothes. A stick should be used to handle the metal while it is in
the solution. This solution is made by putting in the stone jar
the following: Water a little more than one-half, nitric acid a
little less than one-half. DO NOT ADD THE WATER TO THE ACID. Leave
the metal in this solution three or four hours. The time will
depend upon the strength of the acid and the depth to which you
wish the etching to be done. An occasional examination of the
object will show when to take it out.

When the etching has been carried as far as desirable, take the
copper from the bath and remove the asphaltum by scraping it as
clean as possible, using an old case knife. After doing this, put
some of the solution, or pickle as it is called, in an old pan and
warm it over a flame. Put the metal in this hot liquid and swab it
with batting or cloth fastened to the end of a stick. Rinse in
clear water to stop the action of the acid. When clean, cut the
metal out from the center where the picture is to be placed, using
a metal saw.

Solder on the back several small clips with which to hold the
picture in place. There must also be a support soldered in place
to keep the frame upright. To further clean the metal before
soldering, use a solution in the proportion of one-half cup of lye
to 3 gal. water. Heat either the solution or the metal just before
using.

When soldering, care must be taken to have the parts to be
soldered thoroughly clean. Any grease or foreign matter will
prevent the solder from running properly. On a piece of slate
slab, heavy glass or other hard, nonabsorbent substance that is
clean, put a little water and grind a lump of borax around until
the resultant is like thin cream. Thoroughly clean the parts that
are to be soldered by scraping with a knife, and do not touch with
the fingers afterward. Place a piece of thin silver solder between
the parts after having coated them and the solder with the borax.
Use a pair of tweezers to pick up the solder. Hold the parts
firmly together and apply heat--slowly at first until all moisture
has been expelled and the borax crystallized, after which the
flame may be applied more directly and the parts brought to a
soldering heat. An alcohol flame will do. Heat applied too quickly
will throw off the solder and spoil the attempt.

There are various ways of finishing the metal. It may be polished
by means of powdered pumice, chalk or charcoal, and then treated
with a coat of French varnish diluted ten times its volume in
alcohol. Another popular way is to give the background a
bluish-green effect by brushing it over a great many times, after
it has been cleaned, with a solution composed of muriate of
ammonia, 1 part; carbonate of ammonia, 3 parts; water, 24 parts.
The whole may then be treated with French varnish to preserve the
colors.



** How to Make an Easel [415]

A strong and substantial easel may be made at home with very
little expense and no great difficulty.

Smooth down with a plane, four pieces of pine, 1 in. thick, 4 in.
wide and 4 ft. long, until suitable for legs. Make three
cross-pieces, Fig. 1, and join the legs with them as shown in Fig.
2. With an auger bore a hole in each leg about 3 in. from the
bottom, and fit into each a little peg, Fig. 2, for the picture to
rest on. The peg should be of hardwood so it will not break.

Cut the handle from an old broom, measure off the right length,
and put a hinge on one end. Fasten this leg on the second
cross-piece, thus forming a support for the two front legs, Fig.
3. The easel may be finished according to the individual taste. It
may be sandpapered and stained and varnished, or painted in some
pretty tint, or, if preferred, may be enameled.
--Contributed by G. J. Tress.

[Illustration: Details of Easel Construction]



** How to Make a Wind Propeller [415]

A wind propeller may be constructed with four old bicycle wheels
arranged with shafts pretty much like the shafts of a
hand-propelled cart. The platform is flatter, however, and the
body one tier so that it is lower. A framework of wood is built at
M and this is a support

[Illustration: Wind Propeller]

for several purposes. The sail is secured to the mast which is
fixed into the body of the cart as shown. The sail is linen
fabric. There are two crosspieces to aid in keeping the sail
properly opened. The steering arrangement is through the rear
shaft. The shaft is pivoted as in a hand-propelled cart, and the
rod I extends from the middle connection of the shaft up to a
point where the person seated on the wooden frame can handle it.
There is a brake arranged by making a looped piece J and hinging
it as shown. This piece is metal, fitted with a leather face. The
cord K is pulled to press the brake. I marks the support for the
mast underneath the body of the cart. In a steady breeze this cart
spins nicely along the roads.



** Replacing Ball Bearings [415]

Never change a single ball in a bearing. Renew them all.



** How to Construct an Annunciator [416]

Oftentimes a single electric bell may be connected in a circuit so
that it can be operated from more than one push button. These push
buttons are usually located in entirely different parts of the
building and it is necessary to have some means of determining the
particular push button that was pressed and caused the bell to
operate. The electric annunciator is a device that will indicate
or record the various calls or signals that may be sent over the
circuits to which the annunciator is connected. A very simple and
inexpensive annunciator may be made in the following way:

Before taking up the construction of the annunciator it would be
best to make a diagrammatic drawing of the circuit in which the
annunciator is to operate. The simplest circuit that will require
an annunciator is one where the bell may be operated from either
of two push buttons. In this case the annunciator must be
constructed to give only two indications. Fig. 1 shows how the
various' elements of such a circuit may be connected. B is an
ordinary vibrating electric bell, M1 and M2 are the two
electromagnets of the annunciator, A is a battery of several dry
cells, and P1 and P2 are the push buttons from either of which the
bell may be operated.

When the push button P1 is pressed the circuit is completed
through the winding of the magnet M1 and its core becomes
magnetized. In a similar manner the core of the magnet M2 becomes
magnetized when the push button P2 is pressed and the circuit
completed through the winding of the magnet M2.

If an iron armature, that is supported by a shaft through its
center and properly balanced, be placed near the ends of the cores
of M1 and M2, as shown in Fig. 2, it may assume the position
indicated by either the full or dotted lines, depending upon which
of the magnets, M1 or M2, was last magnetized. The position of
this armature will serve to indicate the push button from which
the bell was operated. The magnets should be placed inside a case
and the indication may be made by a pointer attached to the shaft,
supporting the armature.

If you are able to secure the electromagnets from a discarded
electric bell they will work fine for the magnets M1 and M2. They
should be disconnected from their iron support and mounted upon
some non-magnetic material, such as brass or copper, making the
distance between their centers as small as possible. The piece of
metal upon which the magnets are mounted should now be fastened,
by means of two wood screws, to the back of the board, shown in
Fig. 6, that is to form the face of the annunciator. It should be
about 1/8 in. thick, 1/2 in. wide and long enough to extend a
short distance beyond the cores of the magnets M1 and M2. Drill a
1/16-in. hole through its center, as shown in Fig. 2. Drive a
piece of steel rod into this hole, making sure the rod will not
turn easily in the opening, and allow about 1/2 in. of the rod to
project on one side, and 1-1/2 in. on the other side.

Drill a hole in the board upon which the magnets are mounted so
that when the long end of the rod carrying the armature is passed
through the hole, the armature will be a little more than 1/16 in.
from each magnet core. The short end of the rod should be
supported by means of a piece of strip brass bent into the form
shown in Fig. 3.

Drill a hole in the center of this piece, so the rod will pass
through it. When the armature has been put in its proper place,
fasten this strip to the board with two small wood screws. You may
experience some difficulty in locating the hole in the board for
the rod, and it no doubt would be best to drill this hole first
and fasten the magnets in place afterwards.

Two small collars should be fastened to the rod to prevent its
moving endwise. Fit the collars tightly on the rod to hold them in
place.

Cut the long end of the rod off so it projects through the face of
the annunciator about 5/8 in. Take some very thin sheet brass and
cut out a needle or indicator as shown in Fig. 4. In a small piece
of brass drill a hole so it will fit tight on the other end of the
rod. Solder the indicator to this piece and force it in place on
the end of the rod.

When the armature is the same

[Illustration: Details of the Annunciator]

distance from each core, the indicator should be parallel to the
long dimension of the face of the case. The case of the instrument
may be made in the following way:

Secure a piece of 3/8-in. oak, or other hard wood, 3 in. wide and
2 ft. long. Then cut from this board the following pieces: two
whose dimensions correspond to those of Fig. 5 and are to form the
sides of the case; two whose dimensions correspond to those of
Fig. 6 and are to form the back and the face of the case; three
whose dimensions correspond to those of Figs. 7, 8, and 9 and are
to form the lower and upper end of the case and the finish for the
top.

Secure a piece of window glass, 4-1/2 in. by 3-1/8 in. that is to
be used as the front. Before assembling the case cut on the inner
surface of the pieces forming the sides and the lower end, a
groove just wide enough to take the glass and 1/16 in. in depth.
The outer edge of this groove should be 3/8 in. from the outer
edge of the frame. After the case is fastened together there
should be a slot between the piece forming the upper end and the
piece that serves as a finish at the top, that will allow the
glass to be slipped into place. A small strip of wood should be
tacked over this slot, after the glass is put in place, to prevent
the dust and dirt from falling down inside of the case.

The piece upon which the works are to be mounted may be fastened
in place by means of four round-headed brass screws that pass
through the sides of the case. It should be fastened about 1/2 in.
back of the glass front. The back may be fastened inside of the
case in a similar manner.

Cut two pieces, from some sheet brass, whose dimensions correspond
to those of Fig. 10. These pieces are to be used in supporting the
case by means of some small screws. Fasten three binding-posts,
that are to form the terminals of the annunciator, on the top of
the upper end of the case. Mark one of these binding-posts C and
the other two Ll and L2. Connect one terminal of each of the
magnet windings to the post marked C and the other terminal to the
posts Ll and L2. You can finish the case in any style you may
desire. Often times it is desirable to have it correspond to the
finish of the woodwork of the room in which it is to be placed.
The distance the point of the indicator will move through depends
upon the distance between the cores of the magnets and the
distance of the armature from these cores. These distances are
often times such that the indications of the cell are not very
definite. If the armature is moved too far from the cores there is
not sufficient pull exerted by them when magnetized, to cause the
position of the armature' to change.

Mount on the shaft carrying the armature a small gear wheel.
Arrange another smaller gear to engage this on and fasten the
indicator to the shaft of the smaller gear. Any movement now of
the armature shaft will result in a relative large movement of the
indicator shaft. Figure 11 shows the arrangement of the gears just
described.



** How to Make a Steam Calliope [418]

Secure ten gas jet valves, the part of the gas fixture shown in
Fig. 1, and prepare to place them in a piece of 1-in. pipe, 12 in.
long. This is done by drilling and tapping 10 holes, each

[Illustration: Details of the Calliope]

1 in. apart, in a straight line along the pipe. The valves screwed
into these holes appear as shown in Fig. 2. The whistles are made
from pipe of a diameter that will fit the valves. No dimensions
can be given for the exact lengths of these pipes as they must be
tried out to get the tone. Cut ten pieces of this pipe, each one
of a different length, similar to the pipes on a pipe organ. Cut a
thread on both ends, put a cap on the end intended for the top,
and fit a plug in the other end. The plug must have a small
portion of its side filed out, and a notch cut in the side of the
pipe with its horizontal edge level with the top of the plug. This
part of each whistle is made similar to making a bark whistle on a
green stick of willow. The pipes are then screwed into the valves.

The whistles may be toned by trying out and cutting off pieces of
the pipe, or by filling the top end with a little melted lead. The
1-in. pipe must have a cap screwed on one end and the other
attached to a steam pipe. The steam may be supplied by using an
old range boiler, placed horizontally in a fireplace made of brick
or sheet iron. If such a boiler is used, a small safety valve
should be attached. The keys and valve operation are shown in Fig.
3. This is so plainly illustrated that it needs no explanation.
--Contributed by Herbert Hahn, Chicago.



** Sharpening Scissors [419]

When sharpening scissors on a grindstone it is very difficult to
procure a straight edge. For those not having the facilities of a
grinding arrangement a very handy device that will produce a
straight and sharp edge can be easily constructed as follows:

Procure a block of wood, 1-1/2 in. long, 1 in. wide and 1/2 in.
thick, add saw a kerf square with the face of the block, as shown
at A. Attach a piece

[Illustration: A Block of Wood Fitted with a Piece of Emery Cloth
for Sharpening Scissors Correctly]

of fine emery cloth in the kerf, at B, with glue, taking care to
have it flat on the sloping surface only and allowing no part of
the cloth to turn the sharp corner and lie on the back side. Apply
the block to the scissor blade as shown and draw it back and forth
from one end to the other, being careful to keep the back side of
the blade flat against the block. Without being familiar with
scissors grinding, anyone can sharpen them correctly with this
block.
--Contributed by Harriet Kerbaugh, Allentown, Pa.



** Counter Brush for a Shop [419]

A very serviceable brush for use around a shop can be made from a
discarded or worn-out push broom as shown at A. Pull out the
bristles from one-half of the brush and shape the wood of that end
with a knife or

[Illustration: A Discarded Push Broom Shaped to Form a Brush for
the Bench or Counter]

spokes have to the form of a handle, and the brush will be formed
as shown at B.
--Contributed by James T. Gaffney, Chicago.



** A Curtain Roller [419]

Procure a window-shade roller, an umbrella rib and two strips of
oilcloth, each 1 in. wide and 4 in. long. Cut the

[Illustration: The Curtain is Easily Attached to and Detached from
the Roller for Cleaning]

roller off so that it will be 6 in. longer than the distance
across the window, then cut a groove in it to insert the rib. Sew
the pieces of oilcloth so that they will just fit over the ends of
the roller. When this is done lay the curtain across the groove,
then press the rib and curtain into the groove and push the
oilcloth bands over the ends of the rib to keep it in place.
--Contributed by E. L. McFarlane, Nashwaakees, N. B.



** Shade-Holder Bracket for a Gas Jet [419]

An old umbrella rib makes a very effective shade-holder bracket
for a gas jet. The ends of the rib are bent to fit around the
pendant upright and the support end is shaped into a hook. It can
be quickly applied or removed. The outer end is bent into a hook
to

[Illustration: The Bracket for Holding the Shade is Made from an
Old Umbrella Rib]

hold the shade. The rib can be cut to fit a pendant arm of any
length.
--Contributed by Edward Keegstra, Paterson, N. J.



** To Longer Preserve Cut Flowers [419]

A good way to keep cut flowers fresh is to place a small amount of
pure salt of sodium in the water. It is best to procure this salt
at a drug store because commercial salt will cause the flowers to
wither, due to the impurities in the soda. Call for pure sodium
chloride.



** Glass Blowing and Forming [420]

Fortunate indeed is the boy who receives a stock of glass tubing,
a Bunsen burner, a blowpipe, and some charcoal for a gift, for he
has a great deal of fun in store for himself. Glass blowing is a
useful art to understand, if the study of either chemistry or
physics is to be taken up, because much apparatus can be made at
home. And for itself alone, the forming of glass into various
shapes has not only a good deal of pleasure in it, but it trains
the hands and the eye.

Glass, ordinarily brittle and hard, becomes soft and pliable under
heat. When subjected to the action of a flame until dull red, it
bends as if made of putty; heated to a bright yellow, it is so
soft that it may be blown, pulled, pushed or worked into any shape
desired. Hence the necessity for a Bunsen burner, a device
preferred to all others for this work, because it gives the
hottest flame without soot or dirt. The Bunsen burner, as shown in
Fig. 1, is attached to any gas bracket with a rubber tube, but the
flame is blue, instead of yellow, as the burner introduces air at
its base, which mixes with the gas and so produces an almost
perfect combustion, instead of the partial combustion which
results in the ordinary yellow flame. All gas stoves have Bunsen
burners, and many oil stoves.

If gas is not available, an alcohol lamp with a large wick will do
almost as well. The blowpipe, shown in Fig. 2, is merely a tube of
brass with the smaller end at right angles to the pipe, and a fine
tip to reduce the size of the blast, which is used to direct a
small flame. Besides these tools, the glass worker will need some
round sticks of charcoal, sharpened like a pencil, as shown in
Fig. 3, a file, and several lengths of German glass tubing.

To bend a length of the tubing, let it be assumed for the purpose
of making a syphon, it is only necessary to cork one end of the
tube and heat it near the top of the Bunsen flame, turning the
tubing constantly to make it heat evenly on all sides, until it is
a dull red in color. It will then bend of its own weight if held
in one hand, but to allow it to do so is to make a flat place in
the bend. The heating should be continued until the red color is
quite bright, when the open end of the tube is put in the mouth
and a little pressure of air made in the tube by blowing. At the
same time, the tube is bent, steadily but gently. The compressed
air in the tube prevents it from collapsing during the process.

To make a bulb on the end of a tube, one end must be closed. This
is easily done by heating as before, and then pulling the tube
apart as shown in Fig. 4. The hot glass will draw, just like a
piece of taffy, each end tapering to a point. This point on one
length is successively heated and pressed toward and into the
tube, by means of a piece of charcoal, until the end is not only
closed, but as thick as the rest of the tube, as in Fig. 5. An
inch or more is now heated white hot, the tube being turned
continually to assure even heating and to prevent the hot end from
bending down by its own weight. When very hot, a sudden puff into
the open end of the tube will expand the hot glass into a bulb, as
in Fig. 6. These can be made of considerable size, and, if not too
thin, make very good flasks (Fig. 7) for physical experiments. The
base of the bulb should be flattened by setting it, still hot, on
a flat piece of charcoal, so that it will stand alone.

To weld two lengths of, glass tubing together, heat the end of a
tube and insert the point of a piece of charcoal in the opening,
and twirl it about until the end of the tube has a considerable
flare. Do the same to the end of the other tube, which is to be
joined to the first, and then, heating both to a dull red, let
them touch and press lightly together as in Fig. 8. As soon as
they are well in contact, heat the two joined flares together,
very hot, and, pulling slightly, the flares will flatten out and
the tube be perfectly joined. Tubes joined without previous
flaring have a constricted diameter at the joint.

To make a T-joint in two pieces of tubing, it is necessary to make
a hole in the side of one piece, as shown at A in Fig. 9. This is
accomplished by the aid of the principle of physics that gases
expand when heated. Both ends of the tube, which should be cold,
are corked tightly. The whole is then gradually warmed by being
held near the flame. When warm, a small flame is directed by the
blowpipe from the Bunsen flame to a spot on one side of

[Illustration: Glass Blowing and Forming]

the closed tube. As it heats, the air within the tube expands and
becomes compressed, and as soon as the hot spot on the side of the
tube is soft enough, the confined air blows out, pushing the hot
glass aside as it does so, leaving a small puncture. This is to be
enlarged with pointed charcoal until it also flares as shown at B.
This flare is then connected to the flared end of a straight tube,
C, and the T-joint, D, is complete.

Using the blowpipe is not difficult. The lips and cheeks should be
puffed out with a mouthful of air, which is ample to blow a flame
while the lungs are being refilled. In this way, it is possible to
use the blowpipe steadily, and not intermittently, as is necessary
if the lungs alone are the "bellows."

Small glass funnels, such as are used in many chemical operations,
are made by first forming a bulb, then puncturing the bulb at the
top, when hot, with a piece of charcoal, and smoothing down or
flaring the edges. Very small and fine glass tubes, such as are
used in experiments to demonstrate capillary attraction, water or
other liquid rising in them when they are plunged into it, are
made by heating as long a section of tubing as can be handled in
the flame--2 in. will be found enough--and, when very hot, giving
the ends a sudden vigorous pull apart. The tube pulls out and gets
smaller and smaller as it does so, until at last it breaks. But
the fine thread of glass so made is really a tube, and not a rod,
as might be supposed. This can be demonstrated by blowing through
it at a gas flame, or by immersing it in colored liquid. The
solution will be seen to rise some distance within the tube, the
amount depending on the diameter of the tube.

The file is for cutting the glass tubing into lengths convenient
to handle. It should be a three-cornered file, of medium fineness,
and is used simply to nick the glass at the place it is desired to
cut it. The two thumbs are then placed beneath the tube, one on
each side of the nick, and the tube bent, as if it were plastic,
at the same time pulling the hands apart. The tube will break off
squarely at the nick, without difficulty.

The entire outfit may be purchased from any dealer in chemical or
physical apparatus, or any druggist will order it. Enough tubing
to last many days, the Bunsen burner, blowpipe, file and charcoal
should not exceed $2 in cost.



** Cadmium and Solder [421]

The addition of cadmium to soft solder composed of tin and lead,
lowers its melting point and increases its strength.



** Telegraph Codes [422]

[Illustration: Telegraph Codes]



** How to Make a Cruising Catamaran [423]

A launch is much safer than a sailing boat, yet there is not the
real sport to be derived from it as in sailing. Herein is given a
description of a sailing catamaran especially adapted for those
who desire to sail and have a safe craft. The main part of the
craft is made from two boats or pontoons with watertight tops,
bottoms and sides and fixed at a certain distance apart with a
platform on top for the passengers. Such a craft cannot be
capsized easily, and, as the pontoons are watertight, it will
weather almost any rough water. If the craft is intended for rough
waters, care must be taken to make the platform pliable yet stiff
and as narrow as convenient to take care of the rocking movements.

This catamaran has been designed to simplify the construction,
and, if a larger size than the dimensions shown in Fig. 1 is
desired, the pontoons may be made longer by using two boards end
to end and putting battens on the inside over the joint. Each
pontoon is made of two boards 1 in. thick, 14 in. wide and 16 ft.
long, dressed and cut to the shape shown in Fig. 2. Spreaders are
cut from 2-in. planks, 10 in. wide and 12 in. long, and placed 6
ft. apart between the board sides and fastened with screws. White
lead should be put in the joints before turning in the screws. Cut
the ends of the boards so they will fit perfectly and make pointed
ends to the pontoons as shown

[Illustration: Details of the Pontoons]

in Fig. 3, and fit in a wedge shaped piece; white lead the joints
and fasten well with screws.

Turn this shell upside down and lay a board 1/2 in. thick, 12 in.
wide and 16 ft. long on the edges of the sides, mark

[Illustration: Completed Boat]

on the under side the outside line of the shell and cut to shape
roughly. See that the spreaders and sides fit true all over, then
put white lead on the joint and nail with 1-3/4 -in. finishing
nails as close as possible without weakening the wood. Slightly
stagger the nails in the sides, the 1-in. side boards will allow
for this, trim off the sides, turn the box over and paint the
joints and ends of the spreaders, giving them two or three coats
and let them dry.

Try each compartment for leaks by turning water in them one at a
time. Bore a 5/8-in. hole through each spreader in the center and
through the

[Illustration: Crosspiece and Rudder Details]

bottom board as shown. The top board, which is 1/4-in. thick, 12
in. wide and 16 ft. long, is put on the same as the bottom.

After finishing both pontoons in this way place them parallel. A
block of wood is fastened on top of each pontoon and exactly over
each spreader on which to bolt the crosspieces as shown in Fig. 4.
Each block is cut to the shape and with the dimensions shown in
Fig. 5.

The crosspieces are made from hickory or ash and each piece is
2-1/2 in. thick, 5 in. wide and 6-1/2 ft. long. Bore a 5/8-in.
hole 3 in. from each end through the 5-in. way of the wood. Take
maple flooring 3/4 in. thick, 6 in. wide, 74-1/2 in. long and
fasten with large screws and washers to the crosspieces and put
battens across every 18 in. Turn the flooring and crosspieces
upside down and fasten to the pontoons with long 5/8-in. bolts put
through the spreaders. Put a washer on the head of each bolt and
run them through from the under side. Place a thick rubber washer
under and on top of each crosspiece at the ends as shown in Fig.
4. This will make a rigid yet flexible joint for rough waters. The
flooring being placed on the under side of the crosspieces makes
it possible to get the sail boom very low. The sides put on and
well fastened will greatly assist in stiffening the platform and
help it to stand the racking strains. These sides will also keep
the water and spray out and much more so if a 12-in. dash is put
on in front on top of the crosspiece.

The rudders are made as shown in Fig. 6, by using an iron rod 5/8
in. in diameter and 2 ft. long for the bearing of each. This rod
is split with a hacksaw for 7 in. of its length and a sheet metal
