fingers how many women who had once slept by his side were now
sleeping in their graves. There was even--if I wrong him, it is no
great matter--a glance sidelong at his living spouse, as if he were
inclined to drive a thriftier bargain by bespeaking four gravestones
in a lot.

I was better pleased with a rough old whaling-captain who gave
directions for a broad marble slab divided into two compartments, one
of which was to contain an epitaph on his deceased wife and the other
to be left vacant till death should engrave his own name there. As is
frequently the case among the whalers of Martha's Vineyard, so much of
this storm-beaten widower's life had been tossed away on distant seas
that out of twenty years of matrimony he had spent scarce three, and
those at scattered intervals, beneath his own roof. Thus the wife of
his youth, though she died in his and her declining age, retained the
bridal dewdrops fresh around her memory.

My observations gave me the idea, and Mr. Wigglesworth confirmed it,
that husbands were more faithful in setting up memorials to their dead
wives than widows to their dead husbands. I was not ill-natured enough
to fancy that women less than men feel so sure of their own constancy
as to be willing to give a pledge of it in marble. It is more probably
the fact that, while men are able to reflect upon their lost
companions as remembrances apart from themselves, women, on the other
hand, are conscious that a portion of their being has gone with the
departed whithersoever he has gone. Soul clings to soul, the living
dust has a sympathy with the dust of the grave; and by the very
strength of that sympathy the wife of the dead shrinks the more
sensitively from reminding the world of its existence. The link is
already strong enough; it needs no visible symbol. And, though a
shadow walks ever by her side and the touch of a chill hand is on her
bosom, yet life, and perchance its natural yearnings, may still be
warm within her and inspire her with new hopes of happiness. Then
would she mark out the grave the scent of which would be perceptible
on the pillow of the second bridal? No, but rather level its green
mound with the surrounding earth, as if, when she dug up again her
buried heart, the spot had ceased to be a grave.

Yet, in spite of these sentimentalities, I was prodigiously amused by
an incident of which I had not the good-fortune to be a witness, but
which Mr. Wigglesworth related with considerable humor. A gentlewoman
of the town, receiving news of her husband's loss at sea, had bespoken
a handsome slab of marble, and came daily to watch the progress of my
friend's chisel. One afternoon, when the good lady and the sculptor
were in the very midst of the epitaph--which the departed spirit might
have been greatly comforted to read--who should walk into the workshop
but the deceased himself, in substance as well as spirit! He had been
picked up at sea, and stood in no present need of tombstone or
epitaph.

"And how," inquired I, "did his wife bear the shock of joyful
surprise?"

"Why," said the old man, deepening the grin of a death's-head on which
his chisel was just then employed, "I really felt for the poor woman;
it was one of my best pieces of marble--and to be thrown away on a
living man!"

A comely woman with a pretty rosebud of a daughter came to select a
gravestone for a twin-daughter, who had died a month before. I was
impressed with the different nature of their feelings for the dead.
The mother was calm and woefully resigned, fully conscious of her
loss, as of a treasure which she had not always possessed, and
therefore had been aware that it might be taken from her; but the
daughter evidently had no real knowledge of what Death's doings were.
Her thoughts knew, but not her heart. It seemed to me that by the
print and pressure which the dead sister had left upon the survivor's
spirit her feelings were almost the same as if she still stood side by
side and arm in arm with the departed, looking at the slabs of marble,
and once or twice she glanced around with a sunny smile, which, as its
sister-smile had faded for ever, soon grew confusedly overshadowed.
Perchance her consciousness was truer than her reflection; perchance
her dead sister was a closer companion than in life.

The mother and daughter talked a long while with Mr. Wigglesworth
about a suitable epitaph, and finally chose an ordinary verse of
ill-matched rhymes which had already been inscribed upon innumerable
tombstones. But when we ridicule the triteness of monumental verses,
we forget that Sorrow reads far deeper in them than we can, and finds
a profound and individual purport in what seems so vague and
inexpressive unless interpreted by her. She makes the epitaph anew,
though the selfsame words may have served for a thousand graves.

"And yet," said I afterward to Mr. Wigglesworth, "they might have made
a better choice than this. While you were discussing the subject I was
struck by at least a dozen simple and natural expressions from the
lips of both mother and daughter. One of these would have formed an
inscription equally original and appropriate."

"No, no!" replied the sculptor, shaking his head; "there is a good
deal of comfort to be gathered from these little old scraps of poetry,
and so I always recommend them in preference to any new-fangled ones.
And somehow they seem to stretch to suit a great grief and shrink to
fit a small one."

It was not seldom that ludicrous images were excited by what took
place between Mr. Wigglesworth and his customers. A shrewd gentlewoman
who kept a tavern in the town was anxious to obtain two or three
gravestones for the deceased members of her family, and to pay for
these solemn commodities by taking the sculptor to board. Hereupon a
fantasy arose in my mind of good Mr. Wigglesworth sitting down to
dinner at a broad, flat tombstone carving one of his own plump little
marble cherubs, gnawing a pair of crossbones and drinking out of a
hollow death's-head or perhaps a lachrymatory vase or sepulchral urn,
while his hostess's dead children waited on him at the ghastly
banquet. On communicating this nonsensical picture to the old man he
laughed heartily and pronounced my humor to be of the right sort.

"I have lived at such a table all my days," said he, "and eaten no
small quantity of slate and marble."

"Hard fare," rejoined I, smiling, "but you seemed to have found it
excellent of digestion, too."

A man of fifty or thereabouts with a harsh, unpleasant countenance
ordered a stone for the grave of his bitter enemy, with whom he had
waged warfare half a lifetime, to their mutual misery and ruin. The
secret of this phenomenon was that hatred had become the sustenance
and enjoyment of the poor wretch's soul; it had supplied the place of
all kindly affections; it had been really a bond of sympathy between
himself and the man who shared the passion; and when its object died,
the unappeasable foe was the only mourner for the dead. He expressed a
purpose of being buried side by side with his enemy.

"I doubt whether their dust will mingle," remarked the old sculptor to
me; for often there was an earthliness in his conceptions.

"Oh yes," replied I, who had mused long upon the incident; "and when
they rise again, these bitter foes may find themselves dear friends.
Methinks what they mistook for hatred was but love under a mask."

A gentleman of antiquarian propensities provided a memorial for an
Indian of Chabbiquidick--one of the few of untainted blood remaining
in that region, and said to be a hereditary chieftain descended from
the sachem who welcomed Governor Mayhew to the Vineyard. Mr.
Wiggles-worth exerted his best skill to carve a broken bow and
scattered sheaf of arrows in memory of the hunters and warriors whose
race was ended here, but he likewise sculptured a cherub, to denote
that the poor Indian had shared the Christian's hope of immortality.

"Why," observed I, taking a perverse view of the winged boy and the
bow and arrows, "it looks more like Cupid's tomb than an Indian
chief's."

"You talk nonsense," said the sculptor, with the offended pride of
art. He then added with his usual good-nature, "How can Cupid die when
there are such pretty maidens in the Vineyard?"

"Very true," answered I; and for the rest of the day I thought of
other matters than tombstones.

At our next meeting I found him chiselling an open book upon a marble
headstone, and concluded that it was meant to express the erudition of
some black-letter clergyman of the Cotton Mather school. It turned
out, however, to be emblematical of the scriptural knowledge of an old
woman who had never read anything but her Bible, and the monument was
a tribute to her piety and good works from the orthodox church of
which she had been a member. In strange contrast with this Christian
woman's memorial was that of an infidel whose gravestone, by his own
direction, bore an avowal of his belief that the spirit within him
would be extinguished like a flame, and that the nothingness whence he
sprang would receive him again.

Mr. Wigglesworth consulted me as to the propriety of enabling a dead
man's dust to utter this dreadful creed.

"If I thought," said he, "that a single mortal would read the
inscription without a shudder, my chisel should never cut a letter of
it. But when the grave speaks such falsehoods, the soul of man will
know the truth by its own horror."

"So it will," said I, struck by the idea. "The poor infidel may strive
to preach blasphemies from his grave, but it will be only another
method of impressing the soul with a consciousness of immortality."

There was an old man by the name of Norton, noted throughout the
island for his great wealth, which he had accumulated by the exercise
of strong and shrewd faculties combined with a most penurious
disposition. This wretched miser, conscious that he had not a friend
to be mindful of him in his grave, had himself taken the needful
precautions for posthumous remembrance by bespeaking an immense slab
of white marble with a long epitaph in raised letters, the whole to be
as magnificent as Mr. Wigglesworth's skill could make it. There was
something very characteristic in this contrivance to have his money's
worth even from his own tombstone, which, indeed, afforded him more
enjoyment in the few months that he lived thereafter than it probably
will in a whole century, now that it is laid over his bones.

This incident reminds me of a young girl--a pale, slender, feeble
creature most unlike the other rosy and healthful damsels of the
Vineyard, amid whose brightness she was fading away. Day after day did
the poor maiden come to the sculptor's shop and pass from one piece of
marble to another, till at last she pencilled her name upon a slender
slab which, I think, was of a more spotless white than all the rest. I
saw her no more, but soon afterward found Mr. Wigglesworth cutting her
virgin-name into the stone which she had chosen.

"She is dead, poor girl!" said he, interrupting the tune which he was
whistling, "and she chose a good piece of stuff for her headstone.
Now, which of these slabs would you like best to see your own name
upon?"

"Why, to tell you the truth, my good Mr. Wigglesworth," replied I,
after a moment's pause, for the abruptness of the question had
somewhat startled me--"to be quite sincere with you, I care little or
nothing about a stone for my own grave, and am somewhat inclined to
scepticism as to the propriety of erecting monuments at all over the
dust that once was human. The weight of these heavy marbles, though
unfelt by the dead corpse or the enfranchised soul, presses drearily
upon the spirit of the survivor and causes him to connect the idea of
death with the dungeon-like imprisonment of the tomb, instead of with
the freedom of the skies. Every gravestone that you ever made is the
visible symbol of a mistaken system. Our thoughts should soar upward
with the butterfly, not linger with the exuviae that confined him. In
truth and reason, neither those whom we call the living, and still
less the departed, have anything to do with the grave."

"I never heard anything so heathenish," said Mr. Wigglesworth,
perplexed and displeased at sentiments which controverted all his
notions and feelings and implied the utter waste, and worse, of his
whole life's labor. "Would you forget your dead friends the moment
they are under the sod?"

"They are not under the sod," I rejoined; "then why should I mark the
spot where there is no treasure hidden? Forget them? No; but, to
remember them aright, I would forget what they have cast off. And to
gain the truer conception of death I would forget the grave."

But still the good old sculptor murmured, and stumbled, as it were,
over the gravestones amid which he had walked through life. Whether he
were right or wrong, I had grown the wiser from our companionship and
from my observations of nature and character as displayed by those who
came, with their old griefs or their new ones, to get them recorded
upon his slabs of marble. And yet with my gain of wisdom I had
likewise gained perplexity; for there was a strange doubt in my mind
whether the dark shadowing of this life, the sorrows and regrets, have
not as much real comfort in them--leaving religious influences out of
the question--as what we term life's joys.




THE SHAKER BRIDAL.


One day, in the sick-chamber of Father Ephraim, who had been forty
years the presiding elder over the Shaker settlement at Goshen, there
was an assemblage of several of the chief men of the sect. Individuals
had come from the rich establishment at Lebanon, from Canterbury,
Harvard and Alfred, and from all the other localities where this
strange people have fertilized the rugged hills of New England by
their systematic industry. An elder was likewise there who had made a
pilgrimage of a thousand miles from a village of the faithful in
Kentucky to visit his spiritual kindred the children of the sainted
Mother Ann. He had partaken of the homely abundance of their tables,
had quaffed the far-famed Shaker cider, and had joined in the sacred
dance every step of which is believed to alienate the enthusiast from
earth and bear him onward to heavenly purity and bliss. His brethren
of the North had now courteously invited him to be present on an
occasion when the concurrence of every eminent member of their
community was peculiarly desirable.

The venerable Father Ephraim sat in his easy-chair, not only
hoary-headed and infirm with age, but worn down by a lingering disease
which it was evident would very soon transfer his patriarchal staff to
other hands. At his footstool stood a man and woman, both clad in the
Shaker garb.

"My brethren," said Father Ephraim to the surrounding elders, feebly
exerting himself to utter these few words, "here are the son and
daughter to whom I would commit the trust of which Providence is about
to lighten my weary shoulders. Read their faces, I pray you, and say
whether the inward movement of the spirit hath guided my choice
aright."

Accordingly, each elder looked at the two candidates with a most
scrutinizing gaze. The man--whose name was Adam Colburn--had a face
sunburnt with labor in the fields, yet intelligent, thoughtful and
traced with cares enough for a whole lifetime, though he had barely
reached middle age. There was something severe in his aspect and a
rigidity throughout his person--characteristics that caused him
generally to be taken for a schoolmaster; which vocation, in fact, he
had formerly exercised for several years. The woman, Martha Pierson,
was somewhat above thirty, thin and pale, as a Shaker sister almost
invariably is, and not entirely free from that corpse-like appearance
which the garb of the sisterhood is so well calculated to impart.

"This pair are still in the summer of their years," observed the elder
from Harvard, a shrewd old man. "I would like better to see the
hoar-frost of autumn on their heads. Methinks, also, they will be
exposed to peculiar temptations on account of the carnal desires which
have heretofore subsisted between them."

"Nay, brother," said the elder from Canterbury; "the hoar-frost and
the black frost hath done its work on Brother Adam and Sister Martha,
even as we sometimes discern its traces in our cornfields while they
are yet green. And why should we question the wisdom of our venerable
Father's purpose, although this pair in their early youth have loved
one another as the world's people love? Are there not many brethren
and sisters among us who have lived long together in wedlock, yet,
adopting our faith, find their hearts purified from all but spiritual
affection?"

Whether or no the early loves of Adam and Martha had rendered it
inexpedient that they should now preside together over a Shaker
village, it was certainly most singular that such should be the final
result of many warm and tender hopes. Children of neighboring
families, their affection was older even than their school-days; it
seemed an innate principle interfused among all their sentiments and
feelings, and not so much a distinct remembrance as connected with
their whole volume of remembrances. But just as they reached a proper
age for their union misfortunes had fallen heavily on both and made it
necessary that they should resort to personal labor for a bare
subsistence. Even under these circumstances Martha Pierson would
probably have consented to unite her fate with Adam Colburn's, and,
secure of the bliss of mutual love, would patiently have awaited the
less important gifts of Fortune. But Adam, being of a calm and
cautious character, was loth to relinquish the advantages which a
single man possesses for raising himself in the world. Year after
year, therefore, their marriage had been deferred.

Adam Colburn had followed many vocations, had travelled far and seen
much of the world and of life. Martha had earned her bread sometimes
as a sempstress, sometimes as help to a farmer's wife, sometimes as
schoolmistress of the village children, sometimes as a nurse or
watcher of the sick, thus acquiring a varied experience the ultimate
use of which she little anticipated. But nothing had gone prosperously
with either of the lovers; at no subsequent moment would matrimony
have been so prudent a measure as when they had first parted, in the
opening bloom of life, to seek a better fortune. Still, they had held
fast their mutual faith. Martha might have been the wife of a man who
sat among the senators of his native State, and Adam could have won
the hand, as he had unintentionally won the heart, of a rich and
comely widow. But neither of them desired good-fortune save to share
it with the other.

At length that calm despair which occurs only in a strong and somewhat
stubborn character and yields to no second spring of hope settled down
on the spirit of Adam Colburn. He sought an interview with Martha and
proposed that they should join the Society of Shakers. The converts of
this sect are oftener driven within its hospitable gates by worldly
misfortune than drawn thither by fanaticism, and are received without
inquisition as to their motives. Martha, faithful still, had placed
her hand in that of her lover and accompanied him to the Shaker
village. Here the natural capacity of each, cultivated and
strengthened by the difficulties of their previous lives, had soon
gained them an important rank in the society, whose members are
generally below the ordinary standard of intelligence. Their faith and
feelings had in some degree become assimilated to those of their
fellow-worshippers. Adam Colburn gradually acquired reputation not
only in the management of the temporal affairs of the society, but as
a clear and efficient preacher of their doctrines. Martha was not less
distinguished in the duties proper to her sex. Finally, when the
infirmities of Father Ephraim had admonished him to seek a successor
in his patriarchal office, he thought of Adam and Martha, and proposed
to renew in their persons the primitive form of Shaker government as
established by Mother Ann. They were to be the father and mother of
the village. The simple ceremony which would constitute them such was
now to be performed.

"Son Adam and daughter Martha," said the venerable Father Ephraim,
fixing his aged eyes piercingly upon them, "if ye can conscientiously
undertake this charge, speak, that the brethren may not doubt of your
fitness."

"Father," replied Adam, speaking with the calmness of his character,
"I came to your village a disappointed man, weary of the world, worn
out with continual trouble, seeking only a security against evil
fortune, as I had no hope of good. Even my wishes of worldly success
were almost dead within me. I came hither as a man might come to a
tomb willing to lie down in its gloom and coldness for the sake of its
peace and quiet. There was but one earthly affection in my breast, and
it had grown calmer since my youth; so that I was satisfied to bring
Martha to be my sister in our new abode. We are brother and sister,
nor would I have it otherwise. And in this peaceful village I have
found all that I hope for--all that I desire. I will strive with my
best strength for the spiritual and temporal good of our community. My
conscience is not doubtful in this matter. I am ready to receive the
trust."

"Thou hast spoken well, son Adam," said the father. "God will bless
thee in the office which I am about to resign."

"But our sister," observed the elder from Harvard. "Hath she not
likewise a gift to declare her sentiments?"

Martha started and moved her lips as if she would have made a formal
reply to this appeal. But, had she attempted it, perhaps the old
recollections, the long-repressed feelings of childhood, youth and
womanhood, might have gushed from her heart in words that it would
have been profanation to utter there.

"Adam has spoken," said she, hurriedly; "his sentiments are likewise
mine."

But while speaking these few words Martha grew so pale that she looked
fitter to be laid in her coffin than to stand in the presence of
Father Ephraim and the elders; she shuddered, also, as if there were
something awful or horrible in her situation and destiny. It required,
indeed, a more than feminine strength of nerve to sustain the fixed
observance of men so exalted and famous throughout the Beet as these
were. They had overcome their natural sympathy with human frailties
and affections. One, when he joined the society, had brought with him
his wife and children, but never from that hour had spoken a fond word
to the former or taken his best-loved child upon his knee. Another,
whose family refused to follow him, had been enabled--such was his
gift of holy fortitude--to leave them to the mercy of the world. The
youngest of the elders, a man of about fifty, had been bred from
infancy in a Shaker village, and was said never to have clasped a
woman's hand in his own, and to have no conception of a closer tie
than the cold fraternal one of the sect. Old Father Ephraim was the
most awful character of all. In his youth he had been a dissolute
libertine, but was converted by Mother Ann herself, and had partaken
of the wild fanaticism of the early Shakers. Tradition whispered at
the firesides of the village that Mother Ann had been compelled to
sear his heart of flesh with a red-hot iron before it could be
purified from earthly passions.

However that might be, poor Martha had a woman's heart, and a tender
one, and it quailed within her as she looked round at those strange
old men, and from them to the calm features of Adam Colburn. But,
perceiving that the elders eyed her doubtfully, she gasped for breath
and again spoke.

"With what strength is left me by my many troubles," said she, "I am
ready to undertake this charge, and to do my best in it."

"My children, join your hands," said Father Ephraim.

They did so. The elders stood up around, and the father feebly raised
himself to a more erect position, but continued sitting in his great
chair.

"I have bidden you to join your hands," said he, "not in earthly
affection, for ye have cast off its chains for ever, but as brother
and sister in spiritual love and helpers of one another in your
allotted task. Teach unto others the faith which ye have received.
Open wide your gates--I deliver you the keys thereof--open them wide
to all who will give up the iniquities of the world and come hither to
lead lives of purity and peace. Receive the weary ones who have known
the vanity of earth; receive the little children, that they may never
learn that miserable lesson. And a blessing be upon your labors; so
that the time may hasten on when the mission of Mother Ann shall have
wrought its full effect, when children shall no more be born and die,
and the last survivor of mortal race--some old and weary man like
me--shall see the sun go down nevermore to rise on a world of sin and
sorrow."

The aged father sank back exhausted, and the surrounding elders
deemed, with good reason, that the hour was come when the new heads of
the village must enter on their patriarchal duties. In their attention
to Father Ephraim their eyes were turned from Martha Pierson, who grew
paler and paler, unnoticed even by Adam Colburn. He, indeed, had
withdrawn his hand from hers and folded his arms with a sense of
satisfied ambition. But paler and paler grew Martha by his side, till,
like a corpse in its burial-clothes, she sank down at the feet of her
early lover; for, after many trials firmly borne, her heart could
endure the weight of its desolate agony no longer.




NIGHT-SKETCHES,

BENEATH AN UMBRELLA.


Pleasant is a rainy winter's day within-doors. The best study for such
a day--or the best amusement: call it what you will--is a book of
travels describing scenes the most unlike that sombre one which is
mistily presented through the windows. I have experienced that Fancy
is then most successful in imparting distinct shapes and vivid colors
to the objects which the author has spread upon his page, and that his
words become magic spells to summon up a thousand varied pictures.
Strange landscapes glimmer through the familiar walls of the room, and
outlandish figures thrust themselves almost within the sacred
precincts of the hearth. Small as my chamber is, it has space enough
to contain the ocean-like circumference of an Arabian desert, its
parched sands tracked by the long line of a caravan with the camels
patiently journeying through the heavy sunshine. Though my ceiling be
not lofty, yet I can pile up the mountains of Central Asia beneath it
till their summits shine far above the clouds of the middle
atmosphere. And with my humble means--a wealth that is not taxable--I
can transport hither the magnificent merchandise of an Oriental
bazaar, and call a crowd of purchasers from distant countries to pay a
fair profit for the precious articles which are displayed on all
sides. True it is, however, that amid the bustle of traffic, or
whatever else may seem to be going on around me, the raindrops will
occasionally be heard to patter against my window-panes, which look
forth upon one of the quietest streets in a New England town. After a
time, too, the visions vanish, and will not appear again at my
bidding. Then, it being nightfall, a gloomy sense of unreality
depresses my spirits, and impels me to venture out before the clock
shall strike bedtime to satisfy myself that the world is not entirely
made up of such shadowy materials as have busied me throughout the
day. A dreamer may dwell so long among fantasies that the things
without him will seem as unreal as those within.

When eve has fairly set in, therefore, I sally forth, tightly
buttoning my shaggy overcoat and hoisting my umbrella, the silken dome
