"You know," said Kathleen, helping herself to a second potato, and
fixing her eyes on Mrs. Craven's face--"you know how fond I am of Ruth."

"Indeed, my dear young lady, she has been telling me about you; and I am
glad you notice her, dear little girl!"

"But it is not only I," said Kathleen; "every one in the school likes
her. She could be the primest favorite with every one if she only chose.
She is so sweetly pretty, too, and such a lady."

"Well, dear, her mother was a real lady; and her father was educated by
my dear husband, and was in the army."

"It doesn't matter if her father was a duke and her mother a dairymaid,"
said Kathleen with emphasis. "She is just a lady because she is."

Before she could add another word Ruth came in.

"Do come, Kathleen," she said. "He is much better after his sleep. I
told him you were here, and he would like to see you."

"He has been bothered like anything about those accounts," said Mrs.
Craven. "I can't make out what has put it into his head. Years ago it
was an old story with him that something had gone wrong with the books;
but, dear hearts! he had forgotten all about it for a weary long while.
Now within the last week he has been at it again, just as if 'twas
yesterday."

"He has an old account-book on the table now, granny," said Ruth.

"Well," said Mrs. Craven, "we must humor him.--Don't you take any
notice, Miss O'Hara; don't contradict him, I mean."

Kathleen nodded. There was a look on Ruth's face which made her feel no
longer interested in the Irish potatoes. She slipped her hand inside her
friend's, and they went into the parlor. Mr. Craven was seated by the
fire. His white locks fell about his shoulders; there was a faint touch
of pink on each of his sallow cheeks, and his blue eyes were bright.

"Ah!" he said, raising his face when he saw Kathleen. "And is this the
little lady--the dear little lady--- from over the seas, from the heart
of Ireland itself? I was once in Ireland. I spent a month in Dublin, and
I bought the very best paper for packing my sugars and teas in that I
ever came across. Ah! I had a good time. We used to sit in Phoenix Park.
I liked Ireland, and I could welcome any Irish maiden.--Give me your
hand, missy; I am proud to see you."

Kathleen gave her hand. She came up close to the old man and said:

"Do you know, you have a look of my own old grandfather. He is dead and
in his grave; but he had white, white hair like yours. Do you mind if I
put my hand on your hair and stroke it just because of grandfather?"

"Ah, my dear, you may do what you like," said the old man. "And you have
been good to my little lass--my little woman here. She has told me you
have been good to her."

"She has been very good to me. I am glad to see you, Mr. Craven. I hope
when you get strong again you will come over and stay with father and
mother and me at Carrigrohane Castle."

"No, no, my love. There was a time when I'd have liked it well, but not
now. You see, dear--" his voice faltered and his eyes grew anxious--"I
must mind the shop. When a man doesn't attend to his own business,
accounts go wrong. Now there was quite a deficiency last week--the wrong
side of the ledger. It was really terrible. I think of it at night, and
when I wake first thing in the morning I remember it. I must get to my
accounts, little miss, but I am right glad to see you."

Kathleen felt a lump in her throat. Ruth, with her bright eyes fixed on
her grandfather, stood close by.

"But there!" said the old man hastily. "It's splendid for Ruth. She's
got into that school, and she's trying for a scholarship. I know what
Ruth tries for she will get, for her brain is of that fine quality that
could not brook defeat, and her mind is of that high order that it must
adjust itself to true learning. I was a bit of a scholar when I was
young, although I made my money in grocery. Well, well! Ruth is all
right. Even if the old man can't square up the ledger, Ruth is as right
as right can be. Thank you, Miss--I can't remember your name--- but
thank you, little Irish miss, for coming to see me; and good-bye."

Kathleen found herself outside the room. Mrs. Craven was not in the
kitchen. Ruth and Kathleen went into the garden.

"How can you stand it?" said Kathleen. "Doesn't it break your heart to
see him?"

"Oh no," said Ruth. "You see, I am accustomed to him. He talks like
that. I am sorry he is so bothered about the accounts, but perhaps that
phase will pass."

"He is so pleased about you and the scholarship."

"Yes," said Ruth. She turned pale. "Whatever happens," she added, "he
must never know."

"What do you mean about whatever happens?"

"He must never know if I do not get it. Good-bye now, Kathleen. I am
glad you have seen grandfather and granny. I must go back to granny now.
She is very tired; she gets so little rest at night."

Kathleen went slowly home. The meal was over at the Tennants', but
somehow her couple of potatoes had satisfied her. She felt much more
sober than she had done in the morning; she was inclined to think, to
consider her ways. She felt an uncomfortable sensation of being haunted
by the faces of Ruth and the old man.

"But of course Ruth will get her scholarship," she said to herself. "Of
course--of course her grandfather is right. Her brain is of the right
order, and her mind is attuned to learning. How nicely he spoke, and how
beautiful he looked--how like my dear old grandfather who has been with
God for so many years now."

There came a loud rat-tat at the front-door. David went out and brought
in a telegram. It was addressed to Kathleen. She opened it in some
surprise, and read the contents slowly. There was amazement on her face;
a feeling of consternation stole into her heart. The telegram, not a
long one, was from her father:

     "Have just seen Aunt Katie O'Flynn. Do not approve of your
     society. Squash the whole thing at once, or expect my serious
     displeasure.--O'HARA."

"Is there an answer?" asked David.

"No," said Kathleen. "I mean yes. Yes, I suppose so. Can I have a form?
Mrs. Tennant, can I have a telegraph form?"

Mrs. Tennant began to hunt about for one. Telegrams were by no means
common things at the Tennants' house. David suggested that the messenger
boy might have one. This turned out to be the case. Kathleen began to
write, but she suddenly changed her mind.

"No, no; there is no answer," she said. "I can write by post."

She crushed the telegram up and thrust it into her pocket. After this
she went out for a little; she was too restless to stay still. The
fascination of the coming sport grew greater as obstacles appeared in
the way of its realization. Whatever her father might say, she could not
desert the girls who belonged to her society now.

"What can have ailed Aunt Katie to betray me in such a fashion?" she
thought.

She came home in time for tea; but, to her amazement she found another
telegram waiting for her. This was from Dublin, from Aunt Katie herself:

     "Have told your father. He received letter from
     school-mistress this morning. Very angry about Wild Irish
     Girls. You must give the whole thing up or you will incur his
     serious displeasure. Don't be a goose; nip the thing in the
     bud immediately.--AUNT KATIE."

"But indeed I won't," thought Kathleen. "Whatever happens, we will have
our fun to-night. Whatever happens, neither father nor Aunt Katie, nor
Ruth Craven can keep me back."




CHAPTER XXV.

KATHLEEN HAS A GOOD TIME IN LONDON.


So the head-mistress had written; she had dared to write to Kathleen's
father. What she said to him was a matter of no moment; she had written,
and to complain of her!

"She thinks, I suppose," said Kathleen, "that she'll subdue me by these
means. She wants to bring, not the long arm of the law, but father's arm
right across the sea to stop me. No, no, daddy, your Kathleen will be
your Kathleen to the end--always loving, always daring, always true,
but always rebellious; the best and the worst. I am going to-night, and
I am going all the more surely because you wired to me not to go, and
because they are daring to bully dear little Ruth Craven. And after I
have had my fling I will come back in good time. No fear; nothing will
go wrong. Your Kathleen wouldn't hurt a fly, much less your heart. But I
mean to have my fun to-night."

Kathleen quite sobered down as these thoughts came to her. It was now
getting dusk. The girls were to meet at the station at half-past five.
They were to go in quite quietly by twos and twos; each couple of girls
was to go to the booking-office and take their tickets, and walk away
just as though nothing special had happened. They were on no account to
collect in a mass. They were not even to take any notice of each other
until they were off. Once the train was in motion all would be safe;
they might meet then and talk and be merry to their hearts' content. Oh,
it was a good, good time they were about to have!

This arrangement about meeting one another had been suggested by Kate
Rourke, who knew a good deal about theatres, and who also knew how
dangerous it would be for so many girls to be seen at the station
together; but dressed quietly, and just dropping in by couples, nobody
would remark them.

"And then we must go straight to the theatre," she said, "and stand
outside the pit, and take our chance; but we will have time enough for
that if we leave Merrifield by the quarter-to-six train."

Kathleen noticed that evening that Alice watched her as she moved about
the room; that Alice occasionally lifted her eyes and glanced at her
when she sat down to read; and when she approached the tea-table and
helped herself to tea and bread-and-butter and jam, Alice also kept up
that gentle sort of espionage. It annoyed Kathleen; she found herself
watching for it. She found herself getting red and annoyed when the
calm, steadfast gaze of Alice's brown eyes was fixed on her face.
Finally she said:

"What are you doing? Why do you stare at me?"

"Sorry," replied Alice. She bent over her book, and did not glance again
at Kathleen.

By-and-by Kathleen went upstairs. She went to their mutual room, and
turned the key in the lock.

"I must get out of the window," she said to herself. "I can easily do
it; it is but to swing on to that thick cord of ivy and I shall reach
the ground without the slightest trouble. The back-gate that leads into
the garden is never locked, and the window I mean to emerge from looks
into the garden. I shall go off without anybody's noticing me."

Kathleen had to take a great deal of money with her. If there were forty
girls, their tickets would cost a good deal. It is true they were to buy
their own in the first instance, but Kathleen was to return them the
money in the train. Then the omnibuses they were to go on, the seats at
the theatre, their supper of some sort must be paid for by the head of
the society.

"I promised to frank them, and I must frank them," thought the girl.

She slipped some sovereigns into her purse, tucked it for safety into
the bosom of her dress, and then put on her hat and jacket. Some
instinct told the wild, ignorant child to dress quietly. She put on her
plainest hat and a little reefer coat which looked neat and substantial.
She was just drawing a pair of gloves on her hands when Alice was heard
turning the handle of the door.

"Let me in at once, Kathleen," she cried.

Kathleen did not reply at all for a moment; then she said in a sleepy,
smothered sort of voice which seemed to proceed from the bed:

"I have a splitting headache; don't disturb me."

"Very sorry," answered Alice, "but I really must come in."

Kathleen made no answer. After a long pause, during which Alice once or
twice felt the handle of the door again, the sound of her retreating
footsteps was heard.

"Now is my time," thought Kathleen.

To tell the truth, Alice was not at all taken in by Kathleen's headache.

"She is very clever," thought that young lady, "but she has tried that
dodge on so often before that I am not going to be deceived by it now."

Accordingly she went into her mother's room and stood by the window. Now
the window of Mrs. Tennant's bedroom looked also into the garden, and
was really parallel with the window by which Kathleen meant to escape.
There was an interval of silence, and then Alice had her reward! for the
window of their mutual bedroom was flung wide open, and Kathleen, neatly
dressed, appeared on the window-sill. She looked around her for a minute.
Alice caught a glimpse of her bright face by the light of the moon,
which was already getting up in the sky. The next minute Kathleen caught
firm hold of the arm of old ivy and let herself down deftly and quickly
to the ground. The action was done so neatly, and in fact so
beautifully, that Alice in spite of herself felt inclined to cry
"Bravo!" She knew that if she were to trust herself to that ivy she
would probably fall to the bottom and get, if not really killed, at
least half so. But Kathleen stood serenely on the ground, and glanced
up at the window from which she had let herself down. Just at that
moment Alice rushed into their bedroom. Kathleen had shut the window
behind her before she trusted herself to the ivy; she had also unlocked
the door. In a moment Alice had put on her hat and jacket, had rushed
downstairs, opened the hall door, and was following Kathleen across the
common. Now, quite the nearest way to the railway station was across the
common. Kathleen walked fast.

"Kathleen, Kathleen!" cried Alice.

Kathleen looked behind her. She saw Alice, and took to her heels.

"No, no, Kathleen; I will follow you until I drop. You must let me come
up with you."

But Kathleen made no answer. If she could do anything well, she could
run in a race. Her swift feet scarcely touched the ground. She ran and
ran. How soon would Alice get tired? She did not dare to go to the
railway station as long as she was following. And the time to catch the
train was very short. At the other side of the common was a long,
narrow, winding passage which, after a quarter of a mile of tortuous
turning, led right up a back-way to the great terminus. Kathleen had
given herself exactly the right length of time. Had nothing happened to
hinder her, she would have been on the platform three minutes before the
train came in. For reasons of her own she did not wish to be long there.
She had crossed the common when she looked behind her; Alice was still
running, but she was also in the distance.

"If I could only double, hide for a minute, and make her give up the
chase, all would be well," thought the mischievous Irish girl.

There was a great tree, which cast a huge shadow, just before the
winding passage was reached. Kathleen darted towards it. In an instant
she had climbed up and was seated securely in one of its lower branches.

"Now, if only she will be quick, she will run past me into the passage.
She will never get to the end in time. I shall slip down and go the long
way. I know it is a good bit farther, but she is not in it with me as
far as running is concerned," was Kathleen's thought.

Alice came up as far as the tree; she paused a minute and looked around
her. Kathleen in the gray darkness looked down at her. Kathleen's face
was completely in the shadow, but the light fell full on Alice's, and
her face, white and anxious, almost made the other girl laugh.

"If the situation wasn't quite so tremendous I could enjoy this," she
thought.

Presently Alice ran down the passage. Kathleen waited until her
footsteps had died away, and then she descended from the oak-tree. She
flew as fast as she could the long way to the railway station.

"Alice can't think that I want to go by train," thought Kathleen.

Now she was truly a very swift runner, but as she was running to-night,
whom should she meet but Mrs. Hopkins. Mrs. Hopkins was on her way home
after doing a little shopping on her own account. She saw Kathleen,
observed her panting for breath, and stood directly in her path.

"Miss O'Hara," she said, "can I speak to you for a moment? It is
something very particular indeed. I am very thankful I happened to meet
you."

"I will see you to-morrow--to-morrow," panted Kathleen. "I am in a great
hurry. To-morrow, Mrs. Hopkins."

"No, Miss O'Hara; it ought to be to-night. You are going to the railway
station, aren't you, miss?"

Kathleen felt inclined to knock that interfering woman down. She darted
to one side of the road.

"Oh, let me pass!" she said. She was shaking with her quick run. She
knew the moments were flying; already she heard the bell at the station
ring. The train for London was signaled; she had not an instant to lose.

"Don't--don't keep me," she said.

"But you mustn't go, miss; it would be madness--wicked. You musn't; you
daren't."

Kathleen pushed past her. This time Mrs. Hopkins had no power to stop
her. She rushed on, reached the station, flew up the steps, and found
herself on the platform just as the train was coming in.

Instead of the forty girls she expected to meet, she saw not more than
about half-a-dozen. They all crowded up to her at once.

"I have got your ticket for you," said Susy. "I was just able to screw
out the money to get one for you and myself. Here's the train; let us
hop in at once."

"But where are all the others--the forty?" gasped Kathleen.

"They funked it, almost all of them. Oh! come along; here's the train."

The great train thundered into the station. The girls ran wildly looking
for a third-class carriage. At last they found one and tumbled into it;
the door was slammed, and they were off. Kathleen wondered--she was not
sure, but she wondered--if she really did see, or if it was only a
dream, a pair of brown eyes looking at her from the station, and the
severe young figure and shocked face of Alice Tennant.

"It must have been a dream; she could not have guessed that I was going
to the station. What a good thing she didn't meet Mrs. Hopkins!" thought
Kathleen. Then she turned to her companions--to the six girls who had
decided to brave all the terrors of their expedition. They were Susy
Hopkins, Kate Rourke, Clara Sawyer, Rosy Myers, Janey Ford, and Mary
Wilkins.

Kathleen sat quite still for a minute until she had recovered her
breath. She looked around her. To her relief, she saw that they were
alone. There was no one else in the compartment.

"Now then," she said, "how is it that all the others have funked it?"

"There has been so much muttering and whispering and suspecting going on
during the whole livelong day that they were positively afraid," said
Susy. "Indeed, if it hadn't been for you, Kathleen, I doubt if any of us
would have come."

"Well, girls, we can't help it," said Kathleen. "If the rest are so
timid, there's more fun for us; isn't that so?"

She looked round at her companions.

"I mean to enjoy myself," said Kate Rourke. "I have been to a theater
twice before. Once I went with my grandfather, and another time with an
uncle from Australia. I didn't go to the pit when I went with uncle. He
took me to a grand stall, and we rubbed up against the nobility, I can
