early the next morning the journey was resumed. Progress could not be
rapid. They had to face the slow, heavy current of the Mississippi, and
now and then Henry and Shif'less Sol and Tom Ross walked through the
woods along the shore. They early established their reputations as the
best hunters and shots in the fleet, and they kept the men supplied with
game, bear, deer, and water fowl.

Several days passed in this manner, and Henry noticed that people were
even scarcer than they had been when they were coming down. Then they had
seen a few, now not more than two or three, and these avoided them.

"I don't believe they are really friendly to us," said Henry to Paul, "and
something to injure us may be on foot. I wish that we were beyond the last
French and Spanish settlement."

"We are too strong to be attacked," said Paul, "I don't think we have
anything to fear."

Henry shook his head somewhat doubtfully, but he said nothing more on the
subject at that time, and the fleet moved steadily on without event. Adam
Colfax exercised a stern discipline. There were wild men in his fleet,
adventurers, fellows who had floated about the world, but he was a match
for any of them, and those who did not respect his voice feared his ready
hand. But even these were animated by the great purpose and the thrill of
a two-thousand mile journey on unknown rivers through a vast wilderness.

Half of the men slept ashore every night. They would build great fires,
cook their suppers, and then sit around awhile talking. Some one would
sing, and others would play strange, old tunes on accordion or guitar.
Paul heard many a snatch of song in Spanish or French or Portuguese, and
the wilderness would lend an additional charm to the melody. Adam Colfax,
stern ruler that he was, never forbade these amusements.

"It isn't well to stop up things too tight," he would say. "Children have
got to make noise, and men are a good deal the same way. If you seal 'em
up they'll bust."

These evening scenes always made a deep impression upon Paul. There were
the cheerful fires, lighted for cooking, and now dying down to great beds
of coals, the surrounding darkness seeming to come closer and closer, but
within it a wide circle of light in which many men sat or reclined at
ease, smoking or talking, or doing both. All were good-natured, the
weather was fair so far, the journey easy, the work not excessively hard,
and the hunters brought in fresh game in plenty.

They passed the mouth of the bayou near which the Chateau of Beaulieu
stood, and Henry and Shif'less Sol went to see it. They found a small
detachment of Spanish soldiers sent by Bernardo Galvez in possession, but
the followers of Alvarez had disappeared. The place seemed lonely and
deserted, as the soldiers of Galvez kept close to the house, as if they
were afraid of the wilderness.

Henry and Shif'less Sol sped back through the forest toward the river.

"Now I wonder," said Shif'less Sol, "what could hev become o' that Spanish
feller. He wuz jest the kind, so proud he wuz, an' thinkin' so much o'
himself, to be burnin' up with hate over what has happened."

"He has made himself an outlaw," said Henry, "and it's my opinion, Sol,
that he's somewhere in these regions. And Braxton Wyatt is with him, too.
That fellow will never rest in his plots against us. We'll hear from them
both again. They'll try for some sort of revenge."

They rejoined the boats at noon, and three or four hours later they saw a
canoe ahead of them upon the water. It contained two occupants who graded
their speed to that of the fleet, keeping well out of rifle-shot.

"What do you take them to be?" called out Adam Colfax to Henry.

"Indians, I know, and spies, I think," replied Henry.

Several of the more powerful boats moved ahead of the fleet and endeavored
to overtake the canoe, but they could not. The two Indians who occupied it
evidently had skill and powerful arms, as they maintained the distance
between themselves and their pursuers. Henry and Paul, stirred by the
interest of the chase, also seized oars and pulled hard, but the canoe
presently turned up a small tributary river, where they did not have time
to follow it, and they saw it no more.

It was something that many might have passed as a mere incident of the
river, but Henry did not forget it. His sixth sense, the sense of danger,
as it were, had received a definite impression, and he paid heed to the
warning.

That afternoon clouds came up for the first time. It had been very warm on
the river, but the heat and closeness did not develop into a rapid storm
of thunder and lightning as so often happens in the Mississippi valley.
Instead, the air turned colder, and a raw, drizzling rain set it. It was
then that they appreciated the comfort of their well-equipped boats.
Everybody was wrapped up and protected, and they moved steadily on.

Henry and Shif'less Sol, as usual, went ashore later on to seek a landing
place, and a site suitable for a camp, as it was considered wise always to
give the men warm food. Presently they found a fairly well sheltered spot
near the shore, a slope surrounded by high trees, and when Adam Colfax
received the word the boats were tied to the bank. Some tents were pitched
in the opening, and with considerable difficulty the fires were lighted. A
drizzling rain still fell, but the fires finally triumphed over it, and
blazed and crackled merrily. Nevertheless, this lightness and merriment
were not communicated to the men, who shivered in the wet, drew close to
the flames, and had downcast faces. All the five were ashore and in the
shadow of the woods they held a little conference of their own, talking
with great earnestness.

"I think," said Henry, "that we're being watched and that there is danger,
great danger. One never knows what the wilderness contains."

"Suppose that all of us watch the night through," said Paul.

"No," said Henry, "I think, Paul, that you ought to sleep and Long Jim
should do so, too. There are enough without you. To-morrow night will be
your turn. We shouldn't waste our resources."

This satisfied Paul and Jim, and soon they were asleep in one of the
tents, but Henry, Shif'less Sol, and Tom Ross were in the dripping forest
outside Adam Colfax's own line of sentinels, seeking the hidden danger.
The three remained together, and they looked everywhere. They were on the
east bank and there was nothing but forest. The moon lay behind sodden
clouds, and the trees were dark and shadowy. Now and then the wind swept a
dash of rain in their faces, and the air remained raw and chill. Sharp as
were their eyes, they could not see very far into the forest, but they
could see behind them the flame of their own camp fires, a core of light
in the wilderness.

"It might be better to put out all those fires," said Henry, "but I don't
believe Captain Colfax would hear to it. He thinks we're too strong to
fear any serious attack."

"No," said Shif'less Sol, "he wouldn't do it, an' the men would grumble,
too. We've got to be the outside guard ourselves."

The three kept together, continuing their steady patrol in a semi-circle
about the camp, the side of the river being guarded by the boats
themselves. The rain died to a drizzle, but the clouds remained, and the
skies were dark. Hours passed, and nearly everybody slept soundly by the
fires, but the faithful three, gliding among the wet trees and bushes,
still watched.

They heard faint noises in the forest, the passage of the wind, or the
stir of a wild animal, and after a while they heard the long, plaintive
and weird note, with which they were so familiar, the howl of the wolf.

It was characteristic of the three that when this faint note, almost like
the sigh of the wind among the wet trees, reached their ears, they said
nothing, but merely stopped and in the obscurity glanced at one another
with eyes of understanding. They listened patiently, and the low,
plaintive howl came again and then once more, all from different points of
the compass. There had been a time when Henry Ware was deceived for a
moment by these cries, but it was not possible now.

"It must be a gathering of the southern tribes," he said, "and I imagine
that Braxton Wyatt is with them, giving them advice. Sol, suppose that you
go to the right and Tom to the left. I'll stay in the center, and if any
one of us sees an enemy he's to shoot at it and rouse the camp."

The two were gone in an instant, and Henry was left alone. That instant
all the old, primeval instincts, so powerful in him, were aroused. His
sixth sense, the sense of danger, was speaking to him in a voice that he
could not but hear. There, too, was the quaver of the wolf. All the
signals of alarm were set, and he resolved that he should be the first to
see danger when It showed its head.

The clouds piled in heavier masses in the sky, and the darkness thickened.
The wind blew lightly and its sound among the boughs and leaves was a
long, plaintive sigh that had in it a tone like the cry of a woman. The
rain came only in gusts, but when it struck it was sharp and cold. The
trees stood out, black and ill-defined, like skeletons. But the forest,
its wet, its chill, and its loneliness, had no effect upon the attuned
mind of Henry Ware. He was in his native element, and every nerve in him
thrilled with the knowledge that he would rise to meet the crisis,
whatever it might be.

He was crouched by the side of a great oak, his form blurring with its
trunk, his eyes, now used to the darkness, searching every covert in
front--he knew that Shif'less Sol and Tom Ross would watch to right and
left.

The cry of the wolf did not come again, save for a lone note, now much
nearer. But when its sound passed through the forest, Henry Ware's form
seemed to become a little more taut and he leaned a little further
forward. Beyond the slight bending motion he did not stir.

He still saw nothing and heard nothing, but that voice which was his sixth
sense was calling to him more loudly than ever, and he was ready to
respond.

In front of him, thirty yards away, lay a thicket or undergrowth, and he
watched it incessantly. It seemed to him now that he knew every bush and
briar and vine. Presently a briar moved, and then a bush, and then a
vine, but they moved against the wind, and the sharp eyes of the watcher
saw it. He sank a little lower and the muzzle of his rifle stole forward.
He made not the slightest sound, and good eyes, only a few yards away,
could not have separated his dark figure from that of the tree trunk.

The same briar and bush moved a third time, and, as before, against the
wind. It did not escape the notice of Henry Ware. Now he saw a sharp, red
nose appear, and then the shaggy head behind it.

The nose remained--projected and lifted in the air, a-sniff to catch the
fleeting scent of an enemy. Fancy could readily paint the ugly head of the
lank body behind it. But Henry Ware was not deceived for an instant. The
muzzle of the rifle that had been thrust forward, was raised now, and
taking swift aim, he fired.

A wild and terrible cry swelled through the forest. An Indian warrior
sprang to his feet, casting off his guise of a wolfskin, stood perfectly
still for a moment, and then fell headlong among the wet bushes. The cry
came back in many real echoes, the shouts of the warriors who knew now
that there was to be no surprise for them. Their battle cry swelled in
volume, fierce with anger, but Henry, Shif'less Sol, and Tom Ross were
already running back upon the camp, sounding the alarm, and the men,
roused from sleep, were springing to arms.




CHAPTER XIX

THE BATTLE OF THE BANK


"What is it? what is it?" cried Adam Colfax, as the three sentinels, who
were worth all the others combined, dashed into the camp.

"An Indian army!" replied Henry Ware. "We do not yet know how strong, but
we have seen their scouts! hark to them!"

The fierce war whoop rose and swelled through all the forest, died away,
then swelled and died again. From the dark wall of the trees came the
crackling fire of rifles. No one could be in doubt now.

"Out with the fires! Scatter them, trample them down!" exclaimed Henry.

He set the example, kicking the wood and embers in every direction. Adam
Colfax was not one to resent such a sudden assumption of authority, when
he saw that it meant the saving of human lives. He repeated the order and
joined in the work himself. Fortunately the fires had burned low and the
task was soon done, but not before two or three men had been hit by
bullets from the surrounding darkness.

"Lie down, everybody!" cried Henry, and the order was obeyed at once. Then
the strange night battle in the heart of the wilderness began. The
savages, after their first attack, ceased to shout, and the voyagers on
their own part made little noise. But they knew that the assailing force
was numerous. It rimmed them on all sides save that of the river, and the
little pink and red beads of fire seemed to flash from every bush. The men
on the boats swarmed to the shore, but Adam Colfax allowed only half of
them to come, the land force at the same time falling back on the river to
meet them. He had no mind to let his communications be cut.

As the white line fell back the red came on, and uttered again the
long-drawn, high-pitched war whoop, a cry of exultation. But it was not
repeated, as the white line withdrew only to the bank, and yielded no
more. Then both lines lay in the forest, faces invisible, but the pink and
red beads of opposing fire ran back and forth in a stream. Now and then,
even in the darkness, a bullet struck true. A groan would start in the
white line, but it would be checked at the lips, because these were men
too proud to give expression to pain.

"They can't make much progress in this way," said Adam Colfax to Henry,
who had crept to his side.

"They can make it terribly wearing by keeping it up all night."

"We can withdraw to the boats entirely and row away."

"I wouldn't do it. They're sure to have boats, too, knowing that we could
take to the water, and if we were to leave here they'd take it as a sign
of victory and follow. Then we'd have another and worse fight."

Adam Colfax was of the same opinion. He was not in favor of yielding an
inch.

"I think I can see some of their figures dancing about there among the
bushes," he whispered to Henry.

"I see them, too," replied the youth, "and I think that I see white men.
They must be the desperate gang that followed Alvarez out of New Orleans."

"No doubt of it."

Adam Colfax presently crept down the river bank, but came back in a few
minutes.

"Now we'll see something," he whispered to Henry, and what the cautious
leader said was quick to come true.

The fire of both sides died for a moment, and then came a heavy crash and
a jet of fire from the river; there was a long, shrill scream as a missile
curved high over the white line and dropped in the red, where it burst,
flinging red-hot pieces of steel in a shower. It was followed instantly by
another report, another jet of fire, and another shower of metal in the
bushes. The brass twelve-pounders on the boat had opened fire, and with
shot after shot they were searching the dark thickets, whence cries of
rage now came.

The Americans sent up shouts of triumph and redoubled their rifle fire.
Many of the more zealous were eager to creep to the thickets and turn the
defensive into the offensive, but the leaders restrained them.

"No use to waste life in any such foolish fashion," said shrewd Adam
Colfax. "While we stay under the cannon they won't rush us, but if we
follow them into the bushes they'll have an overwhelming advantage."

It began to lighten a little, but the wind blew stronger and very cold for
the time of the year. The red line was withdrawn further into the forest,
but it continued an intermittent fire, and now and then uttered a
challenging war whoop. The cannon every ten minutes sent a shot among
them, but whether it did any damage the Americans could not tell. The
defenders saved their bullets, firing only when there seemed to be a
chance for a hit, and thus the hours dragged their leaden weight slowly
by.

A score of the Americans had been wounded by the rifle fire, but in most
cases the wounds were slight. Six were dead and they were taken to the
boats, where stones were tied to them and they were dropped into the
Mississippi to disappear forever. Rovers, adventurers, masterless men,
they had been, but they died in a good cause, and they were not without
mourners, as their bodies slid into the brown waters.

Adam Colfax had coffee made on several of the boats provided with a
cooking apparatus, and it was served in the darkness to those who fought
on shore. One man had the tin cup shot from his hand as he was raising it
to his lips, but he calmly called for another, and when he had drunk it,
went on with his part of the battle.

The hot coffee heartened them wonderfully, and the ten minute cannon shots
were good company. They grew to look for them, and so strong is habit,
that they knew almost to the second when the shot was due. It was like a
slow, steady chorus, cheering them and telling them to hold on.

Far toward morning there was a tremendous burst of fire from the thickets,
the fierce, high-pitched war shout was repeated three times, and after
that, silence. Then the darkness sank away, and the day came in a burst of
red and gold, gilding river and forest.

"They are gone," said Henry, "you'll find now that the woods are empty."

Many of the voyagers rushed into the forest to discover that he spoke the
truth. Nowhere was there a sign of an enemy. No tree sheltered a warrior,
the thickets were harmless. The peaceful morning breeze had no note of
warning in its song. But when they looked more closely they saw that many
dark stains had soaked into the earth, and they knew that not all the
bullets and cannon balls had gone amiss.

"Well, we drove them off that time," said Adam Colfax cheerfully. "They
found that they couldn't surprise us, and I guess they've concluded that
they couldn't rush us either. I fancy it's the last we'll see of 'em."

Henry shook his head, and Shif'less Sol and Tom Ross, who were standing
by, also shook theirs.

"We're pretty' sure that a big league of the southern tribes has been
