entrance door.

Climbing up, he stood at last in a place of safety, and disappeared
within the doorway of the lighthouse.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE WRECK

Meantime the French privateer sped onward to her doom.

The force with which the French commander fell when Ruby cast him
off, had stunned him so severely that it was a considerable time
before he recovered. The rest of the crew were therefore in absolute
ignorance of how to steer.

In this dilemma they lay-to for a short time, after getting away to a
sufficient distance from the dangerous rock, and consulted what was
to be done. Some advised one course, and some another, but it was
finally suggested that one of the English prisoners should be brought
up and commanded to steer out to sea.

This advice was acted on, and the sailor who was brought up chanced
to be one who had a partial knowledge of the surrounding coasts. One
of the Frenchmen who could speak a few words of English, did his best
to convey his wishes to the sailor, and wound up by producing a
pistol, which he cocked significantly.

"All right," said the sailor, "I knows the coast, and can run ye
straight out to sea. That's the Bell Rock Light on the weather-bow, I
s'pose."

"Oui, dat is de Bell Roke."

"Wery good; our course is due nor'west."

So saying, the man took the wheel and laid the ship's course
accordingly.

Now, he knew quite well that this course would carry the vessel
towards the harbour of Arbroath, into which he resolved to run at all
hazards, trusting to the harbour-lights to guide him when he should
draw near. He knew that he ran the strongest possible risk of getting
himself shot when the Frenchmen should find out his faithlessness,
but he hoped to prevail on them to believe the harbour-lights were
only another lighthouse, which they should have to pass on their way
out to sea, and then it would be too late to put the vessel about and
attempt to escape.

But all his calculations were useless, as it turned out, for in half
an hour the men at the bow shouted that there were breakers ahead,
and before the helm could be put down, they struck with such force
that the topmasts went overboard at once, and the sails, bursting
their sheets and tackling, were blown to ribbons.

Just then a gleam of moonlight struggled through the wrack of clouds,
and revealed the dark cliffs of the Forfar coast, towering high above
them. The vessel had struck on the rocks at the entrance to one of
those rugged bays with which that coast is everywhere indented.

t the first glance, the steersman knew that the doom of all on board
was fixed, for the bay was one of those which are surrounded by
almost perpendicular cliffs; and although, during calm weather, there
was a small space between the cliffs and the sea, which might be
termed a beach, yet during a storm the waves lashed with terrific
fury against the rocks, so that no human being might land there.

It chanced at the time that Captain Ogilvy, who took great delight in
visiting the cliffs in stormy weather, had gone out there for a
midnight walk with a young friend, and when the privateer struck, he
was standing on the top of the cliffs.

He knew at once that the fate of the unfortunate people on board was
almost certain, but, with his wonted energy, he did his best to
prevent the catastrophe.

"Run, lad, and fetch men, and ropes, and ladders. Alarm the whole
town, and use your legs well. Lives depend on your speed," said the
captain, in great excitement.

The lad required no second bidding. He turned and fled like a
greyhound.

The lieges of Arbroath were not slow to answer the summons. There
were neither lifeboats nor mortar-apparatus in those days, but there
were the same willing hearts and stout arms then as now, and in a
marvellously short space of time, hundreds of the able-bodied men of
the town, gentle and semple, were assembled on these wild cliffs,
with torches, rope, &c.; in short, with all the appliances for saving
life that the philanthropy of the times had invented or discovered.

But, alas! these appliances were of no avail. The vessel went to
pieces on the outer point of rocks, and part of the wreck, with the
crew clinging to it, drifted into the bay.

The horrified people on the cliffs looked down into that dreadful
abyss of churning water and foam, into which no one could descend.
Ropes were thrown again and again, but without avail. Either it was
too dark to see, or the wrecked men were paralysed. An occasional
shriek was heard above the roar of the tempest, as, one after
another, the exhausted men fell into the water, or were wrenched
from their hold of the piece of wreck.

At last one man succeeded in catching hold of a rope, and was
carefully hauled up to the top of the cliff.

It was found that this was one of the English sailors. He had taken
the precaution to tie the rope under his arms, poor fellow, having
no strength left to hold on to it; but he was so badly bruised as to
be in a dying state when laid on the grass.

"Keep back and give him air," said Captain Ogilvy, who had taken a
prominent part in the futile efforts to save the crew, and who now
kneeled at the sailor's side, and moistened his lips with a little
brandy.

The poor man gave a confused and rambling account of the
circumstances of the wreck, but it was sufficiently intelligible to
make the captain acquainted with the leading particulars.

"Were there many of your comrades aboard?" he enquired.

The dying man looked up with a vacant expression. It was evident that
he did not quite understand the question, but he began again to
mutter in a partly incoherent manner.

"They're all gone," said he, "every man of 'em but me! All tied
together in the hold. They cast us loose, though, after she struck.
All gone! all gone!"

After a moment he seemed to try to recollect something. "No," said
he, "we weren't all together. They took Ruby on deck, and I never saw
_him_ again. I wonder what they did----"

Here he paused.

"Who,  did you say?" enquired the captain with deep anxiety.

"Ruby--Ruby Brand," replied the man.

"What became of him, said you?"

"Don't know."

"Was _he_ drowned?"

"Don't know," repeated the man.

The captain could get no other answer from him, so he was compelled
to rest content, for the poor man appeared to be sinking.

A sort of couch had been prepared for him, on which he was carried
into the town, but before he reached it he was dead. Nothing more
could be done that night, but next day, when the tide was out, men
were lowered down the precipitous sides of the fatal bay, and the
bodies of the unfortunate seamen were sent up to the top of the
cliffs by means of ropes. These ropes cut deep grooves in the turf,
as the bodies were hauled up one by one and laid upon the grass,
after which they were conveyed to the town, and decently interred.

The spot where this melancholy wreck occurred is now pointed out to
the visitor as "The Seamen's Grave", and the young folk of the town
have, from the time of the wreck, annually recut the grooves in the
turf, above referred to, in commemoration of the event, so that these
grooves may be seen there at the present day.

It may easily be imagined that poor Captain Ogilvy returned to
Arbroath that night with dark forebodings in his breast.

He could not, however, imagine how Ruby came to be among the men on
board of the French prize; and tried to comfort himself with the
thought that the dying sailor had perhaps been a comrade of Ruby's at
some time or other, and was, in his wandering state of mind, mixing
him up with the recent wreck.

As, however, he could come to no certain conclusion on this point, he
resolved not to tell what he had heard either to his sister or
Minnie, but to confine his anxieties, at least for the present, to
his own breast.




CHAPTER XXX

OLD FRIENDS IN NEW CIRCUMSTANCES

Let us now return to Ruby Brand; and in order that the reader may
perfectly understand the proceedings of that bold youth, let us take
a glance at the Bell Bock Lighthouse in its completed condition.

We have already said that the lower part, from the foundation to the
height of thirty feet, was built of solid masonry, and that at the
top of this solid part stood the entrance-door of the
building--facing towards the south.

The position of the door was fixed after the solid part had been
exposed to a winter's storms. The effect on the building was such
that the most sheltered or lee side was clearly indicated; the
weather-side being thickly covered with limpets, barnacles, and short
green seaweed, while the lee-side was comparatively free from such
incrustations.

The walls at the entrance-door are nearly seven feet thick, and the
short passage that pierces them leads to the foot of a spiral
staircase, which conducts to the lowest apartment in the tower, where
the walls decrease in thickness to three feet. This room is the
provision store. Here are kept water-tanks and provisions of all
kinds, including fresh vegetables which, with fresh water, are
supplied once a fortnight to the rock all the year round. The
provision store is the smallest apartment, for, as the walls of the
tower decrease in thickness as they rise, the several apartments
necessarily increase as they ascend.

The second floor is reached by a wooden staircase or ladder, leading
up through a "manhole" in the ceiling. Here is the lightroom store,
which contains large tanks of polished metal for the oil consumed by
the lights. A whole year's stock of oil, or about 1100 gallons, is
stored in these tanks. Here also is a small carpenter's bench and
tool-box, besides an endless variety of odds and ends,--such as
paint-pots, brushes, flags, waste for cleaning the reflectors,
&c. &c.

Another stair, similar to the first, leads to the third floor, which
is the kitchen of the building. It stands about sixty-six feet above
the foundation. We shall have occasion to describe it and the rooms
above presently. Meanwhile, let it suffice to say, that the fourth
floor contains the men's sleeping berths, of which there are six,
although three men is the usual complement on the rock. The fifth
floor is the library, and above that is the lantern; the whole
building, from base to summit, being 115 feet high.

At the time when Ruby entered the door of the Bell Rock Lighthouse,
as already described, there were three keepers in the building, one
of whom was on his watch in the lantern, while the other two were in
the kitchen.

These men were all old friends. The man in the lantern was George
Forsyth, who had been appointed one of the light-keepers in
consideration of his good services and steadiness. He was seated
reading at a small desk. Close above him was the blazing series of
lights, which revolved slowly and steadily by means of machinery,
moved by a heavy weight. A small bell was struck slowly but regularly
by the same machinery, in token that all was going on well. If that
bell had ceased to sound, Forsyth would at once have leaped up to
ascertain what was wrong with the lights. So long as it continued to
ring he knew that all was well, and that he might continue his
studies peacefully--not quietly, however, for, besides the rush of
wind against the thick plate glass of the lantern, there was the
never-ceasing roar of the ventilator, in which the heated air from
within and the cold air from without met and kept up a terrific war.
Keepers get used to that sound, however, and do not mind it.

Each keeper's duty was to watch for three successive hours in the
lantern.

Not less familiar were the faces of the occupants of the kitchen. To
this apartment Ruby ascended without anyone hearing him approach, for
one of the windows was open, and the roar of the storm effectually
drowned his light footfall. On reaching the floor immediately below
the kitchen he heard the tones of a violin, and when his head emerged
through the manhole of the kitchen floor, he paused and listened with
deep interest, for the air was familiar.

Peeping round the corner of the oaken partition that separated the
manhole from the apartment, he beheld a sight which filled his heart
with gladness, for there, seated on a camp stool, with his back
leaning against the dresser, his face lighted up by the blaze of a
splendid fire, which burned in a most comfortable-looking kitchen
range, and his hands drawing forth most pathetic music from a violin,
sat his old friend Joe Dumsby, while opposite to him on a similar
camp stool, with his arm resting on a small table, and a familiar
black pipe in his mouth, sat that worthy son of Vulcan, Jamie Dove.

The little apartment glowed with ruddy light, and to Ruby, who had
just escaped from a scene of such drear and dismal aspect, it
appeared, what it really was, a place of the most luxurious comfort.

Dove was keeping time to the music with little puffs of smoke, and
Joe was in the middle of a prolonged shake, when Ruby passed through
the doorway and stood before them.

Dove's eyes opened to their widest, and his jaw dropt, so did his
pipe, and the music ceased abruptly, while the faces of both men grew
pale.

"I'm not a ghost, boys," said Ruby, with a laugh, which afforded
immense relief to his old comrades. "Come, have ye not a welcome for
an old messmate who swims off to visit you on such a night as this?"

Dove was the first to recover. He gasped, and, holding out both
arms, exclaimed, "Ruby Brand!"

"And no mistake!" cried Ruby, advancing and grasping his friend
warmly by the hands.

For at least half a minute the two men shook each other's hands
lustily and in silence. Then they burst into a loud laugh, while Joe,
suddenly recovering, went crashing into a Scotch reel with energy so
great that time and tune were both sacrificed. As if by mutual
impulse, Ruby and Dove began to dance! But this was merely a spurt of
feeling, more than half-involuntary. In the middle of a bar Joe flung
down the fiddle, and, springing up, seized Ruby round the neck and
hugged him, an act which made him aware of the fact that he was
dripping wet.

"Did ye _swim_ hoff to the rock?" he enquired, stepping back, and
gazing at his friend with a look of surprise, mingled with awe.

"Indeed I did."

"But how? why? what mystery are ye rolled up in?" exclaimed the
smith.

"Sit down, sit down, and quiet yourselves," said Ruby, drawing a
stool near to the fire, and seating himself. "I'll explain, if
you'll only hold your tongues, and not look so scared like."

"No, Ruby; no, lad, you must change yer clothes first," said the
smith, in a tone of authority; "why, the fire makes you steam like a
washin' biler. Come along with me, an' I'll rig you out."

"Ay, go hup with 'im, Ruby. Bless me, this is the most amazin'
hincident as ever 'appened to me. Never saw nothink like it."

As Dove and Ruby ascended to the room above, Joe went about the
kitchen talking to himself, poking the fire violently, overturning
the camp stools, knocking about the crockery on the dresser, and
otherwise conducting himself like a lunatic.

Of course Ruby told Dove parts of his story by fits and starts as he
was changing his garments; of course he had to be taken up to the
lightroom and go through the same scene there with Forsyth that had
occurred in the kitchen; and, of course, it was not until all the
men, himself included, had quite exhausted themselves, that he was
able to sit down at the kitchen fire and give a full and connected
account of himself, and of his recent doings.

After he had concluded his narrative, which was interrupted by
frequent question and comment, and after he had refreshed himself
with a cup of tea, he rose and said--

"Now, boys, it's not fair to be spending all the night with you here,
while my old comrade Forsyth sits up yonder all alone. I'll go up and
see him for a little."

"We'll go hup with 'ee, lad," said Dumsby.

"No ye won't," replied Ruby; "I want him all to myself for a while;
fair play and no favour, you know, used to be our watchword on the
rock in old times. Besides, his watch will be out in a little, so ye
can come up and fetch him down."

"Well, go along with you," said the smith. "Hallo! that must have
been a big 'un."

This last remark had reference to a distinct tremor in the building,
caused by the falling of a great wave upon it.

"Does it often get raps like that?" enquired Ruby, with a look of
surprise.

