people looked at her in a curious, pitying sort of fashion. Why also
they invariably spoke of Beatrice as "poor dear," and inquired with
tender solicitude for her health.

"Brides usedn't to be 'poor deared' in my day," the old lady remarked
rather testily to her handmaiden, Jane. "Any one would suppose Beatrice
was going to have an illness instead of a wedding from the way folks
talk of her."

"Eh, well, ma'am," Jane replied.

Jane's "eh, well, ma'am" was as full of suppressed meaning as a balloon
is full of air. She heaved a prodigious sigh as she spoke, for of course
she had heard the gossip, and had indeed come to blows with a Hartite
that very morning.

"Eh, dear!" said Jane. "Rumor's a queer thing."

She did not vouchsafe any more, and Mrs. Meadowsweet was too innocent
and indolent and comfortable in her mind to question her.

The other person who knew nothing was Mrs. Bertram. Of all the people in
the world Mrs. Bertram was perhaps the most interested in that wedding
which was to take place on Tuesday. The wedding could scarcely mean more
to the bride and bridegroom than it did to her--yet no news of any
_contretemps_, of any little hitch in the all-important proceedings,
had reached her ears. For the last week she had taken steps to keep
Catherine and Mabel apart from all Northbury gossip. The servants at the
Manor who, of course knew everything did not dare to breathe a syllable
of their conjectures. The bravest Hartite and Beatricite would not have
dared to intrude their budgets of wild conjecture on Mrs. Bertram's
ears. Consequently she lived through these exciting days in comparative
calm. Soon the great tension would be over. Soon her gravest alarms
would be lulled to rest, Now and then she wondered that Beatrice was not
oftener at the Manor. Now and then she exclaimed with some vexation at
Mr. Ingram's extraordinary absence from home at such a time.

The Rector had gone to London, and a stranger took his pulpit on that
all-important Sunday before the wedding.

Mrs. Bertram wondered a little over these two points, but they did not
greatly disturb her;--Loftus was at home and Loftus looked strangely,
wildly happy.

Mrs. Bertram had been alarmed, and rendered vaguely uneasy by her son's
gloom a few days ago, but there was no shadow resting on the young man's
face now. He laughed, he talked, his eyes wore an exultant expression in
their fire and daring. He caressed his sisters, he hung over his
mother's chair, and kissed her.

"Ah, Loftie," she said once, "you are really and honestly in love. I
have had my doubts that you did not really appreciate our dear and noble
Beatrice. But your manner the last few days, your spirits, my son, your
all-evident happiness, have abundantly sent these doubts to rest. You
are in love with your future wife, and no wonder!"

"No wonder," echoed Loftus.

He had the grace to blush.

"Yes, I am in love," he said. "No one was ever more madly in love than I
am." Then after a pause he added: "And I think Beatrice, without
exception, the noblest and best woman on earth."

"That is right, my boy. Ah, Loftus, I am glad I could do one thing for
you. I have got you a wife whose price is above rubies."

Bertram laughed.

"You have made a feeble joke, mother," he said in some confusion. "I
should like to know to which you allude--Bee's money or her personal
charms."

"Both--both--you naughty boy Beatrice is all that could be desired in
herself, but in what position should you and I be in the future without
her money?"

"That is true," he said. And there was compunction in his voice.

On Monday morning two letters arrived at Northbury from the Rector. One
was to his housekeeper, the other to Beatrice.

To his housekeeper, Mrs. Matthews, he said:

"Go on with all the wedding preparations, and expect me home this
evening at six o'clock."

His letter to Beatrice was much longer.

"The time to reproach you, my dear ward, is past," began the Rector.
"And you must promise never in the future to reproach me. You are an
impulsive girl, and I may have done wrong to yield to your entreaties.
Your father's face, has, however, over and over flashed before my mental
vision, and the look in his eyes has comforted me. In one sense you are
a fool, Beatrice; in another, you are thrice blessed. Forgive this
little preamble. I have arranged matters as you wish. I shall be home
this evening. Come to me in my study at nine o'clock to-night, my dear
ward, and act in the meantime exactly as your true, brave heart
suggests."

Beatrice read this letter in her own room. She was quite mortal enough
to shed some tears over it, but when she sat opposite to her mother at
breakfast, her face was quite as jubilant as any young bride's might be,
who was so soon to leave home.

Mrs. Meadowsweet looked at her girl with great pride.

"You feature your father wonderfully, Bee," she said. "It isn't only the
Grecian nose, and the well-cut lips, and the full, straight kind of
glance in your eyes, but it's more. It's my belief that your soul
features Meadowsweet; he was ever and always the best of men. Crotchety
from uprightness he was, but upright was no word for him."

"Well, mother, I should like to resemble my father in that particular."

"Yes, my love, yes. Meadowsweet was always heights above me, and so are
you also, for that matter."

"That is not true, mother, you must not say it. It pains me."

Beatrice looked distressed. She went over to her old parent and kissed
her. Then she hastily left the room.

After breakfast Captain Bertram called at the Gray House.

He and Beatrice had a long interview, then she went to the Bells', and
sat with Miss Hart for about half-an-hour.

After dinner that day Bertram spoke to his mother: "Beatrice wants to
come up and see you. Can you receive her about six o'clock?"

"At any time, my dear son. But is she not dreadfully busy? Would it not
convenience her more if I went to her, Loftie?"

"No, mother, she would prefer to come here. She has"--here his face
turned pale--"she has a good deal to say to you--important things to
speak about." His voice trembled. "You will see her alone. You will not
hurry her. Beatrice is the best--the best girl in the world."

Bertram looked very pale when he said this.

"How strange you look, Loftus!" said his mother. "And your words are
very queer. Is anything the matter? Are you concealing any thing from
me?"

"Beatrice will tell you," he said. And he hurried out of the room.

A few minutes before six o'clock Beatrice arrived. Mrs. Bertram had
given directions that she was to be sent at once to her private room.
Clara had these instructions, and was about to carry them out literally
when Catherine and Mabel ran into the hall.

They greeted Beatrice with raptures, and Mabel said in an eager voice:

"We have not yet seen you in your bridal dress, Bee. You know it was an
old promise that we should see you in it the day before the wedding.
Don't stay long with mother, Bee. Catherine and I can walk back with
you, and you can try on your dress while we are by."

"My dress is all right," said Beatrice. "I have tried it; it fits. I
don't want to put it on to-night. I am tired."

Her face was pale, her expression anxious.

Mabel hung back and looked disappointed.

"But you promised," she began.

"Hush, Mabel," said Catherine. She hid quick intuitions, and she saw at
a glance that something was the matter.

"Bee would not break her promise if she could help it," she said to her
sister. "Don't you see that she looks very tired. Bee, shall I take you
to mother?"

"Yes, Catherine," replied Beatrice.

The two girls walked away together. As they mounted the stairs,
Catherine stole another glance at her friend. Then almost timidly she
put her hand through Beatrice's arm.

"To-morrow, Bee," she said, with a loving hug, "you will be _my_
real, real sister."

Beatrice stopped, turned round, and looked at Catherine.

"Kitty, I can't deceive you. I--love you, but I am not going to be
what--what you suppose."

"Then there is something wrong!" exclaimed Catherine. "I feared it from
my mother's face when I saw her an hour ago. Now I am sure. Bee, are you
going to fail us at the last moment? Oh, Beatrice, you have made him so
nice, and we have all been so happy, and mother has said more than once
to me, 'Beatrice Meadowsweet has saved us,' and now, just at the very
last, just at the very end, are you going to be a coward--a deserter?"

"No," said Beatrice. "I won't desert you. I won't fail you. It is given
to me to save your brother Loftus, to really save him. Don't be
frightened, Kitty. I have a hard task to go through. I have to say some
things to your mother which will try her. Yes, I know they will try her
much, but I am doing right, and you must help me, and be brave. Yes, you
must be brave because you know I am doing right."

"I will trust you, Beatrice," said Catherine. Her dark eyes shone, over
the pallor of her face there came a glow. She opened the door of her
mother's room.

"Here is Beatrice, mother. And may I--may I--stay too?"

"No, Kate, you are unreasonable. What a long time you have kept
Beatrice. She has been in the house for ten minutes. I heard you two
gossiping in the corridor. Girls are unreasonable, and they don't
understand that the impatience of the old is the worst impatience of
all. Go, Kate."

Catherine's eyes sought her friend's. They seemed to say mutely:

"Be good to her, Beatrice, she is my mother."

Then she closed the door behind the two.

People who have secrets, who find themselves hemmed into corners, who
live perpetually over graves of the dead past, are seldom quite free
from fear. Mrs. Bertram had gone through tortures during the last couple
of hours. When she was alone with Beatrice she seized her hands, and
drew her down to sit on the sofa by her side. Her eyes asked a thousand
questions, while her lips made use of some conventional commonplace.

Beatrice was after all an unsophisticated country girl. She had never
been trained in _finesse_; painful things had not come to her in
the past of her life, either to conceal or avoid. Now a terrible task
was laid upon her, and she went straight to the point.

Mrs. Bertram said: "You look tired, my dear future daughter."

Beatrice made no reply to this. She did not answer Mrs. Bertram's lips,
but responding to the hunger in her eyes, said:

"I have got something to tell you."

Then Mrs. Bertram dropped her mask.

"I feared something was wrong. I guessed it from Loftie's manner. Go on,
speak. Tell me the worst."

"I'm afraid I must give you pain."

"What does a chit like you know of pain? Go on, break your evil tidings.
Nay, I will break them for you. There is to be no wedding tomorrow."

"You are wrong. There is."

"Thank God. Then I don't care for anything else. You are a true girl,
Beatrice, you have truth in your eyes. Thank God, you are faithful. My
son will have won a faithful wife."

"I trust he will--I think he will. But--"

"You need not be over modest, child. I know you. I see into your soul.
We women of the world, we deep schemers, we who have dallied with the
blackness of lies, can see farther than another into the deep, pure well
of truth. I don't flatter you, Beatrice, but I know you are true."

"I am true, true to your son, and to you. But Mrs. Bertram, don't
interrupt me. In being true, I must give you pain."

Again Mrs. Bertram's dark brows drew together until they almost met. Her
heart beat fast.

"I am not very strong," she said, in a sort of suffocating voice. "You
are concealing something; tell it to me at once."

"I will. Can you manage not to speak for a moment or two?"

"Go on, child. Can I manage? What have I not managed in the course of my
dark life? Go on. Whatever you tell me will be a pin-prick, and I have
had swords in my heart."

"I am sorry," began Beatrice.

"Don't--do you suppose I care for a girl's sorrow! The sorrow of an
uncomprehending child? Speak."

"I have found out," said Beatrice, in a slow voice, "just through an
accident, although I believe God was at the bottom of it, something
which has saved me from committing a great wrong, which has saved your
son from becoming an absolute scoundrel, which has saved us both from a
life of misery."

"What have you found out, Beatrice?"

Mrs. Bertram's face was perfectly white; her words came out in a low
whisper.

"Beatrice, what have you discovered?"

"That Captain Bertram loves another, that another girl loves him, has
almost been brought to death's door because she loves him so well."

"Pooh, child, is that all? How you frightened me."

"Why do you speak in that contemptuous tone. The 'all' means a great
deal to Captain Bertram, and to me, and to the other girl."

"Beatrice, you are a baby. What young man of my son's age has not had
his likings, his flirtations, his heart affairs? If that is all--"

"It is all, it is enough. Your son has not got over his heart affair."

"Has he not? I'll speak to him. I'll soon settle that"

"Nor have I got over it."

"Beatrice, my dear girl, you really are something of a little goose.
Jealous, are you? Beatrice, you ask an impossibility when you expect a
young man never to have looked with eyes of affection on any one but
yourself."

"I will not marry the man who looks with eyes of affection at another."

"How you bewilder me, and yet, how childish you are. Must I argue this
question with you? Must I show you from my own larger experience how
attached Loftus is to you? Dear fellow, his very face shows it."

"I don't want you to teach me anything from your experience, Mrs.
Bertram. Captain Bertram does not love me. I do not love him; he loves
another. She has given him all her heart, all that she can give. He
shall marry her;--he shall marry her to-morrow."

Mrs. Bertram rose very slowly.

"Beatrice," she said. "Your meaning is at last plain to me. _Noblesse
oblige_. Ah, yes, that old saying comes true all the world over. You
have not the advantage of good birth. I thought--for a long time I
thought that you were the exception that proved the rule. You were the
lady made by nature's own hand. Your father could be a tradesman--a
_draper_--and yet have a lady for his daughter. I thought this,
Beatrice; I was deceived. There are no exceptions to that nobility which
only birth can bestow. You belong to the common herd, the
_canaille_. You cannot help yourself. A promise to one like you is
nothing. You are tired of Loftus. This is an excuse to get out of a
bargain of which you have repented."

"It is not."

Beatrice looked at Mrs. Bertram with eyes that blazed with anger. She
walked across the room, and rang the bell. Her ring was imperious. She
stood near the bell-pull until Clara, in some trepidation, obeyed the
summons.

"Is Captain Bertram downstairs?" asked Beatrice.

"I'll inquire, Miss Meadowsweet."

"I think he is. I think you'll find him in the study. Ask him to have
the goodness to come to Mrs. Bertram's room."

Clara withdrew. Beatrice began slowly to pace up and down the floor.

"I belong to the _canaille_," she murmured. "And my father--_my_ father
