
"Impossible! impossible!" he said. "The Mexicans would not dare to come
away so far from their base at San Antonio."

The hunter, an old man, looked at him with curiosity and disapproval.

"That's more than you an' me can say," he said, "although you be a
Mexican yourself and know more about your people than I do. I jest tell
what I've heard."

"Mr. Urrea is one of the most ardent of the Texan patriots," said Ned.

"I jest tell what I've heard," said the old man, whistling to his pony
and riding away.

"Obstinate!" said Urrea, laughing in his usual light, easy manner.
"These old hunters are very narrow. You cannot make them believe that a
Mexican, although born on Texas soil, which can be said of very few
Texans, is a lover of liberty and willing to fight against aggression
from the capital."

At night they rode into a splendid belt of forest, and made their camp
by a cool spring that gushed from a rock and flowed away among the
trees. Ned and Obed scouted a little, and found the country so wild that
the deer sprang up from the bushes. It was difficult to resist the
temptation of a shot, but they were compelled to let them go, and
returning to camp they reported to Urrea and the Ring Tailed Panther
that they seemed to have the forest to themselves, so far as human
beings were concerned.

"Do you think it is safe to light a fire?" asked Urrea.

"I see no danger in it," replied Obed, "that is, none in a little one.
There are so many bushes about us that it couldn't be seen fifty yards
away."

It was now November and as the night had become quite cold Urrea's
suggestion of a fire seemed good to Ned. He showed much zeal in
gathering the dry wood, and then they deftly built a fire, one that
would throw out little flame, but which would yet furnish much heat. The
Ring Tailed Panther, who had the most skill in wilderness life, kindled
it with flint and steel, and while the flames, held down by brush, made
hot coals beneath, the smoke was lost among the trees and the darkness.

The horses were tethered near, and they warmed their food by the coals
before eating it. The place was snug, a little cup set all around by
bushes and high trees, and the heat of the fire was very grateful. While
Ned sat before it, eating his food, he noticed great numbers of last
year's fallen leaves lying about, and he picked the very place where he
would make his bed. He would draw great quantities of the leaves there
under the big beech, and spread his blankets upon them.

They were tired after the long day's journey, and they did not talk
much. The foliage about them was so thick, making it so dark within the
little shade that the need of a watch seemed small, but they decided to
keep it, nevertheless. The Ring Tailed Panther would take the first half
of the night and Urrea the second half. The next night would be divided
between Obed and Ned.

Ned raked up the leaves at the place that he had selected, folded
himself between his blankets, and was asleep in five minutes. The last
thing that he remembered seeing was the broad figure of the Ring Tailed
Panther, sitting with his back against a tree, and his rifle across his
knees.

But Ned awoke hours later--after midnight in fact--although it was not a
real awakening, instead a sort of half way station from slumberland. He
did not move, but opened his eyes partly, and saw that Urrea was now on
guard. The young Mexican was not sitting as the Ring Tailed Panther had
been, but was standing some yards away, with his rifle across his
shoulder. Ned thought in a vague way that he looked trim and strong, and
then his heavy lids dropped down again. But he did not fall back into
the deep sleep from which he had come. The extra sense, his remarkable
power of intuition or divination was at work. Without any effort of his
will the mechanism of his brain was moving and gave him a signal. He
heard a slight noise and he lifted the heavy lids.

Urrea had walked to the other side of the little glade, his feet
brushing some of the dry leaves as he went. There was nothing unusual in
such action on the part of a sentinel, but something in Urrea's attitude
seemed to Ned to denote expectancy. His whole figure was drawn close
together like that of one about to spring, and he leaned forward a
little. Yet this meant nothing. Any good man on guard would be attentive
to every sound of the forest, whether the light noise made by a
squirrel, as he scampered along the bark of a tree, or a stray puff of
wind rustling the leaves.

Ned made another effort of the will, and closed his eyes for the second
time, but the warning sense, the intuitive note out of the infinite,
would not be denied. He was compelled to open his eyes once more and
now his faculties were clear. Urrea had moved again and now he was
facing the sleepers. He regarded them attentively, one by one, and in
the dusk he could not see that Ned's eyelids were not closed. The boy
did not stir, but a cold shiver ran down his spine. He felt with all the
power of second sight that something extraordinary was going to happen.

Urrea walked to the smoldering fire, and now Ned dropped his eyelids,
until he looked only through a space as narrow as the edge of a knife
blade. Urrea stooped and took from the dying heap a long stick, still
burning at the end. Then he took another look at the three and suddenly
disappeared among the bushes, carrying with him the burning stick. He
was so light upon his feet that he made no sound as he went.

Ned was startled beyond measure, but he was like a spring released by a
key. He felt that the need of instant action was great, and, as light of
foot as Urrea himself, he sprang up, rifle in hand, and followed the
young Mexican. He was thankful for the wilderness training that he had
been compelled to acquire. He caught sight of Urrea about twenty yards
ahead, still moving swiftly on soundless feet. He moved thus a hundred
yards or more, with Ned, as his shadow, as dark and silent as he, and
then he stopped by the side of a great tree.

Ned felt instinctively, when Urrea halted that he would look back to see
if by chance he were followed, and he sank down in the bushes before the
Mexican turned. Urrea gave only a glance or two in that direction and,
satisfied, began to examine the tree which was certainly worthy of
attention, as it rose to an uncommon height, much above its fellows.

Ned's amazement grew. Why should Urrea be so particular about the size
or height of a tree? It grew still further, when he saw Urrea lay his
rifle down at the foot of the tree, spring up, grasp the lowest branch
with one hand, and then deftly draw himself up, taking with him the
burning stick. He paused a moment on the bough, looked again toward the
little camp and then climbed upward with a speed and dexterity worthy of
a great monkey.

Ned saw the Mexican's figure going up and up, a dark blur against the
stem of the tree, and it was hard to persuade himself that it was
reality. He saw also the bright spark on the end of the stick that he
carried with him. The tree rose to a height of nearly 150 feet, and when
Urrea passed above the others that surrounded it, the moon's rays,
unobstructed, fell upon him. Then, although he became smaller and
smaller, Ned saw him more clearly. The boy was so much absorbed now in
the story that was unfolding before him that he did not have time to
wonder.

Urrea went up as high as the stem would sustain him. Then he rested his
feet on a bough, wrapped his left arm around the tree, and, with his
right arm, began to whirl the burning stick rapidly. The spark leaped
up, grew into a blaze, and Ned saw a wheel of fire. He had seen many
strange things, but this, influenced by circumstances of time and place,
was the most uncanny of them all.

Far above his head, and above the body of the forest revolved the wheel
of fire. Urrea's own body had melted away in the darkness, until it was
fused with the tree. Ned now saw only the fiery signal, for such it must
be, and his heart rose in fierce anger against Urrea. Once he lifted his
rifle a little, and studied the possibilities of a shot at such range,
but he put the rifle down again. He would watch and wait.

The wheel ceased presently to revolve, and Ned saw Urrea again, torch in
hand, but motionless. He, too, was waiting. He did not stir for a full
quarter of an hour, but all the while the torch burned steadily. Then he
suddenly began to whirl it again, but in a direction opposite to that
made by the first wheel of fire. Around and around went the burning
brand for some minutes. When he stopped, he waited at least ten minutes
longer. Then, as if he had received the answer that he wished, making
the claim of communication complete, he dropped the torch. Ned saw it
falling, a trail of light, until it struck among the bushes, where it
went out. Then Urrea began to descend the tree, but he came down more
slowly than he had gone up.

Ned slipped forward, seized Urrea's rifle, and then slipped back among
the bushes. He put the Mexican's weapon at his feet, cocked his own and
waited.

Urrea, coming slowly down the tree, stopped and stood there for a few
moments as if in contemplation. A shaft of moonlight piercing through
the foliage fell upon his face illumining the olive complexion and the
well-cut features. It was hard for Ned to believe what he had seen. What
could it be but a signal? and that signal to the enemies of the Texans!
And yet Urrea did not look like a villain and traitor. There was
certainly no malevolence in his face, which on the other hand had rather
a melancholy cast, as he stood there on the bough before swinging to the
ground.

Ned strengthened his will. He had seen what he had seen. Such things
could not be passed over in times when lives were the forfeit of
weakness. Urrea let himself lightly to the earth, and stooped down for
his rifle. It was not there, and when he straightened up again Ned saw
that his face was ghastly pale in the moonlight. Urrea, with his quick
perceptions, was bound to know from the absence of the rifle that he had
been followed and was caught. His hand went down toward his belt where a
pistol hung, but Ned instantly called from the bush:

"Hands up, Don Francisco, or I shoot!"

His tone was stern and menacing, and Urrea's hands went up by the side
of his head. But the paleness left his face, and his manner became
careless and easy.

"Is that you, Ned?" he called in the most friendly tones. "Is it a joke
that you play upon me? Ah, you Anglo-Saxons, you seem rough in your play
to us Latins."

"It is no joke, Don Francisco. I was never more earnest in my life,"
said Ned, stepping from the bush, but still keeping Urrea covered with
his rifle. "Your merits as a climber of trees are great, but you
interested me more with your wheel of fire. I think I can account now
for your absences, when any fighting with the Mexicans was to be done.
You are a spy and you were signaling with that torch to our enemies."

Urrea laughed lightly, musically, and he regarded Ned with a look of
amusement. It seemed to say to him that he was only a boy, that one so
young was bound to make mistakes, but that the Mexican was not offended
because he was making one now at his cost. The laugh was irritating to
the last degree, and yet it implanted in the boy's mind a doubt, a fear
that he might have been mistaken.

"Signaling to friends, not enemies, you mean," said Urrea. "This forest
ends but a few hundred yards beyond, and I learned when I was scouting
about San Antonio that some allies of ours in this region were waiting
night and day for the news from us to come. I took this method to
communicate with them, a successful method, too, I am happy to say, as
they answered. In a wild region one must do strange things."

His tone was so light, so easy, and it rang so true that Ned hesitated.
But it was only for a moment. Manner could not change substance. He
cleared away the mists and vapors made by Urrea's light tone and easy
assurance, and came back to the core of the matter.

"Don Francisco," he said, "I have liked you, and I believed that you
were a true Texan patriot, but I cannot believe the story that you tell
me. It seems too improbable. If you wished to make these signals to
friends, why did you not tell us that you were going to do so?"

"I did not know of the possibility of such a signal until I saw this
tree and its great height. Then, as all of you were asleep, I concluded
to make my signal, achieve the result and give you a pleasant surprise.
Come now, Senor Edward, hand me my rifle, and let us end this unpleasant
joke."

Ned shook his head. It was hard to resist Urrea's assurance, but manner
was not all. His logical mind rejected the story.

"I'm sorry, Don Francisco," he said, "but I must refer this to my
comrades, Mr. Palmer and Mr. White. Meanwhile, I am compelled to hold
you a prisoner. You will walk before me to the camp, keeping your hands
up."

Urrea shrugged his shoulders and gave Ned a glance, which seemed to be a
mixture of disgust and contempt.

"Very well, if you will have it so," he said. "There is nothing like the
stubbornness of a boy."

"March!" said Ned, who felt his temper rising.

Urrea, hands up, walked toward the camp, and Ned came behind him,
carrying the two rifles, one of them cocked and ready for instant use.
The Mexican never looked back, but walked with unhesitating step
straight to the camp. The Ring Tailed Panther and Obed were still sound
asleep, but, when Ned called sharply to them, they sprang to their feet,
gazing in astonishment at the spectacle of Urrea with his hands up, and
the boy standing behind him with the two rifles.

"Things seem to have happened while I slept," said Obed.

"Looks as if there might have been some rippin' an' tearin'," said the
Ring Tailed Panther. "What have you been up to, Urrea?"

Urrea gave the Ring Tailed Panther a malignant glance.

"I have not been up to anything, to use your own common language," he
replied. "If you want any explanation, you can ask it of your suspicious
young friend there. As for me, I am tired of holding my hands as high as
my head, and I intend to light a cigarette. Three of you, I suppose, are
sufficient to watch me."

There were still a few embers and touching his cigarette to one of them
he sat down, leaned against the trunk of a tree and began to puff, as if
the future of the case had no interest for him.

"Just hand me that pistol at your belt, will you?" said Obed. "There
seems to be some kind of a difference of opinion between you and Ned,
and, without knowing anything about it, I'm for Ned."

Urrea took the pistol and tossed it toward Obed. The Maine man caught it
deftly and thrust it in his own belt. He did not seem to be at all
offended by the young Mexican's contemptuous manner.

"Besides being one of the best watch makers the State of Maine ever
produced," he said, "I'm pretty good at sleight-of-hand. I could catch
loaded pistols all day, Urrea, if you were to pitch them at me."

Urrea did not deign a reply and Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther looked
at Ned, who told them all he had seen. Urrea did not deny a thing or say
a word throughout the narrative. When Ned finished the Ring Tailed
Panther roared in his accustomed fashion.

"Signalin' to the enemy from a tree top while we was asleep an' he was
supposed to be on guard!" he exclaimed. "What have you got to say to
this, Urrea?"

"Our young paragon of knowledge and wilderness lore has given you my
statement," replied Urrea. "You can believe it or not as you choose. I
shall not waste another word on thickheads."

The teeth of the Ring Tailed Panther came together with a click, and he
looked ominously at Urrea.

"You may not say anything," he growled, "but I will. I didn't trust you
at first, Don Francisco, an' there have been times all along since then
when I didn't trust you. You're a smooth talker, but your habit of
disappearin' has been too much for me. I believe just as Ned does that
you were signalin' to the enemy an' that you meant Texas harm, lots of
harm. It was a lucky thing that the boy awoke. Now, what do you think,
Obed?"

"Appearances are deceitful sometimes but not always. Don Francisco seems
to have spun a likely yarn to Ned, but I've heard better and they were
not so mighty much."

"You see the jury is clean ag'inst you, Don Francisco," said the Ring
Tailed Panther, "an' it's goin' to hold you to a higher court. Did you
hear what I said?"

Urrea nodded.

"Yes, I heard you," he replied, "but I heard only foolishness."

The Ring Tailed Panther growled, but he had the spirit of a gentleman.
He would not upbraid a prisoner.

"The verdict of the jury bein' given," he said soberly, "we've got to
hold the prisoner till we reach the higher court. We ain't takin' no
chances, Urrea, an' for that reason we've got to tie you. Ned, cut off a
piece of that lariat."

Urrea leaped to his feet. He was stung at last.

"I will not be bound," he cried.

"Yes, you will," said the Ring Tailed Panther. "I ain't goin' to hurt
you, 'cause I'm pretty handy at that sort of thing, but I'll tie you so
you won't get loose in a hurry. Better set down an' take it easy."

Urrea, after the single flash of anger, sat down, and resuming his
careless air, held out his hands.

"Since you intend to act like barbarians as well as fools," he said, "I
will not seek to impede you."

None of the three replied. The Ring Tailed Panther handily tied his
wrists together, and then his ankles, but in such fashion that he could
still sit in comfort, leaning against the tree, although the pleasure of
the cigarette was no longer for him.

"If you don't mind," he said, "I think I shall go to sleep."

"No objections a-tall, a-tall," said the Ring Tailed Panther. "Have nice
dreams."

Urrea closed his eyes, and his chest soon rose and fell in the regular
manner of one who sleeps. Ned could not tell whether he really slept. A
feeling of compassion for Urrea rose again in his heart. What if he
should be telling the truth after all? Wild and improbable tales
sometimes came true. He was about to speak of his thoughts to the men,
but he checked himself. Disbelief was returning. It was best to take
every precaution.

"You go to sleep, Ned," said Obed. "You've done a good job and you are
entitled to a rest. The Panther and I will watch till day."

Ned lay down between his blankets and everything was so still that
contrary to his expectations, he fell asleep, and did not awaken again
until after dawn, when Obed told him that they would resume the march,
eating their breakfast as they went. Urrea was unbound, although he was
first searched carefully for concealed weapons.

"I wouldn't have a man to ride with his arms tied," said the Ring Tailed
Panther, "but we'll keep on both sides of you an' you needn't try to
make a bolt of it, Urrea."

"I shall not try to make any bolt of it," said Urrea scornfully, "but
you will pay dearly to Austin and Houston for the indignity that you
have put upon me."

The Ring Tailed Panther, true to his principle of never taunting a
prisoner, did not reply, and they mounted. The Panther rode ahead and
Obed and Ned, with Urrea between them, followed. Urrea was silent, his
face melancholy and reproachful.

The belt of timber extended only a few hundred yards farther, when they
came upon the open prairie extending to the horizon. Far to the left
some antelope were feeding, but there was no other sign of life of any
kind.

"I don't see anything of them friends of ours to whom you were
signalin'," said the Ring Tailed Panther.

Urrea would not reply. The Panther said nothing further, and they rode
on over the prairie. But both the Ring Tailed Panther and Obed were
watching the ground, and, when they had gone about two miles, they
reined in their horses.

"See!" they exclaimed simultaneously.

They had come to a broad trail cutting directly across their path. It
was made by at least a hundred horses, and the veriest novice could not
have missed it. The trail was that of shod hoofs, indicating the
presence of white men.

"What is this, Don Francisco?" asked the Ring Tailed Panther.

"I do not have to reply to you unless I wish," said Urrea, "but I am
willing to tell you that it is undoubtedly the trail of the Texan
reinforcements to which I was signaling last night."

Ned looked quickly at him. Again the young Mexican's voice had the ring
of truth. Was the wild and improbable tale now coming true? If so, he
