      Stood on our storming-day;
    With neck out-thrust, you fancy how,
      Legs wide, arms locked behind,
    As if to balance the prone brow
      Oppressive with its mind.

    Just as perhaps he mused "My plans
      That soar, to earth may fall,
    Let once my army-leader Lannes
      Waver at yonder wall,"--
    Out 'twixt the battery-smokes there flew
      A rider, bound on bound
    Full-galloping; nor bridle drew
      Until he reached the mound.

    Then off there flung in smiling joy,
      And held himself erect
    By just his horse's mane, a boy:
      You scarcely could suspect--
    (So tight he kept his lips compressed,
      Scarce any blood came through)
    You looked twice ere you saw his breast
      Was all but shot in two.

    "Well," cried he, "Emperor, by God's grace
      We've got you Ratisbon!
    The Marshal's in the market-place,
      And you'll be there anon
    To see your flag-bird flap his vans
      Where I, to heart's desire,
    Perched him!" The chief's eye flashed; his plans
      Soared up again like fire.

    The chief's eye flashed; but presently
      Softened itself, as sheathes
    A film the mother-eagle's eye
      When her bruised eaglet breathes;
    "You're wounded!" "Nay," the soldier's pride
      Touched to the quick, he said:
    "I'm killed, Sire!" And his chief beside,
      Smiling the boy fell dead.

Browning




    I made them lay their hands in mine and swear
    To reverence the King, as if he were
    Their conscience, and their conscience as their King,
    To ride abroad redressing human wrongs,
    To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it.

Tennyson




BRITISH COLONIAL AND NAVAL POWER


The sagacity of England is in nothing more clearly shown than in the
foresight with which she has provided against the emergency of war. Let
it come when it may, it will not find her unprepared. So thickly are her
colonies and naval stations scattered over the face of the Earth, that
her war-ships can speedily reach every commercial centre on the globe.

There is that great centre of commerce, the Mediterranean Sea. It was a
great centre long ago, when the Phoenician traversed it, and, passing
through the Pillars of Hercules, sped on his way to the distant, and
then savage, Britain. It was a great centre when Rome and Carthage
wrestled in a death-grapple for its possession. But at the present day
England is as much at home on the Mediterranean as if it were one of her
own Canadian lakes.

Nor is it simply the number of the British colonies, or the evenness
with which they are distributed, that challenges our admiration. The
positions which these colonies occupy, and their natural military
strength, are quite as important facts. There is not a sea or a gulf in
the world, which has any real commercial importance, but England has a
stronghold on its shores. And wherever the continents tending southward
come to points, around which the commerce of nations must sweep, there
is a British settlement; and the cross of St. George salutes you as you
are wafted by. There is hardly a little desolate, rocky island or
peninsula, formed apparently by Nature for a fortress, and nothing else,
but the British flag floats securely over it.

These are literal facts. Take, for example, the great Overland Route
from Europe to Asia. Despite its name, its real highway is on the waters
of the Mediterranean and Red Seas. It has three gates--three only.
England holds the key to every one of these gates. Count
them--Gibraltar, Malta, Aden. But she commands the entrance to the Red
Sea, not by one, but by several strongholds. Midway in the narrow strait
is the black, bare rock of Perim, sterile, precipitous, a perfect
counterpart of Gibraltar; and on either side, between it and the
mainland, are the ship-channels which connect the Red Sea with the great
Indian Ocean. This rock England holds.

A little farther out is the peninsula of Aden, another Gibraltar, as
rocky, as sterile, and as precipitous, connected with the mainland by a
narrow strait, and having a harbour safe in all winds, and a central
coal depot. This England bought in 1839. And to complete her security,
she has purchased from some petty sultan the neighbouring islands of
Socotra and Kouri, giving, as it were, a retaining fee, so that, though
she does not need them herself, no rival power may ever possess them.

As we sail a little farther on, we come to the China Sea. What a beaten
track of commerce is this! What wealth of comfort and luxury is wafted
over it by every breeze!--the teas of China; the silks of farther India;
the spices of the East. The ships of every clime and nation swarm on its
waters--the stately barques of England, France, and Holland; the swift
ships of America; and mingled with them, in picturesque confusion, the
clumsy junk of the Chinaman, and the slender, darting canoe of the
Malaysian islanders.

At the lower end of the China Sea, where it narrows into Malacca Strait,
England holds the little island of Singapore--a spot of no use to her
whatever, except as a commercial depot, but of inestimable value for
that; a spot which, under her fostering care, is growing up to take its
place among the great emporiums of the world. Half-way up the sea she
holds the island of Labuan, whose chief worth is this, that beneath its
surface and that of the neighbouring mainland there lie inexhaustible
treasures of coal, which are likely to yield wealth and power to the
hand that controls them. At the upper end of the sea she holds
Hong-Kong, a hot, unhealthy island, but an invaluable base from which to
threaten and control the neighbouring waters.

Even in the broad, and as yet comparatively untracked Pacific, she is
making silent advances towards dominion. The vast continent of
Australia, which she has secured, forms its south-western boundary. And
pushed out six hundred miles eastward from this lies New Zealand, like a
strong outpost, its shores so scooped and torn by the waves that it must
be a very paradise of commodious bays and safe havens for the mariner.
The soil, too, is of extraordinary fertility; and the climate, though
humid, deals kindly with the Englishman's constitution. Nor is this all;
for, advanced from it, north and south, like picket stations, are
Norfolk Island, and the Auckland group, both of which have good
harbours. And it requires no prophet's eye to see that, when England
needs posts farther eastward, she will find them among the green coral
islets that stud the Pacific.

Turn now your steps homeward, and pause a moment at the Bermudas, those
beautiful isles, with their fresh verdure--green gems in the ocean, with
air soft and balmy as Eden's was! They have their home uses too. They
furnish arrow-root for the sick, and ample supplies of vegetables
earlier than sterner climates will yield them. Is this all that can be
said? Reflect a little more deeply. These islands possess a great
military and naval depot; and a splendid harbour, landlocked, strongly
fortified, and difficult of access to strangers;--and all within a few
days' sail of the chief ports of the Atlantic shores of the New World.
England therefore retains them as a station on the road to her West
Indian possessions; and should America go to war with her, she would use
it as a base for offensive operations, where she might gather and whence
she might hurl upon any unprotected port all her gigantic naval and
military power.

"Atlantic Monthly."




ENGLAND, MY ENGLAND


    What have I done for you,
      England, my England?
    What is there I would not do,
      England, my own?
    With your glorious eyes austere,
    As the Lord were walking near,
    Whispering terrible things and dear
      As the Song on your bugles blown, England--
      Round the world on your bugles blown!

    Where shall the watchful sun,
      England, my England,
    Match the master-work you've done,
      England, my own?
    When shall he rejoice agen
    Such a breed of mighty men
    As come forward, one to ten,
      To the Song on your bugles blown, England--
      Down the years on your bugles blown?

    Ever the faith endures,
      England, my England:--
    "Take and break us: we are yours,
      England, my own!
    Life is good, and joy runs high
    Between English earth and sky:
    Death is death; but we shall die
      To the Song on your bugles blown, England--
    To the stars on your bugles blown!"

    They call you proud and hard,
      England, my England:
    You with worlds to watch and ward,
      England, my own!
    You whose mailed hand keeps the keys
    Of such teeming destinies,
    You could know nor dread nor ease
      Were the Song on your bugles blown, England--
      Round the Pit on your bugles blown!

    Mother of Ships whose might,
      England, my England,
    Is the fierce old Sea's delight,
      England, my own,
    Chosen daughter of the Lord,
    Spouse-in-Chief of the ancient Sword,
    There's the menace of the Word
      In the Song on your bugles blown, England--
      Out of heaven on your bugles blown!

W. E. Henley




A GOOD TIME GOING

(Charles Mackay, at the end of his American tour in 1859, was
entertained in Boston by the leading literary men. This poem, written
for the occasion, was read to speed the parting guest.)


    Brave singer of the coming time,
      Sweet minstrel of the joyous present,
    Crowned with the noblest wreath of rhyme,
      The holly-leaf of Ayrshire's peasant,[4]
    Good-bye! Good-bye!--Our hearts and hands,
      Our lips in honest Saxon phrases,
    Cry, God be with him, till he stands
      His feet among the English daisies!

    'Tis here we part;--for other eyes
      The busy deck, the fluttering streamer,
    The dripping arms that plunge and rise,
      The waves in foam, the ship in tremor,
    The kerchiefs waving from the pier,
      The cloudy pillar gliding o'er him,
    The deep blue desert, lone and drear,
      With heaven above and home before him!

    His home!--the Western giant smiles,
      And twirls the spotty globe to find it;--
    This little speck the British Isles?
      'Tis but a freckle,--never mind it!
    He laughs, and all his prairies roll,
      Each gurgling cataract roars and chuckles,
    And ridges stretched from pole to pole
      Heave till they crack their iron knuckles!

    But Memory blushes at the sneer,
      And Honour turns with frown defiant,
    And Freedom, leaning on her spear,
      Laughs louder than the laughing giant:
    "An islet is a world," she said,
      "When glory with its dust has blended,
    And Britain keeps her noble dead
      Till earth and seas and skies are rended!"

    Beneath each swinging forest-bough
      Some arm as stout in death reposes,--
    From wave-washed foot to heaven-kissed brow
      Her valour's life-blood runs in roses;
    Nay, let our brothers of the West
      Write smiling in their florid pages,
    One-half her soil has walked the rest
      In poets, heroes, martyrs, sages!

    Hugged in the clinging billow's clasp,
      From sea-weed fringe to mountain heather,
    The British oak with rooted grasp
      Her slender handful holds together; With
    cliffs of white and bowers of green,
      And Ocean narrowing to caress her,
    And hills and threaded streams between;--
      Our little mother isle, God bless her!

Oliver Wendell Holmes

FOOTNOTES:
[4] Robert Burns




GOD IS OUR REFUGE


    God is our refuge and strength,
      A very present help in trouble.
    Therefore will we not fear, though the earth do change,
      And though the mountains be moved in the heart of the seas;
    Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled,
      Though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
        THE LORD OF HOSTS IS WITH US;
        THE GOD OF JACOB IS OUR REFUGE.

    There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God,
      The holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
    God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved:
    God shall help her at the dawn of morning.
    The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved:
      He uttered his voice, the earth melted.
        THE LORD OF HOSTS IS WITH US;
        THE GOD OF JACOB IS OUR REFUGE.

    Come, behold the works of the LORD,
      What desolations he hath made in the earth.
    He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth;
      He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder;
      He burneth the chariots in the fire.
    Be still, and know that I am God:
    I will be exalted among the nations,
    I will be exalted in the earth.
        THE LORD OF HOSTS IS WITH US;
        THE GOD OF JACOB IS OUR REFUGE.

Psalm XLVI.




A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good
things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil
things. But I say unto you that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

St. Matthew, XII.




INDIAN SUMMER


    By the purple haze that lies
      On the distant rocky height,
    By the deep blue of the skies,
      By the smoky amber light
    Through the forest arches streaming,
    Where Nature on her throne sits dreaming,
    And the sun is scarcely gleaming
    Through the cloudless snowy white,--
    Winter's lovely herald greets us,
    Ere the ice-crowned giant meets us.

    A mellow softness fills the air,--
      No breeze on wanton wings steals by
    To break the holy quiet there,
      Or make the waters fret and sigh,
    Or the yellow alders shiver,
    That bend to kiss the placid river,
    Flowing on and on forever;
      But the little waves are sleeping,
      O'er the pebbles slowly creeping,
      That last night were flashing, leaping,
    Driven by the restless breeze,
