
"If I had five hundred dollars, I should be able to defeat the schemes
of a villain, and restore a young lady to her rights."

"That seems interesting. Tell me the circumstances."

Dodger told the story as briefly as he could. He was encouraged to
find that the stranger listened to him with attention.

"Do you know," he said, reflectively, "you have done for me what I
once did for another--a rich man? The case was very similar. I was a
poor boy at the time. Do you know what he gave me?"

"What was it, sir?"

"A dollar! What do you think of that for generosity?"

"Well, sir, it wasn't exactly liberal. Did you accept it?"

"No. I told him that I didn't wish to inconvenience him. But I asked
you how much money you supposed I had. I will tell you. In a wallet I
have eleven thousand dollars in bank notes and securities."

"That is a fortune," said Dodger, dazzled at the mention of such a
sum.

"If I had lost it, I have plenty more, but the most serious peril was
to my life. Through your opportune assistance I have escaped without
loss. I fully appreciate the magnitude of the service you have done
me. As an evidence of it, please accept these bills."

He drew from the roll two bills and handed them to Dodger.

The boy, glancing at them mechanically, started in amazement. Each
bill was for five hundred dollars.

"You have given me a thousand dollars!" he gasped.

"I am aware of it. I consider my life worth that, at least. James
Swinton never fails to pay his debts."

"But, sir, a thousand dollars----"

"It's no more than you deserve. When I tell my wife, on my return to
Chicago, about this affair, she will blame me for not giving you
more."

"You seem to belong to a liberal family, sir."

"I detest meanness, and would rather err on the side of liberality.
Now, if agreeable to you, I will order a bottle of champagne, and
solace ourselves for this little incident."

"Thank you, Mr. Swinton, but I have made up my mind not to drink
anything stronger than water. I have tended bar in New York, and what
I have seen has given me a dislike for liquor of any kind."

"You are a sensible young man. You are right, and I won't urge you.
There is my card, and if you ever come to Chicago, call upon me."

"I will, sir."

When Dodger left the Palace Hotel he felt that he was a favorite of
fortune.

It is not always that the money we need is so quickly supplied.

He resolved to return to New York as soon as he could manage it, and
take with him the wife and child of Curtis Waring.

This would cost him about five hundred dollars, and he would have the
same amount left.

Mr. Tucker was reluctant to part with Dodger.

"You are the best assistant I ever had," he said. "I will pay you
twenty dollars a week, if that will induce you to stay."

"I would stay if it were not very important for me to return to New
York, Mr. Tucker. I do not expect to get a place in New York as good."

"If you come back to San Francisco at any time, I will make a place
for you."

"Thank you, sir."

Mrs. Waring was overjoyed when Dodger called upon her and offered to
take her back to New York.

"I shall see Curtis again," she said. "How can I ever thank you?"

But Dodger, though unwilling to disturb her dreams of happiness,
thought it exceedingly doubtful if her husband would be equally glad
to see her.




Chapter XXXV.
The Darkest Day.


When Florence left the employ of Mrs. Leighton she had a few dollars
as a reserve fund. As this would not last long, she at once made an
effort to obtain employment.

She desired another position as governess, and made application in
answer to an advertisement.

Her ladylike manner evidently impressed the lady to whom she applied.

"I suppose you have taught before?" she said.

"Yes, madam."

"In whose family?"

"I taught the daughter of Mrs. Leighton, of West -- Street."

"I have heard of the lady. Of course you are at liberty to refer to
her?"

"Yes, madam," but there was a hesitation in her tone that excited
suspicion.

"Very well; I will call upon her and make inquiries. If you will call
to-morrow morning, I can give you a decisive answer."

Florence fervently hoped that this might prove favorable; but was
apprehensive, and with good reason, it appeared.

When she presented herself the next day, Mrs. Cole said:

"I am afraid, Miss Linden, you will not suit me."

"May I ask why?" Florence inquired, schooling herself to calmness.

"I called on Mrs. Leighton," was the answer. "She speaks well of you
as a teacher, but--she told me some things which make it seem
inexpedient to engage you."

"What did she say of me?"

"That, perhaps, you had better not inquire."

"I prefer to know the worst."

"She said you encouraged the attentions of her nephew, forgetting the
difference in social position, and also that your connections were not
of a sort to recommend you. I admit, Miss Linden, that you are very
ladylike in appearance, but, I can hardly be expected to admit into my
house, in the important position of governess to my child, the
daughter or niece of an apple-woman."

"Did Mrs. Leighton say that I was related to an apple-woman?"

"Yes, Miss Linden. I own I was surprised."

"It is not true, Mrs. Cole."

"You live in the house of such a person, do you not?"

"Yes, she is an humble friend of mine, and has been kind to me."

"You cannot be very fastidious. However, that is your own affair. I am
sorry to disappoint you, Miss Linden, but it will be quite impossible
for me to employ you."

"Then I will bid you good-morning, Mrs. Cole," said Florence, sore at
heart.

"Good-morning. You will, I think, understand my position. If you
applied for a position in one of the public schools, I don't think
that your residence would be an objection."

Florence left the house, sad and despondent. She saw that Mrs.
Leighton, by her unfriendly representations, would prevent her from
getting any opportunity to teach. She must seek some more humble
employment.

"Well, Florence, did you get a place?" asked Mrs. O'Keefe, as she
passed that lady's stand.

"No, Mrs. O'Keefe," answered Florence, wearily.

"And why not? Did the woman think you didn't know enough?"

"She objected to me because I was not living in a fashionable quarter
--at least that was one of her objections."

"I'm sure you've got a nate, clane home, and it looks as nate as wax
all the time."

"It isn't exactly stylish," said Florence, with a faint smile.

"You are, at any rate. What does the woman want, I'd like to know?"

"She doesn't want me. It seems Mrs. Leighton did not speak very highly
of me."

"The trollop! I'd like to give her a box on the ear, drat her
impudence!" said the irate apple-woman. "And what will you be doin'
now?"

"Do you think I can get some sewing to do, Mrs. O'Keefe?"

"Yes, Miss Florence--I'll get you some vests to make; but it's hard
work and poor pay."

"I must take what I can get," sighed Florence. "I cannot choose."

"If you'd only tend an apple-stand, Miss Florence! There's Mrs. Brady
wants to sell out on account of the rheumatics, and I've got a trifle
in the savings bank--enough to buy it. You'd make a dollar a day,
easy."

"It isn't to be thought of, Mrs. O'Keefe. If you will kindly see about
getting me some sewing, I will see how I can get along."

The result was that Mrs. O'Keefe brought Florence in the course of the
day half a dozen vests, for which she was to be paid the munificent
sum of twenty-five cents each.

Florence had very little idea of what she was undertaking.

She was an expert needlewoman, and proved adequate to the work, but
with her utmust industry she could only make one vest in a day, and
that would barely pay her rent.

True, she had some money laid aside on which she could draw, but that
would soon be expended, and then what was to become of her?

"Shure, I won't let you starve, Florence," said the warm-hearted
apple-woman.

"But, Mrs. O'Keefe, I can't consent to live on you."

"And why not? I'm well and strong, and I'm makin' more money than I
nade."

"I couldn't think of it, though I thank you for your kindness."

"Shure, you might write a letter to your uncle, Florence."

"He would expect me, in that case, to consent to a marriage with
Curtis. You wouldn't advise me to do that?"

"No; he's a mane blackguard, and I'd say it to his face."

Weeks rolled by, and Florence began to show the effects of hard work
and confinement.

She grew pale and thin, and her face was habitually sad.

She had husbanded her savings as a governess as closely as she could,
but in spite of all her economy it dwindled till she had none left.

Henceforth, she must depend on twenty-five cents a day, and this
seemed well-nigh impossible.

In this emergency the pawnbroker occurred to her.

She had a variety of nice dresses, and she had also a handsome ring,
given her by her uncle on her last birthday.

This she felt sure must have cost fifty dollars.

It was a trial to part with it, but there seemed to be no alternative.

"If my uncle has withdrawn his affection from me," she said to
herself, "why should I scruple to pawn the ring? It is the symbol of a
love that no longer exists."

So she entered the pawnbrowker's--the first that attracted her
attention--and held out the ring.

"How much will you lend me on this?" she asked, half frightened at
finding herself in such a place.

The pawnbroker examined it carefully. His practiced eye at once
detected its value, but it was not professional to admit this.

"Rings is a drug in the market, young lady," he said. "I've got more
than I know what to do with. I'll give you four--four dollars."

"Four dollars!" repeated Florence, in dismay. "Why, it must have cost
fifty. It was bought in Tiffany's."

"You are mistaken, my dear. Did you buy it yourself there?"

"No, my uncle gave it to me."

"He may have said he paid fifty dollars for it," said the pawnbroker,
wagging his head, "but we know better."

"But what will you give?" asked Florence, desperately.

"I'll give you five dollars, and not a penny more," said the broker,
surveying her distressed face, shrewdly. "You can take it or not."

What could Florence do?

She must have money, and feared that no other pawnbroker would give
her more.

"Make out the ticket, then," she said, wearily, with a sigh.

This was done, and she left the place, half timid, half ashamed, and
wholly discouraged.

But the darkest hour is sometimes nearest the dawn. A great
overwhelming surprise awaited her. She had scarcely left the shop when
a glad voice cried:

