had just fallen into my first sleep, when that detestable dog snapped at
my nose. There was Mrs. Cameron standing in the middle of the room with
a lighted candle in her hand. 'Get up,' she said. 'What for?' I asked.
'Get up this minute!' she said, and she stamped her foot. I thought
perhaps she would disturb your father, for my room is not far away from
his, so I tumbled out of bed. 'Now, what is the matter?' I asked. 'The
matter?' said Mrs. Cameron. '_That's_ the matter! and _that's_ the
matter! and _that's_ the matter!' And what do you think? She was
pointing to my stockings and shoes, and my other clothes. I always do
leave them in a little heap in the middle of the floor; they're
perfectly comfortable there, and it doesn't injure them in the least.
Well! that awful woman woke me out of my sleep to put them by. She stood
over me, and made me fold the clothes up, and shake out the stockings,
and put the shoes under a chair, and all the time that fiendish dog was
snapping at my heels. Oh, it's intolerable! I'll be in a lunatic asylum
if this goes on much longer!"

Polly laughed; she could not help it; and Firefly and David, who were
both listening attentively, glanced significantly at one another.

The next morning, very, very early, Firefly was awakened by a bump. She
sat up, rubbed her eyes, and murmured, "All right!" under her breath.

"Put something on, Fly, and be quick," whispered David's voice from the
door.

Firefly soon tumbled into a warm frock, a thick outdoor jacket, and a
little fur cap; her shoes and stockings were tumbled on anyhow. Holding
her jacket together--for she was in too great a hurry to fasten
it--she joined David.

"I did it last night," he said; "it's a large hole; he'll never be
discovered there. And now the thing is to get him."

"Oh, Dave, how will you manage that?"

"Trust me, Fly. Even if I do run a risk, I don't care. Anything is
better than the chance of Flower getting into another of her passions."

"Oh, anything, of course," said Fly. "Are you going to kill him, Dave?"

"No. The hole is big; he can move about in it. What I thought of was
this--we'd sell him."

"Sell him? But he isn't ours."

"No matter! He's a public nuisance, and he must be got rid of. There are
often men wandering on the moor who would be glad to buy a small dog
like Scorpion. They'd very likely give us a shilling for him. Then we'd
drop the shilling into Mrs. Cameron's purse. Don't you see? She'd never
know how it got there. Then, you understand, it would really have been
Mrs. Cameron who sold Scorpion."

"Oh, delicious!" exclaimed Fly. "She'd very likely spend the money on
postage stamps to send round begging charity letters."

"So Scorpion would have done good in the end," propounded David. "But
come along now, Fly. The difficult thing is to catch the little brute."

It was still very early in the morning, and the corridors and passages
were quite dark. David and Fly, however, could feel their way about like
little mice, and they soon found themselves outside the door of the
green room, which was devoted to Mrs. Cameron.

"Do you feel this?" said David, putting out his hand and touching Fly.
"This is a long towel; I'm winding part of it round my hand and arm. I
don't want to get hydrophobia, like poor Jane. Now, I'm going to creep
into Mrs. Cameron's room so quietly, that even Scorpion won't wake. I
learned how to do that from the black people in Australia. You may stand
there, Fly, but you won't hear even a pin fall till I come back with
Scorpion."

"If I don't hear, I feel," replied Fly. "My heart does thump so. I'm
just awfully excited. Don't be very long away, Dave."

By this time David had managed to unhasp the door. He pushed it open a
few inches, and then lay flat down on his face and hands. The next
moment he had disappeared into the room, and all was profoundly still.
Fly could hear through the partly open door the gentle and regularly
kept-up sound of a duet of snoring. After three or four minutes the duet
became a solo. Still there was no other sound, not a gasp, not even the
pretense of a bark. More minutes passed by. Had David gone to sleep on
the floor? Was Scorpion dead that he had ceased to snore?

These alarming thoughts had scarcely passed through her mind before
David rejoined her.

"He's wrapped up in this towel," he said. "He's kicking with his hind
legs, but he can't get a squeak out; now come along."

Too careless and happy in the success of their enterprise even to
trouble to shut Mrs. Cameron's door, the two children rushed downstairs
and out of the house. They effected their exit easily by opening the
study window. In a moment or two they were in the shrubbery.

"The hole isn't here," said David. "Somebody might find him here and
bring him back, and that would never do. Do you remember Farmer Long's
six-acre field?"

"Where he keeps the bull?" exclaimed Fly. "You haven't made the hole
there, Dave?"

"Yes, I have, in one corner! It's the best place in all the world, for
not a soul will dare to come near the field while the bull is there. You
needn't be frightened, Fly! He's always taken home at night! He's not
there now. But don't you see how he'll guard Scorpion all day? Even Mrs.
Cameron won't dare to go near the field while the bull is there."

"I see!" responded Fly, in an appreciative voice. "You're a very clever
boy, Dave. Now let's come quick and pop him into the hole."

Farmer Long's six-acre field was nearly a quarter of a mile away, but
the children reached it in good time, and Fly looked down with interest
on the scene of David's excavations. The hole, which must have given the
little boy considerable labor, was nearly three feet deep, and about a
foot wide. In the bottom lay a large beef bone.

"He won't like it much!" said David. "His teeth aren't good; he can only
eat chicken bones, but hunger will make him nibble it by-and-by. Now,
Fly, will you go behind that furze bush and bring me a square, flat
board, which you will find there?"

"What a funny board!" said Fly, returning in a moment. "It's all over
little square holes."

"Those are for him to breathe through," said David. "Now, then, master,
here you go! You won't annoy any one in particular here, unless,
perhaps, you interfere with Mr. Bull's arrangements. Hold the board over
the top of the hole, so, Fly. Now then, I hope you'll enjoy yourself, my
dear amiable little friend."

The bandage which firmly bound Scorpion's mouth was removed. He was
popped into the hole, and the wooden cover made fast over the top. The
children went home, vowing eternal secrecy, which not even tortures
should wring from them.

At breakfast that morning Mrs. Cameron appeared late on the scene. Her
eyes were red with weeping. She also looked extremely cross.

"Helen, I must request you to have some fresh coffee made for me. I
cannot bear half cold coffee. Daisy, have the goodness to ring the bell.
Yes, my dear children, I am late. I have a sad reason for being late;
the dog is nowhere to be found."

A gleam of satisfaction filled each young face. Fly crimsoning greatly,
lowered her eyes; but David looked tranquilly full at Mrs. Cameron.

"Is it that nice little Scorpion?" he asked. "I'm awfully sorry, but I
suppose he went for a walk."

Mrs. Cameron glanced with interest at David's sympathetic face.

"No, my dear boy, that isn't his habit. The dear little dog sleeps, as a
rule, until just the last moment. Then I lift him gently, and carry him
downstairs for his cream."

"I wonder how he likes that bare beef bone?" murmured Fly, almost aloud.

"He's sure to come home for his cream in a moment or two!" said David.

He gave Fly a violent kick under the table.

"Helen," said Mrs. Cameron, "be sure you keep Scorpion's cream."

"There isn't any," replied Helen. "I was obliged to send it up to
father. There was not nearly so much cream as usual this morning. I had
scarcely enough for father."

"You don't mean to tell me you have used up the dog's cream?" exclaimed
Mrs. Cameron. "Well, really, that _is_ too much. The little animal will
starve, he can't touch anything else. Oh, where is he? My little,
faithful pet! My lap feels quite empty without him. My dear children, I
trust you may never love--_love_ a little creature as I love Scorpion,
and then lose him. Yes, I am seriously uneasy, the dog would not have
left me of his own accord."

Here, to the astonishment of everybody, and the intense indignation of
Mrs. Cameron, Fly burst into a scream of hysterical laughter, and hid
her face in Polly's neck.

"What a naughty child!" exclaimed the good lady. "You have no sympathy
with my pet, my darling! Speak this minute. Where is the dog, miss?"

"I expect in his grave," said Fly.

Whereupon Dave suddenly disappeared under the table, and all the others
stared in wonder at Fly.

"Firefly, do you know anything?"

"I expect Scorpion is in his grave. Where is the use of making such a
fuss?" responded Fly.

And she made a precipitate retreat out of the window.

All the remainder of that day was occupied in a vain search for the
missing animal. Mrs. Cameron strongly suspected Firefly, but the only
remark the little girl could be got to make was:

"I am sure Scorpion is in his grave."

Mrs. Cameron said that was no answer, and further insisted that the
child should be severely punished. But as in reply to that, Helen said
firmly that as long as father was in the house no one should punish the
children but him, she felt, for the present, at least, obliged to hold
her sense of revenge in check.

After Fly had gone to bed that night, David crept into her room.

"I've done it all now," he said. "I sold Scorpion to-night for a
shilling to a man who was walking across the moor, and I have just
popped the shilling into Mrs. Cameron's purse. The horrid little brute
worked quite a big hole in the bottom of the grave, Fly, and he nearly
snapped my fingers off when I lifted him out to give him to Jones. But
he's away now, that's a comfort. What a silly thing you were, Fly, to
burst out laughing at breakfast, and then say that Scorpion was in his
grave."

"But it was so true, David. That hole looked exactly like a grave."

"But you have drawn suspicion upon you. Now, Mrs. Cameron certainly
doesn't suspect me. See what she has given me: this beautiful new
two-shilling piece. She said I was a very kind boy, and had done my best
to find her treasure for her."

"Oh, Dave, how could you take it!"

"Couldn't I, just! I'm not a little muff, like you. I intend to buy a
set of wickets with this. Well, good-night, Fly; nobody need fear
hydrophobia after this good day's work."




CHAPTER XV.

A DILEMMA.


A night's sleep had by no means improved Mrs. Cameron's temper. She came
downstairs the next morning so snappish and disagreeable, so much
inclined to find fault with everybody, and so little disposed to see the
faintest gleam of light in any direction, that the children almost
regretted Scorpion's absence, and began to wonder if, after all, he was
not a sort of safety-valve for Mrs. Cameron, and more or less essential
to her existence.

Hitherto this good woman had not seen her brother-in-law; and it was
both Helen's and Polly's constant aim to keep her from the sick room.

It was several days now since the Doctor was pronounced quite out of
danger; but the affection of his eyes which had caused his children so
many anxious fears, had become much worse. As the London oculist had
told him, any shock or chill would do this; and there was now no doubt
whatever that for a time, at least, he would have to live in a state of
total darkness.

"It is a dreadful fate," said Helen to Polly. "Oh, yes, it is a dreadful
fate, but we must not complain, for anything is better than losing him."

"Anything truly," replied Polly. "Why, what is the matter, Flower? How
you stare."

Flower had been lying full-length on the old sofa in the school-room;
she now sprang to her feet, and came up eagerly to the two sisters.

"Could a person do this," she said, her voice trembling with
eagerness--"Could such a thing as this be done: could one give their
eyes away?"

"Flower!"

"Yes, I mean it. Could I give my eyes to Dr. Maybright--I mean just do
nothing at all but read to him and look for him--manage so that he
should know everything just through my eyes. Can I do it? If I can, I
will."

"But, Flower, you are not father's daughter," said Polly in an almost
offended tone. "You speak, Flower--you speak as if he were all the
world to you."

"So he is all the world to me!" said Flower. "I owe him reparation, I
owe him just everything. Yes, Helen and Polly, I think I understand how
to keep your father from missing his eyes much. Oh, how glad I am, how
very glad I am!"

From that moment Flower became more or less a changed creature. She
developed all kinds of qualities which the Maybrights had never given
her credit for. She had a degree of tact which was quite astonishing in
a child of her age. There was never a jarring note in her melodious
voice. With her impatience gone, and her fiery, passionate temper
soothed, she was just the girl to be a charming companion to an invalid.

However restless the Doctor was, he grew quieter when Flower stole her
little hand into his; and when he was far too weak and ill and suffering
to bear any more reading aloud, he could listen to Flower as she recited
one wild ballad after another.

Flower had found her mission, and she was seldom now long away from the
Doctor's bedside.

"Don't be jealous, Polly," said Helen. "All this is saving Flower, and
doing father good."

"There is one comfort about it," said Polly, "that as Aunt Maria
perfectly detests poor Flower, or Daisy, as she calls her, she is not
likely to go into father's room."

"That is true!" said Helen. "She came to the room door the other day,
but Flower was repeating 'Hiawatha,' and acting it a little bit--you
know she can't help acting anything she tries to recite--and Aunt Maria
just threw up her hands and rolled her eyes, and went away."

"What a comfort!" said Polly. "Whatever happens, we must never allow the
dreadful old thing to come near father."

Alack! alas! something so bad had happened, so terrible a tragedy had
been enacted that even Flower and Hiawatha combined could no longer keep
Mrs. Cameron away from her brother-in-law's apartment.

On the second day after Scorpion's disappearance, the good woman called
Helen aside, and spoke some words which filled her with alarm.
