On either side of the landing place the cliffs rose steeply up, at
a short distance from the beach. But at this point a sort of
natural gap existed, up which the road ascended into the interior
of the island. There were several natives moving about on the beach
as the boys approached, and one of these was seen, at once, to
start at a run up the road. The lads had carefully removed all
vestige of the paint from their faces and hands and, having put on
their doublets, concealed the strange appearance presented before
by their white shirts.

No resistance was opposed to their landing; but the natives
motioned to them that they must not advance inland, until a
messenger returned from the governor. The boys were only too glad
to throw themselves down full length on the soft sand of the beach,
and to dry their clothes in the sun; as for ten days they had been
constantly wet, and were stiff and tired.

Presently a native came down at a run, and announced that the
governor was at hand. Rising to their feet, and making the best
show they could in their faded garments, the lads soon saw a
Portuguese gentleman, attended by four soldiers, coming down the
road between the cliffs.

"Who are you?" he asked in Portuguese, as he reached them, "and
whence come you?"

"We are Englishmen," Ned said in Spanish. "We belong to the ship of
Captain Drake, which passed by here in its voyage of circumnavigation.
By an accident, we in the canoe were separated from the ship and left
behind. We have come to seek your hospitality, and protection."

"We heard of an English vessel at Ternate," the governor said,
sternly, "some weeks since; and heard also that its captain was
making an alliance with the king there, against us."

"It was not so," Ned said. "The admiral stopped there for a few
days to obtain supplies such as he needed; but we are not here
either to make alliances or to trade. Captain Drake, on starting,
intended to voyage round the coast of America; and to return, if
possible, by the north. After coasting up the western shores of
that continent, he found that it would be impossible to pass round
the north, as the coast extended so rapidly toward the north of
Asia. He therefore started to return by the Cape, and on his way
passed through these islands.

"Had it been part of his plan to make alliances with the King of
Ternate, or any other potentate, he would have stopped and done so;
and would have given his armed assistance to the king. But his
object was simply to return, as quickly as possible. Had there been
any alliance made, we should naturally have made for Ternate,
instead of this island. But as we have no relations with the king,
and seek only means of returning to Europe, we preferred, of
course, to come here, where we knew that we should find Christians;
and, we hoped, friends."

There was palpable truth in what Ned said; and the governor,
unbending, expressed his readiness to receive and help them. He
then asked a few more questions about the manner in which they had
become separated from their friends; and seeing no advantage in
concealing the truth, and thinking perhaps that it would be well,
if an opportunity should offer, that the governor should send a
vessel to search among the islands near where the wreck took place,
and see if any of the crew had sought refuge there, they told him
frankly the circumstances under which they had left the Golden
Hind.

"It would be sad, indeed," said the Portuguese, "if so grand an
expedition, under so noble a commander, should have been wrecked
after accomplishing such a work. We in these parts are not friendly
to any European meddling. His Holiness the pope granted us all
discoveries on this side of the Cape, and we would fain trade in
peace and quiet, without interference. But we can admire the great
deeds and enterprise of your countrymen; and indeed," he said
smiling--for the Portuguese are, as a rule, a very small race--and
looking at the bulk of the four young men, which was, indeed,
almost gigantic by the side of himself and his soldiers, "I am
scarcely surprised, now I see you, at the almost legendary deeds
which I hear that your countrymen have performed on the Spanish
main.

"But now, follow me to my castle, and I will there provide you with
proper appliances. What position did you hold in the ship?"

"We are gentlemen of Devonshire," Ned said, "and bore a share in
the enterprise, sailing as gentlemen adventurers under Captain
Drake. I myself held the rank of third officer in the ship."

"Then, senors," the Portuguese said, bowing, "I am happy to place
myself and my house at your disposal. It may be that you will be
able to render me services which will far more than repay any
slight inconvenience or trouble to which I may be put, for we hear
that the King of Ternate is preparing a formidable expedition
against us; and as my garrison is a very small one, and the natives
are not to be relied upon to fight against those of the other
island, the addition of four such experienced soldiers as yourself
will, in no slight degree, strengthen us."

The boys replied that their swords were at the service of their
host; and, well content with the turn things had taken, they
proceeded with him up the road into the interior of the island.

Upon gaining the higher land, they were surprised at the aspect of
the island. In place of the almost unbroken forest which they had
beheld, in other spots at which they had landed, here was fair
cultivated land. Large groves of spice trees grew here and there,
and the natives were working in the fields with the regularity of
Europeans. The Portuguese method of cultivating the islands which
they took differed widely from that of the English. Their first
step was to compel the natives to embrace Christianity. Their
second to make of them docile and obedient laborers, raising spice
and other products, for which they received in payment calico,
beads, and European goods.

The castle, which stood in the center of a small plain, was built
of stone roughly hewn; and was of no strength which would have
resisted any European attack, but was well calculated for the
purpose for which it was designed. It consisted of a pleasant house
standing in an enclosure, round which was a wall, some fifteen feet
in height, with a platform running behind it, to enable its
garrison to shoot over the top. A ditch of some ten feet in depth
and fifteen feet wide surrounded it; so that, without scaling
ladders to ascend the walls, or cannon to batter holes in them, the
place could be well held against any attack that the natives might
make upon it.

The garrison was not a formidable one, consisting only of some
thirty Portuguese soldiers, whose appearance did not speak much for
the discipline maintained. Their uniforms were worn and rusty in
the extreme. They were slovenly in appearance, and wore a look of
discontent and hopelessness. A large portion of them, indeed, had
been criminals, and had been offered the choice of death or of
serving for ten years, which generally meant for life, in the
eastern seas. Ned judged that no great reliance could be placed
upon this army of scarecrows, in the event of an attack of a
serious character.

"My men would scarcely show to advantage at home," the governor
said, noting the glance of surprise with which the boys had viewed
them. "But in a country like this, with such great heat and no real
occasion for more than appearances, it is hopeless to expect them
to keep up the smartness which would, at home, be necessary. The
natives are very docile and quiet, and give us no trouble whatever;
and were it not for interference from Ternate, where the people are
of a much more warlike nature, the guard which I have would be
ample for any purposes. I am expecting a vessel which calls here
about once in six months, very shortly, and anticipate that she
will bring me some twenty more soldiers, for whom I wrote to the
viceroy at Goa when she last called here."

"What is your latest news from Ternate?" Ned asked.

"I have no direct news," he said. "What we know we gather from the
natives, who, by means of canoes and fishing boats, are often in
communication with those of the opposite island. They tell me that
great preparations are being made, that several of the largest-sized
canoes have been built, and that they believe, when it is full moon,
which is generally the era at which they commence their adventures,
there will be a descent upon this island."

"Then you have seven days in which to prepare," Ned said. "Have you
been doing anything to enable you to receive them hotly?"

"I have not," the governor said. "But now that you gentlemen have
come, I doubt not that your experience in warfare will enable you
to advise me as to what steps I had better take. I stand at present
alone here. The officer who, under me, commanded the garrison died
two months since; and I myself, who was brought up in a civil
rather than a military capacity, am, I own to you, strange
altogether to these matters."

Ned expressed the willingness of himself and his friends to do all
in their power to advise and assist the governor; and with many
mutual compliments they now entered the house, where a goodly room
was assigned to them; some natives told off as their servants; and
the governor at once set two native seamsters to work, to
manufacture garments of a proper cut for them, from materials which
he had in a storehouse for trading with the neighboring chiefs;
who, like all savages, were greatly given to finery. Thus, by the
end of the week, the boys were able once more to make a show which
would have passed muster in a European capital.

At the governor's request, they had at once proceeded to drill the
soldiers, Ned and Gerald taking each the command of a company of
fifteen men, as they understood Spanish and could readily make
themselves understood in Portuguese, whereas Tom and Reuben knew
but little of the Spanish tongue.

"I think," Tom said the first morning to the governor, after the
friends had discussed the prospect together, "it would be well to
throw up some protection at the top of the road leading from the
shore. I should order some large trees to be cut down, and dragged
by a strong force of natives to the spot, and there so arranged
that their branches will point downward and form a chevaux de frise
in the hollow way; leaving until the last moment a passage between
them, but having at hand a number of young saplings, to fill up the
gap. There are, I suppose, other places at which the enemy could
land?"

"Oh, yes," the governor said. "On the other side of the island the
land slopes gradually down to the shore, and indeed it is only for
a few miles, at this point, that the cliffs rise so abruptly that
they could not be ascended. Yet even here there are many points
which a native could easily scale; although we, in our accoutrements,
would find it impossible."

While Ned and Gerald drilled their men with great assiduity,
astonishing the Portuguese soldiers with their energy and
authoritative manner, Tom and Reuben occupied themselves in
superintending the felling of the trees; and their carriage, by
means of a large number of natives, to the top of the road.
Preparations were also made for blocking up the lower windows of
the house so that, in case of the enemy succeeding in carrying the
outer wall, a stout resistance could be made within. Large piles of
provisions were stored in the building, and great jars of water
placed there.

"Are you sure," Ned asked the governor one evening, "of the natives
here? For I own that there appears to me to be a sullen defiance in
their manner, and I should not be surprised to see them turn upon
us, immediately those from the other island arrive. If they did so,
of course our position at the top of the road would be untenable,
as they would take us in the rear. However, if they do so, I doubt
not that we shall be able to cut our way back to the castle,
without difficulty.

"I think that it would be, in any case, advisable to leave at least
ten men to hold the castle, while the rest of us oppose the
landing."

There were in store four small culverins and several light wall
pieces. Two of the culverins were placed on the cliff, one at each
side of the path, so as to command the landing. Two others were
placed on the roof of the castle, which was flat and terraced. The
wall pieces were also cleaned, and placed in position at the
corners of the walls; and the boys, having seen that the musketoons
and arquebuses of the garrison were in excellent order, and ready
for service, felt that all had been done that was possible to
prepare for an attack.

The day before the full moon a sentinel was placed at the cliff,
with orders to bring word instantly to the castle, in case any
craft were seen coming from Ternate, the distance from the cliff to
the house being about a mile. A short time after daybreak, next
morning, the sentry arrived at full speed, saying that a great
fleet of canoes was visible.

Hurrying to the spot with the governor, the lads made out that the
approaching flotilla consisted of eighteen great war canoes, each
of which, crowded as it was, might contain a hundred men; and in
addition to these were a large number of smaller craft. The
invading force, therefore, would considerably exceed two thousand
men.

Reuben had the command of a gun at one side, Tom at the other, and
these now loaded and sighted their pieces, so as to pour a volley
of case shot into the canoes when they arrived within a quarter of
a mile from shore.

The canoes came along in a dense body, as close together as they
could paddle, their rowers filling the air with defiant yells. When
they reached the spot upon which the guns had been trained Tom
fired his piece, and its roar was answered by wild screams and
yells from the crowded fleet. Reuben followed suit, and the
destruction wrought by the gnus was at once manifest. Three of the
great canoes were broken to pieces, and their occupants swimming in
the water climbed into the others, among which also a great many
men had been wounded.

The effect of this reception upon the valor of the natives was very
speedy. Without a moment's delay they backed off, and were soon
seen making out of range of the guns, like a troop of wild fowl
scattered by the shot of a fowler.

"They have a horror of cannon," the governor said, exultingly, as
he witnessed their departure. "If we had a few more pieces, I
should have no fear of the result."

The dispersal of the canoes continued only until they thought that
they were out of range; for although the lads now sent several
round shot at them, these did not produce any effect, the canoes
being but small objects to hit at a distance, when on the move, and
the culverins being old pieces, and but little adapted for accurate
shooting.

The fleet were soon seen to gather again, and after a little pause
they started in a body, as before, along the coast.

"They are going to make a landing elsewhere," Ned said, "and we
shall have to meet them in the open. It is a pity that we have no
beasts of burden to which to harness our pieces; for as these are
only ships' guns, it is impossible for us to drag them at a speed
which would enable us to oppose their landing. Where are all the
natives?"

At the first alarm a large body of the islanders had assembled upon
the cliff, but in the excitement of watching the approaching enemy,
their movements had not been noticed. It was now seen that the
whole of them had left the spot, and not a single native was in
sight.

"I think," Ned said, "we had better fall back and take up a
position near the house, and repel their attack with the assistance
of the guns mounted there. With muskets only, we should not have
much chance of preventing their landing; and indeed they will row
much faster along the coast than we could run to keep up with
them."

The governor agreed in the justice of Ned's view, and the whole
force were now ordered to fall back towards the castle. As they
proceeded they saw large bodies of the natives. These, however,
kept at a distance; but their exultant shouts showed that they must
be considered to have gone over to the enemy.

"I will make you pay for this," the governor said, stamping his
foot and shaking his fist angrily in their direction. "Each man
shall have to furnish double the amount of spice for half the
amount of calico, for the next five years. Ungrateful dogs! When we
have done so much for them!"

Ned could scarcely help smiling to himself, at the thought of the
many benefits which the Portuguese had bestowed upon these
unfortunate islanders, whom they had reduced from a state of happy
freedom to one which, whatever it might be called, was but little
short of slavery.

It was late in the evening before great numbers of the enemy were
seen approaching, and these, swelled as they were by the population
of the island, appeared a formidable body, indeed, by the side of
the handful of white men who were drawn up to defend the place. The
enemy, numerous as he was, appeared indisposed to commence a fight
at once, but began, to the fierce indignation of the governor, to
cut down the groves of spice trees, and to build great fires with
them.

"I don't think that they will attack until tomorrow," Ned said,
"and it would be well, therefore, to withdraw within the walls, to
plant sentries, and to allow the men to rest. We shall want all our
strength when the battle begins."

"Do you think," the governor asked, when they were seated in his
room, and had finished the repast which had been prepared, "that it
will be well to sally out to meet them in the open? Thirty white
men ought to be able to defeat almost any number of these naked
savages."

"If we had horses I should say yes," Ned said, "because then, by
our speed, we could make up for our lack of numbers; and, wheeling
about, could charge through and through them. But they are so light
and active in comparison to ourselves that we should find it
difficult, if not impossible, to bring them to a hand-to-hand
conflict. We have, indeed, the advantage of our musketoons; but I
observed at Ternate that many of the men have muskets, and the
sound of firearms would therefore in no way alarm them. With their
bows and arrows they can shoot more steadily at short distances
than we can, and we should be overwhelmed with a cloud of missiles,
while unable to bring to bear the strength of our arms and the
keenness of our swords against their clubs and rough spears. I
think that we could hold the house for a year against them; but if
we lost many men in a fight outside, it might go hard with us
afterwards."

When morning dawned the garrison beheld, to their dismay, that the
Indians had in the night erected a battery at a quarter of a mile
in front of the gate, and that in this they had placed the
culverins left on the cliff, and a score of the small pieces
carried in their war canoes.

"This is the work of the two white men we saw at Ternate," Gerald
exclaimed. "No Indian could have built a battery according to this
fashion."

As soon as it was fairly light the enemies' fire opened, and was
answered by the culverins on the roof of the house. The latter were
much more quickly and better directed than those of the Indians,
but many of the balls of the latter crashed through the great
gates.

"Shall we make a sortie?" the governor asked Ned.

"I think that we had better wait for nightfall," he replied. "In
passing across this open ground we should lose many men from the
cannon shots, and with so small a force remaining, might not be
able to resist the onrush of so great numbers. Let us prepare,
however, to prop up the gates should they fall, and tonight we will
silence their guns."

At nightfall the gates, although sorely bruised and battered, and
pierced in many places, still stood; being shored up with beams
from behind. At ten o'clock twenty of the garrison were let down by
ropes at the back of the castle, for Ned thought that scouts might
be lurking near the gates, to give notice of any sortie. With great
precaution and in perfect silence they made a way round, and were
within a hundred yards of the battery before their approach was
discovered.

Then, headed by the governor, who was a valiant man by nature, and
the four English, they ran at great speed forward, and were inside
the battery before the enemy could gather to resist them. The
battle was indeed a hard one; for the Indians, with their clubs,
fought valorously. Reuben and Tom, having been furnished with
hammer and long nails, proceeded to spike the guns; which they did
with great quickness, their doings being covered, alike, by their
