daughter by the side of the prostrate man.  He stepped over to her at
once.

"Katharine, Katharine," he said to her in a tone of stern reproof and
surprise, not as he usually spoke to her, "you here!  'T is no place
for women.  When did you come from below?"

"I've not been below at all, father," she replied, looking up at him
with a white, stricken face which troubled his loving heart.

"Do you mean to tell me that you have been on deck during the action?"

"Yes, father, right here.  Do you not understand that it was Mr.
Seymour's ship--I could not go away!"

"By heavens!  Think of it!  And I forgot you completely--  The fault
was mine, how could I have allowed it?" he continued in great agitation.

"Never mind, father; I could not have gone below in any case.  Do you
think he--Mr. Seymour--can be yet alive?" she asked, still cherishing a
faint hope.

The colonel shook his head gloomily, and then stooping down and looking
at the prostrate form of the man on the deck, he asked,--

"But who is this you have here?"

The man opened his eyes at this moment and looked up vacantly.

"William Bentley, sir," he said in a hoarse whisper, as if in answer to
the question; and then making a vain effort to raise his hand to his
head, he went on half-mechanically, "bosun of the Randolph, sir.  Come
aboard!"

"Merciful Powers, it is old Bentley!" cried the colonel.  "Can anything
be done for you, my man?  How is it with you?"

Katharine poured a little more of the cordial down his throat, which
gave him a fictitious strength for a moment, and he answered in a
little stronger voice, with a glance of recognition and wonder,--

"The colonel and the young miss! we thought you dead in the wreck of
the Radnor.  He will be glad;" and then after a pause recollection came
to him.  "Oh, God!" he murmured, "Mr. Seymour!"

"What of him?  Speak!" cried Katharine, in agony.

"Gone with the rest," he replied with an effort "'T was a good fight,
though.  The other ships,--where are they?"

"Escaped," answered the colonel; "we are too much cut up to pursue."

"Why did you do it?" moaned Katharine, thinking of Seymour's attack on
the ship of the line.

The old man did not heed the question; his eyes closed.  He was still a
moment, and then he opened his eyes again slowly.  Straight above him
waved the standard of his enemy.

"I never thought--to die--under the English flag," he said slowly and
with great effort.  Supplying its place with her own young soft arm,
Katharine drew forth the little American ensign which had served him
for a pillow--stained with his own blood--and held it up before him.  A
light came into his dying eyes,--a light of heaven, perhaps, no pain in
his heart now.  One trembling hand would still do his bidding; by a
superhuman effort of his resolute will he caught the bit of bunting and
carried it to his lips in a long kiss of farewell.  His lips moved.  He
was saying something.  Katharine bent to listen.  What was it?  Ah! she
heard; they were the words he said on the deck of the transport when
they saw the ship wrecked in the pass in the beating seas,--the words
he had repeated in the old farmhouse on that winter night to the great
general, when he told the story of that cruise; the words he had made
to stand for the great idea of his own life; the words with which he
had cheered and soothed and sustained and encouraged many weaker men
who had looked to his iron soul for help and guidance.  They were the
words to which many a patriot like him, now lying mute and cold upon
the hills about Boston, under the trees at Long Island, by the flowing
waters and frowning cliffs of the Hudson, on the verdant glacis at
Quebec, 'neath the smooth surface of Lake Champlain, in the dim
northern woods, on the historic field of Princeton, or within the still
depths of this mighty sea now tossing them upon its bosom, had given
most eloquent expression and final attestation.  What were they?

"For--for--love--of--country."  The once mighty voice died away in a
feeble whisper; a child might still the faintly beating heart.  The
mighty chest--rose--fell; the old man lay still.  Love of
country,--that was his passion, you understand.

Love of country!  That was the great refrain.  The wind roared the song
through the pines, on the snow-clad mountains in the far north, sobbed
it softly through the rustling palmetto branches in the south-land, or
breathed it in whispers over the leaves of the oak and elm and laurel,
between.  The waves crashed it in tremendous chorus on rock-bound
shores, or rolled it with tender caress over shining sands.  Under its
inspiration, mighty men left all and marched forth to battle; wooed by
its subtle music, hero women bore the long hours of absence and
suspense; and in its tender harmonies the little children were rocked
to sleep.  Ay, love of country!  All the voices of man and nature in a
continent caught it up and breathed it forth, hurled it in mighty
diapason far up into God's heaven.  Love of country!  It was indeed a
mighty truth.  They preached it, loved it, lived for it, died for it,
till at last it made them free!




CHAPTER XXXVIII

_Philip Disobeys Orders_

"Who is this, pray?" said Captain Vincent, at this moment stepping back
to the silent little group.

"The boatswain of the Randolph," replied the colonel.  "He has just
died."

"Poor fellow! but there are many other brave men gone this day.  What
think you was the complement of the frigate, colonel?"

"Over three hundred men certainly," replied the colonel (the actual
number was three hundred and fifteen).  "Most of them not already done
for were lost in the explosion, I presume?"

"Yes, assuredly; and now I owe you an apology, my dear sir.  I never
saw a more gallant action in my life.  The man 's gone, of course, but
he shall have full credit for it in my report; 'twas bravely done, and
successfully, too.  We are frightfully cut up, and in no condition to
pursue.  In fact, I will not conceal from you that some of our spars
are so severely wounded, and the starboard rigging so damaged and
scorched and cut up, that I know not how we could stand a heavy blow.
Twenty-five are killed, and upward of sixty wounded too, and about
thirty missing, killed, or wounded men of the boarding party, who were
undoubtedly blown up with the frigate.  Beauchamp is gone; and that
little fellow there," pointing to a couple of seamen bringing a small
limp body aft, "is Montagu.  Poor little youngster!"

"This has indeed been a frightful action, captain," replied the
colonel.  "I knew young Seymour well.  He was a man of the most
consummate gallantry.  This sacrifice is like him," he continued
softly, looking at Katharine and then turning away.  Perhaps the
captain understood.  At any rate he stepped to her side and said
gently,--

"Mistress Katharine, this is no place for you; you must go below.
Indeed, I must insist.  I shall have to order you.  Come--" and then
laying his hand on her arm, he started back in surprise.  "Why, you are
wounded!"

"'Tis nothing, sir," said Katharine, faintly.  "I welcome it; 'twas an
American bullet.  Would it had found my heart!"

"Only a flesh-wound, colonel; no cause for alarm," said the captain,
looking at it with the eye of experience.  "It will be all right in a
day or two.  But now she must go below.  I can't understand how you
were allowed to stay here, or be here.  What were they thinking of?
But you saw one of the hottest and most desperate battles ever fought
between two ships since you were here.  They can fight; you were right,
colonel," he went on in ungrudging admiration.

"Here, Desborough," he added, addressing the lieutenant, who just then
put his foot on the deck, "take Miss Wilton below, and ask the surgeon
to attend her at his convenience; she 's gone and got herself wounded
by her friends."

Lieutenant Desborough, black and grimy, streaked with smoke and powder,
turned pale at the captain's words, and sprang forward anxiously and
led the object of his love down the steps to her cabin.  "Wounded!" he
murmured.  "Oh, my love, why did no one take you to a place of safety?"

"'T is nothing," she replied, going on as if in a dream.

Desborough had his wish: his rival was gone; he had the field to
himself; but he was too manly to feel any exultation now that it was
over, and too sorry for the vacant despair he saw on her face.  He
tenderly whispered to her as he led her on,--

"Believe me, dear Katharine, it is not thus I would have triumphed over
Mr. Seymour.  He was in truth a knightly gentleman."

Overwhelming pity for her filled his heart, and he went on
magnanimously,--

"I am sorry--"

She made no answer; she did not hear.  In the cabin the body of little
Montagu was lying on a table.  He would never get his frigate now.  How
small and frail and boyish looked the Honorable Giles to-day!  Why did
they send children like that to war?  Had he no mother?--poor lad!
Moved by a sudden impulse, she stooped and kissed him, as she had done
an hour before.  No throb of the proud little heart answered responsive
to her caress now.  Alas! she might kiss him when and as she pleased;
he would not feel it, and he would not heed.  Entering her own berth at
last, she closed the door and sank down upon her knees,--alone with God!


"A sail coming down fast,--the little brig, sir," reported the officer
of the deck to Captain Vincent.  "Shall we come about and give him a
broadside?"

"No, no; we dare not handle the braces yet,--not until the gear and
spars have been well overhauled."

"Shall we use the stern-chaser then, sir?"

The Yarmouth had left the scene of the explosion some distance away by
this time, but she was still within easy gun-shot.  Captain Vincent
earnestly examined the brig; as he looked, she came up to the wind,
hove to, and dropped a boat in the water.  There was a bit of spar
still floating there.  The captain saw that three or four men were
clinging to it.

"No; she's on an errand of mercy.  There are men in the water on that
topmast there.  Let her go free," he said generously.  "We 've done
enough to-day to satisfy any reasonable man."

The colonel grasped his hand warmly and thanked him.  The little brig
picked up her boat, swung her mainyard, and filled away again on the
port tack, in the wake of the rest of the little squadron now far
ahead; then, understanding the forbearance of the big ship, she fired a
gun to leeward and dipped her ensign in salute.

The force of the explosion had thrown Seymour, from his advantageous
position aft, far out into the water and away from the sinking ship.
The contact with cold water recalled him to his senses at once; and
with the natural instinct of man for life, he struck out as well as he
might, considering his broken leg and wounded arm and weakened state.
There was a piece of a mast with the top still on it floating near by.
He struggled gallantly to make it,--'twas no use, he could do no more;
closing his eyes, he sank down in the dark water.  But help was near: a
hand grasped him by his long hair and drew him up; one of his men,
unwounded fortunately, had saved him.  The two men presently reached
the bit of wreck; the sailor scrambled up on it, and by a great effort
drew his captain by his side; two more men swam over desperately, and
finally joined the little group.  They clung there helpless, hopeless,
despairing, fascinated, watching the remains of the Randolph disappear,
marking a few feeble swimmers here and there struggling, till all was
still.  Then they turned their eyes upon their late antagonist, running
away before the wind in flames; they saw her fight them down
successfully; appalled, none spoke.  Presently one of the seamen
glanced the other way, and saw the little brig swiftly bearing down
upon them.

"God be praised!  Here's the brig, the Fair American," he cried.  "We
shall be saved--saved!"

The brig was handled smartly; she came to the wind, backed the
maintopsail, and lay gently tossing to and fro on the long swells.  The
young captain stood on the rail, clinging to the back-stays, anxiously
watching.  The boat was dropped into the water, and with long strokes
shot over to them.  The men sprang aboard; rude hands gently and
tenderly lifted the wounded captain in.  They pulled rapidly back to
the brig; the falls were manned, and the boat was run up, the yard
swung, and she filled away.  Seymour was lifted down; Philip received
him in his arms.

"I ought to arrest you for disobedience of orders," said the captain,
sternly.  "Why did you pay no attention to my signals?  You have
jeoparded the brig.  Yon ship can blow you out of the water; you are
quite within range."

But they soon saw that no motion was made by the ship; and in
accordance with Seymour's orders the gun was fired and the colors
dipped,--a salute which the ship promptly returned.

"I ought to put you under arrest, Philip," again said Seymour, faintly,
while he was lying in the tiny cabin, having his wounds dressed; "but I
will not.  'T was gallantly done; but obey orders first hereafter,--'t
is the first principle of action on the sea."  That was rather cool
comfort for the young officer, considering that his somewhat reckless
action had just saved Seymour's life.  He made brief reply, however,
and then resumed his station on the deck of his little vessel, which
was rapidly overhauling the rest of the fleet.  As soon as the night
fell, the wind permitting, they were by Seymour's direction headed for
the harbor of Charleston once more.  Now that his mind was free again,
Seymour's thoughts turned to that woman's form of which he had one
brief glimpse ere the line-of-battle ship disappeared in the smoke.
Could it indeed have been Katharine Wilton?  Could fate play him such a
trick as to awaken once more his sleeping hope?  Through the long night
he tossed in fevered unrest in his narrow berth.  Again he went over
the awful scenes of that one hour of horror.  The roar of the guns, the
crash of splintered timbers, the groans of the wounded men, rang in his
fretted ear.  They seemed to rise before him, those gallant officers
and men, the hardy, bold sailors, veterans of the sea, audacious
youngsters with life long before them, Bentley, his old, his faithful
friend,--lost--all lost.  Was there reproach in their gaze?  Was it
worth while, after all?  Ay, but duty; he had always done his
duty--duty always--duty--  Ah, they faded away, and Katharine looked
down upon--it was she--love--duty--love--duty!  Was that the roar of
battle again, or only his beating heart?  They found him in the
morning, delirious, shouting orders, murmuring words of love, calling
Kate,--babbling like a child.




CHAPTER XXXIX

_Three Pictures of the Sea_

A short time before sunset that same evening the Yarmouth was hove to,
and the hoarse cry of the boatswain and his mates was once more heard
through the ship, calling,--

"All hands!  Bury the dead."

Skilled hands had been working earnestly all the afternoon to repair
the damage to the vessel; much had been accomplished, but much more
still remained to be done.  However, night was drawing on, and it was
advisable to dispose of the dead bodies of those who had been killed in
the action, or who had died since of their wounds, without further
delay.  Some of the sailmaker's mates had been busy during the
afternoon, sewing up the dead in new, clean hammocks, and weighting
each one with heavy shot at the feet to draw it down.  The bodies were
laid in orderly rows amidships, forward of the mainmast, and all was
ready when the word was passed.  The crew assembled in the gangways
facing aft, the boatswain, gunner, carpenter, sailmaker, and other
warrant officers at their head.  The captain, attended by Colonel
Wilton and the first lieutenant in full uniform, and surrounded by the
officers down to the smallest midshipman, stood facing the crew on the
quarter-deck; back of the officers, on the opposite side of the deck,
the marine guard was drawn up.  At the break of the poop stood the
slender, graceful figure of a woman, alone, clearly outlined against
the low light of the setting sun, looking mournfully down upon the
picture, her heart, though filled with sadness and sorrow particularly
her own, still great enough to feel sympathy for others.

The chaplain, clothed in the white vestments of his sacred office,
presently came from out the cabin beneath the poop-deck, and stopped
opposite the gangway between the line of men and officers.  Two of the
boatswain's mates, at a signal from the first lieutenant, stepped to
the row of bodies and carefully lifted up the first one and laid it on
a grating, covering it at the same time with a flag.  They next lifted
the grating and placed one end of it on the rail overlooking the sea,
and held the other in their hands and waited.  The captain uncovered,
all the other officers and the men following his example.

The chaplain began to read from the book in his hand.  The first body
on the grating was a very small one,--only a boy, looking smaller in
