"Rather a breather, that," said Dick, his honest face beaming all over;
"you chaps took a lot of driving."

"I feel quite fresh after it," said Coote, beaming too.

"You didn't feel fresh ten minutes ago, under the last shoulder but one,
my boy.  If you feel so fresh, suppose you trot down and up again while
Georgie and I sit here and look at the view."

Coote declined, and after a short rest they dropped down the long slope,
with the scent in full view, on to Lowhouse, where the Gurgle, slipping
clear and deep between its banks, seemed to them one of the loveliest
pictures Nature ever drew.

The scent lay right along the bank, sometimes down on the stones,
sometimes on the high paths above the tree tops, until suddenly it
stopped.

"By Jove, we shall have to swim for it, you fellows," cried Dick,
delighted.  "Chuck your shoes and things across, and tumble in."

With joy they obeyed.  They would fain have spent half an hour in the
delicious water, so soft and cool and deep.  But Dick was in a self-
denying mood, and would not allow his men more than ten minutes.  That,
however, was as good as an hour's nap; and when, after dressing and
picking up the scent, they took up the running again, it was like a new
start.

Half-a-mile down, they came on to the country road, and here suddenly
the scent vanished.  High or low they could not find it.  It neither
crossed the road, nor went up the road, nor went down the road.  They
sniffed round in circles, but all to no good--not a scrap of paper was
anywhere within twenty yards, except at the spot where they had struck
the road.

They had gone, perhaps, half a mile with no sign yet of the scent, and
were beginning to make up their minds that, after all, they should have
turned up the road instead of down, when a horseman, followed by a
groom, turned a corner of the road in front of them and came to meet
them.

"Hurrah!" cried Dick, "here's a chap we can ask."

The "chap" in question was evidently somewhat perplexed by the
apparition of these three bareheaded, bare-legged, dust-stained
youngsters, and reined up his horse as they trotted up.

"I say," cried Dick, ten yards off, "have you seen the Harriers go by,
please?--Whew!"

This last exclamation was caused by the sudden and alarming discovery
that the "chap" thus unceremoniously addressed was no other than one of
the two magistrates before whom, not three days ago, Tom White had stood
on his trial in the presence of the "Firm."

"What Harriers, my man?" asked the gentleman.

"Oh, if you please, the Templeton Harriers, sir.  It's a paper-chase,
you know."

"Oh, you're Templeton boys, are you?  Why, I was a Templetonian myself
at your age," said the delighted old boy.  "No; no Harriers have gone
this way.  You must have lost the scent."

"We lost it half a mile ago.  If you're going that way, we can show you
where," said Dick.

"Come on, then," said the good-humoured squire; "we'll smell 'em out
somewhere."

So the "Firm" turned and trotted in its very best form alongside the
worthy magistrate until they reached the point where the scent had
struck the road.

The old Templetonian summoned his groom, and, dismounting, joined the
boys, with all the ardour of an old sportsman, in their search for the
scent.  He poked the hedges knowingly with his whip, and tracked up the
ditches; he took note of the direction of the wind, and ordered his
groom to take his horse a wide sweep of the field opposite on the chance
of a discovery.

The boys, fired by his example, strained every nerve to prove themselves
good Harriers, and covered a mile or more in their circuits.

At length the old gentleman brought his whip a crack down on his
leggings and exclaimed:--

"I have it!  Ha! ha! knowing young dogs!  Look here, my boy! look here!"

And, taking Dick by the arm, he led him to the point where the scent
touched the road.

"Do you see what they've done?--artful young scamps!  They've doubled on
their own scent.  Usen't to be allowed in my days."

And, delighted with his discovery, he led them back along the scent for
a hundred yards or so up the field, where it suddenly forked off behind
some gorse-bushes, and made straight for the railway at Norton.

"Ha! ha! the best bit of sniffing I've had these many years.  And, now I
come to think of it, with the wind the way it is blowing, they may have
dropped their scent fair, and the breeze has taken it on to the old
track.  Cunning young dogs!"

"Thanks, awfully," said Dick, gratefully; "we should never have found
it."

The other two echoed their gratitude, and the delighted old gentleman
valued their thanks quite as much as his Commission of the Peace.

"Now you've got it," said he, "come along and have a bit of lunch at my
house; I'm not five minutes away."

"Thanks, very much," said Dick, "but I'm afraid--"

"Nonsense! come on.  You're out of the hunt; ten minutes won't make any
difference."

Of course they yielded, and enjoyed a sumptuous lunch of cold meat and
bread and cheese, which made new men of them.  It took all their good
manners to curb their attentions to the joint; and their chatty host
spun out the repast with such stories of his own school days, that the
ten minutes grew to fully half an hour before they could get away.

Before they did so Dick, who for a quarter of an hour previously had
been exhibiting signs of agitation and inward debate, contrived to
astonish both the "Firm," and his host.

"We saw you at Tom White's trial the other day, sir," said he, abruptly,
at the close of one of the Squire's stories.

"Bless my soul! were you there?  Why, of course--all three of you; I saw
you.  They didn't let the youngsters do that sort of thing in my day."

"We were rather interested about White, you know," said Dick, nervously.

"A good-for-nothing vagabond he is!" said the very unprofessional
magistrate.

"We rather hope," said Dick, turning very red, "he'll get let off."

"Eh? what?  Do you know, you young scamp, I can-- So you want him let
off, do you?  How's that?"

"Because he didn't take the boat away," said Dick, avoiding the horror-
struck eyes of his "Firm."

"We--that is I--let it go."

"What do you say?" said the Squire, putting down his knife and fork and
sitting back in his chair.

Whereupon Dick, as much to stave off the expected storm as to justify
himself, proceeded to give a true, though agitated, story of his and
Georgie's adventures on the day of the Grandcourt match, appealing to
Georgie at every stage in the narration to corroborate him.  Which
Georgie did, almost noisily.

The magistrate heard it all out in silence, with a face gradually
becoming serious.

"Do you know what you can get for doing it?" he asked.

Dick's face grew graver and graver.

"Shall we be transported?" he asked, with a quaver in his voice.

The magistrate took a hurried gulp from the tumbler before him.

"You've put me in a fix, my man.  You'd no business to get round me to
prevent me doing my duty."

"I really didn't mean to do that," put in Dick.

"No--we wouldn't do such a thing," said Georgie.

"Well, never mind that.  Whatever Tom White did to you, you'd no right
to do what you did.  You've put me in a fix, I say.  Take my advice and
write to your father, and tell him all about it, and get him to come
down.  If Tom White's partners and the pawnbroker get their money, they
may stop the case, and there'll be an end of it.  If they don't, Tom
must take his chance.  Dear, dear, things have changed in Templeton
since my day.  Confound it, I wish the Harriers would choose some other
run!  A nice fix I'm in, to be sure--young rascals!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Late that evening a crowd assembled in the Quadrangle of Templeton.  The
hunt had been in three hours ago, and all the hounds but three had
turned up and gone to their kennels.  It was to welcome the remaining
three that the crowd was assembled.  They had already been signalled
from the beach, and the faint hum in the High Street told that they had
already got into their last run.

Nearer and louder grew the sound, till the hum became a shout, and the
shout a roar, as through the great gate of Templeton three small travel-
stained figures trotted gamely into the Quad, with elbows down and heads
up.

They hardly seemed to hear the cheers or notice the crowd, but kept
their faces anxiously towards where Cresswell--book in hand--stood at
the door of Westover's to receive them.

"Have you run right through?" he asked as they came up.

"Yes, every step," gasped Dick.

Five minutes later, the "Firm" was in bed and fast asleep.

And two days later, when the revised list of candidates eligible for
election to the "Select Sociables" was displayed on the library door, it
included the names of Richardson, Heathcote, and Coote.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

HOW THE SWORD OF DAMOCLES STILL HANGS OVER OUR HEROES.

  Dear Father,--Please come down here as soon as you can.  We're in a
  regular row.  I'm awfully afraid fifty pounds will not quite cover it.

  Please try and come by the next train as the case comes on on
  Saturday, and there's not much time.  We saw the magistrate yesterday,
  and made a clean breast.  I hope they won't transport us.  He was very
  jolly helping us find the scent, and gave us a stunning lunch.  We ran
  the big hunt right through, and are pretty sure to get our names on
  the "Sociables" list.  I wish you and mother could have seen the view
  on the top of Welkin Beacon.  The awkward thing is that Tom White may
  get transported instead of us, and it would be jolly if you could come
  and get him off.  Coote wasn't in it, but he's backing us up.  How is
  Tike?  I hope they wash him regularly.  If I'm not transported, I
  shall be home in eight weeks and three days and will take him out for
  walks.

  Love to mother, in which all join,--Your affectionate son, Basil.

  P.S.--If you come, don't take Fegan's cab--he's a cheat.  Old White
  will drive you cheap.  He's Tom's father.  Georgie sends his love.

The reader may imagine, if he can, the consternation with which Mr and
Mrs Richardson read this loving epistle at breakfast on the Friday
morning following the great hunt.

They gazed at one another with countenances full of horror and terror,
like people suddenly brought face to face with a great calamity.  At
length Mr Richardson said:--

"Where's the Bradshaw, Jane?"

"Oh, the train goes in half an hour.  You have just time to catch it.
Do go quickly.  My poor, poor boy!"

The father groaned; and in another five minutes he was on his way to the
station.

That morning, while school was in full swing, the porter entered the
third class room with a telegram in his hand, which he took straight to
the master.

"Richardson," said the master, "this is for you."

Dick, who was at the moment engaged in drawing a circle on his Euclid
cover with a pencil and a piece of string, much to the admiration of his
neighbours, jumped up as if he had been shot, and with perturbed face
went up to receive the missive.

He tore it open, and, as he glanced at its contents, his anxious face
relaxed into a complacent grin.

"From G.  Richardson, London.  I shall reach Templeton at 3:5 this
afternoon.  Meet me, if you can."

"Huzzah, Georgie!" said he, as he returned to his seat.  "Father's
coming down by the 3:5.  Let's all go and meet him."

The "Firm" said they would, and, accordingly, that afternoon after
dinner the trio sallied forth in great spirits and good-humour to give
the anxious father a reception.

With the easy memory of youth, they forgot all about the probable object
of his visit; or, if they remembered it, it was with a sort of passing
feeling of relief that the Tom White "row" was now as good as over--at
any rate, as far as they were concerned.

When Mr Richardson, haggard and anxious, descended from the carriage,
it was a decided shock to encounter the beaming countenance of his son
and hear his light-hearted greeting.

"Hullo, father--jolly you've come!  Old White's cab is bagged, but
Swisher's got a good horse to go.  Here's Georgie and Coote--you know."

The bewildered gentleman greeted his son's friends kindly, and then,
disclaiming all intention of taking anybody's cab, drew his son aside.

"What is all this, my boy?  Your mother and I almost broke our hearts
over your letter."

"Oh, it's all serene--really, father," said the boy, a little disturbed
by his father's anxious tones.  "We really wouldn't have sent if the
magistrate hadn't said we'd better--would we, Georgie?"

"No; he said that was our only chance," replied Georgie.

"If your two friends will take my bag up to the 'George,'" said Mr
Richardson, despairing of getting any lucid information out of the
"Firm" as a body, "I should like a walk with you, Basil, on the strand."

Coote and Georgie departed with the bag, and the father and son being
left alone, Dick gave a simple and unvarnished narrative of the legal
difficulties in which he and his friends were involved.

Mr Richardson's heart beat lighter as he heard it.  The scrape was bad
enough, but it was not as bad as he had imagined, nor was the foolish
boy at his side the monster of iniquity his letter had almost implied.
They had a long talk, those two, that afternoon as they paced the hard,
dry strand at the water's edge and watched the waves tumbling in from
the sea.  They talked about far more than Tom White and his boat.
Dick's heart, once opened, poured into his father's ears the story of
all his trials and temptations, and hopes and disappointments, at
Templeton.

The narration did him good.  It cleared and strengthened his mind
wonderfully.  It humbled him to discover in how many things he had been
wrong, and in how many foolish; and it comforted him to feel that his
father understood him and judged him fairly.

It was late in the afternoon when their walk came to an end.  Then Mr
Richardson said:--

"Now, I suppose you and your friends have decided that I am to give you
high tea at the 'George'--eh?"

"Thanks," said Dick, who had had a dim prospect of the kind.

"Well, I'll come up to the school and see if I can get Dr Winter to
give you leave."

"Dr Winter doesn't know about Tom White's boat, you know," said the
boy, as they walked up.  "I didn't like to tell him."

Dr Winter was easily persuaded to allow the "Firm" to spend the evening
with Mr Richardson at the "George."

The small party which assembled that evening at the table of the worthy
paterfamilias did not certainly look like one over which hung the shadow
of "transportation."  The talk was of "Tubs" and Harriers, of tennis and
"Sociables," of Virgil and Euclid; and as the first shyness of their
introduction wore off, the "Firm" settled down to as jovial an evening
as they had spent for a long time.

Only once did the shadow of their "row" return, when Mr Richardson, at
eight o'clock, said:--

"Now, boys, good-night.  I have a solicitor coming here directly."

"About the trial, father?" asked Dick, with falling countenance.

"Yes, my boy.  As the case comes on to-morrow, there is no time to be
lost."

There certainly was not; and Mr Richardson, before he went to bed that
night had not only seen a good many persons, but had materially
lightened his pockets.

Buying off the law, even in the most straightforward way, is an
expensive luxury.  The prosecutors, of Tom White, seeing that their
victim had an unexpected backer, became very righteous and high-
principled indeed.  They could not think of withdrawing the case.  It
was a public duty--painful, of course, but not to be shirked.  It pained
them very much to bring trouble on any one, particularly an old
shipmate; but they owed it to society to see he got his deserts.

They were, of course, wholly unaware of Mr Richardson's special
interest in the matter.  Otherwise, they might have been even more
virtuous and high-principled than they were.  They looked upon him as a
benevolent individual, bent on getting the half-witted vagabond out of
trouble, and, as such, they knew quite enough of fishing to see that he
was in their net.

Their own solicitor, too, knew something about this sort of fishing, and
the unfortunate father spent a very unhappy morning floundering about in
the net these gentlemen provided for him--extremely doubtful whether,
after all, he would not be obliged publicly to incriminate his son, in
order to solve the difficulty.

However, by dint of great exertion, he contrived to get the case
adjourned for three days more.  The prosecutors were, of course, shocked
to see the course of the law delayed for even this length of time.  It
meant expense to them, as well as inconvenience.  Of course Mr
Richardson had to act up to this broad hint, and promising, further, not
to make any attempt to bail their prisoner, he obtained their reluctant
consent to a postponement till Wednesday, greatly to the disgust, among
other persons, of Duffield and Raggles, who, mindful of their pleasant
morning last Saturday, had come down with another five-pennyworth of
chocolate creams, to watch the case again.

"Beastly soak it was," said Raggles that afternoon, to Dick, who, acting
on parental orders, had abstained with the "Firm" from visiting the
Court.  "They say there's some idiot come all the way from London to
stop the case.  I'd like to kick him.  What business has he to come and
spoil our fun?"

"Look here!" said Dick, with a sudden warmth which quite took away the
breath of Master Raggles.  "Shut up, and hold your row, unless you want
to be chucked out of the Quad."

"What on earth is the row with you?" asked the astounded Raggles.

"Never you mind.  Hook it!" retorted Dick.

Raggles departed, not quite sure whether Dick had not had too much
"swipes" for dinner, or whether his run after the Harriers yesterday had
not been too much for his wits.

Dick felt rather blue that afternoon as he watched the train which
carried his father steam out of Templeton station.

He had somehow expected that this visit would settle everything.  But
instead of doing that, Mr Richardson had left Templeton almost as
anxious as when he entered it.  Dick couldn't make it out, and he
returned rather dismally to Templeton.

Here, however, he had plenty to distract his attention.  The fame of the
"Firm's" exploit on the previous day was still a nine days' wonder in
the Den, and he might, had he been so inclined, have spent the afternoon
in discoursing to an admiring audience of his achievement.  But he was
not so minded.  He was more in the humour for a football scrimmage, and
as to-day was the first practice day of the season, he strolled off to
the fields, and relieved his feelings and recovered his spirits in an
hour's energetic onslaught on the long-suffering ball.

Rather to his surprise, Georgie did not join him in this occupation.
That young gentleman, to tell the truth, was very particularly engaged
elsewhere.

His proceedings during the last few days had not been unnoticed by his
old patron, Pledge.

That senior, after his unceremonious deposition from the monitorship by
Mansfield, had been considerably exercised in his mind how to hold up
his head with dignity in Templeton.

