
Upon reaching the brook he drank of the pure water, and then sat down
on the bank to laugh at the mischievous gambols of the ripples as they
pushed one another against rocks or crowded desperately to see which
should first reach the turn beyond.  And as they raced away he listened
to the song they sang:

  "Rushing, pushing, on we go!
  Not a wave may gently flow--
    All are too excited.
    Ev'ry drop, delighted,
  Turns to spray in merry play
  As we tumble on our way!"


Next Claus searched for roots to eat, while the daffodils turned their
little eyes up to him laughingly and lisped their dainty song:

  "Blooming fairly, growing rarely,
    Never flowerets were so gay!
  Perfume breathing, joy bequeathing,
    As our colors we display."


It made Claus laugh to hear the little things voice their happiness as
they nodded gracefully on their stems.  But another strain caught his
ear as the sunbeams fell gently across his face and whispered:

  "Here is gladness, that our rays
    Warm the valley through the days;
  Here is happiness, to give
    Comfort unto all who live!"


"Yes!" cried Claus in answer, "there is happiness and joy in all things
here.  The Laughing Valley is a valley of peace and good-will."

He passed the day talking with the ants and beetles and exchanging
jokes with the light-hearted butterflies.  And at night he lay on his
bed of soft moss and slept soundly.

Then came the Fairies, merry but noiseless, bringing skillets and pots
and dishes and pans and all the tools necessary to prepare food and to
comfort a mortal.  With these they filled cupboard and fireplace,
finally placing a stout suit of wool clothing on the stool by the
bedside.

When Claus awoke he rubbed his eyes again, and laughed, and spoke aloud
his thanks to the Fairies and the Master Woodsman who had sent them.
With eager joy he examined all his new possessions, wondering what some
might be used for.  But, in the days when he had clung to the girdle of
the great Ak and visited the cities of men, his eyes had been quick to
note all the manners and customs of the race to which he belonged; so
he guessed from the gifts brought by the Fairies that the Master
expected him hereafter to live in the fashion of his fellow-creatures.

"Which means that I must plow the earth and plant corn," he reflected;
"so that when winter comes I shall have garnered food in plenty."

But, as he stood in the grassy Valley, he saw that to turn up the earth
in furrows would be to destroy hundreds of pretty, helpless flowers, as
well as thousands of the tender blades of grass.  And this he could not
bear to do.

Therefore he stretched out his arms and uttered a peculiar whistle he
had learned in the Forest, afterward crying:

"Ryls of the Field Flowers--come to me!"

Instantly a dozen of the queer little Ryls were squatting upon the
ground before him, and they nodded to him in cheerful greeting.

Claus gazed upon them earnestly.

"Your brothers of the Forest," he said, "I have known and loved many
years.  I shall love you, also, when we have become friends.  To me the
laws of the Ryls, whether those of the Forest or of the field, are
sacred.  I have never wilfully destroyed one of the flowers you tend so
carefully; but I must plant grain to use for food during the cold
winter, and how am I to do this without killing the little creatures
that sing to me so prettily of their fragrant blossoms?"

The Yellow Ryl, he who tends the buttercups, made answer:

"Fret not, friend Claus.  The great Ak has spoken to us of you.  There
is better work for you in life than to labor for food, and though, not
being of the Forest, Ak has no command over us, nevertheless are we
glad to favor one he loves.  Live, therefore, to do the good work you
are resolved to undertake.  We, the Field Ryls, will attend to your
food supplies."

After this speech the Ryls were no longer to be seen, and Claus drove
from his mind the thought of tilling the earth.

When next he wandered back to his dwelling a bowl of fresh milk stood
upon the table; bread was in the cupboard and sweet honey filled a dish
beside it.  A pretty basket of rosy apples and new-plucked grapes was
also awaiting him.  He called out "Thanks, my friends!" to the
invisible Ryls, and straightway began to eat of the food.

Thereafter, when hungry, he had but to look into the cupboard to find
goodly supplies brought by the kindly Ryls.  And the Knooks cut and
stacked much wood for his fireplace.  And the Fairies brought him warm
blankets and clothing.

So began his life in the Laughing Valley, with the favor and friendship
of the immortals to minister to his every want.



2.  How Claus Made the First Toy

Truly our Claus had wisdom, for his good fortune but strengthened his
resolve to befriend the little ones of his own race.  He knew his plan
was approved by the immortals, else they would not have favored him so
greatly.

So he began at once to make acquaintance with mankind.  He walked
through the Valley to the plain beyond, and crossed the plain in many
directions to reach the abodes of men.  These stood singly or in groups
of dwellings called villages, and in nearly all the houses, whether big
or little, Claus found children.

The youngsters soon came to know his merry, laughing face and the kind
glance of his bright eyes; and the parents, while they regarded the
young man with some scorn for loving children more than their elders,
were content that the girls and boys had found a playfellow who seemed
willing to amuse them.

So the children romped and played games with Claus, and the boys rode
upon his shoulders, and the girls nestled in his strong arms, and the
babies clung fondly to his knees.  Wherever the young man chanced to
be, the sound of childish laughter followed him; and to understand this
better you must know that children were much neglected in those days
and received little attention from their parents, so that it became to
them a marvel that so goodly a man as Claus devoted his time to making
them happy.  And those who knew him were, you may be sure, very happy
indeed.  The sad faces of the poor and abused grew bright for once; the
cripple smiled despite his misfortune; the ailing ones hushed their
moans and the grieved ones their cries when their merry friend came
nigh to comfort them.

Only at the beautiful palace of the Lord of Lerd and at the frowning
castle of the Baron Braun was Claus refused admittance.  There were
children at both places; but the servants at the palace shut the door
in the young stranger's face, and the fierce Baron threatened to hang
him from an iron hook on the castle walls.  Whereupon Claus sighed and
went back to the poorer dwellings where he was welcome.

After a time the winter drew near.

The flowers lived out their lives and faded and disappeared; the
beetles burrowed far into the warm earth; the butterflies deserted the
meadows; and the voice of the brook grew hoarse, as if it had taken
cold.

One day snowflakes filled all the air in the Laughing Valley, dancing
boisterously toward the earth and clothing in pure white raiment the
roof of Claus's dwelling.

At night Jack Frost rapped at the door.

"Come in!" cried Claus.

"Come out!" answered Jack, "for you have a fire inside."

So Claus came out.  He had known Jack Frost in the Forest, and liked
the jolly rogue, even while he mistrusted him.

"There will be rare sport for me to-night, Claus!" shouted the sprite.
"Isn't this glorious weather?  I shall nip scores of noses and ears and
toes before daybreak."

"If you love me, Jack, spare the children," begged Claus.

"And why?" asked the other, in surprise.

"They are tender and helpless," answered Claus.

"But I love to nip the tender ones!" declared Jack.  "The older ones
are tough, and tire my fingers."

"The young ones are weak, and can not fight you," said Claus.

"True," agreed Jack, thoughtfully.  "Well, I will not pinch a child
this night--if I can resist the temptation," he promised.  "Good night,
Claus!"

"Good night."

The young man went in and closed the door, and Jack Frost ran on to the
nearest village.

Claus threw a log on the fire, which burned up brightly.  Beside the
hearth sat Blinkie, a big cat give him by Peter the Knook.  Her fur was
soft and glossy, and she purred never-ending songs of contentment.

"I shall not see the children again soon," said Claus to the cat, who
kindly paused in her song to listen.  "The winter is upon us, the snow
will be deep for many days, and I shall be unable to play with my
little friends."

The cat raised a paw and stroked her nose thoughtfully, but made no
reply.  So long as the fire burned and Claus sat in his easy chair by
the hearth she did not mind the weather.

So passed many days and many long evenings.  The cupboard was always
full, but Claus became weary with having nothing to do more than to
feed the fire from the big wood-pile the Knooks had brought him.

One evening he picked up a stick of wood and began to cut it with his
sharp knife.  He had no thought, at first, except to occupy his time,
and he whistled and sang to the cat as he carved away portions of the
stick.  Puss sat up on her haunches and watched him, listening at the
same time to her master's merry whistle, which she loved to hear even
more than her own purring songs.

Claus glanced at puss and then at the stick he was whittling, until
presently the wood began to have a shape, and the shape was like the
head of a cat, with two ears sticking upward.

Claus stopped whistling to laugh, and then both he and the cat looked
at the wooden image in some surprise.  Then he carved out the eyes and
the nose, and rounded the lower part of the head so that it rested upon
a neck.

Puss hardly knew what to make of it now, and sat up stiffly, as if
watching with some suspicion what would come next.

Claus knew.  The head gave him an idea.  He plied his knife carefully
and with skill, forming slowly the body of the cat, which he made to
sit upon its haunches as the real cat did, with her tail wound around
her two front legs.

The work cost him much time, but the evening was long and he had
nothing better to do.  Finally he gave a loud and delighted laugh at
the result of his labors and placed the wooden cat, now completed, upon
the hearth opposite the real one.

Puss thereupon glared at her image, raised her hair in anger, and
uttered a defiant mew.  The wooden cat paid no attention, and Claus,
much amused, laughed again.

Then Blinkie advanced toward the wooden image to eye it closely and
smell of it intelligently:  Eyes and nose told her the creature was
wood, in spite of its natural appearance; so puss resumed her seat and
her purring, but as she neatly washed her face with her padded paw she
cast more than one admiring glance at her clever master.  Perhaps she
felt the same satisfaction we feel when we look upon good photographs
of ourselves.

The cat's master was himself pleased with his handiwork, without
knowing exactly why.  Indeed, he had great cause to congratulate
himself that night, and all the children throughout the world should
have joined him rejoicing.  For Claus had made his first toy.



3.  How the Ryls Colored the Toys

A hush lay on the Laughing Valley now.  Snow covered it like a white
spread and pillows of downy flakes drifted before the dwelling where
Claus sat feeding the blaze of the fire.  The brook gurgled on beneath
a heavy sheet of ice and all living plants and insects nestled close to
Mother Earth to keep warm.  The face of the moon was hid by dark
clouds, and the wind, delighting in the wintry sport, pushed and
whirled the snowflakes in so many directions that they could get no
chance to fall to the ground.

Claus heard the wind whistling and shrieking in its play and thanked
the good Knooks again for his comfortable shelter.  Blinkie washed her
face lazily and stared at the coals with a look of perfect content.
The toy cat sat opposite the real one and gazed straight ahead, as toy
cats should.

Suddenly Claus heard a noise that sounded different from the voice of
the wind.  It was more like a wail of suffering and despair.

He stood up and listened, but the wind, growing boisterous, shook the
door and rattled the windows to distract his attention.  He waited
until the wind was tired and then, still listening, he heard once more
the shrill cry of distress.

Quickly he drew on his coat, pulled his cap over his eyes and opened
the door.  The wind dashed in and scattered the embers over the hearth,
at the same time blowing Blinkie's fur so furiously that she crept
under the table to escape.  Then the door was closed and Claus was
outside, peering anxiously into the darkness.

The wind laughed and scolded and tried to push him over, but he stood
firm.  The helpless flakes stumbled against his eyes and dimmed his
sight, but he rubbed them away and looked again.  Snow was everywhere,
white and glittering.  It covered the earth and filled the air.

The cry was not repeated.

Claus turned to go back into the house, but the wind caught him
unawares and he stumbled and fell across a snowdrift.  His hand plunged
into the drift and touched something that was not snow.  This he seized
and, pulling it gently toward him, found it to be a child. The next
moment he had lifted it in his arms and carried it into the house.

The wind followed him through the door, but Claus shut it out quickly.
He laid the rescued child on the hearth, and brushing away the snow he
discovered it to be Weekum, a little boy who lived in a house beyond
the Valley.

Claus wrapped a warm blanket around the little one and rubbed the frost
from its limbs.  Before long the child opened his eyes and, seeing
where he was, smiled happily.  Then Claus warmed milk and fed it to the
boy slowly, while the cat looked on with sober curiosity.  Finally the
little one curled up in his friend's arms and sighed and fell asleep,
and Claus, filled with gladness that he had found the wanderer, held
him closely while he slumbered.

The wind, finding no more mischief to do, climbed the hill and swept on
toward the north.  This gave the weary snowflakes time to settle down
to earth, and the Valley became still again.

The boy, having slept well in the arms of his friend, opened his eyes
and sat up.  Then, as a child will, he looked around the room and saw
all that it contained.

"Your cat is a nice cat, Claus," he said, at last.  "Let me hold it."

But puss objected and ran away.

"The other cat won't run, Claus," continued the boy.  "Let me hold that
one."  Claus placed the toy in his arms, and the boy held it lovingly
and kissed the tip of its wooden ear.

"How did you get lost in the storm, Weekum?" asked Claus.

"I started to walk to my auntie's house and lost my way," answered
Weekum.

"Were you frightened?"

"It was cold," said Weekum, "and the snow got in my eyes, so I could
not see.  Then I kept on till I fell in the snow, without knowing where
I was, and the wind blew the flakes over me and covered me up."

Claus gently stroked his head, and the boy looked up at him and smiled.

"I'm all right now," said Weekum.

"Yes," replied Claus, happily.  "Now I will put you in my warm bed, and
you must sleep until morning, when I will carry you back to your
mother."

"May the cat sleep with me?" asked the boy.

"Yes, if you wish it to," answered Claus.

"It's a nice cat!" Weekum said, smiling, as Claus tucked the blankets
around him; and presently the little one fell asleep with the wooden
toy in his arms.

When morning came the sun claimed the Laughing Valley and flooded it
with his rays; so Claus prepared to take the lost child back to its
mother.

"May I keep the cat, Claus?" asked Weekum.  "It's nicer than real cats.
It doesn't run away, or scratch or bite.  May I keep it?"

"Yes, indeed," answered Claus, pleased that the toy he had made could
give pleasure to the child.  So he wrapped the boy and the wooden cat
in a warm cloak, perching the bundle upon his own broad shoulders, and
then he tramped through the snow and the drifts of the Valley and
across the plain beyond to the poor cottage where Weekum's mother lived.

"See, mama!" cried the boy, as soon as they entered, "I've got a cat!"

The good woman wept tears of joy over the rescue of her darling and
thanked Claus many times for his kind act.  So he carried a warm and
happy heart back to his home in the Valley.

That night he said to puss: "I believe the children will love the
wooden cats almost as well as the real ones, and they can't hurt them
by pulling their tails and ears.  I'll make another."

So this was the beginning of his great work.

The next cat was better made than the first.  While Claus sat whittling
it out the Yellow Ryl came in to make him a visit, and so pleased was
he with the man's skill that he ran away and brought several of his
fellows.

There sat the Red Ryl, the Black Ryl, the Green Ryl, the Blue Ryl and
the Yellow Ryl in a circle on the floor, while Claus whittled and
whistled and the wooden cat grew into shape.

"If it could be made the same color as the real cat, no one would know
the difference," said the Yellow Ryl, thoughtfully.

"The little ones, maybe, would not know the difference," replied Claus,
pleased with the idea.

