while the larger proportion, with savage yells and war-cries, made a
furious attack on their position.

Closing round the circle, they endeavoured again and again to break
through the line or to clamber over the waggon-tilts, and never did
savage warriors earn a better title to the name of braves than on that
occasion.  Even the bristling four and six-inch thorns of the
mimosa-bushes would not have been able to turn back their impetuous
onset if behind these the stout Dutchmen, fighting for wives and
children, had not stood manfully loading and firing volleys of slugs and
buckshot at arm's-length from them.  The crowded ranks of the Kafirs
were ploughed as if by cannon, while hundreds of assagais were hurled
into the enclosure, but happily with little effect, though a few of the
defenders--exposing themselves recklessly--were wounded.

While Conrad Marais was standing close to the hind-wheels of one of the
waggons, watching for a good shot at a Kafir outside, who was dodging
about for the double purpose of baulking Conrad's intention and
thrusting an assagai into him, another active Kafir had clambered
unobserved on the tilt of the waggon and was in the very act of leaning
over to thrust his spear into the back of the Dutchman's neck when he
was observed by Stephen Orpin, who chanced to be reloading his gun at
the moment.

With a loud roar, very unlike his usual gentle tones, Orpin sprang
forward, seized a thick piece of wood like a four-foot rolling-pin, and
therewith felled the savage, who tumbled headlong into the enclosure.

"Oh, father!" exclaimed a terrified voice at that moment, while a light
touch was laid on Conrad's shoulder.

"What brings you here, Bertha?" said Conrad, with an impatient gesture.
"Don't you know--"

"Come, quick, to mother!" cried the girl, interrupting.

No more was needed.  In a moment Conrad was in the central enclosure,
where, crowded under a rude erection of planks and boxes, were the women
and children.  An assagai had penetrated an unguarded crevice, and,
passing under the arm of poor Mrs Marais, had pinned her to the family
trunk, against which she leaned.

"Bertha could not pull it out," said Mrs Marais, with a faint smile on
her pale face, "but I don't think I'm much hurt."

In a moment her husband had pulled out the spear, found that it had
penetrated her clothing, and only grazed her breast, took time merely to
make sure of this, and then, leaving her in Bertha's hands, returned to
the scene of combat.

He was not an instant too soon.  A yell was uttered by the savages as
they rushed at a weak point, where the thorn-bush defences had been
broken down.  The point appeared to be undefended.  They were about to
leap through in a dense mass when ten Dutchmen, who had reserved their
fire, discharged a volley simultaneously into the midst of them.  It was
a ruse of the defenders to draw the savages to that point.  Whilst the
Kafirs tumbled back over heaps of dead and dying, several other farmers
thrust masses of impenetrable mimosa bush into the gap and refilled it.
This discomfiture checked the assailants for a little; they drew off and
retired behind the ridge to concert plans for a renewed and more
systematic attack.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

TREATS OF VARIOUS STRANGE INCIDENTS, SOME INTERESTING MATTERS, AND A
RESCUE.

While the emigrant farmers were thus gallantly defending themselves, the
party under Hans Marais and Charlie Considine was hastening on their
spoor to the rescue.

Their numbers had been increased by several volunteers, among whom were
George Dally and Scholtz, also David, Jacob, and Hendrik, the sons of
Jan Smit, who had made up their minds not to follow the fortunes of
their savage-tempered sire, but who were at once ready to fly to his
rescue on learning that he was in danger.  While passing through the
country they were further reinforced by a band of stout burghers, and by
four brothers named Bowker.  There were originally seven brothers of
this family, who afterwards played a prominent part in the affairs of
the colony.  One of these Bowkers was noted for wearing a very tall
white hat, in which, being of a literary turn of mind, he delighted to
carry old letters and newspapers.  From this circumstance his hat became
known as "the post-office."

Although small, this was about as heroic a band of warriors as ever took
the field--nearly every man being strong, active, a dead shot well
trained to fight with wild beasts, and acquainted with the tactics of
wilder men.

Proceeding by forced marches, they soon drew near to that part of the
country where the beleaguered farmers lay.

One evening, having encamped a little earlier than usual, owing to the
circumstance of their having reached a fountain of clear good water,
some of the more energetic among them went off to search for game.
Among these were the brothers Bowker.

"There's very likely a buffalo or something in that bush over there,"
said Septimus Bowker, who was the owner of the "post-office" hat.
"Come, Mr Considine, you wanted to--Where's Considine?"

Every one looked round, but Considine and Hans were not there.  One of
the Skyds, however, remembered that they had fallen behind half an hour
before, with the intention of procuring something fresh for supper.

"Well, we must go without him.  He wanted to shoot a buffalo.  Will no
one else go?"

No one else felt inclined to go except Junkie Brook, so he and the four
Bowkers went off, Septimus pressing the "post-office" tightly on his
brows as they galloped away.

They had not far to go, game of all kinds being abundant in that region,
but instead of finding a buffalo or gnu, they discovered a lioness in a
bed of rushes.  The party had several dogs with them, and these went
yelping into the rushes, while the brothers stationed themselves on a
mound, standing in a row, one behind another.

The brother with the tall white hat stood in front.  Being the eldest,
he claimed the post of honour.  They were all fearless men and crack
shots.  Junkie was ordered to stand back, and complied with a bad grace,
being an ardent sportsman.

"Look out!" exclaimed the brother in front to the brothers in rear.

"Ready!" was the quiet response.

Next moment out came the lioness with a savage growl, and went straight
at Septimus, who cocked his gun as coolly as if he were about to slay a
sparrow.

While the enraged animal was in the act of bounding, Septimus fired
straight down its throat and suddenly stooped.  By so doing he saved his
head.  Perhaps we should say the tall white hat saved it, for the
crushing slap which the lioness meant to give him on the side of the
head took effect on the post-office, and scattered its contents far and
wide.  Spurning Septimus on the shoulders with her hind-legs as she flew
past, the lioness made at the brothers.  Firm as the Horatii stood the
other three.  Deliberate and cool was their action as they took aim.
Junkie followed suit, and the whole fired a volley, which laid the
lioness dead at their feet.

Gathering himself up, Septimus looked with some concern at the white hat
before putting it on.  Remarking that it was tough, he proceeded to pick
up its literary contents, while his brothers skinned the lioness.
Shortly afterwards they all returned to camp.

Passing that way an hour or so later, Hans Marais and Charlie Considine
came upon the spoor of the lioness.

"I say, Charlie," called out Hans, "there must be a lion in the vley
there.  I've got the spoor.  Come here."

"It's not in the vley now," replied Charlie; "come here yourself; I've
found blood, and, hallo! here's a newspaper!  Why, it must be a literary
lion!  Look, Hans, can you make out the name?--Howker, Dowker, or
something o' that sort.  Do lions ever go by that name?"

"Bowker," exclaimed Hans, with a laugh.  "Ah! my boy, there's no lion in
the vley if the Bowkers have been here; and see, it's all plain as a
pikestaff.  They shot it here and skinned it there, and have dragged the
carcass towards that bush; yes, here it is--a lioness.  They're back to
camp by this time.  Come, let's follow them."

As they rode along, Hans, who had been glancing at the newspaper, turned
suddenly to his companion.

"I say, Charlie, here's a strange coincidence.  It's not every day that
a man finds a _Times_ newspaper in the wilds of Southern Africa with a
message in it to himself."

"What do you mean, Hans?"

"Tell me, Charlie, about that uncle of whom you once spoke to me--long
ago--in rather disrespectful tones, if not terms.  Was he rich?"

"I believe so, but was never quite certain as to that."

"Did he like you?"

"I rather think not."

"Had you a male cousin or relative of the same name with yourself whom
he _did_ like?"

"Then allow me to congratulate you on your good fortune, and read that,"
said Hans, giving him the newspaper.

Charlie read.

"If this should meet the eye of Charles Considine, formerly of Golden
Square, Hotchester, he is requested to return without delay to England,
or to communicate with Aggard, Ale, and Ixley, Solicitors, 23a
Fitzbustaway Square, London."

"Most amazing!" exclaimed Considine, after a pause, "and there can be no
doubt it refers to me, for these were my uncle's solicitors--most
agreeable men--who gave me the needful to fit me out, and it was their
chief clerk--a Roman-nosed jovial sort of fellow, named Rundle something
or other--who accompanied me to the ship when I left, and wished me a
pleasant voyage, with a tear, or a drop of rain, I'm not sure which,
rolling down his Roman nose.  Well, but, as I said before, isn't it an
astonishing coincidence?"

"It wasn't you who said that before, it was I," returned Hans, "but we
must make allowance for your state of mind.  And now, as we're nearing
the camp, what is it to be--silence?"

"Silence, of course," said Charlie.  "There's no fear of Bowker reading
the advertisements through, he has far too much literary taste for that,
and even if he did, he's not likely to stumble on this one.  So let's be
silent."

There was anything but silence in the camp, however, when the friends
reached it and reported their want of luck; for the warriors were then
in the first fervour of appealing their powerful appetites.

Next morning they started at sunrise.

Early in the day they came on the mangled remains of the emigrant
farmers before referred to.  At first it was supposed this must be the
remnant of the band they were in search of, but a very brief examination
convinced them, experienced as they were in men and signs, that it was
another band.  Soon after, they came in sight of the party for which
they were searching, just as the Kafirs were making a renewed attack.
Already a few volleys had been fired by the Dutchmen, the smoke of which
hung like a white shroud over the camp, and swarms of savages were
yelling round it.

"The cattle and flocks have been swept away," growled Frank Dobson.

"But the women and children must be safe as yet," said Considine, with a
sigh of relief.

"Now, boys," cried Hans, who had been elected captain, "we must act
together.  When I give the word, halt and fire like one man, and then
charge where I lead you.  Don't scatter.  Don't give way to impetuous
feelings.  Be under command, if you would save our friends."

He spoke with quick, abrupt vigour, and waited for no reply or remark,
but, putting himself where he fancied a leader should be, in front of
the centre of his little line, set off in the direction of the
emigrants' camp at a smart gallop.  As the horsemen drew near they
increased their pace, and then a yell from the savages, and a cheer from
their friends, told that they had been observed by the combatants on
both sides.  The Kafirs were seen running back to the ridge on the other
side of the camp, and assembling themselves hurriedly in a dense mass.

On swept the line of stalwart burghers, over the plain and down into the
hollow in dead silence.  The force of their leader's character seemed to
have infused military discipline into them.  Most of them kept boot to
boot like dragoons.  Even Dally and Scholtz kept well in line, and none
lagged or shot ahead.  As they passed close to the camp without drawing
rein, the Dutchmen gave them an enthusiastic cheer, but no reply was
made, save by Junkie, who could not repress a cry of fierce delight.
Down deeper into the hollow they went, and up the opposite slope,--the
thunder of their tread alone breaking the stillness.

"Halt!" cried the leader in a deep loud voice.

They drew up together almost as well as they had run.  Next moment every
man was on the ground and down on one knee; then followed the roar of
their pieces, and a yell of wild fury told that none had missed his
mark.  Before the smoke had risen a yard they were again in the saddle.
No further order was given.  Hans charged; the rest followed like a wall
at racing speed, with guns and bridles grasped in their left hands and
sabres drawn in their right.

The savages did not await the onset.  They turned, scattered, and fled.
Many were overtaken and cut down.  The Dutchmen sallied from the camp
and joined in the pursuit.  The Kafirs were routed completely, and all
the cattle and flocks were recovered.

That same day there was a hot discussion over the camp-fires as to
whether the emigrant farmers should return at once to the colony or wait
until they should gather together some of the other parties of emigrants
which were known to have crossed the frontier.  At last it was resolved
to adopt the latter course, but the wives and families were to be sent
back to Fort Wilshire under the escort of their deliverers, there to
remain till better times should dawn.

"Charlie," said Conrad Marais, as he walked up and down with his friend,
"I must stick by my party, but I can trust you and Hans.  You'll be
careful of the women and little ones."

"You may depend on us," replied Considine, with emphasis.

"And you needn't be afraid to speak to Bertha by the way," said Conrad,
with a peculiar side glance.

Charlie looked up quickly with a flush.

"Do you mean, sir, that--that--"

"Of course I do," cried the stout farmer, grasping his friend by the
hand; "I forgive your being an Englishman, Charlie, and as I can't make
you a Dutchman, the next best I can do for you is to give you a Dutch
wife, who is in my opinion better and prettier than any English girl
that ever lived."

"Hold!" cried Considine, returning the grasp, "I will not join you in
making invidious comparisons between Dutch and English; but I'll go
farther than you, and say that Bertha is in my opinion the best and
prettiest girl in the whole world."

"That'll do, lad, that'll do.  So, now, we'll go see what the Totties
have managed to toss us up for breakfast."

Before the sun set that night the emigrant farmers, united with another
large band, were entrenched in a temporary stronghold, and the women and
children, with the rescue party--strengthened by a company of hunters
and traders who had been in the interior when the war broke out, were
far on their way back to Fort Wilshire.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

RELATES INCIDENTS OF THE WAR AND A GREAT DELIVERANCE.

On reaching the frontier fort it was found to be in a state of
excitement bustle, and preparation.

News had just been received that the treacherous chief Hintza, although
professedly at peace with the colony, was secretly in league with the
invading chiefs, and the Governor was convinced of the necessity of
taking vigorous measures against him.  The savages, flushed with
success, and retiring for a time to their own land with the cattle they
had carried off, found in Hintza one ready to aid them in every way.  It
transpired that he had not only allowed the stolen cattle to be secreted
in his territory, but many of his own people were "out" with the
confederate chiefs fighting against the colonists, while traders under
his protection had by his orders been seized and plundered.  A message
had therefore been sent to Hintza requiring him at once and decidedly to
declare his intentions.  To this, instead of a reply, the savage chief
sent one of his braves, whose speech and conduct showed that his wily
master only wished to gain time by trifling diplomacy.  The brave was
therefore sent back with another message, to the effect that if he,
Hintza, should afford any of the other chiefs shelter or protection, and
did not restore the booty concealed in his territory, he would be
treated as an enemy.  It was also proposed that himself should come and
have an interview with the Governor, but this invitation he declined.
Sir Benjamin D'Urban, therefore, resolved to menace the truculent chief
in his own dominions, and when Hans Marais with his band entered the
square of the little fort, he found the troops on the point of setting
out.

