communicate, for they appear to be very anxious about it."

As he spoke, a tall savage, with an unusually grave countenance, stalked
from among his fellows, thrust Powlet and the young man whom Krake had
styled Bluenose aside, and seated himself on the ground in imitation of
the free-and-easy manner of the Norsemen.  Suddenly his face lighted up.
He clapped both hands to his chest and breathed hard, then raised his
hands aloft, looked enthusiastically up at the sky, rolled his eyes in a
fearful manner, opened his mouth wide, and gave utterance to a series of
indescribable howls.  Checking himself in the midst of one of these, he
suddenly resumed his grave aspect, looked straight at Krake, and said
"Ho!"

That he thought he had hit the mark, and conveyed the meaning of himself
and his friends precisely, was made evident by the other savages, who
nodded their heads emphatically, and exclaimed "Ho!" with earnestness.

"H'm! 'tis easy to say `Ho!'" replied Krake, more perplexed than ever,
"and if `Ho' would be a satisfactory answer, I'd give ye as much as ye
liked of that; but I can't make head or tail of what it is ye would be
at."

"Stay," exclaimed Hake, stepping quickly forward, "I think I know what
they want."

Saying this, he looked earnestly at the grave savage, and ran over one
or two notes of a song.

No words in any language could convey such a powerful meaning as did the
beam of intelligence and delight which overspread the faces of these
sons of the wilderness.  The "ho! ho! hos!" and noddings were repeated
with such energy, that Krake advised them to "stop that, lest their
heads should come off altogether!"

"I thought so," said Hake, turning away from them; "they want you to
give them a song, Krake."

"They shall have that, and welcome," cried the jovial Norseman, striking
up the "Danish Kings" at once, with all the fire of his nature.

The natives sat in rapt solemnity, and when the Norsemen joined
laughingly in the chorus, they allowed a faint smile to play for a
moment on their faces, and murmured their satisfaction to each other
when the song was done.  But it was evident that they wanted something
more, for they did not seem quite satisfied until one of their number
rose, and going up to Hake touched his lips with his finger.

"Ha!  I thought so!" exclaimed Krake in contempt.  "It's bad taste ye
have to want a song from _him_ after hearing _me_!  But what else could
we expect from ye?"

Hake willingly complied with their wish, and it then became evident that
the savages had gained their point at last, for they listened with
half-closed eyes, and more than half-opened mouths, while he was
singing, and heaved a deep sigh when he had finished.

Thus pleasantly was the feast concluded, and thus they sealed their
friendship.

But there was something still more satisfactory in store for the
Norsemen, for it was soon afterwards discovered that the savages
possessed a large quantity of beautiful furs, with which, of course,
they were willing to part for the merest trifle, in the shape of a shred
of brilliant cloth or an ornamental bauble.

This was not only fortunate, as affording an opportunity for the
Norsemen to procure full and valuable cargoes for both their ships, but
as creating a busy and interesting occupation, which would prevent the
natives from growing weary of inaction, and, perhaps, falling into those
forms of mischief which proverbially lie ready to idle hands.

"It seems to me, friends," said Leif one evening, shortly after the
feast just described, while he was seated in the chief hall, polishing
his iron headpiece, and occasionally watching the active hands of Gudrid
and Thora as they busied themselves about domestic affairs, while Bertha
sat beside him dandling Snorro on her knee,--"It seems to me that we
have got together such a rich cargo that the sooner we send our ships to
Greenland the better.  They can then return with fresh supplies of such
things as are needed in good time.  For myself, I will go with the
ships, and overlook the loading of them in Greenland."

"Oh! may I go with you?" exclaimed Bertha, looking up suddenly with much
eagerness.

Hake, who was seated at the lower end of the hall, busily engaged in
making a bow, paused abruptly in his work, but did not raise his head.

"I have no objection, if Freydissa has none," answered Leif.

"Freydissa will be only too glad to get rid of her," replied that
amiable woman, who was engaged in the manufacture of a leathern tunic
for Snorro; "she is tired of milk-and-water."

"And yet milk-and-water is more likely to agree with you than anything
resembling beer," said Biarne, with a laugh.

"I should be sorry to leave Vinland," returned Bertha, "but I am very
_very_ anxious to see my dear father again.  Besides--I can return
hither."

Hake's hand was suddenly released, and resumed its occupation.

"If you go, Leif," asked Karlsefin, "will you return and spend the
winter with us?"

"I will not promise that," replied Leif with a smile.

There was silence for some minutes, which was broken at length by a very
small voice saying:--

"'Norro go to G'eenland too?"

Poor Snorro was as regardless of the _S_ in his own name as he was of
the _l_ in Olaf's!

"'Norro may go, if Gudrid will allow him," answered Leif, patting the
child's curly pate.

"And O'af too?" added Snorro.

"Of course _I_ must go if Snorrie goes," cried Olaf who had just entered
the hall.  "We could not live separate--could we, Snorrie?"  He caught
up the child and placed him on his back in his wonted fashion.  "Just
think," he continued, "what would it do in Greenland without O'af to
give it rides and take it out for long walks?"

"Ay, and go lost with it in the woods," added Biarne.

Olaf blushed, but replied promptly--"That would be impossible, Biarne,
for there are no woods in Greenland."

"If Snorro goes so must I," said Thora.  "He could not get on without
his nurse."

"Methinks we had better all go together to Greenland," said Astrid, who
was busy preparing supper.

"Not bad advice," observed Biarne, somewhat seriously.

"Do you mean what you say?" asked Karlsefin.

"I half mean it," replied Biarne.

There was a pause here.  Karlsefin then said--"It seems to me, friends,
that our minds are all jumping together.  I have thought for a long time
of leaving Vinland, for it is plain to me that as we stand just now we
cannot make much headway.  Many of our men are longing to get back to
their families, some to their sweethearts, and some to their native
land; while, from what you have said, it would seem that none of us are
very anxious to remain."

"Do not speak for _all_," said Thorward.

"Well, dost _thou_ wish to stay?"

"It may be that I do.  At any rate, we have had much trouble in coming
hither and settling ourselves, and it would be a pity to lose all our
labours unless we can't help it.  There may be others of my way of
thinking in the colony.  It is my advice that before we discuss such a
matter we had better call a Thing, [an assembly for discussion] and do
it in an orderly way."

"By all means," said Karlsefin, "let us discuss the matter for
_decision_ in a Thing; yet our discussing here for amusement is not
disorderly."

After a little more conversation it was finally arranged that a Thing,
or general assembly of the people, should be called on the following
day, to discuss and decide on the propriety of forsaking Vinland and
returning home.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE FIRST CONGRESS AND THE LAST FAREWELL.

At the gathering of the Vinland colonists next day a number of able
speeches were made by various individuals; for the Norsemen of old were
accustomed to the free discussion of public affairs, at a time when
nearly all Europe was crushed under the yoke of feudalism.  Some of the
speeches were humorous, and some had a good deal of sound about them
without much weight of matter--a peculiarity, by the way, which marks
many of the speeches made in the national and general assemblies of
mankind in the present day, not less, perhaps rather more, than in the
olden time.

All the men of the colony were entitled to raise their voices in the
council except the thralls, so that the brothers Hake and Heika took no
part in the discussion.  These two therefore held a private
confabulation of their own on the margin of the lake.

Thorward was among the first speakers at the assembly.

"It is my opinion," he said, in the tone of a man who expects to have
his opinion opposed, "that we have not yet given Vinland a fair trial.
We are only just beginning to discover the value of the land.  Ye know
now that it is not a small island, as was at first supposed, but a vast
country of unknown extent.  Who knows but that it may be as large as
Norway?  This lake and river on which we dwell do not owe their birth to
an insignificant country; any man with half the vision of one eye
remaining may see that!  The woods supply all that man can desire; the
waters swarm with fish; the climate is delightful; our ships are even
now loaded to the bulwarks with costly furs, and the natives are
friendly.  What would ye more?  It seems to me that we might, if we
chose, lay the foundation of a new nation that would rival Iceland,
perchance equal old Norway itself, if we take advantage of the great
opportunities that have fallen to our hands.  But if we get frightened
at the yell of every savage that makes his appearance, or grow weary of
good, vigorous, hard work, and begin to sigh like children for home,
then there is small chance of our doing anything, and it will doubtless
be the fate of a bolder race of men to people this land at some future
time."

There was a good deal of applause from some of the people when Thorward
finished this speech, which was uttered with great decision, but it was
observable that those who thought with him, though noisy, were not
numerous.

The moment Thorward sat down Krake started up and said somewhat
warmly--"'Tis all very well for Thorward to speak in this way, and ask
`What would ye more?' seeing that he has got in his house a handsome and
sweet-tempered wife; but I will tell him of _something more_ that I
want, and that I haven't got just now, and am not likely to get as long
as I remain in Vinland.  There is a comely little woman in Iceland, who
was born in that best of countries, Ireland, and who forsook the land,
and her father and mother, and kith and kin, all for the sake of a
red-headed thrall--for he was no better at that time--called Krake.
Now, _I_ want that sweet little Irishwoman!  Moreover, there's a stout
curly-headed boy in Iceland who's an elegant chip of the ancient tree,
and the born image of his mother--I want that curly-headed boy!  Then
there are six other curly-headed boys in Iceland--only that three of
them are girls, and the youngest had the curls in prospect when I saw it
last, bein' as bare on the head as the palm of my hand--all of them
descending in size, one after another, from the first curly-headed boy--
I want these.  Besides which there is a sweet little hut in Iceland at
the edge of a swamp, with the spouting waters not far off, and the
boilin' waters quite handy to cook your dinner without firin', and a
lovely prospect of the burnin' hill behind--I want all that; and I want
to know how Thorward would feel if he wanted all that and couldn't get
it, and was advised to go on wantin' it, and if he couldn't keep himself
easy, to try his best to keep as easy as he could!"

There was some laughter and great applause at this point.

"Moreover," continued Krake, with increasing energy, "it don't give me a
scrap of comfort to be told that this is a vast country, full of all
that's desirable and the best of livin', when I can't enjoy it along
with my sweet little Kathleen and the curly-headed boys and girls before
mentioned.  What does Krake care for stuffing his own ugly carcase full
when mayhap the wife and bairns are dyin' for want--anyhow dyin' to see
their husband an' father?  And what does Krake care to be the beginning
of a new nation?  No more than he does to be the middle of it, and if
left to himself he'd far sooner be the end of it by not beginning it at
all!  As for being frightened by the yells of savages, it's not worth my
while to mention _that_, but when Thorward talks about beginning to sigh
like children for home, he misses his mark entirely.  It's not _sighing_
I am for home, but roaring, bellowing, howling for it in my wearied
spirit, and it's my opinion, comrades, as I gaze round upon your
speaking faces, that there's a good many here howling along with me."

There could be no doubt that Krake's sentiments were largely entertained
and appreciated, for his speech was followed by prolonged and
enthusiastic applause, in which the Norsemen not only raised their
voices, but rattled their arms on their shields by way of emphasis.
Thorward smiled grimly and shrugged his shoulders, but made no reply.

After several others had spoken in various strains--a few in favour of
Thorward's opinion, but many more in sympathy with Krake,--Leif made a
short speech, advising immediate return to Greenland, Biarne followed
suit, and Karlsefin wound up with a few remarks, in which he urged,
among other things, that although the savages were friendly just then,
it was not likely they would remain so very long, and in the event of a
quarrel it was certain, considering their great numbers, that the infant
colony would be kept in perpetual hot water, if not actual warfare.  He
suggested, moreover, that the proper way to establish a colony, that
would have some chance to survive and flourish, would be to organise it
thoroughly in Iceland or Norway, and induce so many married men with
their families to emigrate, that they would be able to _feel_ at home in
the new land, and thus _wish_ to remain.  He concluded by saying that
those who now desired to remain in Vinland might join together and
devote their energies to the getting up of such a band of colonists if
so disposed.  For his own part, since the majority were evidently in
favour of returning home, he was free to confess that he had no taste
for colonising.  The ocean was _his_ home, and when that failed him he
hoped that God might permit him to end his days and lay his bones in
Iceland.

It was finally agreed that the country should be abandoned, and that,
having made up their minds, they should set about preparations without
delay.

We have said that the Scottish brothers had gone to the margin of the
lake to hold a little consultation by themselves, while the affairs of
the nation were being settled in the grand parliament.

"What think you?  Will these men of Iceland decide to return home or to
remain here?" said Hake, seating himself on a bank of wild-flowers,
which he began to pluck and scatter with an absent air.

"They will decide to forsake Vinland," answered Heika.

"You appear to be very sure, brother."

"I am; because I have been watching the men for some time past, and
occasionally leading them on to talk about the matter."

"Which way do you hope they will decide?" asked Hake.

"I hope they will leave."

"Do you?  For my part I care but little.  It seems to me that we have as
small a chance of escaping from Greenland as from this land."

"Brother, ye think in this way because you are content to remain where
Bertha dwells.  If Bertha were with Emma in bonny Scotland, your wits
would be sharp enough to perceive that the voyage from Vinland to
Scotland, with an unknown sea between, would be a more hazardous venture
than a voyage from Greenland to Scotland, with Iceland between."

"That may be true, brother, but methinks my wits are sharp enough to
perceive that neither voyage concerns us, seeing that we have no ship,
and are not likely to succeed in persuading a whale to carry us over."

"Nevertheless," replied Heika, "I mean to go over to Scotland this
summer if I can."

Hake looked earnestly in his brother's face.

"From your tones and words," said he, "I know that you have some plan in
your head."

"That have I," rejoined Heika firmly, yet with a look of
sadness.--"Listen, Hake: the thought that I shall never more see Emma or
my father is more than I can bear.  I will now make the effort to escape
from Greenland--for well assured am I that we shall soon be there
again--or die in the attempt.  Of what value is a thrall's life?  The
plan that I have in my head is this.  You know that when in Greenland we
were often sent out beyond the fiord to fish and to hunt the walrus and
the seal--sometimes in large, sometimes in small, boats.  The boats on
Eric's fiord are numerous now.  The absence of one for a time would not
be much noticed.  There is a man there whose life I saved not long
before we set sail for Vinland.  He has a good boat, which I will
borrow, take it round to the western skerries, to which our men seldom
go, and there quietly fit it out for a long voyage.  When a fitting time
arrives I will set sail for Scotland."

