"Now, Squeaky," said the Bu'ster, hitting the pig on its snout with a
bit of firewood, "keep your dirty nose away from yer cousin."

Squeaky obeyed meekly, and removed to another spot.

"Isn't it a strange thing, daddy, that you and I should come to feel so
homelike here?"

"Ay, it is strange," responded Gaff with a sigh, as he laid down the
hook he was working at and glanced round the cavern.  "Your mother would
be astonished to see us now, lad."

"She'll hear all about it some day," said Billy.  "You've no notion what
a splendid story I'll make out of all this when we get back to Cove!"

It was evident that the Bu'ster inherited much of his mother's sanguine
disposition.

"P'raps we'll never git back to Cove," said Gaff sadly; "hows'ever,
we've no reason to complain.  Things might ha' bin worse.  You'd better
go and haul down the flag, lad.  I'll look arter the roast till ye come
back."

"The roast'll look after itself, daddy," said the Bu'ster; "you look
after Squeaky, however, for that sly critter's always up to mischief."

Billy hastened to the top of Signal Cliff just as the sun was beginning
to descend into the sea, and had commenced to pull down the flag when
his eye caught sight of a sail--not on the far-off horizon, like a
sea-gull's wing, but close in upon the land!

The shout that he gave was so tremendous that Gaff heard it in the cave,
and rushed out in great alarm.  He saw Billy waving a shred of cocoa-nut
cloth frantically above his head, and his heart bounded wildly as he
sprang up the hill like a stag.

On reaching the flagstaff he beheld the vessel, a large full-rigged
ship, sailing calmly, and, to his eye, majestically, not far from the
signal cliff.

His first impulse was to wave his hand and shout.  Then he laid hands on
the halliards of the flag and gave it an extra pull to see that it was
well up, while Billy continued to stamp, cheer, yell, and wave his arms
like a madman!

Only those who have been long separated from their fellow-men can know
the wild excitement that is roused in the breast by the prospect of
meeting with new faces.  Gaff and Billy found it difficult to restrain
themselves, and indeed they did not try to do so for at least ten
minutes after the discovery of the ship.  Then a feeling of dread came
suddenly upon the former.

"Surely they'll never pass without takin' notice of us."

"Never!" exclaimed Billy, whose sudden fall of countenance belied the
word.

Gaff shook his head.

"I'm not so sure o' that," said he; "if she's a whaler like the one we
came south in, lad, she'll not trouble herself with us."

Billy looked very grave, and his heart sank.

"My only consolation is that she looks more like a man-o'-war than a
whaler."

"I wish we had a big gun to fire," exclaimed Billy, looking round in
perplexity, as if he half hoped that a carronade would spring up out of
the ground.  "Could we not make a row somehow?"

"I fear not," said Gaff despondingly.  "Shoutin' is of no use.  She's
too far-off for that.  Our only chance is the flag."

Both father and son stood silent for some moments earnestly gazing at
the ship, which was by this time nearly opposite to their flagstaff, and
seemed to be passing by without recognising the signal.  This was not to
be wondered at, for, although the flag was visible enough from landward,
being well defined against the bright sky, it was scarce perceptible
from seaward, owing to the hills which formed a background to it.

"_I_ know what'll do it!" exclaimed Billy, as he leaped suddenly to one
side.  "Come along, daddy."

A few yards to one side of the spot on which the flagstaff was reared
there was a part of the precipice which sloped with a steep descent into
the sea.  Here there had been a landslip, and the entire face of the
cliff was laid bare.  At the top of this slope there was a great
collection of stones and masses of rock of considerable size.  At
various points, too, down the face of the steep, masses of rock and
_debris_ had collected in hollows.

Billy now went to work to roll big stones over the edge of this cliff,
and he did it with such good-will that in a few minutes masses of a
hundred weight were rolling, bounding, and crashing down the steep.
These, in many cases, plunged into the collections of _debris_, and
dislodged masses of rock that no efforts of which Billy was capable
could have otherwise moved.

The rattling roar of the avalanche was far more effective than a salvo
of artillery, because, besides being tremendous, it was unceasing, and
the result was that the vessel ran up a flag in reply to the strange
salute.  Then a white puff of smoke from her side preceded the roar of a
heavy gun.  Immediately after, the vessel's head came round, and she
lay-to.

"It's a man-o'-war," cried Billy excitedly.

"Ay, and a British one too," exclaimed Gaff; "let's give him a cheer,
lad."

Billy complied with a will!  Again and again did they raise their strong
voices until the woods and cliffs became alive with full, true, ringing
British cheers!



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

DELIVERED, WRECKED, AND RESCUED.

It is unnecessary, indeed impossible, to describe the feelings with
which Gaff and Billy descended from Signal Cliff to the beach to meet
the boat which put off from the man-of-war and made for the little creek
just below the cave.

As the boat's keel grated on the sand, the midshipman in command leaped
ashore.  He was a particularly small and pert midshipman, a smart
conceited vigorous little fellow, who delighted to order his big men
about in the voice of a giant; and it was quite interesting to observe
how quietly and meekly those big men obeyed him, just as one sometimes
sees a huge Newfoundland dog or mastiff obey the orders of a child.

"Why, where on earth did you come from, and what are you doing here?"
demanded the little middy, as he approached Gaff, and looked up in that
man's rugged and unshorn countenance.

Poor Gaff could scarce command himself sufficiently to reply--

"We're Englishmen--bin cast away--five years now--"

He could go no farther, but, seizing the boy's hand, shook it warmly.
The Bu'ster, being equally incapable of speaking, seized the hand of the
sailor next him, and also shook it violently.  Then he uttered a cheer,
and turning suddenly round ran along the beach for half a mile like a
greyhound, after which he returned and asserted that his feelings were
somewhat relieved!

Meanwhile the middy continued to question Gaff.

"What! d'ye mean to say you've been five years here--all alone?"

"Ay, all but a few days," said Gaff, looking round on the men with a
bewildered air.  "How strange yer voices sound!  Seems as if I'd a'most
forgotten what men are like!"

"Well, you _are_ a queer fish," said the boy with a laugh.  "Are there
no more here but you two?"

"No more; just Billy and me--also Squeaky and Shrieky."

Gaff said this quite gravely, for nothing was farther from his thoughts
at that time than jesting.

"And pray, who may Squeaky and Shrieky be?"

"Squeaky's a pig, and Shrieky's a little parrot."

"Well," observed the middy with a laugh, "that's better than no company
at all."

"Yours is an English man-o'-war, I think?" said Gaff.

"You're right, old fellow; she's the `Blazer,' 74, Captain Evans, bound
for England.  Took a run farther south than usual after a
piratical-looking craft, but missed her.  Gave up the chase, and came to
this island to get water.  Little thought we should find _you_ on it.
Astonish the captain rather when we go back.  Of course you'll want us
to take you home.  Will you go off with me at once?"

Gaff and Billy hesitated, and both looked back with a strange mixture of
feelings at their island-home.

"Oh, we won't hurry you," said the boy, with a kindly and patronising
air; "if there are any traps you want to pack up, we'll wait for you.
It'll take us some time to get the breakers filled.  Can you show me a
good spring?"

"Ay, an' we can show you a hot one," cried Billy, with a smile.  "But
come up to the cave with us and have some grub."

The midshipman expressed his readiness to comply, and ordered one of the
men to stay and watch the boat.

"You needn't leave any one with the boat," said Gaff; "there's nobody
here to touch it."

"Nevertheless I will leave a guard.  Now, then show us the way."

It is needless to describe the surprise of the sailors at everything
they saw and heard; and the mixed feelings that agitated the breasts of
Gaff and his son--anxiety to return to England, with regret to quit the
cavern home where they had spent so many quiet and comparatively happy
years.

Suffice it to say that they, and the few things they possessed, were
speedily transferred to the "Blazer," on board of which they received
the most considerate attention and kindness.  And you may be sure,
reader, that Billy did not forget to take the pig and the parroquet
along with him.

Fair winds sprang up, and for many weeks the "Blazer" bowled along
steadily on her course.  It seemed as if the elements had agreed to be
favourable, and expedite the return of the exiles.  But this state of
things did not last.

Towards the end of the voyage fogs and gales prevailed, and the "Blazer"
was driven considerably out of her course to the northward, insomuch
that she finally made the land on the north-western coast of Scotland.
This induced the captain to run through the Pentland Firth, after
passing through which they were beset by calms.

One day a small steamer passed close alongside the "Blazer."

"That's an Aberdeen steamer," said the captain; "would you like to be
put on board, Gaff?"

Gaff said that he would, as it was probable he should reach home sooner
by her than if he were to accompany the "Blazer" to London.

Accordingly the steamer was signalled, and Gaff and Billy were put on
board.

Scarcely had this been done when a stiff easterly gale set in, and
before morning a heavy sea was running, before which the steamer rolled
heavily.

It seemed as if Gaff and his son were doomed to be drowned, for disaster
by sea followed them wherever they went.  At last, however, the morning
broke bright and clear, and the wind abated, though the sea was still
running very high.

That forenoon the steamer sighted the coast of Aberdeenshire and the
tall column of the Girdle-ness lighthouse came into view.

"We'll be home soon now, daddy," said Billy, as they walked the
quarter-deck together.

"P'raps, but we an't there yet," said Gaff; "an' I never count my
chickens before they are hatched."

Gaff and his son no longer wore the rough skin garments which had
clothed them while in their island-home.  They had been rigged out in
man-o'-war habiliments by the kindness of those on board the "Blazer,"
but they had steadily refused to permit the barber to operate upon them,
and still wore their locks shaggy and long.  They were, perhaps, as fine
specimens of a hardy and powerful man and boy as could be found
anywhere; for Gaff, although past his prime, was not a whit less
vigorous and athletic than he had been in days of yore, though a little
less supple; and Billy, owing probably to his hardy and healthy style of
life on the island, was unusually broad and manly for his age.

In a few hours the steamer made the harbour of Aberdeen.  The
passengers, who had been very busy all the morning in packing up the
things they had used on the voyage, were now assembled in groups along
the side of the vessel trying to make out objects on shore.  The captain
stood on the bridge between the paddles giving directions to the
steersman, and everything gave promise of a speedy and happy landing.

A heavy sea, however, was still running, filling the bay to the
northward of the harbour with foaming breakers, while the pier-head was
engulfed in clouds of spray as each billow rolled past it and fell in
thunder on the bar.

Every one on board looked on with interest; but on that clear bright
day, no one thought of danger.

Just as the steamer came close up to the bar, a heavy sea struck her on
the port bow, driving her a little too near the pier.  The captain
shouted to the steersman, but the man either did not understand him, or
did not act with sufficient promptitude, for the next wave sent them
crashing on the portion of bulwark or breakwater that juts out from the
head of the Aberdeen pier.

The consternation and confusion that ensued is beyond description.  The
women screamed, the men shouted.  The captain ordered the engines to be
reversed, and this was done at once, but the force of the next billow
was too great.  It lifted the vessel up and let her fall heavily again
on the pier, where she lay hard and fast with her back broken.  Another
wave lifted her; the two halves of the vessel separated and sank on each
side of the pier, leaving the passengers and crew in the waves.

It would be difficult to say whether the shouts of the multitudes who
stood on the pier-head or the shrieks of the wrecked people were
loudest.

Instantly every exertion was made to save them.  Boats were launched,
ropes were thrown, buoys were cast into the sea, and many of the people
were saved, but many were also drowned before assistance reached them.

Gaff and Billy, being expert swimmers, seized the persons nearest to
them, and took them safe to the pier, where ready hands were stretched
out to grasp them.  The former saved a lady, the latter a little girl.
Then they plunged back into the sea, and saved two more lives.

While this was going on, several of the passengers were swept round into
the bay, where they would have perished but for the prompt and able
assistance of a man who was known as "The Rescue."

This man was so named because he undertook the dangerous and trying duty
of watching the bathers during the summer months, and rescuing such of
them as got out of their depth.

In this arduous work that heroic man had, during five years of service,
saved with his own hands between thirty and forty lives--in some cases
with a boat, but in most cases by simply swimming out and seizing the
drowning persons, and without using corks or floats of any kind.  When
asked why he did not use a lifebelt, he said that it would only impede
his motions and prevent him from diving, which he was often compelled to
do when the drowning persons had sunk.  His usual method was to swim off
when there was a shout for help, and make for the struggling man or boy
so as to come up behind him.  He then seized him under the armpits, and
thus effectually prevented him from grasping him in any way.  Drawing
him gently upon his breast while he lay over on his back, he then made
for the shore, swimming on his back and using his feet only.

On the present occasion the "Rescue" saved four or five of those who
were washed into the bay, and then ran out to the end of the pier to
render assistance there.

In height he was not above the middle size, but he had a very muscular
and well-knit frame.  Just as he drew near, Gaff, who was bearing a
little boy through the surf in his arms, was hurled against the stones
of the pier, rendered insensible, and sucked back by the retreating
water.  Billy was farther out at the moment, and did not see what had
occurred.

The shout of alarm from those in front of the crowd was almost
immediately answered by a cry from behind of:

"The Rescue!  The Rescue!  This way!"

Without checking his speed, the Rescue sprang into the sea, caught Gaff
by the hair of the head, and was next moment hurled on the breakwater.
He was prepared for the shock, and caught the hands of two men, who,
with ropes round their waists, waded into the water as far as they
dared.  Billy was washed ashore at the same moment, almost in a state of
helpless exhaustion, and all were hauled out of the sea amid the wild
cheers of the excited crowd.

Gaff, being laid under the lee of the pier-wall, soon recovered, and
then he and Billy were led tenderly up to the town, where they were
kindly entertained and cared for during several days, by the hospitable
Rescue, in whose house they lodged during their stay in the fair city of
