live--'

"`Jeph!' exclaimed Guy.

"`Don't interrupt me, lad.  I've got _two weeks to live_, so I want you
to go and arrange about my funeral.  Get a coffin made--I used to be six
feet when I was young, but I dessay I'm shorter now--and get the
undertaker to cast up beforehand wot it'll all come to, and pay him, and
bring me the receipts.  Will ye do this, lad?'

"`I will, if you wish it, but--'

"`If I didn't wish it I wouldn't ask it.'

"`Well, Jeph,' said Guy, earnestly, `I _will_ do it.'

"`Thank'ee, lad, thank 'ee.  I know'd ye would, so I brought the money
with me.  Here it is--forty pounds all told; you'll pay for the things,
and bring me the receipts, and _keep the rest and use it in the service
of God_.  I know I can trust you, lad, so that's enough.  All I want is
to prevent my small savin's goin' to the winds, or to those as don't
need 'em; _you_ understand how to give it to those as do.'"

"Is that all?" said Rodney Nick, impatiently.

"No that's not all," replied his companion, "though if it _was_ all,
it's a rather coorious fact, for which ye might thank me for takin' the
trouble to tell you.  But you're thankless by nature.  It seems to me
that nother you nor me's likely to trouble Guy Foster to look arter
_our_ spare cash in that way!  But that ain't the end o' my story yet."

"What! you didn't rob 'em? eh! you didn't pitch into the `Puppy,' and
ease him o' the shiners?"

Rodney Nick said this with a sneer, for he was well aware that his
boastful companion would not have risked a single-handed encounter with
Guy on any consideration.

"No, I didn't; it warn't worth the trouble," said Orrick, "but--you
shall hear.  Arter the old man had said his say, Guy asked him if that
was all, for if it was, he didn't see no occasion to make no secret
about it."

"`No,' said the old man, `that's not all.  I want you to take charge of
a packet, and give it to Bax after I'm gone.  No one must break the seal
but Bax.  Poor Bax, I'd thought to have seen him once again before I
went.  I'll leave the old house to him; it ain't worth much, but you can
look arter it for him, or for Tommy Bogey, if Bax don't want it.  Many a
happy evening we've spent in it together.  I wanted to give you the
parcel here--here out on the dark Sandhills, where no one but God hears
us.  It's wonderful what a place the town is for eavesdroppin'! so I
made you come out here.  You must promise me never to open the packet
unless you find that Bax is dead; _then_ you may open it, and do as you
think fit.  You promise me this?'

"`I do,' said Guy, as the old man pulled a small packet, wrapped in
brown paper, from his breast pocket, and put it into his hands.  Then,
they rose and went away together."

"Well?" said Rodney Nick.

"Well!" echoed Long Orrick, "wot then?"

"What next? what d'ye want to do?" inquired Rodney.

"Do," cried Orrick, "I mean to get hold o' that packet if I can, by fair
means or by foul, _that's_ wot I mean to do, and I mean that you shall
help me!"

The reader may imagine what were the feelings of the poor old man as he
sat in the dark corner of the cave listening to this circumstantial
relation of his most secret affairs.  When he heard Long Orrick's last
words, and felt how utterly powerless he was in his weakness to
counteract him in his designs, he could not prevent the escape of a deep
groan.

The effect on the two men was electrical.  They sprang up, filled with
superstitious horror, and fled precipitately from the cave.

Old Jeph staggered out after them, and made for the cottage of his
friend Coleman.  The latter met him near the threshold.

"Why, Jeph, is this you?  I've bin searchin' for ye more than an hour,
and come to the conclusion ye must ha' gone home; but why, you're ill,
Jeph!"

"Ay, I'm ill, come, help me home."

"Nay, not this night, you shall stop with me; the missus'll give you a
cup o' tea as will do yer old heart good."

"No, I must go home now," said Jeph, in a tone so decided that his
friend was staggered.

"You can't walk it, you know, in a stormy night like this."

"I _will_ walk it," said Jeph.

"Come, then, if you're bent on it, you'd better go in your own lugger;
it's here just now, agoin' to put off in ten minutes or so.  Nothin'
ever stops Bluenose, blow high, blow low.  W'en he wants to go off to
sea, he _goes_ off, right or wrong.  But you'll take a glass o' grog
first."

Old Jeph would not do this, so he was led down to the beach by Coleman,
where they found the boat being launched.

"Good-bye, old man," said Coleman, helping him over the side.

"_Good-bye,--farewell_," said Jeph earnestly.  "I came here to-day
a-purpose to say farewell; shake hands, God bless you."

The coast-guard-man was surprised by the warmth of his friend's manner,
as well as by his words; but before he could ask him what he meant, the
boat was run down the beach and out to sea.  An hour later old Jeph was
carefully put to bed in his own cottage, by his friend Captain Bluenose.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE STORM AND THE WRECK.

Guy Foster, clad in a sou'-wester hat and oilskin coat, stood at the end
of the pier of Ramsgate Harbour, with his sweet wife, Lucy, clinging to
his arm, and a sturdy boy of about four years old, holding on with one
hand to the skirts of his coat, and with the other grasping the sleeve
of his silver-haired grandsire, Mr Burton.

It was night, and a bitter gale was blowing from the north-east,
accompanied by occasional showers, of sleet.  Crowds of seamen and
others stood on the pier eagerly watching the lifeboat, which was being
got ready to put off to sea.

"It is too cold for you, darling," said Guy, as he felt Lucy's arm
tremble.

"Oh no!  I should like to stay," said Lucy, anxiously.  Just then a
tremendous wave burst on the massive stone pier, and a shower of spray
fell upon the crowd.  Lucy and her companions received a copious share
of it.

"You are wet through, dear, and so is Charlie," said Guy,
remonstratively.

"Well, I will go home, but you must come with us, papa.  Guy wants to
remain, I know."

The missionary gave his daughter his arm, and led her away, while Guy,
pushing through the crowd, soon stood beside the lifeboat, the crew of
which, already encased in their cork life-belts, were hastily taking
their places.

"There goes another rocket," cried one of those on the look-out; "it's
from the North-s'n'-Head light."

"Look alive, lads," cried the coxswain of the boat, more to relieve his
feelings than to hurry the men, who were already doing their best.

The shrill note of a steam-whistle was heard at this moment, its
piercing sound rising high above the shriek of the gale and the roaring
of the sea.  It was a signal from the steam-tug appointed to attend on
the lifeboat, and told that steam was up and all ready to put to sea.

Put to sea on such a night! with the waves bursting in thunder on the
shore, the foam seething like milk beneath, the wind shrieking like ten
thousand fiends above, and the great billows lifting up their heads, as
they came rolling in from the darkness of Erebus that lay incumbent on
the raging sea beyond.

Ay, a landsman might have said "madness" with reason.  Even a seaman
might have said that without much apparent impropriety.  But the boatmen
of Ramsgate held a different opinion!  The signal gun had been fired,
the rocket had gone up, a wreck was known to be on the fatal Goodwin
Sands, and they were as eager to face the storm as if encountering
danger and facing death were pleasant pastime.

As the oars were about to be shipped, one of the crew stumbled, and
struck his head so violently against the bollard, that he fell stunned
into the bottom of the boat.  Guy saw the accident as he stood on the
edge of the pier.  A sudden impulse seized him.  At one bound he passed
from the pier to the boat, which was already some half-dozen feet away,
and took the seat and oar of the injured man.  In the confusion and
darkness, the others thought he was one of the supernumerary boatmen,
and took no further notice of him.  The boat was shoved back, the
life-jacket was transferred to Guy, and the boatman was put ashore.

A few strokes brought the boat alongside the steam-tug.

"Heave the warp! make fast! all right, steam a-head!"

The whistle shrieked again, the warp tautened, and tug and lifeboat made
for the mouth of the harbour.  As they passed out an inspiring cheer was
given by the crowd, and a rocket streamed up from the pier-head to
signal the lightship that assistance was on the way.

The lifeboat which thus gallantly put off to the rescue in a storm so
wild that no ordinary boat could have faced it for a moment without
being swamped, was a celebrated one which had recently been invented and
placed at this station--where it still lies, and may be recognised by
its white sides and peculiar build.

Its history is interesting.  In the year 1851 the Duke of
Northumberland, then president of the Lifeboat Institution, offered a
prize of 100 pounds for the best model of a lifeboat.  The result was
that 280 models and plans were sent to Somerset House for examination.
The prize was awarded to Mr James Beeching, boat-builder at Great
Yarmouth, who was ordered to construct a boat, after the pattern of his
model, 36 feet long, with 12 oars.

The boat was built, and was found to be the most perfect of its kind
that had ever been launched.  It was the first self-righting boat ever
constructed.

The three great points to be attained in the construction of a lifeboat
are: buoyancy, the power of righting itself if upset, and the power of
emptying itself if filled with water.  Up to this date the lifeboats of
the kingdom were possessed of only the first quality.  They could not be
sunk; that was all.  Of course that was a great deal, but it was far
from sufficient.  Mr Beeching's boat united all three qualities.

Its self-righting principle was effected by means of two raised
air-cases, one at the stem, the other at the stern, and a heavy metal
keel.  When overturned, the boat attempted, as it were, to rest on its
two elevated cases, but these, being buoyant, resisted this effort, and
turned the boat over on its side; the action being further assisted by
the heavy keel, which had a tendency to drag the bottom downwards.  Thus
the upper part of the boat was raised by one action, and the bottom part
depressed by the other, the result being that the boat righted itself
immediately.  In fact, its remaining in an inverted position was an
impossibility.

The self-emptying principle was accomplished by the introduction of six
self-acting valves into the bottom of the boat, through which the water,
when shipped, ran back into the sea!  When we first heard of this we
were puzzled, reader, as doubtless you are, for it occurred to us that
any hole made in a boat's bottom would inevitably let water in instead
of out!  The difficulty was cleared up when we saw the model.
Beeching's boat had a double floor, the upper one raised to a little
above the level of the sea.  The escapes were short metal pipes, the
upper openings of which were fitted into holes in the upper floor.  The
lower ends passed through the bottom of the boat.  The valves of the top
opened downward, but could not be opened upwards, so that the rushing of
the sea into the pipes from below was checked, but the rushing in of the
sea from above pressed the valves open, and allowed the water to run
out, in accordance with the well-known law that water must find its
_level_.  Thus, the _upper_ floor being above the _level_ of the sea,
all the water ran out.

Boats on this principle, modified in some of the details by Mr Peake,
of Her Majesty's dockyard at Woolwich, are now adopted by the Lifeboat
Institution.  They right themselves in less than a minute, and free
themselves of water in about the same time.

Besides the above advantages, Mr Beeching's boat was fitted with the
usual air-cases round the sides, and with a thick stripe of cork outside
the gunwale; also with lines hanging over the sides in festoons, so that
any one in the water, using them as stirrups, might get into the boat
with ease.  She was further provided with an anchor and cable; with
strong but light lines attached to grappling irons at the bow and stern,
which, when thrown into the rigging or upon a wreck, might fasten
themselves to the ship and retain the boat without any other aid; also
with a life-buoy, and a lantern for night work, besides numerous small
articles.

This boat was purchased by the Harbour Commissioners of Ramsgate, and
anchored close to the pier, in connexion with a powerful steam-tug (the
fires of which were never allowed to die down), ready at any moment to
fly to the rescue, on the signal of distress being given.  This is the
boat whose splendid deeds have so frequently of late drawn the attention
and compelled the admiration of the whole country; and it was this boat
that issued from Ramsgate harbour on the wild night referred to at the
beginning of this chapter.

Both tide and wind were dead against them as they issued from the
shelter of the pier and met the storm, but the steamer was very
powerful; it buffeted the billows bravely, and gradually gained the
neighbourhood of the Sands, where the breakers and cross seas beat so
furiously that their noise, mingled with the blast, created a din which
can only be described as a prolonged and hideous roar.

The night was extremely dark, and bitterly cold.  Heavy seas continually
burst over the steamer's bulwarks, and swept her deck from stem to
stern.  The little lifeboat, far astern, was dragged by the strong
hawser through a wild turmoil of water and spray.  The men nestling
under the gunwales clung to the thwarts and maintained their position,
although sea after sea broke over them and well nigh washed them out.

At length they reached the light-ship; hailed her and were told that the
wreck was on a high part of the shingles, bearing north-west from the
light.  Away they went in that direction, but, being unable to find her,
made their way to the Prince's light-ship, where they were told there
was a large ship on the Girdler.  Once more they steamed in the
direction indicated, and soon discovered the wreck by the tar-barrels
which she was burning.  Just as they sighted her an enormous sea broke
over the steamer with such violence as to stop her way for a moment, and
cause her strong frame to quiver.

"Look out, lads!" cried the coxswain of the lifeboat, as the black water
loomed up between them and the tug.

The men grasped the thwarts more firmly as a tremendous sea filled the
boat to the gunwale.  At this moment the checked steamer again leaped on
her way; the stout hawser parted like a piece of twine, and the lifeboat
was left behind.  Hoisting the corner of its small sail they made for
the wreck.  No time was lost in bailing, as would have been the case
with the boats of former years; a few seconds sufficed to empty her.

The wind was now blowing a complete hurricane with a terrific sea on,
the horrors of which were increased by the darkness of the night, so
that it was with the utmost difficulty they succeeded in getting
alongside.  The wreck was a coasting vessel with a crew of eighteen men.
There were no women or children, so they were got into the boat without
much loss of time, and safely conveyed to the tug which lay to for her
little consort, about three-quarters of a mile off.

The lifeboat was again taken in tow, and they proceeded together towards
Ramsgate, when another gun and signal-rocket recalled them to continue
their arduous duties.

The sleet of a winter's night beat furiously in the faces of these
boatmen, as already much exhausted, they once again faced the storm.
But the streaming rocket and the signal-gun seemed to infuse new life
and vigour into their hardy frames.  Out to sea they went again, and,
having approached as near as they dared to the breakers, worked their
way along the edge of the Sands, keeping a bright look-out for the
vessel in distress.  Up and down they cruised, but nothing could be seen
of her.

At last, on the eastern side of the Sands, they descried a large ship
looming against the dark sky.

"There she is!" shouted the coxswain.

The hawser was slipt, and the boat, detached from her bulky companion,
pushed into the very vortex of the breakers.

To say that no other boat could have lived in such a sea, would convey
