intentions.  I'm sure you will when you know how much I'm distressed by
the position I'm placed in.  It grieves me that my instructions compel
such harsh measures towards my two prisoners: but, in truth, I can say
no discretion has been left me.  I act under an order from
headquarters."

"Senor," she rejoins, casting upon him a look of scornful incredulity,
"you have said all this before.  I suppose you had something else to
speak of."

"And so I have, senorita.  Something of a nature so unpleasant I
hesitate to tell it, fearing it may sadly shock you."

"You need not.  After what has passed I am not likely to be nervous."

Despite her natural courage, and an effort to appear calm, she trembles,
as also her voice.  There is an expression on the face of the man that
bodes sinister risings--some terrible disclosure.

The suspense is too painful to be borne; and in a tone more firm and
defiant she demands the promised communication.

"Dona Adela Miranda," he rejoins, speaking in a grave, measured voice,
like a doctor delivering a prognosis of death, "it has been my duty to
make your brother a prisoner--a painful one, as I have said.  But, alas!
the part I've already performed is nothing compared with that now
required of me.  You say you are prepared for a shock.  What I'm going
to say will cause you one."

She no longer attempts to conceal alarm.  It is now discernible in her
large, wondering eyes.

"Say it!"

The words drop mechanically from her lips, drawn forth by the intensity
of her apprehension.

"You are soon to be without a brother!"

"What mean you, senor?"

"Don Valerian dies within the hour."

"You are jesting, sir.  My brother has not been sick?  He is not
wounded?  Why should he die?"

She speaks hurriedly, and with an incredulous stare at Uraga; while at
the same time her heaving, palpitating bosom shows she too truly
believes what he said.

"Don Valerian is not sick," continues the unfeeling wretch, "nor yet has
he received any wound.  For all this, in less than an hour he must die.
It is decreed."

"_Madre de Dios_!  You are mocking me.  His death decreed!  By whom?"

"Not by me, I assure you.  The military authorities of the country have
been his judges, and condemned him long ago, as also Don Prospero.  It
only needed their capture to have the sentence carried out.  This
disagreeable duty has been entrusted to me.  My orders at starting were
to have both shot on the instant of making them captives.  For your
sake, senorita, I've so far disobeyed the rigorous command--an act which
may cost me my commission.  Yes, Dona Adela, for your sake."

The tale is preposterous, and might seem to her who hears it a lie, but
for her knowledge of many similar occurrences in the history of her
native land, "Cosas de Mexico."  Besides, her own and her brother's
experience render it but too probable.

"_Dios de mi alma_!" she cries out in the anguish of conviction, "can
this be true?"

"It is true."

"Colonel Uraga, you will not carry out this cruel sentence!  It is not
an execution--it is an assassination!  You will not stain your soul with
murder?"

"I must obey orders."

"My poor brother!  Have mercy!  You can save him?"

"I can."

"You will?  You will?"

"I will!"

The emphasis with which these two words are pronounced brings a flush of
gratefulness over her face, and she makes a forward movement as if to
thank him by a pressure of the hand.  She might have given it but for
the cast upon his features, telling his consent not yet obtained, nor
his speech finished.  There is more to come--two other words.  They
are--

"Upon conditions!"

They check her bursting gratitude.  Conditions!  She knows not what they
may be.  But she knows the character of Gil Uraga, and can predict they
will be hard.

"Name them!" she demands.  "If it be money, I'm ready to give it.
Though my brother's property is taken from him, as we've heard, not so
mine.  I have wealth--houses, lands.  Take all, but save Valerian's
life."

"You can save it without expending a single _claco_; only by giving a
grace."

"What mean you, senor?"

"To explain my meaning I'll repeat what I've said.  Your brother's head
is forfeit.  It can be saved by a hand."

"Still I do not understand you.  A hand?"

"Yes, your hand."

"How?"

"Grasped in mine--united with it in holy wedlock.  That is all I ask."

She starts as if a serpent had stung her, for she now comprehends all.

"All I ask," he continues in a strain of fervid passion, "I who love you
with my whole soul; who have loved you for long hopeless years--aye,
senorita, ever since you were a schoolgirl; myself a rough, wild youth,
the son of a ranchero, who dared only gaze at you from a distance.  I am
a peasant no longer, but one who has wealth; upon whom the State has
bestowed power to command; made me worthy to choose a wife from among
the proudest in our land--even to wed with the Dona Adela Miranda, who
beholds him at her feet!"

While speaking he has knelt before her, and remains upon his knees
awaiting her response.

She makes none.  She stands as if petrified, deprived of the power of
speech.

Her silence gives him hope.

"Dona Adela," he continues in an appealing tone, as if to strengthen the
chances of an affirmative answer, "I will do everything to make you
happy--everything a husband can.  And remember your brother's life!  I
am risking my own to save it.  I have just spoken to him on the subject.
He does not object; on the contrary, has given consent to you being
mine."

"You say so?" she inquires, with a look of incredulity.  "I do not
believe it--will not, without hearing it from his own lips."

While speaking, she springs past the kneeling suppliant, and, before he
can get upon his legs or stretch forth a hand to detain her, she has
glided out of the tent, and makes for the place where she supposes the
prisoners to be kept.

Starting to his feet, Uraga rushes after.  His intent is to overtake and
bring her back, even if he have to carry her.

He is too late.  Before he can come up with her she has reached the spot
where her brother lies bound, and kneels beside him with arms embracing,
her lips pressing his brow, his cheeks moistened by her tears.



CHAPTER SIXTY EIGHT.

A TERRIBLE INTENTION.

Not for long does the scene of agonised affection remain uninterrupted.
In a few seconds it is intruded on by him who is causing its agony.

Uraga, hastening after, has reached the spot and stands contemplating
it.  A spectacle to melt a heart of stone, it has no softening effect on
his.  His brow his black with rage, his eyes shining like coals of fire.

His first impulse is to call Galvez and order him to drag brother and
sister apart.  His next to do this himself.  He is about seizing Adela's
wrist, when a thought restrains him.  No melting or impulse of humanity.
There is not a spark of it in his bosom.  Only a hope, suddenly
conceived, that with the two now together he may repeat his proposal
with a better chance of its being entertained.

From the expression upon their countenances he can see that in the
interval before his coming up words have passed between them--few and
hastily spoken, but enough for each to have been told what he has been
saying to the other.  It does not daunt; on the contrary, but determines
him to renew his offer, and, if necessary, reiterate his threats.

There is no one within earshot for whom he need care.  Galvez has taken
Don Prospero far apart.  Roblez is inside the tent, though he thinks not
of him; while the Indian damsel, who stands trembling by, is not worth a
thought.  Besides, he is now more than ever regardless of the result.

"Don Valerian Miranda!" he exclaims, recovering breath after his chase
across the camp-ground.  "I take it your sister has told you what has
passed between us.  If not, I shall tell you myself."

"My sister has communicated all--even the falsehood by which you've
sought to fortify your infamous proposal."

"_Carramba_!" exclaims Uraga, upon whose cheeks there is no blush of
shame for the deception practised.  "Does the offer to save your life,
at risk of my own--to rescue you from a felon's death--does that deserve
the harsh epithet with which you are pleased to qualify it?  Come,
senor, you are wronging me while trifling with your own interests.  I
have been honest, and declared all.  I love the Dona Adela, as you've
known, long.  What do I ask?  Only that she shall become my wife, and,
by so doing, save the life of her brother.  As your brother-in-law it
will be my duty, my interest, my pleasure, to protect you."

"That you shall never be!" firmly rejoins Miranda.  "No, never!" he
adds, with kindling fervour, "never, on such conditions!"

"Does the senorita pronounce with the same determination?" asks Uraga,
riveting his eyes on Adela.

It is a terrible ordeal for the girl.  Her brother lying bound by her
side, his death about to be decreed, his end near as if the executioner
were standing over him--for in this light does Uraga appear.  Called
upon to save his life by promising to become the wife of this man--
hideous in her eyes as the hangman himself; knowing, or believing, that
if she does not, in another hour she may be gazing upon a blood-stained
corpse--the dead body of her own brother!  No wonder she trembles from
head to foot, and hesitates to endorse the negative he has so
emphatically pronounced.

Don Valerian notes her indecision, and, firmly as before, repeats the
words,--

"No--never!" adding, "Dear sister, think not of me.  Do not fear or
falter; I shall not.  I would rather die a hundred deaths than see you
the wife of such a ruffian.  Let me die first!"

"_Chingara_!" hisses the man thus boldly defied, using the vilest
exclamation known to the Spanish tongue.  "Then you shall die first.
And, after you're dead, she shall still be my wife, or something you may
not like so well--my _Margarita_!"

The infamous meaning conveyed by this word, well understood by Miranda,
causes him to start half-upright, at the same time wrenching at the rope
around his wrists.  The perspiration forced from him by the agony of the
hour has moistened the raw-hide thong to stretching.  It yields to the
convulsive effort, leaving his hands released.

With a quick lurch forward he clutches at the sword dangling by Uraga's
side.  Its hilt is in his grasp, and in an instant he has drawn the
blade from its scabbard!

Seeing himself thus suddenly disarmed, the Lancer Colonel springs back
shouting loudly for help.  Miranda, his ankles bound, is at first unable
to follow, but with the sword-blade he quickly cut the thongs, and is on
his feet--free!

In another instant he is chasing Uraga across the camp-ground, the
latter running like a scared hound.

Before he can be overtaken, the trampling of hoofs resound upon the
grassy turf, and the returned lancers, with Roblez and the sentry, close
around the prisoner.

Don Valerian sees himself encircled by a _chevaux de frise_ of lances,
with cocked carbines behind.  There is no chance of escape, no
alternative but surrender.  After that--

He does not stop to reflect.  A wild thought flashes across his brain--a
terrible determination.  To carry it out only needs the consent of his
sister.  She had rushed between their horses and stands by his side,
with arms outstretched to protect him.

"Adela!" he says, looking intently into her eyes, "dear sister, let us
die together!"

She sees the sword resolutely held in his grasp.  She cannot mistake the
appeal.

"Yes; let us, Valerian!" comes the quick response, with a look of
despairing resignation, followed by the muttered speech of "Mother of
God, take us both to thy bosom!  To thee we commit our souls!"

He raises the blade, its point towards his sister--in another moment to
be buried in her bosom, and afterwards in his own!

The sacrifice is not permitted, though the soldiers have no hand in
hindering it.  Dismayed or careless, they sit in their saddles without
thought of interfering.  But between their files rushes a form in whose
heart is more of humanity.

The intruder is Conchita--opportune to an instant.

Two seconds more, and the fratricidal sword would have bereft her of a
mistress and a master, both alike beloved.

Both are saved by her interference; for grasping the upraised arm, she
restrains it from the thrust.

Roblez, close following, assists her, while several of the lancers, now
dismounted, fling themselves upon Miranda and disarm him.

The intending sororicide and suicide is restored to his fastenings; his
sister taken back to her tent; a trooper detailed to stand sentry beside
and frustrate any attempt at a second escapade.



CHAPTER SIXTY NINE.

AN INTERCEPTED DISPATCH.

While the thrilling incident described is occurring in Uraga's camp, the
Rangers, _en route_ along the banks of the Pecos, are making all the
haste in their power to reach it, Hamersley and Wilder every now and
then saying some word to urge them on.

In pursuit of such an enemy the Texans need no pressing.  'Tis only the
irrestrainable impatience of the two whose souls are tortured by the
apprehension of danger hovering over the heads of those dear to them.
There is no difficulty in lifting the trail of the soldiers.  Their
horses are shod, and the late storm, with its torrent of rain, has
saturated the earth, obliterating all old hoof-marks, so that those
later made are not only distinct but conspicuous.  So clear, that the
craft of Cully and Wilder is not called into requisition.  Every Ranger
riding along the trail can take it up as fast as his horse is able to
carry him.

All see that Uraga has taken no pains to blind the track of his party.
Why should he?  He can have no suspicion of being pursued; certainly not
by such pursuers.

Along the trail, then, they ride rapidly; gratified to observe that it
grows fresher as they advance for they are travelling thrice as fast as
the men who made it.

All at once they come to a halt--summoned to this by a sight which never
fails to bring the most hurried traveller to a stand.  They see before
them the dead body of a man!

It is lying on a sand-spit, which projects into the river.  Upon this it
has evidently been washed by the waters, now subsiding after the
freshet, due to the late tornado.  Beside it shows the carcase of a
mule, deposited in similar manner.  Both are conspicuous to the Rangers
as they ride abreast of the spit; but their attention has been called to
them long before by a flock of buzzards, some hovering above, others
alighting upon the sandbank.

Six or seven of the Texans, heading their horses down the sloping bank,
ride towards the "sign"--so sad, yet terribly attractive.  It would
tempt scrutiny anywhere; but in the prairie wilderness, in that
dangerous desert, it may be the means of guiding to a path of safety, or
warding from one that is perilous.

While those who have detached themselves proceed out upon the sand-bar,
the main body remains upon the high bank, awaiting their return.

The dead man proves to be an Indian, though not of the _bravos_, or
savage tribes.  Wearing a striped woollen _talma_, with coarse cotton
shirt underneath, wide sheep-skin breeches, ex tending only a little
below the knee, and rude raw-hide sandals upon his feet, he is evidently
one of the Christianised aboriginals.

There are no marks of violence on his body, nor yet on the carcase of
the mule.  The case is clear at a glance.  It is one of drowning; and
the swollen stream, still foaming past, is evidence eloquent of how it
happened.  On the man's body there are no signs of rifling or robbery.
His pockets, when turned inside out, yield such contents as might be
expected on the person of an _Indio manso_.

Only one thing, which, in the eyes of the examinators, appears out of
place; a sheet of paper folded in the form of a letter, and sealed as
such.  It is saturated with water, stained to the hue of the still
turbid stream.  But the superscription can be read, "Por Barbato."

So much Cully and Wilder, who assist at the examination, can make out
for themselves.  But on breaking open the seal, and endeavouring to
decipher what is written inside, both are at fault, as also the others
along with them.  The letter is in a language that is a sealed book to
all.  It is in Spanish.

Without staying to attempt translating it, they return to the river's
bank, taking the piece of paper along, for the superscription has
touched a tender point, and given rise to strange suspicions.

Walt carries the wet letter, which, soon as rejoining their comrades, he
places in the hands of Hamersley.  The latter, translating, reads aloud:

  "Senor Barbato,--As soon as you receive this, communicate its contents
  to the chief.  Tell him to meet me on the Arroyo de Alamo--same place
  as before--and that he is to bring with him twenty or thirty of his
  painted devils.  The lesser number will be enough, as it's not an
  affair of fighting.  Come yourself with them.  You will find me
  encamped with a small party--some female and two male captives.  No
  matter about the women.  It's the men you have to deal with; and this
  is what you are to do.  Charge upon our camp the moment you get sight
  of it; make your redskins shout like fiends, and ride forward,
  brandishing their spears.  You won't meet resistance, nor find any one
  on the ground when you've got there, only our two prisoners, who will
  be fast bound, and so cannot flee with us.  What's to be done with
  them, amigo mio, is the important part--in fact, the whole play.  Tell
  the chief they are to be speared upon the spot, thrust through as soon
  as you get up to them.  See to this yourself, lest there be any
  mischance; and I'll take care you shall have your reward."

Made acquainted with the contents of this vile epistle, the rage of the
Rangers, already sufficiently aroused, breaks from all bounds, and, for
a while, seeks vent in fearful curses and asseverations.  Though there
is no name appended to the diabolical chapter of instructions, they have
no doubt as to who has dictated it.  Circumstances, present and
antecedent, point to the man of whom they are in pursuit--Gil Uraga.

And he to whom the epistle is superscribed, "Por Barbato."

A wild cry ascends simultaneously from the whole troop as they face
round towards the renegade, who is still with them, and their prisoner.
The wretch turns pale, as if all the blood of his body were abruptly
drawn out.  Without comprehending the exact import of that cry, he can
read in fifty pairs of eyes glaring angrily on him that his last hour
has come.

The Rangers can have no doubt as to whom the letter has been addressed,
as they can also tell why it has miscarried.  For the renegade has
already disclosed his name, not thinking it would thus strangely turn up
to condemn him to death.

Yes--to death; for, although promised life, with only the punishment of
a prison, these conditions related to another criminality, and were
granted without the full knowledge of his guilt--of connivance at a
crime unparalleled for atrocity.  His judges feel absolved from every
stipulation of pardon or mercy; and, summoning to the judgment seat the
quick, stem decreer--Lynch--in less than five minutes after the
trembling wretch is launched into eternity!

There is reason for this haste.  They know that the letter has
miscarried; but he who could dictate such a damnable epistle is a wild
beast at large, who cannot be too soon destroyed.

Leaving the body of Barbato to be devoured by wolves and vultures, they
spur on along the Pecos, only drawing bridle to breathe their horses as
the trail turns up at the bottom of a confluent creek--the Arroyo de
Alamo.



CHAPTER SEVENTY.

A SCHEME OF ATROCITY.

Discomfited--chagrined by his discomfiture--burning with shame at the
pitiful spectacle he has afforded to his followers--Uraga returns within
his tent like an enraged tiger.  Not as one robbed of its prey--he is
still sure of this as ever; for he has other strings to his bow, and the
weak one just snapped scarce signifies.

But for having employed it to no purpose he now turns upon Roblez, who
counselled the course that has ended so disastrously.

The adjutant is a safe target on which to expend the arrows of his
spleen, and to soothe his perturbed spirit he gives vent to it.

In time, however, he gets somewhat reconciled; the sooner by gulping
down two or three glasses of Catalan brandy.  Along with the liquor,
smoking, as if angry at his cigar, and consuming it through sheer spite,
Roblez endeavours to soothe him by consolative speech.

"What matters it, after all!" puts in the confederate.  "It may be that
everything has been for the best.  I was wrong, no doubt, in advising as
I did.  Still, as you see, it's gained us some advantage."

"Advantage!  To me the very reverse.  Only to think of being chased
about my own camp by a man who is my prisoner!  And before the eyes of
everybody!  A pretty story for our troopers to tell when they get back
