sounds of the blows on the chisels, or stone, being heard.

As soon as it was dark enough for them to pass along the ledge,
Meinik went with Stanley to examine the ground. Fortunately, the
portion of stone that remained above the level, and prevented the
rock from being rolled back, was but small; and they were able to
break it up in half an hour, with the axes. Then, making their way
along without difficulty for another four feet, they found
themselves standing upright in the depression in the centre of the
ruin. Mounting six more steps, they were among the bushes that
covered the site of the temple.

They now carefully cleared away every fragment of stone from the
floor of the passage and, returning, Stanley gave orders for the
start to be made. Two or three shots were fired, from the lower
entrance, to show the enemy that they were there and on the watch;
and then all went up to Harry's room. He had been dressed, for the
first time, and was ready for the start. Two of the strongest of
the Burmans went on first.

"Now, Harry, you are to put your hands on my shoulders. Meinik will
follow close behind you, and will keep his arms round you, in case
you need help. Of course, we shall go along very slowly."

"I don't think that all these precautions are necessary," Harry
said. "I am sure that I can walk that distance, easily enough. Why,
you say the stair is only about forty feet."

"I dare say you could, Harry; but we don't want to run any risks.
Your head is not very strong, at present; and you might turn giddy,
or you might stumble. So, at present, you will have just to do as
you are told.

"Let us start."

Harry did not find it as easy as he had expected, getting out
through the lower opening; and he was by no means sorry to have the
support of Stanley and Meinik, as he proceeded along the ledge.
They moved very carefully, and slowly; and all were greatly
relieved when he sat down, on a blanket laid on the steps.

"Now lie back, Harry. We shall have no difficulty in getting you up
here."

Two Burmans took the upper end of the blanket, Stanley and Meinik
the lower, and they were soon at the top of the steps.

"You are not very heavy now, Harry; but you are a good deal heavier
than you were, when we brought you in below.

"Now, the next is the most difficult part of the work--once we get
you through this passage, it will be plain sailing. You see, you
will have to be dragged. The place is only two feet high, so that
it would be impossible to lift you at all. We have made the floor
as smooth as we can, but I am afraid that there are a good many
projecting corners, that will try you a good deal."

"It cannot be helped, Stanley. Fire away, as soon as you like."

The rest of the party were now all gathered, on the steps below;
and Meinik and Stanley, getting up first into the hole, received
Harry as the others lifted him and, with the aid of two of the
Burmans, laid him on his blanket in the passage.

"Now," Stanley said, to the two men who took the other end of the
blanket, "keep it as tight as you can and, when I say 'lift,' we
will all lift together, and move him forward a few inches. Do not
hurry over it--we have plenty of time before us."

They were packed so closely that they had each but one arm
available. Little by little they moved him along, gaining some six
inches, each time; then all had to move, so as to place themselves
for the next effort. However, in five or six minutes they had him
through, and carried him up into the open air. The rest of the
party at once joined them and, with three of the natives on each
side of the blanket, they were soon beyond the circle of ruins, and
making at a brisk pace through the forest. After going for a
quarter of a mile they stopped, cut some poles for the hammock and,
in a short time, were on their way again; having placed in it one
of the bags of rice, as a pillow for Harry.

They travelled for some hours, and then halted to cook some rice.
All had slept a good deal during the day so that, after resting for
an hour, they proceeded on their way again. They had no fear,
whatever, of pursuit; and the only danger that they could incur was
from meeting with a band, similar to that which had carried Harry
off. When they rigged up the hammock, they had cut wood for
torches, to protect themselves from tigers. These were thrown away,
as soon as daylight broke.

At midday they halted again, for another hour; and then, continuing
their journey, arrived at the village before nightfall. They were
received with great joy, the villagers setting up a shout of
welcome--the friends of the men and boys being especially exuberant
in their joy, for they had become extremely anxious at their long
absence. The two troopers were still there; and these saluted
Stanley, with less than the usual stiff formality of the Mohammedan
soldier.

He himself laughed.

"I don't look much like a British officer, at present," he said, in
their language. "Well, has everything been quiet here?"

"Yes, sahib. A sowar brought us orders, from the general, to remain
here; and to send at once, if we heard any news of you. We sent off
one of the villagers, when the man came back to fetch the others,
and said that you had good hopes of getting Lieutenant Brooke sahib
out of the hands of the Burmese."

"I will write a note," Stanley said. "Get your horse saddled, at
once. Directly we have made Mr. Brooke comfortable, I will give you
the letter."

During the time that Stanley had been absent, the houses had been
re-erected, and the village had assumed its general appearance. A
hut was at once handed over to them, and Harry laid on a bamboo
pallet. He had not slept, most of the way down.

"You see I was quite right, Stanley. I told you that the journey
would be nothing."

"Fortunately, it has turned out so. Meinik has already killed a
chicken, and will make it into broth for you. It will be a change,
for you, after your diet of rice. The cooking was excellent, for
the first three or four days; but it fell off sadly. That was one
of the reasons why I gave way to your wish to start at once. You
have done wonderfully well, but a constant diet of rice is not
quite the thing for building up a sick man.

"Now, I am going to write a few lines to the general to say that
you have got safely down, but will need at least another week
before you are able to sit on a horse. Of course, you can be
carried on; but I think that the air here is a great deal more
healthy, and bracing, than it is at Prome and, the longer you stay
here, the better."

Stanley's note was a short one. It merely said that he had
succeeded in getting his cousin, and the trooper who was carried
off at the same time, from the hands of the Burmese, but that Harry
was still very weak; and that, if he himself could be spared, he
would stay with him at the village for another week or ten days, at
the end of which time he would ride, by easy stages, to Prome.

Three days later, the trooper returned with a note from the
general.

"I congratulate you most heartily on having rescued your cousin,"
he wrote. "By all means, stay where you are until he is quite
strong again. This place is not at all healthy, at present. We
shall not be moving forward for another three weeks."

Stanley remained at the village for another fortnight and, at the
end of that time, Harry had so far recovered that he was quite
capable of making a short day's journey on horseback. Two of the
men who had aided in the rescue had gone to Prome, with an order
from Stanley on the staff paymaster, for the rewards that had been
promised to the villagers and the two Burmese soldiers. They
returned with the money, and the men were all highly delighted at
the result of the expedition.

Stanley retained the services of the two soldiers, as long as he
remained in the village. He had no fear, whatever, of the same band
returning that had, before, visited the village; and he learned
that no others had been heard of in the neighbourhood but, at the
same time, he thought it as well that a man should be on guard,
night and day, at each end of the village. The peasants agreed to
watch at one end, while the two Burmese soldiers and the troopers
took charge of the other end. The bulk of the villagers were
engaged in forming a strong stockade round, it to defend themselves
in case of further attack; and Stanley promised to send them down
twenty muskets, and a supply of ammunition, as soon as he got to
Prome.

There was real regret, on the part of the Burmese, when the time
came for the party to start. It had been something altogether new
to them to have officials among them who paid for everything. These
Englishmen had treated them kindly, and were pleased and contented
with everything. The money that the five men and two boys had
earned had enriched the village, and had enabled them to more than
replace their losses by the recent raid and, if Stanley had
accepted all the presents of fruit, fowls, and eggs they would have
given him, he would have needed a couple of extra horses to convey
them. A strong pony had been purchased for Meinik and, after taking
a hearty leave of the villagers, the party rode off.

"I wish we had such a good cook as your man is, Stanley," Harry
said, as they journeyed along at a walk. "I never tasted better
soup than he serves up. I must really get him to teach our mess
cook how to make it."

"Do you know what it is, Harry?"

"I have not the least idea; it might be anything. I think that it
tasted, to me, more like stewed eels than anything else."

"You are not very far out. It is made of the creatures you turned
up your nose at--snakes."

"Nonsense, Stanley!"

"It is, I can assure you. I would not tell you before, because it
might have set you against it. That soup you had in the cave was
made from snake flesh. The recesses in parts of the caves swarmed
with them, and the men laid in quite a store of them, before we
were besieged. Unfortunately they would not keep well, even in
these cool chambers, so we had to fall back on rice. You liked it
so much that, though there was no occasion to have gone on with
snake soup, after we got to the village, I continued to give it to
you; for it is very nourishing."

"Well, I am glad you did not tell me, at the time; but I must own
that it was excellent, and I think that, in future, I shall have no
objection to snake in that form."

"They are just as good, in other ways," Stanley replied. "The
Burmans are no fools, and I consider that snake and lizards are
very much better eating than their mutton; which is tasteless
stuff, at the best."

"We shall have to have a big settlement, when we get back, Stanley.
Of course, all those men you paid, and the guards you bribed, are
entirely my account; to say nothing of my share of the general
expenditure."

"The general expenses are practically nothing, Harry. I invited you
to come with me and, of course, you were my guest. As to the other
matter, that also is my business. I would not say so, if I had not
plenty of funds, but what with my pay as interpreter, and the year
of back pay that I got when the Gazette came out, I have plenty out
of my income to pay for it, without breaking in upon the amount I
told you I had got for those rubies."

"I should pay you, Stanley, if you were rolling in money. Not that
I should mind taking money from you, if I wanted it, but my
expenses since I landed here have not been anything approaching my
pay and allowances; and I have besides, as I told you, an income of
500 pounds a year of my own. You have risked your life for me, and
I am not going to let you pay the piper, as well."

"All right, if it pleases you, Harry. I am delighted at having been
able to save you and, just at present, money does not seem an
important matter one way or the other; so if it really would be a
satisfaction to you to pay, I will certainly not deprive you of
it."

Although they only travelled ten miles the first day, Harry
acknowledged that he was as tired as a dog when he dismounted; and
was so stiff, the next morning, that he had to be helped on to his
horse. However, this gradually wore off and, on the evening of the
fourth day, they arrived at Prome. Leaving Harry at his regimental
camp, Stanley rode to the headquarters, and there dismounted.
Meinik had led the second horse, after Harry dismounted; and now
took them both across to the lines, with the air of a man who has
only been away a few hours. Stanley at once went up to the general.

"Welcome back, lad!" Sir Archibald said. "You have been longer away
than we expected, when you started. I am glad, indeed, that you
succeeded in rescuing your cousin; and we are all burning to hear
about it. I wrote that note to you in a hurry, for I was on the
point of going on a round of inspection of the camp, when your
sowar arrived. I intended to question him concerning you, on my
return; for I had no idea that, after making such a long journey,
he would start back at once, but I found that he had ridden
straight off, directly the note was handed to him. You must dine
with me, today, and tell me all the story. I see, from the colour
of your skin, that you have been in disguise again."

"Yes, sir. There were materials for dyeing the skin in the village,
but nothing that availed to take it off. It is gradually going and,
as I shall be now able to get some strong alkali, from the doctor,
I hope I shall be presentable by tomorrow."

"They are honourable marks," the general said, with a smile. "I
don't think any of us would mind being so coloured, for a bit, if
we had done such good work as you have; but I won't detain you now,
for dinner will be ready in half an hour."

Stanley hurried to his room, took a bath, donned his mess uniform,
and was ready by the time the bugle sounded. Three or four of the
staff were, as usual, members of the party. After the meal was
over, he was requested to narrate his adventures, at full length.
The story was necessarily a long one and, when he concluded, all
joined the general in hearty commendation for the manner in which
he had carried out the adventure.

"Your last story was a stirring one, Mr. Brooke," the general said;
"but this is even more so. When I received your first note, I
thought it next door to madness for you to try to get your cousin,
badly wounded as you knew him to be, from the hands of the Burmese.
It is not an easy thing to get any man out of prison but, when the
man was unable to help himself, it seemed well-nigh impossible; and
I was greatly afraid that, instead of saving his life, you would
lose your own. Of course, the fact that you had successfully
traversed the country before was strongly in your favour; but then
you were unencumbered, and the two things were, therefore, not to
be compared with each other. I shall, of course, put you in orders
tomorrow as having performed a singularly gallant action, in
rescuing Lieutenant Brooke of the 47th and a sowar from their
captivity, by the Burmese, in a prison at Toungoo.

"You have arrived just in time for, after endeavouring to fool us
for the past three months, by negotiations never meant to come to
anything, the enemy are now advancing in great force, and are
within a few miles of the town. So we are likely to have hot work
of it for from all accounts, they have got nearly as large an army
together as Bandoola had. I don't know whether they have learned
anything from his misfortunes, but I am bound to say that the court
does not seem to have taken the lesson, in the slightest degree, to
heart; and their arrogance is just as insufferable as it was before
a shot was fired."

Stanley learnt that there had already been one fight. The enemy were
advancing in three columns. Their right--consisting of 15,000 men,
commanded by Sudda Woon--had crossed the Irrawaddy, and was marching
down the other bank; with the apparent object of recrossing, below
Prome, and cutting the British line of communication. The centre--from
25,000 to 30,000 strong, commanded by the Kee Wongee--was coming down
the left bank of the river, accompanied by a great fleet of war boats.
The left division--15,000 strong, led by an old and experienced general,
Maha Nemiow--was moving parallel with the others, about ten miles distant
from the centre, but separated from it by a thick and impenetrable
forest. A reserve of 10,000 men, commanded by the king's half-brother,
occupied a strongly fortified post at Melloon.  In addition to these, a
large force was gathered near Pegu, and threatened an attack upon Rangoon.

On the 10th of November, a fortnight before Stanley's return, two
brigades of native infantry--under Colonel M'Dowall--had marched
out to dislodge Maha Nemiow; whose division threatened to turn the
British right, and to move round to its rear. The force was divided
into three columns; one moving directly towards the enemy's
position, the others--marching by circuitous routes, so arranged as
to arrive at the point of attack at the same time--were to attack
in flank and rear, while the main body assailed the enemy in front.
The Burmese had, however, obtained information from spies of the
intended movement and, advancing boldly, met the British columns
half way; skirmishing with them hotly in the woods, and threatening
an attack by large bodies of horse.

The centre drove the Burmese before them, and reached their
stockaded position. Colonel M'Dowall, while reconnoitring it, was
killed by a ball from a musket and, as the two flanking columns did
not arrive as expected, the force was compelled to fall back. The
retreat was conducted in good order, but the loss was heavy, as the
Burmese pressed hotly upon them for several miles.

Since this unfortunate affair, the enemy had steadily advanced.
Maha Nemiow had moved directly upon Prome; advancing slowly, and
constantly stockading himself. The centre had also advanced; and
was now fortifying some heights above the river five miles away,
within sight of Prome. Sudda Woon was intrenching himself on the
opposite bank. All these divisions were working, day and night;
advancing steadily but slowly, and erecting formidable lines of
intrenchments as they went; and it seemed to be the intention of
the Burmese general to proceed in that manner, until the whole of
his troops were gathered within a very short distance of the town,
and then to rush upon it from all sides.

In the morning, Stanley went to the lines of the 47th. Harry had,
of course, told his story on his arrival; and the tale had
circulated generally through the regiment and, as he rode in, the
men ran out from their huts and cheered him heartily. No less warm
a greeting did he receive from the officers, in spite of his
protest that there had really been no great difficulty or danger in
the affair.

"What I specially admire," one of the officers said, laughing, "is
that any man should have run all this risk, on purpose, to prevent
himself from coming into an earldom. You had only to leave the
matter alone, and there you were--heir to title and estates."

"I should have been haunted by Harry's ghost," Stanley laughed. "It
would have been as bad as Banquo and Macbeth; he would have sat at
my table, and stood at the head of my bed. No, no; that would have
been a much more serious affair, to face, than a party of Burmese.
The title and estates would have been too dear, at the price."

"Well, you behaved like a brick, anyhow," the colonel said, "and
there is not a man in the regiment who would not have been proud,
indeed, if he had accomplished such a feat. Half my subalterns were
talking, at dinner last night, of learning the language so that, if
the chance fell in their way, they might emulate your doings."

"It is rather a tough language to master," Stanley replied. "It
gave me more trouble than the four or five Indian languages I
speak. I am afraid the campaign will be over, a long time, before
any of your officers learn to talk Burmese well enough to pass as
natives."

After the failure of the expedition of the 10th, no further effort
had been made against the enemy. Indeed, the troops had been
withdrawn from their outlying positions; and there had even been a
feint made of embarking stores, as if with the intention of
retiring down the river, in hopes of tempting the Burmese to make
an attack.
