"Do you endorse this statement, Peggie Weston?"

"Yes, Miss Roscoe, it's quite true," murmured Peggie nervously.

"Netta Goodwin, have you anything to answer in reply to this charge?"

But Netta kept her eyes on the ground, and did not reply. Miss Roscoe,
who was still standing beside the open desk, began to turn over some
of the loose pieces of exercise paper which it contained, and shook
her head as she noticed the names of various candidates scrawled in
different handwritings, evidently for practice. Determined to
investigate the affair thoroughly, she pulled out yet more papers, and
among them a small roll fastened by a brass clip. At this she glanced
with attention, then with marked surprise. "Netta Goodwin," she
continued, "this is an entirely different matter, but one which I
should like explained nevertheless. Last term you gained a prize for
an essay on Thomas Carlyle. How is it that there is a manuscript of
this essay in your desk, signed 'Gwen Gascoyne'? Yes, and in Gwen's
handwriting, too, which I know well."

Netta glanced hastily at Gwen, who had turned as red as fire. Perhaps
feeling that she had already been so entirely exposed that an added
circumstance would make little difference, and wishing to get Gwen
also into trouble, Netta suddenly resolved to make a full confession.

"I suppose I may as well tell everything," she volunteered sulkily.
"Yes--I did want to get the tennis championship, and I altered the
names because I didn't think I had a chance otherwise. About that
essay, it was Gwen Gascoyne's. She wrote it, but she sold it to me for
a sovereign."

"And you passed it off as your own?"

"I'd paid for it, so I just copied it. I couldn't see where the harm
came in!" said Netta doggedly.

"Netta Goodwin, have you absolutely no sense of right and wrong, or
any vestige of conscience?"

"I can't see that I'm worse than some other people," replied Netta,
with a spiteful glance at Gwen.

"Gwen Gascoyne, did you sell this essay to Netta?"

"Yes, Miss Roscoe," gulped Gwen, covered with shame, and too much
embarrassed to offer any explanation.

"I shall have a word with you later on. Netta, by your own confession
you admit appropriating a schoolfellow's work last term, and altering
the voting papers this afternoon. Forgery is a very ugly word and one
which I am sorry to use, but there is no other name for what you have
done. In all the years of my headmistress-ship here such a thing has
not occurred before. I have had unruly and disobedient girls
occasionally, but in the whole of my experience never a girl so
deliberately bad as you. It is well for the school that this has
occurred, and that I have discovered your true character; your
influence must have been most pernicious, and I can only hope that it
has not already done harm. It is, of course, impossible for me to
allow you to remain at Rodenhurst. It is the first time I have been
obliged to expel a pupil, and I much regret the necessity, but I feel
that to keep you would be to retain a source of moral infection. You
will go home at once. Your books and any other articles belonging to
you will be sent after you, and I shall write to your parents,
informing them of the circumstances under which you have been sent
away. I am grieved for the sorrow which I know it will cause them.
Go!"

Miss Roscoe pointed peremptorily to the door, and Netta, all her
jaunty, self-confident airs gone for once, with downcast eyes that did
not dare to meet the scorn of her schoolfellows, and white lips that
quivered with passion, slunk ignominiously from the room. The
Principal waited a few minutes to allow her time to go downstairs,
then she ordered Ida and Peggie back to their own classroom, and
turned with a sigh to Gwen.

"You will come with me to the study," she said briefly. Gwen followed
in a state of abject misery. Was she never to finish reaping that
harvest of tares, the sowing of which she had already so bitterly
repented. One initial slip had indeed plunged her into undreamt-of
trouble.

"Well, Gwen, you had better tell me all about this unhappy business,"
said Miss Roscoe as soon as they were alone. "Let us get to the bottom
of everything this time, and leave nothing concealed."

Hard though it was to make confession, Gwen was almost glad to have
the opportunity of doing so, and of at last setting straight the last
threads of the tangled web she had woven. She felt that she would have
told before about the essay if Netta had not been implicated, but her
father had agreed that she could not in honour expose her
schoolfellow. By skilful cross-questioning Miss Roscoe soon gathered
the facts of the case.

"I understand," she said thoughtfully; "I am glad you paid back that
sovereign, Gwen! It gives me a higher opinion of you than I should
otherwise have had. I judge that your own conscience and your father's
disapproval have punished you so severely that I can add little more
in the way of reproof. I can trust you not to do such a thing again.
Do I now know absolutely the whole of that transaction?"

"Every scrap!"

"Then we will consider the slate wiped clean."

"Thank you just a thousand times!" said Gwen, as Miss Roscoe with a
nod dismissed her from the study.




CHAPTER XXII

The Tennis Tournament


Netta's expulsion naturally made a great sensation in the school. To
prevent misconceptions Gwen told her classmates the entire story both
of the breaking of the china and the selling of her essay. They
already knew so much, that she felt it was better for them to learn
the whole; they could then form their own judgment of the case, and
decide upon what terms they would receive her back amongst them.

"I'm fearfully sorry about it," she said in conclusion; "I know I
don't deserve you to be decent to me."

"I'm extremely glad you've told us," said Hilda Browne, acting
mouthpiece for the rest. "It explains so very much. We never could
understand why you were friends with Netta, and it made us think badly
of you that you seemed so chummy with such a girl. But of course this
accounts for it. I won't whitewash you, but since you're sorry, I vote
we all agree to drop the thing."

"Yes, anyone who refers to it will be a sneak," agreed Elspeth Frazer.
"Gwen's made a fresh start, and it's not fair that any old scores
should be raked up against her. Netta's gone, of which I'm heartily
glad, and I hope now there'll be a better tone altogether throughout
the whole Form."

Elspeth mentioned no names, but she looked meaningly at Annie Edwards,
Millicent Cooper, and Minna Jennings, and the three reddened beneath
her glance. They were not bad girls, but they were weak, and under
Netta's sway they had been very silly, and sometimes dishonourable.

"We must all try and help each other to keep rules," said Hilda Browne
quickly and tactfully. "I'm sure none of us like cheating, and that
we'd every one be willing to promise to be absolutely square in our
work, and in games and everything. Shout 'Aye!' those who agree."

Eighteen voices were raised in unison, Annie's, Millicent's, and
Minna's among the heartiest.

"Carried unanimously!" said Hilda, with a sigh of satisfaction.

"Now the matter's thrashed out, let's talk about tennis," said Edith
Arnold. "Do you know, Gwen Gascoyne, that you were elected one of our
Form champions?"

"Oh! oh!" gasped Gwen.

"Yes, you and Hilda Browne were the pair chosen, and we look to you
both to win the trophy."

"You take net, then, Hilda, and I'll take back," suggested Gwen.

"Netta was certainly very good at back-balls," began Minna Jennings,
but Elspeth Frazer struck in immediately:

"Let us please agree that Netta Goodwin's name is not mentioned again
in this Form. She's best forgotten. I think Hilda and Gwen will work
together splendidly. They must practise as much as they can before
Friday."

Thus forgiven and reinstated both by Miss Roscoe and the Form, Gwen
felt she had at last started quite anew, with her bygones to be
remembered only as danger signals for the future. Her elevation to the
proud position of Form champion half elated and half weighed her down.
It was an enormous responsibility to have to compete for the trophy,
and she hoped her play would justify the girls' choice. Friday
afternoon was to be given up to the match, the Forms allowed to take
part being the Sixth, the Fifth, the Upper, Middle, and Lower Fourth,
handicaps, of course, being arranged by the Committee. The event was
one of the chief excitements of the term, and when Friday arrived the
whole school turned out to act audience. The Fifth was drawn to play
first with the Lower Fourth, and in spite of a heavy handicap scored
an easy victory.

"Not much triumph in beating those kids," remarked Gwen. "They're
simply not in the running."

"Our trials are all to come," agreed Hilda. "We're against the Upper
Fourth now, and if we beat them, then we may expect our tussle with
the Sixth."

"I'm shaking in my shoes already!"

"Don't make too sure; the Upper Fourth are better than the Lower, and
need taking seriously. We may lose on this."

"I think the handicap's too big," grumbled Gwen.

As Hilda had prophesied, the Upper Fourth proved adversaries worthy of
their skill. Eve Dawkins and Myra Johnson were both as old and nearly
as tall as Gwen, and they played up with grim determination. At first
the score went against the Fifth, and the spectators watched with
keenest interest, but in the end Gwen's swift serving told, and Eve
and Myra retired vanquished. The Middle Fourth had already been beaten
by the Sixth, so it was now the Final between Sixth and Fifth.

"When Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug-of-war!" said Hilda.

"I found a four-leaved clover this morning on the wold, and I've
pinned it on to my dress as a mascot," returned Gwen.

"May it bring us luck! though I believe in play more than in mascots.
Keep as cool as you can, Gwen, and remember Olga's nasty balls."

"I'll do my best, though I'm afraid you'll all rue choosing me for a
champion," said Gwen, as she took her place.

Geraldine French and Olga Hunter, their two opponents, were renowned
players in the school, and very few of the lookers-on expected the
Fifth to have any chance at all.

"I'm afraid we'll lose!" sighed Edith Arnold.

"Oh, we won't give up too soon!" declared Elspeth Frazer. "Geraldine
is in form to-day, certainly, and Olga is serving swifter than I've
ever known her before, but we haven't proved yet what Hilda and Gwen
are capable of."

It was Olga's serve. She sent one of her famous invincible balls,
which hardly rose from the ground, and Gwen missed it. A suppressed
cheer rose from the adherents of the Sixth. Gwen clenched her teeth
hard, and watched for the next ball with the expression of a Red
Indian. It skimmed over the net as swiftly as its predecessor, but
Gwen was prepared this time, and returned it.

"Well played!" cried the Fifth ecstatically.

All four champions were on their mettle, and the fight that ensued was
of the keenest. Gwen was not a graceful player, but, as her friends
observed, she seemed capable of being everywhere at once, she was so
extremely lithe and quick.

"Very good! Excellent!" were the remarks that passed round at certain
of the strokes.

"I'd no idea Gwen had it in her!" commented Miss Trent.

In spite of Gwen's exertions the first game fell to the Sixth. They
were heartily clapped, and the Fifth began to look rather blue. Each
side now played with extreme caution. They had taken one another's
measure, and knew what they had to expect. Hilda Browne kept her nerve
well, and her serves were acknowledged to be what the girls called
"clinchers". As for Gwen, her arms seemed elastic. This time the Sixth
were beaten, and the Fifth began to breathe.

"It would be just too ripping if we really won!" exclaimed Betty
Brierley.

"We mustn't crow too soon, we're not out of the wood yet," returned
Irene Platt.

The excitement had risen to high-water mark. Some of the school were
for the Sixth, and some for the Fifth, and their rival claims were
discussed eagerly.

"Try and think you don't mind, and then you'll be far less nervous,"
whispered Hilda to Gwen.

Gwen nodded. She had almost passed the stage of nervousness.

"We can't do better than our best," she replied.

Perhaps Olga and Geraldine were nervous too; they made one or two bad
strokes which seemed to put them out considerably. Gwen, on the
contrary, surpassed herself. Never in her life before had she played
so well. She seemed able to take every ball in whatever awkward spot
it landed. Thanks largely to her ubiquity, the set ended in the
triumph of the Fifth. A tremendous clapping and cheering ensued. For
three years the Sixth had held the trophy, so it was indeed an honour
to have won it from their possession. Gwen and Hilda were absolutely
feted by their Form, and even the vanquished Sixth had the magnanimity
to praise their play.

"Gwen Gascoyne is simply A1," was the general verdict. "She's a
perfect surprise. We didn't know we'd anyone so good in the school."

"Look here, Gwen, you and Olga will have to enter for the shield. You
and she have proved yourselves far and away the best champions this
afternoon," said Bessie Manners.

"Compete for the shield!" cried Gwen, turning hot with pleasure at the
bare idea.

She and Hilda were called up then to receive the trophy, and bore
away the silver cup with much pride. All the Form marched into the
school to see it put in its place upon the mantelpiece of their
classroom.

"Well done, the old Fifth!" said Betty Brierley.

"And hurrah for its champions!" added Rachel Hunter.

To Gwen, though the winning of the trophy had been a wild delight,
Bessie's hint was a cause of even greater excitement. Rodenhurst
belonged to the County United Schools' Tennis League, which every year
played a big tournament in Stedburgh. Ten different schools were in
the league, four being from Stedburgh and the others from various
