  And perchance there may come a vision true
  Ere day create the world anew."                                     10
    Slowly Sir Launfal's eyes grew dim,
    Slumber fell like a cloud on him,
  And into his soul the vision flew.

  The crows flapped over by twos and threes,
  In the pool drowsed the cattle up to their knees,                   15
    The little birds sang as if it were
    The one day of summer in all the year,
  And the very leaves seemed to sing on the trees.
  The castle alone in the landscape lay
  Like an outpost of winter, dull and gray:                           20

  'Twas the proudest hall in the North Countree,
  And never its gates might opened be,
  Save to lord or lady of high degree;
  Summer besieged it on every side,
  But the churlish stone her assaults defied;                         25
  She could not scale the chilly wall,
  Though round it for leagues her pavilions tall
  Stretched left and right,
  Over the hills and out of sight;
    Green and broad was every tent,                                   30
    And out of each a murmur went
  Till the breeze fell off at night.
  The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang,
  And through the dark arch a charger sprang,
  Bearing Sir Launfal, the maiden knight,                             35
  In his gilded mail that flamed so bright
  It seemed the dark castle had gathered all
  Those shafts the fierce sun had shot over its wall
    In his siege of three hundred summers long,
  And, binding them all in one blazing sheaf,                         40
    Had cast them forth: so, young and strong,
  And lightsome as a locust leaf,
  Sir Launfal flashed forth in his unscarred mail,
  To seek in all climes for the Holy Grail.

  It was morning on hill and stream and tree                          45
    And morning in the young knight's heart;
  Only the castle moodily
  Rebuffed the gift of the sunshine free,
    And gloomed by itself apart;
  The season brimmed all other things up                              50
  Full as the rain fills the pitcher-plant's cup.

  As Sir Launfal made morn through the darksome gate
    He was 'ware of a leper, crouched by the same,
  Who begged with his hand and moaned as he sate;
    And a loathing over Sir Launfal came;                             55
  The sunshine went out of his soul with a thrill,
    The flesh 'neath his armour 'gan shrink and crawl,
  And midway its leap his heart stood still
    Like a frozen waterfall;
  For this man, so foul and bent of stature,                          60
  Rasped harshly against his dainty nature,
  And seemed the one blot on the summer morn,--
  So he tossed him a piece of gold in scorn.

  The leper raised not the gold from the dust:
  "Better to me the poor man's crust,                                 65
  Better the blessing of the poor,
  Though I turn me empty from his door;
  That is no true alms which the hand can hold;
  He gives nothing but worthless gold
    Who gives from a sense of duty;                                   70
  But he who gives a slender mite,
  And gives to that which is out of sight,
    That thread of the all-sustaining Beauty
  Which runs through all and doth all unite,--
  The hand cannot clasp the whole of his alms,                        75
  The heart outstretches its eager palms,
  For a god goes with it and makes it store
  To the soul that was starving in darkness before."


PART SECOND

  There was never a leaf on bush or tree,
  The bare boughs rattled shudderingly;                               80
  The river was numb and could not speak,
    For the weaver Winter its shroud had spun;
  A single crow on the tree-top bleak
    From his shining feathers shed off the cold sun;
  Again it was morning, but shrunk and cold                           85
  As if her veins were sapless and old,
  And she rose up decrepitly
  For a last dim look at earth and sea.

  Sir Launfal turned from his own hard gate,
  For another heir in his earldom sate;                               90
  An old, bent man, worn out and frail,
  He came back from seeking the Holy Grail;
  Little he recked of his earldom's loss,
  No more on his surcoat was blazoned the cross,
  But deep in his soul the sign he wore,                              95
  The badge of the suffering and the poor.

  Sir Launfal's raiment thin and spare
  Was idle mail 'gainst the barbed air,
  For it was just at the Christmas time;
  So he mused, as he sat, of a sunnier clime,                        100
  And sought for a shelter from cold and snow
  In the light and warmth of long-ago:
  He sees the snake-like caravan crawl
  O'er the edge of the desert, black and small.
  Then nearer and nearer, till, one by one,                          105
  He can count the camels in the sun,
  As over the red-hot sands they pass
  To where, in its slender necklace of grass,
  The little spring laughed and leapt in the shade,
  And with its own self like an infant played,                       110
  And waved its signal of palms.
  "For Christ's sweet sake I beg an alms;"--
  The happy camels may reach the spring,
  But Sir Launfal sees only the grewsome thing,
  The leper, lank as the rain-blanched bone,                         115
  That cowers beside him, a thing as lone
  And white as the ice-isles of Northern seas
  In the desolate horror of his disease.

  And Sir Launfal said, "I behold in thee
  An image of Him who died on the tree;                              120
  Thou also hast had thy crown of thorns,
  Thou also hast had the world's buffets and scorns,
  And to thy life were not denied
  The wounds in the hands and feet and side:
  Mild Mary's Son, acknowledge me;                                   125
  Behold, through him, I give to thee!"

  Then the soul of the leper stood up in his eyes
    And looked at Sir Launfal, and straightway he
  Remembered in what a haughtier guise
    He had flung an alms to leprosie,                                130
  When he girt his young life up in gilded mail
  And set forth in search of the Holy Grail.
  The heart within him was ashes and dust;
  He parted in twain his single crust,
  He broke the ice on the streamlet's brink,                         135
  And gave the leper to eat and drink:
  'Twas a mouldy crust of coarse brown bread,
    'Twas water out of a wooden bowl,--
  Yet with fine wheaten bread was the leper fed,
    And 'twas red wine he drank with his thirsty soul.               140

  As Sir Launfal mused with a downcast face,
  A light shone round about the place;
  The leper no longer crouched at his side,
  But stood before him glorified,
  Shining and tall and fair and straight                             145
  As the pillar that stood by the Beautiful Gate,--
  Himself the Gate whereby men can
  Enter the temple of God in Man.

  His words were shed softer than leaves from the pine,
  And they fell on Sir Launfal as snows on the brine,                150
  Which mingle their softness and quiet in one
  With the shaggy unrest they float down upon:
  And the voice that was calmer than silence said:
  "Lo it is I, be not afraid!
  In many climes, without avail,                                     155
  Thou has spent thy life for the Holy Grail;
  Behold it is here,--this cup which thou
  Didst fill at the streamlet for me but now;
  This crust is my body broken for thee,
  This water His blood that died on the tree;                        160
  The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,
  In whatso we share with another's need;
  Not what we give, but what we share,--
  For the gift without the giver is bare;
  Who gives himself with his alms feeds three,--                     165
  Himself, his hungering neighbour, and me."

  Sir Launfal awoke as from a swound:--
  "The Grail in my castle here is found!
  Hang my idle armour up on the wall,
  Let it be the spider's banquet-hall;                               170
  He must be fenced with stronger mail
  Who would seek and find the Holy Grail."

  The castle gate stands open now,
    And the wanderer is welcome to the hall
  As the hangbird is to the elm-tree bough;                          175
    No longer scowl the turrets tall,
  The Summer's long siege at last is o'er;
  When the first poor outcast went in at the door,
  She entered with him in disguise,
  And mastered the fortress by surprise;                             180
  There is no spot she loves so well on ground,
  She lingers and smiles there the whole year round.
  The meanest serf on Sir Launfal's land
  Has hall and bower at his command;
  And there's no poor man in the North Countree                      185
  But is lord of the earldom as much as he.

      --_James Russell Lowell_


  PREPARATORY.--Read Tennyson's _The Holy Grail_.

  Compare the mode in which Tennyson treats the pursuit of
  the Holy Grail, in _Sir Galahad_, with that adopted by
  Lowell in this poem.

  Show the connection between the fundamental ideas in
  this poem, and those in Longfellow's _King Robert of
  Sicily_ and _The Legend Beautiful_.

  Point out the various contrasts (_a_) of scene, (_b_) of
  thought, (_c_) of emotion, and show a corresponding
  contrast in vocal expression.

  Articulation. (Appendix A, 1 and 11.)

  5 and 6. What is the Inflection?

  11. What changes of vocal expression accompany the
  transition?

  14-20. Note the word-pictures and the effect of the
  Imaging process on the Time.

  22. What is the Inflection on BE?

  27-29 and 37-39. Observe the Grouping, Pause, and
  Inflection.

  41. HAD CAST THEM FORTH. With what phrase is this
  parallel? How does the voice express the parallelism?

  42-44. Which line expresses the main thought? How is it
  made prominent? (Introduction, p. 33.)

  51. Where is the Pause?

  65-67. Show the relative importance of the emphatic
  words and phrases. (Introduction, pp. 30 and 31.)

  69-78. Read these lines with a view to (_a_)
  Perspective, (_b_) Inflection.

  91. OLD, BENT. Account for the pause between these two
  adjectives. (Introduction, pp. 7 and 8.)

  95. What is the emphatic word? Why?

  107-111. Note the difference in the sound of the letter
  _a_ in the various words.

  119-126. What feeling predominates? How are the Force,
  Pitch, and Time affected?

  137-140. How does the voice indicate the contrast
  between the meagre and the sumptuous? (Introduction, pp.
  34 and 35.)

  141-142. Note the transition from the subjective to the
  objective. How is it indicated in reading?

  154-166. What atmosphere pervades this speech? What
  Quality of voice suggests it? (Introduction, p. 35.)

  167. Note the transition. What movement is suggested?
  What is the Stress and Quality of voice?

  168-172. What state of mind does this speech suggest?
  What is the change in Stress and Quality?

       *       *       *       *       *


ON THE DEATH OF GLADSTONE

Delivered in the Canadian House of Commons, May 26, 1898


England has lost the most illustrious of her sons; but the loss is not
England's alone, nor is it confined to the great empire which
acknowledges England's suzerainty, nor even to the proud race which
can claim kinship with the people of England. The loss is the loss of
mankind. Mr. Gladstone gave his whole life to his country; but the
work which he did for his country, was conceived and carried out, on
principles of such high elevation, for purposes so noble, and aims so
lofty, that not his country alone, but the whole of mankind, benefited
by his work. It is no exaggeration to say that he has raised the
standard of civilization, and the world to-day is undoubtedly better
for both the precept and the example of his life.

His death is mourned not only by England, the land of his birth, not
only by Scotland, the land of his ancestors, not only by Ireland for
whom he did so much, and attempted so much more; but also by the
people of the two Sicilies, for whose outraged rights he once aroused
the conscience of Europe, by the people of the Ionian Islands, whose
independence he secured, and by the people of Bulgaria and the
Danubian Provinces, in whose cause he enlisted the sympathy of his own
native country. Indeed, since the days of Napoleon, no man has lived
whose name has travelled so far and so wide, over the surface of the
earth; no man has lived whose name alone so deeply moved the hearts of
so many millions of men. Whereas Napoleon impressed his tremendous
personality upon peoples far and near, by the strange fascination
which the genius of war has always exercised over the imagination of
men in all lands and in all ages, the name of Gladstone had come to be
in the minds of all civilized nations, the living incarnation of right
against might--the champion, the dauntless, tireless champion, of the
oppressed against the oppressor. It is, I believe, equally true to say
that he was the most marvellous mental organization which the world
has seen since Napoleon--certainly the most compact, the most active
and the most universal.

This last half century in which we live, has produced many able and
strong men who, in different walks of life, have attracted the
attention of the world at large; and of the men who have illustrated
this age, it seems to me that in the eyes of posterity four will
outlive and outshine all others--Cavour, Lincoln, Bismarck, and
Gladstone. If we look simply at the magnitude of the results obtained,
compared with the exiguity of the resources at command,--if we
remember that out of the small Kingdom of Sardinia grew united Italy,
we must come to the conclusion that Count Cavour was undoubtedly a
statesman of marvellous skill and prescience. Abraham Lincoln, unknown
to fame when he was elected to the presidency, exhibited a power for
the government of men which has scarcely been surpassed in any age. He
saved the American Union, he enfranchised the black race, and for the
task he had to perform he was endowed in some respects almost
miraculously. No man ever displayed a greater insight into the
motives, the complex motives, which shape the public opinion of a free
country, and he possessed almost to the degree of an instinct, the
supreme quality in a statesman of taking the right decision, taking it
at the right moment and expressing it in language of incomparable
felicity. Prince Bismarck was the embodiment of resolute common sense,
unflinching determination, relentless strength, moving onward to his
end, and crushing everything in his way as unconcerned as fate itself.
Mr. Gladstone undoubtedly excelled every one of these men. He had in
his person a combination of varied powers of the human intellect,
rarely to be found in one single individual. He had the imaginative
fancy, the poetic conception of things, in which Count Cavour was
deficient. He had the aptitude for business, the financial ability
which Lincoln never exhibited. He had the lofty impulses, the generous
inspirations which Prince Bismarck always discarded, even if he did
not treat them with scorn. He was at once an orator, a statesman, a
poet, and a man of business. As an orator he stands certainly in the
very front rank of orators of his country or any country of his age or
any age. I remember when Louis Blanc was in England, in the days of
the Second Empire, he used to write to the press of Paris, and in one
of his letters to "Le Temps" he stated that Mr. Gladstone would
undoubtedly have been the foremost orator of England, if it were not
for the existence of Mr. Bright. It may be admitted, and I think it is
admitted generally, that on some occasions Mr. Bright reached heights
of grandeur and pathos which even Mr. Gladstone did not attain. But
Mr. Gladstone had an ability, a vigour, a fluency which no man in his
age or any age ever rivalled or even approached. That is not all. To
his marvellous mental powers he added no less marvellous physical
gifts. He had the eye of a god, the voice of a silver bell; and the
very fire of his eye, the very music of his voice swept the hearts of
men even before they had been dazzled by the torrents of his
eloquence.

As a statesman, it was the good fortune of Mr. Gladstone that his
career was not associated with war. The reforms which he effected, the
triumphs which he achieved, were not won by the supreme arbitrament of
the sword. The reforms which he effected and the triumphs which he
achieved were the result of his power of persuasion over his
fellow-men. The reforms which he achieved in many ways amounted to a
revolution. They changed, in many particulars, the face of the realm.
After Sir Robert Peel had adopted the great principle which eventually
carried England from protection to free trade, it was Mr. Gladstone
who created the financial system which has been admitted ever since by
all students of finance, as the secret of Great Britain's commercial
success. He enforced the extension of the suffrage to the masses of
the nation, and practically thereby made the government of monarchical
England as democratic as that of any republic. He disestablished the
Irish church, he introduced reform into the land tenure and brought
hope into the breasts of those tillers of the soil in Ireland who had
for so many generations laboured in despair. And all this he did, not
by force or violence, but simply by the power of his eloquence and the
strength of his personality.

Great, however, as were the acts of the man, after all he was of the
human flesh, and for him, as for everybody else, there were trivial
and low duties to be performed. It is no exaggeration to say that even
in those low and trivial duties he was great. He ennobled the common
realities of life. His was above all things a religious
mind--essentially religious in the highest sense of the term. And the
religious sentiment which dominated his public life and his speeches,
that same sentiment, according to the testimony of those who knew him
best, also permeated all his actions from the highest to the humblest.
He was a man of strong and pure affections, of long and lasting
friendship, and to describe the beauty of his domestic life, no words
of praise can be adequate. It was simply ideally beautiful, and in the
later years of his life, as touching as it was beautiful. May I be
permitted, without any impropriety, to recall that it was my privilege
to experience and to appreciate that courtesy, made up of dignity and
grace, which was famous all the world over, but of which no one could
have an appropriate opinion, unless he had been the recipient of it.
In a character so complex and diversified, one may ask what was the
dominant feature, what was the supreme quality, the one characteristic
which marked the nature of the man. Was it his incomparable genius for
finance? Was it his splendid oratorical powers? Was it his marvellous
fecundity of mind? In my estimation it was not any one of these
qualities. Great as they were, there was one still more marked, and if
I have to give my own impression, I would say that the one trait which
was dominant in his nature, which marked the man more distinctly than
any other, was his intense humanity, his paramount sense of right, his
abhorrence of injustice, wrong, and oppression wherever to be found or
in whatever shape they might show themselves. Injustice, wrong,
