surprising."

"I didn't earn it by my art," replied Chester, smiling. "It was a
bequest."

"That accounts for it. I suppose, under the circumstances, we must let
you go; but why need you give up your work? Probably ideas and
suggestions may come to you while you are traveling. These you can send
to us by mail."

"But I can't do enough to earn the salary you pay me."

"Then we will pay according to the amount you do."

"That will be satisfactory."

"Do you need an advance for the expenses of your journey?"

"No; I have some money laid by."

"Another surprise! When do you want to start?"

"As soon as possible. I will not come to the office again."

"Then good luck and a pleasant journey."

When Edward Granger came into his room later in the day, Chester said:
"Day after to-morrow we start for Oregon. Ask your employers to hold
your place for you, and get ready at once."

"But the money, Chester?" gasped Edward.

"I will advance it to you, and you shall repay me when you can."




CHAPTER XXXV.

PREPARING FOR THE JOURNEY.


No sooner had Chester decided upon his Western journey than he
telegraphed to Dean & Downe, of Tacoma:

"I will call upon you within two weeks."

Mrs. Rand was much surprised when Chester, coming home unexpectedly,
announced his intentions.

"Do you want me to take you with me, mother?" asked Chester, with a
smile.

"I am afraid I could not help you much. But you are not used to
traveling. You may take the wrong cars."

Again Chester smiled.

"I have spent over a year in the city, mother," he said. "I have got
along pretty well in the last twelve months, haven't I?"

"Yes; but suppose you were to fall sick, with no one to look after
you?"

"I didn't tell you that I am going to have company. Edward Granger, who
was born in Oregon, and is three years older than myself, will go with
me."

"Then I shall feel easier. He knows the way, and can look after you."

Chester was secretly of opinion that he was more competent to look
after Edward, but did not say so. He saw that his mother was easier in
mind, and this relieved him.

Before he started from New York he called to see Mr. Fairchild. On
Fourteenth Street he fell in with Felix Gordon.

"How are you getting along, Felix?" he asked.

"Pretty well. Mr. Fairchild has raised me to six dollars a week."

"I am glad of it. That shows he is satisfied with you."

"I try to please him. I began to think that is the best policy. That is
why you have succeeded so well."

"Do you ever hear from Mr. Mullins?"

"No; but I know where he is."

"Where? Of course you know that I have no wish to injure him."

"He is somewhere in Oregon, or perhaps in Washington Territory."

Washington had not at that time been advanced to the dignity of a
State.

"That is curious."

"Why is it curious?"

"Because I am going to start for Oregon and Washington to-night."

"You don't mean it! What are you going for?"

"On business," answered Chester, not caring to make a confidant of
Felix."

"Won't it cost a good deal of money?"

"Yes; but I expect to get paid for going."

"What a lucky fellow you are!" said Felix, not without a trace of envy.
"I wish I could go. I like to travel, but I have never had a chance."

Mr. Fairchild was equally surprised when told of Chester's plans.

"Are you going as an artist?" he asked.

"No; as a real estate man," answered Chester. "I own a few lots in
Tacoma, and have a chance of selling a part of them."

Then he went into particulars.

"I congratulate you. I have only one piece of advice to offer. Make
careful inquiries as to the value of property. Then ask a fair price,
not one that is exorbitant. That might drive the hotel people to
seeking another site for their house."

"Thank you, Mr. Fairchild; I will remember your advice."

"The journey is an expensive one. If you need two or three hundred
dollars I will loan it to you cheerfully."

"Thank you very much, but I have more money saved up than I shall
require."

"I see you are careful and provident. Well, Chester, I wish you every
success."

"I am sure of that, Mr. Fairchild. By the way, I hear that your old
bookkeeper is in Oregon or Washington."

"Who told you?"

"Felix. Have you any message for him if I happen to meet him?"

"Say that I have no intention of prosecuting him. If he is ever able I
shall be glad to have him return the money he took from me. As to
punishment, I am sure he has been punished enough by his enforced
flight and sense of wrongdoing."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

A GREAT SURPRISE.


From New York to Tacoma is a long journey. Over three thousand miles
must be traversed by rail, but the trip is far from tiresome. Chester
and his companion thoroughly enjoyed it. All was new and strange, and
the broad spaces through which they passed were full of interest.

They stopped at Niagara Falls, but only for a few hours, and spent a
day in Chicago. Then they were whirled onward to St. Paul and
Minneapolis, and later on over the broad plains of North Dakota and
through the mountains of Montana.

"I never thought the country was so large before," said Chester to
Edward. "You have been over the ground once before."

"Yes; but part of it was during the night, It is pleasant to see it
once more. Many of the places have grown considerably, though it is
only two years since I came from Portland."

Chester made some agreeable acquaintances. An unsociable traveler
misses many of the profitable results of his journey, besides finding
time hang heavily on his hands.

Just after leaving Bismarck, in North Dakota, Chester's attention was
called to an old man, whose white hair and wrinkled face indicated that
he had passed the age of seventy years.

The conductor came through the car, collecting tickets. The old man
searched for his, and an expression of dismay overspread his face.

"I can't find my ticket," he said.

"That is unfortunate. Where did you come from?"

"From Buffalo."

"When did you last see your ticket?"

"I stopped over one night in Bismarck, and had to share my room with a
young man, for the hotel was crowded. I think he must have picked my
pocket of the ticket."

"Did you know the ticket was missing when you boarded the train?"

"No, sir. I did not think to look."

"Your case is unfortunate. How far are you going?"

"To Tacoma. I have a son there."

"I am afraid you will have to pay the fare from here. I have no
discretion in the matter, and cannot allow you to ride without a
ticket."

"Don't you believe my ticket was stolen?" asked the old man, in a state
of nervous agitation.

"Yes, I believe it. I don't think a man of your age would deceive me.
But I cannot let you travel without paying for another."

"I haven't money enough," said the old man, piteously. "If you will
wait till I reach Tacoma my son will give me money to pay you."

"I am not allowed to do that. I think you will have to get out at the
next station."

The old man was much agitated.

"It is very hard," he sighed. "I--I don't know what to do."

Chester had listened to this conversation with great sympathy for the
unfortunate traveler, on account of his age and apparent helplessness.

"How much is the fare to Tacoma from this point?" he asked.

"In the neighborhood of fifty dollars," answered the conductor.

"Will your son be able to pay this?" asked Chester.

"Oh, yes," answered the old man. "William has been doin' well. He is
going to build a large hotel in Tacoma--he and another man."

"Then," said Chester, "I will advance you what money you need. You can
give me a memorandum, so that I can collect it from your son."

"Heaven bless you, young man!" said the old man, fervently. "You are
indeed a friend to me who am but a stranger. I am sure you will
prosper."

"Thank you."

"What a fellow you are, Chester!" said Edward. "You will make yourself
poor helping others."

"I shall sleep better for having aided the old man," answered Chester.

The rest of the journey was uneventful. The two boys went at once to
Tacoma, as Chester felt that the gentlemen who were negotiating for his
lots were probably in a hurry to arrange for the building of the hotel.
After establishing themselves at a hotel and eating dinner, they went
at once to the office of Dean & Downie, the real estate agents from
whom Chester had received a letter.

Here a surprise awaited him.

Standing at a desk in the rear of the office was a figure that looked
familiar. The man turned as the door opened to admit Chester, and the
latter recognized to his great astonishment his old enemy--David
Mullins!




CHAPTER XXXVII.

DAVID MULLINS AGAIN.


When David Mullins saw Chester enter the office he turned pale, and
looked panic-stricken.

"You here!" he exclaimed, in a hollow voice.

"Yes, Mr. Mullins. I am surprised to meet you."

"Then you didn't know I was here?"

"I heard from Felix that you were in this part of the country."

"I am trying to earn an honest living," said Mullins, in agitation. "My
employers know nothing to my prejudice. Do you come as a friend or an
enemy?"

"Mr. Mullins, I haven't the least intention of harming you. I will not
even appear to know you. I came here to see Dean & Downie, with whom I
have business."

"Heaven be praised! I will not soon forget your kindness. Here comes
Mr. Dean. Remember your promise."

At this moment Mr. Dean entered the office. David Mullins had returned
to his desk.

"This young man wishes to see you, Mr. Dean," he said, formally, when
his employer entered.

Mr. Dean looked at Chester, inquiringly.

"I am Chester Rand, with whom you have had some correspondence," said
Chester, tendering his card. "I have just arrived from New York."

The broker regarded him in surprise.

"You Chester Rand?" he exclaimed. "Why, you are a boy."

"I must plead guilty to that indictment," said Chester, smiling, "but I
am the owner of the lots which I understand are wanted for the new
hotel."

David Mullins, who heard this conversation, looked up in amazement. He
had not known of the correspondence with Chester, as Mr. Dean had
written his letter personally, and it had not gone through the office.

"Can you furnish any evidence of this?" asked Mr. Dean.

"Here is the letter you sent me, and here is a copy of my reply."

The broker took the letter from Chester's hand and all doubt vanished
from his countenance.

"I am glad to see you here so soon, Mr. Rand," he said, "as the parties
with whom I am negotiating are anxious to conclude matters as soon as
possible. Will you go over with me to Mr. Taylor's office? Taylor and
