huddle up in da bed. 'E rub 'ese'f 'pon da 'tomach; 'e say:--

"'Hoo! me feel-a too good fer tahlk 'bout. I no know wut me gwan fer
tell da ole 'Gator wun 'e is come bahck. Ki! me no keer. Me feel too
good fer t'ink 'bout dem t'ing. Me t'ink 'bout dem wun da 'Gator is bin
come; me t'ink 'bout dem bumbye wun da time come fer t'ink.'

"Da lil boy Bear lay down; 'e quile up in da 'Gator bed; 'e shed 'e
y-eye; 'e sleep ha'd lak bear do wun ef full up. Bumbye, mos' toze
night, da 'Gator come; 'e holler:--

"'Hey! lil boy Bear! How you is kin min' me chillun wun you is gone fer
sleep by um?'

"Da lil boy Bear, 'e set up 'pon 'e ha'nch; 'e say:--

"'Me y-eye gone fer sleep, but me year wide 'wake.'

"Da 'Gator flut 'e tail; 'e say:--

"'Wey me chillun wut me leaf you wit'?'

"Da lil boy Bear 'come skeer; 'e say:--

"'Dey all dey-dey, Missy 'Gator. Wait! lemme count dem, Missy 'Gator.

    "'_Yarrah one, yarrah narrah,
    Yarrah two 'pon top er tarrah,
    Yarrah t'ree pile up tergarrah!_'[76]

"Da 'Gator y-open 'e mout', 'e grin wide; 'e say:--

"'Oona nuss dem well, lil boy Bear; come, fetch-a me one fer wash en git
'e supper.'

"Da lil boy Bear, 'e ca' one, 'e ca' nurrer, 'e ca' turrer, 'e ca' um
all tel 'e ca' six, den 'e come skeer. 'E t'ink da 'Gator gwan fine um
out fer true. 'E stop, 'e yent know wut fer do. Da 'Gator holler:--

"'Fetch-a me turrer!'

"Da lil boy Bear, 'e grab da fus' one, 'e wullup um in da mud, 'e ca' um
bahck. Da 'Gator bin wash un feed um fresh; 'e yent know da diffran.

"Bumbye, nex' day mornin', da 'Gator gone 'way. Da lil boy Bear stay fer
nuss dem lil 'Gator. 'E come honkry; 'e wait, but 'e come mo' honkry. 'E
grab nurrer lil 'Gator, 'e eat um fer 'e dinner. Mos' toze night, da
'Gator come. It sem t'ing:--

"'Wey me chillun wut me leaf you fer nuss?'

"'Dey all dey-dey, Missy 'Gator. Me count um out:--

    "'_Yarrah one, yarrah narrah,
    Yarrah two 'pon top er tarrah,
    Yarrah t'ree pile up tergarrah!_'

"'E ca' um one by one fer wash en git dey supper. 'E ca' two bahck two
tam. Ebry day 'e do dis way tel 'e come at de las'. 'E eat dis one, en
'e gone luf da place wey da 'Gator lif. 'E gone down da crik side tel 'e
is come by da foot-log, en 'e is run 'cross _queek_. 'E git in da bush,
'e fair fly tel 'e is come by da place wey 'e lil titty bin lif. 'E come
dey-dey, en 'e yent go 'way no mo'."


FOOTNOTES:

[75] Sissy.

[76] Here is one, here's another; here are two on top of t'other; here
are three piled up together.




LXI

WHY MR. DOG RUNS BRER RABBIT


The little boy was not particularly pleased at the summary manner in
which the young Alligators were disposed of; but he was very much amused
at the somewhat novel method employed by the Bear to deceive the old
Alligator. The negroes, however, enjoyed Daddy Jack's story immensely,
and even 'Tildy condescended to give it her approval; but she qualified
this by saying, as soon as she had ceased laughing:--

"I 'clar' ter goodness you all got mighty little ter do fer ter be
settin' down yer night atter night lis'nin' at dat nigger man."

Daddy Jack nodded, smiled, and rubbed his withered hands together
apparently in a perfect ecstasy of good-humor, and finally said:--

"Oona come set-a by me, lil gal. 'E berry nice tale wut me tell-a you.
Come sit-a by me, lil gal;'e berry nice tale. Ef you no want me fer
tell-a you one tale, dun you is kin tell-a me one tale."

"Humph!" exclaimed 'Tildy, contemptuously, "you'll set over dar in dat
cornder en dribble many's de long day 'fo' I tell you any tale."

"Look yer, gal!" said Uncle Remus, pretending to ignore the queer
courtship that seemed to be progressing between Daddy Jack and 'Tildy,
"you gittin' too ole fer ter be sawin' de a'r wid yo 'head en squealin'
lak a filly. Ef you gwine ter set wid folks, you better do lak folks
does. Sis Tempy dar ain't gwine on dat a-way, en she ain't think 'erse'f
too big fer ter set up dar en jine in wid us en tell a tale, needer."

This was the first time that Uncle Remus had ever condescended to accord
'Tildy a place at his hearth on an equality with the rest of his
company, and she seemed to be immensely tickled. A broad grin spread
over her comely face as she exclaimed:--

"_Oh!_ I 'clar' ter goodness, Unk Remus, I thought dat ole nigger man
wuz des a-projickin' 'long wid me. Ef it come down ter settin' up yer
'long wid you all en tellin' a tale, I ain't 'nyin' but w'at I got one
dat you all ain't never year tell un, 'kaze dat ar Slim Jim w'at Mars
Ellick Akin got out'n de speckerlater waggin,[77] he up'n tell it dar at
Riah's des 'fo' de patter-rollers tuck'n slipt up on um."

"Dar now!" remarked Aunt Tempy. 'Tildy laughed boisterously.

"W'at de patter-rollers do wid dat ar Slim Jim?" Uncle Remus inquired.

"Done nothin'!" exclaimed 'Tildy, with an air of humorous scorn. "Time
dey got in dar Slim Jim 'uz up de chimbly, en Riah 'uz noddin' in one
cornder en me in de udder. Nobody never is ter know how dat ar long-leg
nigger slick'd up dat chimbly--dat dey ain't. He put one foot on de
pot-rack,[78] en whar he put de t'er foot _I_ can't tell you."

"What was the story?" asked the little boy.

"I boun' fer you, honey!" exclaimed Uncle Remus.

"Well, den," said 'Tildy, settling herself comfortably, and bridling a
little as Daddy Jack manifested a desire to give her his undivided
attention,--"well, den, dey wuz one time w'en ole Brer Rabbit 'uz bleedz
ter go ter town atter sump'n' 'n'er fer his famerly, en he mos' 'shame'
ter go 'kaze his shoes done wo' tetotally out. Yit he bleedz ter go, en
he put des ez good face on it ez he kin, en he take down he walkin'-cane
en sot out des ez big ez de next un.

"Well, den, ole Brer Rabbit go on down de big road twel he come ter de
place whar some folks bin camp out de night befo', en he sot down by de
fier, he did, fer ter wom his foots, 'kaze dem mawnin's 'uz sorter cole,
like deze yer mawnin's. He sot dar en look at his toes, en he feel
mighty sorry fer hisse'f.

"Well, den, he sot dar, he did, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he year sump'n'
'n'er trottin' down de road, en he tuck'n look up en yer come Mr. Dog
a-smellin' en a-snuffin' 'roun' fer ter see ef de folks lef' any scraps
by der camp-fier. Mr. Dog 'uz all dress up in his Sunday-go-ter-meetin'
cloze, en mo'n dat, he had on a pa'r er bran new shoes.

"Well, den, w'en Brer Rabbit see dem ar shoes he feel mighty bad, but he
ain't let on. He bow ter Mr. Dog mighty perlite, en Mr. Dog bow back, he
did, en dey pass de time er day, 'kaze dey 'uz ole 'quaintance. Brer
Rabbit, he say:--

"'Mr. Dog, whar you gwine all fix up like dis?'

"'I gwine ter town, Brer Rabbit; whar you gwine?'

"'I thought I go ter town myse'f fer ter git me new pa'r shoes, 'kaze my
ole uns done wo' out en dey hu'ts my foots so bad I can't w'ar um. Dem
mighty nice shoes w'at you got on, Mr. Dog; whar you git um?'

"'Down in town, Brer Rabbit, down in town.'

"'Dey fits you mighty slick, Mr. Dog, en I wish you be so good ez ter
lemme try one un um on.'

"Brer Rabbit talk so mighty sweet dat Mr. Dog sot right flat on de
groun' en tuck off one er de behime shoes, en loant it ter Brer Rabbit.
Brer Rabbit, he lope off down de road en den he come back. He tell Mr.
Dog dat de shoe fit mighty nice, but wid des one un um on, hit make 'im
trot crank-sided.

"Well, den, Mr. Dog, he pull off de yuther behime shoe, en Brer Rabbit
trot off en try it. He come back, he did, en he say:--

"'Dey mighty nice, Mr. Dog, but dey sorter r'ars me up behime, en I
dunner 'zackly how dey feels.'

"Dis make Mr. Dog feel like he wanter be perlite, en he take off de
befo' shoes, en Brer Rabbit put um on en stomp his foots, en 'low:--

"'Now dat sorter feel like shoes;' en he rack off down de road, en w'en
he git whar he oughter tu'n 'roun', he des lay back he years en keep on
gwine; en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he git outer sight.

"Mr. Dog, he holler, en tell 'im fer ter come back, but Brer Rabbit keep
on gwine; Mr. Dog, he holler, Mr. Rabbit, he keep on gwine. En down ter
dis day," continued 'Tildy, smacking her lips, and showing her white
teeth, "Mr. Dog bin a-runnin' Brer Rabbit, en ef you'll des go out in de
woods wid any Dog on dis place, des time he smell de Rabbit track he'll
holler en tell 'im fer ter come back."

"Dat's de Lord's trufe!" said Aunt Tempy.


FOOTNOTES:

[77] Speculator's wagon.

[78] A bar of iron across the fireplace, with hooks to hold the pots and
kettles. The original form of the crane.




LXII

BRER WOLF AND THE HORNED CATTLE


Daddy Jack appeared to enjoy 'Tildy's story as thoroughly as the little
boy.

"'E one fine tale. 'E mekky me lahff tell tear is come in me y-eye," the
old African said. And somehow or other 'Tildy seemed to forget her
pretended animosity to Daddy Jack, and smiled on him as pleasantly as
she did on the others. Uncle Remus himself beamed upon each and every
one, especially upon Aunt Tempy; and the little boy thought he had never
seen everybody in such good-humor.

"Sis Tempy," said Uncle Remus, "I 'speck it's yo' time fer ter put in."

"I des bin rackin' my min'," said Aunt Tempy, thoughtfully. "I see you
fixin' dat ar hawn, en terreckerly hit make me think 'bout a tale w'at I
ain't year none en you tell yit."

Uncle Remus was polishing a long cow's-horn, for the purpose of making a
hunting-horn for his master.

"Hit come 'bout one time dat all de creeturs w'at got hawns tuck a
notion dat dey got ter meet terge'er en have a confab fer ter see how
dey gwine take ker deyse'f, 'kaze dem t'er creeturs w'at got tush en
claw, dey uz des a-snatchin' um fum 'roun' eve'y cornder."

"Tooby sho'!" said Uncle Remus, approvingly.

"Dey sont out wud, de hawn creeturs did, en dey tuck'n meet terge'er
'way off in de woods. Man--Sir!--dey wuz a big gang un um, en de muster
dey had out dar 't wa'n't b'ar tellin' skacely. Mr. Bull, he 'uz dar, en
Mr. Steer, en Miss Cow"--

"And Mr. Benjamin Ram, with his fiddle," suggested the little boy.

--"Yes, 'n Mr. Billy Goat, en Mr. Unicorn"--

"En ole man Rinossyhoss," said Uncle Remus.

--"Yes, 'n lots mo' w'at I ain't know de names un. Man--Sir!--dey had a
mighty muster out dar. Ole Brer Wolf, he tuck'n year 'bout de muster, en
he sech a smarty dat nothin' ain't gwine do but he mus' go en see w'at
dey doin'.

"He study 'bout it long time, en den he went out in de timber en cut 'im
two crooked sticks, en tie um on his head, en start off ter whar de hawn
creeturs meet at. W'en he git dar Mr. Bull ax 'im who is he, w'at he
want, whar he come frum, en whar he gwine. Brer Wolf, he 'low:--

"'Ba-a-a! I'm name little Sook Calf!'"

"Eh-eh! Look out, now!" exclaimed 'Tildy, enthusiastically.

"Mr. Bull look at Brer Wolf mighty hard over his specks, but atter a
w'ile he go off some'rs else, en Brer Wolf take his place in de muster.

"Well, den, bimeby, terreckerly, dey got ter talkin' en tellin' der
'sperence des like de w'ite folks does at class-meetin'. W'iles dey 'uz
gwine on dis a-way, a great big hoss-fly come sailin' 'roun', en Brer
Wolf tuck'n fergit hisse'f, en snap at 'im.

"All dis time Brer Rabbit bin hidin' out in de bushes watchin' Brer
Wolf, en w'en he see dis he tuck'n break out in a laugh. Brer Bull, he
tuck'n holler out, he did:--

"'Who dat laughin' en showin' der manners?'

"Nobody ain't make no answer, en terreckerly Brer Rabbit holler out:--

    "'_O kittle-cattle, kittle-cattle, whar yo' eyes?
    Who ever see a Sook Calf snappin' at flies?_'

"De hawn creeturs dey all look 'roun' en wonder w'at dat mean, but
bimeby dey go on wid dey confab. 'T wa'n't long 'fo' a flea tuck'n bite
Brer Wolf 'way up on de back er de neck, en 'fo' he know what he doin',
he tuck'n squat right down en scratch hisse'f wid his behime foot."

"Enty!" exclaimed Daddy Jack.

"Dar you is!" said 'Tildy.

"Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n broke out in 'n'er big laugh en 'sturb um all,
en den he holler out:--

    "'_Scritchum-scratchum, lawsy, my laws!
    Look at dat Sook Calf scratchin' wid claws!_'

"Brer Wolf git mighty skeer'd, but none er de hawn creeturs ain't take
no notice un 'im, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' Brer Rabbit holler out ag'in:--

    "'_Rinktum-tinktum, ride 'im on a rail!
    Dat Sook Calf got a long bushy tail!_'

"De hawn creeturs, dey go on wid der confab, but Brer Wolf git skeerder
en skeerder, 'kaze he notice dat Mr. Bull got his eye on 'im. Brer
Rabbit, he ain't gin 'im no rest. He holler out:--

    "'_One en one never kin make six,
    Sticks ain't hawns, en hawns ain't sticks!_'

"Wid dat Brer Wolf make ez ef he gwine 'way fum dar, en he wa'n't none
too soon, needer, 'kaze ole Mr. Bull splunge at 'im, en little mo' en
he'd er nat'ally to' 'im in two."

"Did Brother Wolf get away?" the little boy asked.

"Yas, Lord!" said Aunt Tempy, with unction; "he des scooted 'way fum
dar, en he got so mad wid Brer Rabbit, dat he tuck'n play dead, en wud
went 'roun' dat dey want all de creeturs fer ter go set up wid 'im. Brer
Rabbit, he went down dar fer ter look at 'im, en time he see 'im, he
ex:--

"'Is he grin yit?'

"All de creeturs dey up'n say he ain't grin, not ez dey knows un. Den
Brer Rabbit, he 'low, he did:--

"'Well, den, gentermuns all, ef he ain't grin, den he ain't dead good.
In all my 'speunce folks ain't git dead good tel dey grins.'[79]

"W'en Brer Wolf year Brer Rabbit talk dat a-way, he tuck'n grin fum year
ter year, en Brer Rabbit, he picked up his hat en walkin'-cane en put
out fer home, en w'en he got 'way off in de woods he sot down en laugh
fit ter kill hisse'f."

Uncle Remus had paid Aunt Tempy the extraordinary tribute of pausing in
his work to listen to her story, and when she had concluded it, he
looked at her in undisguised admiration, and exclaimed:--

"I be bless, Sis Tempy, ef you ain't wuss'n w'at I is, en I'm bad
'nuff', de Lord knows I is!"

FOOTNOTE:

[79] See _Uncle Remus: His Songs and his Sayings_, p. 60.




LXIII

BRER FOX AND THE WHITE MUSCADINES


Aunty Tempy did not attempt to conceal the pleasure which Uncle Remus's
praise gave her. She laughed somewhat shyly, and said:--

"Bless you, Brer Remus! I des bin a-settin' yer l'arnin'. 'Sides dat,
Chris'mus ain't fur off en I 'speck we er all a-feelin' a sight mo'
humorsome dan common."

"Dat's so, Sis Tempy. I 'uz comin' thoo de lot des 'fo' supper, en I
seed de pigs runnin' en playin' in de win', en I 'low ter myse'f, sez I,
'Sholy dey's a-gwine ter be a harrycane,' en den all at once hit come in
my min' dat Chris'mus mighty close at han', en den on ter dat yer come
de chickens a-crowin' des now en 't ain't nine er'clock. I dunner how de
creeturs know Chris'mus comin', but dat des de way it stan's."

The little boy thought it was time enough to think about Christmas when
the night came for hanging up his stockings, and he asked Uncle Remus if
it was n't his turn to tell a story. The old man laid down the piece of
glass with which he had been scraping the cow's horn, and hunted around
among his tools for a piece of sandpaper before he replied. But his
reply was sufficient. He said:--

"One time w'iles Brer Rabbit wuz gwine thoo de woods he tuck'n strak up
wid ole Brer Fox, en Brer Fox 'low, he did, dat he mighty hongry. Brer
Rabbit 'low dat he ain't feelin' dat a-way hisse'f, 'kaze he des bin en
had er bait er w'ite muscadimes, en den he tuck'n smack he mouf en lick
he chops right front er Brer Fox. Brer Fox, he ax, sezee:--

"'Brer Rabbit, whar de name er goodness is deze yer w'ite muscadimes, en
how come I'm ain't never run 'crosst um?' sezee.

"'I dunner w'at de reason you ain't never come up wid um,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee; 'some folks sees straight, some sees crooked, some sees
one thing, some sees 'n'er. I done seed dem ar w'ite muscadimes, en let
'lone dat, I done wipe um up. I done e't all dey wuz on one tree, but I
lay dey's lots mo' un um 'roun' in dem neighborhoods,' sezee.

"Ole Brer Fox mouf 'gun to water, en he git mighty restless.

"'Come on, Brer Rabbit; come on! Come show me whar dem ar w'ite
muscadimes grows at,' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit, he sorter hang back. Brer Fox, he 'low:--

"'Come on, Brer Rabbit, come on!'

"Brer Rabbit, he hang back, en bimeby he 'low:--

"'Uh-uh, Brer Fox! You wanter git me out dar in de timber by myse'f en
do sump'n' ter me. You wanter git me out dar en skeer me.'

"Ole Brer Fox, he hol' up he han's, he do, en he 'low:--

"'I des 'clar' 'fo' gracious, Brer Rabbit, I ain't gwine do no sech uv a
thing. I dunner w'at kinder 'pinion you got 'bout me fer ter have sech
idee in yo' head. Come on, Brer Rabbit, en less we go git dem ar w'ite
muscadimes. Come on, Brer Rabbit.'

"'Uh-uh, Brer Fox! I done year talk er you playin' so many prank wid
folks dat I fear'd fer ter go 'way off dar wid you.'

"Dey went on dat a-way," continued Uncle Remus, endeavoring to look at
the little boy through the crooked cow's horn, "twel bimeby Brer Fox
promise he ain't gwine ter bodder 'long er Brer Rabbit, en den dey
tuck'n put out. En whar you 'speck dat ar muscheevous Brer Rabbit tuck'n
kyar' Brer Fox?"

Uncle Remus paused and gazed around upon his audience with uplifted
eyebrows, as if to warn them to be properly astonished. Nobody made any
reply, but all looked expectant, and Uncle Remus went on:--

"He ain't kyar 'im nowhars in de roun' worl' but ter one er deze yer
great big scaly-bark trees. De tree wuz des loaded down wid
scaly-barks, but dey wa'n't ripe, en de green hulls shined in de sun des
lak dey ben whitewash'. Brer Fox look 'stonish'. Atter w'ile he up'n
'low:--

"'Is dem ar de w'ite muscadimes? Mighty funny I ain't fine it out 'fo'
dis.'

"Ole Brer Rabbit, he scratch hisse'f en 'low:--

"'Dems um. Dey may n't be ripe ez dem w'at I had fer my brekkus, but
dems de w'ite muscadimes sho' ez youer bawn. Dey er red bullaces[80] en
dey er black bullaces, but deze yer, dey er de w'ite bullaces.'

"Brer Fox, sezee, 'How I gwine git um?'

"Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'You'll des hatter do lak I done.'

"Brer Fox, sezee, 'How wuz dat?'
