"Madame is on the roof," Margot said as he entered; "everyone is up
there: she said I was to give you breakfast when you came in; the coffee
is ready, and I have an omelette prepared, it will be cooked in three
minutes; Madame said that you would be sure to be hungry after being out
so long." In a quarter of an hour he ascended to the roof. The resident
on the ground-floor had an astronomical telescope with which he was in
the habit of reconnoitring the skies from the garden. This he had taken
up to the roof, where some twenty persons were gathered. A magnificent
view was obtained here of the circle of hills from Valerien round by
Meudon, and the whole of the left bank of the river. It needed but a
glance to see that the army of the Commune had made but little progress.
Although the fighting began soon after two o'clock in the morning, and
it was now nearly mid-day, the heights of Meudon were still in the hands
of the troops.

From among the trees by the chateau white puffs of smoke shot out, many
of the shells bursting in and around the fort of Issy, which replied
briskly. The guns of Vanves joined in the combat, their fire being
directed towards the plateau of Chatillon, which was held by the troops.
Round Issy a force of the National Guard was assembled, but the main
body was in the deep valley between the forts and Meudon, and on the
slopes nearly up to the chateau; the rattle of musketry here was
continuous, a light smoke drifting up through the trees. After a time it
was evident that the line of musketry fire was lower down the hill,
descending, showing that the troops were pressing the Communists
backwards, and presently one of the batteries near the chateau shifted
its position, and took ground some distance down the hill, and this and
a battery near the end of the viaduct by the chateau, opened a heavy
fire on the forts.

A look through the telescope showed that the Communists were crouching
behind walls and houses, occasionally, when the fire of the guns was
silent, a few of them would get up and advance into the open, but only
to scamper back into shelter as soon as they reopened fire.

"That settles it, monsieur," Cuthbert said, to the owner of the
telescope, after taking a long look through it, "hitherto, the
Communists have believed that Versailles was at their mercy, and they
had but to march out to capture it. They have failed, and failure means
their final defeat. They say that the prisoners of war are arriving in
Versailles at the rate of two or three thousand a day, and in another
fortnight, Thiers will have a force sufficient to take the offensive,
and by that time, will doubtless have siege-guns in position. I don't
say that Paris may not hold out for a considerable time, but it must
fall in the long run, and I fear, that all who have got anything to lose
will have a very bad time of it."

"I fear so, monsieur; as these wretches become more desperate, they will
proceed to greater lengths. You see they have already insisted that all
the National Guard--whatever their opinions--shall join in the defence
of the city. They have declared the confiscation of the goods of any
member of the Guard who shall leave the town. I hear a decree is likely
to be published to-morrow or next day confiscating all Church property;
already they have taken possession of the churches, and turned them into
clubs. If they do such things now, there is no saying to what lengths
they may go as they see their chances of success diminishing daily."

Although the artillery fire was maintained for some time longer, it was
by three o'clock evident that the battle was virtually over. The party
therefore descended from the roof, and Cuthbert strolled back to the
centre of Paris. The streets, that evening, presented a very strong
contrast to the scene of excitement that had reigned twenty-four hours
before. There was no shouting and singing; no marching of great bodies
of troops. An air of gloom pervaded the lower classes, while the
bourgeois remained for the most part in their houses, afraid that the
deep satisfaction the events of the day had caused them, might betray
itself in their faces.

For the next few days Cuthbert worked steadily, going up late in the
afternoon to Passy. The Commune had, on the day after the failure
against Versailles, issued a decree that all unmarried men from
seventeen to thirty-five, should join the ranks, and a house-to-house
visitation was ordered to see that none escaped the operation of the
decree. One of these parties visited Cuthbert: it consisted of a man
with a red sash, and two others in the uniform of the National Guard. As
soon as they were satisfied of Cuthbert's nationality, they left, having
been much more civil than he had expected. He thought it advisable,
however, to go at once to the Hotel de Ville, where, on producing his
passport, he was furnished with a document bearing the seal of the
Commune, certifying that being a British subject, Cuthbert Hartington
was exempt from service, and was allowed to pass anywhere without
molestation.

Equal good luck did not attend the other students, all of whom were, to
their intense indignation, enrolled upon the list of the National Guard
of their quarter. Cuthbert had difficulty in retaining a perfectly
serious countenance, as Rene, Pierre, and two or three others came in to
tell him what had occurred.

"And there is no getting away from it," Rene said. "If we had thought
that it would come to this, of course we would have left Paris directly
this affair began, but now it is impossible: no tickets are issued by
the railways except to old men, women and children, no one is allowed to
pass through the gates without a permit from the Commune, and even if
one could manage to get on to the wall and drop down by a rope one
might be taken and shot by the Communist troops outside, or, if one got
through them, by the sentries of the army of Versailles. What would you
advise us to do, Cuthbert?"

"I am afraid I can't give you any advice whatever, Rene, it is certainly
horribly unpleasant being obliged to fight in a cause you detest, but I
don't think there will be a very great deal of fighting till an assault
is made on the city, and when that begins, I should say the Communists
will be too busy to look for absentees from the ranks."

"We shall be in double danger then," Pierre Leroux put in. "We run the
risk of being shot by the Communists for not fighting at the barricades,
and if we escape that, we have a chance of being shot by the Versaillais
as Communists. It is a horrible position to be placed in."

"Well, I should say, Pierre, keep your eyes open and escape if you
possibly can before the assault takes place. I should think some might
manage to get out as women, but, of course you would have to sacrifice
your mustaches. But if you did that, and borrowed the papers of some
young woman or other, you might manage it. No doubt it would be awkward
if you were found out, but it might be worth trying. If I cannot leave
before the assault takes place I mean to go to one of the English hotels
here, Meurice's or the Dover, and establish myself there. During such
fighting as there may be in the streets, there will be very few
questions asked, and one might be shot before one could explain one was
a foreigner, but the hotels are not likely to be disturbed. Seriously I
should say that the best thing you can all do when the fighting begins
in the streets, is to keep out of the way until your battalion is
engaged, then burn anything in the way of uniform, get rid of your rifle
somehow, and gather at Goude's. He could vouch for you all as being his
pupils, and as being wholly opposed to the Commune. His name should be
sufficiently well known, if not to the first officer who may arrive, at
least, to many officers, for his testimony to be accepted. Still, I do
think that the best plan of all will be to get out of the place when you
get a chance."

Some of the students did succeed in getting out. Pierre and two others
made their way down through the drains, came out on the river at night,
and swam across. One of the youngest went out by train dressed as a
woman, but the rest were forced to don the uniform and take their places
in the ranks of the National Guard. The question of leaving Paris was
frequently discussed by Cuthbert and Mary Brander, but they finally
determined to stay. It was morally certain that the troops would enter
Paris either at the Port Maillot or at the gate of Pont du Jour; or at
any rate, somewhere on that side of Paris. Once inside the walls they
would meet with no resistance there--the fighting would only commence
when they entered the city itself. Passy was to a large extent inhabited
by well-to-do people, and it was not here that the search for Communists
would begin. The troops would here be greeted as benefactors.

"I do not think there is the smallest risk, Mary; if there were, I
should say at once that we had better be off, and I would escort you
down to Cornwall, but as there seems to me no danger whatever, I should
say let us stick to our original plan. I own I should like to see the
end of it all. You might amuse yourself at present by making a
good-sized Union Jack, which you can hang out of your window when the
troops enter. When I see the time approaching, I intend to make an
arrangement with the Michauds to establish myself here, so as to
undertake the task of explaining, if necessary, but I don't think any
explanation will be asked. It is likely enough that as soon as the
troops enter they will establish themselves in this quarter before
making any further advance; they will know that they have hard fighting
before them, and until they have overcome all opposition, will have
plenty to think about, and will have no time to spare in making
domiciliary visits."




CHAPTER XXIII.


Arnold Dampierre had moved from his lodgings in the Quartier Latin at
the outbreak of the insurrection, and had taken up his abode in one of
the streets leading up to Montmartre. There he was in close connection
with many of the leaders of the Commune, his speeches and his regular
attendance at their meetings, his connection with Dufaure, who was the
president of one of the revolutionary committees, and with his daughter,
and the fact that he was an American, had rendered him one of the most
conspicuous characters in the Quarter. He would have been named one of
the delegates of the Council of the Commune, but he refused the honor,
preferring to remain, as he said, "the representative of the great
republic across the seas."

More than once Cuthbert met him as he rode about, but only once did they
speak. Cuthbert was crossing the square in front of the Hotel de Ville,
when he saw Arnold Dampierre. The latter was on foot and did not notice
Cuthbert until he was within a few yards of him; as his eye fell on him
he hesitated and then walked on as if about to pass without speaking;
Cuthbert, however, held out his hand.

"Why, Dampierre," he said, "you are not going to cut me, are you? There
has been no quarrel between us, and the last time we met was when we
were lying next to each other in the ambulance."

Dampierre took the offered hand. "No, no," he said with nervous
quickness, "no quarrel at all, Hartington, but you see we have gone
different ways, that is to say, I have gone out of your way, and thought
that you would not care to continue the acquaintance."

"There is no such feeling on my part, I can assure you. There need be no
question between us as to the part you have taken. I am sorry, but it
is no concern of mine, and after living in the same house for a year or
so, and having faced death side by side at Champigny, no difference of
political opinion should interfere with our friendship. Besides, you
know," he added with a laugh, "I may want to get you to exert your
influence on my behalf. Events are thickening. In troubled times it is
always well to have a friend at court, and if I come to be treated as a
suspect, I shall refer to you for a character as a peaceable and
well-intentioned student of art."

"There is no fear of anything of that sort, Hartington; but should you,
by any possibility, get into trouble, you have but to send to me.
However, this state of things will not last long, the people are fairly
roused now and will soon sweep the butchers of Versailles before them,
and a reign of perfect freedom and equality will be established, and the
world will witness the spectacle of a free country, purging itself from
the tyranny of capital and the abuse of power, under which it has so
long groaned. But I have much to do and must be off," and with a hasty
shake of the hand he hurried away again.

Cuthbert looked after him. "The poor fellow is fast qualifying for a
mad-house," he said; "he has changed sadly, his cheeks are hollow and
his eyes unnaturally brilliant. Those patches of color on his cheeks are
signs of fever rather than of health. That woman, Minette, is
responsible for this ruin. It must end badly one way or the other; the
best thing that could happen to him would be to fall in one of these
sorties. He has made himself so conspicuous that he is almost certain to
be shot when the troops take Paris, unless, indeed, he becomes an actual
lunatic before that. Wound up as he is by excitement and enthusiasm he
will never bring himself to sneak off in disguise, as most of the men
who have stirred up this business will do."

The time passed quickly enough in Paris, events followed each other
rapidly, there was scarce a day without fighting, more or less serious.
Gradually the troops wrested position after position from the
Communists, but not without heavy fighting. The army at Versailles had
swelled so rapidly by the arrival of the prisoners from Germany that
even in Paris, where the journals of the Commune endeavored to keep up
the spirits of the defenders by wholesale lying as to the result of the
fighting outside its walls. It was known that at least a hundred
thousand men were now gathered at Versailles.

"There is no doubt of one thing," Cuthbert said, as standing with Mary
on the Trocadero, they one day watched the duel, when the guns at Meudon
were replying vigorously to the fire of the forts, "I must modify my
first opinions as to the courage of the Communists. They have learnt to
fight, and allowing for all the exaggeration and bombast of their
proclamations, they now stand admirably; they have more than once
retaken positions from which they have been driven, and although very
little is said about their losses, I was talking yesterday to a surgeon
in one of the hospitals, and he tells me that already they must be as
great as those throughout the whole of the first siege.

"They are still occasionally subject to panics. For instance, there was
a bad one the other night when the troops took the Chateau of Becon, and
again at Clamart, but I fancy that is owing to the mistake the
Communists made in forcing men who are altogether opposed to them into
their ranks. These men naturally bolt directly they are attacked, and
that causes a panic among the others who would have fought had the rest
stood. Still, altogether, they are fighting infinitely better than
expected, and at Clamart they fought really well in the open for the
first time. Before, I own that my only feelings towards the battalions
of beetle-browed ruffians from the faubourgs was disgust, now I am
beginning to feel a respect for them, but it makes the prospect here all
the darker.

"I have no doubt that as soon as McMahon has got all his batteries into
position he will open such a fire as will silence the forts and speedily
make breaches in the walls; but the real fighting won't begin till they
enter. The barricades were at first little more than breastworks, but
they have grown and grown until they have become formidable
fortifications, and, if stoutly defended, and with every house occupied
by desperate men, it will be terrible work carrying them by assault.
However, there are few places where the main defences cannot be turned,
for it is impossible to fortify every street. However, if the Communists
fight as desperately as we may now expect, in their despair, the work of
clearing the whole city must occupy many days."

"It will be very unpleasant in Passy when the batteries on all those
heights open fire."

"It would, indeed, if they were to direct their fire in this direction,
for they could wipe Passy out altogether in a few hours; but everything
shows that Thiers is anxious to spare Paris itself as much as possible.
Not a shot has been fired at random, and scarcely a house has been
injured. They fire only at the forts and at the batteries on this side,
and when they begin in earnest I have no doubt it will be the same. It
would be a mere waste of shot to fire up there, and if the Versailles
people were to do unnecessary damage it would bring them into odium
throughout all France, for it would be said that they were worse than
the Prussians."

On the 25th of April, at 8 o'clock in the morning, the long silence of
the besiegers' batteries ended. Cuthbert was taking his coffee when he
heard a sound like the rumble of a heavy wagon. He ran to his window.
There was quiet in the street below, for everyone had stopped abruptly
to listen to the roar, and from every window heads appeared. Completing
his dressing hastily, he went out and took the first fiacre he met and
drove to Passy. The rumble had deepened into a heavy roar; the air
quivered with the vibrations, and the shriek of the shells mingled with
the deep booming of the guns. When he entered Madame Michaud's, she, her
husband and Mary were standing at the open window.

"We have just come down from the top of the house," Mary said, "it is a
grand sight from there; will you come up, Cuthbert?"

"Certainly, Mary; you see I was right, and there do not seem to be any
shell coming this way."

"No. But we were all desperately alarmed, were we not madame, when they
began."

"It was enough to alarm one," Madame Michaud said indignantly, "half the
windows were broken, and that was enough to startle one even without the
firing."

"It was perfectly natural, madame," Cuthbert agreed; "the first shock is
always trying, and even soldiers with seasoned nerves might be excused
for starting, when such a din as this commenced."

Cuthbert and Mary went up at once to the roof, where the old gentleman
from below had already set up his telescope. He did not need that,
however, to observe what was going on. Along almost the whole crest of
the eminences round the south and west, heavy guns were playing upon the
defences. From the heights of Chatillon, the puffs of white smoke came
thick and fast, the battery at the Chateau of Meudon was hard at work,
as were those of Brimborien and Breteuil. Mount Valerien was joining in
the fray, while batteries on the plateau of Villejuif were firing at the
forts of Montrouge and Bicetre. Without exception, the greater part of
the fire was concentrated upon the forts of Issy and Vanves, while
attention was also being paid to the batteries at Point de Jour and
Porte Maillot.

The Communists replied to the fire steadily, although Issy, which came
in for by far the largest share of the attentions of the assailants,
fired only a gun now and then, showing that it was still tenanted by the
defenders. It was difficult indeed to see how often it replied, for the
shell burst so frequently on it that it was difficult to distinguish
between their flashes and those of its guns. Through the telescope could
be seen how terrible was the effect of the fire; already the fort had
lost the regularity of its shape, and the earth, with which it had been
thickly covered, was pitted with holes. Presently there was an outburst
of firing comparatively close at hand.

"That is the battery on the Trocadero," one of the party exclaimed. "I
think that they must be firing at Valerien, I saw several spurts of
smoke close to it."

"I hope not," Cuthbert said, "for if Valerien answers, our position here
will not be so pleasant."

For an hour Valerien disregarded the shells bursting in and around it,
and continuing its fire against Issy.

"That was a good shot," the astronomer said, as he sat with his eyes at
his telescope watching the fort. "A shell burst right on one of the
embrasures." A minute or two later came a rushing sound, rising rapidly
to a scream; instinctively most of those on the roof ducked their heads.

"Valerien is waking up," Cuthbert said; "here comes another."

For an hour Valerien poured its fire upon the battery on the Trocadero,
and with so accurate an aim that at the end of that time it was reduced
to silence. While the fire was going on, those on the roof went below,
for although the precision with which the artillerymen fired was so
excellent that there was but slight danger, the trial to the nerves from
the rush of the heavy shell was so great that they were glad to leave
the roof and to take their places at the windows below. The danger was
no less, for had a shell struck the house and exploded, it would have
wrecked the whole building, but there was some sense of safety in
drawing back behind the shelter of the wall as the missiles were heard
approaching.

To the disappointment of the middle class who still remained in Paris,
the bombardment was only partly renewed on the following day, and then
things went on as before. It was supposed that its effects, great as
they had been on the forts most exposed to it, had not come up to the
expectations of the besiegers, and the telescope showed that the troops
were hard at work erecting a great battery on Montretout, an eminence
near St. Cloud. On the night of the 5th of May the whole of the
batteries opened fire again, and the troops made a desperate effort to
cut the force in Issy from communication either with the town or with
Vanves. The National Guard poured out from the city, and for some hours
the fighting was very severe, the troops at last succeeding in their
object; but as soon as they had done so, the guns on the enciente and
those of Vanves opened so tremendous a fire upon them, that they were
forced to abandon the positions they had won.

At the Railway Station at Clamart there was also heavy fighting; the
National Guard attacked suddenly and in such overwhelming numbers that
after a short but desperate resistance, the garrison of the station were
forced to retire. Reinforcements were soon brought up, the troops again
advanced and the insurgents were driven out. Their loss during the night
was put down as a thousand. On the 8th Montretout, which was armed with
72 heavy guns, opened fire, the rest of the batteries joined in, and for
a couple of hours the din was terrific. The next day Issy was captured
by the troops. They attacked the village at daybreak, and advancing
slowly, capturing house by house, they occupied the church and
marketplace at noon. Just as they had done so, a battalion of Insurgents
were seen advancing, to reinforce the garrison of the Fort. They were
allowed to advance to within fifty yards when a heavy volley was poured
into them. They halted for a moment, but their colonel rallied them. He
was, however, killed by another volley, when the men at once broke,
threw away their arms, and ran back to the city gates. The rest of the
village was carried with a rush, and when the troops reached the gate of
the Fort, it was found open. It was at once occupied, the whole of the
defenders having fled, as they saw that the steady advance of the troops
would, if they remained, cut them off from escape. The fall of the Fort
was so unexpected that the batteries on the heights continued to fire
upon it for some time after the troops had gained possession.

The capture of Issy created an immense effect in Paris. General Rossel
resigned the command of the insurgent army. He had been a colonel of the
engineers, and was an officer of merit, but his political opinions had
proved too much for his loyalty to his country and profession; doubtless
he had deemed that if, as at first seemed probable, the insurrection
would be successful and the revolution triumph, he would become its
Napoleon. He now saw the ruin of his hopes; he had forfeited his
position and his life, and in the proclamation he issued announcing his
resignation he poured out all the bitterness of his disappointment, and
told the Commune his opinion of them, namely, that they were utterly
incapable, without an idea of the principles either of liberty or of
order, and filled only with jealousy and hatred of each other. So
scathing was the indictment, that he was at once arrested, but managed
to make his escape.

The fire from the batteries on the assailants' right, was now
concentrated upon Vanves, which was evacuated by the insurgents two days
later. The fall of these forts left the position at Point de Jour
unsupported, and indeed the guns remounted at Issy took its defenders in
flank, and rendered it impossible for them to work their guns. In their
despair the Commune now threw off the mask of comparative moderation,
and proceeded to imitate to its fullest extent the government of the
Jacobins. Decrees were passed for the establishment of courts to arrest,
try, and execute suspected persons without delay, and under the false
pretence that prisoners taken by the troops had been executed, the
murder of the Archbishop of Paris and other priests, who had been taken
and thrown into prison as hostages, was decided upon.

Upon the fall of Issy being known, Cuthbert considered the end to be so
near that it would be better for him to take up his abode permanently at
Madame Michaud's. She had been pressing him to do so for some time, as
she and her husband thought that the presence of an English gentleman
there would conduce to their safety when the troops entered Paris. He
had indeed spent most of his time there for the last three weeks, but
had always returned to his lodgings at night. He, therefore, packed up
his pictures and his principal belongings and drove with them to Passy.
Two days later he met Arnold Dampierre.

"I am glad to have met you," the latter said, "I have been to our old
place, and found that you had left. Minette and I are to be married
to-morrow, a civil marriage, of course, and I should be very glad if you
will be present as a witness. There is no saying who will be alive at
the end of another week, and I should like the marriage to be witnessed
by you."

"I will do so with pleasure, Arnold, though it seems scarcely a time for
