head and a passage twelve men long.  When the points first clashed
together The Rat struck himself hard upon his breast.  His exultation
was too keen to endure.  He gazed at Marco standing still--in that
curiously splendid way in which both he and his father COULD stand
still--and wondered how he could do it.  He looked as if he were
prepared for any strange thing which could happen to him--because he
was "under orders."  The Rat knew that he was doing whatsoever he did
merely for his father's sake. It was as if he felt that he was
representing his father, though he was a mere boy; and that because of
this, boy as he was, he must bear himself nobly and remain outwardly
undisturbed.

At the end of the arch of swords, the old priest stood and gave a sign
to one man after another.  When the sign was given to a man he walked
under the arch to the dais, and there knelt and, lifting Marco's hand
to his lips, kissed it with passionate fervor.  Then he returned to the
place he had left.  One after another passed up the aisle of swords,
one after another knelt, one after the other kissed the brown young
hand, rose and went away.  Sometimes The Rat heard a few words which
sounded almost like a murmured prayer, sometimes he heard a sob as a
shaggy head bent, again and again he saw eyes wet with tears.  Once or
twice Marco spoke a few Samavian words, and the face of the man spoken
to flamed with joy.  The Rat had time to see, as Marco had seen, that
many of the faces were not those of peasants.  Some of them were clear
cut and subtle and of the type of scholars or nobles. It took a long
time for them all to kneel and kiss the lad's hand, but no man omitted
the ceremony; and when at last it was at an end, a strange silence
filled the cavern.  They stood and gazed at each other with burning
eyes.

The priest moved to Marco's side, and stood near the altar.  He leaned
forward and took in his hand a cord which hung from the veiled
picture--he drew it and the curtain fell apart.  There seemed to stand
gazing at them from between its folds a tall kingly youth with deep
eyes in which the stars of God were stilly shining, and with a smile
wonderful to behold.  Around the heavy locks of his  black hair the
long dead painter of missals had set a faint glow of light like a halo.

"Son of Stefan Loristan," the old priest said, in a shaken voice, "it
is the Lost Prince!  It is Ivor!"

Then every man in the room fell on his knees.  Even the men who had
upheld the archway of swords dropped their weapons with a crash and
knelt also.  He was their saint--this boy!  Dead for five hundred
years, he was their saint still.

"Ivor!  Ivor!" the voices broke into a heavy murmur.  "Ivor! Ivor!" as
if they chanted a litany.

Marco started forward, staring at the picture, his breath caught in his
throat, his lips apart.

"But--but--" he stammered, "but if my father were as young as he is--he
would be LIKE him!"

"When you are as old as he is, YOU will be like him--YOU!" said the
priest.  And he let the curtain fall.

The Rat stood staring with wide eyes from Marco to the picture and from
the picture to Marco.  And he breathed faster and faster and gnawed his
finger ends.  But he did not utter a word.  He could not have done it,
if he tried.

Then Marco stepped down from the dais as if he were in a dream, and the
old man followed him.  The men with swords sprang to their feet and
made their archway again with a new clash of steel.  The old man and
the boy passed under it together.  Now every man's eyes were fixed on
Marco.  At the heavy door by which he had entered, he stopped and
turned to meet their glances.  He looked very young and thin and pale,
but suddenly his father's smile was lighted in his face.  He said a few
words in Samavian clearly and gravely, saluted, and passed out.

"What did you say to them?" gasped The Rat, stumbling after him as the
door closed behind them and shut in the murmur of impassioned sound.

"There was only one thing to say," was the answer.  "They are men--I am
only a boy.  I thanked them for my father, and told them he would
never--never forget."



XXVIII

"EXTRA! EXTRA! EXTRA!"

It was raining in London--pouring.  It had been raining for two weeks,
more or less, generally more.  When the train from Dover drew in at
Charing Cross, the weather seemed suddenly to have considered that it
had so far been too lenient and must express itself much more
vigorously.  So it had gathered together its resources and poured them
forth in a deluge which surprised even Londoners.

The rain so beat against and streamed down the windows of the
third-class carriage in which Marco and The Rat sat that they could not
see through them.

They had made their homeward journey much more rapidly than they had
made the one on which they had been outward  bound.  It had of course
taken them some time to tramp back to the frontier, but there had been
no reason for stopping anywhere after they had once reached the
railroads.  They had been tired sometimes, but they had slept heavily
on the wooden seats of the railway carriages.  Their one desire was to
get home.  No. 7 Philibert Place rose before them in its noisy
dinginess as the one desirable spot on earth.  To Marco it held his
father.  And it was Loristan alone that The Rat saw when he thought of
it. Loristan as he would look when he saw him come into the room with
Marco, and stand up and salute, and say:  "I have brought him back,
sir.  He has carried out every single order you gave him--every single
one.  So have I."  So he had.  He had been sent as his companion and
attendant, and he had been faithful in every thought.  If Marco would
have allowed him, he would have waited upon him like a servant, and
have been proud of the service.  But Marco would never let him forget
that they were only two boys and that one was of no more importance
than the other.  He had secretly even felt this attitude to be a sort
of grievance.  It would have been more like a game if one of them had
been the mere servitor of the other, and if that other had blustered a
little, and issued commands, and demanded sacrifices. If the faithful
vassal could have been wounded or cast into a dungeon for his young
commander's sake, the adventure would have been more complete.  But
though their journey had been full of wonders and rich with beauties,
though the memory of it hung in The Rat's mind like a background of
tapestry embroidered in all the hues of the earth with all the
splendors of it, there had been no dungeons and no wounds.  After the
adventure in Munich their unimportant boyishness had not even been
observed by such perils as might have threatened them.  As The Rat had
said, they had "blown like grains of dust" through Europe and had been
as nothing.  And this was what Loristan had planned, this was what his
grave thought had wrought out.  If they had been men, they would not
have been so safe.

From the time they had left the old priest on the hillside to begin
their journey back to the frontier, they both had been given to long
silences as they tramped side by side or lay on the moss in the
forests.  Now that their work was done, a sort of reaction had set  in.
There were no more plans to be made and no more uncertainties to
contemplate.  They were on their way back to No. 7 Philibert
Place--Marco to his father, The Rat to the man he worshipped.  Each of
them was thinking of many things.  Marco was full of longing to see his
father's face and hear his voice again.  He wanted to feel the pressure
of his hand on his shoulder--to be sure that he was real and not a
dream.  This last was because during this homeward journey everything
that had happened often seemed to be a dream.  It had all been so
wonderful--the climber standing looking down at them the morning they
awakened on the Gaisburg; the mountaineer shoemaker measuring his foot
in the small shop; the old, old woman and her noble lord; the Prince
with his face turned upward as he stood on the balcony looking at the
moon; the old priest kneeling and weeping for joy; the great cavern
with the yellow light upon the crowd of passionate faces; the curtain
which fell apart and showed the still eyes and the black hair with the
halo about it! Now that they were left behind, they all seemed like
things he had dreamed.  But he had not dreamed them; he was going back
to tell his father about them.  And how GOOD it would be to feel his
hand on his shoulder!

The Rat gnawed his finger ends a great deal.  His thoughts were more
wild and feverish than Marco's.  They leaped forward in spite of him.
It was no use to pull himself up and tell himself that he was a fool.
Now that all was over, he had time to be as great a fool as he was
inclined to be.  But how he longed to reach London and stand face to
face with Loristan!  The sign was given.  The Lamp was lighted.  What
would happen next?  His crutches were under his arms before the train
drew up.

"We're there!  We're there!" he cried restlessly to Marco. They had no
luggage to delay them.  They took their bags and followed the crowd
along the platform.  The rain was rattling like bullets against the
high glassed roof.  People turned to look at Marco, seeing the glow of
exultant eagerness in his face. They thought he must be some boy coming
home for the holidays and going to make a visit at a place he delighted
in.  The rain was dancing on the pavements when they reached the
entrance.

"A cab won't cost much," Marco said, "and it will take us quickly."

They called one and got into it.  Each of them had flushed cheeks, and
Marco's eyes looked as if he were gazing at something a long way
off--gazing at it, and wondering.

"We've come back!" said The Rat, in an unsteady voice.  "We've
been--and we've come back!"  Then suddenly turning to look at Marco,
"Does it ever seem to you as if, perhaps, it--it wasn't true?"

"Yes," Marco answered, "but it was true.  And it's done." Then he added
after a second or so of silence, just what The Rat had said to himself,
"What next?"  He said it very low.

The way to Philibert Place was not long.  When they turned into the
roaring, untidy road, where the busses and drays and carts struggled
past each other with their loads, and the tired-faced people hurried in
crowds along the pavement, they looked at them all feeling that they
had left their dream far behind indeed. But they were at home.

It was a good thing to see Lazarus open the door and stand waiting
before they had time to get out of the cab.  Cabs stopped so seldom
before houses in Philibert Place that the inmates were always prompt to
open their doors.  When Lazarus had seen this one stop at the broken
iron gate, he had known whom it brought. He had kept an eye on the
windows faithfully for many a day--even when he knew that it was too
soon, even if all was well, for any travelers to return.

He bore himself with an air more than usually military and his salute
when Marco crossed the threshold was formal stateliness itself.  But
his greeting burst from his heart.

"God be thanked!" he said in his deep growl of joy.  "God be thanked!"

When Marco put forth his hand, he bent his grizzled head and kissed it
devoutly.

"God be thanked!" he said again.

"My father?" Marco began, "my father is out?"  If he had been in the
house, he knew he would not have stayed in the back sitting-room.

"Sir," said Lazarus, "will you come with me into his room? You, too,
sir," to The Rat.  He had never said "sir" to him before.

He opened the door of the familiar room, and the boys entered. The room
was empty.

Marco did not speak; neither did The Rat.  They both stood still in the
middle of the shabby carpet and looked up at the old soldier.  Both had
suddenly the same feeling that the earth had dropped from beneath their
feet.  Lazarus saw it and spoke fast and with tremor.  He was almost as
agitated as they were.

"He left me at your service--at your command"--he began.

"Left you?" said Marco.

"He left us, all three, under orders--to WAIT," said Lazarus. "The
Master has gone."

The Rat felt something hot rush into his eyes.  He brushed it away that
he might look at Marco's face.  The shock had changed it very much.
Its glowing eager joy had died out, it had turned paler and his brows
were drawn together.  For a few seconds he did not speak at all, and,
when he did speak, The Rat knew that his voice was steady only because
he willed that it should be so.

"If he has gone," he said, "it is because he had a strong reason.  It
was because he also was under orders."

"He said that you would know that," Lazarus answered.  "He was called
in such haste that he had not a moment in which to do more than write a
few words.  He left them for you on his desk there."

Marco walked over to the desk and opened the envelope which was lying
there.  There were only a few lines on the sheet of paper inside and
they had evidently been written in the greatest haste. They were these:

"The Life of my life--for Samavia."

"He was called--to Samavia," Marco said, and the thought sent his blood
rushing through his veins.  "He has gone to Samavia!"

Lazarus drew his hand roughly across his eyes and his voice shook and
sounded hoarse.

"There has been great disaffection in the camps of the Maranovitch," he
said.  "The remnant of the army has gone mad. Sir, silence is still the
order, but who knows--who knows?  God alone."

He had not finished speaking before he turned his head as if listening
to sounds in the road.  They were the kind of sounds which  had broken
up The Squad, and sent it rushing down the passage into the street to
seize on a newspaper.  There was to be heard a commotion of newsboys
shouting riotously some startling piece of news which had called out an
"Extra."

The Rat heard it first and dashed to the front door.  As he opened it a
newsboy running by shouted at the topmost power of his lungs the news
he had to sell:  "Assassination of King Michael Maranovitch by his own
soldiers!  Assassination of the Maranovitch!  Extra! Extra!  Extra!"

When The Rat returned with a newspaper, Lazarus interposed between him
and Marco with great and respectful ceremony. "Sir," he said to Marco,
"I am at your command, but the Master left me with an order which I was
to repeat to you.  He requested you NOT to read the newspapers until he
himself could see you again."

Both boys fell back.

"Not read the papers!" they exclaimed together.

Lazarus had never before been quite so reverential and ceremonious.

"Your pardon, sir," he said.  "I may read them at your orders, and
report such things as it is well that you should know.  There have been
dark tales told and there may be darker ones.  He asked that you would
not read for yourself.  If you meet again--when you meet again"--he
corrected himself hastily--"when you meet again, he says you will
understand.  I am your servant.  I will read and answer all such
questions as I can."

The Rat handed him the paper and they returned to the back room
together.

"You shall tell us what he would wish us to hear," Marco said.

The news was soon told.  The story was not a long one as exact details
had not yet reached London.  It was briefly that the head of the
Maranovitch party had been put to death by infuriated soldiers of his
own army.  It was an army drawn chiefly from a peasantry which did not
love its leaders, or wish to fight, and suffering and brutal treatment
had at last roused it to furious revolt.

"What next?" said Marco.

"If I were a Samavian--" began The Rat and then he stopped.

Lazarus stood biting his lips, but staring stonily at the carpet. Not
The Rat alone but Marco also noted a grim change in him.  It was grim
because it suggested that he was holding himself under an iron control.
It was as if while tortured by anxiety he had sworn not to allow
himself to look anxious and the resolve set his jaw hard and carved new
lines in his rugged face.  Each boy thought this in secret, but did not
wish to put it into words. If he was anxious, he could only be so for
one reason, and each realized what the reason must be.  Loristan had
gone to Samavia--to the torn and bleeding country filled with riot and
danger.  If he had gone, it could only have been because its danger
called him and he went to face it at its worst.  Lazarus had been left
behind to watch over them.  Silence was still the order, and what he
knew he could not tell them, and perhaps he knew little more than that
a great life might be lost.

Because his master was absent, the old soldier seemed to feel that he
must comfort himself with a greater ceremonial reverence than he had
ever shown before.  He held himself within call, and at Marco's orders,
as it had been his custom to hold himself with regard to Loristan.  The
ceremonious service even extended itself to The Rat, who appeared to
have taken a new place in his mind. He also seemed now to be a person
to be waited upon and replied to with dignity and formal respect.

When the evening meal was served, Lazarus drew out Loristan's chair at
the head of the table and stood behind it with a majestic air.

"Sir," he said to Marco, "the Master requested that you take his seat
at the table until--while he is not with you."

Marco took the seat in silence.


At two o'clock in the morning, when the roaring road was still, the
light from the street lamp, shining into the small bedroom, fell on two
pale boy faces.  The Rat sat up on his sofa bed in the old way with his
hands clasped round his knees.  Marco lay flat on his hard pillow.
Neither of them had been to sleep and yet they had  not talked a great
deal.  Each had secretly guessed a good deal of what the other did not
say.

"There is one thing we must remember," Marco had said, early in the
night.  "We must not be afraid."

"No," answered The Rat, almost fiercely, "we must not be afraid."

"We are tired; we came back expecting to be able to tell it all to him.
We have always been looking forward to that.  We never thought once
that he might be gone.  And he WAS gone.  Did you feel as if--" he
turned towards the sofa, "as if something had struck you on the chest?"

"Yes," The Rat answered heavily.  "Yes."

"We weren't ready," said Marco.  "He had never gone before; but we
ought to have known he might some day be--called.  He went because he
was called.  He told us to wait.  We don't know what we are waiting
for, but we know that we must not be afraid.  To let ourselves be
AFRAID would be breaking the Law."

"The Law!" groaned The Rat, dropping his head on his hands, "I'd
forgotten about it."

"Let us remember it," said Marco.  "This is the time.  'Hate not.  FEAR
not!'"  He repeated the last words again and again. "Fear not!  Fear
not," he said.  "NOTHING can harm him."

The Rat lifted his head, and looked at the bed sideways.
