
"You'll never grow old, Teacher," said Paul.  "You are one of the
fortunate mortals who have found and drunk from the Fountain of
Youth,--you and Mother Lavendar.  See here!  When you're married I
WON'T call you Mrs. Blythe.  To me you'll always be 'Teacher'--the
teacher of the best lessons I ever learned.  I want to show you
something."

The "something" was a pocketbook full of poems.  Paul had put some of
his beautiful fancies into verse, and magazine editors had not been as
unappreciative as they are sometimes supposed to be.  Anne read Paul's
poems with real delight.  They were full of charm and promise.

"You'll be famous yet, Paul.  I always dreamed of having one famous
pupil.  He was to be a college president--but a great poet would be
even better.  Some day I'll be able to boast that I whipped the
distinguished Paul Irving.  But then I never did whip you, did I, Paul?
What an opportunity lost!  I think I kept you in at recess, however."

"You may be famous yourself, Teacher.  I've seen a good deal of your
work these last three years."

"No.  I know what I can do.  I can write pretty, fanciful little
sketches that children love and editors send welcome cheques for.  But
I can do nothing big.  My only chance for earthly immortality is a
corner in your Memoirs."

Charlotta the Fourth had discarded the blue bows but her freckles were
not noticeably less.

"I never did think I'd come down to marrying a Yankee, Miss Shirley,
ma'am," she said.  "But you never know what's before you, and it isn't
his fault.  He was born that way."

"You're a Yankee yourself, Charlotta, since you've married one."

"Miss Shirley, ma'am, I'm NOT!  And I wouldn't be if I was to marry a
dozen Yankees!  Tom's kind of nice.  And besides, I thought I'd better
not be too hard to please, for I mightn't get another chance.  Tom
don't drink and he don't growl because he has to work between meals,
and when all's said and done I'm satisfied, Miss Shirley, ma'am."

"Does he call you Leonora?" asked Anne.

"Goodness, no, Miss Shirley, ma'am.  I wouldn't know who he meant if he
did.  Of course, when we got married he had to say, 'I take thee,
Leonora,' and I declare to you, Miss Shirley, ma'am, I've had the most
dreadful feeling ever since that it wasn't me he was talking to and I
haven't been rightly married at all.  And so you're going to be married
yourself, Miss Shirley, ma'am?  I always thought I'd like to marry a
doctor.  It would be so handy when the children had measles and croup.
Tom is only a bricklayer, but he's real good-tempered.  When I said to
him, says I, 'Tom, can I go to Miss Shirley's wedding?  I mean to go
anyhow, but I'd like to have your consent,' he just says, 'Suit
yourself, Charlotta, and you'll suit me.'  That's a real pleasant kind
of husband to have, Miss Shirley, ma'am."

Philippa and her Reverend Jo arrived at Green Gables the day before the
wedding.  Anne and Phil had a rapturous meeting which presently
simmered down to a cosy, confidential chat over all that had been and
was about to be.

"Queen Anne, you're as queenly as ever.  I've got fearfully thin since
the babies came.  I'm not half so good-looking; but I think Jo likes
it.  There's not such a contrast between us, you see.  And oh, it's
perfectly magnificent that you're going to marry Gilbert.  Roy Gardner
wouldn't have done at all, at all.  I can see that now, though I was
horribly disappointed at the time.  You know, Anne, you did treat Roy
very badly."

"He has recovered, I understand," smiled Anne.

"Oh, yes.  He is married and his wife is a sweet little thing and
they're perfectly happy.  Everything works together for good.  Jo and
the Bible say that, and they are pretty good authorities."

"Are Alec and Alonzo married yet?"

"Alec is, but Alonzo isn't.  How those dear old days at Patty's Place
come back when I'm talking to you, Anne!  What fun we had!"

"Have you been to Patty's Place lately?"

"Oh, yes, I go often.  Miss Patty and Miss Maria still sit by the
fireplace and knit.  And that reminds me--we've brought you a wedding
gift from them, Anne.  Guess what it is."

"I never could.  How did they know I was going to be married?"

"Oh, I told them.  I was there last week.  And they were so interested.
Two days ago Miss Patty wrote me a note asking me to call; and then she
asked if I would take her gift to you.  What would you wish most from
Patty's Place, Anne?"

"You can't mean that Miss Patty has sent me her china dogs?"

"Go up head.  They're in my trunk this very moment.  And I've a letter
for you.  Wait a moment and I'll get it."

"Dear Miss Shirley," Miss Patty had written, "Maria and I were very
much interested in hearing of your approaching nuptials.  We send you
our best wishes.  Maria and I have never married, but we have no
objection to other people doing so.  We are sending you the china dogs.
I intended to leave them to you in my will, because you seemed to have
sincere affection for them.  But Maria and I expect to live a good
while yet (D.V.), so I have decided to give you the dogs while you are
young.  You will not have forgotten that Gog looks to the right and
Magog to the left."

"Just fancy those lovely old dogs sitting by the fireplace in my house
of dreams," said Anne rapturously.  "I never expected anything so
delightful."

That evening Green Gables hummed with preparations for the following
day; but in the twilight Anne slipped away.  She had a little
pilgrimage to make on this last day of her girlhood and she must make
it alone.  She went to Matthew's grave, in the little poplar-shaded
Avonlea graveyard, and there kept a silent tryst with old memories and
immortal loves.

"How glad Matthew would be tomorrow if he were here," she whispered.
"But I believe he does know and is glad of it--somewhere else.  I've
read somewhere that 'our dead are never dead until we have forgotten
them.' Matthew will never be dead to me, for I can never forget him."

She left on his grave the flowers she had brought and walked slowly
down the long hill.  It was a gracious evening, full of delectable
lights and shadows.  In the west was a sky of mackerel clouds--crimson
and amber-tinted, with long strips of apple-green sky between.  Beyond
was the glimmering radiance of a sunset sea, and the ceaseless voice of
many waters came up from the tawny shore.  All around her, lying in the
fine, beautiful country silence, were the hills and fields and woods
she had known and loved so long.

"History repeats itself," said Gilbert, joining her as she passed the
Blythe gate.  "Do you remember our first walk down this hill, Anne--our
first walk together anywhere, for that matter?"

"I was coming home in the twilight from Matthew's grave--and you came
out of the gate; and I swallowed the pride of years and spoke to you."

"And all heaven opened before me," supplemented Gilbert.  "From that
moment I looked forward to tomorrow.  When I left you at your gate that
night and walked home I was the happiest boy in the world.  Anne had
forgiven me."

"I think you had the most to forgive.  I was an ungrateful little
wretch--and after you had really saved my life that day on the pond,
too.  How I loathed that load of obligation at first!  I don't deserve
the happiness that has come to me."

Gilbert laughed and clasped tighter the girlish hand that wore his
ring.  Anne's engagement ring was a circlet of pearls.  She had refused
to wear a diamond.

"I've never really liked diamonds since I found out they weren't the
lovely purple I had dreamed.  They will always suggest my old
disappointment."

"But pearls are for tears, the old legend says," Gilbert had objected.

"I'm not afraid of that.  And tears can be happy as well as sad.  My
very happiest moments have been when I had tears in my eyes--when
Marilla told me I might stay at Green Gables--when Matthew gave me the
first pretty dress I ever had--when I heard that you were going to
recover from the fever.  So give me pearls for our troth ring, Gilbert,
and I'll willingly accept the sorrow of life with its joy."

But tonight our lovers thought only of joy and never of sorrow.  For
the morrow was their wedding day, and their house of dreams awaited
them on the misty, purple shore of Four Winds Harbor.



CHAPTER 4

THE FIRST BRIDE OF GREEN GABLES

Anne wakened on the morning of her wedding day to find the sunshine
winking in at the window of the little porch gable and a September
breeze frolicking with her curtains.

"I'm so glad the sun will shine on me," she thought happily.

She recalled the first morning she had wakened in that little porch
room, when the sunshine had crept in on her through the blossom-drift
of the old Snow Queen.  That had not been a happy wakening, for it
brought with it the bitter disappointment of the preceding night.  But
since then the little room had been endeared and consecrated by years
of happy childhood dreams and maiden visions.  To it she had come back
joyfully after all her absences; at its window she had knelt through
that night of bitter agony when she believed Gilbert dying, and by it
she had sat in speechless happiness the night of her betrothal.  Many
vigils of joy and some of sorrow had been kept there; and today she
must leave it forever.  Henceforth it would be hers no more;
fifteen-year-old Dora was to inherit it when she had gone.  Nor did
Anne wish it otherwise; the little room was sacred to youth and
girlhood--to the past that was to close today before the chapter of
wifehood opened.

Green Gables was a busy and joyous house that forenoon.  Diana arrived
early, with little Fred and Small Anne Cordelia, to lend a hand.  Davy
and Dora, the Green Gables twins, whisked the babies off to the garden.

"Don't let Small Anne Cordelia spoil her clothes," warned Diana
anxiously.

"You needn't be afraid to trust her with Dora," said Marilla.  "That
child is more sensible and careful than most of the mothers I've known.
She's really a wonder in some ways.  Not much like that other
harum-scarum I brought up."

Marilla smiled across her chicken salad at Anne.  It might even be
suspected that she liked the harum-scarum best after all.

"Those twins are real nice children," said Mrs. Rachel, when she was
sure they were out of earshot.  "Dora is so womanly and helpful, and
Davy is developing into a very smart boy.  He isn't the holy terror for
mischief he used to be."

"I never was so distracted in my life as I was the first six months he
was here," acknowledged Marilla.  "After that I suppose I got used to
him.  He's taken a great notion to farming lately, and wants me to let
him try running the farm next year.  I may, for Mr. Barry doesn't think
he'll want to rent it much longer, and some new arrangement will have
to be made."

"Well, you certainly have a lovely day for your wedding, Anne," said
Diana, as she slipped a voluminous apron over her silken array.  "You
couldn't have had a finer one if you'd ordered it from Eaton's."

"Indeed, there's too much money going out of this Island to that same
Eaton's," said Mrs. Lynde indignantly.  She had strong views on the
subject of octopus-like department stores, and never lost an
opportunity of airing them.  "And as for those catalogues of theirs,
they're the Avonlea girls' Bible now, that's what.  They pore over them
on Sundays instead of studying the Holy Scriptures."

"Well, they're splendid to amuse children with," said Diana.  "Fred and
Small Anne look at the pictures by the hour."

"_I_ amused ten children without the aid of Eaton's catalogue," said
Mrs. Rachel severely.

"Come, you two, don't quarrel over Eaton's catalogue," said Anne gaily.
"This is my day of days, you know.  I'm so happy I want every one else
to be happy, too."

"I'm sure I hope your happiness will last, child," sighed Mrs. Rachel.
She did hope it truly, and believed it, but she was afraid it was in
the nature of a challenge to Providence to flaunt your happiness too
openly.  Anne, for her own good, must be toned down a trifle.

But it was a happy and beautiful bride who came down the old,
homespun-carpeted stairs that September noon--the first bride of Green
Gables, slender and shining-eyed, in the mist of her maiden veil, with
her arms full of roses.  Gilbert, waiting for her in the hall below,
looked up at her with adoring eyes.  She was his at last, this evasive,
long-sought Anne, won after years of patient waiting.  It was to him
she was coming in the sweet surrender of the bride.  Was he worthy of
her?  Could he make her as happy as he hoped?  If he failed her--if he
could not measure up to her standard of manhood--then, as she held out
her hand, their eyes met and all doubt was swept away in a glad
certainty.  They belonged to each other; and, no matter what life might
hold for them, it could never alter that.  Their happiness was in each
other's keeping and both were unafraid.

They were married in the sunshine of the old orchard, circled by the
loving and kindly faces of long-familiar friends.  Mr. Allan married
them, and the Reverend Jo made what Mrs. Rachel Lynde afterwards
pronounced to be the "most beautiful wedding prayer" she had ever
heard.  Birds do not often sing in September, but one sang sweetly from
some hidden bough while Gilbert and Anne repeated their deathless vows.
Anne heard it and thrilled to it; Gilbert heard it, and wondered only
that all the birds in the world had not burst into jubilant song; Paul
heard it and later wrote a lyric about it which was one of the most
admired in his first volume of verse; Charlotta the Fourth heard it and
was blissfully sure it meant good luck for her adored Miss Shirley.
The bird sang until the ceremony was ended and then it wound up with
one mad little, glad little trill.  Never had the old gray-green house
among its enfolding orchards known a blither, merrier afternoon.  All
the old jests and quips that must have done duty at weddings since Eden
were served up, and seemed as new and brilliant and mirth-provoking as
if they had never been uttered before.  Laughter and joy had their way;
and when Anne and Gilbert left to catch the Carmody train, with Paul as
driver, the twins were ready with rice and old shoes, in the throwing
of which Charlotta the Fourth and Mr. Harrison bore a valiant part.
Marilla stood at the gate and watched the carriage out of sight down
the long lane with its banks of goldenrod.  Anne turned at its end to
wave her last good-bye.  She was gone--Green Gables was her home no
more; Marilla's face looked very gray and old as she turned to the
house which Anne had filled for fourteen years, and even in her
absence, with light and life.

But Diana and her small fry, the Echo Lodge people and the Allans, had
stayed to help the two old ladies over the loneliness of the first
evening; and they contrived to have a quietly pleasant little supper
time, sitting long around the table and chatting over all the details
of the day.  While they were sitting there Anne and Gilbert were
alighting from the train at Glen St. Mary.



CHAPTER 5

THE HOME COMING

Dr. David Blythe had sent his horse and buggy to meet them, and the
urchin who had brought it slipped away with a sympathetic grin, leaving
