deliver her from another, and he led her down to the sea-shore. But he
did not do much harm to this Troll either, for when the time came when
the Troll might be expected, he said as he had said before: 'It is
better that one should die than two,' and then climbed up into the tree
again.

Minnikin once more begged the cook's leave to go down to the sea-shore
for a short time.

'Oh, what can you do there?' said the cook.

'My dear, do let me go!' said Minnikin; 'I should so like to go down
there and amuse myself a little with the other children.'

So this time also she said that he should have leave to go, but he must
first promise that he would be back by the time the joint was turned and
that he would bring a great armful of wood with him.

No sooner had Minnikin got down to the strand than the Troll came
rushing along with a great whistling and whirring, and he was twice as
big as the first Troll, and he had ten heads.

'Fire!' shrieked the Troll.

'Fire yourself!' said Minnikin.

'Can you fight?' roared the Troll.

'If not, I can learn,' said Minnikin.

So the Troll struck at him with his iron club--which was still bigger
than that which the first Troll had had--so that the earth flew ten
yards up in the air.

'Fie!' said Minnikin. 'That was not much of a blow. Now you shall see
one of my blows.'

Then he grasped his sword and struck at the Troll, so that all his ten
heads danced away over the sands.

And again the King's daughter said to him, 'Sleep a while on my lap,'
and while Minnikin lay there she drew some silver raiment over him.

As soon as Ritter Red saw that there was no longer any danger afoot, he
crept down from the tree and threatened the Princess, until at last she
was again forced to promise to say that it was he who had rescued her;
after which he took the tongue and the lungs of the Troll and put them
in his pocket-handkerchief, and then he conducted the Princess back
to the palace. There was joy and gladness in the palace, as may be
imagined, and the King did not know how to show enough honour and
respect to Ritter Red.

Minnikin, however, took home with him an armful of gold and silver
hoops from the Troll's ship. When he came back to the King's palace the
kitchen-maid clapped her hands and wondered where he could have got all
that gold and silver; but Minnikin answered that he had been home for
a short time, and that it was only the hoops which had fallen off some
pails, and that he had brought them away for the kitchen-maid.

When the third Thursday evening came, everything happened exactly as
it had happened on the two former occasions. Everything in the King's
palace was hung with black, and everyone was sorrowful and distressed;
but Ritter Red said that he did not think that they had much reason to
be afraid--he had delivered the King's daughter from two Trolls, so he
could easily deliver her from the third as well.

He led her down to the strand, but when the time drew near for the Troll
to come, he climbed up into the tree again and hid himself.

The Princess wept and entreated him to stay, but all to no purpose. He
stuck to his old speech, 'It is better that one life should be lost than
two.'

This evening also, Minnikin begged for leave to go down to the
sea-shore.

'Oh, what can you do there?' answered the kitchen-maid.

However, he begged until at last he got leave to go, but he was forced
to promise that he would be back again in the kitchen when the roast had
to be turned.

Almost immediately after he had got down to the sea-shore the Troll came
with a great whizzing and whirring, and he was much, much bigger than
either of the two former ones, and he had fifteen heads.

'Fire!' roared the Troll.

'Fire yourself!' said Minnikin.

'Can you fight?' screamed the Troll.

'If not, I can learn,' said Minnikin.

'I will teach you,' yelled the Troll, and struck at him with his iron
club so that the earth flew up fifteen yards high into the air.

'Fie!' said Minnikin. 'That was not much of a blow. Now I will let you
see one of my blows.'

So saying he grasped his sword, and cut at the Troll in such a way that
all his fifteen heads danced away over the sands.

Then the Princess was delivered, and she thanked Minnikin and blessed
him for saving her.

'Sleep a while now on my lap,' said she, and while he lay there she put
a garment of brass upon him.

'But now, how shall we have it made known that it was you who saved me?'
said the King's daughter.

'That I will tell you,' answered Minnikin. 'When Ritter Red has taken
you home again, and given out that it was he who rescued you, he will,
as you know, have you to wife, and half the kingdom. But when they ask
you on your wedding-day whom you will have to be your cup-bearer,
you must say, "I will have the ragged boy who is in the kitchen, and
carries wood and water for the kitchen-maid;" and when I am filling
your cups for you, I will spill a drop upon his plate but none upon
yours, and then he will be angry and strike me, and this will take place
thrice. But the third time you must say, "Shame on you thus to smite
the beloved of mine heart. It is he who delivered me from the Troll, and
he is the one whom I will have."'

Then Minnikin ran back to the King's palace as he had done before, but
first he went on board the Troll's ship and took a great quantity of
gold and silver and other precious things, and out of these he once more
gave to the kitchen-maid a whole armful of gold and silver hoops.

No sooner did Ritter Red see that all danger was over than he crept
down from the tree, and threatened the King's daughter till he made her
promise to say that he had rescued her. Then he conducted her back to
the King's palace, and if honour enough had not been done him before it
was certainly done now, for the King had no other thought than how to
make much of the man who had saved his daughter from the three Trolls;
and it was settled then that Ritter Red should marry her, and receive
half the kingdom.

On the wedding-day, however, the Princess begged that she might have the
little boy who was in the kitchen, and carried wood and water for the
kitchen-maid, to fill the wine-cups at the wedding feast.

'Oh, what can you want with that dirty, ragged boy, in here?' said
Ritter Red, but the Princess said that she insisted on having him as
cup-bearer and would have no one else; and at last she got leave, and
then everything was done as had been agreed on between the Princess and
Minnikin. He spilt a drop on Ritter Red's plate but none upon hers, and
each time that he did it Ritter Red fell into a rage and struck him. At
the first blow all the ragged garments which he had worn in the kitchen
fell from off Minnikin, at the second blow the brass garments fell off,
and at the third the silver raiment, and there he stood in the golden
raiment, which was so bright and splendid that light flashed from it.

Then the King's daughter said: 'Shame on you thus to smite the beloved
of my heart. It is he who delivered me from the Troll, and he is the one
whom I will have.'

Ritter Red swore that he was the man who had saved her, but the King
said: 'He who delivered my daughter must have some token in proof of
it.'

So Ritter Red ran off at once for his handkerchief with the lungs
and tongue, and Minnikin went and brought all the gold and silver and
precious things which he had taken out of the Trolls' ships; and they
each of them laid these tokens before the King.

'He who has such precious things in gold and silver and diamonds,' said
the King, 'must be the one who killed the Troll, for such things are not
to be had anywhere else.' So Ritter Red was thrown into the snake-pit,
and Minnikin was to have the Princess, and half the kingdom.

One day the King went out walking with Minnikin, and Minnikin asked him
if he had never had any other children.

'Yes,' said the King, 'I had another daughter, but the Troll carried her
away because there was no one who could deliver her. You are going to
have one daughter of mine, but if you can set free the other, who has
been taken by the Troll, you shall willingly have her too, and the other
half of the kingdom as well.'

'I may as well make the attempt,' said Minnikin, 'but I must have an
iron rope which is five hundred ells long, and then I must have five
hundred men with me, and provisions for five weeks, for I have a long
voyage before me.'

So the King said he should have these things, but the King was afraid
that he had no ship large enough to carry them all.

'But I have a ship of my own,' said Minnikin, and he took the one which
the old woman had given him out of his pocket. The King laughed at him
and thought that it was only one of his jokes, but Minnikin begged
him just to give him what he had asked for, and then he should see
something. Then all that Minnikin had asked for was brought; and first
he ordered them to lay the cable in the ship, but there was no one who
was able to lift it, and there was only room for one or two men at a
time in the little bit of a ship. Then Minnikin himself took hold of the
cable, and laid one or two links of it into the ship, and as he threw
the links into it the ship grew bigger and bigger, and at last it was
so large that the cable, and the five hundred men, and provisions, and
Minnikin himself, had room enough.

'Now go over fresh water and salt water, over hill and dale, and do not
stop until thou comest to where the King's daughter is,' said Minnikin
to the ship, and off it went in a moment over land and water till the
wind whistled and moaned all round about it.

When they had sailed thus a long, long way, the ship stopped short in
the middle of the sea.

'Ah, now we have got there,' said Minnikin, 'but how we are to get back
again is a very different thing.'

Then he took the cable and tied one end of it round his body. 'Now I
must go to the bottom,' he said, 'but when I give a good jerk to the
cable and want to come up again, you must all pull like one man, or
there will be an end of all life both for you and for me.' So saying
he sprang into the water, and yellow bubbles rose up all around him. He
sank lower and lower, and at last he came to the bottom. There he saw a
large hill with a door in it, and in he went. When he had got inside he
found the other Princess sitting sewing, but when she saw Minnikin she
clapped her hands.

'Ah, heaven be praised!' she cried, 'I have not seen a Christian man
since I came here.'

'I have come for you,' said Minnikin.

'Alas! you will not be able to get me,' said the King's daughter. 'It is
no use even to think of that; if the Troll catches sight of you he will
take your life.'

'You had better tell me about him,' said Minnikin. 'Where is he gone? It
would be amusing to see him.'

So the King's daughter told Minnikin that the Troll was out trying
to get hold of someone who could brew a hundred lasts of malt at one
brewing, for there was to be a feast at the Troll's, at which less than
that would not be drunk.

'I can do that,' said Minnikin.

'Ah! if only the Troll were not so quick-tempered I might have told him
that,' answered the Princess, 'but he is so ill-natured that he will
tear you to pieces, I fear, as soon as he comes in. But I will try to
find some way of doing it. Can you hide yourself here in the cupboard?
and then we will see what happens.'

Minnikin did this, and almost before he had crept into the cupboard and
hidden himself, came the Troll.

'Huf! What a smell of Christian man's blood!' said the Troll.

'Yes, a bird flew over the roof with a Christian man's bone in his bill,
and let it fall down our chimney,' answered the Princess. 'I made
haste enough to get it away again, but it must be that which smells so,
notwithstanding.'

'Yes, it must be that,' said the Troll.

Then the Princess asked if he had got hold of anyone who could brew a
hundred lasts of malt at one brewing.

'No, there is no one who can do it,' said the Troll.

'A short time since there was a man here who said he could do it,' said
the King's daughter.

'How clever you always are!' said the Troll. 'How could you let him go
away? You must have known that I was just wanting a man of that kind.'

'Well, but I didn't let him go, after all,' said the Princess; 'but
father is so quick-tempered, so I hid him in the cupboard, but if father
has not found any one then the man is still here.'

'Let him come in,' said the Troll.

When Minnikin came, the Troll asked if it were true that he could brew a
hundred lasts of malt at one brewing.

'Yes,' said Minnikin, 'it is.'

'It is well then that I have lighted on thee,' said the Troll. 'Fall to
work this very minute, but Heaven help thee if thou dost not brew the
ale strong.'

'Oh, it shall taste well,' said Minnikin, and at once set himself to
work to brew.

'But I must have more trolls to help to carry what is wanted,' said
Minnikin; 'these that I have are good for nothing.'

So he got more and so many that there was a swarm of them, and then
the brewing went on. When the sweet-wort was ready they were all, as a
matter of course, anxious to taste it, first the Troll himself and then
the others; but Minnikin had brewed the wort so strong that they all
fell down dead like so many flies as soon as they had drunk any of it.
At last there was no one left but one wretched old hag who was lying
behind the stove.

'Oh, poor old creature!' said Minnikin, 'you shall have a taste of the
wort too like the rest.' So he went away and scooped up a little from
the bottom of the brewing vat in a milk pan, and gave it to her, and
then he was quit of the whole of them.

While Minnikin was now standing there looking about him, he cast his eye
on a large chest. This he took and filled it with gold and silver, and
then he tied the cable round himself and the Princess and the chest, and
tugged at the rope with all his might, whereupon his men drew them up
safe and sound.

As soon as Minnikin had got safely on his ship again, he said: 'Now go
over salt water and fresh water, over hill and dale, and do not stop
until thou comest unto the King's palace.' And in a moment the ship went
off so fast that the yellow foam rose up all round about it.

When those who were in the King's palace saw the ship, they lost no
time in going to meet him with song and music, and thus they marched up
towards Minnikin with great rejoicings; but the gladdest of all was the
King, for now he had got his other daughter back again.

But now Minnikin was not happy, for both the Princesses wanted to have
him, and he wanted to have none other than the one whom he had first
saved, and she was the younger. For this cause he was continually
walking backwards and forwards, thinking how he could contrive to get
her, and yet do nothing that was unkind to her sister. One day when he
was walking about and thinking of this, it came into his mind that if
he only had his brother, King Pippin, with him, who was so like himself
that no one could distinguish the one from the other, he could let
him have the elder Princess and half the kingdom; as for himself,
he thought, the other half was quite enough. As soon as this thought
occurred to him he went outside the palace and called for King Pippin,
but no one came. So he called a second time, and a little louder, but
no! still no one came. So Minnikin called for the third time, and with
all his might, and there stood his brother by his side.

'I told you that you were not to call me unless you were in the utmost
need,' he said to Minnikin, 'and there is not even so much as a midge
here who can do you any harm!' and with that he gave Minnikin such a
blow that he rolled over on the grass.

'Shame on you to strike me!' said Minnikin. 'First have I won one
Princess and half the kingdom, and then the other Princess and the other
half of the kingdom; and now, when I was just thinking that I would give
you one of the Princesses and one of the halves of the kingdom, do you
think you have any reason to give me such a blow?'

When King Pippin heard that he begged his brother's pardon, and they
were reconciled at once and became good friends.

'Now, as you know,' said Minnikin, 'we are so like each other that no
one can tell one of us from the other; so just change clothes with me
and go up to the palace, and then the Princesses will think that I am
coming in, and the one who kisses you first shall be yours, and I will
have the other.' For he knew that the elder Princess was the stronger,
so he could very well guess how things would go.

King Pippin at once agreed to this. He changed clothes with his brother,
and went into the palace. When he entered the Princess's apartments they
believed that he was Minnikin, and both of them ran up to him at once;
but the elder, who was bigger and stronger, pushed her sister aside, and
threw her arms round King Pippin's neck and kissed him; so he got her
to wife, and Minnikin the younger sister. It will be easy to understand
that two weddings took place, and they were so magnificent that they
were heard of and talked about all over seven kingdoms.(27)

(27) From J. Moe.




BUSHY BRIDE

THERE was once on a time a widower who had a son and a daughter by his
first wife. They were both good children, and loved each other with all
their hearts. After some time had gone by the man married again, and he
chose a widow with one daughter who was ugly and wicked, and her mother
was ugly and wicked too. From the very day that the new wife came into
the house there was no peace for the man's children, and not a corner to
be found where they could get any rest; so the boy thought that the best
thing he could do was to go out into the world and try to earn his own
bread.

When he had roamed about for some time he came to the King's palace,
where he obtained a place under the coachman; and very brisk and active
he was, and the horses that he looked after were so fat and sleek, that
they shone again.

But his sister, who was still at home, fared worse and worse. Both her
step-mother and her step-sister were always finding fault with her,
whatsoever she did and whithersoever she went, and they scolded her and
abused her so that she never had an hour's peace. They made her do all
the hard work, and hard words fell to her lot early and late, but little
enough food accompanied them.

One day they sent her to the brook to fetch some water home, and an ugly
and horrible head rose up out of the water, and said, 'Wash me, girl!'

'Yes, I will wash you with pleasure,' said the girl, and began to wash
and scrub the ugly face, but she couldn't help thinking that it was a
very unpleasant piece of work. When she had done it, and done it well,
another head rose up out of the water, and this one was uglier still.

'Brush me, girl!' said the head.

'Yes, I will brush you with pleasure,' said the girl, and set to work
with the tangled hair, and, as may be easily imagined, this too was by
no means pleasant work.

When she had got it done, another and a much more ugly and
horrible-looking head rose up out of the water.

'Kiss me, girl!' said the head.

'Yes, I will kiss you,' said the man's daughter, and she did it, but
she thought it was the worst bit of work that she had ever had to do in
her life.

So the heads all began to talk to each other, and to ask what they
should do for this girl who was so full of kindliness.

'She shall be the prettiest girl that ever was, and fair and bright as
the day,' said the first head.

'Gold shall drop from her hair whenever she brushes it,' said the
second.

'Gold shall drop from her mouth whenever she speaks,' said the third
head.

So when the man's daughter went home, looking as beautiful and bright as
day, the step-mother and her daughter grew much more ill-tempered, and
it was worse still when she began to talk, and they saw that golden
coins dropped from her mouth. The step-mother fell into such a towering
passion that she drove the man's daughter into the pig-stye--she might
stay there with her fine show of gold, the step-mother said, but she
should not be permitted to set foot in the house.

It was not long before the mother wanted her own daughter to go to the
stream to fetch some water.

When she got there with her pails, the first head rose up out of the
water close to the bank. 'Wash me, girl!' it said.

'Wash yourself!' answered the woman's daughter.

Then the second head appeared.

'Brush me, girl!' said the head.

'Brush yourself!' said the woman's daughter.

So down it went to the bottom, and the third head came up.

'Kiss me, girl!' said the head.

'As if I would kiss your ugly mouth!' said the girl.

So again the heads talked together about what they should do for this
girl who was so ill-tempered and full of her own importance, and they
agreed that she should have a nose that was four ells long, and a jaw
that was three ells, and a fir bush in the middle of her forehead, and
every time she spoke ashes should fall from her mouth.

When she came back to the cottage door with her pails, she called to her
mother who was inside, 'Open the door!'

'Open the door yourself, my own dear child!' said the mother.

'I can't get near, because of my nose,' said the daughter.

When the mother came and saw her you may imagine what a state of mind
she was in, and how she screamed and lamented, but neither the nose nor
the jaw grew any the less for that.

Now the brother, who was in service in the King's palace, had taken a
portrait of his sister, and he had carried the picture away with him,
and every morning and evening he knelt down before it and prayed for his
sister, so dearly did he love her.

The other stable-boys had heard him doing this, so they peeped through
the key-hole into his room, and saw that he was kneeling there before a
picture; so they told everyone that every morning and evening the youth
knelt down and prayed to an idol which he had; and at last they went
to the King himself, and begged that he too would peep through the
key-hole, and see for himself what the youth did. At first the King
would not believe this, but after a long, long time, they prevailed with
him, and he crept on tip-toe to the door, peeped through, and saw the
youth on his knees, with his hands clasped together before a picture
