
"Cross as a bear; Marian will fight against the prevailing ill wind,
but it will finally blow her down to a state of depression where her
best friend wouldn't recognize her, and"--

"You don't mention me, my boy," said Mr. King dryly.

Jasper looked into his father's eyes, and they both laughed.

"And if you, Polly Pepper, don't keep things bright, why, we shall all
go to the dogs," said the old gentleman, sobering down. "So mind you
do, and we'll try to bear Cousin Algernon's relict."

"I will," said Polly stoutly, though "relict" sounded very dreadful to
begin with.

"Give us your hand, then," said Jasper's father, putting out his palm.
"There!" releasing it, "now I'm much more comfortable about matters."

"And give me your hand, Polly," cried Jasper, his own brown hand flying
to meet hers. "There! and now I'm comfortable too! So it's a compact,
and a sure one!"

"And I want to give my hand," cried Phronsie, very much aggrieved.
"Here, Jasper."

"Bless my soul, so you must!" cried old Mr. King; "to think we didn't
ask you first. There--and there!"

"And, Phronsie darling," cried Polly in a rapture, "you must promise
with me, after you have with the others. I couldn't ever get along in
all this world without that."

So the ceremony of sealing the compact having been observed with great
gravity, Phronsie drew a long breath, and now felt that the "poor lady"
might come down at any time to find all things prepared for her.

"Now tell our plan," cried Jasper to Polly, "and put this disagreeable
business out of our heads. It's a fine one," he added to his father.

"Of course it is," cried the old gentleman.

"Well, you know Joel and Davie and Van and Percy are coming home from
school next week for the Christmas holidays," began Polly, trying to
still the wild beating of her heart.

"Bless me! so they are," said Mr. King. "How time flies, to be sure!
Well, go on, Polly."

"And we ought to do something to celebrate," said Polly, "at least
don't you think so?" she asked anxiously, looking up in his face.

"To be sure I do," cried the old gentleman heartily. "Well, what would
you do, Polly child, to show the youngsters we're proud of them, and
glad to get them back--hey?"

"We want to get up a little play," said Polly, "Jasper and I, and act
it."

"And have music," cried Jasper. "Polly shall play on the piano. The
boys will be so delighted to see how she has improved."

"And Jasper will play too," cried Polly eagerly. "Oh, Jasper! will you
play that concerto, the one you played when Mary Gibbs was here at tea
last week? Do, Jasper, do."

"That nearly floored me," said Jasper.

"No; you said it was Mary's watching you like a lynx--you know you
did," said Polly, laughing merrily.

"Never mind," said the old gentleman. "What next, Polly? The play is
all right."

"I should think it was," cried Jasper. "It's the Three Dragons, and the
Princess Clotilde."

"Oh, my goodness," exclaimed Mr. King, "What a play for Christmas Eve!"

"Well, you'll say it's a splendid hit!" cried Jasper, "when you see it
from the private box we are going to give you."

"So you are intending to honor me, are you?" cried his father, vastly
pleased to find himself as ever, the central figure in their plans.
"Well, well, I dare say it will all be as fine as can be to welcome
these young scapegraces home. What next, Polly?"

"It must be kept a perfect surprise," cried Polly, clasping her hands
while the color flew over her face. "No one must even whisper it to
each other, the day before Christmas when the boys get here, for Joel
is so very dreadful whenever there is a secret."

"His capacity certainly is good," said Mr. King dryly. "We will all be
very careful."

"And Phronsie is to be Princess Clotilde," cried Jasper, seizing her
suddenly, to prance around the room, just like old times.

"Oh, Jasper! I'm eight years old," she cried, struggling to free
herself.

"Nonsense! What of it--you are the baby of this household." But he set
her on her feet nevertheless, one hand still patting the soft yellow
waves over her brow. "Go on, Polly, do, and lay the whole magnificence
before father. He will be quite overcome."

"That would be disastrous," said Mr. King; "better save your effects
till the grand affair comes off."

"Jasper is to be one of the dragons," announced Polly, quite in her
element, "that is, the head dragon; Ben is to be another, and we
haven't quite decided whether to ask Archy Hurd or Clare to take the
third one."

"Clare has the most 'go' in him," said Jasper critically.

"Then I think we'll decide now to ask him," said Polly, "don't you,
Jasper?"

"A dragon without 'go' in him would be most undesirable, I should
fancy. Well, what next do you propose to do, Polly?" asked Mr. King.

"Now that we know that you will allow us to have it," cried Polly in a
rapture, "why, we can think up splendid things. We've only the play
written so far, sir."

"Polly wrote the most," said Jasper.

"Oh, no, Jasper! I only put in the bits," said Polly. "He planned
it?--every single bit, Jasper did."

"Well, she thought up the dragons, and the cave, and"?--

"Oh! that was easy enough," said Polly, guilty of interrupting,
"because you see something has to carry off the Princess Clotilde."

"Oh, now! you are not going to frighten my little girl," cried Mr.
King. "I protest against the whole thing if you do," and he put out his
hand. "Come, Phronsie," when, as of old, she hurried to his side
obediently.

"Oh! we are going to show her the boys, and how we dress them up just
like dragons," cried Polly, "and while they are prancing around and
slashing their tails at rehearsal, I'm going to keep saying, 'That's
nothing but Jasper and Ben and Clare, you know, Phronsie,' till I get
her accustomed to them. You won't be frightened, will you, pet, at
those dear, sweet old dragons?" she ended, and getting on her knees,
she looked imploringly into Phronsie's brown eyes.

"N--no," said Phronsie, slowly, "not if they are really Jasper and Ben
and Clare."

"They really will be," cried Polly, enchanted at her success, "Jasper
and Ben and Clare; and they will give you a ride, and show you a cave,
oh! and perfect quantities of things; you can't think how many!"

Phronsie clapped her hands and laughed aloud in glee.

"Oh! I don't care if they are true dragons, Polly, I don't," she cried,
dreadfully excited. "Make 'em real big live ones, do; do make them big,
and let me ride on their backs."

"These will be just as real," said Polly comfortingly, "that is,
they'll act real, only there will be boys inside of them. Oh! we'll
have them nice, dear, don't you fear."

"But I'd really rather have true ones," sighed Phronsie.




III

THE REHEARSAL


"Now, Phronsie," said Polly, on her knees before the Princess, who was
slowly evolving into "a thing of beauty," "do hold still just a minute,
dear. There," as she thrust in another pin, then turned her head
critically to view her work, "I do hope that is right."

Phronsie sighed. "May I just stretch a wee little bit, Polly," she
asked timidly, "before you pin it up? Just a very little bit?"

"To be sure you may," said Polly, looking into the flushed little face;
"I'll tell you, you may walk over to the window and back, once; that'll
rest you and give me a chance to see what is the matter with that back
drapery."

So Phronsie, well pleased, gathered up the embyro robe of the Princess
and moved off, a bewildering tangle of silver spangles and floating
lace, drawn over the skirt of one of Mrs. Whitney's white satin gowns.

"There ought to be a dash of royal purple somewhere," said Polly,
sitting on the floor to see her go, and resting her tired hands on her
knees. "Now where shall I get it, and where shall I put it when I do
have it?" She wrinkled up her eyebrows a moment, lost in thought over
the momentous problem. "Oh! I know," and she sprang up exultingly.
"Phronsie, won't this be perfectly lovely? we can take that piece of
tissue paper Auntie gave you, and I can cut out little knots and
sashes. It is so soft, that in the gaslight they will look like silk.
How fine!"

"Can't I be a Princess unless you sew up that purple paper?" asked
Phronsie, pausing suddenly to look over her shoulder in dismay at Polly.

"Why, yes, you can be, of course," said Polly, "but you can't be as
good a one as if you had a dash of royal purple about you. What's a bit
of tissue paper to the glory of being a Princess?" she cried, with
sparkling eyes. "Dear me, I wish I could be one."

"Well, you may have it, Polly," said Phronsie with a sigh, "and then
afterwards I'll rip it all off and smooth it out, and it will be almost
as good as new."

"I think there won't be much left of it when the play is over," cried
Polly with a laugh; "why, the dragons are going to carry you off to
their cave, you know, and you are to be rescued by the knight, just
think, Phronsie! You can't expect to have such perfectly delightful
times, and come out with a quantity of tissue paper all safe. Something
has to be scarified to royalty, child."

Phronsie sighed again. But as Polly approved of royalty so highly, she
immediately lent herself to the anticipations of the pleasure before
her, smothering all lesser considerations.

"When you get your little silver cap on with one of Auntie's diamond
rings sewed in it, why, you'll be too magnificent for anything," said
Polly, now pulling and patting with fresh enthusiasm, since the "purple
dash" was forthcoming.

"Princesses don't wear silver caps with diamond rings sewed in them,"
observed Phronsie wisely.

"Of course not; they have diamonds by the bushel, and don't need to sew
rings in their caps to make them sparkle," said Polly, plaiting and
pinning rapidly, "but in dressing up for a play, we have to take a
poetic license. There, turn just one bit to the right, Phronsie dear."

"What's poetic license?" demanded Phronsie, wrenching her imagination
off from the bushel of diamonds to seize practical information.

"Oh! when a man writes verses and says things that aren't so," said
Polly, her mind on the many details before her.

"But he ought not to," cried Phronsie, with wide eyes, "say things that
are not so. I thought poets were always very good, Polly."

"Oh! well, people let him," said Polly, carelessly, "because he puts it
into poetry. It would never do in prose; that would be quite shocking."

"Oh!" said Phronsie, finding the conversation some alleviation to the
fitting-on process.

"Now this left side," said Polly, twisting her head to obtain a good
view of the point in question, "is just right; I couldn't do it any
better if I were to try a thousand times. Why won't this other one
behave, and fall into a pretty curve, I wonder?"

Phronsie yawned softly as the brown eyes were safely behind her.

"I shall gather it up anyway, so," and Polly crushed the refractory
folds recklessly in one hand; "that's the way Mary Gibbs's hat
trimmings look, and I'm sure they're a complete success. Oh! that's
lovely," cried Polly, at the effect. "Now, that's the treatment the
whole drapery needs," she added in the tone of an art connoisseur. "Oh!"

A rushing noise announced the approach of two or three boys, together
with the barking of Prince, as they all ran down the wide hall.

"O dear, dear!" exclaimed Polly, hurriedly pulling and pinning, "there
come the boys to rehearse. It can't be four o'clock," as the door
opened and three members of the cast entered.

"It's quarter-past four," said Jasper, laughing and pulling out his
watch; "we gave you an extra fifteen minutes, as you had such a lot to
do. Dear me! but you are fine, Phronsie. I make my obeisance to
Princess Clotilde!" and he bowed low to the little silver and white
figure, as did the other two boys, and then drew off to witness the
final touches.

"It's a most dreadful thing," cried Polly, pushing back the brown waves
from her brow, as she also fell off to their point of view, "to get up
a princess. I had no idea it was such a piece of work."

"You have scored an immense success," said Jasper enthusiastically.
"Oh, Phronsie! you will make the hit of the season."

"You'll think it is even much nicer when it is done," said Polly,
vastly relieved that Jasper had given such a kind verdict. "It's to
have a dash of royal purple on that right side, and in one of the
shoulder knots, and to catch up her train."

"That will be very pretty, I don't doubt," said Jasper, trying to
resolve himself into the cold critic, "but it seems to me it is almost
perfect now, Polly."

"Oh! thank you so much," she cried, with blooming cheeks. "How do you
like it, Clare and Bensie?"

"I can't tell," said Ben, slowly regarding the Princess on all sides;
"it's so transforming."

"It's tiptop!" cried Clare. "It out-princesses any princess I've ever
imagined."

"Well, it's a perfect relief," said Polly, "to have you boys come in.
I've been working so over it that I was ready to say it was horrid.
It's too bad, isn't it, that Dick can't be here to-day to rehearse his
part?"

"To be sure," exclaimed Jasper, looking around, "where is the
Princess's page?"

"He's gone to the dentist's," said Polly, making a wry face. "Auntie
had to make the appointment for this afternoon, and we couldn't put off
the rehearsal; Clare can't come any other time, you know."

