
The missionary also gave us an account of the manner in which
Christianity had been introduced among them.  He said: "When missionaries
were first sent here, three years ago, a small vessel brought them; and
the chief, who is now dead, promised to treat well the two native
teachers who were left with their wives on the island.  But scarcely had
the boat which landed them returned to the ship, than the natives began
to maltreat their guests, taking away all they possessed, and offering
them further violence, so that, when the boat was sent in haste to fetch
them away, the clothes of both men and women were torn nearly off their
backs.

"Two years after this the vessel visited them again, and I, being in her,
volunteered to land alone, without any goods whatever; begging that my
wife might be brought to me the following year,--that is, _this_ year;
and, as you see, she is with me.  But the surf was so high that the boat
could not land me; so with nothing on but my trousers and shirt, and with
a few catechisms and a Bible, besides some portions of the Scripture
translated into the Mango tongue, I sprang into the sea, and swam ashore
on the crest of a breaker.  I was instantly dragged up the beach by the
natives; who, on finding I had nothing worth having upon me, let me
alone.  I then made signs to my friends in the ship to leave me; which
they did.  At fist the natives listened to me in silence, but laughed at
what I said while I preached the gospel of our blessed Saviour Jesus
Christ to them.  Afterwards they treated me ill sometimes; but I
persevered, and continued to dwell among them, and dispute, and exhort
them to give up their sinful ways of life, burn their idols, and come to
Jesus.

"About a month after I landed, I heard that the chief was dead.  He was
the father of the present chief, who is now a most consistent member of
the church.  It is a custom here that, when a chief dies, his wives are
strangled and buried with him.  Knowing this, I hastened to his house to
endeavour to prevent such cruelty if possible.  When I arrived, I found
two of the wives had already been killed, while another was in the act of
being strangled.  I pleaded hard for her, but it was too late; she was
already dead.  I then entreated the son to spare the fourth wife; and,
after much hesitation, my prayer was granted: but, in half an hour
afterwards, this poor woman repented of being unfaithful, as she termed
it, to her husband, and insisted on being strangled; which was
accordingly done.

"All this time the chief's son was walking up and down before his
father's house with a brow black as thunder.  When he entered, I went in
with him, and found, to my surprise, that his father was not dead!  The
old man was sitting on a mat in a corner, with an expression of placid
resignation on his face.

"'Why,' said I, 'have you strangled your father's wives before he is
dead?'

"To this the son replied, 'He is dead.  That is no longer my father.  He
is as good as dead now.  He is to be _buried alive_.'

"I now remembered having heard that it is a custom among the Feejee
islanders, that when the reigning chief grows old or infirm, the heir to
the chieftainship has a right to depose his father; in which case he is
considered as dead, and is buried alive.  The young chief was now about
to follow this custom, and, despite my earnest entreaties and pleadings,
the old chief was buried that day before my eyes in the same grave with
his four strangled wives!  Oh! my heart groaned when I saw this, and I
prayed to God to open the hearts of these poor creatures, as he had
already opened mine, and pour into them the light and the love of the
gospel of Jesus.  My prayer was answered very soon.  A week afterwards,
the son, who was now chief of the tribe, came to me, bearing his god on
his shoulders, and groaning beneath its weight.  Flinging it down at my
feet, he desired me to burn it!

"You may conceive how overjoyed I was at this.  I sprang up and embraced
him, while I shed tears of joy.  Then we made a fire, and burned the god
to ashes, amid an immense concourse of the people, who seemed terrified
at what was being done, and shrank back when we burned the god, expecting
some signal vengeance to be taken upon us; but seeing that nothing
happened, they changed their minds, and thought that our God must be the
true one after all.  From that time the mission prospered steadily, and
now, while there is not a single man in the tribe who has not burned his
household gods, and become a convert to Christianity, there are not a
few, I hope, who are true followers of the Lamb, having been plucked as
brands from the burning by Him who can save unto the uttermost.  I will
not tell you more of our progress at this time, but you see," he said,
waving his hand around him, "the village and the church did not exist a
year ago!"

We were indeed much interested in this account, and I could not help
again in my heart praying God to prosper those missionary societies that
send such inestimable blessings to these islands of dark and bloody
idolatry.  The teacher also added that the other tribes were very
indignant at this one for having burned its gods, and threatened to
destroy it altogether, but they had done nothing yet; "and if they
should," said the teacher, "the Lord is on our side; of whom shall we be
afraid?"

"Have the missionaries many stations in these seas?" inquired Jack.

"Oh, yes.  The London Missionary Society have a great many in the Tahiti
group, and other islands in that quarter.  Then the Wesleyans have the
Feejee Islands all to themselves, and the Americans have many stations in
other groups.  But still, my friend, there are hundreds of islands here
the natives of which have never heard of Jesus, or the good word of God,
or the Holy Spirit; and thousands are living and dying in the practice of
those terrible sins and bloody murders of which you have already heard.  I
trust, my friends," he added, looking earnestly into our faces, "I trust
that if you ever return to England, you will tell your Christian friends
that the horrors which they hear of in regard to these islands are
_literally true_, and that when they have heard the worst, the '_half has
not been told them_;' for there are perpetrated here foul deeds of
darkness of which man may not speak.  You may also tell them," he said,
looking around with a smile, while a tear of gratitude trembled in his
eye and rolled down his coal-black cheek,--"tell them of the blessings
that the gospel has wrought _here_!"

We assured our friend that we would certainly not forget his request.  On
returning towards the village, about noon, we remarked on the beautiful
whiteness of the cottages.

"That is owing to the lime with which they are plastered," said the
teacher.  "When the natives were converted, as I have described, I set
them to work to build cottages for themselves, and also this handsome
church which you see.  When the framework and other parts of the houses
were up, I sent the people to fetch coral from the sea.  They brought
immense quantities.  Then I made them cut wood, and, piling the coral
above it, set it on fire.

"'Look! look!' cried the poor people, in amazement; 'what wonderful
people the Christians are!  He is roasting stones.  We shall not need
taro or bread-fruit any more; we may eat stones!'

"But their surprise was still greater when the coral was reduced to a
fine soft white powder.  They immediately set up a great shout, and,
mingling the lime with water, rubbed their faces and their bodies all
over with it, and ran through the village screaming with delight.  They
were also much surprised at another thing they saw me do.  I wished to
make some household furniture, and constructed a turning-lathe to assist
me.  The first thing that I turned was the leg of a sofa; which was no
sooner finished than the chief seized it with wonder and delight, and ran
through the village exhibiting it to the people, who looked upon it with
great admiration.  The chief then, tying a string to it, hung it round
his neck as an ornament!  He afterwards told me that if he had seen it
before he became a Christian he would have made it his god!"

As the teacher concluded this anecdote we reached his door.  Saying that
he had business to attend to, he left us to amuse ourselves as we best
could.

"Now, lads," said Jack, turning abruptly towards us, and buttoning up his
jacket as he spoke, "I'm off to see the battle.  I've no particular
fondness for seein' blood-shed, but I must find out the nature o' these
fellows and see their customs with my own eyes, so that I may be able to
speak of it again, if need be, authoritatively.  It's only six miles off,
and we don't run much more risk than that of getting a rap with a stray
stone or an over-shot arrow.  Will you go?"

"To be sure we will," said Peterkin.

"If they chance to see us we'll cut and run for it," added Jack.

"Dear me!" cried Peterkin,--"_you_ run! thought you would scorn to run
from any one."

"So I would, if it were my duty to fight," returned Jack, coolly; "but as
I don't want to fight, and don't intend to fight, if they offer to attack
us I'll run away like the veriest coward that ever went by the name of
Peterkin.  So come along."




CHAPTER XXXI.


A strange and bloody battle--The lion bearded in his den--Frightful
scenes of cruelty, and fears for the future.

We had ascertained from the teacher the direction to the spot on which
the battle was to be fought, and after a walk of two hours reached it.
The summit of a bare hill was the place chosen; for, unlike most of the
other islanders, who are addicted to bush-fighting, those of Mango are in
the habit of meeting on open ground.  We arrived before the two parties
had commenced the deadly struggle, and, creeping as close up as we dared
among the rocks, we lay and watched them.

The combatants were drawn up face to face, each side ranged in rank four
deep.  Those in the first row were armed with long spears; the second,
with clubs to defend the spearmen; the third row was composed of young
men with slings; and the fourth consisted of women, who carried baskets
of stones for the slingers, and clubs and spears with which to supply the
warriors.  Soon after we arrived, the attack was made with great fury.
There was no science displayed.  The two bodies of savages rushed
headlong upon each other and engaged in a general _melee_, and a more
dreadful set of men I have never seen.  They wore grotesque war-caps made
of various substances and decorated with feathers.  Their faces and
bodies were painted so as to make them look as frightful as possible; and
as they brandished their massive clubs, leaped, shouted, yelled, and
dashed each other to the ground, I thought I had never seen men look so
like demons before.

We were much surprised at the conduct of the women, who seemed to be
perfect furies, and hung about the heels of their husbands in order to
defend them.  One stout young women we saw, whose husband was hard
pressed and about to be overcome: she lifted a large stone, and throwing
it at his opponent's head, felled him to the earth.  But the battle did
not last long.  The band most distant from us gave way and were routed,
leaving eighteen of their comrades dead upon the field.  These the
victors brained as they lay; and putting some of their brains on leaves
went off with them, we were afterwards informed, to their temples, to
present them to their gods as an earnest of the human victims who were
soon to be brought there.

We hastened back to the Christian village with feelings of the deepest
sadness at the sanguinary conflict which we had just witnessed.

Next day, after breakfasting with our friend the teacher, we made
preparations for carrying out our plan.  At first the teacher endeavoured
to dissuade us.

"You do not know," said he, turning to Jack, "the danger you run in
venturing amongst these ferocious savages.  I feel much pity for poor
Avatea; but you are not likely to succeed in saving her, and you may die
in the attempt."

"Well," said Jack, quietly, "I am not afraid to die in a good cause."

The teacher smiled approvingly at him as he said this, and after a little
further conversation agreed to accompany us as interpreter; saying that,
although Tararo was unfriendly to him, he had hitherto treated him with
respect.

We now went on board the schooner, having resolved to sail round the
island and drop anchor opposite the heathen village.  We manned her with
natives, and hoped to overawe the savages by displaying our brass gun to
advantage.  The teacher soon after came on board, and setting our sails
we put to sea.  In two hours more we made the cliffs reverberate with the
crash of the big gun, which we fired by way of salute, while we ran the
British ensign up to the peak and cast anchor.  The commotion on shore
showed us that we had struck terror into the hearts of the natives; but
seeing that we did not offer to molest them, a canoe at length put off
and paddled cautiously towards us.  The teacher showed himself, and
explaining that we were friends and wished to palaver with the chief,
desired the native to go and tell him to come on board.

We waited long and with much impatience for an answer.  During this time
the native teacher conversed with us again, and told us many things
concerning the success of the gospel among those islands; and perceiving
that we were by no means so much gratified as we ought to have been at
the hearing of such good news, he pressed us more closely in regard to
our personal interest in religion, and exhorted us to consider that our
souls were certainly in as great danger as those of the wretched heathen
whom we pitied so much, if we had not already found salvation in Jesus
Christ.  "Nay, further," he added, "if such be your unhappy case, you
are, in the sight of God, much worse than these savages (forgive me, my
young friends, for saying so); for they have no knowledge, no light, and
do not profess to believe; while you, on the contrary, have been brought
up in the light of the blessed gospel and call yourselves Christians.
These poor savages are indeed the enemies of our Lord; but you, if ye be
not true believers, are traitors!"

I must confess that my heart condemned me while the teacher spoke in this
earnest manner, and I knew not what to reply.  Peterkin, too, did not
seem to like it, and I thought would willingly have escaped; but Jack
seemed deeply impressed, and wore an anxious expression on his naturally
grave countenance, while he assented to the teacher's remarks and put to
him many earnest questions.  Meanwhile the natives who composed our crew,
having nothing particular to do, had squatted down on the deck and taken
out their little books containing the translated portions of the New
Testament, along with hymns and spelling-books, and were now busily
engaged, some vociferating the alphabet, others learning prayers off by
heart, while a few sang hymns,--all of them being utterly unmindful of
our presence.  The teacher soon joined them, and soon afterwards they all
engaged in a prayer which was afterwards translated to us, and proved to
be a petition for the success of our undertaking and for the conversion
of the heathen.

While we were thus engaged a canoe put off from shore and several savages
leaped on deck, one of whom advanced to the teacher and informed him that
Tararo could not come on board that day, being busy with some religious
ceremonies before the gods, which could on no account be postponed.  He
was also engaged with a friendly chief who was about to take his
departure from the island, and therefore begged that the teacher and his
friends would land and pay a visit to him.  To this the teacher returned
answer that we would land immediately.

"Now, lads," said Jack, as we were about to step into our little boat,
"I'm not going to take any weapons with me, and I recommend you to take
none either.  We are altogether in the power of these savages, and the
utmost we could do, if they were to attack us, would be to kill a few of
them before we were ourselves overpowered.  I think that our only chance
of success lies in mild measures.  Don't you think so?"

To this I assented gladly, and Peterkin replied by laying down a huge
bell-mouthed blunderbuss, and divesting himself of a pair of enormous
horse-pistols with which he had purposed to overawe the natives!  We then
jumped into our boat and rowed ashore.

On reaching the beach we were received by a crowd of naked savages, who
shouted a rude welcome, and conducted us to a house or shed where a baked
pig and a variety of vegetables were prepared for us.  Having partaken of
these, the teacher begged to be conducted to the chief; but there seemed
some hesitation, and after some consultation among themselves, one of the
men stood forward and spoke to the teacher.

"What says he?" inquired Jack when the savage had concluded.

"He says that the chief is just going to the temple of his god and cannot
see us yet; so we must be patient, my friend."

"Well," cried Jack, rising; "if he won't come to see me, I'll e'en go and
see him.  Besides, I have a great desire to witness their proceedings at
this temple of theirs.  Will you go with me, friend?"

"I cannot," said the teacher, shaking his head; "I must not go to the
heathen temples and witness their inhuman rites, except for the purpose
of condemning their wickedness and folly."

"Very good," returned Jack; "then I'll go alone, for I cannot condemn
their doings till I have seen them."

Jack arose, and we, having determined to go also, followed him through
the banana groves to a rising ground immediately behind the village, on
the top of which stood the Bure, or temple, under the dark shade of a
group of iron-wood trees.  As we went through the village, I was again
led to contrast the rude huts and sheds, and their almost naked savage-
looking inhabitants, with the natives of the Christian village, who, to
use the teacher's scriptural expression, were now "clothed and in their
right mind."

As we turned into a broad path leading towards the hill, we were arrested
by the shouts of an approaching multitude in the rear.  Drawing aside
into the bushes we awaited their coming up, and as they drew near we
observed that it was a procession of the natives, many of whom were
dancing and gesticulating in the most frantic manner.  They had an
exceedingly hideous aspect, owing to the black, red, and yellow paints
with which their faces and naked bodies were bedaubed.  In the midst of
these came a band of men carrying three or four planks, on which were
seated in rows upwards of a dozen men.  I shuddered involuntarily as I
recollected the sacrifice of human victims at the island of Emo, and
turned with a look of fear to Jack as I said,--

"Oh, Jack!  I have a terrible dread that they are going to commit some of
