Nick rather hoped that no one would bid against him, but in this he was
destined to be disappointed.

"Five dollars!" was next heard.

And this bid came from Mr. Dunbar, the father of his friend Frank.
Philip's eyes brightened up, for there was no one he would sooner see
the possessor of the watch than his kind friend.

Nick looked chopfallen when he heard this large increase on his original
bid, and hesitated to continue, but finally mustered up courage to say,
in a rather feeble tone:

"Five and a quarter."

"Five dollars and a quarter bid!" said the auctioneer. "Do I hear more?"

"Six dollars," said Mr. Dunbar quietly.

The bid was repeated, and the auctioneer waited for a higher one, but
Nick retired ignominiously from the contest.

He wasn't sure whether he could get much over six dollars for it
himself, and he foresaw that Mr. Dunbar intended to have it, even if it
cost considerable more.

"It's kinder hard on a feller," he complained to the man standing next
him. "What does Mr. Dunbar want of the watch? He's got one already."

"Perhaps he thinks it is a good bargain at the price."

"It's what I've been wantin' all along," said Nick. "He might have let
me have it."

"Why don't you bid more?"

"I wanted to get it cheap."

"And the auctioneer wants to get as much as he can for the articles, and
so do Philip's friends," This was a consideration which, of course, had
no weight with Nicholas. However, he had one comfort. He would bid on
the violin, and probably no one else would bid against it. He did not
see it, to be sure, but concluded, of course, that it would be bid off.
When the sale drew near the end, he went to Philip, and said:

"Whereabouts is the fiddle, Phil?"

"It isn't here," answered our hero.

"Ain't it goin' to be sold?"

"Of course not! It's mine. I told you that once already."

"We'll see!" said Nicholas angrily.

And going up to Squire Pope, he held a brief conversation with that
gentleman.

The squire nodded vigorously, and walked over to Philip.

"Philip," said he, "go and bring your violin."

"What will I do that for!" asked our hero quietly.

"So that it may be sold."

"It is not to be sold," returned Philip quietly. "It belongs to me."

"Nothing belongs to you except your clothes!" said the squire angrily.
"I require you to go and fetch the instrument."

"And I decline to do it," said Philip.

"Do you know who I am," demanded the squire, with ruffled dignity.

"I know you perfectly well," answered Philip "but I am the owner of the
violin, and I don't mean to have it sold."

"YOU will repent this!" said Squire Pope, who felt that his lawful
authority and official dignity were set at naught.

Philip bowed and left the house. He did not know what steps the squire
might take, but he was resolved not to give up his cherished violin.



CHAPTER V. AN ALLIANCE AGAINST PHILIP.



Squire Pope was not a bad man, nor was he by nature a tyrant, but he
was so fully convinced of his own superior judgment that he was in all
things obstinately bent on having his own way. He had persuaded himself
that our young hero, Philip, would be better off in the poorhouse than
in a place where he could earn his own living, and no one could convince
him to the contrary.

As to the boy's feelings on the subject, he considered those of no
importance. He had good reason to know that Philip would object to being
an inmate of the almshouse, but he was determined that he should go
there.

In like manner, before the auction was over, he saw clearly that it
would realize a sum more than sufficient to pay the funeral expenses
of the late Mr. Gray and the few small bills outstanding against his
estate, and that there was no necessity that Philip's violin should be
sold, but none the less he resolved that it should be sold.

"Shall I allow a young lad to dictate to me?" Squire Pope asked himself,
in irritation. "Certainly not! I know better what is right than he.
It is ridiculous that a town pauper should own a violin. Why, the next
thing, we shall have to buy pianos for our almshouses, for the use of
the gentlemen and ladies who occupy them. A violin, indeed!"

This Squire Pope regarded as irresistible logic and withering sarcasm
combined.

He saw Philip go out of the cottage, but, as the sale was not over, he
was unable to follow him.

"Never mind, I'll fix him as soon as I have time," he said to himself.

"Back so soon? Is the auction over!" asked his friend, Frank Dunbar, who
was engaged in splitting wood in the rear of the house.

"No, Frank, not quite; but it's almost over..Who do you think bid on
father's gold watch?"

"I don't know."

"Nick Holden."

"He didn't get it, did he?"

"I am glad to say not. Your father bought it."

"Did he! Why, he's got one watch already."

"I am glad he's got it. I couldn't bear to think of Nick Holden carrying
my father's watch. He was disappointed about one thing besides."

"What was that?"

"The violin. He went to Squire Pope, and complained that it was not in
the sale."

"That's just like his impudence. What did the squire say?"

"He came to me and ordered me to get it, so that it might be sold."

"Shall I get it for you, then?"

"Not much!" answered Philip emphatically. "It is mine, as I have
already told you. If the auction doesn't bring in enough to settle up
everything, I may agree to sell it for a fair price; but I am sure, from
the prices, that it won't be necessary."

"Squire Pope's a dreadful obstinate man," said Frank doubtfully. "He may
insist upon your selling the violin."

"Let him do it!" said Philip contemptuously. "I should like to see him
get it. Where have you put it, Frank?"

"Where Squire Pope won't be apt to find it--in an old chest up in the
garret. It's full of old clothes, belonging to my grandfather, and
hasn't been looked into by any one except me for years. I put it away
under all the clothes at the bottom. No one knows where it is except you
and me, not even mother."

"That's good. I guess we can defy the squire, then."

Half an hour later, Mr. Dunbar came home from the auction.

Philip went to meet him.

"Thank you for buying father's watch," he said. "But for you, Nick
Holden would have had it, and I should have been sorry for it."

"He was badly disappointed," said Mr. Dunbar smiling. "But I didn't buy
the watch for myself, Philip."

"For whom, then?" asked Philip, in some surprise.

"For the one that has the best right to it--for you," and the farmer
took the watch from his pocket, and handed it to Philip.

"But I haven't the money to pay for it, Mr. Dunbar," said our hero.

"Then I give it to you as a present," said Mr. Dunbar.

"I am very grateful," said Philip; "but I ought not to accept it. You
are too kind to me."

"Let me be the judge of that."

"Besides, it wouldn't be safe for me to take it. Squire Pope will try to
get my violin away from me in order to sell it, and he would be sure to
try to do the same by the watch if he found that I had it."

"But, Philip, I don't need the watch myself."

"Then, Mr. Dunbar, will you be kind enough to keep it for me, and when I
can afford to pay for it, and there is no danger of its being taken
from me, I will ask you for it. I shall be very glad, indeed, when I am
older, to carry my father's watch, for I have seen it in his hands so
often that it will constantly remind me of him."

"Perhaps that will be the best arrangement," said Mr. Dunbar. "You might
have it stolen from you, if you carried it yourself just at present. As
you request, I will keep it, subject to your order; but I would rather
let it be a gift from me, and not require you to pay for it."

"We won't talk about that now," said Philip, smiling. "At any rate, you
must let me thank you for your great kindness to me."

"Don't speak of that, Phil," said the farmer kindly. "I had a great
respect and liking for your father, and I verily believe my Frank loves
you as well as if you were his own brother. So, come what may, you have
a friend in our family."

"I indorse all that father says," Frank said.

And he extended his hand to Philip, who grasped it heartily.

It warmed his heart to think that he had such good friends, though he
was an orphan and alone in the world.

After supper, Mr. Dunbar went to the village store, while Frank and
Philip remained at home.

Suddenly Frank said:

"Philip, you are going to have a visitor, I guess."

"A visitor!"

"Yes; I saw Squire Pope stumping along the road, nourishing his
gold-headed cane. He is headed this way, and it's likely he is going to
honor you with a call. He's got somebody with him, too. Who is it!"

Philip shaded his eyes with his hand, for the Sun was near its setting,
and shining with dazzling brightness from the quarter toward which he
was looking.

"It's Nick Holden!" he said.

"So it is! What can he want?"

"I understand very well. He wants my violin. He couldn't get it at the
sale, so he has come here to see if he can't make me give it to him."

"And will you?"

"You ought to know me better than to ask, Frank," said Philip firmly.
"Nick might as well have stayed away, for he won't accomplish anything."

Nick, however, held a different opinion. After Philip left the cottage,
he had gone to Squire Pope, and cunningly asked:

"Are you going to let Philip keep his fiddle in spite of you, squire?"

"What do you mean, Nicholas?" demanded the squire, in a stately way.

"Why, seems to me he's kinder settin' up his will agin yours. You say
the fiddle shall be sold, and he says it shan't. He told me he didn't
care what you said, he should keep it."

"Did he say that, Nicholas?" asked the squire, who felt that his dignity
was outraged by such insolence.

"I'm sartain he did. He's pretty big feelin', Phil is. He always wants
to have his own way."

"He will find that he can't defy me with impunity," said the squire
stiffly.

"Just so. Then you'll sell me the fiddle?"

"I will!" said the squire emphatically.

"You won't ask too much, will you?" asked Nick anxiously.

Now Squire Pope, who knew nothing of the price of violins, and had a
very inadequate idea of their value, after some haggling on the part of
Nick, agreed to sell him the instrument for two dollars and a half, and
to see that it was delivered that evening.

"Do you know where it is, Nicholas?" he asked.

"Why, Phil is staying over at Frank Dunbar's, and I guess he's got it
there somewhere. I guess we'd better go over there and get it."

"Very well, Nicholas. After supper, if you will come to my house, I will
go over there, and see that you have the instrument."

"All right, squire!" said Nick gleefully, "Phil will find that he can't
have his own way this time."

"I apprehend he will," said the squire complacently.

Now the reader understands how it happened that Squire Pope and Nick
Holden made a call on Philip. As to what passed at the interview, we
must refer him to the next chapter.



CHAPTER VI. FUSS ABOUT A FIDDLE.



"Ahem! Good evening!" said Squire Pope to Frank Dunbar, taking no notice
of Philip's cold but polite salutation.

"Good evening! Will you go into the house?" said Frank.

"I believe not. I have not time."

"I am sorry father isn't home. He just started for the village."

"Ahem! it was not to see your father that I called," answered Squire
Pope. "I wish to have a few words with this young man," indicating
Philip stiffly.

"I am at your service, Squire Pope," said Philip, with ceremonious
politeness.

"We came about the fiddle," interrupted Nick Holden, who always wanted
to have a share in the conversation.

Squire Pope frowned, for he did not relish Nick's interference.

"Nicholas," he said severely, "I apprehend I am competent to manage the
business we have come upon."

"Don't get riled, squire," said Nick, by no means abashed by this
rebuke. "I thought you were kinder slow about comin' to the point."

"Your interruption was very indecorous. I do not require any assistance
or any suggestions."

"All right, squire!"

Squire Pope now turned to our hero, and said:

"As I was about to say, when interrupted by Nicholas, I have come to
require you to give up--the Violin which, without authority and against
my express command, you withheld from the auction."

"The violin is mine, Squire Pope," said Philip firmly, "and I mean to
keep it!"

"You talk like an ignorant boy. As a minor, you had no claim to the
possession of any article except your clothing. I judged it best that
the violin should be sold at the auction, and it is presumptuous for you
to set up your judgment against mine!"

"I don't take that view of it," said Philip, and then he stopped.

He knew it was of no use to argue against the squire, who was obstinate
to the verge of pig-headedness, if I may be allowed to use the
expression. He felt that it would be only wasting his breath.

"It is quite immaterial how you view the subject," said the squire
pompously. "My mind is made up, and my resolution is not likely to be
shaken by a boy."

"Then, sir," answered Philip, in a respectful tone but with a slight
smile, "it is hardly worth while for me to say any more."

"I am glad you have arrived at so sensible a conclusion," said Squire
Pope. "I take it that you have the violin here."

"Yes, sir."

"Then bring it out and give it to me."

Now came the critical point, when Philip must array himself in
determined opposition to Squire Pope. He felt that he was entirely in
the right; still he regretted the necessity of the antagonism.

Philip had one thing in his favor: He had plenty of self-control, and,
although he was very indignant at the course of the squire, which he
regarded as unjustifiable, he made up his mind to be as respectful as
circumstances would permit.

"I don't think you understand me, Squire Pope," he said. "I refuse to
give up the violin!"

"You refuse to give up the violin!" repeated Squire Pope, scarcely
believing the testimony of his ears. "Do I hear you aright?"

"Yes, sir."

"I never see such impudence!" ejaculated Nick Holden, wishing to egg on
the squire.

"Do you mean to defy me to my face?" demoded Squire Pope, growing very
red.

"I don't wish to defy you or anybody else," returned Philip; "but I
shall stand up for my rights."

"Misguided boy!" said the squire severely; "you will yet rue this rash
and heedless course. Frank," he continued, turning to Frank Dunbar, "do
you know where Philip's violin is!"

"Yes, sir."

"Do me the favor to bring it out and place it in my hands."

"You must excuse me, Squire Pope," answered Frank. "It belongs to
Philip, and I have no right to meddle with it."

"If Philip has told you this, he has misrepresented," said the squire,
rather discouraged by this second rebuff. "The violin does not belong to
Philip. It belongs to this young man."

And, with a wave of his hand, he designated Nick Holden.

It was not polite, but Frank Dunbar was so surprised by this
