having fully half a dozen wounds, but it was not before he had killed
at least twice as many of his assailants with that terrible mace of
his."

So far Edgar had spoken in English. He went on in French:

"This is the good knight, Sir Robert De Beaulieu, who is our captor,
and will hold us on ransom."

"You may congratulate yourself, Sir Albert," the knight said,
courteously, "that you had such stout defenders as your comrade here
and his man-at-arms, because for fully five minutes they held the whole
of us at bay, and so stoutly did they fight that we were all glad when
Sir Edgar yielded himself to me. Truly, between you, you have done us
ill service, for not only have you and your party killed a large number
of our men, but you have enabled Sir Hugh Calverley to be carried off,
and for so famous a captain we should have claimed a goodly ransom, and
it would have been an honour and glory to have taken so fearless a
knight. As it is, with the exception of yourselves, no single prisoner
has fallen into our hands, and methinks that in all there were not more
than ten or twelve in the storming party killed, while we must have
lost nigh a hundred. 'Tis the first time I have fought against the
English, and in truth you are doughty foemen. It was well that you came
into the land but some four or five thousand strong, for had you
brought an army you might have marched to Paris. Now, Sir Edgar, I will
show you your room."

He led the way along a broad corridor to a large room, the men-at-arms
carrying the couch on which Albert was lying.

"I should like to have my man-at-arms brought here also, Sir Robert,"
Edgar said. "He is a faithful fellow, and I have known him for years.
He speaks but little of any language but English, and will, methinks,
do better with my nursing than with any other."

In a fortnight Albert was quite convalescent, and Hal was rapidly
gaining strength. Three days after they had been taken prisoner Sir
Robert had said to Edgar:

"It will be best, Sir Edgar, that you should not go abroad in the
streets. The townsmen here, as in other towns in Flanders, are rough
fellows. They are, of course, suffering somewhat from the siege, and
they murmur that any prisoners should have been taken. They say that
your people showed no mercy at Gravelines and Dunkirk, which, methinks,
is true enough, and that none should be given here. Yesterday some of
their leaders came to the house where I was sitting in council with
other knights, and represented that all English prisoners should be put
to the sword at once. I pointed out to them that, for their own sakes,
as many prisoners should be taken as possible. We hope to defend the
town until succour comes, but were the English to capture it, and to
find that prisoners who had surrendered had been killed, no mercy would
be shown, but every man within the walls would be slain and the city
laid in ashes.

"To this they had no answer ready, and retired grumbling. But, in any
case, it were better that you did not show yourself in the street, for
a tumult might arise, and your life might be sacrificed before any of
us could come to your assistance."

"I thank you, Sir Robert, and will gladly take your advice. I have seen
somewhat of the townsmen of Ghent and Bruges, and know that, when the
fit seizes them, they are not to be restrained."

After that time Sir Robert De Beaulieu seldom left the house, and Edgar
found that the doors were kept closed, and that the knight's followers
and men-at-arms were also kept in the house. Several times he heard
shouts in the street of "Death to the English!"

He took his meals with the knight, while Albert and Hal were served in
their room. At the end of the week, however, Albert was able to join
the two knights, and a fortnight later Hal was again up and about.

"I fear, Sir Robert, that our presence here is a source of trouble to
you," Edgar said one day. "If it could be managed, we would gladly give
you our knightly word to send you our ransom at the first opportunity,
and not to serve in arms again until it is paid, if you would let us go
free."

"I would do so gladly, Sir Edgar, but I fear that it would be difficult
to manage. Both before and behind the house there are evidently men on
the watch to see that no one passes out. My own men-at-arms have been
stopped and questioned, and were you to issue out methinks that there
would, on the instant, be an uproar, for so great a crowd would gather
in a few minutes that even had you a strong guard you might be torn
from them. You see, though some eight of us knights and three hundred
men-at-arms were placed here to aid in the defence, we could do naught
without the assistance of the townsmen, who have on all occasions
fought stoutly. Were there to be a fray now, the safety of the town
would be compromised, for the craftsmen of all these towns are as
fickle as the wind. The men of Ypres fought by the side of those at
Ghent at one time, and when the Count of Flanders came here, great
numbers of the townspeople were executed. At present, why, I know not,
they are fighting stoutly for the count, while the men of Ghent are
with the besiegers; but were there to be troubles between them and us,
they might tomorrow open their gates to the English."

"That I can quite believe, Sir Robert. I can only say that we are in
your hands, and are ready to pursue any course that you may think best,
either to stay here quietly and take the risk of what may come of it or
endeavour to escape in disguise if so it could be managed."

"I would that it could be managed, for the matter is causing us grave
anxiety. My comrades are, of course, all with me, and hold, that even
if it comes to a struggle with the mob, the lives of prisoners who have
surrendered on ransom must be defended. I suggested that we should hold
counsel here, that two should remain, and that you should sally out
with the others, but our faces are all so well known in the town that
there would be little chance indeed of your passing undetected."

"Think you, Sir Robert, that we could pass along the roofs, enter a
casement a few houses along, and then make our way out in disguise?"

"It would be well-nigh impossible. The roofs are all so sloping that no
one could maintain a footing upon them."

"When it gets dusk I will, with your permission, Sir Robert, go up to
one of the attics and take a look out."

"By all means do so. Escape in that manner would certainly be the best
way out of the dilemma, though I much fear that it cannot be done."

When it became so dark that while he could take a view round, his
figure could not be recognized at a short distance, Edgar, with Albert
and Hal, went up to the top of the house, and the former got out of the
highest of the dormer windows, and, standing on the sill, looked out.
The roof was indeed so steep that it would be impossible to obtain a
footing upon it. Its ridge was some twenty feet above the window. The
houses were of varying heights, some being as much as thirty feet lower
than others. Still it seemed to Edgar that it would not be very
difficult to make their way along if they were provided with ropes.
Descending, he told Sir Robert the result of their investigations.

"It would," he said, "be very desirable, if possible, to come down into
some house which was either uninhabited, or where the people were
friendly. Still that would not be absolutely necessary, as we might
hope to make our way down to the door unperceived."

"There is one house which is empty," Sir Robert said, "for the owner
left the town with his family before the siege began, he having another
place of business at Liege, He was an old man, and was therefore
permitted to leave; for he could have been no good for the defence, and
there would, with his family and servants, have been ten mouths more to
feed had he remained. It is the sixth house along, I think, but I will
see when I go out. Once in the street and away from here, there would
be no difficulty. I would meet you a short distance away, and go with
you to the walls, from which you could lower yourself down. One or two
of my comrades would give their aid, for, naturally, all would be
pleased that you should escape, and so put an end to this cause of feud
between us and the townsmen. You would, of course, require some rope;
that I can easily procure for you."

"We shall want several lengths, Sir Robert, and two or three stout
grapnels. We shall also want a strong chisel for forcing open a
casement."

"All these you shall have; one of my men shall fetch them to-morrow."

On the following day the ropes and grapnels were brought in, and Sir
Robert, who had been out, ascertained that he had been correct, and
that the empty house was indeed the sixth from that he occupied. "I
have been speaking with two of my comrades," he said, "and they will be
with me at ten o'clock to-night at the end of the street that faces the
house through which you will descend. I shall accompany you to the foot
of the walls. The citizens are on guard there at night, and if they ask
questions, as they may well do, my comrades will say that you are
bearers of a message to the King of France to pray him to hasten to our
aid. I shall not myself go up on to the walls, for were I to do so
suspicion might fall upon me. Should you be interrupted as you go along
the street to meet us, give a call and we will run to your assistance."

"And now as to our ransom, Sir Robert?" Edgar went on.

"Trouble not yourselves about it," he replied; "you are but young
knights, and 'tis a pleasure to me to have been of service to two such
valiant young gentlemen. Moreover, I consider that I have no right to a
ransom, since, instead of letting you go free to obtain it, or holding
you in honourable captivity until it is sent to you, you are obliged to
risk your lives, as you assuredly will do, by climbing along those
roofs to obtain your liberty; therefore, we will say nothing about it.
It may be that some day you will be able to treat leniently some young
Flemish or French knight whom you may make captive. As to your armour,
I see not how you can carry it away with you, for you will have to swim
the ditches; but the first time that there is a flag of truce exchanged
I will send it out to you, or should there be no such opportunity, I
will, when the siege is over, forward it by the hands of some merchant
trading with England, to any address that you may give me there."

The two young knights thanked Sir Robert De Beaulieu most cordially for
his kindness to them, and at his request gave him their word not to
serve again during the campaign. This, indeed, they were by no means
sorry to do, for they had keenly felt the slight paid to Sir Hugh
Calverley by the haughty bishop in acting altogether contrary to his
advice. They also had been thoroughly disgusted by the massacre at
Gravelines, and the sack of so many towns against which England had no
cause for complaint.

In the afternoon Sir Robert brought three doublets and caps for them to
put over their own clothes, so that they could pass as citizens. They
employed some time in wrapping strips of cloth round the grapnels, so
that these would fall noiselessly onto the tiles.

At nine o'clock Sir Robert said good-bye to them and went out; and half
an hour later they ascended to the upper story. They were well provided
with ropes, and had made all their arrangements. Edgar was the first to
fasten a rope round his body, and while this was held by his companions
he was to get out on the window-sill and throw a grapnel over the ridge
and pull himself up by the rope attached to it.

The others were to fasten the rope round their bodies at distances of
twenty feet apart, so that if one slipped down the others could check
him. Edgar took off his shoes and tied them round his neck, and then
stood out on the window-sill, and threw the grapnel over the ridge of
the roof; then he drew the rope in until he found that the hook caught
on the ridge.

"That is all right," he said to his comrades. "Now keep a firm hold on
the rope, but let it gradually out as I climb; if you hear me slipping
draw it in rapidly so as to stop me as I come past the window. But
there is no fear of that unless the hook gives way."

Then he swung himself up to the roof of the dormer window and proceeded
to haul himself by the rope up the steep incline, helping himself as
much as possible with his feet and knees. He was heartily glad when he
gained the ridge, and had thus accomplished the most dangerous part of
the work. He was able now to fix the grapnel firmly, and sitting
astride of the roof, he called down that he was ready. It was easier
work for Albert to follow him. Not only was the latter certain that the
grapnel was safely fixed, but Edgar, pulling upon the rope, was enabled
to give him a good deal of assistance. In two or three minutes Hal
Carter joined them.

"In faith, master," he said, panting, "I had not deemed that so much of
my strength had gone from me. If it had not been for the help you gave
me I doubt if I could have climbed up that rope."

They now made their way along to the end of the roof. The grapnel was
fixed, and Edgar slid down the rope to the next roof, which was some
fifteen feet below them. They did not attempt to free the grapnel,
fearing that in its fall it might make a clatter; they therefore used
another to mount to the next house, which was as high as that which
they had left. There was but a difference of four feet in the height of
the next, and they had not to use the grapnel again until they reached
the sixth house, which was ten feet below that next to it.

[Illustration: THE PRISONERS MAKE THEIR ESCAPE OVER THE ROOFS OF YPRES.]

There was light enough to enable them to make out the position of the
dormer window below them, and fixing the grapnel, Edgar, aided by his
companions lowering him, made his way down beside it, and knelt upon
the sill, his companions keeping a steady strain upon the rope. With
his chisel he had but little difficulty in prising open the casement.
His companions were not long in joining him. Once inside the house they
made their way with great caution. They had no means of striking a
light, and were forced to grope about with their swords in front of
them to prevent their touching any piece of furniture, till at last
they discovered the door. It was not fastened, and passing through,
and, as before, feeling the floor carefully as they went, they
presently found the head of the stairs.

After this it was comparatively easy work, though a stoppage was
necessary at each landing. At last, to their satisfaction, they found
themselves in a flagged passage, and knew that they were on the ground
floor. They made their way along the passage, and soon reached the
door. It was locked with so massive a fastening that it would have been
difficult to unfasten it from the outside; but with the aid of the
chisel they had but little difficulty in forcing back the lock. They
paused for a minute to listen, as a passer-by might have been startled
by the sound of the bolts being shot in an empty house. All was quiet,
however, and, opening the door cautiously, Edgar stepped out.

"The street is all clear," he said; "except half a dozen fellows
watching in front of the house we have left, there is not a soul in
sight." The others joined him, closing the door silently behind them.
They had not put on their shoes again, so with noiseless steps they
crossed the street and turned up the one that had been indicated by Sir
Robert. After going a few paces they stopped, put on their shoes, and
then walked boldly along. When they reached the end of the street three
figures came out from a deep doorway to meet them.

"Is all well?" one asked.

This was the signal that had been agreed upon.

"All is well, Sir Robert. We have escaped without any difficulty or
aught going wrong."

"The saints be praised!" the knight ejaculated. "These with me are Sir
Oliver Drafurn and Sir Francois Regnault."

"Right glad we are, knights," one of them said, "that we can assist in
giving you your freedom. A foul shame indeed would it have been had two
such gallant fighters been massacred by this rascally mob, after
yielding themselves to a knight."

"Truly, sirs, we are greatly beholden to you," Edgar replied, "and
trust that an occasion may occur in which we may repay to some of your
countrymen the great service you are now rendering us."

They had gone but a short distance further when the door of a tavern
opened and twelve or fifteen half-drunken soldiers poured out.

"Whom have we here?" one of them shouted. "Faith, if they are burghers
they must pay for being thus late in the streets."

"Silence, knaves," Sir Francois Regnault said, sternly. "What mean ye
by this roystering? Disperse to your quarters at once, or by St. James,
some of you shall hang in the morning, as a lesson to others that the
burgesses of Ypres are not to be insulted by drunken revellers."

As by this time the speaker had moved on into the light that streamed
through the open door, the soldier saw at once that it was a knight,
and, muttering excuses, went hastily down the street. No one else was
encountered until they reached the foot of the wall. Here Sir Robert
took a hearty farewell of them. The two knights first mounted the steps
to the wall.

As they reached the top a sentry close by challenged.

"France," Sir Oliver replied; "and, hark ye, make no noise. I am Sir
Oliver Drafurn, and I am here with Sir Francois Regnault to pass three
messengers over the wall, bearers of important dispatches. We do not
wish the news to get abroad, so take your halbert and march up and
down."

Hal Carter had brought one of the ropes, twisted round him for the
purpose.

"You are on the side facing the English camp," Sir Oliver said. "Those
are the lights that you see ahead. You will have three ditches to swim,
and will find it cold work, but there is no other way for it."

After giving hearty thanks to the knights, the three were lowered, one
at a time, and the rope was then dropped down. It was a good deal
longer than was necessary for descending the wall, but Edgar, rather to
the surprise of the others, had chosen it for the purpose. The first
ditch was but ten yards away; it was some thirty feet across.

"Now," Edgar said, "I will cross first. I am much the strongest, for
neither of you has fully recovered his strength. The water will be icy
cold, therefore I will swim across first, and do you, when I am over,
each hold to the rope and I will pull you across."

Short as was the distance the work was trying, for the night was
bitterly cold, and the ditches would have been frozen hard, were it not
that twice a day the besieged went out and broke the ice, which had now
begun to bind again. At last, however, Edgar got across.

"Do you take the rope, Albert, and let Hal hold on by you, for the
passage I have made is but narrow."

A few strong pulls on Edgar's part brought them across.

"It is well," he said, as they climbed out, "that the knights promised
to go one each way, to tell the watchers on the walls to take no heed
of any sounds that they might hear of breaking ice, for that those
leaving the town were doing so by their authority."

The two other ditches were crossed in the same way, but the work was
more difficult, as the besieged only broke the ice of these once a day.

"We should never have got across without your aid, Edgar," Albert said.
"I could scarce hold on to the rope. My hands are dead, and I feel as
if I were frozen to the bone."

"Let us run for a bit, Albert, to warm our blood. Another quarter of a
mile and we shall be challenged by our sentries."




CHAPTER XVIII

A NOBLE GIFT


The pace at which the party started soon slackened, for neither Albert
nor Hal Carter could maintain it. However, it was not long before they
heard the sentry challenge:

"Who go there?"

"Sir Albert De Courcy and Sir Edgar Ormskirk escaped from Ypres," Edgar
answered.

"Stand where you are till I call the sergeant," the man said, and
shouted "Sergeant!" at the top of his voice. In five minutes a sergeant
and two men-at-arms came up.

"Hurry, sergeant, I pray you," Edgar said. "We have swum three ditches,
and my companions, being weakened by their wounds, are well-nigh
perished."
