So he sat down beside Johnny Chuck and began to talk, just as if Johnny
Chuck was his usual good-natured self.

"It's a fine day," said Jimmy Skunk.

Johnny Chuck just sniffed.

"You're looking very fine," said Jimmy.

Johnny just scowled.

"I think you've got the best place on the Green Meadows for a house,"
said Jimmy, pretending to admire the view.

Johnny scowled harder than ever.

"And such a splendid house!" said Jimmy. "I wish I had one like it."

"I'm glad you like it! You can have the old thing!" snapped Johnny
Chuck.

"What's that?" demanded Jimmy Skunk, opening his eyes very wide.

"I said that you can have it. I'm going to move," replied Johnny Chuck.

Now he really hadn't thought of moving until that very minute. And he
didn't know why he had said it. But he had said it, and because he is an
obstinate little fellow he stuck to it.

"When can I move in?" asked Jimmy Skunk, his eyes twinkling.

"Right away, if you want to," replied Johnny Chuck, and swaggered off
down the Lone Little Path, leaving Jimmy Skunk to stare after him as if
he thought Johnny Chuck had suddenly gone crazy, as indeed he did.




VI. JOHNNY CHUCK TURNS TRAMP


Johnny Chuck had turned tramp. Yes, Sir, Johnny Chuck had turned tramp.
It was a funny thing to do, but he had done it. He didn't know why he
had done it, excepting that he had become dissatisfied and discontented
and unhappy in his old home. And then, almost without thinking what he
was doing, he had told Jimmy Skunk that he could have the house he had
worked so hard to build the summer before and of which he had been so
proud. Then Johnny Chuck had swaggered away down the Lone Little Path
without once looking back at the home he was leaving.

Where was he going? Well, to tell the truth, Johnny didn't know. He was
going to see the world, and perhaps when he had seen the world, he would
build him a new house. So as long as he was in sight of Jimmy Skunk, he
swaggered along quite as if he was used to traveling about, without any
snug house to go to at night. But right down in his heart Johnny Chuck
didn't feel half so bold as he pretended.

You see, not since he was a little Chuck and had run away from old
Mother Chuck with Peter Rabbit, had he ever been very far from his own
door-step. He had always been content to grow fat and roly-poly right
near his own home, and listen to the tales of the great world from Jimmy
Skunk and Peter Rabbit and Bobby Coon and Unc' Billy Possum, all of whom
are great travelers.

But now, here he was, actually setting forth, and without a home to come
back to! You see, he had made up his mind that no matter what happened,
he wouldn't come back, after having given his house to Jimmy Skunk.

When he had reached a place where he thought Jimmy Skunk couldn't see
him, Johnny Chuck turned and looked back, and a queer little feeling
seemed to make a lump that filled his throat and choked him. The fact
is, Johnny Chuck already began to feel homesick. But he swallowed very
hard and tried to make himself think that he was having a splendid time.
He stopped looking back and started on, and as he tramped along, he
tried to sing a song he had once heard Jimmy Skunk sing:

    "The world may stretch full far and wide--
     What matters that to me?
     I'll tramp it up; I'll tramp it down!
     For I am bold and free."

It was a very brave little song, but Johnny Chuck didn't feel half so
brave and bold as he tried to think he did. Already he was beginning to
wonder where he should spend the night. Then he thought of old Whitetail
the Marshhawk, who had given him such a fright and had so nearly caught
him when he was a little fellow. The thought made him look around
hastily, and there was old Whitetail himself, sailing back and forth
hungrily just ahead of him. A great fear took possession of Johnny
Chuck, and he made himself as flat as possible in the grass, for there
was no place to hide. He made up his mind that anyway he would fight.

Nearer and nearer came old Whitetail! Finally he passed right over
Johnny Chuck. But he didn't offer to touch him. Indeed, it seemed to
Johnny that old Whitetail actually grinned and winked at him. And right
then all his fear left him.

"Pooh!" said Johnny Chuck scornfully. "Who's afraid of him!" He suddenly
realized that he was no longer a helpless little Chuck who couldn't take
care of himself, but big and strong, with sharp teeth with which his old
enemy had no mind to make a closer acquaintance, when there were mice
and snakes to be caught without fighting. So he puffed out his chest and
went on, and actually began to enjoy himself, and almost wished for a
chance to show how big and strong he was.




VII. JOHNNY'S FIRST ADVENTURE


After old Whitetail the Marshhawk passed Johnny Chuck without offering
to touch him, Johnny began to feel very brave and bold and important. He
strutted and swaggered along as much as his short legs would let him.
He held his head very high. Already he felt that he had had an adventure
and he longed for more. He forgot the terrible lonesome feeling of a
little while before. He forgot that he had given away the only home he
had. He didn't know just why, but right down deep inside he had a sudden
feeling that he really didn't care a thing about that old home. In fact,
he felt as if he wouldn't care if he never had another home. Yes, Sir,
that is the way that Johnny Chuck felt. Do you know why? Just because he
had just begun to realize how big and strong he really was.

Now it is a splendid thing to feel big and strong and brave, a very
splendid thing! But it is a bad thing to let that feeling turn to pride,
foolish pride. Of course old Whitetail hadn't really been afraid of
Johnny Chuck. He had simply passed Johnny with a wink, because there
was plenty to eat without the trouble of fighting, and Whitetail doesn't
fight just for the fun of it.

But foolish Johnny Chuck really thought that old Whitetail was afraid of
him. The more he thought about it, the more tickled he felt and the more
puffed up he felt. He began to talk to himself and to brag. Yes, Sir,
Johnny Chuck began to brag:

   "I'm not afraid of any one;
     They're all afraid of me!
     I only have to show my teeth
     To make them turn and flee!"

"Pooh!" said a voice. "Pooh! It would take two like you to make me run
away!"

Johnny Chuck gave a startled jump. There was a strange Chuck glaring at
him from behind a little bunch of grass. He was a big, gray old Chuck
whom Johnny never had seen on the Green Meadows before, and he didn't
look the least bit afraid. No, Sir, he didn't look the teeniest,
weeniest bit afraid! Somehow, Johnny Chuck didn't feel half so big and
strong and brave as he had a few minutes before. But it wouldn't do to
let this stranger know it. Of course not! So, though he felt very small
inside, Johnny made all his hair bristle up and tried to look very
fierce.

"Who are you and what are you doing on my Green Meadows?" he demanded.

"Your Green Meadows! Your Green Meadows! Ho, ho, ho! Your Green
Meadows!" The stranger laughed an unpleasant laugh. "How long since you
owned the Green Meadows? I have just come down on to them from the Old
Pasture, and I like the looks of them so well that I think I will stay.
So run along, little boaster! There isn't room for both of us here, and
the sooner you trot along the better." The stranger suddenly showed all
his teeth and gritted them unpleasantly.

Now when Johnny Chuck heard this, great anger filled his heart. A
stranger had ordered him to leave the Green Meadows where he had been
born and always lived! He could hardly believe his own ears. He, Johnny
Chuck, would show this stranger who was master here!

With a squeal of rage, Johnny sprang at the gray old Chuck. Then began
such a fight as the Merry Little Breezes of Old Mother West Wind
had never seen before. They danced around excitedly and cried: "How
dreadful!" and hoped that Johnny Chuck would win, for you know they
loved him very much.

Over and over the two little fighters rolled, biting and scratching and
tearing and growling and snarling. Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun hid
his face behind a cloud, so as not to see such a dreadful sight. The
stranger had been in many fights and he was very crafty. For a while
Johnny felt that he was getting the worst of it, and he began to wonder
if he really would have to leave the Green Meadows. The very thought
filled him with new rage and he fought harder than ever.

Now the stranger was old and his teeth were worn, while Johnny was young
and his teeth were very sharp. After a long, long time, Johnny felt the
stranger growing weaker. Johnny fought harder than ever. At last the
stranger cried "Enough!" and when he could break away, started back
towards the Old Pasture. Johnny Chuck had won!




VIII. JOHNNY HAS ANOTHER ADVENTURE


Johnny Chuck lay stretched out on the cool, soft grass of the Green
Meadows, panting for breath. He was very tired and very sore. His
face was scratched and bitten. His clothes were torn, and he smarted
dreadfully in a dozen places. But still Johnny Chuck was happy. When
he raised his head to look, he could see a gray old Chuck limping off
towards the Old Pasture. Once in a while the gray old Chuck would
turn his head and show his teeth, but he kept right on towards the Old
Pasture. Johnny Chuck smiled.

It had been a great fight, and more than once Johnny Chuck had thought
that he should have to give up. He thought of this now, and then he
thought with shame of how he had bragged and boasted just before the
fight. What if he had lost? He resolved that he would never again brag
or boast. But he also made up his mind that if any one should pick a
quarrel with him, he would show that he wasn't afraid.

It was getting late in the afternoon when Johnny finally felt rested
enough to go on. He had got to find a place to spend the night. He
hobbled along, for he was very stiff and sore, until he came to the edge
of the Green Meadows, where they meet the Green Forest.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun was almost ready to go down to his bed behind
the Purple Hills. Shadows were already beginning to creep through the
Green Forest. Somehow they gave Johnny Chuck that same lonesome feeling
that he had had when he first left his old home. You see he had always
lived out in the Green Meadows and somehow he was afraid of the Green
Forest in the night.

So, instead of going into the Green Forest, he wandered along the edge
of it, looking for a place in which to spend the night. At last he came
to a hollow log lying just out on the edge of the Green Meadows. Very
carefully Johnny Chuck examined it, to be sure that no one else was
using it.

"It's just the place I'm looking for!" he said aloud.

Just then there was a sharp hiss, a very fierce hiss. Johnny Chuck felt
