
"You cannot give my niece a testimonial with regard to conduct?" she
gasped. "Do you know what you are saying what you are doing, Miss
Sherrard?"

"Perfectly well, Mrs. Steward."

"In your letters to me you have invariably spoken of Elma's conduct as
excellent. Miss Sherrard, you surely forget yourself--you cannot be
well; you must be mistaking Elma for one of your other pupils? She has
always been an exemplary girl. You cannot give her a testimonial with
regard to conduct? Am I to believe the testimony of my own ears?"

"I am deeply sorry; I have seldom been more grieved about anything. I am
told that Elma has accompanied you here--if you will permit me, I will
send for her, and explain how matters really stand in your presence."

"Oh, this is intolerable," said Mrs. Steward, clasping and unclasping
her hands in her agitation. "The wicked girl, what has she done? Pray
send for her at once, Miss Sherrard; if she has done anything really
disgraceful I wash my hands of her. If you, her mistress, cannot give
her a certificate, do you suppose that my husband and I will take her
up?"

"It is impossible for me to say, madam. In this emergency to really help
Elma would be a Christian act. She may have been tempted beyond her
strength, but you will be better able to decide when you know the
circumstances."

As Miss Sherrard spoke she rang the bell. "When the servant appeared,
she desired her to bring Elma immediately into her presence. A moment
later the young girl entered the room. She gave a wild and frightened
glance first at her aunt, then at Miss Sherrard, then stepping forward,
fell on her knees.

"Has Kitty told you?" she gasped.

"Yes, Elma. Get up; you cannot kneel to me."

"Rise this minute you wicked girl!" said Mrs. Steward.

Elma staggered to her feet.

"It is all up, then," she murmured.

"I know everything, Elma," said Miss Sherrard. "The knowledge has come
to me as a painful surprise. Your aunt has just asked me to give you a
testimonial with regard to character. I am bitterly pained to say that I
must refuse to do so."

"But what does it all mean," cried Mrs. Steward, "and why am I to be
kept in the dark any longer? Elma, stop twirling your thumbs; stand
back. Now, Miss Sherrard, I have paid the school fees for Elma Lewis for
the last four years, so I presume I am entitled to know all about her.
Tell me what has occurred. Of what she is accused?"

Miss Sherrard then briefly related the story which had been told to her
by Kitty.

It was exactly the sort of tale which would affect a woman of Mrs.
Steward's caliber disagreeably. She listened with a horror-stricken
face. When the school-mistress had finished, she said abruptly:

"What do you propose to do now?"

"It will be necessary for me to explain the whole circumstances of
Elma's wrong-doing to the entire school to-morrow," said Miss Sherrard.
"This is necessary for the sake of Kitty Malone."

"At what hour do you propose to make this very pleasant exhibition of my
niece?"

"After prayers to-morrow morning--I sent for you, Elma," continued Miss
Sherrard, "to tell you, as I thought you ought to be prepared."

"Thank you," answered Elma, her head bowed on her breast. She felt
stunned and cold. The dreadful blow had fallen; but the acute misery
which was immediately to follow was not at present awakened within
her.

"Come, Elma," said Mrs. Steward. She turned to leave the room. Just as
she reached the door she looked back at Miss Sherrard.

"After you have exposed Elma, and ruined her character for life, you
will doubtless expel her?" she said.

"I hope not--I think not."

"In any case she leaves the school, for I pay no more fees. Come Elma."




CHAPTER XXIII.

STARS AND MOON, AND GOD BEHIND.


During the long walk home to Constantine Road the elder and the younger
lady maintained an absolute silence. As soon as they got to the house
Mrs. Steward turned to Elma for the first time and spoke.

"Find out immediately if your mother is in. If she is tell her I wish to
see her. Go; don't stare at me."

Elma went without a word. Her mother was in, and so was Carrie.

"Mother," said Elma, "Aunt Charlotte wants to see you."

"Why, my dear Elma, what is the matter? How queer you look!"

"Don't mind about me, mother, pray; the expression of my face is not
worth considering. Aunt Charlotte is waiting for you in the
dining-room."

Mrs. Lewis gave a profound sigh.

"How very unreasonable of Charlotte!" she said; "she will doubtless be
expecting more tea and cream and fresh eggs, and other impossibilities."

"Oh, go mother, and stop talking," said Elma.

Mrs. Lewis dragged herself up from the sofa on which she was reclining.

"I really don't know what the world is coming to," she said. "Even my
own children are turning out quite disagreeable to me. Dear! dear! what
it is to be a mother! How little those who are fortunate in not
possessing children understand the burden!"

She went, downstairs slowly, and Elma turned to Carrie.

Carrie was standing with her back to her; she was making up something in
tissue-paper.

"Well, Elma," she said, looking up at her sister, "what is up?"

"Everything is up," said Elma.

"What do you mean?"

"Everything is up and everything is over. What are you doing with that
paper, Carrie?"

"I am folding up the money I have just got for Kitty Malone?"

"The money you have got for Kitty Malone! Has--has Sam Raynes returned
the sovereigns?"

"Bless you, poor Sam can't do impossibilities. No; this money has
nothing whatever to do with Sam. I am folding it up, and giving her a
little account with it. We got exactly eleven pounds eleven shillings
for the clothes and the watch and chain. She can redeem them all within
a month if she likes. Here is the pawnbroker's receipt; tell her to keep
it until she does. She can redeem them whenever she cares to pay back
eleven pounds eleven shillings with interest. My commission at ten per
cent, is one pound three shillings and tenpence--that leaves a balance
of ten pounds seven shilling and twopence; it will doubtless get her
nicely out of her difficulty. She ought to be thankful to me to her
dying day. Look here, Elma, if you are worried about things--and I can
guess what is the matter pretty well; for I happen to know that Kitty
Malone made a clean breast of your secret not long ago--you will be glad
to get out of the house. Here, take this money to her, and be off, can't
you?"

Elma still did not speak. That cold, stunned feeling was pressing round
her heart. She did not much care whether she was in the house or not.
Just at that moment, however, a loud slam of the front door caused both
the girls to run to the window. Mrs. Steward had sailed down the steps.
Mrs. Steward with her long train streaming behind her, was walking up
Constantine Road. The next instant Mrs. Lewis burst into the room.

"Well, Elma," she cried, "this is a pretty state of things. Your aunt
has told me everything. What a miserable woman I am!"

"Please, don't scold me," said Elma. "I have had enough scolding during
the last hour to last me my life. Say what you like to me to-morrow."

"But your aunt says she washes her hands of you. How are you to be
educated? How are you to live? How are you to support yourself?"

"I don't know. I don't think it much matters."

"Don't talk in that silly way, Elma; of course it matters. She says too
that you are to be publicly exposed at Middleton School to-morrow, and
your conduct--I must say I could not make out what she was talking
about; I don't see that you did anything very wrong--but your conduct is
to be proclaimed to the school, and that you are to be, if not expelled,
something like it. Elma, this is enough to take all my senses away!"

"Never mind, now, mother; we can talk it all over presently," said Elma.
"Give me the money, Carrie, and let me go."

Carrie handed her sister the little parcel without a word. Elma walked
slowly out of the room.

A moment later she found herself on the dusty road. She reached the top
of the ugly street, and then paused to look around her. To her right lay
the peaceful valley in which Middleton School was situated. A little
further away was the open country, beautiful, verdant, full of summer
splendor. Gwin Harley's house could be seen in the distance.

"If only Gwin had been my friend this morning, all these terrible things
need not have happened," thought Elma. "I have nothing to thank Gwin
for; I have nothing to thank Kitty for. I am a miserable, forlorn,
forsaken girl. There is nothing before me but the most wretched life.
Shall I go to see Kitty? Does Kitty deserve anything at my hands? I have
got ten pounds seven shillings and twopence in my pocket. Why should I
not go right away with the money? I don't think Kitty would prosecute
me; and if she did would it matter? I am so hopeless that I don't think
anything much worse could happen to me. I know I could not stand being
publicly exposed to-morrow at the school. I cannot have those hundreds
of eyes fixed on me; I, who have always been looked up to, respected,
who belonged to the Tug-of-war Society. I cannot, cannot bear it. Why
should Kitty have this money? She has treated me badly. She promised
not to tell. She had no right to break her word. I cannot see her at
present; no, I cannot."

Elma walked down the road. She longed beyond words to get into a fresh
place, to be where there was no chance of meeting a Middleton girl. She
walked faster and faster. Presently she found herself at the little
station; she had not an idea where to go nor what to do. She had no
luggage with her. It would look queer her going away without even a
handbag. It would look very much as if she were running away. All the
girls belonging to Middleton School had to wear a badge on their hats,
and Elma would therefore be known. She would be recognized as one of the
pupils. Nevertheless she thought she would risk it, for the longing to
go away got stronger and stronger.

The railway station happened to be rather empty at this time. She looked
around her hastily, saw no one that she knew about, and went into the
booking-office. She hastily made up her mind to take a ticket for a
large seaport town a few miles distant. She asked for a third-class
single ticket to Saltbury, inquired when the next train came up, and a
few moments later found herself on the right platform waiting for it. It
came in within a quarter of an hour, and Elma took her seat in a
third-class compartment. She was relieved to find that she was in the
company of a good-natured-looking, middle-aged woman who was just
returning to her own home from doing some marketing at Middleton. She
did not take any notice of Elma, who crouched up in the opposite corner,
and sat looking out at the country. The woman left the carriage at the
next station, and Elma continued her journey for the rest of the way
alone. She got to Saltbury within an hour, and stepped out on to the
platform. She had been at Saltbury before with her mother and Carrie.
They had once spent a never-to-be-forgotten week there when Mrs. Lewis
had a ten-pound note in her pocket which she resolved to devote to a
treat at the seaside. Elma wondered if she might venture to go to the
little cottage in the suburbs of Saltbury where she had spent this week.
After reflection, however, she thought that it would not be wise to
venture, for if she were missed it would be very easy to trace her to
Saltbury, and then this cottage would be the first to seek for her in.
Accordingly she went into the more thronged and populous part of the
town. The expensive season had not yet begun, and she presently went
into a neat little house with "Apartments" written on a card in the
window. She asked for a bed for the night. The landlady, a ruddy-faced
young woman, immediately said she could accommodate her, and took Elma
upstairs to the top of the house to show her a neat little bedroom.

"You can have this for half a crown a night, miss," she said. "Are you
likely to make a long stay?"

"I don't know," answered Elma; "I can't be sure. I want the room for one
night, and then I'll let you know."

"Very well, miss, that's quite satisfactory, and I can get in anything
you like in the way of food. If you happened to wish for a sitting-room,
miss--"

"Oh, no, a bedroom will be enough," answered Elma. "I do not care to go
to the expense of a sitting-room."

"You left your luggage I suppose, miss, at the railway station?"

Elma colored and then turned pale.

"No," she said; "I have not brought any luggage with me."

The woman stared, opening her eyes very wide, now giving Elma a full and
particular attention which she had not hitherto vouchsafed to her. She
said nothing further, and Elma went downstairs.

"I'll go down to the beach for a little," she said. "You might have some
tea ready for me when I come back. I am very tired, and should like some
tea and toast."

"And a hegg, miss, or anything of that sort?"

"No, thank you; just tea and toast, please. Nothing more."

The woman stared after her as she went down the street. Elma got as far
as the beach; she then sat down on a bench and gazed out at the waves.
The tide was coming in. The beach at Saltbury was celebrated, and
children were playing about, amusing themselves gathering shells, making
sand-castles, and otherwise disporting themselves after the manner of
their kind. A little boy was wading far out. Elma watched him with
lack-luster eyes. She wondered vaguely how long he would be allowed to
wade, and how deep he might go. He got as far as his knees, and then
turned back. As he was going back he fell, wetting himself and crying
out lustily.

Elma continued to gaze at him with eyes which scarcely saw.

"He thinks he is hurt," she said to herself, "that he has had a
terrible misfortune. How little he knows what real pain means, and what
real misfortune is! Here am I with money in my pocket which does not
belong to me, having run away from home, disgraced for life, miserable
for life. Oh! what shall I do?"

It had been a very hot day, but the evening was chilly, and Elma
shivered as she went back to her lodgings in South Street. She had
brought away no wraps with her, and her thin cotton dress was not
sufficient to keep out the chill of the sea breezes. She thought she
would be glad to get under shelter, to go to bed, to wrap herself up and
cover her face and court sleep. When she got to the door, however, the
young landlady, who was evidently waiting for her, came out on to the
steps.

"If you please, miss," she said, "I am really very sorry, but my husband
thinks----"

"What?" said Elma.

"That as you have no luggage, miss (you know it ain't customary for us
to take in ladies without luggage)----"

"Then you mean--" said Elma, turning very white and pale.

"Yes, miss, I'm ever so sorry."

"You can't give me the room even for one night?"

"We can't really, miss."

"But I can pay in advance," said Elma eagerly.

"I'm ever so sorry, miss; but another lady came just as you left, and
she had a box and a handbag, and everything proper, and as she wanted
the room very badly and as we had her before, we have let it to her,
miss. I am sure I am very sorry not to oblige; but I dare say--There
are a great many other apartments down this road, miss."

"Thank you," said Elma; "it does not matter at all."

She spoke with a voice of ice; pride, a remnant of pride, came to her
aid. She would not let the woman see how distressed she was.

"Good-evening, miss," said the young landlady. "I'm real sorry not to
oblige."

"Oh, it doesn't matter," said Elma; "I dare say I can manage."

She walked down South Street, knowing that the landlady was watching her
as she disappeared. She soon came to a corner where four roads met.
Where should she go? What could she do? Where was she to have shelter
for the night?

