"And what happened?"

"I was kidnapped by a slaver, and I was to have been taken to the
coast of Africa, but a storm intervened and saved me. Perhaps the
slaver was acting for Mynheer Van Zoon, but I talked it over with Mr.
Hardy and we haven't a shred of proof."

"Perhaps a storm will not intervene next time. You must look to
yourself, Robert Lennox."

"And you to yourself, Chevalier de St. Luc. I'm grateful to you for
the warning you gave me, and other acts of friendship, but whatever
your mission may have been in New York I'm sure that one of your
errands, perhaps the main one, in Williamsburg, is to gather
information for France, and, sir, I should be little of a patriot did
I not give the alarm, much as it hurts me to do so."

Robert saw very clearly by the moonlight that the blue eyes of St. Luc
were twinkling. His situation might be dangerous, but obviously he
took no alarm from it.

"You'll bear in mind, Mr. Lennox," he said, "that I'm not asking you
to shield me. Consider me a French spy, if you wish--and you'll not be
wholly wrong--and then act as you think becomes a man with a
commission as army scout from Governor Dinwiddie of Virginia."

There was a little touch of irony in his voice. His adventures and
romantic spirit was in the ascendant, and it seemed to Robert that he
was giving him a dare. That he would have endured because of his
admiration for St. Luc, and also because of his gratitude, but the
allusion to his commission from the governor of Virginia recalled him
to his sense of duty.

"I can do nothing else!" he exclaimed. "'Tis a poor return for the
services you have done me, and I tender my apologies for the action
I'm about to take. But guard yourself, St. Luc!"

"And you, Lennox, look well to yourself when Braddock marches! Every
twig and leaf will spout danger!"

His light manner was wholly gone for the moment, and his words were
full of menace. Up the street, a sentinel walked back and forth, and
Robert could hear the faint fall of his feet on the sand.

"Once more I bid you beware, St. Luc!" he exclaimed, and raising his
voice he shouted: "A spy!  A spy!"

He heard the sentinel drop the butt of his musket heavily against the
earth, utter an exclamation and then run toward them. His shout had
also been heard at the tavern, and the guests, bareheaded, began to
pour out, and look about confusedly to see whence the alarm had come.

Robert looked at the sentinel who was approaching rapidly, and then he
turned to see what St Luc would do. But the Frenchman was gone. Near
them was a mass of shrubbery and he believed that he had flitted into
it, as silently as the passing of a shadow. But the sentinel had
caught a glimpse of the dusky figure, and he cried:

"Who was he? What is it?"

"A spy!" replied Robert hastily. "A Frenchman whom I have seen in
Canada! I think he sprang into those bushes and flowers!"

The sentinel and Robert rushed into the shrubbery but nothing was
there. As they looked about in the dusk, Robert heard a refrain,
distant, faint and taunting:

  "Hier sur le pont d'Avignon
   J'ai oui chanter la belle
        Lon, la."

It was only for an instant, then it died like a summer echo, and he
knew that St. Luc was gone. An immense weight rolled from him. He had
done what he should have done, but the result that he feared had not
followed.

"I can find nothing, sir," said the sentinel, who recognized in Robert
one of superior rank.

"Nor I, but you saw the figure, did you not?"

"I did, sir. 'Twas more like a shadow, but 'twas a man, I'll swear."

Robert was glad to have the sentinel's testimony, because in another
moment the revelers were upon him, making sport of him for his false
alarm, and asserting that not his eyes but the punch he had drunk had
seen a French spy.

"I scarce tasted the punch," said Robert, "and the soldier here is
witness that I spoke true."

A farther and longer search was organized, but the Frenchman had
vanished into the thinnest of thin air. As Robert walked with Willet
and Tayoga back to the tavern, the hunter said:

"I suppose it was St. Luc?"

"Yes, but why did you think it was he?"

"Because it was just the sort of deed he would do. Did you speak with
him?"

"Yes, and I told him I must give the alarm. He disappeared with
amazing speed and silence."

Robert made a brief report the next day to Governor Dinwiddie, not
telling that St. Luc and he had spoken together, stating merely that
he had seen him, giving his name, and describing him as one of the
most formidable of the French forest leaders.

"I thank you, Mr. Lennox," said the Governor. "Your information shall
be conveyed to General Braddock. Yet I think our force will be too
great for the wilderness bands."

On the following day they were at Alexandria on the Potomac, where the
great council was to be held. Here Braddock's camp was spread, and in
a large tent he met Governor Dinwiddie of Virginia, Governor de Lancey
of New York, Governor Sharpe of Maryland, Governor Dobbs of North
Carolina and Governor Shirley of Massachusetts, an elderly lawyer, but
the ablest and most energetic of all the governors.

It was the most momentous council yet held in North America, and all
the young officers waited with the most intense eagerness the news
from the tent. Robert saw Braddock as he went in, a middle-aged man of
high color and an obstinate chin. Grosvenor gave him some of the
gossip about the general.

"London has many stories of him," he said. "He has spent most of his
life in the army. He is a gambler, but brave, rough but generous,
irritable, but often very kind. Opposition inflames him, but he likes
zeal and good service. He is very fond of your young Mr. Washington,
who, I hear is much of a man."

The council in the great tent was long and weighty, and well it might
have been, even far beyond the wildest thoughts of any of the
participants. These were the beginnings of events that shook not only
America but Europe for sixty years. In the tent they agreed upon a
great and comprehensive scheme of campaign that had been proposed some
time before. Braddock would proceed with his attack upon Fort
Duquesne, Shirley would see that the forces of New England seized
Beausejour and De Lancey would have Colonel William Johnson to move
upon Crown Point and then Niagara. Acadia also would be
taken. Dinwiddie after Shirley was the most vigorous of the governors,
and he promised that the full force of Virginia should be behind
Braddock. But to Shirley was given the great vision. He foresaw the
complete disappearance of French power from North America, and, to
achieve a result that he desired so much, it was only necessary for
the colonists to act together and with vigor. While he recognized in
Braddock infirmities of temper and insufficient knowledge of his
battlefield, he knew him to be energetic and courageous and he
believed that the first blow, the one that he was to strike at Fort
Duquesne, would inflict a mortal blow upon France in the New World. In
every vigorous measure that he proposed Dinwiddie backed him, and the
other governors, overborne by their will, gave their consent.

While Robert sat with his friends in the shade of a grove, awaiting
the result of the deliberations in the tent, his attention was
attracted by a strong, thick-set figure in a British uniform.

"Colonel Johnson!" he cried, and running forward he shook hands
eagerly with Colonel William Johnson.

"Why, Colonel!" he exclaimed, "I didn't dream that you were here, but
I'm most happy to see you."

"And I to see you, Mr. Lennox, or Robert, as I shall call you," said
Colonel Johnson. "Alexandria is a long journey from Mount Johnson, but
you see I'm here, awaiting the results of this council, which I tell
you may have vast significance for North America."

"But why are you not in the tent with the others, you who know so much
more about conditions on the border than any man who is in there?"

"I am not one of the governors, Robert, my lad, nor am I General
Braddock. Hence I'm not eligible, but I'm not to be neglected. I may
as well tell you that we are planning several expeditions, and that
I'm to lead one in the north."

"And Madam Johnson, and everybody at your home? Are they well?"

"As well of body as human beings can be when I left. Molly told me
that if I saw you to give you her special love. Ah, you young blade,
if you were older I should be jealous, and then, again, perhaps I
shouldn't!"

"And Joseph?"

"Young Thayendanegea? Fierce and warlike as becomes his lineage. He
demands if I lead an army to the war that he go with me, and he scarce
twelve. What is more, he will demand and insist, until I have to take
him. 'Tis a true eagle that young Joseph. But here is Willet! It
soothes my eyes to see you again, brave hunter, and Tayoga, too, who
is fully as welcome."

He shook hands with them both and the Onondaga gravely asked:

"What news of my people, Waraiyageh?"

Colonel Johnson's face clouded.

"Things do not go well between us and the vale of Onondaga," he
replied. "The Hodenosaunee complain of the Indian commissioners at
Albany, and with justice. Moreover, the French advance and the
superior French vigor create a fear that the British and Americans may
lose. Then the Hodenosaunee will be left alone to fight the French and
all the hostile tribes. Father Drouillard has come back and is working
with his converts."

"The nations of the Hodenosaunee will never go with the French,"
declared Tayoga with emphasis. "Although the times seem dark, and
men's minds may waver for a while, they will remain loyal to their
ancient allies. Their doubts will cease, Waraiyageh, when the king
across the sea takes away the power of dealing with us from the Dutch
commissioners at Albany, and gives it to you, you who know us so well
and who have always been our friend."

Colonel Johnson's face flushed with pleasure.

"Your opinion of me is too high, Tayoga," he said, "but I'll not deny
that it gratifies me to hear it."

"Have you heard anything from Fort Refuge, and Colden and Wilton and
the others?" asked Robert.

"An Oneida runner brought a letter just before I left Mount
Johnson. The brave Philadelphia lads still hold the little fortress,
and have occasional skirmishes with wandering bands. Theirs has been a
good work, well done."

But while Colonel Johnson was not a member of the council and could
not sit with it, he had a great reputation with all the governors, and
the next day he was asked to appear before them and General Braddock,
where he was treated with the consideration due to a man of his
achievements, and where the council, without waiting for the authority
of the English king, gave him full and complete powers to treat with
the Hodenosaunee, and to heal the wounds inflicted upon the pride of
the nations by the commissioners at Albany. He was thus made
superintendent of Indian affairs in North America, and he was also as
he had said to lead the expedition against Crown Point. He came forth
from the council exultant, his eyes glowing.

"'Tis even more than I had hoped," he said to Willet, "and now I must
say farewell to you and the brave lads with you. We have come to the
edge of great things, and there is no time to waste."

He hastened northward, the council broke up the next day, and the
visiting governors hurried back to their respective provinces to
prepare for the campaigns, leaving Braddock to strike the first blow.




CHAPTER XV

THE FOREST FIGHT


Robert thought they would march at once, but annoying delays
occurred. He had noticed that Hamilton, the governor of the great
neighboring province of Pennsylvania, was not present at the council,
but he did not know the cause of it until Stuart, the young Virginian,
told him.

"Pennsylvania is in a huff," he said, "because General Braddock's army
has been landed at Alexandria instead of Philadelphia. Truth to tell,
for an expedition against Fort Duquesne, Philadelphia would have been
a nearer and better place, but I hear that one John Hanbury, a
powerful merchant who trades much in Virginia, wanted the troops to
come this way that he might sell them supplies, and he persuaded the
Duke of Newcastle to choose Alexandria. 'Tis a bad state of affairs,
Lennox, but you and I can't remedy it. The chief trouble is between
the general and the Pennsylvanians, many of whom are Quakers and
Germans, as obstinate people as this world has ever produced."

The differences and difficulties were soon patent to all. A month of
spring was passing, and the army was far from having the necessary
supplies. Neither Virginia nor Pennsylvania responded properly. In
Pennsylvania there was a bitter quarrel between the people and the
proprietary government that hampered action. Many of the contractors
who were to furnish equipment thought much more of profit than of
patriotism. Braddock, brave and honest, but tactless and wholly
ignorant of the conditions predominant in any new country, raged and
stormed. He denounced the Virginia troops that came to his standard,
calling shameful their lack of uniforms and what he considered their
lack of discipline.

Robert heard that in these turbulent days young Washington, whom
Braddock had taken on his staff as a colonel and for whom he had a
warm personal regard, was the best mediator between the testy general
and the stubborn population. In his difficult position, and while yet
scarcely more than a boy, he was showing all the great qualities of
character that he was to display so grandly in the long war twenty
years later.

"Tis related," said Willet, "that General Braddock will listen to
anything from him, that he has the most absolute confidence in his
honesty and good judgment, and, judging from what I hear, General
Braddock is right."

But to Robert, despite the anxieties, the days were happy. As he had
affiliated readily with the young Virginians he was also quickly a
friend of the young British officers, who were anxious to learn about
the new conditions into which they had been cast with so little
preparation. There was Captain Robert Orme, Braddock's aide-de-camp, a
fine manly fellow, for whom he soon formed a reciprocal liking, and
the son of Sir Peter Halket, a lieutenant, and Morris, an American,
another aide-de-camp, and young William Shirley, the son of the
governor of Massachusetts, who had become Braddock's secretary. He
also became well acquainted with older officers, Gladwin who was to
defend Detroit so gallantly against Pontiac and his allied tribes,
Gates, Gage, Barton and others, many of whom were destined to serve
again on one side or other in the great Revolution.

Grosvenor knew all the Englishmen, and often in the evenings, since
May had now come they sat about the camp fires, and Robert listened
with eagerness as they told stories of gay life in London, tales of
the theater, of the heavy betting at the clubs and the races, and now
and then in low tones some gossip of royalty. Tayoga was more than
welcome in this group, as the great Thayendanegea was destined to be
years later. His height, his splendid appearance, his dignity and his
manners were respected and admired. Willet sometimes sat with them,
but said little. Robert knew that he approved of his new friendships.

Willet was undoubtedly anxious. The delays which were still numerous
weighed heavily upon him, and he confided to Robert that every day
lost would increase the danger of the march.

"The French and Indians of course know our troubles," he
said. "St. Luc has gone like an arrow into the wilderness with all the
news about us, and he's not the only one. If we could adjust this
trouble with the Pennsylvanians we might start at once."

An hour or two after he uttered his complaint, Robert saw a middle
aged man, not remarkable of appearance, talking with Braddock. His
dress was homespun and careless, but his large head was beautifully
shaped, and his features, though they might have been called homely,
shone with the light of an extraordinary intelligence. His manner as
he talked to Braddock, without showing any tinge of deference, was
soothing. Robert saw at once, despite his homespun dress, that here
was a man of the great world and of great affairs.

"Who is he?" he said to Willet.

"It's Benjamin Franklin, of Pennsylvania," replied the hunter. "I hear
he's one of the shrewdest men in all the colonies, and I don't doubt
the report."

It was Robert's first sight of Franklin, certainly not the least in
that amazing group of men who founded the American Union.

"They say," continued Willet, "that he's already achieved the
impossible, that he's drawing General Braddock and the Pennsylvanians
together, and that we'll soon get weapons, horses and all the other
supplies we need."

It was no false news. Franklin had done what he alone could do. One of
the greatest masters of diplomacy the world has ever known, he brought
Braddock and Pennsylvania together, and smoothed out the
difficulties. All the needed supplies began to flow in, and on the
tenth of an eventful May the whole army started from Wills Creek to
which point it had advanced, while Franklin was removing the
difficulties. A new fort named Cumberland had been established there,
and stalwart Virginians had been cutting a road ahead through the
wilderness.

The place was on the edge of the unending forest. The narrow fringe
of settlements on the Atlantic coast was left behind, and henceforth
they must march through regions known only to the Indians and the
woods rangers. But it was a fine army, two British regiments under
Halket and Dunbar, their numbers reinforced by Virginia volunteers,
and five hundred other Virginians, divided into nine companies. There
was a company of British sailors, too, and artillery, and hundreds of
wagons and baggage horses. Among the teamsters was a strong lad named
Daniel Boone destined to immortality as the most famous of all
pioneers.

