way back through such a fog as this."

"Quite impossible, sir," Jack said. "If we were to move from where we
are, we should lose all idea of our bearings in three minutes, and
should be as likely to go into the plain as up the valley."

"It's a most awkward position," Mr. Myers said anxiously. "Now, Mr.
Archer, you have had some sort of experience of this kind before. Tell
me frankly what you think is the best thing to be done."

"I have been thinking it over, sir, for the last half, hour," Jack
said, "and it appears to me that the best thing to do would be for me
to find my way up to the house again. I can't well miss that, as we
came straight down hill. I will bring back two of those Cossacks'
cloaks and lances. Then we had better move about till we come on a
clump of trees, and make ourselves as comfortable there as we can.
These fogs last, as you know, sometimes for two or three days. When it
gets clear, whether it is to-day or to-morrow, we will look out and
see whether there are any of the enemy about. Of course, as they know
the way, they can come back in the fog. If we see any of them, we must
put on the Cossack's cloaks, take their lances, and boldly ride off.
They are always galloping about in pairs all over the country; so that
we shall attract no attention."

"But if they catch us," the lieutenant said, "we shall be liable to be
shot as spies."

"I suppose we shall, sir," Jack answered; "but I would rather run the
risk of being shot as a spy than the certainty of being caught as a
naval officer, and imprisoned till the war is over."

"Well, Mr Archer, I certainly can suggest nothing better," the
lieutenant said. "Will you go up, then, and, get the cloaks you speak
of?"

Leaving his pony with the lieutenant, Jack made his way up the hill.
Fortunately, in their descent they had followed a small track worn by
persons going to and from the chateau from the valley, and he had,
therefore, but little difficulty in finding the house. He paused when
he reached the courtyard, for he heard voices in the chateau.
Listening attentively, he discovered that they were Russians, no doubt
some of the party who had been driven thence by the Sardinians, and
who had, upon the retirement of the latter, ridden straight back from
the plain. Fortunately, the fog was so thick that there was no
probability whatever of his movements being discovered, and he
therefore proceeded to strip off two of the long coats, reaching
almost down to the heels, which form the distinctive Cossack dress,
from the dead men. He took possession also of their caps, their
bandoliers for cartridges, worn over one shoulder, and of their
carbines and lances, and then retraced his steps down the hill to his
companion. Leading their ponies, they wandered aimlessly through the
fog for a considerable time before they came to some trees.

"If you will hold my horse, sir," Jack said, "I will just look round,
and see if this is a small wood. I shall lose you before I have gone a
yard, so when you hear me whistle, please whistle back, but not loud,
for there may be enemies close by for aught I know. I thought I heard
voices just now."

Searching about, Jack found that the clump of trees extended for some
little distance. Returning to the lieutenant, they entered the wood,
and moved a little way among the trees, so as to be out of sight if
the fog lifted suddenly. Then they loosened the saddle-girths,
gathered some sticks and lit a fire, and using the Cossack coats for
rugs, began to discuss the meal they had brought with them.

"If the Russians really advance again, and get between us and
Balaklava, I do not see how on earth we are to pass through them," Mr.
Myers said.

"No, sir, I don't think we could," Jack answered. "I should propose
that we make a wide sweep round so as to come down upon the shore some
distance away. As you know, boats from the ships often land at some of
the deserted places along there in search of loot; so that we ought to
be able to be taken off. If, when we are riding, we come upon any
Russian troops suddenly, so that we cannot move away in any other
direction without exciting suspicion, you must put a good face on it.
My Russian is good enough to pass muster as a Cossack. All we have to
do is to avoid any of these fellows, for they would detect at once
that I did not belong to them."

"Well, Mr. Archer, you take things very coolly, and I hope you will
get us out of the scrape we have got into. If I had been by myself, I
should have ridden up and surrendered to the first Russians I saw."

"That would have been the best way, sir, had it not been for those
poor beggars having been killed up above there; for in our naval dress
we could not have hoped to have escaped. As it is, if we have any
luck, we shall soon be back at Balaklava again."




CHAPTER XXIV.


A FORTUNATE STORM

The fog seemed to get thicker and thicker as the day went on. At
nightfall, when it became evident that no move could be made before
morning, they gave a biscuit to each of their ponies, cut some grass
and laid it before them, and then, wrapping themselves in the Cossack
cloaks to keep off the damp fog, were soon asleep. At day-break the
fog was still thick, but as the sun rose it gradually dispersed it,
and they were shortly able to see up the valley. They found that in
their wandering in the mist they must have moved partly in a circle,
for they were still little more than a quarter of a mile from the
point where they had left it to ascend to the chateau. Round this they
could see many soldiers moving about. Looking up the valley, they
perceived lines of horses, picqueted by a village but a few hundred
yards away.

"Those were the voices I thought I heard, no doubt, when we first came
here," Jack said. "It's lucky we found these trees, for if we had
wandered about a little longer, we might have stumbled into the middle
of them. Now, sir, we had better finish the biscuits we put aside for
breakfast, and be off. It is quite evident the direct way to the camp
is close to us."

Saddling up their horses, and putting on the Cossack black sheepskin
caps and long coats, and taking the lances and carbines, the latter of
which were carried across the saddle before them, they mounted their
ponies and rode off, quitting the wood at such a point that it formed
a screen between them and the cavalry in the distance, until they had
gone well down the valley. They were unnoticed, or at any rate,
unchallenged by the party at the chateau, and, issuing from the
valley, rode out into the open country.

Far out in the plain they saw several Russians moving about, and
judged that these were occupied in searching those who had fallen in
the cavalry fight of the preceding day. They did not approach them,
but turning to the right, trotted briskly along, skirting the foot of
the hills. They passed through two or three Tartar villages whose
inhabitants scarcely glanced at them, so accustomed were they to the
sight of small parties of Cossacks riding hither and thither.

In one, which stood just at the mouth of the valley which they had
determined to enter, as a road running up it seemed to indicate that
it led to some place, perhaps upon the sea-shore, they found several
Russian soldiers loitering about. Lieutenant Myers would have checked
his pony, but Jack rode unhesitatingly forward. An officer came out of
one of the cottages.

"Any news?" he asked.

"None," Jack said. "The enemy's horse came out yesterday, through the
Baida valley, but we beat them back again."

"Where are you going?" the Russian asked.

"Down towards the sea," Jack answered, "to pick up stragglers who land
to plunder. A whole sotina is coming down. They will be here
presently," so saying, with a wave of his hand, he resumed his way up
the valley, Lieutenant Myers having ridden on, lest any questions
should be addressed to him. The road mounted steadily, and after some
hours' riding they crossed a brow, and found themselves at the head of
a valley opening before them, and between the cliffs at its end they
could see the sea.

They could scarcely restrain a shout of joy, and, quickening their
speed, rode rapidly down the valley. Presently they perceived before
them a small village lying on the sea-shore, to the left of which
stood a large chateau, half hidden among trees.

"Do you think it's safe to ride in?" Mr. Myers asked.

"Most of these villages have been found deserted, sir," Jack said, "by
our fellows when they landed. I'm afraid we are beyond the point to
which they come, for I should think we must be twenty miles from
Balaklava. However, there are not likely to be any troops here, and we
needn't mind the Tartars."

They found, as they expected, that the village was wholly deserted,
and, riding through it, they dismounted at the chateau. The doors were
fastened, but, walking round it, they perceived no signs of life, and,
breaking a window, they soon effected an entrance.

They found that the house, which was of great size and evidently
belonged to a Russian magnate, was splendidly furnished, and that it
had so far not been visited by any parties from the ships. Some fine
pictures hung on the walls, choice pieces of statuary were scattered
here and there, tables of malachite and other rare stones stood about,
and Eastern carpets covered the floors.

"We are in clover now, sir," Jack said, "and if we could but charter a
ship, we should be able to make a rich prize. But as our ponies can
only carry us, I'm afraid that all these valuables are worthless to
us."

"I'd give the whole lot of them," the lieutenant said, "for a good
meal. At any rate, we are sure to find something for the ponies."

In the stables behind the house were great quantities of forage and
the ponies soon had their fill.

The officers, taking some corn, of which also there was an abundance,
hammered a quantity between two flat stones, and moistening the rough
flour so obtained, with water, made two flat cakes, with which, baked
over a wood fire, they satisfied their hunger. A consultation was held
while they ate their meal, and it was agreed that as the place was
evidently beyond the range of boats from Balaklava, they had better
ride along the cliffs till they reached some village, where, as they
would find from the state of the houses, parties were in the habit of
coming.

After a couple of hours' stay to give the horses time to rest, they
again saddled up and took the road along the coast. After riding two
miles along the edge of the cliffs, they simultaneously checked their
horses, as, upon mounting a slight rise, they saw before them the
tents of a considerable party of Russian soldiers. As they had paused
the moment their heads came above the level, they were themselves
unobserved, and turning, they rode back to the chateau they had
quitted, where, having made their ponies comfortable, they prepared to
pass the night. There were plenty of luxurious beds, and they slept
profoundly all night. In the morning they went down to the sea. Not a
vestige of a boat was to be seen, and they began to question whether
it would not be possible to make a small raft, and to paddle along the
foot of the cliffs.

"We need not trouble about that now," Lieutenant Myers said, "for,
unless I am mistaken, we're going to have a regular Black Sea gale in
an hour or two. The wind is freshening fast, and the clouds banking
up."

The lieutenant was not mistaken. In an hour the wind was blowing in
furious gusts, and the sea breaking heavily in the little bay.

Having nothing to do, they sat under the shelter of a rock, and
watched the progress of the gale. The wind was blowing dead along the
shore, and grew fiercer and fiercer. Three hours passed, and then
Lieutenant Myers leaped to his feet.

"See," he said, "there is a boat coming round the point!"

It was so. Driving before the gale was a ship's boat, a rag of sail
was set, and they could see figures on board.

"She is making in here!" the lieutenant exclaimed. "Let us run down
and signal to them to beach her at that level spot just in front of
the village. No doubt it is some ship's boat which came out to picnic
at one of the villages near Balaklava, and they have been blown along
the coast and have been unable to effect a landing."

The boat's head was now turned towards shore, the sail lowered, and
the oars got out. So high was the sea already, that the spectators
feared every moment she would be swamped, but she was well handled,
and once in the little bay the water grew smoother, and she soon made
her way to the spot where the officers were standing. The latter were
astonished when the men leaped out instantly, and, without a word,
rushed at them, and in a moment both were levelled to the ground by
blows of stretchers. When they recovered from the shock and
astonishment, they found the sailors grouped round them.

"Hallo!" Jack exclaimed in astonishment, "Mr. Simmonds, is that you?
What on earth are you knocking us about like that for?"

"Why, Jack Archer!" exclaimed the officer addressed, "where on earth
did you come from? and what are you masquerading as a Cossack for? We
saw you here, and of course took you for an enemy. I thought you were
up at the front."

"So we were," Jack replied, "but, as you see, we are here now. This is
Lieutenant Myers, of the 'Tartar.'"

"I'm awfully sorry!" Mr. Simmonds said, holding out his hand, and
helping them to their feet.

"It was not your fault," Mr. Myers answered. "We forgot all about our
Cossack dresses. Of course you supposed that we were enemies. It is
fortunate indeed for us that you came here. But I fear you must put to
sea again. There is a Russian camp two miles off on the hill, and the
boat is sure to have been seen."

"It will be awkward," Lieutenant Simmonds said, looking at the sky,
"for it is blowing tremendously. I think, though, that it is breaking
already. These Black Sea gales do not often last long. At any rate, it
would be better to take our chance there than to see the inside of a
Russian prison."

"If you send a man along the road to that crest," Lieutenant Myers
suggested, "he will see them coming, and if we all keep close to the
boat, we may get out of gunshot in time."

A sailor was accordingly despatched up the hill. The instant he
reached the top he was seen to turn hastily, and to come running back
at full speed.

"Now, lads," Mr. Simmonds said, "put your shoulders to her. Now, all
together, get her into the water, and be ready to jump in and push off
when Atkins arrives."

When the sailor was still a hundred yards away the head of a column of
Russian infantry appeared over the crest. When they saw the boat they
gave a shout, and breaking, ran down the hill at full speed. Before
they reached the village, however, Atkins had leaped into the boat,
and with a cheer the men ran her out into the surf, and scrambled in.

"Out oars, lads, and row for your lives!" Mr. Simmonds said, and, with
steady strokes the sailors drove their boat through the waves.

The Russians opened fire the instant they reached the beach, but the
boat was already 150 yards away, and although the bullets fell thickly
round, no one was hit.

"I think, Mr. Myers," Lieutenant Simmonds said, "we had better lay-to,
before we get quite out of shelter of the bay. With steady rowing we
can keep her there, and we shall be out of range of the Russians."

Mr. Myers assented, and for two hours the men, rowing their utmost,
kept the boat stationary, partly sheltered by the cliffs at the mouth
of the bay. The Russians continued to fire, but although the boat was
not wholly beyond their range, and the bullets sometimes fell near,
these were for the most part carried to leeward by the wind, and not a
single casualty occurred.

"The wind is falling fast," Lieutenant Simmonds said. "We could show a
rag of canvas outside now. We had best make a long leg out to sea, and
then, when the wind goes down, we can make Balaklava."

For four or five hours the boat was buffeted in the tremendous seas,
but gradually, as the wind went down, these abated, and after running
twenty miles off the land, the boat's head was turned, and she began
to beat back to Balaklava. It was eleven o'clock that night before
they reached the "Falcon," officers and men completely worn out with
their exertions.

Jack found to his satisfaction that no report of his being missing had
been received by the captain, and next morning at daybreak he and
Lieutenant Myers walked up to camp, regretting the loss of their
ponies, which would, however, they were sure, be found by the Russians
long ere they finished the stores of provender within their reach.

Upon reaching camp they found that their absence had not been noticed
until the afternoon of the second day of their absence. They had been
seen to ride away together, and when in the evening they were found to
be absent, it was supposed that they had gone down to Balaklava and
slept there. When upon the following day they were still missing, it
was supposed that the admiral had retained them for duty on board
ship. The storm, which had scattered everything, had put them out of
the thoughts of the commanding officer, and it was only that morning
that, no letter respecting them having been received, he was about to
write to their respective captains to inquire the cause of their
absence. This was now explained, and as they had been detained by
circumstances altogether beyond their control, they escaped without a
reprimand, and were indeed warmly congratulated upon the adventures
they had passed through.

In the meantime the cannonade had been going on very heavily in front.
