a son, a brother, or a father on the sea. Perhaps this is one of the
facts which binds the people to one another--the rich lady in her
carriage, and the poor starved, gaunt woman who lives in one room up
many pairs of stairs in a dismal back slum, look alike out on the
waters of the Mersey for the boy who may come back any day with the
taste of the sea about him.

The Liverpool boy has his work cut out for him; those who wish to
belong emphatically to the place of their birth, either earn what they
can at the docks or go to sea. They need never debate as to their
profession or their calling in life; it is cut out for them--it lies at
their feet with that sea which is brought by the ships to their very
doors.

But the Liverpool girl--that is, the girl of the people--is not so
fortunate. She has no special work provided for her; she is not like
the Manchester girl, who is as certain to go into the factory as she is
to eat and drink--there are scarcely any factories in Liverpool, and a
very tiny proportion of girls find work there.

Domestic service is hated by the Liverpool lass. At one time, when
forced by necessity to adopt this means of earning her bread, she made
a stipulation that she should at least sleep at home--that her evenings
from seven o'clock out should be her own. Now that this rule is no
longer allowed, domestic service is held in less esteem than ever, and
only the most sensible girls dream of availing themselves of its
comforts.

While the boys, therefore, are earning and striking out independent
paths for themselves, the girls are under difficulties. They must earn
money; for life is not too easy to live in their native place, and each
must bring in his or her small portion of help to the family purse; but
how, is the difficulty. Some hawk fruit and vegetables, doing a fairly
brisk trade on Saturdays, and even on Sunday mornings; but the most
favored Liverpool girls earn their daily bread by selling newspapers
night after night in the streets. A good-looking girl will secure her
regular customers, have her own regular and undisturbed beat, and will
often earn from tenpence to a shilling a night; but the newspaper beats
have to be bought, and often at a high figure, for competition is very
keen, and the coveted corners where the greater number of gentlemen are
to be met that require evening papers are highly prized.

Bet Granger had been a newspaper girl for a couple of years now; her
mother had saved up money to buy her beat for her; it was one of the
best in the town, and she was always so trim and neat, so comely and
pleasant-looking, and her papers so clean and crisp and neatly cut,
that she did a fair trade, and largely helped to support her mother and
little brothers. Her trade occupied her for a couple of hours every
evening. In the morning, as the mood took her, she helped her mother
with plain needlework--Mrs. Granger worked for a wholesale shop at the
usual shop prices--or she went down to the docks.

Every Liverpool girl is fond of watching the ships as they come in or
go out; they connect her with the outer life, with the far-away
world--they give her a pleasing and ever-recurring sense of excitement
and exhilaration; but, as a rule, they never implant in her breast that
fever to be off and away which so soon affects the Liverpool boy.

Bet liked to watch the ships. She would stand erect and almost haughty
in her bearing, often quite close to the edge of the quays, speaking
very few words, and making scarcely any acquaintances, but thinking
many strange and undefined thoughts in her untutored heart.

The Grangers did not belong to the lowest of the people. Granger was a
clever workman. He was seldom out of employment; for although he drank
away his earnings, and gave no thought whatever to the comfort of his
wife and children, he was sober and steady by day. He had a clever,
shrewd head, as yet unaffected by drink, and he did the work allotted
to him in a superior manner to most of his class.

When first they were married, he and his wife had two bright, cheery
rooms. They were well furnished, and things promised brightly for the
couple. Granger, however, was the son of a drunkard, and the sins of
the father were soon to be abundantly visited on him. Mrs. Granger
meant well, but her religion was not of an inspiriting kind. Whenever
she saw her husband the worse for drink she reproached him, and spoke
to him about hell-fire. He soon ceased to care for her; and even when
Bet was a tiny child she scarcely ever remembered an evening which did
not find her mother in tears, and her father returning home, having
taken a great deal more than was good for him.

Years went by; children were born, only to live for a day or two and to
pass away. Mrs. Granger became more broken-down and unhappy-looking
every year, and Bet grew into a tall, comely girl. She was not
particularly gentle, nor particularly amiable, and she had the worst
possible training for such a nature as hers; but nevertheless she had a
certain nobility about her. For instance, no one had ever heard
Elizabeth Granger tell a lie. She was proud of her truthfulness, which
was simply the result of courage. She was afraid of no one, and no
circumstance had ever caused her cheek to blanch with fear. She quickly
acquired a name for truth and honesty of purpose, and then pride helped
her to live up to her character. She was not very quick to give
promises, but she often boasted that, once she gave one, nothing would
ever induce her to break it. She was very fiery and hot-tempered, but
as a rule she did not fly out about trifles, and there was a certain
grandeur about her nature which accorded well with her fine physique
and upright bearing.

Bet was an only child for several years. It is true that many little
brothers and sisters had been carried away to the cemetery, but none
lived until two puny boys put in so feeble an appearance that the
neighbors thought the miserable thing called life could not exist in
their tiny persons more than a day or two. They were twins, and Mrs.
Granger nearly died when she gave them birth. The neighbors said that
it would be a good thing if the broken-down mother and the babes that
nobody wanted all went away together.

"There's a deal too many children in the world," they said; "it would
be good if they was took, poor lambs."

But here Bet, who overheard the words, gave way to one of her bursts of
fury. She turned the offending but well-disposed neighbors out of the
room; she locked the door, and kneeling down by the babies, gave them a
perfect baptism of tears and kisses.

"Who says as they're not wanted?" she sobbed. "I want 'em--I'm allays
a-wanting something, and maybe they'll fill my heart."

From this moment she constituted herself the babies' devoted nurse; and
so, after a fashion, they throve, and did not die.

The darker the times grew for Mrs. Granger the more she clung to her
religion. She had a real belief, a real although dim faith. The belief
supported her tottering steps, and the faith kept her worn spirit from
utterly fainting; but they did nothing to illumine or render happy the
lives of those about her. She believed intensely in a God who punished.
He saved--she knew He saved--but only through fire. In the dark winter
evenings she poured out her stern thoughts, her unlovely ideas, into
the ears of her young daughter. As a child Bet listened in terror; as a
woman she simply ceased to believe.

"Ef God were like that, she'd have nought to do with Him,"--this was
her thought of thoughts. She refused to accompany her mother to chapel
on Sundays; she left the room when the Bible was read aloud; she made
one or two friends for herself, and these friends were certainly not of
her mother's choosing. She could read, and she loved novels--indeed,
she would devour books of any kind, but she had to hide them from her
mother, who thought it her duty, as she valued her daughter's immortal
soul, to commit them to the flames.

The mother loved the girl, and never ceased to wrestle in prayer for
her, and to believe she would shine as a jewel in her crown some day;
and the girl also cared for the mother, respecting her stern sense of
duty, admiring the length of her prayers, wondering at her ceaseless
devotion; but both were outwardly hard to the other, showing no
softness, and speaking of no love.

All Bet's up-bringing was hardening; and but for the presence of the
boys she might have wondered if she possessed any heart at all.

She was nineteen when her mother suddenly broke down completely in
health, and after the shortest of illnesses--too short to alarm anyone,
too short for even the word danger to be whispered--closed her eyes on
this world, leaving Bet in a state of bewildered and impotent rage.

There was no longer the faintest doubt in her orphaned heart that she
loved her mother.




CHAPTER IV.


Bet wept silently for the greater part of the day which saw her
motherless, but in the evening she went out as usual to sell her
papers. Her eyes were swollen from the heavy and constant tears she
shed, but she had neatly plaited her hair and wound it round her comely
head, and she carried herself with even a little more defiance than
usual. She was miserable to-night, and she felt that the whole world
was against her.

The night, for the time of year was November, was quite in accordance
with her feelings. It was damp, a drizzling mist was blown into her
face, and the pavements were slippery with that peculiar Liverpool mud
which exceeds even London mud in slipperiness. Bet's beat, however, was
brightly lighted; there was a public-house at one corner, and a little
further up were two gentlemen's clubs. All were brilliant with
gaslight, and the girl, wrapping her shawl about her--she wore no hat
or bonnet--took her accustomed stand. She always avoided the
public-house--not because she feared its tipsy inhabitants, but because
she knew no sale for her wares lay there. Her favorite stand was under
a lamp post, close to the largest of the clubs. The light of the lamp
fell full on her face and figure, and shone on the evening papers which
she offered for sale. Her customers came up as usual, bought what they
required of her, one or two giving her a careless and some a friendly
"good-evening." No one noticed her pallid cheeks, nor the heavy depths
of trouble in her red-brown eyes. Her luck, however, was good, and she
had almost sold all her little stock of papers, when a vibrating and
rather peculiar voice at her elbow caused her to start and turn quickly.

"Is that you, Hester Wright?" she said, speaking in an almost pettish
voice. "Well, I can't go with you to-night, no how; I'm off home this
minute."

"Why, Bet, is yer mother took worse?" asked the voice. It vibrated
again, and two sweet though rather wild-looking eyes gazed full into
Bet's tired, white face.

"Mother," said the girl. She made a valiant struggle, but no more words
would come.

After about a moment she spoke in a strained and totally altered voice:

"Let me be for to-night, Hester. I've sold my papers, and I'm going
home."

"No, you're not, honey; you're coming along o' me. Don't I see as yer
white with the grief, and half distraught like. There, I'm alone
tonight, unless Will should drop in; come and have a cup o' tea with
me, Bet."

"My mother's dead, Hester," said Bet. She could speak without effort
now, but the tears were raining down her cheeks.

"Poor lamb! Dead? Well, I thought as the blow would come. You come home
with me, Elizabeth. Maybe I'll sing something to you."

At this proposition Bet changed color.

"I'm starved for that voice of yours, Hester," she said. And then she
put her hand through her companion's arm, and they walked off at a
quiet pace together. Hester was as tall as Bet, and about ten years her
senior. She was very slender, and carried herself well; her eyes were
dark and beautiful, otherwise she had a queer, irregularly formed face.
Her jet-black hair grew low on her forehead, and when she smiled, which
she only did occasionally, she showed the gleam of very white teeth. No
one called Hester Wright handsome, but few women of her class in
Liverpool had a wider influence. She had a peculiar voice, rather deep
set, and, at least in speaking, only admitting of a limited range of
compass; but every word spoken by her was so nicely adjusted, so
carefully modulated, that the simplest and most ill-formed sentence
acquired a rude eloquence. This was her speaking voice. When she sang,
it rose into power; it was then a deep contralto, utterly untaught, but
free and easy as the notes of a bird. Hester could do what she liked
with men and women when she sang to them, and she knew her power. In
her own circle she was more or less of a queen, and although she was no
better and no richer than the poorest of the Liverpool girls, yet her
smallest word of approbation was treasured almost as if it had been a
royal gift. She had a great insight into character; she had large tact,
and she was also affectionate.

Bet in her heart of hearts had a boundless admiration for this woman,
and she felt a sense of comfort stealing over her as they walked
quickly through the wet, slippery streets side by side.

Hester lived in a little room, which she managed to keep fairly neat
and clean, quite close to the docks. In the daytime you could see the
masts of the tall ships from her window, and the language of the
sailors and the many shouts of the workers on the quays could be borne
into her room on the breeze. Now the window was curtained, and a little
fire shed a cheerful reflection on the dingy walls. Hester stirred the
fire, threw on an additional lump or two of coal, and drawing a
three-legged stool forward for Bet, motioned to her to seat herself.
The room was fairly warm, and Bet was glad to dry her damp dress, and
to spread out her hands before the cheerful blaze. As Hester bustled
about, and laid a tiny table with plates for three, she gradually drew
from Bet a little of the story of last night.

"I have promised," said Bet, in conclusion, "to keep the two littl'uns
safe--that's my work now, and I told father this morning what he wor to
expect."

"And how did he take it, honey?" said Hester. "He knew you, Bet. He
knew as you weren't a girl to say one thing and mean another."

"Yes, he knew that," answered Bet. "Most folks know that of me," she
continued, with a heavy sigh.

"Well, have some tea now, honey--draw up to the table. The butter's
good, and the red-herring done to a turn. I expected Will Scarlett in,
but we won't wait for him. Ah! here he is--just in the nick o' time."

The door was opened, and a young sailor, with a certain resemblance to
Hester both in face and figure, stepped across the threshold. He
colored up under his brown skin when he saw Bet, but she scarcely
noticed him, and gave him her hand in limp fashion, her eves hardly
raised.

"My ship sails to-morrow, Hester," he said, "the 'Good Queen
Anne,'--I've got a rattling good berth this time, and no mistake."

He tossed off his cap as he spoke, again glanced at Bet with a certain
shyness, and then dropped into the seat opposite to her.

"Help yourself, Will," said Hester. "Bet's in a bit o' trouble--you
mustn't mind her; she wor telling me things, and she'll have a hard
fight afore her, I can see. Well, I say she must keep up heart. Have
some tea, honey? Will, don't you make two mouths of a cherry--put the
whole of that herring on your plate--there are more in the bag for me
to toast when this is finished."

"I can't eat, Hester--it's no use," said Bet.

She rose from the table, and went back once more to the little
three-legged stool by the fire. Then she turned her back on Hester and
the young sailor, and went on spreading out her hands to the warmth, as
though she could never take the chill off.

"Don't mind her," whispered Hester to her cousin. "She's taking it
hard, and I didn't know as it were in her. But presently she'll cry,
and that'll bring her round. You tell me what your prospects are, Will.
I'm loathe to part with ye, lad, and that's the truth."

"I'll be back by the summer, Hetty. We're going to Africa and back. I'm
to be well paid, and it's a good ship to sail in. The cap'n ain't one
of your rough and ready, and the rations are fair."

As he spoke he glanced again at Bet, who was leaning her cheek on her
hand. Neither he nor Hester could catch any reflection of her face,
which was completely hidden.

"We'll talk to her presently," whispered the elder woman. "Now push the
table aside, Will, and let's have a sailor-song together, just for good
luck."

"No, let's sing 'Barbara Allen,'" said Will. Again he glanced at Bet,
and this time he sighed.

The two voices blended well, Will's being of nearly as rare a quality
as his cousin's. When they sang, so great was the power of this gift
bestowed upon them, they rose several degrees in the scale of
refinement and even of education. Their voices lost all trace of
dialect, their eyes shone with true feeling. The pathetic old words had
never been more fitly rendered.

As the voices rose and swelled, and filled the little room with a
perfect melody of sound, Bet ceased to sigh; her hands fell idly into
her lap, and her face, which was now turned towards the singers, became
filled with a sort of ecstasy. Her parted lips seemed scarcely to
breathe, and her eyes reflected the emotions caused by the pathos of
the story and the wonderful power of the singers like a mirror.

