
"I also had a letter from Primrose," said Miss Egerton. "She is
unhappy because she thinks that I am at personal inconvenience for the
money which I lent her instead of that which Dove stole. I am not
inconvenienced for it--I can never regret making matters a little
smooth for you poor children. I am going to write to Primrose
to-night; but before I do so I should like to have a little talk with
you, Jasmine."

"Oh, yes," said Jasmine, "I feel very humble to-night, and very
thankful. I am in the kind of humor to-night when I could listen to
any amount of good advice."

"Notwithstanding, Jasmine," said Miss Egerton, with a slight smile,
"that advisers are never considered the most agreeable people.
Jasmine, dear, I have seen Mrs. Ellsworthy to-day."

"Our darling Mrs. Ellsworthy," said Jasmine, flushing brightly; "and
how was she? Does she know that I still care for her?"

"I think she does, Jasmine, and undoubtedly she cares for you. She
again offers to help you, and, Jasmine, dear, I think the time has
come when you must accept her help."

Jasmine smiled, and flushed brightly.

"I do not mind," she said; "I mean I do not mind as Primrose minds,
but I know, I fear that it will go very hard with Primrose."

"It is often very hard to do right, Jasmine," said Miss Egerton, "and
I can quite believe that Primrose will find it difficult to accede to
our plan. At the same time I feel convinced that although she will
have a great struggle, in the end she will yield to it. This is like
the 'Hill Difficulty' to Primrose, but she is not the sort of girl to
turn away from it without conquering its steepness and its toils.
Jasmine, dear, you three have tried bravely to help yourselves, and
you have--yes, I must say it, dear--you have failed. Primrose cannot
spend her life as continual reader to Mrs. Mortlock; you see now, my
dear little girl, that you are much too young to earn anything by your
pen, and little Daisy--ah! Jasmine, how thankful we ought to be that
we have our little Daisy still with us--but Daisy must never again
have her peace of mind so seriously imperilled. Jasmine, you three
girls want two things--you want education, and you want protection.
You want to be thoroughly educated, first of all, in those general
matters which all cultivated women ought to know about; and secondly,
in the special matter which each of you has a taste for. That special
taste or talent ought to be developed to the very uttermost, so that
bye-and-bye each of you girls can take up a profession and earn her
living usefully to others, and with ease and comfort to herself. If
Primrose feels that she can after a time paint very exquisitely and
very beautifully on porcelain, she ought to be apprenticed to one of
the best houses, and there properly learn her trade; and you, Jasmine,
whether you eventually earn your bread by writing beautiful stories,
or lovely poems, or whether the artist within you develops into a love
for making painted pictures instead of word pictures, you must for
many years to come be taught to think and have your little mind and
vivid imagination fed on the wise and great thoughts of others.
Daisy's future we none of us can talk about, but I have no doubt she
also has her special gift.

"Now, Jasmine, what a long, long lecture I am giving you, only the sum
and substance of it all is, dear, that I want to protect you, and Mrs.
Ellsworthy is willing and anxious to advance a sufficient sum of money
to have you all properly educated. When you go to bed to-night I am
going to write very fully to Primrose on the subject."

"I wonder if she will refuse," said Jasmine, speaking in a very
thoughtful tone; "she is very, very determined. You think she will
regard it as a 'Hill Difficulty' which she ought to climb. I think she
will regard it as a fearful, dreadful temptation which she ought to
put away."

Miss Egerton smiled, for Jasmine's sunny little face looked so grave
and anxious, and there was such a disturbed frown between her brows.

"At any rate, dear," continued the governess, "you will not oppose my
scheme. You will see, dear, that the greatest strength sometimes shows
itself in yielding. Jasmine, dear, are you not quite tired of having
your own way?"

"A little," answered Jasmine. "I mean," she added, "that I never again
will offer my stories to papers recommended by people like Mr. and
Mrs. Dove."




CHAPTER L.

A DAZZLING DAY.


Mrs. Ellsworthy felt very much excited when Miss Egerton left her. She
paced up and down her pretty boudoir, her cheeks were flushed and her
pretty eyes bore traces of tears. Miss Egerton had told the good
little lady for the first time the sad story of Daisy's terrible
adventure with Mr. Dove. All the poor little child's terror, and her
final flight into the country, were graphically described by the good
woman.

"She went to find me, little darling, little darling," repeated Mrs.
Ellsworthy, tears running down her cheeks. "Oh, my dear little girl!
to think of her being turned away from my very gates."

When Miss Egerton at last took her leave Mrs. Ellsworthy felt too much
excited to stay quiet; and when her husband came into the room he
found her much perturbed.

"Joseph," she said, running up to him, "I have such a story for you,"
and then she once again repeated little Daisy's adventure.

"And Joseph," she added, "Miss Egerton and I have quite agreed that
you and I are to educate the girls; and, Joseph, the dear good
creature is resolved that they shall stay with her in town, and that
you and I are only to have the pleasure of spending any amount of
money on them; but I will not have it. Joseph, I am resolved that they
shall come to us at Shortlands, and have the instructions of the very
best governess I can procure for them, and then in the spring the
darlings shall come up to town, and have masters for every conceivable
sort of accomplishment. Oh, Joseph, we shall have our Jasmine yet, as
our very own."

Mr. Ellsworthy smiled, kissed his wife, patted her on the cheek, told
her to do just what she liked, and went downstairs to his beloved
books. But Mrs. Ellsworthy's excitement kept her on thorns for the
greater part of the evening.

That night she dreamt of the Mainwarings; dreamt that she saw Daisy's
piteous little face when she was turned away from her gates; dreamt
again a brighter dream, that Jasmine had her arms round her neck, and
was calling her mother; that Primrose, with none of her sweet dignity
abated, was smiling at her, and saying gratefully, "I accept your
kindness; I will gladly take your money; I will come and live with you
at Shortlands, and be to you as a daughter." And Daisy was saying, in
that funny little sententious voice of hers which she sometimes used,
"Weren't we all naughty, and aren't we good now, and is it not a good
thing that our pride should have a fall?"

Mrs. Ellsworthy sighed deeply when she awoke from this beautiful
dream.

"It was but a dream," she said to herself, and she went downstairs
sadly and soberly to her breakfast.

Mr. Ellsworthy had breakfasted at a much earlier hour, and the little
lady had her beautifully-appointed table to herself.

"Now, if the girls were all here," she thought, "how pleasant and
cheerful it would be! Primrose should sit just opposite to me, and
pour out the coffee; she would do it very nicely and deftly, and would
look so sweet and daughterly. And Jasmine--little witch!--I do not
suppose she would keep the same seat two mornings running, and I
should have to tell her over and over not to jump up every moment to
rush to the window. Daisy would sit near me, and, of course, I should
have to have a special chair made for that funny kitten of hers. I
would dress the three girls in white--white is so sweet for girls--and
how Jasmine and Daisy would chatter; their voices are very sweet in
tone, and they never talk too fast, so as to make one's head ache. I
often fancy I hear Jasmine talking to me now, her voice is so
bright--and--oh, dear! is not that very like her voice? Who is that
asking for me in the hall? Surely, surely, it must be Jasmine
Mainwaring. No other voice that I know has such a ring about it."

Mrs. Ellsworthy half rose from her seat, half sat down again, and the
color of eager anticipation flushed her cheeks.

The eager voice outside came nearer, light steps sounded in the hall,
and the next moment Jasmine had her arms round her friend's neck, and
was kissing her, while both woman and girl wept.

"I had to come to you," said Jasmine, while she wiped some bright
falling tears away. "I have not come to stay, nor to give you our
address, nor to do anything of which Primrose would not approve; but
after Miss Egerton told me last night all that you wanted to do for
us, and how you still loved us, I just had to run round and thank you
and kiss you. Primrose and Daisy are still in the country, and Daisy
is better. Aren't you glad she will be all right again soon?"

"Have breakfast with me, Jasmine," said Mrs. Ellsworthy. "I was
thinking so much about you, and so longing to see you, and to have you
in the room seems like a beautiful dream realized. Sit down now and
have some breakfast with me."

"I did not have any at home, so I will," answered Jasmine. "I stayed
awake half the night thinking about you. Oh, you are a real, real
friend!"

"And I spent the greater part of the night dreaming about you three
girls," said Mrs. Ellsworthy. "Have some buttered toast, Jasmine, and
some of this apricot preserve."

"Did you dream about us last night?" asked Jasmine. "Did you really?
You must love us very much."

"I believe I do. Now, Jasmine, I will not ask you for your address. I
will do nothing more to really help you until we get Primrose's
letter, but I want you all the same to spend this whole long day with
me."

Jasmine smiled, and her cheeks flushed.

"It would be very luxurious," she said, "and such a change from our
attics, although Daisy does call them a Palace Beautiful. Will you
take me for a drive, if I stay, Mrs. Ellsworthy, and will you let me
imagine myself quite a rich little girl all day long? You must not
give me any presents, you know, for Primrose would not like that; but
I can imagine I have got all kinds of things, and I wonder, oh! I
wonder, if we might call to see Poppy this afternoon?"

"We will take her too for a drive in the Park," said Mrs. Ellsworthy.
"I have heard a great deal of that Poppy of yours, and I think she is
quite a splendid kind of girl."

Thus a very delightful programme was unexpectedly realized by two
little hard-working London girls, for Mrs. Ellsworthy gave herself up
to be enchanting, and took Poppy away from her work of drudgery, and
from the astonished ladies of the boarding-house.

Poppy, in her dazzlingly brilliant hat, and with her cheeks quite
flaming with excitement, stepped into the carriage, and drove away,
facing Mrs. Ellsworthy and Jasmine, to the great scandal of the
footman, who was obliged, sorely against his will, to assist her to
her place.

Mrs. Ellsworthy took the girls all round the Park, and then to a place
of amusement, and finally she presented Poppy with a very neat brown
dress and jacket, and hat to match, saying, as she did so, that really
Jasmine, even though she forbade her to offer her any presents, could
not lay a like embargo with regard to her friends.

"It's of all the dazzlings, the most blindingly beautiful," was
Poppy's oft-reiterated comment. "Oh! won't I have something to tell
them ladies about bye-and-bye! Oh, my! Miss Jasmine, what a neat hat,
miss! I don't mind denuding this one now, for I has got a 'at from a
West End shop what beats anything that Miss Slowcum wears for
gentility."

Finally, Jasmine and Poppy both returned to their respective homes,
tired, but wonderfully happy little girls.

Mrs. Ellsworthy also laid her head that night on her pillow with a
wonderful sense of satisfaction.

"Even if they do not come to me--although they must come," she
soliloquized, "I am glad--I shall all my life be glad that I gave
Jasmine a happy day."




CHAPTER LI.

A LETTER.


A morning or two after this, when Daisy had greatly advanced towards
convalescence, and was sitting up in Hannah's tiny little sitting-room
to partake of a very dainty little breakfast, Primrose received a long
letter from Miss Egerton. This was what it contained:--

"MY DEAR PRIMROSE,

"You of course know that that wicked man Dove has received the
sentence which he so richly deserves. Alas, we cannot get back all the
stolen money, but we must manage without it, dear, and you are never
even to talk of repaying me for the furnishing of dear little Daisy's
Palace Beautiful. It has been a joy to me to have you, dear, and I
hope you will be able to bring Daisy back with you, and to live here
in peace and comfort next winter. Dear Primrose, it is more and more
evident to me that young girls should not venture to come to London
alone. You showed much bravery in your undertaking; but, my dear
girl, the pitfalls you exposed yourselves to were awful to
contemplate. I don't want to make you unhappy, dear, after all you
have suffered with regard to Daisy, but I must now tell you of a
little adventure which our poor dear Jasmine has had. You know how
very anxious she has been to see herself in print. Of course, I could
not conscientiously encourage her, for although she may have talent
(this I am not prepared to say), yet she is a great deal too young to
have anything printed. All books worth anything should teach, and
surely our dear little girl is only at the age to be taught herself.

"Well, Primrose, the little maid was fired with the strongest
ambition. She wrote her novel in secret, and one day, accompanied by
that good-natured Poppy Jenkins and sweet little Daisy, went
Citywards, and simply plunged--for I can use no other word--into the
unknown and to me rather awful realm of publishers.

"Poor child, of course none of the good houses would even look at her
immature productions; but she was taken in by a man who professed
himself to be the editor of a monthly paper--_The Joy-bell_ was its
silly title. On an understanding that her story was to be printed in
the pages of _The Joy-bell_--of course I've never seen the paper, and
should not dream of reading anything so rubbishy--poor Jasmine was
induced to subscribe two pounds five shillings, or, in other words, to
undertake to buy one hundred copies of _The Joy-bell_. Of course she
imagined that her printed words would immediately bring her fame. She
paid her money, and looked out for her story."

"Where did she get the money from?" thought the anxious reader.

"Primrose, how wrinkled up your brows are;" called out little Daisy.

Primrose sighed, and resumed her perusal of the closely-written
sheets.

"On the very evening our little Daisy ran away Jasmine received her
first proofs. They were barbarously printed on wretched paper, but the
poor child was in such trouble then that she scarcely noticed them.
Afterwards she did read them with care, and was surprised to find what
a very small portion of her story had been printed.

"You know that I was unexpectedly detained in the country by the
serious illness and death of my poor cousin. Jasmine was not doing as
well as we supposed by her profession of dressing dinner-tables. The
dear child was determined not to ask help from any one, not even from
you, Primrose, and she made a valiant effort to support herself on her
tiny earnings. Alas, her purse was all too soon emptied, and she had
also upon her the awful load of debt, for Poppy Jenkins it seems, lent
her the money to get that rubbishy story published. In her despair she
thought of _The Joy-bell_, and went off to see the editor.

"She was met at the office (poor child, how she could venture there
alone is a mystery to me) with the intelligence that _The Joy-bell_
had ceased to exist, and the editor had decamped with poor Poppy's
wages.

"Luckily I came home that evening, and found your poor little sister
in sad trouble. I am thankful to say I have been able to relieve her
present necessities without the slightest inconvenience to myself.
Jasmine has been greatly shaken, but she is better again now, and is
most anxious that you should not be troubled. I only tell you this
much, dear Primrose, because I consider it my bounden duty that you
should know how matters really stand. Rest happy about Poppy; her
money has been returned to her, and Jasmine has sufficient for her
present necessities. On second thoughts, I had better perhaps let you
into my little secret. I have borrowed ten pounds for Jasmine on that
valuable Spanish lace of her mother's. Do not imagine that the lace is
gone; it will be returned to Jasmine whenever she can refund the
money. It was necessary, dear Primrose, to take it, and I acted as I
am sure you would think right in the matter. Poppy had to be paid her
wages.

"Now, dear Primrose, I want to talk with you very seriously on another
matter. You must own, dear, that though you have tried bravely you
have not yet, any of you, succeeded in earning your living. It is
almost a year since you began to try, and you have made, I fear, but
small headway. You, Primrose, have done best, and have made fewer
mistakes than your sisters, but even you would not care to spend all
your life in continual reading to Mrs. Mortlock. Jasmine can only earn
a precarious and uncertain living by dressing dinner-tables. Of
course, no one even expects dear little Daisy to contribute to the
family purse at present, but at the same time she need not put us into
terrible frights, nor be in the power of wicked and designing people.
My dear girls have had a trial of their own way; and now I think they
ought to take the advice of those older and wiser than themselves.

"If, dear Primrose, you want to earn your living well--and nothing
makes a woman braver and better than being able to support
herself--you must be educated to take up some one profession in an
efficient manner. Money must be spent for this purpose, and you must
not be too proud to accept money from those who really love you. I
have been to see Mrs. Ellsworthy, and she and I had a long, long talk
about you girls. She is full of kindness, and she really and truly
loves you. It would be worse than folly, it would be wicked, to throw
such friendship away. Mrs. Ellsworthy tells me that she has been
consulting your old friend Mr. Danesfield about you. Both he and Mrs.
Ellsworthy are arranging plans which they trust you will all listen to
with patience. These plans shall be fully disclosed to you on your
return to town, but I may as well mention here that it will be
absolutely necessary that you should give up your present lives, and
should enter seriously on the great work of education. Money must be
spent for this object; but when you are able to earn well, bye-and-bye
it will be in your power to repay the money to the kind friends whose
happiness it is now to lend it to you.

       "Dear Primrose,
     "I am, yours affectionately,
         "AGNES EGERTON."
