the water.

The largest and most noted of these vast gorges is the Grand Canon,
which extends a distance of more than two hundred miles. The height of
the walls of this canon varies from four thousand to seven thousand
feet.

The river, as it runs through it, is from fifty to three hundred feet
wide. So swift is the current, that it is almost impossible to float a
boat down the stream without having it dashed to pieces against the
rocky walls on either side.

The first descent through these canons was made in 1867, from a point on
Grand River, about thirty miles above its junction with Green River.

Three men were prospecting for gold, and being attacked by Indians and
one of their number killed, the other two decided to attempt the descent
of the river, rather than retrace their steps through a country where
Indians were numerous.

They constructed a raft of a few pieces of drift-wood, and having
secured their arms and provisions, commenced their journey down the
stream.

A few days afterward, while the raft was descending a cataract, one of
the men was drowned and all the provisions were washed overboard.

The third man, hemmed in by the walls of the canon, continued the
journey alone amid great perils from cataracts, rocks, and whirlpools.

For ten days he pursued, his lonely way, tasting food but twice during
the whole time. Once he obtained a few green pods and leaves from bushes
growing along the stream, and the second time from some friendly
Indians.

At last he succeeded in reaching Callville in safety, after having
floated several hundred miles.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXXIII.


pro por'tions, _relations of parts to each other_.

in te'ri or, _the inside_.

al a bas'ter, _a kind of whitish stone_.

chasm, _a deep opening_.

a're a, _any surface, as the floor of a room_.

an'cient, _belonging to past ages_.

un ex am'pled, _without a similar case_.

co los'sal, _of great size_.

feat'ure, _any thing worthy of notice_.

dra'per y, _hangings of any kind_.

o ver awed', _held in a state of fear_.

sur pass'ing, _exceeding others_.


       *       *       *       *       *




NATURAL WONDERS OF AMERICA.

PART II.


THE MAMMOTH CAVE.


In the year 1809, a hunter named Hutchins, while pursuing a bear in
Edmondson County, Kentucky, was surprised to see the animal disappear
into a small opening in the side of a hill.

Upon examining the spot, Hutchins found that the opening led into a
cave. Following up the examination soon after, it was discovered that
the cave was immense in its proportions.

On account of its great size, it was named Mammoth Cave. It has an area
of several hundred square miles, and two hundred and twenty-three known
and numbered avenues, with a united length of from one hundred and
fifty to two hundred miles.

The interior of this cave is divided by huge columns and walls of stone
into chambers of various shapes and sizes. Some of these are large
enough to afford standing room for thousands of people.

One of the largest of these chambers is called Mammoth Dome. This room
is four hundred feet long, one hundred and fifty feet wide, and two
hundred and fifty feet in height.

The walls of this grand room are curtained by alabaster drapery in
vertical folds and present to the eye a scene of unexampled beauty and
grandeur.

A large gateway at one end of this room opens into another room, in
which the position of the huge stone pillars, reminds one of the ruins
of some ancient temple.

Six colossal columns, or pillars, eighty feet high and twenty-five feet
in diameter, standing in a half circle, are among the imposing
attractions of this wonderful room.

Another striking feature of Mammoth Cave is what is called the Dead Sea.
This body of water is four hundred feet long, forty feet wide, and very
deep.

A curious fish is found in this dark lake. It is without eyes, and, in
form and color, is different from any fish found outside the cave.

There are found also a blind grasshopper, without wings, and a blind
crayfish of a whitish color, both of which are very curious and
interesting.

The fact that these living creatures are blind would seem to indicate
that nature had produced them for the distinct purpose of inhabiting
this dark cave.


NIAGARA FALLS.


Of all the sights to be seen on this continent, there is none that
equals the great Falls of Niagara River, situated about twelve miles
north of Buffalo, in the State of New York.

On first beholding this most wonderful of all known cataracts, one is
overawed by its surpassing grandeur, "and stunned by the sound of the
falling waters as by a roar of thunder."

For quite a distance above the falls, the Niagara River is about one
mile wide, and flows with great swiftness.

Just at the edge of the cataract stands Goat Island, which divides the
waters of the river, and makes two distinct cataracts; one on the
Canadian side, and one on the American side of the river.

The one on the Canadian side, called from its shape the Horse-shoe Fall,
is eighteen hundred feet wide, and one hundred, and fifty-eight feet
high. The other, called the American Fall, is six hundred feet wide, and
one hundred and sixty-four feet high.

As the immense body of water leaps over this vast precipice, it breaks
into a soft spray, which waves like a plume in the wind. At times, when
the rays of the sun strike this spray, a rainbow is formed which
stretches itself across the deep chasm, and produces a beautiful effect.

During the winter, much of the water and spray freezes, and as each
moment adds to the frozen mass, some curious and wonderful ice
formations are produced.

Sometimes, during a very cold winter, the ice at the foot of the falls
forms a complete bridge from one shore to the other.

An interesting feature of a visit to these falls is a descent to the
level of the foot of the cataract behind the great sheet of water.

A long flight of steps leads down to a secure footing between the rocky
precipice and the falling torrent. By a narrow footpath, it is possible
for the visitor to pass between this column of water and the wall of
rock.

Once behind the sheet of water, the roar is deafening. One can only
cling to the narrow railing or his guide, as he picks his way for more
than a hundred feet behind the roaring torrent.

A single misstep, a slip, or a fall, and nothing remains but a horrible
death by being dashed to pieces upon the jagged rocks below.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Point out four places in the lesson where
words would likely be run together by a careless reader.

The word _canon_ is pronounced _can'yon_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Give rules for marks of punctuation and capital
letters used in the first paragraph of the account of Niagara Falls.

Let pupils make out an _analysis_ in five or six parts, treating some
well-known scene.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXXIV.


vo ra'cious, _greedy; very hungry_.

o ver whelmed', _overcome by force of numbers_.

a bound'ing, _existing in large numbers_.

as cend'ing, _going up_.

her'ald ed, _gave notice of_.

im pet'u ous, _furious; without care for what happens_.

crim'i nals, _those who have broken the law_.

con'cen trate, _gather in a large mass_.

in tol'er a ble, _not to be borne_.

ir re sist'i ble, _can not be opposed_.


       *       *       *       *       *




AFRICAN ANTS.


A strange kind of ant is very abundant in the whole region I have
traveled over in Africa, and is the most voracious creature I ever met.
It is the dread of all living animals, from the leopard to the smallest
insect.

I do not think that these ants build nests or homes of any kind. At any
rate they carry nothing away, but eat all their prey on the spot. It is
their habit to march through the forests in a long, regular line--a line
about two inches broad and often several miles in length. All along this
line are larger ants, who act as officers, stand outside the ranks, and
keep this singular army in order.

If they come to a place where there are no trees to shelter them from
the sun, whose heat they can not bear, they immediately build
underground tunnels, through which the whole army passes in columns to
the forest beyond. These tunnels are four or five feet underground, and
are used only in the heat of the day, or during a storm.

When, they grow hungry the long file spreads itself through the forest
in a front line, and attacks and devours all it overtakes with a fury
which is quite irresistible. The elephant and gorilla fly before this
attack. The black men run for their lives. Every animal that lives in
their line of march is chased.

They seem to understand and act upon the tactics of Napoleon, and
concentrate with great speed their heaviest forces upon the point of
attack. In an incredibly short space of time the mouse, or dog, or
leopard, or deer, is overwhelmed, killed, eaten, and the bare skeleton
only remains.

They seem to travel night and day. Many a time have I been awakened out
of a sleep, and obliged to rush from the hut and into the water to save
my life, and after all suffered intolerable agony from the bites of the
advance-guard, that had got into my clothes.

When they enter a house they clear it of all living things. Cockroaches
are devoured in an instant. Rats and mice spring round the room in vain.
An overwhelming force of ants kill a strong rat in less than a minute,
in spite of the most frantic struggles, and in less than another minute
its bones are stripped. Every living thing in the house is devoured.

They will not touch vegetable matter. Thus they are in reality very
useful, as well as dangerous, to the natives, who have their huts
cleaned of all the abounding vermin, such as immense cockroaches and
centipedes, at least several times a year.

When on their march the insect world flies before them, and I have often
had the approach of an ant-army heralded to me by this means. Wherever
they go they make a clean sweep, even ascending to the tops of the
highest trees in pursuit of their prey.

Their manner of attack is an impetuous leap. Instantly the strong
pincers are fastened, and they let go only when the piece gives way.

At such times this little animal seems animated by a kind of fury which
causes it to disregard entirely its own safety, and to seek only the
conquest of its prey. The bite of these ants is very painful.

The natives relate that in former times it was the custom to expose
criminals in the path of these ants, as the most cruel way that was
known of putting them to death.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Name the _emphatic words_ in the last
paragraph of the lesson, and mark the _inflections_.

In determining upon the _emphasis_ to be given to the words of a
sentence, the only guide we have to follow is the _meaning_. We must
ask ourselves, "Which, words are of special importance to the meaning?"


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Change each of the sentences given below to
_statements_, expressing as nearly as possible the same meaning.

    "What troubles you to-day?"

    "Tell me at once what the matter is!"

    "Let us shout for Meccatina, and its mountains bare and brown!"

Model.--"What is your name?" changed to the form of a _statement_,
becomes--"I wish you to tell me your name."

Let pupils write four _questions_, and then change them to
_statements_, expressing as nearly as possible the same meaning.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON LXXV.


plun'dered, _stripped  of their goods by force_.

surge, _a rolling swell of water; billows_.

verge, _extreme side or edge_.

sheer, _straight up and down_.

frag'ments, _pieces; small portions_.

vis'ion _scene; imaginary picture_.

a byss', _chasm; deep space_.

phan'tom, _ghost; airy spirit_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE LEAP OF ROUSHAN BEG.


  Mounted  on Kyrat strong and fleet,
  His chestnut steed with four white feet,
    Roushan Beg, called Kurroglou,
  Son of the road and bandit chief,
  Seeking refuge and relief,
    Up the mountain pathway flew.

  Such was Kyrat's wondrous speed,
  Never yet could any steed
    Reach the dust-cloud in his course.
  More than maiden, more than wife,
  More than gold, and next to life,
    Roushan the  Robber loved his horse.

  In the land that lies beyond
  Erzeroum and Trebizond,
    Garden-girt his fortress stood.
  Plundered khan, or caravan
  Journeying north from Koordistan,
    Gave him wealth and wine and food.

  Seven hundred and fourscore
  Men at arms his livery wore,
    Did his bidding night and day.
  Now, through regions all unknown,
  He was wandering, lost, alone,
    Seeking without guide his way.

  Suddenly the pathway ends,
  Sheer the precipice descends,
    Loud the torrent roars unseen;
  Thirty feet from side to side
  Yawns the chasm; on air must ride
    He who crosses this ravine.

  Following close in his pursuit,
  At the precipice's foot,
    Reyhan the Arab of Orfah
  Halted with his hundred men,
  Shouting upward from the glen,
    "La Illah'illa Allah'!"

  Gently Roushan Beg caressed
  Kyrat's forehead, neck, and breast;
    Kissed him upon both his eyes;
  Sang to him in his wild way,
  As upon the topmost spray
    Sings a bird before it flies.

  "O my Kyrat, O my steed,
  Round and slender as a reed,
    Carry me this peril through!
  Satin housings shall be thine,
  Shoes of gold, O Kyrat mine,
    O thou soul of Kurroglou!

  "Soft thy skin as silken skein,
  Soft as woman's hair thy mane,
    Tender are thine eyes and true;
  All thy hoofs like ivory shine,
  Polished bright; O, life of mine,
    Leap and rescue Kurroglou!"

  Kyrat, then, the strong and fleet,
  Drew together his four white feet,
    Paused a moment on the verge,
  Measured with his eye the space,
  And into the air's embrace
