


"DOLLY'S CHARGE" SERIES.

_With Illustrations. Small Crown 8vo. 1s. each._.

1. DOLLY'S CHARGE. By Miss MARSHALL.

2. THE LITTLE PEAT-CUTTERS; or, The Song of Love. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

3. PRIMROSE; or, The Bells of Old Effingham. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

4. THE BOY GUARDIAN. By C.E. BOWEN.

5. GENTLEMAN JIM. By Mrs. PRENTISS.

6. OUR LADDIE. By Miss L.J. TOMLINSON.

7. VIOLET IN THE SHADE. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

8. LIGHT ON THE LILY. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

9. A ROSE WITHOUT A THORN. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

10. ALICE'S PUPIL. By Miss M'CLINTOCK.

11. HEATHERCLIFFE; or, It's no Concern of Mine. By Mrs. MARSHALL.

12. ADVENTURES OF JOHNNY PASCOE. By G. NORWAY.

13. MISS BROWN'S BASKET. By Mrs. HENRY CHARLES.

14. LOTTA'S LIFE MISTAKE. By Mrs. EVERED POOLE.

15. THE PRINCESSES OF PENRUTH. By MARY H. DEBENHAM.

16. SEE FOR YOURSELF. By GRACE STEBBING.

17. SUNDAY OCCUPATIONS FOR CHILDREN. BY Mrs. BARCLAY.

18. PARSON'S GREEN. By G. NORWAY.

19. HELEN; or, Temper and its Consequences.

20. THE CAPTAIN'S STORY; or, The Disobedient Son.

21. CHINA AND ITS PEOPLE. By A MISSIONARY'S WIFE.

22. FRANK GORDON, by F.R. GOULDING; and LITTLE JACK, by ANNA WARNER.

23. TO-DAY AND YESTERDAY. A Story of Summer and Winter Holidays. By Mrs.
MARSHALL.

24. BOTH SIDES. By JESSIE W. SMITH.

25. STEPHEN GILMORE'S DREAM; or, Coals of Fire. By JESSIE W. SMITH.

26. JUDITH THE STRANGER. By the Hon. GERTRUDE BOSCAWEN.

27. THE GATE IN PARK LANE. By the Hon. GERTRUDE BOSCAWEN.

28. SIMPLE LESSONS FROM NATURE. By the Hon. M.C. LEIGH.

29. THE SPOILT TWINS. By EMILY DIBDIN.

30. BEN BRIGHTBOOTS, and Other True Stories. HAVERGAL.

31. SAM'S MISSION. By BEATRICE MARSHALL, Author of "Dolly's Charge," &c.

32. KATIE: A Daughter of the King.




NISBET'S JUVENILE LIBRARY.

_With Illustrations. 16mo. 1s. 6d. each_.


"Capital books, well printed, tastefully bound, and containing a good
deal of letterpress. We do not know a cheaper series at the
price."--_Sunday School Chronicle_.

LILIES OF THE VALLEY.

HERBERT PERCY.

PASSING CLOUDS.

WARFARE AND WORK.

EVELYN GREY.

THE CHRISTMAS STOCKING.

SOWING IN TEARS AND REAPING IN JOY.

SILVER SANDS.

THE KNOTS TOM GILLIES TIED AND UNTIED.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SELECT SERIES OF BOOKS SUITABLE FOR PRESENTS AND PRIZES.

_With Illustrations. Small Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. each_.

THE MOUNTAINS OF THE BIBLE: Their Scenes and their Lessons. By the Rev.
JOHN MACFARLANE, LL.D.

LIFE: A Series of Illustrations of the Divine Wisdom in the Forms,
Structures, and Instincts of Animals. By P.H. GOSSE, F.R.S.

LAND AND SEA. By P.H. GOSSE, F.R.S.

THE ROMANCE OF NATURAL HISTORY. By P.H. Gosse, F.R.S. Two Vols.

TALES FROM ALSACE; or, Scenes and Portraits from Life in the Days of the
Reformation.

BYEWAYS IN PALESTINE. By JAMES FINN, M.R.A.S.




THE "PILGRIM" SERIES.

POPULAR EDITIONS OF STANDARD BOOKS.

_Small Crown 8vo, numerous Illustrations, 2s. each; with gilt edges, 2s.
6d. each_.

       *       *       *       *       *

1. BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.

2. BUNYAN'S HOLY WAR.

3. FOXE'S BOOK OF MARTYRS.

4. THE THRONE OF DAVID: From the Consecration of the Shepherd of
Bethlehem to the Rebellion of Prince Absalom. By the Rev. J.H. INGRAHAM,
LL.D.

5. THE PRINCE OF THE HOUSE OF DAVID; or, Three Years in the Holy City.
By the Rev. J.H. INGRAHAM, LL.D.

6. THE PILLAR OF FIRE; or, Israel in Bondage. By the Rev. J.H. INGRAHAM,
LL.D.

7. BEN-HUR; or, The Days of the Messiah. By LEW WALLACE.

8. THE LAMPLIGHTER. By M. CUMINS.

9. UNCLE TOM'S CABIN. By Mrs. H. STOWE.

10. ROBINSON CRUSOE.

11. MY DESIRE. By SUSAN WARNER.

12. NOBODY. By SUSAN WARNER.

13. THE FAIRCHILD FAMILY. By Mrs. SHERWOOD.

14. THE SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON.

15. DERRY. A Tale of the Revolution. By CHARLOTTE ELIZABETH.

16. ROMANCE OF NATURAL HISTORY. By P.H. GOSSE.

17. GREAT MEN: A Series of Lectures. By the late Rev. FREDERIC MYERS,
M.A.

18. TOO LATE FOR THE TIDE-MILL. By Rev. E.A. RAND.

19. LITTLE WOMEN. By L.M. ALCOTT.

20. DRAYTON HALL. By JULIA MATHEWS.




THE "PILGRIM" SERIES-continued.

21. THE END OF A COIL. By SUSAN WARNER.

22. GLEN LUNA. By ANNA WARNER.

23. DIANA. By SUSAN WARNER.

24. STEPHEN, M.D. By SUSAN WARNER.

25. MELBOURNE HOUSE. By SUSAN WARNER.

26. BIBLE WARNINGS. By Rev. Dr. NEWTON.

27. THE PHYSICIAN'S DAUGHTER.

28. THE WIDE, WIDE WORLD. By SUSAN WARNER.

29. DAISY. By SUSAN WARNER.

30. DAISY IN THE FIELD. By SUSAN WARNER.

31. NOR'ARD OF THE DOGGER. By E.J. MATHER.

32. A DREAM OF THE NORTH SEA. By J. RUNCIMAN.

33. SCRIPTURE ANIMALS. By Rev. Dr. NEWTON.

34. QUEECHY. By SUSAN WARNER.

35. DARE TO DO RIGHT. By JULIA MATHEWS.

36. NETTIE'S MISSION. By JULIA MATHEWS.

37. WANDERING HOMES AND THEIR INFLUENCES.

38. FRANK WEATHERALL. By W.C. METCALFE, Author of "Above Board," &c.

39. SHORT LIVES OF MEN WITH A MISSION: Charles Kingsley, Lord Lawrence,
Henry M. Stanley. With Portraits.

40. EXPELLED. By the Author of "Dorrincourt."

41. YOKED TOGETHER. By ELLEN DAVIS.

42. BESSIE HARRINGTON'S VENTURE. By JULIA MATHEWS.

43. OPENING OF A CHESTNUT BURR. By E.P. ROE.

44. ST. ELMO. By A.J.E. WILSON.

45. THE CHILDREN'S PILGRIMAGE. By L.T. MEAD.

46. ROMANCE OF NATURAL HISTORY. Second Series. By P.H. GOSSE.

LONDON: JAMES NISBET & CO., 21 BERNERS STREET, W.




SELECT LIST OF BOOKS
DEVOTIONAL AND PRACTICAL
PUBLISHED BY
JAMES NISBET & CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

+THE CHRISTIAN UNDER REVIEW+.

A SERIES OF WORKS ON PRACTICAL CHRISTIAN LIFE Small crown 8vo.

THE CHRISTIAN'S INFLUENCE. By the Ven. WILLIAM MACDONALD SINCLAIR, D.D.,
Archdeacon of London. 2s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S START. By the Very Rev. the DEAN OF NORWICH. 1s.

THE MORAL CULTURE OF THE CHRISTIAN. By the Rev. JAMES MCCANN, D.D. 1s.

THE PATHWAY OF VICTORY. By the Rev. ROBERT B. GIRDLESTONE, M.A., Hon.
Canon of Christ Church, and late Principal of Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S RECREATIONS. By the Rev. HENRY SUTTON, M.A., Vicar of
Holy Trinity, Bordesley. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S PROGRESS. By the Ven. G.R. WYNNE, D.D., Archdeacon of
Aghadoe. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. By the Very Rev. the DEAN
OF NORWICH. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S AIMS. By the Rev. ALFRED PEARSON, M.A., Incumbent of St.
Margaret's Church, Brighton. 1s.

THE INTELLECTUAL CULTURE OF THE CHRISTIAN. By the Rev. JAMES MCCANN,
D.D. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S PRIVILEGES. By the Rev. W.J. DEANE, M.A. 1s.

THE CHRISTIAN'S INHERITANCE. By the Rev. C.A. GOODHART, M.A., Incumbent
of St. Barnabas', Highfield, Sheffield. 1s.

"Simple and forcible as these books are in their teaching, and brief in
extent, they deserve the attention of those who direct the religious
teaching of the young."--_Scotsman_.

"We dipped into these pages alike with pleasure and profit. The writers,
each on his own theme, seem steadfastly to keep in view scriptural
teaching, sound doctrine, and the trials and temptations which beset the
daily life and walk of the believer."--_Word and Work_.

"How completely they cover the field of Christian needs is sufficiently
indicated by their titles. They are well fitted to stimulate the piety
and clear the views of those holding the doctrines of the Church of
England."-_Liverpool Mercury._




By H. BONAR, D.D.

GOD'S WAY OF PEACE. A Book for the Anxious. 16mo, 1s. 6d. Cheap Edition,
paper cover, 6d.; cloth, 9d. Large Type Edition, crown 8vo, 2s.

GOD'S WAY OF HOLINESS. 16mo, 1s. 6d. Cheap Edition, paper cover, 6d.;
cloth, 9d. Large Type Edition, crown 8vo, 2s.


By MATTHEW HENRY.

EXPOSITION OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS;

With Practical Remarks and Observations--In Nine Volumes. Imp. 8vo, L2,
2s. _Net._ In Six Volumes. Medium 8vo, L1, 11s. 6d. _Net_.


By LADY CATHARINE LONG.

HEAVENLY THOUGHTS FOR MORNING AND EVENING HOURS. Selections in Prose and
Verse, with Passages from Scripture. With a Short Introduction, 16mo.,
Cloth, 2s. 6d.; silk, 4s. 6d, each.


By HARRIET E. COLVILE.

THE WAY SHE TROD. A STUDY. Just Published. Small crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

"'The Way She Trod' is a study of the development of religious sentiment
and belief in a girl's character."--_Scotsman._

"She is Triplice, which, being interpreted, means threefold.... Her
life-history, under these various phases, is ingeniously set
forth."--_Glasgow Herald._

"An admirably written book for young women, who will be attracted by the
interesting story, telling how Triplice was led by a way she knew not'
until she finds rest and joy in God."--_The Christian_.

"A good book for distribution among girls of the upper
classes."--_Record_.

FLOWER VOICES. With Illustrations. Demy 16mo, 1s.

"A dainty little booklet, giving many sweet and useful lessons from the
flowers."--_The News_.

"A choice little book, in which flowers are made to typify men and
women, and to whisper important lessons regarding life and
duty."-_Christian_.

"Short stories, which will both please and profit. There is life and
point about them, and their association with flowers is by no means
strained. We place this little book in the first class as to the quality
of the writing."-_Sword and Trowel_.

WAFTED SEEDS. With Illustrations. Demy 16mo, 1s.




By Miss MARSH.

THE RIFT IN THE CLOUDS. Small crown 8vo, 1s.

CROSSING THE RIVER. Small crown 8vo, 1s.

SHINING LIGHT. Small crown 8vo, 1s.

WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. A True Story. Crown 8vo, 1s.


By Rev. J. REID HOWATT.

THE CHILDREN'S PEW. Sermons to Children.

AFTER HOURS; or, The Religion of Our Leisure Time. With Appendix on How
to Form a Library for Twenty Shillings. Small crown 8vo, 1s.

THE CHILDREN'S PULPIT. A Year's Sermons and Parables for the Young.
Second Edition. Extra crown 8vo, 6s.

"It will be heartily welcomed. The subjects are well selected; the style
is always simple and forcible, and the lessons which the preacher
desires to impress upon the mind are such as every youthful reader may
appreciate. The sermons have another merit--that of brevity. A child may
read them with a good deal of pleasure, and, it need hardly be said,
with much profit."--_Scotsman_.

"The sermonettes are simple, suggestive, and singularly happy in
illustration and treatment."--_Word and Work_.

"All these fifty-three sermons and parables are worth reading, and would
seem admirable either as models for addresses to children, or for
reading in the home circle."--_Church Bells_.

"Full of nature and of life, and flashing with happy illustrations.
"_--Christian World._

THE CHILDREN'S ANGEL. Being a Volume of Sermons to Children. Crown 8vo,
2s. 6d.

"Brief, fresh, and often original in thought. A preacher to children
will find many suggestions and ideas in these discourses."--_Literary
Churchman_.

"Fifty-three brief addresses to children. Direct, as such things should
be; clear, as they must always be; and interesting, as, if any good is
to be done, they are bound to be--they contain a collection of truths
which children ought to be taught, and the teacher is always bright and
clear, which is saying a great deal."--_Church Bells_.

"One of the most beautiful and helpful books we know of for ministers
and others who are called upon to address the young."--_Methodist New
Connexion Magazine._


By Miss NUGENT.

THE PRINCE IN THE MIDST. Jesus our Centre. 16mo, 1s.


By SAMUEL GILLESPIE PROUT.

NEVER SAY DIE: A Talk with Old Friends. 16mo. 9d.; paper cover, 6d.




By the Rev. JAMES WELLS, M.A.

BIBLE OBJECT LESSONS. Addresses to Children. With Illustrations. Crown
8vo, 3s. 6d.

BIBLE ECHOES. Addresses to the Young. Small crown. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

THE PARABLES OF JESUS. With Illustrations. Small crown 8vo, 5s.

BIBLE CHILDREN. Studies for the Young. With illustrations. Small crown
8vo, 3s. 6d.

BIBLE IMAGES. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.


By the Rev. J.H. WILSON, D.D.

THE KING'S MESSAGE. A Book for the Young. With Illustrations. Small
crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

THE GOSPEL AND ITS FRUITS. A Book for the Young With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

OUR FATHER IN HEAVEN: The Lord's Prayer Familiarly Explained and
Illustrated for the Young. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.


By EDITH RALPH.

STEP BY STEP THROUGH THE BIBLE. PART I
FROM THE CREATION TO THE DEATH OF JOSHUA. A Scripture History for Little
Children. With a Preface by CUNNINGHAM GEIKIE, D.D., LL.D., and Twelve
Illustrations. Crown. 8vo, 2s. 6d.

FROM THE PREFACE.

"Miss Edith Ralph, in this little book, shows herself exceptionally
skilful in her delicate task.... The tone and spirit of her pages seem
to me admirably suited to her subject--simple, tender, gentle, wise, and
full of sweet Christian love, they point the little ones invitingly to
heaven, and lead the way.... Nor is the careful and well-informed
intelligence wanting which is needed to make the first steps in Bible
knowledge a preparation for safe and healthy progress in it hereafter."

Part II. FROM DEATH OF JOSHUA TO END OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. A Scripture
History for Little Children. Revised and recommended by CUNNINGHAM
GEIKIE, D.D., LL.D. Twelve Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

"No sweeter, wiser, or more Christian story of the Scriptures could be
given to a little child or read to it."--_Christian Commonwealth._ "Just
the thing for Sunday afternoon,"--_Word and Work_.




By FREDERICK A. ATKINS,

Editor of "The Young Man," and Hon. Sec. of the National Anti-Gambling
League.

