friends and by darkness. When they had finished their task they
gave the signal, and the Portuguese, being sorely pressed, fell
back fighting strongly to the castle, where the gates were opened
to receive them. In this sortie they lost eight men.

The next morning at dawn the natives, being gathered in large
numbers, came on to the assault, uttering loud and fierce cries.
The cannon on the roof, which were under the charge of Tom and
Reuben, at once opened fire upon them, while the soldiers upon the
walls shot briskly with their musketoons. The natives, however,
appeared determined to succeed and, firing a cloud of arrows,
pushed forward towards the gate. Among them were borne, each by
some thirty natives, long trees; and this party, surrounded by the
main body, proceeded rapidly towards the gate, which, damaged as it
was, they hoped easily to overthrow.

The fire of the two culverins was, however, so deadly, and the
concentrated discharge of the musketoons upon them as they advanced
so fatal that, after trying several times to approach close to the
gate, the natives dropped the great logs and fled.




Chapter 21: Wholesale Conversion.



That day and the three which followed passed without adventure. The
natives were seen ravaging the fields, destroying the plantations,
and doing terrible damage, to the intense exasperation of the
Portuguese governor. But they did not show any signs of an
intention to attack the castle.

"I believe," Ned said on the fourth day, "that they have determined
to starve us out. They must know that, however large our stock of
provisions, they will not last forever; and indeed they will have
learned, from the men who bore them in, something of the amount of
stock which we have. It will last, you say, for two months; which
would be little enough, were it not that we are expecting the ship
you spoke of. If that comes shortly we shall, with the additional
force which it is bringing; and the crew, who will no doubt aid; be
able to attack them in the open. But were it not for that, our
position would be a bad one."

"I fear," Tom said, "that even when the ship arrives, evil may come
of it."

"How is that, Tom?" Ned asked.

"The captain will know nothing of what is passing on shore; and if
he lands his men incautiously upon the beach, and advances in this
direction, the natives will fall upon them and, taking them by
surprise, cut them to pieces; and our last hope will then be gone."

"But we might sally out and effect a diversion," Reuben said.

"Yes," Tom replied; "but, unfortunately, we should not know of the
arrival of the ship until all is over."

It was clear to all that Tom's view was the correct one, and that
the position was much more serious than they had anticipated. For
some time the governor and the four young men looked at each other,
blankly. The destruction of the reinforcements, which would be
followed no doubt by the capture of the ship by the war canoes, and
the massacre of all on board, would indeed be fatal to their hopes.
After what they had seen of the determination with which the enemy
had come up to attack the gate, they were sure that they would
fight valiantly, outside.

The question of sallying forth was again discussed, and all were of
opinion that, unequal as the fight would be, it were better to
attempt to defeat the enemy than to remain quiet, and allow them to
triumph over the coming reinforcements.

"Upon what day do you think the ship will arrive?" Ned said, after
considerable thought.

"I cannot say to a day," the governor replied; "but she should be
here this week. There is no exact time, because she has to touch at
several other islands. She leaves Goa always on a certain day; but
she takes many weeks on her voyage, even if the wind be favorable
She might have been here a week since. She may not be here for
another fortnight. But unless something unforeseen has occurred,
she should be here by that time; for the winds are steady in these
regions, and the rate of sailing regular."

"The one chance appears to me," Ned said, after thinking for some
time, "is to give them warning of what is happening here."

"But how is that to be done?" asked the governor.

"The only possible plan," Ned said, "would be for one of us--and I
should be ready to accept the duty, knowing more perhaps of the
ways of natives than the others--to steal forth from the castle, to
make for the shore, and to lie concealed among the woods until the
vessel is in sight. If then I could find a canoe, to seize it and
paddle off to the ship; if not, to swim."

The other lads eagerly volunteered to undertake the work; but Ned
insisted that he was better suited to it, not only from his
knowledge of the natives, but from his superior powers in swimming.

"I may have," he said, "to keep myself up in the water for a long
time, and perhaps to swim for my life, if the natives see me. It is
even desirable, above all things, that whosoever undertakes the
work should be a good swimmer; and although you have long ago given
up calling me The Otter, I do not suppose that my powers in the
water have diminished."

After long consultation, it was agreed that this plan offered more
chances of success than any other.

"It would be most desirable," Gerald said, "that we should have
some notice, here, of the ship being in sight; in order that we
might sally out, and lend a hand to our friends on their arrival. I
will, therefore, if you will allow me, go with Ned; and when the
ship is in sight, I will make my way back here, while he goes off
to the vessel."

"But it will be impossible," Ned said, "to make your way back here
in the daytime. I can steal out at night, but to return unnoticed
would be difficult, indeed."

"But when you see the ship, Ned, and get on board, you might warn
them to delay their landing until the next morning; and in the
night I might enter here with the news, and we might sally out at
daybreak."

This plan appeared to offer more advantages than any other; and it
was agreed, at last, that the two lads should, having darkened
their skins and put on Indian dress, steal out that night from the
castle and make for the shore. Tom and Reuben regretted much that
they could not take part in the enterprise; but the governor
assured them that, even were it desirable that four should
undertake the mission, they could not be spared, since their
presence would be greatly needed in the castle should the natives,
before the arrival of the ship, make an attack upon it.

That night Ned and Gerald, according to the arrangement, stole out
from the castle. Their skins had been darkened from head to foot.
Round their waists they wore short petticoats, reaching to their
knees, of native stuff. They had sandals on their feet; for, as Ned
said, if they were seen close by the natives they were sure to be
detected in any case, and sandals would not show at a short
distance, while they would enable them to run at full speed, which
they certainly could not do barefooted. They took with them a bag
of provisions, and each carried a sword. Reuben had pressed upon
them to take pistols also; but Ned said that, if cut off and
detected, pistols would be of no use, as nothing but running would
carry them through; while should a pistol be fired inadvertently,
it would call such a number of assailants upon them that their
escape would be impossible. A thrust with a sword did its work
silently, and just as well as a pistol bullet.

The natives apparently had no fear of any attempt at a sally from
the castle, for there was nothing like a watch set round it;
although near the entrance a few men were stationed, to give
warning should the garrison sally out to make a sudden attack upon
the invaders. The natives were, for the most part, scattered about
in small parties, and once or twice the lads nearly fell in with
these; but by dint of keeping their ears and eyes open they steered
through the dangers, and arrived safely upon the coast, at a point
two miles to the west of the landing place.

Here the cliff had nearly sloped away, the height being only some
twenty or thirty feet above the water, and being practicable in
many cases for descent; while behind lay a large wood in which
concealment was easy, except in the case of an organized search, of
which they had no fear, whatever.

The next morning they made along the shore as far as the point
where the native war canoes had been pulled up, in hopes of finding
some canoe small enough for Ned to use for rowing off to the ship.
But none of them rowed less than twelve or fourteen paddles, and so
cumbrous a boat as this would be overtaken in a very short time,
should it be seen making out from shore. Ned therefore determined
to swim out, especially as they observed that a watch was kept,
both day and night, near the canoes.

Five days passed in concealment. The coconuts afforded them both
food and drink. Occasionally they heard the boom of the culverins
at the castle, and knew that the natives were showing within range;
but as these shots were only heard at times, they were assured that
no persistent attack was being made.

It was late in the afternoon of the fifth day that the lads
observed a sail in the distance. It was indeed so far away that, as
the light was fading, they could not say with absolute certainty
that it was the longed-for ship. They both felt convinced, however,
that they had seen a sail; and watched intently, as night darkened,
for some sign of its passage.

It was four hours later when they saw, passing along at a distance
of about half a mile, a light on the ocean which could be no other
than that on board a ship.

"Now is the time," Ned said. "I will keep along the shore, under
the cliff, until I get nearly to the landing; and will then strike
out. Do you make for the castle, and tell them that the ship has
arrived, and that we will attack tomorrow; but not at daybreak, as
we proposed, but at noon."

As Ned proceeded on his way along the shore, he saw suddenly blaze
up, far ahead at the landing place, a small bonfire.

"Ah!" he muttered to himself. "The natives have seen the ship, too;
and are following the usual custom, here, of making a fire to show
them where to land. I trust that they will not fall into the
snare."

When, however, he had reached within a quarter of a mile of the
landing, he saw a small boat come suddenly within its range of
light, and two white men step out of it. They were received,
apparently, with much respect by the natives assembled there, and
at once advanced up the road; while the boat, putting off,
disappeared in the darkness.

"They will be murdered," Ned said to himself, "before they have
gone a hundred yards. The natives were crafty enough to allow them
to land without hindrance, in order that no suspicion might arise
among those on board ship."

In the stillness of the night he thought that he heard a distant
cry. But he was not sure that his ears had not deceived him. Far
out he could see a faint light and, knowing that this marked the
place where the ship was moored, he prepared to strike out for it.

It was a long swim, and further than he had expected; for in the
darkness the captain, unable to see the land, had prudently
anchored at a considerable distance from it. Even, however, had it
been several times as far, Ned could have swum the distance without
difficulty; but the whole way he could not forget that those seas
swarmed with sharks, and that any moment he might have to encounter
one of those hideous monsters. He had left his sword behind him,
but carried a dagger and, as he swam, kept his eyes in all
directions, in order that he should not be attacked unprepared.

The ocean was however, fortunately, at that time deserted by these
beasts; or if they were in the neighborhood, the quiet, steady,
noiseless stroke of the swimmer did not reach their ears.

As he neared the ship his heart rose, and he sang out blithely,
"Ship ahoy!"

"Hullo!" was the reply. "Where are you? I cannot see your boat."

"I am swimming," Ned answered. "Throw me a rope, to climb up the
side. I have a message from the governor for the captain of the
ship."

A minute later Ned stood upon the deck of the Portuguese vessel,
the soldiers and sailors looking on wonderingly at him, his body
being white, but his face still colored by the preparation.

The captain himself soon appeared.

"I am the bearer of a message to you, senor, from the governor,"
Ned said. "It is here in this hollow reed. He gives you but few
particulars, but I believe tells you that you may place every
confidence in me, and that I have detailed instructions from him."

The captain split open the little reed which Ned handed to him, and
taking out a paper coiled within it, opened it, and by the light of
a lantern read:

"We are in a very critical position, and it will need at once
courage and prudence to come out of it. I have sent my friend Don
Eduardo Hearne, an English gentleman of repute, to warn you against
the danger which threatens, and to advise you on your further
proceedings. He will give you all particulars."

The captain invited Ned to follow him to his cabin and, calling in
the officers, asked for an explanation of this singular visit. Ned
briefly entered into an account of the landing of the natives of
Ternate, and of the present situation; and the captain rejoiced at
the escape, which he had had, from falling into an ambuscade. This
he would assuredly have done, had he landed the troops in the
morning as he had intended, and marched them inland, fearing no
danger, and unprepared for attack.

Ned explained that the plan was that the troops on board the ship
should land, and fight their way into the interior; and that,
simultaneously, the garrison should sally out and attack the
natives in the rear; and fight their way towards each other, until
they effected a junction. They could then retire into the castle,
where their future plans could be arranged.

"I have, however," Ned said, "ventured to modify that plan, and
have sent word to the governor that we shall not attack until noon,
instead of landing at daybreak, as before arranged. We have been
examining the position where the canoes are lying. They are all
hauled up on the beach, in a compact body. It is in a quiet creek,
whose mouth you would sail past without suspecting its existence. I
cannot say, of course, the depth of water; but these creeks are
generally deep, and I should think that there would be enough water
for the ship to float. At any rate, should you not like to venture
this, your pinnace might row in, carrying a gun in her bow, and
might play havoc among the canoes. Or, better still, if you could
send two boat loads of men there, tonight, and could manage to land
and destroy a portion of the canoes, and launch and tow out the
others, I think that we should have a fair chance of getting peace.
The natives would be terrified at the loss of their canoes, and
would be likely to make any terms which would ensure their return
to their island."

The captain at once agreed to the proposition. The three boats of
the ship were lowered, and the sailors and soldiers took their
places; only two or three being left on board ship, as there was no
fear, whatever, of an attack from the shore during the night. Ned
took his place in the leading boat of the captain, and acted as
guide. They coasted along at a short distance from the land, until
Ned told them to cease rowing.

"We must," he said, "be close to the spot now; but it is needful
that one boat should go forward, and find the exact entrance to the
creek."

Rowing very quietly, the boat in which he was advanced, until
within a few yards of the shore; and then proceeded quietly along,
for a distance of a few hundred yards, when the black line of shore
disappeared, and a streak of water was seen stretching inland.
Quietly they rowed back to the other two boats, and the three
advancing, entered the creek together.

Before starting, each officer had been assigned his work. The crew
of one of the boats, consisting principally of soldiers, were to
land, to advance a short distance inland, and to repulse any
attacks that the natives might make upon them. Another party were
to stave in all the small canoes and, this done, they were to
assist the third boat's crew in launching the war canoes into the
water.

As they approached the spot they were hailed, in the Indian tongue,
by someone on shore. No reply was given, and the hail was repeated
louder. Then, as the boats rowed rapidly up to the place where the
canoes were hauled up, a shrill yell of alarm was given, which was
re-echoed in several directions near; and could be heard, growing
fainter and fainter, as it was caught up by men inland.

The moment the boats touched the shore the men leaped out. The
soldiers advanced, and took up the position assigned to them to
defend the working parties; while the rest set to, vigorously, to
carry out their portion of the work. The war canoes were heavy, and
each required the efforts of the whole of the crew to launch her
into the water. It was, therefore, a work of considerable time to
get fifteen of them afloat; and long ere this had been done, the
natives, called together by the alarm, were flocking down in great
numbers.

They were, however, in entire ignorance as to the number of their
assailants; and the fire which the soldiers opened, with their
arquebuses, checked them in their advance. Feeling sure that their
canoes were being destroyed, they filled the air with yells of
lamentation and rage; discharging such volleys of arrows at random,
in the direction of the Portuguese, that a great number of these
were wounded. Indeed, the natives pressed on with such audacity
that a considerable portion of the workers had to go forward, to
assist the soldiers in holding them at bay.

At last, however, the whole of the canoes were in the water, and
every other boat disabled. The canoes were tied together, five
abreast, and one of the boats towed these out of the harbor, while
the crews of the others remained, keeping the natives at bay; for
it was felt that if the whole were to embark at once, while still
encumbered with the canoes, they would be able to get out of the
creek but slowly; and would, for the most part, be destroyed by the
arrows of the natives.

When the boat had towed the canoes well out to sea, it cast them
adrift and returned up the creek. Then, covered by the muskets of
the soldiers, the others took their places, in good order and
regularity, until at last all were in the boats. The soldiers were
ordered to stand up, and to keep up a steady fire upon the shore;
while the sailors laid to, with a hearty goodwill.

The natives rushed down to the shore in great numbers, and although
many of them must have fallen under the fire of the soldiers, they
yet waded into the water, in their anxiety to seize the boats, and
poured large numbers of arrows into them.

When the three boats gained the open sea there were few, indeed, of
the Portuguese who had not received wounds, more or less severe, by
the arrows; and several had been killed, in addition to others who
had fallen on shore. The soldiers had suffered much less severely
than the sailors; for although they had been more hotly engaged,
their breast pieces and steel caps had protected them, and they
were principally wounded in the limbs.

The canoes were now picked up, and with these in tow the party
returned to the ship. Here their wounds were dressed, by a priest
who accompanied the vessel in her voyages, landing at the different
stations, and ministering to the garrisons of the islands. He had
some knowledge of the healing art, and poured soothing oils into
the wounds inflicted by the arrows. The men were much alarmed lest
these arrows should be poisoned, but Ned assured them that none of
those who had been wounded, during the attacks on shore, had died
from the effects; and that, although it was the custom in many of
these islands to use poisoned weapons, the people of Ternate, at
least, did not practice this barbarous usage.

Morning was just breaking as the party gained the ship, and the
