He was acute enough to see that his chief offence in the eyes of these
enemies had been, not open rebellion, or a flagrant breach of rules, but
his influence over the juniors with whom he came into contact.

Over George Heathcote's soul, especially, he saw that a great battle had
been waged, and was still waging, in which, somehow or other, the two
great parties of Templeton seemed involved.

So far, the battle had gradually gone against Pledge.  Just when he had
considered the youngster his own, he had been quietly snatched off by
Dick, and before he could be recovered, the monitors had stepped in and
taken Dick's side, and left him, Pledge, discomfited, and a laughing-
stock to Templeton.

Had they?  Pledge chuckled to himself, as he thought of Mr Webster's
pencil, and of the toils in which, as he flattered himself, he still
held both Heathcote and Dick.  They were sure of their darling little
_proteges_, were they?  Not so sure, reflected Pledge, as they think.
They might even yet sue for terms, when they found that by a single word
he could change the lodgings of the two sweet babes from Templeton to
the county jail.

He, therefore, in moderately cheerful spirits, allowed a day or two to
pass, avoiding even a further visit to Webster; and then casually
waylaid his old fag as he was returning, decidedly depressed in mind,
from saying good-bye to Mr Richardson.

"Why, Georgie, old man," said Pledge, "how festive you look!  The change
of air from my study to Swinstead's has done you good.  Where have you
been all the morning?"

"I've just come up from the town," said Heathcote, wishing he could get
away.

"Ah, trying to square somebody up, eh?  It's not quite as easy as one
might think; is it?"

Heathcote looked doubtfully up at his old senior's face, and said
nothing.

"It's a wonder to me, you know," said Pledge, turning his back and
looking out of the window, "that your new angelic friends don't somehow
do it for you.  There's Mansfield, you know.  One word from his lips
would do the business.  Everyone knows he never did anything low."

"Mansfield never speaks to me," said Georgie, more for the sake of
saying something than because he considered the fact important.

"Really!  How ungrateful of him, when you have been the means of
enabling him to kick me out of the Sixth.  Very ungrateful!"

"I never had anything to do with that," said Georgie.

"No!  You don't, then, believe a fellow can make use of you without your
knowing it.  You can't imagine Mansfield saying to his dear friends,
'I'd give anything to get at that wicked Pledge, but I daren't do it
straight out.  So I must pretend to be deeply interested in that little
prig, Heathcote, and much concerned lest he should be corrupted by his
wicked senior.  That will be a fine excuse for having a slap at Pledge.
I'll take away his fag, and then, of course, he'll resign, and we shall
get rid of him!'"

"I don't believe he really said that," said Heathcote, colouring up.

"'And then,' he would say, 'to bribe the youngster over, and keep him
from spoiling all and going back to his old senior, we'll manage to fool
him about our precious new Club, and put his name on the list.'"

This was rousing Georgie on a tender point.

"If my name gets on the list, it will be because Dick and Coote and I
ran through the hunt; that's why!" he said, rather fiercely.

"Ha, ha!  If they could only humbug everybody as easily as they do you.
So you are really going to get into the Club?"

"I'll try, if our names get on the list."

"And you think they are sure to elect you?  Of course you've done
nothing to disgrace Templeton, eh?"

The boy's face fell, and Pledge followed up his hit.

"They'd like you all the better, wouldn't they, if they heard you and
your precious friends are--well, quite a matter of interest to the
Templeton police; eh, my boy?"

"We're not," stammered Georgie, very red.  "You needn't say anything
about that, Pledge."

"Is it likely?  Don't I owe you too much already for cutting me, and
talking of me behind my back, and letting the monitors make a catspaw of
you to hurt me?  Oh, no!  I've no interest in telling anybody!"

"Really, Pledge, I never talked of you behind your back, and all that.
I didn't mean to cut you.  Please don't go telling everybody.  It's bad
enough as it is."

Pledge chuckled to himself, and began to get his tea-pot out of his
cupboard.

"You see I have to help myself now," said he.

Georgie's heart was touched.  What with dread of the possible mischief
Pledge could do him, and with a certain amount of self-reproach at his
desertion, he felt the least he could do would be to fall into his old
ways for this one evening.

It was just what Pledge wanted.  How he longed that Mansfield and
Cresswell and Freckleton could all have been there to see it.

"Mansfield is hardly likely to trouble his head about every errand even
such an important personage as you run," said he, in reply to one feeble
protest from the boy.  "Call yourself Swinstead's fag by all means.  You
can still fag for me.  However, it doesn't matter to me.  I can get on
well enough without."

"Oh, yes, I'll try," said Georgie.

That was enough.  Pledge felt that too much might overdo it.  So with
this triumph he dismissed his youthful perturbed _protege_ for the
night, and dreamed sweetly of the wrath of his enemies, when they
discovered that after all he (Pledge) was master of the situation in
spite of them.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

HOW THE "MARTHA" COMES HOME TO HER BEREAVED FRIENDS.

Pledge did well to sleep sweetly and enjoy his triumph while it lasted,
for the battle which raged over the soul of George Heathcote was by no
means ended yet.

"I say, Georgie," said Dick, next day, as the "Firm" took a Sunday
afternoon stroll along the cliffs.  "Where on earth did you get to
yesterday?  You never turned up at football practice, and skulked all
the evening."

Georgie coloured.  His conscience had already smitten him for detaching
himself from his leader at a time of danger like the present; still
more, for deserting him for a fellow like Pledge.

One result of Dick's sovereignty had been that the "Firm" had contracted
a habit of telling the truth to one another on all occasions.  It was
found to be the shortest cut to friendship, and a vast saving of time
and trouble.

Georgie, therefore, however much his inclination, as moulded by Pledge,
may have led him to prevaricate, replied, "I was in Pledge's study."

Dick whistled, rather a dismayed whistle.

"I thought you were out of that," he said.

"So did I; but, I don't know, Dick.  He's got to know all about our row,
and if I don't be civil to him he'll let out on us."

"How does he know?  Who's told him?"

"I never did," said Coote.

"I can't fancy how he heard.  But he knows all about it, and he as good
as says he'll spoil our chance for the 'Sociables' if I don't fag for
him."

"Beastly cad!" murmured Dick.

"He says, you know," pursued George, "that it was all a spite of
Mansfield's against him--that making me Swinstead's fag.  They knew it
would make him resign.  It is rather low, isn't it, to humbug me about
just for the sake of spiting someone else?"

"It's all a lie, Georgie.  Pledge is one of the biggest cads in
Templeton.  I heard lots of people say so.  Webster said so.  He says
he'd no more let a boy of his go near Pledge than he'd fly; and
Webster's not particular."

"And I heard Cartwright say," said Coote, by way of assisting the
discussion, "that Pledge has done his best to make a cad of you, and
nearly succeeded."

"He said that?" said Georgie, hotly; "like his cheek!  Has he done so,
Dick?"

"Not much," said Dick, frankly.

"I don't feel myself a cad," said poor Heathcote.

"Perhaps fellows can't always tell, themselves," said Coote.

There was a pause after this, and the "Firm" walked on for some distance
in silence.  Then Dick said:

"You'll have to jack him up, Georgie, that's all about it."

"But I tell you he'll let out on us," pleaded Georgie, "and really I've
only said I'll fag now and then for him."

"Can't help, Georgie; We don't want to have you made a cad of.  It would
smash up our 'Firm,' wouldn't it, Coote?"

"Rather," said Coote.

"Besides," said Dick, "he's such a cad, no one would believe him if he
did tell of us.  My father would shut him up.  He'll be down, you know,
on Tuesday."

Heathcote breathed hard.  But when it came to a question of choosing
between Pledge and the "Firm," it needed no very desperate inward battle
to decide.

"What had I better do?" he asked.

"Cut him," said Dick.

"But suppose I've promised him?"

"That's a nuisance.  Never mind, we're all in it, so we'll send him a
letter from the 'Firm' and tell him you cry off.  It's a bad job, of
course, but it can't be helped, and we'll back you up, won't we, Coote?"

"I should rather say so," replied the genial junior partner.

So, that quiet Sunday afternoon, in an unpretentious and unsentimental
way, a very good stroke of work was done, not only for the soul of
Georgie Heathcote, but for Templeton generally.

The "Firm" were by no means elated at their decision, for they had yet
to learn what revenge the senior would take upon them.  Still, the
effort and the common peril knit them together in bonds of closer
brotherhood, and enabled them to face the future, if not cheerily, at
least, with grim determination.

Pledge was considerably astounded that evening, just as he was
speculating on the reason of Heathcote's non-appearance, to see Coote's
round head suddenly thrust in at the door, and a small billet tossed on
to the table.

Pledge was getting used to small billets by this time, and was rather
tired of them.  Coote, as he knew, was Cartwright's fag; he therefore
concluded that Cartwright was the writer of the note, and that being so,
he pitched the paper unopened into the empty fireplace with a sneer.

He waited for another half-hour, and still Heathcote did not appear.
Pledge didn't like it, and began to grow concerned.  Was it possible,
after all, he had made too sure of his young friend?

Partly to pass the time, and partly with the vague idea that might throw
some light on the matter, he had the curiosity to pick the neglected
billet out of the hearth and open it.

His face went through a strange series of emotions as he read its
extraordinary contents:--

  Our Dear Pledge,--We think you will like to hear that Heathcote can't
  fag for you.  He doesn't believe he really promised, but must be
  excused.  We've made him do it because we don't want him to be made a
  cad.  He is very sorry, and hopes you won't be a cad and let out about
  the row we are in.  Excuse this short letter, and, with kind regards,
  believe us, our dear Pledge, your affectionate young friends, B.
  Richardson, G.  Heathcote, A.D.  Coote.  Sunday afternoon.

This masterpiece of conciliatory firmness, which had cost the "Firm" an
hour's painful labour to concoct, brought out the angry spots on
Pledge's cheeks and forced some bad language from his lips.

The letter he had received from Mansfield a week ago had been nothing to
this.  Mansfield and he were equals, and a reverse at Mansfield's hands
was at least an ordinary misfortune of war.

But to be coolly flouted, and to have all the work of a term upset by
three wretched youngsters, who called themselves his affectionate young
friends, was a drop too much in the bucket of the "spider's"
humiliation.

He stared at the letter in a stupid way, like one bewildered.  Even its
quaint phrases and artless attempts at conciliation failed to raise a
sneer on his lips.  Something told him it was the hardest hit yet, and
that out of the mouths of these honest babes and sucklings his confusion
had reached its climax.

If Richardson, Heathcote, and Coote snapped their fingers at him in the
face of all Templeton, who else would care a fig about him?

The one grain of comfort was in the possession of the secret of Mr
Webster's pencil, to which Pledge clung as his last and winning card.

How to make the most of it was the important question Pledge decided not
to be impatient.  Wednesday was to be the great election for the
"Sociables," and, if our heroes' names appeared on the list, as rumour
already said they would, his blow would tell best if held over till
then.

So he sat down, and acknowledged the "Firm's" note as follows:--

  My Dear Richardson, Heathcote, and Coote,--Pray do as you like.
  Promises are never made to be kept by "Select Sociables" of your high
  character.  I do not understand what you mean about your row.  What
  row are you in?  _Are_ you in a row?  You don't call that little
  matter that I am expecting to talk to the "Sociables" about on
  Wednesday a row, do you?  Please give my kind regards to Georgie
  Heathcote, and tell him he will need to beg hard before I trouble him
  to lay my cloth.  No doubt he has given you many interesting stories
  of the miserable week he spent with me last holidays in London.  I'm
  not surprised at his turning against me after that.  I hope I shall
  not have to tell anyone some of the stories he has told me of
  Richardson and Coote.  Excuse this long letter, and believe me, my
  dear young jail-birds, your "affectionate" P.  Pledge.

This bitter effusion was read next morning by the "Firm" as they walked
down to the "Tub."  Its full sting did not come out till after three or
four careful perusals, and then the "Firm" looked blankly at one another
with lengthened faces.

"I couldn't believe any fellow could be such a cad," said Dick.

"It's jolly awkward!" said Heathcote.  "You know he was awfully civil to
me in London, and it does seem low to be cutting him now."

"Civil, be hanged!" said Dick.  "He tried to get hold of you to make a
cad of you, that's what he did; and you were precious near being one,
too, when you came back, weren't you?"

"Was I?" asked the humble Georgie.

"Rather," said Coote; "everybody said so."

"Well, of course," said Georgie, "if that's what he was driving at, it
doesn't matter so much."

"Except that it makes him all the bigger a cad."

"What on earth shall we do about the other thing?" asked Georgie.

"The row?  We must cheek it, that's all.  If he does us over the
'Sociable' election, we can't be helped."

"And suppose he gets us transported?"

"Can't do it, I tell you; my father will be up here, you know."

There was a pause, and the "Firm" walked on.  Then Georgie said:--

"I say, what does he mean about the stories I told about you and Coote.
I never told any stories, that I remember.  I never had any to tell."

"Ah, I was wondering what that meant," said Dick.  "He speaks as if
you'd been blabbing all sorts of things."

"I really don't think I ever did," said Heathcote, ransacking his
memory.  "I may have said once I thought Coote was rather an ass, but
that was all."

"What made you tell him that?" said Coote.

"He asked me if I didn't think so," said Georgie, apologetically, "and
of course I was bound to say what I thought."

"Rather," said Coote.

"But he's telling crams about you, Dick," said Georgie; "I'm quite sure
of that.  He used to try and make out you were a sneak and a prig; and
perhaps I believed him once or twice, but that was while I was a cad,
you know."

"Oh, yes, that's all right!" said Dick, putting his arm in that of his
friend.

Pledge would have had very little consolation out of this short
discussion, and if for the next two days he sat up in his study
expecting that every footstep belonged to the "Firm" on its way to
capitulate, he must have been sorely disappointed.  Capitulation was the
one consideration which had never once entered the heads of the honest
fraternity.

That afternoon the town of Templeton was startled by an incident, which
had it come to the ears of our heroes, as they sat and groaned over
their "Select Dialogues of the Dead," would have effectually driven
every letter of the Greek alphabet out of their heads for the time
being.

The event was nothing else but the arrival in port of the collier brig,
_Hail!  Columbia_ with a cargo of coals from the Tyne, and _mirabile
dictu_! with the _Martha_ lying comfortably, bottom upwards, safe and
sound, on her deck.

The collier, according to the account of the skipper, had been running
across the head of the bay on the 5th of June last, in half a cap of
wind from the shore, when it sighted the _Martha_ drifting empty out to
sea.  Having sent one of his men after her to capture her, and being
convinced by the absence of oars or tackle that she must have drifted
from her moorings empty, he took her on board; and, as he was bound to
deliver his cargo by a certain day, and the wind being against his
putting into Templeton, he stowed his prize comfortably away amidships,
where she had been ever since, awaiting his next call at Templeton.

With the free-and-easy business ways of his craft, he had neglected to
send any letter or message announcing the safety of the _Martha_ to her
afflicted friends; and having been detained in this place and that by
stress of weather or business, he had now, after more than three months'
absence, his first opportunity of restoring the lost property to its
rightful owner.

If the simple fishermen of Templeton had been inclined to believe in
miracles, the strange reappearance of the missing _Martha_ at this
particular time must have savoured of something of the sort.  But being
matter-of-fact folk, they contented themselves with lounging round the
boat as she lay once more on the beach, staring at her, and wondering
between their whiffs what the solicitors and judges would say now.

The skipper of the _Hail!  Columbia_ had neither the time nor the
patience to discover who just now was the lawful owner of the boat.
Some said Tom White; some said Tom White's partners; some said the
pawnbroker.

The master disposed the problem off his mind very simply by setting down
the _Martha_ on the beach, and letting those who chose to claim her
settle their squabble among themselves.

The news of the return of the prodigal was not long in spreading; and by
the time the Templeton boys came down for their afternoon bathe it was
common property.

Our heroes heard it in the water, from Raggles, and immediately landed
and dressed.  They scarcely exchanged a word till they stood at the side
of the _Martha_, where she lay in almost the same spot where two of them
had seen her three-and-a-half months ago.  Then Dick said:--

"Think of her turning up at last!"

"I half guessed she would," said Georgie, "though I never expected it.
I say, this settles our row, doesn't it?"

"Pretty well.  But of course Tom White may catch it for pawning the
boat.  He collared the money, you know."

"Ah, but that's not got much to do with us," said Heathcote.

"Well," said Dick, "we ought to back him right up, while we are at it.
Besides, you know, we may still get into a row for letting her go,
though she _has_ turned up."
