
After a while he rose and said, in a voice very low and trembling, "I'll
go up stairs, Fred."

"No," said I, taking his arm and gently leading him back to his chair.
"I'll go up, old boy, and look after Billy to-night."

He did not resist, and I hastened up.

Mr Smith met me at the door with anxious face.

"Well?" he inquired, in a voice which trembled as much as Jack's had
done.

"He knows all," I said.

"Yes? and--"

"And he is downstairs, expecting you," I said.

With a sigh very like a sob, Mr Smith left me and went down the stairs.
All that long night, as I sat beside Billy and watched his fitful
sleep, I could hear the sound of voices in the room below.

What they said to one another I never knew, and never inquired.

But next morning, when Jack came and summoned me to breakfast, his happy
face and Mr Smith's quiet smile answered far more eloquently than words
every question I could possibly have asked about that strange and sacred
meeting between a lost father and a lost son.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

HOW JACK AND I TALKED LOUDER THAN WE NEED HAVE DONE.

About a week after the experiences narrated in the last chapter, my
friend Smith and I went down one morning early to Hawk Street.

We usually took a short walk on our way when we happened to be early,
and I don't exactly know why we did not do so this time.  But certain it
is that instead of reaching the office at half-past nine, we found
ourselves there a few minutes before nine.

The housekeeper was sweeping the stairs and shaking the mats on the
pavement as we arrived.

She naturally looked surprised to see us, and said she had the office
yet to sweep out, and we had better take a walk.

But, being lazily disposed, we declined the invitation, and determined
to brave the dust and go up.

The office was certainly not very tempting for work.  The windows were
wide open, and the din of omnibuses and other traffic from the street
below was almost deafening.  Stools and chairs were stacked together in
the middle of the floor, and the waste-paper of yesterday littered the
whole place.  Even our own desks were thick with dust.

Under these depressing circumstances we were forced to admit that
possibly the housekeeper was right, and that we had better take a walk.

"It's a nuisance," said I, "for I had to leave one or two things
unfinished yesterday."

"I've a good mind to try," said Jack.  "Unless I can catch up my work I
shall have to stay late to-night, and I don't want to do that, as father
is going to try to get away early."

So we dusted our desks as best we could, shut the windows to keep out
the noise, recovered our stools from the assortment in the middle, and
prepared to make the best of it.

"Do you know, Jack," said I, as I was getting out my papers, "it is so
queer to hear you talking of Mr Smith as father?  I can hardly realise
it yet."

"No more can I, often," said Jack, "though I am getting more used to the
idea."

"When are you going to take him to Packworth?"  I asked.

"I'm not quite sure.  He thinks he can get a week at the end of this
month, and I shall try to get the partners to let me take my holiday at
the same time."

"I hope you'll be able to manage it."

"So do I.  Poor father is in very low spirits at the prospect of meeting
Mary, I think.  You know we shall have to tell her everything."

"Will you?  Is it necessary?"

"Oh, yes.  At least father says it is.  If she were to hear of his story
from any other source, he says he would never dare see her again.  It
will be far better to tell her.  But I wish it was over."

"So do I," I said.  "Poor Mary!"

I had got quite into the way of talking of her to Jack by her Christian
name, as if she were my sister as well as his.

"I suppose," said I, "she will still live with Mrs Shield at
Packworth?"

"Oh, yes, for the present.  There's no place to bring her to in London
till we get a little better off."

"I hope that won't be very long," said I.

"I'm afraid father's situation on the staff of the _Banner_ is not a
very--"

"Hush!"  I exclaimed, suddenly.

We had remained, so far, in undisturbed possession of the office, and
there was no chance of any new-comer entering without our knowing.  But
while Jack was speaking I thought I heard a sound, not on the stairs
outside, but in the partners' room, which opened out of the counting-
house.

Suppose one of the partners had been there all the while, and heard all
we had said.

Jack stopped dead in his talk, and with pale face looked inquiringly at
me.

"I thought I heard a noise in there," said I, pointing to the door.

"What?" said Jack, with a gasp.  The same thought was evidently crossing
his mind which had crossed mine.

"It can't be either of the partners," whispered he, "at this hour."

"We'd better see," said I; "it may be a thief."

We went quietly to the door.  All was silent as we listened; and yet I
felt I could not have been mistaken about the noise.  The door was
closed to, but not fastened.  Jack opened it softly.

There, sitting at the partners' table, with his head on his hands,
apparently absorbed in work, and unconscious of everything else, sat--
Hawkesbury!

A spectre could not have startled and horrified us more!

At first he did not seem to be aware of our presence, and it was not
till Jack advanced a step, and involuntarily exclaimed "Hawkesbury!"
that he looked up in a flurried way.

"Why, Smith!" he exclaimed, "and Batchelor!  What a start you gave me!
What are you doing here at this hour, and in this room?"

"We've been here a quarter of an hour," said Jack, solemnly.

"Have you?  How quiet you've been!"

This, at any rate, was a relief.  He could hardly have heard our
conversation.

"But what are you doing in here?" he added, in an important voice.  "You
must know this room is private, and not for the clerks."

"We heard a noise," said I, "and did not know who was here."

Hawkesbury smiled incredulously.

"All I can say is," said he, "I hope you are not in the habit of coming
in here when you are by yourselves in the office.  But kindly leave me
now--I am busy."

He had a lot of papers spread out on the table before him, which he was
gathering together in his hand while he spoke.  Whether they were
accounts, or letters, or what, we could not tell; but as there was
nothing more to be said we withdrew to the counting-house.  He followed
us out in about five minutes, carrying the papers to his desk.  Then,
informing the housekeeper in an audible voice that he would just go and
get breakfast, he left us to ourselves.

"What a mercy," said I, "he doesn't seem to have heard what we were
talking about!"

Jack smiled bitterly.

"Unless I'm mistaken, he's heard every word!"

"Surely, Jack," I exclaimed, stunned by the very idea, "you don't mean
that?"

"I'm sure of it."

Our feelings during the remainder of that day may be more easily
imagined than expressed.  If there was one person in the world more than
another we would have wished not to hear what had been said, it was
Hawkesbury.  Thanks to my folly and meanness, he had known far too much
as it was, before, and trouble had fallen on Jack in consequence.  Now,
if Jack's surmise was true, to what use might he not put the knowledge
just obtained?

No one quite understood Hawkesbury.  But I knew enough of him to see
that jealousy of my friend Smith mixed up with all the motives for his
conduct at Hawk Street.  His tone of superiority, his favouring one
clerk above another, his efforts to assert his influence over me had all
been part of a purpose to triumph over Jack Smith.  And yet, in spite of
it all, Jack had held on his way, rising meanwhile daily in favour and
confidence with his employers, and even with some of his formerly
hostile fellow-clerks.

But now, with this new secret in his hand, Hawkesbury once more had my
friend in his power, and how he would use it there was no knowing.

All that day he was particularly bland and condescending in his manner
to me, and particularly pompous and exacting in his manner to Jack, and
this, more than anything else, convinced me the latter was right in his
suspicion.

Our discussion as we walked home that night was dismal enough.  The
brighter prospects which had seemed to dawn on Jack and his father
appeared somehow suddenly clouded, and a sense of trouble hung over both
our minds.

"One thing is certain," said Jack, "I must tell the partners everything
now."

"Perhaps you are right--if there is any chance of his telling them.  But
he could surely hardly act so shamefully."

"It may be too late, even now," said Jack.  "You know, when I was taken
on at Hawk Street, and they asked me about my father, I said simply he
was abroad.  I've thought since it was hardly straightforward, and yet
it didn't seem necessary to tell them all about it."

"Certainly not.  Why should your prospects be ruined because your
father--"

"Because my father," said Jack, taking me up quietly, "had lost his?
That's what I thought.  But perhaps they will think differently.  At any
rate, I will tell them."

"If you do," said I, "and they take it kindly, as I expect they will, I
don't see what more harm he can do you."

"Unless," said Jack, "he thinks it his duty to tell the proprietors of
the _Banner_."

"What possible good could that do him?"  I asked.

"Why, he might as well think it his duty to tell Mary."

Jack said nothing, and we walked on, very uneasy and depressed.

When we arrived at our lodgings we found Billy, whose recovery was now
almost complete, sitting up in the bed with a jubilant face.

"You're a-done it, governor," cried he, as we entered.  "You are a-done
it."

"Done what?" said Jack.

"Why, that there sam."

"What about it?" we cried, eagerly.

"Oh, that there flashy bloke, Flanikin, 'e comes up, and says 'e, `Jack
Smith in?' says he--meanin' you, governor.  `Ain't no concern of yourn,'
says I--not 'olding with them animals as comes to see yer.  `Yes it is,'
says 'e, a blowin' with the run he'd 'ad.  `Tell 'im the moment 'e comes
in that 'e's fust in the sam,' says he."

"Hurrah!"  I cried, forgetting everything in this good news.  "Old man,
how splendid!"

Jack too for a moment relaxed his grave face as he answered my greeting.

"I can hardly believe it," said he.

"Oh, there ain't no error, so I tells you," cried Billy, "the cove 'ad
been up to the shop, he says, and copied it down.  He was nigh off 'is
'ead, was that there Flanikin, and 'e's a-comin' in to see you 'imself,
he says, afore eight o'clock."

And before eight Flanagan turned up and confirmed the glorious news with
a printed list, in which sure enough "Smith" stood out distinctly in the
first place.

"You know, I thought it might be another Smith," said Flanagan,
laughing; "there are one or two of the same name in the world, I know.
But there's not another in the list, so it's all right.  I say, wouldn't
old Henniker be proud of you now, my boy--eh, Fred?  She'd let you
sneeze without pulling you up for it, I do believe."

A letter by the evening post to Jack brought the official confirmation
of the news from the examiners, and announced further that the
distinction carried with it a scholarship worth L50 a year for three
years.

In the midst of our jubilation, Mr Smith came in, and that evening, but
for the morning's cloud which still hung over us, our happiness would
have been complete.

The next day Jack took an early opportunity of seeking an interview with
the partners, and making a clean breast to them of his birth and
position.  He gave me an account of the interview afterwards, and said
that while Mr Merrett, as usual, took everything kindly and even
sympathetically, Mr Barnacle was disposed to regard Jack's
representation of himself on first coming to the office as not candid,
and so blameworthy.  However, they both agreed that he had done the
proper thing in speaking out now, and willingly agreed to let him take
his holiday at the time proposed, so as to accompany his father to
Packworth.

So a great weight was taken off our minds, and the consciousness that
now nothing remained concealed from our employers enabled us to bear
Hawkesbury's lofty manner with comparative indifference.

I even yet had my doubts whether he could really have overheard our talk
that morning.  Nothing certainly that he said or did gave colour to the
suspicion; only his almost deferential manner to me, and his almost
scornful manner to Jack, seemed to hint that it might be so.

Jack's opinion, however, on the point was unshaken.

An uneventful fortnight passed.  Billy was up again and back at his work
as usual, except that he was strictly forbidden to walk about on his
hands any more--a terrible hardship for the lad.

The first half-year's cheque of Jack's scholarship had come, and had
been proudly deposited in the bank, as a nucleus of a fund in which
father, son, and daughter were some day to participate.

And now the long-looked-for time had arrived when Jack and his father
were to pay their promised visit to Packworth.  I had seen them both
half rejoicing in, half dreading the prospect; and now that I saw them
actually start, I scarcely knew whether most to pity or envy them.

It was a lonely evening for me, the evening after I had seem them off.
They had promised to write and tell me how they fared; but meanwhile I
felt very desolate.  Even Billy's company failed altogether to raise my
spirits.

However, as it happened, that youth had some news to give me which at
any rate tended to divert my mind for a time from my bereaved condition.

"I seen that Mashing agin," he said, abruptly.

"Did you?  Where?"

"Down Trade Street.  I was on a pal's beat there, for a change, and he
comes and wants his boots blacked.  I knows the animal, but he don't
twig me, bein' off my beat.  I would a-liked to give the beauty a
topper, so I would; but, bless you, where's the use!"

"So you blacked his boots for him?"

"I did so.  An' 'e got a pal along of him, and they was a-jawin' about a
parson's son as owed Mashing fifteen pound, and saying as they'd crack
him up if he didn't pay up.  And then they was a-jawin' about the shine
up here that night, and the pal was a-chaffin' Mashing cos of the wipin'
my bloke give 'im, and Mashing he says he reckons he's quits with the
prig--meaning the governor--by this time, he says.  And t'other one say
`'Ow?'  And Mashing says as the governor's a conwex son, and he knows
who Mr Conwex is, he says, and he are writ a letter to Miss Conwex, he
says, down in the country, that'll open 'er goggle eyes, he says."

"What!"  I exclaimed, starting from my seat, "he's written to Mary, the
brute!"

"Dunno so much about your Mary, but that's what he says," replied Billy,
composedly.

"When--when did he write--eh?"  I cried.

"'Ow do I know?" retorted Billy, who evidently misunderstood and failed
to appreciate my agitated manner.

"I aren't arsked 'im.  Arst 'im yourself if you want to know."

And he drew himself up in evident dudgeon.

I didn't know what to do.  It was no time to denounce or lament.  The
thought of the poor innocent girl receiving such a letter as Masham
would be likely to write was too much to endure.  If only I could
prevent her seeing it!

"When did you hear all this?"  I said to Billy.

"Find out.  'Tain't no concern of yourn," said the offended hero.

"But, Billy," said I, "it's most important.  Do you, know that what
Masham has done will make your Mr Smith miserable?"

Billy started at this.

"If I'd a known that, I'd a wrung his leg off," said he.

"But when was it?  This morning?"

"No, last night."

Last night!  Then the letter would already have reached Packworth, and
long before Jack and his father arrived the happiness of her life would
have been dashed.

It seemed no use attempting anything.  I determined, however, to send a
telegram to meet Jack on his arrival, so as to warn him, in case the
letter should still be undelivered.  I worded it carefully, for fear it
might be opened before Jack arrived.

"Hawkesbury did hear our talk.  He told Masham, who has written a letter
to some one we both care for."

This I flattered myself was sufficiently unintelligible to any one but
Jack.

I spent the rest of the evening in fighting against the tumult of my own
feelings.  My impulse had been to rush at once to Hawkesbury and charge
him with his infamy.  But what good would that do?  And who was I, to
prefer such a charge against another?  My next was to find out Masham,
and take some desperate revenge on him.  But, after all, my only
authority was Billy's report of a conversation overheard by him; and,
though it might be all true, I had no right, I felt, without further
proof, even if then, to do anything.

On the whole, I came to the conclusion I had better go to bed, which I
did.  But whether I slept or not the reader may guess.



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

HOW HAWKESBURY AND I CAME ACROSS ONE ANOTHER RATHER SERIOUSLY.

It took a great effort to appear before Hawkesbury next morning as if I
was not aware of his meanness.  Now Jack was away, he once again put on
an air of friendliness towards me which was particularly aggravating.
Had he only made himself disagreeable, and given me an opportunity of
venting my wrath, I should have been positively grateful.  But to stand
by all day and be simpered to, and even cringed to, was galling in the
extreme.

I did once venture on a mild protest.

He was speaking to me about the coming holidays, and begging me in a
most humble manner to choose what time I should like to take mine,
assuring me that any time would do for him.

I suggested, curtly, that as Doubleday had not yet had his holiday I
considered he had first choice.

"Oh," he said, "I don't think so.  Besides, Batchelor, Doubleday and I
could both be away at the same time; but I really would hardly feel
comfortable in going unless you could take charge of the petty-cash
while I am away."

"Smith will be back," I said; "he could do that for you."

As I expected, his face clouded.

"I can't agree with you there, Batchelor.  But don't let us talk of
that.  I hope you will choose the time you would like best.  I can
easily arrange for any time."

"I don't know what makes you so wonderfully civil," said I, losing
patience at all this soft soap.  "After all that has happened,
Hawkesbury, I should have thought you might have spared yourself this
gush, as far as I was concerned."

"I would like bygones to be bygones between us, Batchelor.  I know quite
well I have been to blame in many things!  I am sorry for them now, if
it prevents our being friends."

And he smiled sweetly.

I gave it up in disgust, and let him say what he liked.  It was not
worth the trouble of preventing him, unless I was prepared for an open
rupture, which just then I felt would be unwise, both on Jack's account
and my own.

So he had the satisfaction of believing his sweetness had made its due
impression on my savage breast, and of scoring to himself a victory in
consequence.

As I had found it before, hard work proved now to be the best specific
for dull spirits, and during the next few days I gave the remedy a full
trial.

It seemed ages before any letter came from Packworth, and I was dying to
hear.  For meanwhile all sorts of doubts and fears took hold of me.  How
had that strange family meeting gone off?  Had it been marred by
Masham's cruel letter? or was the poor lost father once more finding
happiness in the sight of one whom he had last seen an infant beside his
dead wife?  Surely if sympathy and common interest were to count for
kinship, I was as much a member of that little family as any of them!

At last the letter came.  It was from Jack:

"Dear Fred,--We got down on Wednesday.  Father went that night to the
hotel, as his heart failed him at the last moment.  I went on to Mrs
Shield's, and found your telegram on my arrival.  I was horrified, but
hardly surprised at what it told me.  Happily, Mary was in bed, as I had
not been expected till the morning, so I was able to explain all to Mrs
Shield.  She knew all about it before I told her; for the enclosed
letter had arrived by the post in the morning, addressed to Mary.
Mercifully, seeing it was in a strange hand, and, as I have often told
you, being most jealously careful of Mary, Mrs Shield took it into her
head to open the letter and read it before giving it to Mary, and you
may imagine her utter horror.  She of course did not let her see it, and
thus saved the child from what would have been a fearful shock; and I
was able to break it all to her gradually.  Father is to come this
evening--I am thankful it is all so well over.

"How are you getting on?  Anything fresh at Hawk Street?  I don't envy
Hawkesbury or his friend their feelings just now; but I am determined to
take no notice of this last brutal plot.  Good-bye now.

"Yours ever,--

"J.S."

The enclosure, written in an evidently disguised hand, was as follows:--

"An unknown admirer thinks it may interest Mary Smith to know that her
father is a common thief and swindler, who has just come back from
fourteen years' penal servitude among the convicts.  He is now living in
London with his son, Mary's brother, who, Mary may as well know, is
following close in his dear father's footsteps, however pious he may
seem to others.  This is the truth, or the writer would not have taken
the trouble to send it.  The best thing, if Mary wants to prevent the
whole affair being made public, is to make her brother leave his place
in London at once, and go somewhere in the country where he will be a
nuisance to nobody."

My first feeling on reading this was one of devout thankfulness for the
Providence which had kept it from falling into the hands for which it
was designed.  But my wrath soon drove out every other feeling--wrath
ten times the more fierce because it was helpless.

I could do nothing.  I might go and attempt to thrash Masham, or I might
thrash Hawkesbury, who was equally to blame, if not more.  But what good
would it do?  It would only make bad worse.  Jack's secret, instead of
being the private property of a few, would become common talk.  I should
be unable to bring positive proof of my charges, and even if I could, I
should only be putting myself in the wrong by using force to redress my
wrongs.  No, after all, the only punishment was to take no notice of the
affair, to let the two blackguards flatter themselves their plot had
succeeded, and to leave them to find out as best they could that they
had failed.

So I kept my hands resolutely in my pockets when next I met Hawkesbury,
and consoled myself by picturing what his feelings would have been, had
he known that that letter of his and his friend's was in my pocket all
the time.

However, my resolution to have nothing to do with him was upset very
shortly, and in an unexpected manner.

Since the eventful morning when Jack and I had had that unlucky
conversation at Hawk Street, I had not again put in an appearance there
before the stated time.  Now, however, that I was all by myself in town,
with very few attractions towards a solitary walk, and a constant sense
of work to catch up at Hawk Street, it occurred to me one fine morning--
I should say one wet morning--when the streets were very uninviting, to
seek shelter at the unearthly hour of half-past eight in Messrs.
Merrett, Barnacle, and Company's premises.

The housekeeper, greatly to my satisfaction, was engaged in clearing out
the offices below ours, so that I was able to ascend without challenge
and establish myself at my desk.  I had not been there five minutes when
another footstep sounded on the stairs and Hawkesbury entered.

I had thought it quite possible he might be there when I arrived, and
was therefore not nearly so surprised to see him as he appeared to see
me.

"What, Batchelor!" he exclaimed, "are you here?"

"Yes," I replied, "are you?"
