Aberdeen.

Most of the cattle that happened to be on board the ill-fated steamer
were saved, and among them was Squeaky.  Shrieky, too, managed to
escape.  His cage having been smashed in the general confusion he was
set free, and flew wildly towards the pier, where he took refuge in the
bosom of a sailor, who took care of him.  Ultimately he and his
companion in distress were restored to their friends.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

HOME AGAIN.

A few days after the events narrated in the last chapter, Gaff and his
son arrived by stage-coach in the town of Wreckumoft, and at once
started off for the village of Cove.

It was night.  There was no moon, but the stars shone brightly in a
clear sky, affording sufficient light to show them their road.

Neither of them spoke.  Their minds were filled with anxiety, for the
thought that was uppermost and ever-present in each was, "Are they well?
are they _alive_?"  They did not utter the thought, however.

"It's a long bit since you an' I was here, Billy," observed Gaff in a
low voice.

"Ay, very long," replied the lad.

They walked on again at a smart pace, but in silence.

Presently they heard footsteps approaching, and a man soon came up from
the direction of Cove.

"Foine noight," said the man.

"Fine night it is," responded Gaff and Billy in the same breath.

Gaff suddenly turned and accosted the stranger just as he had passed
them.

"D'ye belong to Cove?"

"No, I doan't; only stoppin' there a bit."

"Ye don't happen to know a 'ooman o' the name o' Gaff, do ye?"

"Gaff--Gaff," repeated the man, meditating; "no, I niver heern on her."

"Hm; thought pr'aps ye might--good-night."

"Good-noight."

And the man went his way.

"Ah!  Billy, my heart misgives me, boy," said Gaff after a pause.

It was evident that Billy's heart misgave him too, for he made no reply.

The distance to Cove being only three miles, they were not long in
reaching the cottage, although their pace had become slower and slower
as they approached the village, and they stopped altogether when they
first came in sight of their old home.

A light shone brightly in the little window.  They glanced at each other
on observing this, but no word escaped them.  Silently they approached
the cottage-window and looked in.

Gaff started back with a slight exclamation of surprise, for his eye
fell on the new and strange furniture of the "boodwar."  Billy looked
round with a searching eye.

"There's nobody in," he said at length, "but look, daddy, the old
clock's there yet."

Gaff did not know whether this was a good or a bad omen, for any one who
had taken and refurnished the cottage might have bought the old clock
and kept it as a sort of curiosity.

While they were gazing, the door of the closet opened and Mrs Gaff came
out.  She was a little stouter, perhaps, than she had been five years
before, but not a whit less hale or good-looking.

"Mother--God bless her!" murmured Billy in a deep earnest voice.

"Where can Tottie be?" whispered Gaff anxiously.

"Maybe she's out," said Billy.

The lad's voice trembled while he spoke, for he could not but reflect
that five years was a long long time, and Tottie might be dead.

Before Gaff spoke again, the closet door once more opened, and a slender
sprightly girl just budding into womanhood tripped across the room.

"Hallo!" exclaimed Billy, "who can that--surely! impossible! yes it is,
it _must_ be Tot, for I could never mistake her mouth!"

"D'ye see any sign of--of--a man?" said Gaff in a voice so deep and
peculiar, that his son turned and looked at him in surprise.

"No, daddy--why? what d'ye ask that for?"

"'Cause it's not the first time a sailor has comed home, after bein'
many years away, and found that his wife had guv him up for dead, an'
married again."

Gaff had often thought of the possibility of such a thing during his
prolonged residence on the island, and the thought had cost him many a
bitter pang, but he had never mentioned it to Billy, on whom the idea
fell for the first time like a thunderbolt.  He almost staggered, and
put his hand quickly on the window-sill.

"But come, lad, let's bear up like men.  I'll go in first.  Don't let
on; see if they'll remember us."

So saying, Gaff lifted the latch of the door and stood before his wife
and child.  Billy also entered, and stood a pace behind him.

Mrs Gaff and Tottie, who were both engaged about the fireplace at the
time, in the preparation of supper, turned and looked at the intruders
in surprise, and, for a few seconds, in silence.

The light that fell upon father and son was not very strong, and the
opening of the door had caused it to flicker.

"Come in, if ye wants a word wi' me," said Mrs Gaff, who was somewhat
uneasy at the rugged appearance of her visitors, but was too proud to
show it.

"Hast forgotten me, Jess?"

Mrs Gaff rushed at once into his arms.

"`Bless the Lord, O my soul,'" murmured Gaff, as he smoothed the head
that lay on his shoulder.

Tottie recognised her brother the instant he advanced into the full
light of the fire, and exclaiming the single word "Billy," leaped into
his open arms.

"Not lost after all, thank God," said Gaff, with a deep prolonged sigh,
as he led his wife to a chair and sat down beside her.

"Lost, Stephen, what mean ye?"

"Not married again," said Gaff with a quiet smile.

"Married again! an' _you_ alive! oh, Stephen!"

"Nay, lass, not _believin'_ me alive, but ye've had good reason to think
me dead this many a year."

"An' d'ye think I'd ha' married agin even though ye was dead, lad?"
asked the wife, with a look of reproach.

"Well, I believe ye wouldn't; but it's common enough, ye must admit, for
folk to marry a second time, an' so, many and many a long day I used to
think p'raps Jess'll ha' found it hard to keep herself an' Tottie, an'
mayhap she'll have married agin arter givin' me up for dead."

"Never!" exclaimed Mrs Gaff energetically.

"Well, forgive me for thinkin' it, lass.  I've been punished enough, for
it's cost me many a bitter hour when I was on the island."

"On the island!" exclaimed Tottie in surprise.

"Ay, Tot, but it's an old story that, an' a long one."

"Then you'll have to tell it to me, daddy, and begin at once," said
Tottie, leaving the Bu'ster--who was more entitled to his nickname on
that evening than he had ever been in all his life,--and sitting down
beside her father on the floor.

"Come, let's have fair exchange," said Gaff, pushing his wife towards
Billy, who grasped his mother round her ample waist, and pulled her down
upon his knee!

"You're so big and strong an' handsome," said Mrs Gaff, running her
fingers through her son's voluminous locks, while a few tears tumbled
over her cheeks.

"Mother," said Billy with a gleeful look, "give me a slap on the face;
do, there's a good old woman; I want to feel what it's like now, to see
if I remember it!"

"There!" cried Mrs Gaff, giving him a slap, and no light one--a slap
that would have floored him in days of yore; "you deserve it for calling
me an old woman."

Mrs Gaff followed up the slap with a hug that almost choked her son.

"Make less noise, won't you?" cried Tottie.  "Don't you see that daddy's
going to begin his story?"

Silence being with difficulty obtained, Gaff did begin his story,
intending to run over a few of the leading facts regarding his life
since he disappeared, but, having begun, he found it impossible to stop,
all the more so that no one wanted to stop him.  He became so excited,
too, that he forgot to take note of time, and his audience were so
interested that they paid no attention whatever to the Dutch clock with
the horrified countenance, which, by the way, looked if possible more
horrified than it used to do in the Bu'ster's early days.  Its
preliminary hissing and frequent ringings were unheeded; so were the
more dignified admonitions of the new clock; so was the tea-kettle,
which hissed with the utmost fury at being boiled so long, but hissed in
vain, for it was allowed to hiss its entire contents into thin air, and
then to burn its bottom red hot!  In like manner the large pot of
potatoes evaporated its water, red-heated its bottom, and burned its
contents to charcoal.

This last event it was that aroused Mrs Gaff.

"Lauks! the taties is done for."

She sprang up and tore the pot off the fire.  Tottie did the same to the
kettle, while Gaff and Billy looked on and laughed.

"Never mind, here's another kettle; fill it, Tot, fro' the pitcher,"
said Mrs Gaff; "it'll bile in a few minutes, an' we can do without
taties for one night."

On examination, however, it was found that a sufficient quantity of
eatable potatoes remained in the heart of the burned mass, so the
misfortune did not prove to be so great as at first sight it appeared to
be.

"But now, Jess, let me pump _you_ a bit.  How comes it that ye've made
such a 'xtraornary affair o' the cottage?"

Mrs Gaff, instead of answering, hugged herself, and looked unutterably
sly.  Then she hugged Billy, and laughed.  Tottie laughed too, much more
energetically than there was any apparent reason for.  This caused Billy
to laugh from sympathy, which made Mrs Gaff break out afresh, and Gaff
himself laughed because he couldn't help it!  So they all laughed
heartily for at least two minutes--all the more heartily that half of
them did not know what they were laughing at, and the other half knew
particularly well what they were laughing at!

"Well, now," said Gaff, after a time, "this may be uncommonly funny, but
I'd like to know what it's all about."

Mrs Gaff still looked unutterably sly, and giggled.  At length she
said--

"You must know, Stephen, that I'm a lady!"

"Well, lass, you an't 'xactly a lady, but you're an uncommon good woman,
which many a lady never wos, an' never will be."

"Ay, but I _am_ a lady," said Mrs Gaff firmly; "at least I'm rich, an'
that's the same thing, an't it?"

"I'm not so sure o' that," replied Gaff, shaking his head; "seems to me
that it takes more than money to make a lady.  But what are ye drivin'
at, Jess?"

Mrs Gaff now condescended on explanation.  First of all she made Gaff
and Billy go round the apartment with her, and expounded to them the
signification of the various items, after the manner of a showman.

"Here, you see," said the good woman, pointing to the floor, "is a
splendid carpit strait fro' the looms o' Turkey; so the man said as sold
it to me, but I've reason to believe he told lies.  Hows'ever, there it
is, an' it's a fuss-rater as ye may see.  The roses is as fresh as the
day it was put down, 'xceptin' that one where Tottie capsized a saucepan
o' melted butter an' eggs last Christmas day.  This," (pointing to the
bed), "is a four-poster.  You've often said to me, Stephen, that you'd
like to sleep in a four-poster to see how it felt.  Well, you'll git the
chance now, _my_ man!  This here is a noo grate an' fire-irons, as cost
fi' pun' ten.  The man I got it fro' said it wos a bargain at that, but
some knowin' friends o' mine holds a different opinion.  Here is a noo
clock, as goes eight days of his own accord, an' strikes the halves an'
quarters, but he's not so good as he looks, like many other showy
critters in this world.  That old farmiliar face in the corner does his
dooty better, an' makes less fuss about it.  Then this here is a noo set
o' chimbley ornaments.  I don't think much o' them myself, but Tot says
they're better than nothing.  Them six cheers is the best I ever sat on.
Nothin' can smash 'em.  Mad Haco even can't--"

"Ah! is Haco alive still?" interrupted Gaff.

"Alive, I should think so.  Nothin' 'll kill that man.  I don't believe
buryin' him alive would do it.  He's up at the Sailors' Home just now.
But I'm not done yet.  Here's a portrait o' Lord Nelson, as can look all
round the room.  See, now, git into that corner.  Now, an't he lookin'
at ye?"

"That he is, an' no mistake," replied Gaff.

"Well, git into this other corner; now, an't he lookin' at ye still?"

"To be sure he is!"

"Well, well, don't go for to puzzle yer brains over it.  That pictur'
has nearly druv all the thinkin' men o' Cove mad, so we'll let it alone
just now.  Here's a man-o'-war, ye see; an' this is the steps for
mountin' into the four-poster.  It serves for a--a--some sort o' _man_,
I forget--Tot, _you_ know--"

"An ottoman," said Tottie.

"Ay, a ottyman by day, an' steps-an'-stairs at night.  Look there!"

Mrs Gaff opened up the steps and said, "What d'ye think o' that?"

Gaff said, "Wonderful!" and Billy exclaimed, "Hallo!"

"Yes, Stephen," resumed Mrs Gaff, going to the cupboard and fetching
the tea-caddy, from which she extracted her banker's book, "all them
things was bought for you with your own fortin', which is ten thousand
pound, (an' more, for I've not lived up to the interest by no manner o'
means); an' that there book'll show ye it's all true."

Having reached this point, Mrs Gaff was seized with a fit of laughter,
which she stifled on her husband's breast, and then, flinging herself
into the four-poster, she burst into a flood of tears.

This was the first time in her life that she had given way to such
weakness, and she afterwards said to Tottie, in reference to it, that
she couldn't help it, and had made up her mind to have a good cry once
for all, and be done with it.

Gaff and his son examined the bank-book, and listened with wonder to
Tottie's account of the manner in which their wealth had come to them.
Before the recital was completed, Mrs Gaff had had her cry out, and
dried her eyes.

"What think ye of that, Stephen?" she said, pointing to the book.

Gaff shook his head slowly, and looked very grave.

"I don't much like it, Jess."

"What, don't like money?"

"Too much of it is dangerous.  I hope it won't harm us, lass."

"It's done no harm to me yet, as I knows of," said Mrs Gaff firmly.

"What says the Bible, Tot, about that?" asked Gaff.  "Money's the root
o' all evil, an't it?"

"No, daddy, it's _the love_ o' money that's the root of all evil."

"Ah, to be sure.  Well, there's a difference there.  Hows'ever, we can't
help it, so we must larn to bear it.  Come along now, Jess, and let us
have supper."

To supper they sat down, and long they sat over it, and a hearty one
they ate.  It was not till they began to think of retiring for the night
