you do.  Tightened up as you seem to be with wind or fat or conceit, if
you were to attempt to think the effort would crack your skin, so you'd
better not try.  But, after all, you've some good points about you.  If
it were not that you would become vain I would tell you that you've got
a very good pair of bright eyes, and a pretty mottled skin, and that
you're at least the size of a big chicken--not a plucked but a
full-fledged chicken.  But, O frog, you've got a horribly ugly big
mouth, and you're too fat--a great deal too fat for elegance; though I
have no doubt it's comfortable.  Most fat people are comfortable.  Oh!
you would, would you?"

This last exclamation was caused by the frog making a lazy leap to one
side, tumbling heavily over on its back, and rolling clumsily on to its
legs again, as if it wished to escape from its tormentor, but had
scarcely vigour enough to make the effort.  Peterkin quietly lifted it
up and placed it deliberately before him again in the same attitude as
before.

"Don't try that again, old boy," said he, shaking his finger
threateningly and frowning severely, "else I'll be obliged to give you a
poke in the nose.  I wonder, now, Frog, if you ever had a mother, or if
you only grew out of the earth like a plant.  Tell me, were you ever
dandled in a mother's arms?  Do you know anything of maternal affection,
eh?  Humph!  I suspect not.  You would not look so besottedly stupid if
you did.  I tell you what it is, old fellow: you're uncommonly bad
company, and I've a good mind to ram my knife through you, and carry you
into camp to my friend Ralph Rover, who'll skin and stuff you to such an
extent that your own mother wouldn't know you, and carry you to England,
and place you in a museum under a glass case, to be gazed at by nurses,
and stared at by children, and philosophised about by learned
professors.  Hollo! none o' that now.  Come, poor beast; I didn't mean
to frighten you.  There, sit still, and don't oblige me to stick you up
again, and I'll not take you to Ralph."

The poor frog, which had made another attempt to escape, gazed vacantly
at Peterkin again without moving, except in regard to the puffing before
referred to.

"Now, frog, I'll have to bid you good afternoon.  I'm sorry that time
and circumstance necessitate our separation, but I'm glad that I have
had the pleasure of meeting with you.  Glad and sorry, frog, in the same
breath!  Did you ever philosophise on that point, eh?  Is it possible,
think you, to be glad and sorry at one and the same moment?  No doubt a
creature like you, with such a very small intellect, if indeed you have
any at all, will say that it is not possible.  But I know better.  Why,
what do you call hysterics?  Ain't that laughing and crying at once--
sorrow and joy mixed?  I don't believe you understand a word that I say.
You great puffing blockhead, what are you staring at?"

The frog, as before, refused to make any reply; so our friend lay for
some time chuckling and making faces at it.  While thus engaged he
happened to look up, and to our surprise as well as alarm we observed
that he suddenly turned as pale as death.

To cock our rifles, and take a step forward so as to obtain a view in
the direction in which he was gazing with a fixed and horrified stare,
was our immediate impulse.  The object that met our eyes on clearing the
bushes was indeed well calculated to strike terror into the stoutest
heart; for there, not three yards distant from the spot on which our
friend lay, and partially concealed by foliage, stood a large black
rhinoceros.  It seemed to have just approached at that moment, and had
been suddenly arrested, if not surprised, by the vision of Peterkin and
the frog.  There was something inexpressibly horrible in the sight of
the great block of a head, with its mischievous-looking eyes, ungainly
snout, and ponderous horn, in such close proximity to our friend.  How
it had got so near without its heavy tread being heard I cannot tell,
unless it were that the noise of the turbulent brook had drowned the
sound.

But we had no time either for speculation or contemplation.  Both Jack
and I instantly took aim--he at the shoulder, as he afterwards told me;
I at the monster's eye, into which, with, I am bound to confess, my
usual precipitancy, I discharged both barrels.

The report seemed to have the effect of arousing Peterkin out of his
state of fascination, for he sprang up and darted towards us.  At the
same instant the wounded rhinoceros crossed the spot which he had left
with a terrific rush, and bursting through the bushes as if it had been
a great rock falling from a mountain cliff, went headlong into the
rivulet.

Without moving from the spot on which we stood, we recharged our pieces
with a degree of celerity that, I am persuaded, we never before
equalled.  Peterkin at the same time caught up his rifle, which leaned
against a tree hard by, and only a few seconds elapsed after the fall of
the monster into the river ere we were upon its banks ready for another
shot.

The portion of the bank of the stream at this spot happened to be rather
steep, so that the rhinoceros, on regaining his feet, experienced
considerable difficulty in the attempts to clamber out, which he made
repeatedly and violently on seeing us emerge from among the bushes.

"Let us separate," said Jack; "it will distract his attention."

"Stay; you have blown out his eye, Ralph, I do believe," said Peterkin.

On drawing near to the struggling monster we observed that this was
really the case.  Blood streamed from the eye into which I had fired,
and poured down his hideous jaws, dyeing the water in which he
floundered.

"Look out!" cried Jack, springing to the right, in order to get on the
animal's blind side as it succeeded in effecting a landing.

Peterkin instantly sprang in the same direction, while I bounded to the
opposite side.  I have never been able satisfactorily to decide in my
own mind whether this act on my part was performed in consequence of a
sudden, almost involuntary, idea that by so doing I should help to
distract the creature's attention, or was the result merely of an
accidental impulse.  But whatever the cause, the effect was most
fortunate; for the rhinoceros at once turned towards me, and thus, being
blind in the other eye, lost sight of Jack and Peterkin, who with the
rapidity almost of thought leaped close up to its side, and took close
aim at the most vulnerable parts of its body.  As they were directly
opposite to me, I felt that I ran some risk of receiving their fire.
But before I had time either to reflect that they could not possibly
miss so large an object at so short a distance, or to get out of the
way, the report of both their heavy rifles rang through the forest, and
the rhinoceros fell dead almost at my feet.

"Hurrah!" shouted Peterkin, throwing his cap into the air at this happy
consummation, and sitting down on the haunch of our victim.

"Shame on you, Peterkin," said I, as I reloaded his rifle for
him--"shame on you to crow thus over a fallen foe!"

"Ha, boy! it's all very well for you to say that now, but you know well
enough that you would rather have lost your ears than have missed such a
chance as this.  But, I say, it'll puzzle you to stuff that fellow,
won't it?"

"No doubt of it," answered Jack, as he drew a percussion cap from his
pouch, and placed it carefully on the nipple of his rifle.  "Ralph will
not find it easy; and it's a pity, too, not to take it home with us, for
under a glass case it would make such a pretty and appropriate
_pendant_, in his museum, to that interesting frog with which you--"

"Oh, you sneaking eavesdropper!" cried Peterkin, laughing.  "It is
really too bad that a fellow can't have a little _tete-a-tete_ with a
friend but you and Ralph must be thrusting your impertinent noses in the
way."

"Not to mention the rhinoceros," observed Jack.

"Ah! to be sure--the rhinoceros; yes, I might have expected to find you
in such low company, for `birds of a feather,' you know, are said to
`flock together.'"

"If there be any truth in that," said I, "you are bound, on the same
ground, to identify yourself with the frog."

"By the way," cried Peterkin, starting up and looking around the spot on
which his interesting _tete-a-tete_ had taken place, "where is the frog?
It was just here that--Ah!--oh!--oh! poor, poor frog!

  "`Your course is run, your days are o'er;
  We'll never have a chat no more,'

"As Shakespeare has it.  Well, well, who would have thought that so
conversable and intelligent a creature should have come to such a
melancholy end?"

The poor frog had indeed come to a sad and sudden end, and I felt quite
sorry for it, although I could not help smiling at my companion's quaint
manner of announcing the fact.

Not being gifted with the activity of Peterkin, it had stood its ground
when the rhinoceros charged, and had received an accidental kick from
the great foot of that animal which had broken its back and killed it
outright.

"There's one comfort, however," observed Jack, as we stood over the
frog's body: "you have been saved the disagreeable necessity of killing
it yourself, Ralph."

This was true, and I was not sorry that the rhinoceros had done me this
service; for, to say truth, I have ever felt the necessity of killing
animals in cold blood to be one of the few disagreeable points in the
otherwise delightful life of a naturalist.  To shoot animals in the heat
and excitement of the chase I have never felt to be particularly
repulsive or difficult; but the spearing of an insect, or the deliberate
killing of an unresisting frog, are duties which I have ever performed
with a feeling of deep self-abhorrence.

Carefully packing my frog in leaves, and placing it in my pouch, I
turned with my companions to quit the scene of our late encounter and
return to our camp, on arriving at which we purposed sending back
Makarooroo to cut off the horn of the rhinoceros; for we agreed that, as
it was impossible to carry away the entire carcass, we ought at least to
secure the horn as a memorial of our adventure.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

WE SEE STRANGE THINGS, AND GIVE OUR NEGRO FRIENDS THE SLIP.

During the two following days we passed through a country that was more
thickly covered with the indiarubber vine than any place we had before
met with in our African travels.  I could not help feeling regret that
such a splendid region should be almost, if not altogether, unknown and
useless to civilised man.  There seemed to be an unlimited supply of
caoutchouc; but the natives practised a method of gathering it which had
the effect of destroying the vine.

One day, some weeks after this, we came upon the habitation of a most
remarkable species of monkey, named the Nshiego Mbouve, which we had
often heard of, but had not up to that time been so fortunate as to see.
Being exceedingly anxious to observe how this remarkable creature made
use of its singular house, Peterkin and I lay down near the place, and
secreting ourselves in the bushes, patiently awaited the arrival of the
monkey, while Jack went off in another direction to procure something
for supper.

"I don't believe he'll come home to-night," said Peterkin, after we had
lain down.  "People never do come in when any one chances to be waiting
for them.  The human race seems to be born to disappointment.  Did you
never notice, Ralph, how obstinately contrary and cross-grained things
go when you want them to go otherwise?"

"I don't quite understand you," said I.

"Of course you don't.  Yours seems to be a mind that can never take
anything in unless it is hammered in by repetition."

"Come now, Peterkin, don't become, yourself, an illustration of your own
remark in reference to cross-grained things."

"Well, I won't.  But seriously, Ralph, have you not observed, in the
course of your observant life, that when you have particular business
with a man, and go to his house or office, you are _certain_ to find him
out, to use the common phrase?  It would be more correct, however, to
say `you are certain not to find him in.'"

"You are uncommonly particular, Peterkin."

"Truly I had need to be so, with such an uncommonly stupid audience."

"Thank you.  Well?"

"Well, have you never observed that if you have occasion to call at a
house where you have never been before, the number of that particular
house is not in its usual place, and you find it after a search quite
away from where it ought to be?  Has it never struck you that when you
take out your umbrella, the day is certain to become hot and sunny;
while, if you omit to carry it with you, it is sure to rain?"

"From all of which you conclude," said I, "that the Nshiego will not
come home to-night?"

"Exactly so; that is my meaning precisely."

After Peterkin said this, we relapsed into silence; and it was well that
we did so, for had we continued our conversation even in the whispering
tones in which it had up to that time been conducted, we should have
frightened away the ape which now came, as it were, to rebuke Peterkin
for his unbelief.

Coming quickly forward, the Nshiego Mbouve chambered quickly up the tree
where its nest was built.  This nest was not a structure _into_ which it
clambered, but a shelter or canopy formed of boughs with their leaves,
somewhat in shape like an umbrella, under which it sat.  The
construction of this shelter exhibited a good deal of intelligent
ingenuity on the part of the ape; for it was tied to the tree by means
of wild vines and creepers, and formed a neat, comfortable roof, that
was quite capable of shedding the night dews or heavy rains, and thus
protecting its occupant.

We were greatly amused by the manner in which the creature proceeded to
make itself comfortable.  Just below the canopy was a small branch which
jutted out horizontally from the stem of the tree.  On this branch the
ape seated itself, its feet and haunches resting thereon.  Then it threw
one arm round the tree, and hugging that lovingly to its side, gave what
appeared to me to be a small sigh of satisfaction, and prepared to go to
sleep.

At this Peterkin chuckled audibly.  The Nshiego's eyes opened at once.
I cocked my gun and took aim.  The desire to procure a specimen was very
strong within me, but an unconquerable aversion to kill an animal in
such cozy circumstances restrained me.  The Nshiego got up in alarm.  I
pointed the gun, but could not fire.  It began to descend.  I pulled the
trigger, and, I am happy to add, missed my aim altogether, to the
intense delight of Peterkin, who filled the woods with laughter, while
the Nshiego Mbouve, dropping to the ground, ran shrieking from the spot.

My forbearance at this time was afterwards repaid by my obtaining two
much finer specimens of this shelter-building ape, both of which were
killed by Peterkin.

On quitting this place we had a narrow escape, the recollection of which
still fills me with horror.  We were walking rapidly back towards our
encampment, chatting as we went, when Peterkin suddenly put his foot on
what appeared to be the dead branch of a tree.  No sooner had he done so
than the curling folds of a black snake fully ten feet long scattered
the dry leaves into the air, and caused us both to dart aside with a
yell of terror.

I have thought that in the complicated and wonderful mechanism of man
there lies a species of almost involuntary muscular power which enables
him to act in all cases of sudden danger with a degree of prompt
celerity that he could not possibly call forth by a direct act of
volition.  At all events, on the present emergency, without in the least
degree knowing what I was about, I brought my gun from my shoulder into
a horizontal position, and blew the snake's head off almost in an
instant.

I have pondered this subject, and from the fact that while at one time a
man may be prompt and courageous in case of sudden danger, at another
time the same man may become panic-stricken and helpless, I have come to
the conclusion that the all-wise Creator would teach us--even the
bravest among us--the lesson of our dependence upon each other, as well
as our dependence upon Himself, and would have us know that while at one
time we may prove a tower of strength and protection to our friends, at
another time our friends may have to afford succour and protection to
us.

I have often wondered, in reference to this, that many men seem to take
pride in bold independence, when it is an obvious fact that _every_ man
is dependent on his fellow, and that this mutual dependence is one of
the chief sources of human happiness.

The black snake which I had killed turned out to be one of a very
venomous kind, whose bite is said to be fatal, so that we had good cause
to be thankful, and to congratulate ourselves on our escape.

In this region of Africa we were particularly fortunate in what we saw
and encountered, as the narrative of our experiences on the day
following the above incidents will show.

We had scarcely advanced a few miles on our journey on the morning of
that day, when we came upon a part of the country where the natives had
constructed a curious sort of trap for catching wild animals; and it
happened that a large band of natives were on the point of setting out
for a grand hunt at that time.

We were greeted with immense delight on our arrival, for those natives,
we soon discovered, had already heard of our exploits in the lands of
the gorilla, and regarded us as the greatest hunters that had ever been
born.  After a short conversation with the chief, through the medium of
Makarooroo, we arranged to rest there a day, and accompany them on their
hunting expedition; and the better to secure their good will, we
presented some of the head men with a few of the beads which we still
possessed.  Then hauling our canoe out of the water, we prepared
ourselves for the chase.

After a long and tedious march through somewhat dense jungle, we came
