out for the day, so that you may have time to think over it.  This cabin
o' yours ain't just the thing, you know,--raither dirty, and too high in
the clouds by a long way, so I've bin an' seen a noo house on the river,
not unlike this one, an' I wants you to shift your berth.  What say
'ee--eh?"

To the Captain's surprise and dismay, the old woman shook her head
decidedly, and no argument which he could bring to bear had the least
effect on her.  She had, in fact, got used to her humble old home, and
attached to it, and could not bear the thought of leaving it.  Having
exhausted his powers of suasion in vain, he left her to think over it,
and sallied forth crestfallen.  However, he consoled himself with the
hope that time and consideration would bring her to a right state of
mind.  Meanwhile he would go to the parties interested, and communicate
the contents of Willum's letter.

He went first to Doctor Lawrence, who was delighted as well as pleased
at what it contained.  The Captain at first read only the clauses which
affected his friends the Stoutleys, and said nothing about that which
referred to the Doctor himself.

"So you see, Doctor, I'm off to let the Stoutleys know about this little
matter, and just looked in on you in passing."

"It was very kind of you, Captain."

"Not at all, by no means," returned the Captain, pulling out a large
clasp-knife, with which he proceeded carefully to pare his left thumb
nail.  "By the way, Doctor," he said carelessly, "were you ever in
love?"

Lawrence flushed, and cast a quick glance at his interrogator, who,
however, was deeply engaged with the thumb nail.

"Well, I suppose men at my time of life," he replied, with a laugh,
"have had some--"

"Of course--of course," interrupted the other, "but I mean that I wonder
a strapping young fellow like you, with such a good practice, don't get
married."

The Doctor, who had recovered himself, laughed, and said that his good
practice was chiefly among the poor, and that even if he wished to
marry--or rather, if any one would have him--he would never attempt to
win a girl while he had nothing better than two hundred a year and
prospects to offer her.

"Then I suppose you _would_ marry if you had something better to offer,"
said the Captain, finishing off the nail and shutting the clasp-knife
with a snap.

Again the Doctor laughed, wondered why the Captain had touched on such a
theme, and said that he couldn't exactly say what he might or might not
do if circumstances were altered.

The Captain was baffled.  However, he said that circumstances _were_
altered, and, after reading over the latter part of Willum's letter,
left Lawrence to digest it at his leisure.

We need not follow him on his mission.  Suffice it to say that he
carried no small amount of relief to the minds of Mrs Stoutley and her
household; and, thereafter, met Gillie by appointment at Charing Cross,
whence he went to Kensington to see a villa, with a view to purchasing
it.

At night he again essayed to move Mrs Roby's resolution, and many a
time afterwards attacked her, but always with the same result.
Although, as he said, he fought like a true-blue British seaman, and
gave her broadside after broadside as fast as he could load and fire, he
made no impression on her whatever.  She had nailed her colours to the
mast and would never give in.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

IN WHICH TREMENDOUS FORCES COME TO THE CAPTAIN'S AID.

It is probable that most people can recall occasions when
"circumstances" have done for them that which they have utterly failed
to effect for themselves.

Some time after the failure of Captain Wopper's little plots and plans
in regard to Mrs Roby, "circumstances" favoured him--the wind shifted
round, so to speak, and blew right astern.  To continue our metaphor, it
blew a tremendous gale, and the Captain's ends were gained at last only
by the sinking of the ship!

This is how it happened.  One afternoon the Captain was walking rather
disconsolately down the Strand in company with his satellite--we might
almost say, his confidant.  The street was very crowded, insomuch that
at one or two crossings they were obliged to stand a few minutes before
venturing over,--not that the difficulty was great, many active men
being seen to dodge among the carts, drays, vans, and busses with
marvellous ease and safety, but the Captain was cautious.  He was wont
to say that he warn't used to sail in such crowded waters--there warn't
enough o' sea room for him--he'd rather lay-to, or stand--off-an'-on for
half a day than risk being run down by them shore-goin' crafts.

"Everything in life seems to go wrong at times," muttered the Captain,
as he and the satellite lay-to at one of these crossings.

"Yes, it's coorious, ain't it, sir," said Gillie, "an' at other times
everything seems to go right--don't it, sir?"

"True, my lad, that's a better view to take of it," returned the
Captain, cheerfully, "come, we'll heave ahead."

As they were "heaving" along in silence, the rattle and noise around
them being unsuited to conversation, they suddenly became aware that the
ordinary din of the Strand swelled into a furious roar.  Gillie was half
way up a lamp-post in an instant! from which elevated position he looked
down on the Captain, and said--

"A ingine!"

"What sort of a ingine, my lad?"

"A fire! hooray!" shouted Gillie, with glittering eyes and flushed
countenance, "look out, Cappen, keep close 'longside o' me, under the
lee o' the lamp-post.  It's not a bad buffer, though never quite a sure
one, bein' carried clean away sometimes by the wheels w'en there's a bad
driver."

As he spoke, the most intense excitement was manifested in the crowded
thoroughfare.  Whips were flourished, cabmen shouted, horses reared,
vehicles of all kinds scattered right and left even although there had
seemed almost a "block" two seconds before.  Timid foot passengers
rushed into shops, bold ones mounted steps and kerb-stones, or stood on
tip-toe, and the Captain, towering over the crowd, saw the gleam of
brass helmets as the charioteer clove his way through the swaying mass.

There is something powerfully exciting to most minds in the sight of men
rushing into violent action, especially when the action may possibly
involve life and death.  The natural excitement aroused in the Captain's
breast was increased by the deep bass nautical roar that met his ear.
Every man in the London fire-brigade is, or used to be, a picked
man-of-war's-man, and the shouting necessary in such a thoroughfare to
make people get out of the way was not only tremendous but unceasing.
It was as though a dozen mad "bo's'ns," capped with brazen war-helmets,
had been let loose on London society, through which they tore at full
gallop behind three powerful horses on a hissing and smoking monster of
brass and iron.  A bomb shell from a twenty-five-ton gun could scarce
have cut a lane more effectually.  The Captain took off his hat and
cheered in sympathy.  The satellite almost dropped from the lamp-post
with excess of feeling.  The crash and roar increased, culminated,
rushed past and gone in a moment.

Gillie dropped to the ground as if he had been shot, seized the
Captain's hand, and attempted to drag him along.  He might as well have
tried to drag Vesuvius from its base, but the Captain was willing.  A
hansom-cab chanced to be in front of them as they dashed into the road,
the driver smoking and cool as a cucumber, being used to such incidents.
He held up a finger.

"Quick, in with you, Cappen!"

Gillie got behind his patron, and in attempting to expedite his
movements with a push, almost sent him out at the other side.

"After the ingine--slap!" yelled Gillie to the face which looked down
through the conversation-hole in the roof, "double extra fare if you
look sharp."

The cabman was evidently a sympathetic soul.  He followed in the wake of
the fire-engine as well as he could; but it was a difficult process,
for, while the world at large made way for _it_, nobody cared a straw
for _him_!

"Ain't it fun?" said Gillie, as he settled his panting little body on
the cushion beside his friend and master.

"Not bad," responded the Captain, who half laughed at the thought of
being so led away by excitement and a small boy.

"I'd give up all my bright prospects of advancement in life," continued
Gillie, "to be a fireman.  There's no fun goin' equal to a fire."

"P'r'aps it don't seem quite so funny to them as is bein' burnt out,"
suggested the Captain.

"Of course it don't, but that can't be helped, you know--can it, sir?
What can't be cured must be endoored, as the proverb says.  Get along,
old fellow, don't spare his ribs--double fare, you know; we'll lose 'em
if you don't."

The latter part of the remark was shouted through the hole to the
cabman, who however, pulled up instead of complying.

"It's of no use, sir," he said, looking down at the Captain, "I've lost
sight of 'em."

Gillie was on the pavement in a moment.

"Never mind, Cappen, give him five bob, an' decline the change; come
along.  _I_ see 'em go past the Bridge, so ten to one it's down about
the docks somewheres--the wust place in London for a fire w'ich, of
course, means the best."

The idea of its being so afforded such unalloyed pleasure to Gillie,
that he found it hard to restrain himself and accommodate his pace to
that of his friend.

It soon became very evident that the fire was in truth somewhere about
the docks, for not only was a dense cloud of smoke seen rising in that
direction, but fire-engines began to dash from side streets everywhere,
and to rush towards the smoke as if they were sentient things impatient
for the fray.

The cause of such unusual vigour and accumulation of power was, that a
fire anywhere about the docks is deemed pre-eminently dangerous, owing
to the great and crowded warehouses being stuffed from cellars to
roof-trees with combustibles.  The docks, in regard to fire, form the
citadel of London.  If the enemy gets a footing there, he must be
expelled at all hazards and at any cost.

As the Captain and his _protege_ hurried along, they were naturally led
in the direction of their home.  A vague undefined fear at the same
instant took possession of both, for they glanced gravely at each other
without speaking, and, as if by mutual consent, began to run.  Gillie
had no need now to complain of his companion's pace.  He had enough to
do to keep up with it.  There were many runners besides themselves now,
for the fire was obviously near at hand, and the entire population of
the streets seemed to be pressing towards it.  A few steps more brought
them in sight of the head of Grubb's Court.  Here several fire-engines
were standing in full play surrounded by a swaying mass of human beings.
Still there was no sign of the precise locality of the fires for the
tall houses hid everything from view save the dense cloud which
overshadowed them all.

Even Captain Wopper's great strength would have been neutralised in such
a crowd if it had not now been seconded by an excitement and anxiety
that nothing could resist.  He crushed his way through as if he had been
one of the steam fire-engines, Gillie holding tight to the stout tails
of his monkey jacket.  Several powerful roughs came in his way, and
sought to check him.  The Captain had hitherto merely used his shoulders
and his weight.  To the roughs he applied a fist--right and left--and
two went down.  A few seconds brought him to the cordon of policemen.
They had seen him approaching, and one placed himself in front of the
Captain with the quiet air of a man who is accustomed _never_ to give
way to physical force!

"I live down Grubb's Court, my man," said the Captain, with an eager
respectful air, for he was of a law-abiding spirit.

The constable stepped aside, and nodded gravely.  The Captain passed the
line, but Gillie was pounced upon as if he had been a mouse and the
constable a cat.

"_He_ belongs to me," cried the Captain, turning back on hearing
Gillie's yell of despair.

The boy was released, and both flew down the Court, on the pavement of
which the snake-like water-hose lay spirting at its seams.

"It's in the cabin," said the Captain, in a low deep voice, as he dashed
into the Court, where a crowd of firemen were toiling with cool, quiet,
yet tremendous energy.  No crowd interrupted them here, save the few
frantic inhabitants of the Court, who were screaming advice and doing
nothing; but no attention whatever was paid to them.  A foreman of the
brigade stood looking calmly upwards engaged in low-toned conversation
with a brother fireman, as if they were discussing theories of the
picturesque and beautiful with special application to chimney-cans,
clouds of smoke, and leaping tongues of fire.

Immense engine power had been brought to bear, and one of the gigantic
floating-engines of the Thames had got near enough to shower tons of
water over the buildings, still it was a matter of uncertainty whether
the fire could be confined to the Court where it had originated.

The result of the foreman's quiet talk was that the brother-fireman
suddenly seized a nozzle from a comrade, and made a dash at the door
leading up to "the cabin."  Flames and smoke drove him back instantly.

It was at this moment that Captain Wopper came on the scene.  Without a
moment's hesitation he rushed towards the same door.  The foreman seized
his arm.

"It's of no use, sir, you can't do it."

The Captain shook him off and sprang in.  A few seconds and he rushed
out choking, scorched, and with his eyes starting almost out of their
sockets.

"It is of no use, sir," remonstrated the foreman, "besides, the people
have all bin got out, I'm told."

"No, they 'aven't," cried Mrs White, coming up at the moment,
frantically wringing the last article of linen on which she had been
professionally engaged, "Mrs Roby's there yet."

"All right, sir," said the foreman, with that quiet comforting
intonation which is peculiar to men of power, resource, and
self-reliance, "come to the back.  The escape will be up immediately.
It couldn't get down the Court, owin' to some masonry that was piled
there, and had to be sent round."

Quick to understand, the Captain followed the fireman, and reached the
back of the house, on the riverside, just as the towering head of the
escape emerged from a flanking alley.

"This way.  The small window on the right at the top--so."

The ladder was barely placed when the Captain sprang upon it and ran up
as, many a time before, he had run up the shrouds of his own vessel.  A
cheer from the crowd below greeted this display of activity, but it was
changed into a laugh when the Captain, finding the window shut and
bolted, want into the room head first, carrying frame and glass along
with him!  Divesting himself of the uncomfortable necklace, he looked
hastily round.  The smoke was pretty thick, but not sufficiently so to
prevent his seeing poor Mrs Roby lying on the floor as if she had
fallen down suffocated.

"Cheer up, old lass," he cried, kneeling and raising her head tenderly.

"Is that you, Cappen?" said the old woman, in a weak voice.

"Come, we've no time to lose.  Let me lift you; the place is all alight.
I thought you was choked."

"Choked! oh dear, no," replied the old woman, "but I've always heard
that in a fire you should keep your face close to the ground for air--
Ah! gently, Cappen, dear!"

While she was speaking, the Captain was getting her tucked under his
strong right arm.  He could have whisked her on his shoulder in a
moment, but was afraid of her poor old bones, and treated her as if she
had been a fragile China tea-cup of great value.

Next moment he was out on the escape, and reached the ground amid
ringing cheers.  He carried her at once to the nearest place of safety,
and, committing her to the care of Mrs White, rushed back to the scene
of conflagration just as they were about to remove the escape.

"Stop!" shouted the Captain, springing on it.

"There's nobody else up, is there?" cried a fireman, as the Captain ran
up.

"No, nobody."

"Come down then, directly," roared the fireman, "the escape is wanted
elsewhere.  Come down, I say, or we'll leave you."

"You're welcome to leave me," roared the Captain, as he stepped into the
window, "only hold your noise, an' mind your own business."

With a mingled feeling of amusement and indignation they hurried away
with the escape.  It had been urgently wanted to reach a commanding
position whence to assail the fire.  The order to send it was
peremptory, so the Captain was left in his uncomfortable situation, with
the smoke increasing around him, and the fire roaring underneath.

The actions of our seaman were now curious as well as prompt.  Taking a
blanket from his old friend's bed, he spread it below the chimney-piece,
and in a remarkably short time pulled down, without damaging, every
object on the wall and threw it into the blanket.  He then added to the
heap the Chinese lantern, the Turkish scimitar, the New Zealand club,
the Eastern shield, the ornamented dagger, the worsted work sampler, the
