older men, who were unfit for much work, were taken. Then there was
a pause, for already many cargoes of captives had reached
Alexandria, and the resources of their benevolent countrymen were
becoming exhausted.

No one had yet bid for John or Jonas, as the slave dealers had
placed a high price upon them as being strong and active, and
fitted for hard work. Their great fear was that they should be
separated; and John had, over and over again, assured his companion
that should he, as he hoped, succeed in getting himself sent to
Titus, and so be freed, he would, before proceeding home, come to
Egypt and purchase his friend's freedom.

The event they feared, however, did not happen. One day a Roman,
evidently of high rank, came into the market and, after looking
carelessly round, fixed his eyes upon John and his companion, and
at once approached their master. A few minutes were spent in
bargaining; then the dealer unfastened the fetters which bound
them, and the Roman briefly bade them follow him.

He proceeded through the crowded streets, until they were in the
country outside the town. Here, villas with beautiful gardens lined
the roads. The Roman turned in at the entrance to one of the
largest of these mansions. Under a colonnade, which surrounded the
house, a lady was reclining upon a couch. Her two slave girls were
fanning her.

Illustration: 'Lesbia,' the Roman said, 'I have brought you two
more slaves.'

"Lesbia," the Roman said, "you complained, yesterday, that you had
not enough slaves to keep the garden in proper order, so I have
bought you two more from the slave market. They are Jews, that
obstinate race that have been giving Titus so much trouble. Young
as they are, they seem to have been fighting, for both of them are
marked with several scars."

"I dare say they will do," the lady said. "The Jews are said to
understand the culture of the vine and fig better than other
people, so they are probably accustomed to garden work."

The Roman clapped his hands, and a slave at once appeared.

"Send Philo here."

A minute later a Greek appeared.

"Philo, here are two slaves I have brought from the market. They
are for work in the garden. See that they do it, and let me know
how things go on. We shall know how to treat them, if they are
troublesome."

Philo at once led the two new slaves to the shed, at a short
distance from the house, where the slaves employed out of doors
lodged.

"Do you speak Greek?" he asked.

"As well as my native language," John replied.

"My lord Tibellus is a just and good master," Philo said, "and you
are fortunate in having fallen into his hands. He expects his
slaves to work their best and, if they do so, he treats them well;
but disobedience and laziness he punishes, severely. He is an
officer of high rank in the government of the city. As you may not
know the country, I warn you against thinking of escape. The Lake
of Mareotis well-nigh surrounds the back of the city and, beyond
the lake, the Roman authority extends for a vast distance, and none
would dare to conceal runaway slaves."

"We shall not attempt to escape," John said, quietly, "and are well
content that we have fallen in such good hands. I am accustomed to
work in a garden, but my companion has not had much experience at
such work; therefore, I pray you be patient with him, at first."

John had agreed with Jonas that, if they had the good fortune to be
sold to a Roman, they would not, for a time, say anything about the
ring. It was better, they thought, to wait until Titus returned to
Rome--which he would be sure to do, after the complete conquest of
Jerusalem. Even were they sent to him there, while he was still
full of wrath and bitterness against the Jews--for the heavy loss
that they had inflicted upon his army, and for the obstinacy which
compelled him to destroy the city which he would fain have
preserved, as a trophy of his victory--they might be less
favourably received than they would be after there had been some
time for the passions awakened by the strife to abate; especially
after the enjoyment of the triumph which was sure to be accorded to
him, on his return after his victory.

The next day the ring, the badge of slavery, was fastened round the
necks of the two new purchases. John had already hidden in the
ground the precious ring, as he rightly expected that he would have
to work barefooted. They were at once set to work in the garden.
John was surprised at the number and variety of the plants and
trees which filled it; and at the beauty and care with which it was
laid out, and tended. Had it not been for the thought of the grief
that they would be suffering, at home, he would--for a time--have
worked contentedly. The labour was no harder than that on his
father's farm; and as he worked well and willingly Philo, who was
at the head of the slaves employed in the garden--which was a very
extensive one--did not treat him with harshness.

Jonas, although less skilful, also gave satisfaction; and two
months passed without any unpleasant incident. The Roman slaves,
save in exceptional instances, were all well treated by their
masters, although these had power of life and death over them. They
were well fed and, generally, had some small money payment made
them. Sometimes, those who were clever at a handicraft were let out
to other masters, receiving a portion of the wages they earned; so
that they were frequently able, in old age, to purchase their
freedom.

There were four other slaves who worked in the garden. Two of these
were Nubians, one a Parthian, the other a Spaniard. The last died,
of homesickness and fever, after they had been there six weeks; and
his place was filled up by another Jew, from a cargo freshly
arrived.

From him, John learned what had taken place after he had left
Jerusalem. The bands of Simon and John of Gischala were so much
weakened, by death and desertion, and were so enfeebled by famine,
that they could not hope to withstand the regular approaches of the
Roman arms, for any length of time. The two leaders therefore
invited Titus to a parley; and the latter, being desirous of
avoiding more bloodshed, of saving the Palace of Herod and the
other great buildings in the upper city, and of returning to Rome
at once, agreed to meet them. They took their places at opposite
ends of the bridge across the Tyropceon Valley.

Titus spoke first, and expostulated with them on the obstinacy
which had already led to the destruction of the Temple, and the
greater part of the city. He said that all the world, even to the
distant Britons, had done homage to the Romans, and that further
resistance would only bring destruction upon them. Finally, he
offered their lives to all, if they would lay down their arms and
surrender themselves as prisoners of war.

Simon and John replied that they and their followers had bound
themselves, by a solemn oath, never to surrender themselves into
the hands of the Romans; but they expressed their willingness to
retire, with their wives and families, into the wilderness, and
leave the Romans in possession of the city. Titus considered this
language, for men in so desperate a position, to be a mockery; and
answered sternly that, henceforth, he would receive no deserters,
and show no mercy, and that they might fight their hardest. He at
once ordered the destruction of all the buildings standing round
the Temple.

The flames spread as far as the Palace of Helena, on Ophel, to the
south of the Temple platform. Here the members of the royal family
of Adiabene dwelt, and also in the Palaces of Grapte and Monobazus;
and the descendants of Helena now went over to the Romans, and
Titus, although he had declared that he would in future spare none,
did not take their lives, seeing that they were of royal blood.

Simon and John of Gischala, when they heard that the Adiabene
princes had gone over to the Romans, rushed to the Palace of
Helena, sacked it, and murdered all who had taken refuge in the
building--seven thousand in number. They then sacked the rest of
the outer lower town, and retired with their booty into the high
town.

Titus, furious at this conduct, ordered all the outer lower town to
be burned; and soon, from the Temple platform to the Fountain of
Siloam, a scene of desolation extended. The Roman soldiers then
commenced to throw up banks, the one against Herod's Palace, the
other near the bridge across the valley close to the Palace of
Agrippa.

The Idumeans, under Simon, were opposed to further resistance, and
five of their leaders opened communication with Titus, who was
disposed to treat with them; but the conspiracy was discovered by
Simon, and the five leaders executed. Still, in spite of the
watchfulness of Simon and John, large numbers of the inhabitants
made their escape to the Romans who, tired of slaying, spared their
lives, but sold the able-bodied as slaves, and allowed the rest to
pass through their lines.

On the 1st of September, after eighteen days' incessant labour, the
bank on the west against Herod's Palace was completed, and the
battering rams commenced their work. The defenders were too
enfeebled, by famine, to offer any serious resistance and, the next
day, a long line of the wall fell to the ground.

Simon and John at first thought of cutting their way through the
Roman ranks but, when they saw how small was the body of followers
gathered round them, they gave up the attempt. They hesitated, for
a moment, whether they should throw themselves into the three great
towers, and fight to the last; or endeavour to fight their way
through the wall of circumvallation.

They chose the latter course, hurried down to the lower end of the
upper city and, sallying out from the gate, they rushed at the
Roman wall; but they had no engines of war to batter it, they were
few in number and weakened by famine; and when they tried to scale
the wall the Roman guards, assembling in haste, beat them back; and
they returned into the city and, scattering, hid themselves in the
underground caves.

The Romans advanced to the great towers, and found them deserted.
Titus stood amazed at their strength and solidity; and exclaimed
that God, indeed, was on their side for that by man, alone, these
impregnable towers could never have been taken.

All resistance having now ceased, the Romans spread themselves
through the city, slaughtering all whom they met, without
distinction of age or sex. They were, however, aghast at the
spectacle which the houses into which they burst presented. Some of
these had been used as charnel houses, and had been filled with
dead bodies. In others were found the remains of whole families
who, with their servants, had shut themselves up to die of hunger.
Everywhere the dead far outnumbered the living.

The next day, Titus issued an order that only such as possessed
arms should be slain, and that all others should be taken
prisoners; but the Roman soldiers were too infuriated at the losses
and defeats they had suffered even to obey the orders of Titus, and
all save the able-bodied, who would be of value as slaves, were
slaughtered. A vast number of those fit for slaves were confined in
the charred remains of the Women's Court and, so weakened were
these, by the ravages of famine, that eleven thousand of them are
said to have perished. Of the survivors, some were selected to
grace the triumphal procession at Rome. Of the remainder, all under
the age of seventeen were sold as slaves. A part of those above
that age were distributed, among the amphitheatres of Syria, to
fight as gladiators against the wild beasts; and the rest were
condemned to labour in the public works, in Egypt, for the rest of
their lives.

When all above the surface had been slain, or made prisoners, the
Romans set to work methodically to search the conduits, sewers, and
passages under the city. Multitudes of fugitives were found here,
and all were slain as soon as discovered. Then the army was set to
work, to raze the city to the ground. Every building and wall were
thrown down, the only exception being a great barrack adjoining
Herod's Palace--which was left for the use of one of the legions,
which was to be quartered there for a time--and the three great
towers--Hippicus, Phasaelus, and Mariamne--which were left
standing, in order that they might show to future generations how
vast had been the strength of the fortifications which Roman valour
had captured.

John of Gischala and Simon had both so effectually concealed
themselves that for a time, they escaped the Roman searchers. At
the end of some days, however, John was compelled by famine to come
out, and surrender. Simon was much longer, before he made his
appearance. He had taken with him into his hiding place a few of
his followers, and some stone masons with their tools, and an
effort was made to drive a mine beyond the Roman outposts. The rock
however was hard, and the men enfeebled by famine; and the
consequence was that Simon, like his fellow leader, was compelled
to make his way to the surface.

The spot where he appeared was on the platform of the Temple, far
from the shaft by which he had entered the underground galleries.
He appeared at night, clad in white, and the Roman guards at first
took him for a spectre; and he thus escaped instant death, and had
time to declare who he was. Titus had already left; but Terentius
Rufus--who commanded the Tenth Legion, which had been left
behind--sent Simon in chains to Titus, at Caesarea; and he, as well
as John of Gischala, were taken by the latter to Rome, to grace his
triumph.

"It is strange," John said, when he heard the story, "that the two
men who have brought all these woes upon Jerusalem should have both
escaped with their lives. The innocent have fallen, and the guilty
escaped--yet not escaped, for it would have been better for them to
have died fighting, in the court of the Temple, than to live as
slaves in the hands of the Romans."

A month later, John learned the fate that had befallen the two
Jewish leaders. Both were dragged in the triumphal procession of
Titus through the streets of Rome; then, according to the cruel
Roman custom, Simon was first scourged and then executed, as the
bravest of the enemies of Rome, while John of Gischala was
sentenced to imprisonment for life.

The day after the news of the return to Rome and triumph of Titus
arrived, John asked Philo to tell Tibellus that he prayed that he
would hear him, as he wished to speak to him on a subject connected
with Titus. Wondering what his Jewish slave could have to say about
the son of the emperor, Tibellus, upon hearing from Philo of the
request, at once ordered John to be brought to him.

"Let me bring my companion, also, with me," John said to Philo. "He
is my adopted brother, and can bear evidence to the truth of my
statements."

When they reached the colonnade Philo told them to stop there and,
a minute later, Tibellus came out.

"Philo tells me that you have something to say to me, concerning
Titus."

"I have, my lord," John said, and he advanced and held out the
ring.

The Roman took it, and examined it.

"It is a signet ring of Titus!" he said, in surprise. "How came you
by this? This is a grave matter, slave; and if you cannot account
satisfactorily as to how you came possessed of this signet, you had
better have thrown yourself into the sea, or swallowed poison, than
have spoken of your possession of this signet."

"It was given to me by Titus, himself." John said.

The Roman made a gesture of anger.

"It is ill jesting with the name of Caesar," he said, sternly.
"This is Caesar's ring. Doubtless it was stolen from him. You may
have taken it from the robber by force, or fraud, or as a gift--I
know not which--but do not mock me with such a tale as that Caesar
gave one of his signets to you, a Jew."

"It is as I said," John replied, calmly. "Titus himself bestowed
that ring upon me; and said that, if I desired to come to him at
any time, and showed it to a Roman, it would open all doors, and
bring me to his presence."

"You do not speak as if you were mad," Tibellus said, "and yet your
tale is not credible.

"Are you weary of life, Jew? Do you long to die by torture? Philo
has spoken well to me of you and your young companion. You have
laboured well, and cheerfully, he tells me; and are skilled at your
work. Do you find your lot so hard that you would die to escape it,
and so tell me this impossible story? For death, and a horrible
death, will assuredly be your portion. If you persist in this tale
and, showing me this ring, say: 'I demand that you send me and my
companion to Titus,' I should be bound to do so; and then torture
and death will be your portion, for mocking the name of Caesar."

"My lord," John said, calmly, "I repeat that I mock not the name of
Caesar, and that what I have told you is true. I am not weary of
life, or discontented with my station. I have been kindly treated
by Philo, and work no harder than I should work at my father's
farm, in Galilee; but I naturally long to return home. I have
abstained from showing you this ring before, because Titus had not
as yet conquered Jerusalem; but now that I hear he has been
received in triumph, in Rome, he would have time to give me an
audience; and therefore I pray that I may be sent to him."

"But how is it possible that Titus could have given you this ring?"
Tibellus asked, impressed by the calmness of John's manner, and yet
still unable to believe a statement which appeared to him
altogether incredible.

"I will tell you, my lord, but I will tell you alone; for although
Titus made no secret of it at the time, he might not care for the
story to be generally told."

Tibellus waved his hand to Philo, who at once withdrew.

"You have found it hard to believe what I have told you, my lord,"
John went on. "You will find it harder, still, to believe what I
now tell you; but if it is your command, I am bound to do so."

"It is my command," Tibellus said, shortly. "I would fain know the
whole of this monstrous tale."

"I must first tell you, my lord, that though as yet but twenty-one
years old, I have for four years fought with my countrymen against
the Romans.

"You see," he said, pointing to the scars on his head, arms, and
body, "I have been wounded often and, as you may see for yourself,
some of these scars are yet unhealed. Others are so old that you
can scarce see their traces. This is a proof of so much, at least,
of my story. My companion here and I were, by the protection of our
God, enabled to escape from Jotapata, when all else save Josephus
perished there. This was regarded by my countrymen as well-nigh a
miracle, and as a proof that I had divine favour. In consequence a
number of young men, when they took up arms, elected me as their
leader and, for three years, we did what we could to oppose the
progress of the Roman arms. It was as if a fly should try to stop a
camel. Still, we did what we could, and any of the Roman officers
who served under Titus would tell you that, of those who opposed
them in the field, there was no more active partisan than the
leader who was generally known as John of Gamala."

"You, John of Gamala!" Tibellus exclaimed. "In frequent letters
from my friends with the army I have read that name, and heard how
incessant was the watchfulness required to resist his attacks, and
how often small garrisons and parties were cut off by him. It was
he, too, who burned Vespasian's camp, before Gamala. And you tell
me, young man, that you are that Jewish hero--for hero he was,
though it was against Rome he fought?"

"I tell you so, my lord; and my adopted brother here, who was with
me through these campaigns, will confirm what I say. I say it not
boastingly, for my leadership was due to no special bravery on my
part, but simply because the young men of the band thought that God
had specially chosen me to lead them."

"And now, about Titus," Tibellus said briefly, more and more
convinced that his slave was audaciously inventing this story.

"Once, near Hebron," John said, "I was passing through a valley,
alone; when Titus, who was riding from Carmelia in obedience to a
summons from Vespasian--who was at Hebron--came upon me. He
attacked me, and we fought--"

"You and Titus, hand to hand?" Tibellus asked, with a short laugh.

"Titus and I, hand to hand," John repeated, quietly. "He had
wounded me twice, when I sprang within his guard and closed with
him. His foot slipped, and he fell. For a moment I could have slain
him, if I would, but I did not.

"Then I fainted from loss of blood. Titus was shortly joined by
some of his men, and he had me carried down to his camp; where I
was kindly nursed for a week, he himself visiting me several times.
At the end of that time he dismissed me, giving me his signet ring,
and telling me that if ever again I fell into the hands of the
Romans, and wished to see him, I had but to show the ring to a
Roman, and that he would send me to him."

"And to him you shall go," Tibellus said, sternly; "and better
would it have been that you had never been born, than that I should
send you to him with such a tale as this."

So saying, he turned away, while John and his companion returned to
their work. The Roman officer was absolutely incredulous, as to the
story he had heard; and indignant in the extreme at what he
considered the audacity of the falsehood. Still, he could not but
be struck by the calmness with which John told the story, nor could
he see what motive he could have in inventing it. Its falsity
would, of course, be made apparent the instant he arrived in Rome;
whereas had he said, as was doubtless the truth, that he had
obtained the ring from one who had stolen it from Titus, he might
have obtained his freedom, and a reward for its restoration.

After thinking the matter over for a time, he ordered his horse and
rode into the city. One of the legions from Palestine had returned
there, while two had accompanied Titus to Rome, and a fourth had
remained in Judea. Tibellus rode at once to the headquarters of the
commander of the legion. He had just returned, with some of his
officers, from a parade of the troops. They had taken off their
armour, and a slave was pouring wine into goblets for them.

"Ah, Tibellus!" he said, "Is it you? Drink, my friend, and tell us
what ails you, for in truth you look angered and hot."

"I have been angered, by one of my slaves," Tibellus said.
