guard, that it might go quietly to the table, the meat-safe, or the
pantry, and there--deliberately--steal!

Kate had grown very much since we saw her last.  She was quite a woman
now, and well worthy of a minute description here; but we never could
describe a woman to our own satisfaction.  We have frequently tried, and
failed; so we substitute, in place, the remarks of Kate's friends and
acquaintances about her--a criterion on which to form a judgment that is
a pretty correct one, especially when the opinion pronounced happens to
be favourable.  Her father said she was an angel, and the only joy of
his life.  This latter expression, we may remark, was false; for Mr
Kennedy frequently said to Kate, confidentially, that Charley was a
great happiness to him; and we are quite sure that the pipe had
something to do with the felicity of his existence.  But the old
gentleman _said_ that Kate was the _only_ joy of his life, and that is
all we have to do with at present.  Several ill-tempered old ladies in
the settlement said that Miss Kennedy was really a quiet, modest girl--
testimony this (considering the source whence it came) that was quite
conclusive.  Then old Mr Grant remarked to old Mr Kennedy, over a
confidential pipe, that Kate was certainly, in his opinion, the most
modest and the prettiest girl in Red River.  Her old school companions
called her a darling.  Tom Whyte said "he never see'd nothink like her
nowhere."  The clerks spoke of her in terms too glowing to remember; and
the last arrival among them, the youngest, with the slang of the "old
country" fresh on his lips, called her a _stunner_!  Even Mrs Grant got
up one of her half-expressed remarks about her, which everybody would
have supposed to be quizzical in its nature, were it not for the
frequent occurrence of the terms "good girl," "innocent creature," which
seemed to contradict that idea.  There were also one or two hapless
swains who _said_ nothing, but what they _did_ and _looked_ was in
itself unequivocal.  They went quietly into a state of slow, drivelling
imbecility whenever they happened to meet with Kate; looked as if they
had become shockingly unwell, and were rather pleased than otherwise
that their friends should think so too; and upon all and every occasion
in which Kate was concerned, conducted themselves with an amount of
insane stupidity (although sane enough at other times) that nothing
could account for, save the idea that their admiration of her was
inexpressible, and that _that_ was the most effective way in which they
could express it.

"Kate, my darling," said Mr Kennedy, as he finished the last mouthful
of tea, "wouldn't it be capital to get another letter from Charley?"

"Yes, dear papa, it would indeed.  But I am quite sure that the next
time we shall hear from him will be when he arrives here, and makes the
house ring with his own dear voice."

"How so, girl?" said the old trader, with a smile.  It may as well be
remarked here that the above opening of conversation was by no means
new; it was stereotyped now.  Ever since Charley had been appointed to
the management of Lower Fort Garry, his father had been so engrossed by
the idea, and spoke of it to Kate so frequently, that he had got into a
way of feeling as if the event so much desired would happen in a few
days, although he knew quite well that it could not, in the course of
ordinary or extra-ordinary circumstances, occur in less than several
months.  However, as time rolled on he began regularly, every day or
two, to ask Kate questions about Charley that she could not by any
possibility answer, but which he knew from experience would lead her
into a confabulation about his son, which helped a little to allay his
impatience.

"Why, you see, father," she replied, "it is three months since we got
his last, and you know there has been no opportunity of forwarding
letters from Stoney Creek since it was dispatched.  Now, the next
opportunity that occurs--"

"Mee-aow!" interrupted the cat, which had just finished two pats of
fresh butter without being detected, and began, rather recklessly, to
exult.

"Hang that cat!" cried the old gentleman angrily, "it'll be the death o'
me yet;" and seizing the first thing that came to hand, which happened
to be the loaf of bread, discharged it with such violence, and with so
correct an aim, that it knocked, not only the cat, but the teapot and
sugar-bowl also, off the table.

"O dear papa!" exclaimed Kate.

"Really, my dear," cried Mr Kennedy, half angry and half ashamed, "we
must get rid of that brute immediately.  It has scarcely been a week
here, and it has done more mischief already than a score of ordinary
cats would have done in a twelvemonth."

"But then, the mice, papa--"

"Well, but--but--oh, hang the mice!"

"Yes; but how are we to catch them?" said Kate.

At this moment the cook, who had heard the sound of breaking crockery,
and judged it expedient that he should be present, opened the door.

"How now, rascal!" exclaimed his master, striding up to him.  "Did I
ring for you, eh?"

"No, sir; but--"

"But! eh, but! no more `buts,' you scoundrel, else I'll--"

The motion of Mr Kennedy's fist warned the cook to make a precipitate
retreat, which he did at the same moment that the cat resolved to run
for its life.  This caused them to meet in the doorway, and making a
compound entanglement with the mat, they both fell into the passage with
a loud crash.  Mr Kennedy shut the door gently, and returned to his
chair, patting Kate on the head as he passed.

"Now, darling, go on with what you were saying; and don't mind the
teapot--let it lie."

"Well," resumed Kate, with a smile, "I was saying that the next
opportunity Charley can have will be by the brigade in spring, which we
expect to arrive here, you know, a month hence; but we won't get a
letter by that, as I feel convinced that he and Harry will come by it
themselves."

"And the express canoe, Kate--the express canoe," said Mr Kennedy, with
a contortion of the left side of his head that was intended for a wink;
"you know they got leave to come by express, Kate."

"Oh, as to the express, father, I don't expect them to come by that, as
poor Harry Somerville has been so ill that they would never think of
venturing to subject him to all the discomforts, not to mention the
dangers, of a canoe voyage."

"I don't know that, lass--I don't know that," said Mr Kennedy, giving
another contortion with his left cheek.  "In fact, I shouldn't wonder if
they arrived this very day; and it's well to be on the look-out, so I'm
off to the banks of the river, Kate."  Saying this, the old gentleman
threw on an old fur cap with the peak all awry, thrust his left hand
into his right glove, put on the other with the back to the front and
the thumb in the middle finger, and bustled out of the house, muttering
as he went, "Yes, it's well to be on the look-out for him."

Mr Kennedy, however, was disappointed: Charley did not arrive that day,
nor the next, nor the day after that.  Nevertheless the old gentleman's
faith each day remained as firm as on the day previous that Charley
would arrive on _that_ day "for certain."  About a week after this, Mr
Kennedy put on his hat and gloves as usual, and sauntered down to the
banks of the river, where his perseverance was rewarded by the sight of
a small canoe rapidly approaching the landing-place.  From the costume
of the three men who propelled it, the cut of the canoe itself, the
precision and energy of its movements, and several other minute points
about it only apparent to the accustomed eye of a nor'-wester, he judged
at once that this was a new arrival, and not merely one of the canoes
belonging to the settlers, many of which might be seen passing up and
down the river.  As they drew near he fixed his eyes eagerly upon them.

"Very odd," he exclaimed, while a shade of disappointment passed over
his brow: "it ought to be him, but it's not like him; too big--different
nose altogether.  Don't know any of the three.  Humph!--well, he's
_sure_ to come to-morrow, at all events."  Having come to the conclusion
that it was not Charley's canoe, he wheeled sulkily round and sauntered
back towards his house, intending to solace himself with a pipe.  At
that moment he heard a shout behind him, and ere he could well turn
round to see whence it came, a young man bounded up the bank and seized
him in his arms with a hug that threatened to dislocate his ribs.  The
old gentleman's first impulse was to bestow on his antagonist (for he
verily believed him to be such) one of those vigorous touches with his
clinched fist which in days of yore used to bring some of his disputes
to a summary and effectual close; but his intention changed when the
youth spoke.

"Father, dear, dear father!" said Charley, as he loosened his grasp,
and, still holding him by both hands, looked earnestly into his face
with swimming eyes.

Old Mr Kennedy seemed to have lost his powers of speech.  He gazed at
his son for a few seconds in silence, then suddenly threw his arms
around him and engaged in a species of wrestle which he intended for an
embrace.

"O Charley, my boy!" he exclaimed, "you've come at last--God bless you!
Let's look at you.  Quite changed: six feet; no, not quite changed--the
old nose; black as an Indian.  O Charley, my dear boy!  I've been
waiting for you for months; why did you keep me so long, eh?  Hang it,
where's my handkerchief?"  At this last exclamation Mr Kennedy's
feelings quite overcame him; his full heart overflowed at his eyes, so
that when he tried to look at his son, Charley appeared partly magnified
and partly broken up into fragments.  Fumbling in his pocket for the
missing handkerchief, which he did not find, he suddenly seized his fur
cap, in a burst of exasperation, and wiped his eyes with that.
Immediately after, forgetting that it _was_ a cap, he thrust it into his
pocket.

"Come, dear father," cried Charley, drawing the old man's arm through
his, "let us go home.  Is Kate there?"

"Ay, ay," cried Mr Kennedy, waving his hand as he was dragged away, and
bestowing, quite unwittingly, a backhanded slap on the cheek to Harry
Somerville, which nearly felled that youth to the ground.  "Ay, ay!
Kate, to be sure, darling.  Yes, quite right, Charley; a pipe--that's
it, my boy, let's have a pipe!"  And thus, uttering incoherent and
broken sentences, he disappeared through the doorway with his long-lost
and now recovered son.

Meanwhile Harry and Jacques continued to pace quietly before the house,
waiting patiently until the first ebullition of feeling at the meeting
of Charley with his father and sister should be over.  In a few minutes
Charley ran out.

"Hollo, Harry! come in, my boy; forgive my forgetfulness, but--"

"My dear fellow," interrupted Harry, "what nonsense you are talking!  Of
course you forgot me, and everybody and everything on earth, just now;
but have you seen Kate?  Is--"

"Yes, yes," cried Charley, as he pushed his friend before him, and
dragged Jacques after him into the parlour.--"Here's Harry, father,
Jacques.--You've heard of Jacques, Kate?"

"Harry, my dear boy!" cried Mr Kennedy, seizing his young friend by the
hand; "how are you, lad?  Better, I hope."

At that moment Mr Kennedy's eye fell on Jacques, who stood in the
doorway, cap in hand, with the usual quiet smile lighting up his
countenance.

"What!  Jacques--Jacques Caradoc!" he cried, in astonishment.

"The same, sir; you an' I have know'd each other afore now in the way o'
trade," answered the hunter, as he grasped his old bourgeois by the hand
and wrung it warmly.

Mr Kennedy, senior, was so overwhelmed by the combination of exciting
influences to which he was now subjected, that he plunged his hand into
his pocket for the handkerchief again, and pulled out the fur hat
instead, which he flung angrily at the cat; then using the sleeve of his
coat as a substitute, he proceeded to put a series of abrupt questions
to Jacques and Charley simultaneously.

In the meantime Harry went up to Kate and _stared_ at her.  We do not
mean to say that he was intentionally rude to her.  No!  He went towards
her intending to shake hands, and renew acquaintance with his old
companion; but the moment he caught sight of her he was struck not only
dumb, but motionless.  The odd part of it was that Kate, too, was
affected in precisely the same way, and both of them exclaimed mentally,
"Can it be possible?"  Their lips, however, gave no utterance to the
question.  At length Kate recollected herself, and blushing deeply, held
out her hand, as she said--

"Forgive me, Har--Mr Somerville; I was so surprised at your altered
appearance I could scarcely believe that my old friend stood before me."

Harry's cheeks crimsoned as he seized her hand and said: "Indeed, Ka--
a--Miss--that is, in fact, I've been very ill, and doubtless have
changed somewhat; but the very same thought struck me in regard to
yourself, you are so--so--"

Fortunately for Harry, who was gradually becoming more and more
confused, to the amusement of Charley, who had closely observed the
meeting of his friend and sister, Mr Kennedy came up.

"Eh! what's that?  What did you say _struck_ you, Harry, my lad?"

"_You_ did, father, on his arrival," replied Charley, with a broad grin,
"and a very neat back-hander it was."

"Nonsense, Charley," interrupted Harry, with a laugh.--"I was just
saying, sir, that Miss Kennedy is so changed that I could hardly believe
it to be herself."

"And I had just paid Mr Somerville the same compliment, papa," cried
Kate, laughing and blushing simultaneously.

Mr Kennedy thrust his hands into his pockets, frowned portentously as
he looked from the one to the other, and said slowly, "_Miss_ Kennedy,
_Mr_ Somerville!" then turning to his son, remarked, "That's something
new, Charley lad; that girl is _Miss_ Kennedy, and that youth there is
_Mr_ Somerville!"

Charley laughed loudly at this sally, especially when the old gentleman
followed it up with a series of contortions of the left cheek, meant for
violent winking.

"Right, father, right; it won't do here.  We don't know anybody but Kate
and Harry in this house."

Harry laughed in his own genuine style at this.

"Well, Kate be it, with all my heart," said he; "but, really, at first
she seemed so unlike the Kate of former days that I could not bring
myself to call her so."

"Humph!" said Mr Kennedy.  "But come, boys, with me to my smoking-room,
and let's have a talk over a pipe, while Kate looks after dinner."
Giving Charley another squeeze of the hand and Harry a pat on the
shoulder, the old gentleman put on his cap (with the peak behind), and
led the way to his glass divan in the garden.

It is perhaps unnecessary for us to say that Kate Kennedy and Harry
Somerville had, within the last hour, fallen deeply, hopelessly,
utterly, irrevocably, and totally in love with each other.  They did not
merely fall up to the ears in love.  To say that they fell _over_ head
and ears in it would be, comparatively speaking, to say nothing.  In
fact they did not _fall_ into it at all.  They went deliberately
backwards, took a long race, sprang high into the air, turned completely
round, and went down head first into the flood, descending to a depth
utterly beyond the power of any deep-sea lead to fathom, or of any human
mind adequately to appreciate.  Up to that day Kate had thought of Harry
as the hilarious youth who used to take every opportunity he could of
escaping from the counting-room and hastening to spend the afternoon in
rambling through the woods with her and Charley.  But the instant she
saw him a man, with a bright, cheerful countenance, on which rough
living and exposure to frequent peril had stamped unmistakable lines of
energy and decision, and to which recent illness had imparted a
captivating touch of sadness--the moment she beheld this, and the
undeniable scrap of whisker that graced his cheeks, and the slight
_shade_ that rested on his upper lip, her heart leaped violently into
her throat, where it stuck hard and fast, like a stranded ship on a
lee-shore.

In like manner, when Harry beheld his former friend a woman, with
beaming eyes and clustering ringlets, and--(there, we won't attempt
it!)--in fact, surrounded by every nameless and nameable grace that
makes woman exasperatingly delightful, his heart performed the same
eccentric movement, and he felt that his fate was sealed; that he had
been sucked into a rapid which was too strong even for his expert and
powerful arm to contend against, and that he must drift with the current
now, _nolens volens_, and run it as he best could.

When Kate retired to her sleeping-apartment that night, she endeavoured
to comport herself in her usual manner; but all her efforts failed.  She
sat down on her bed, and remained motionless for half an hour; then she
started and sighed deeply; then she smiled and opened her Bible, but
forgot to read it; then she rose hastily, sighed again, took off her
gown, hang it up on a peg, and, returning to the dressing-table, sat
down on her best bonnet; then she cried a little, at which point the
candle suddenly went out; so she gave a slight scream, and at last went
to bed in the dark.

Three hours afterwards, Harry Somerville, who had been enjoying a cigar
and a chat with Charley and his father, rose, and bidding his friends
good-night, retired to his chamber, where he flung himself down on a
chair, thrust his hands into his pockets, stretched out his legs, gazed
abstractedly before him, and exclaimed--"O Kate, my exquisite girl,
you've floored me quite flat!"

As he continued to sit in silence, the gaze of affection gradually and
slowly changed into a look of intense astonishment as he beheld the grey
cat sitting comfortably on the table, and regarding him with a look of
complacent interest, as if it thought Harry's style of addressing it was
highly satisfactory--though rather unusual.

"Brute!" exclaimed Harry, springing from his seat and darting towards
it.  But the cat was too well accustomed to old Mr Kennedy's sudden
onsets to be easily taken by surprise.  With a bound it reached the
floor, and took shelter under the bed, whence it was not ejected until
Harry, having first thrown his shoes, soap, clothes-brush, and
razor-strop at it, besides two or three books and several miscellaneous
articles of toilet, at last opened the door (a thing, by the way, that
people would do well always to remember before endeavouring to expel a
cat from an impregnable position), and drew the bed into the middle of
the room.  Then, but not till then, it fled, with its back, its tail,
its hair, its eyes--in short, its entire body--bristling in rampant
indignation.  Having dislodged the enemy, Harry replaced the bed, threw
off his coat and waistcoat, untied his neckcloth, sat down on his chair
again, and fell into a reverie; from which, after half an hour, he
started, clasped his hands, stamped his foot, glared up at the ceiling,
slapped his thigh, and exclaimed, in the voice of a hen, "Yes, I'll do
it, or die!"



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

THE FIRST DAY AT HOME--A GALLOP IN THE PRAIRIE, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

Next morning, as the quartette were at breakfast, Mr Kennedy, senior,
took occasion to propound to his son the plans he had laid down for them
during the next week.

"In the first place, Charley, my boy," said he, as well as a large
mouthful of buffalo steak and potato would permit, "you must drive up to
the fort and report yourself.  Harry and I will go with you; and after
we have paid our respects to old Grant (another cup of tea, Kate, my
darling)--you recollect _him_, Charley, don't you?"

"Yes, perfectly."

"Well, then, after we've been to see him, we'll drive down the river,
and call on our friends at the mill.  Then we'll look in on the
Thomsons; and give a call, in passing, on old Neverin--he's always out,
so he'll be pleased to hear we were there, and it won't detain us.
Then--"

"But, dear father--excuse my interrupting you--Harry and I are very
anxious to spend our first day at home entirely with you and Kate.
Don't you think it would be more pleasant? and then, to-morrow--"

"Now, Charley, this is too bad of you," said Mr Kennedy, with a look of
affected indignation: "no sooner have you come back than you're at your
old tricks, opposing and thwarting your father's wishes."

"Indeed, I do not wish to do so, father," replied Charley, with a smile;
"but I thought that you would like my plan better yourself, and that it
would afford us an opportunity of having a good long, satisfactory talk
about all that concerns us, past, present, and future."

"What a daring mind you have, Charley," said Harry, "to speak of
cramming a _satisfactory_ talk of the past, the present, and the future
all into _one_ day!"

"Harry will take another cup of tea, Kate," said Charley, with an arch
smile, as he went on--

"Besides, father, Jacques tells me that he means to go off immediately,
to visit a number of his old voyageur friends in the settlement, and I
cannot part with him till we have had one more canter together over the
prairies.  I want to show him to Kate, for he's a great original."

"Oh, that _will_ be charming!" cried Kate.  "I should like of all things
to be introduced to the bold hunter.--Another cup of tea, Mr S--Harry,
I mean?"

Harry started on being thus unexpectedly addressed.  "Yes, if you
please--that is--thank you--no, my cup's full already, Kate!"

"Well, well," broke in Mr Kennedy, senior, "I see you're all leagued
against me, so I give in.  But I shall not accompany you on your ride,
as my bones are a little stiffer than they used to be," (the old
gentleman sighed heavily), "and riding far knocks me up; but I've got
business to attend to in my glass house which will occupy me till
dinner-time."

"If the business you speak of," began Charley, "is not incompatible with
a cigar, I shall be happy to--"

"Why, as to that, the business itself has special reference to tobacco,
and, in fact, to nothing else; so come along, you young dog," and the
