allowed from the company 6 pounds a week, until recovered, or, in the
event of my sinking under my injuries within three months after the
accident, the whole sum of 1000 pounds will be paid to my family."

Mrs Tipps smiled and nodded her head approvingly, but Mrs Marrot still
looked dubious.

"But, sir," she said, "supposin' you don't get either hurt or killed?"

"Why then," replied the elderly gentleman, "I'm all right of course, and
only 50 shillings out of pocket, which, you must admit, is but a
trifling addition to the expenses of a three months' tour.  Besides,
have I not had three months of an easy mind, and of utter regardlessness
as to my life and limbs?  Have not my wife and boys had three months of
easy minds and indifference to my life and limbs also!  Is not all that
cheaply purchased at 30 shillings? while the sum itself, I have the
satisfaction of knowing, goes to increase the funds of that excellent
company which enables you and me and thousands of others to become so
easy-minded and reckless, and which, at the same time, pays its
fortunate shareholders a handsome dividend."

"Really, sir," said Mrs Tipps, laughing, "you talk so enthusiastically
of this Insurance Company that I almost suspect you to be a director of
it."

"Madam," replied the elderly gentleman with some severity, "if I _were_
a director of it, which I grieve to say I am not, I should only be doing
my simple duty to it and to you in thus urging it on your attention.
But I am altogether uninterested in it, except as a philanthropist.  I
see and feel that it does good to myself and to my fellow-men,
_therefore_ I wish my fellow-men to appreciate it more highly than they
do, for it not only insures against accident by railway, but against all
kinds of accidents; while its arrangements are made to suit the
convenience of the public in every possible way."

"Why, madam," he continued, kindling up again and polishing his head
violently, "only think, for the small sum of 4 pounds paid annually, it
insures that you shall have paid to your family, if you chance to be
killed, the sum of 1000 pounds, or, if not killed, 6 pounds a week while
you are totally laid up, and 1 pound, 10 shillings a week while you are
only partially disabled.  And yet, would you believe it, many persons
who see the value of this, and begin the wise course of insurance, go on
for only a few years and then foolishly give it up--disappointed, I
presume, that no accident has happened to them!  See, here is one of
their pamphlets!"

He pulled a paper out of his pocket energetically, and put on a pair of
gold spectacles, _through_ which he looked when consulting the pamphlet,
and _over_ which he glanced when observing the effect of what he read on
Mrs Tipps.

"What do I find--eh? ha--yes--here it is--a Cornish auctioneer pushed
back a window shutter--these are the very words, madam--what more he did
to that shutter, or what it did to him, is not told, but he must have
come by _some_ damage, because he received 55 pounds.  A London clerk
got his eye injured by a hair-pin in his daughter's hair--how suggestive
that is, madam! what a picture it calls up of a wearied toil-worn man
fondling his child of an evening--pressing his cheek to her fair head--
and what a commentary it is (he became very stern here) on the use of
such barbarous implements as hair-pins!  I am not punning, madam; I am
much too serious to pun; I should have used the word savage instead of
barbarous.

"Now, what was the result?  This company gave that clerk compensation to
the extent of 26 pounds.  Again, a medical practitioner fell through the
floor of a room.  It must have been a bad, as it certainly was a
strange, fall--probably he was heavy and the floor decayed--at all
events that fall procured him 120 pounds.  A Cardiff agent was bathing
his feet--why, we are not told, but imagination is not slow to
comprehend the reason, when the severity of our climate is taken into
account; he broke the foot-pan--a much less comprehensible thing--and
the breaking of that foot-pan did him damage, for which he was
compensated with 52 pounds, 16 shillings.  Again, a merchant of
Birkenhead was paid 20 pounds for playing with his children!"

"Dear me, sir!" exclaimed Mrs Marrot in surprise, "surely--"

"Of course, my good woman," said the elderly gentleman, "you are to
understand that he came by some damage while doing so, but I give you
the exact words of the pamphlet.  It were desirable that a _little_ more
information had been given just to gratify our curiosity.  Now, these
that I have read are under the head of `Accidents at Home.'  Under other
`Heads,' we find a farmer suffocated by the falling in of a sand-pit,
for which his representatives received 1000 pounds.  Another thousand is
paid to the heirs of a poor dyer who fell into a vat of boiling liquor;
while, in regard to smaller matters, a warehouseman, whose finger caught
in the cog-wheel of a crane, received 30 pounds.  And, again, here is
1000 pounds to a gentleman killed in a railway accident, and 100 pounds
to a poor woman.  The latter had insured for a single trip in an
excursion train at a charge of two-pence, while the former had a policy
of insurance extending over a considerable period, for which he probably
paid twenty or thirty shillings.  These are but samples, madam, of the
good service rendered to sorrowing humanity by this assurance company,
which, you must observe, makes no pretensions to philanthropic aims, but
is based simply on business principles.  And I find that the total
amount of compensation paid in this manner daring one year by this
Company amounts to about 72,000 pounds."

As Mrs Marrot yawned at this point and Mrs Tipps appeared somewhat
mystified, the enthusiastic gentleman smiled, put away his pamphlet, and
wisely changed the subject.  He commented on the extreme beauty of the
weather, and how fortunate this state of things was for the people who
went to the country for a day's enjoyment.  Thus pleasantly he whiled
away the time, and ingratiated himself with Gertie, until they arrived
at the station where Mrs Tipps and Mrs Marrot had to get out, and
where many of the excursionists got out along with them.  While the
former went their several ways, arranging to meet in the evening and
return together by the same train, the latter scattered themselves over
the neighbouring common and green fields, and, sitting down under the
hedgerows among the wild-flowers, pic-nicked in the sunshine, or
wandered about the lanes, enjoying the song of birds and scent of
flowers, and wishing, perchance, that their lot had been cast among the
green pastures of the country, rather than amid the din and smoke and
turmoil of the town.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

DETAILS A TERRIBLE ACCIDENT.

In due time that holiday came to a close, and the excursionists returned
to the station where their train awaited them.  Among the rest came Mrs
Tipps and Mrs Marrot, but they did not arrive together, and therefore,
much to their annoyance, failed to get into the same carriage.

The weather, which up to that time had kept fine, began to lower, and,
just as the train started, a smart thunder-shower fell, but, being under
cover, the holiday-makers heeded it not.  Upon the whole they were an
orderly band of excursionists.  Some of the separate groups were
teetotallers, and only one or two showed symptoms of having sought to
increase their hilarity by the use of stimulants.

When the shower began, John Marrot and his mate put on their pilot-cloth
coats, for the screen that formed their only protection from the weather
was a thin flat one, without roof or sides, forming only a partial
protection from wind and rain.

Night had begun to descend before the train left the station, and as the
lowering clouds overspread the sky, the gloom rapidly increased until it
became quite dark.

"We are going to have a bad night of it," observed John Marrot as his
mate examined the water-gauge.

"Looks like it," was Garvie's curt reply.

The clatter of the engine and howling of the wind, which had by that
time risen to a gale, rendered conversation difficult; the two men
therefore confined themselves to the few occasional words that were
requisite for the proper discharge of their duties.  It was not a night
on which the thoughts of an engine-driver were likely to wander much.
To drive an excursion train in a dark night through a populous country
over a line which was crowded with traffic, while the rain beat
violently on the little round windows in the screen, obscuring them and
rendering it difficult to keep a good look-out was extremely anxious
work, which claimed the closest and most undivided attention.
Nevertheless, the thoughts of John Marrot did wander a little that night
to the carriage behind him in which were his wife and child, but this
wandering of thought caused him to redouble rather than to relax his
vigilance and caution.

Will Garvie consulted the water-gauge for a moment and then opened the
iron door of the furnace in order to throw in more coal.  The effect
would have stirred the heart of Rembrandt.  The instantaneous blinding
glare of the intense fire shot through the surrounding darkness,
lighting up the two men and the tender as if all were made of red-hot
metal; flooding the smoke and steam-clouds overhead with round masses
and curling lines of more subdued light, and sending sharp gleams
through the murky atmosphere into dark space beyond, where the ghostly
landscape appeared to rush wildly by.

Now it chanced that at the part of the line they had reached, a mineral
train which preceded them had been thrown off the rails by a bale of
goods which had fallen from a previous goods train.  Carelessness on the
part of those who had loaded the truck, from which the bale had fallen,
led to this accident.  The driver and fireman of the mineral train were
rather severely hurt, and the guard was much shaken as well as excited,
so that they neglected to take the proper precaution of sending back one
of their number to stop the train that followed them.  This would have
been a matter of little consequence had the line been worked on the
block system, because, in that case, the danger-signal would have been
kept up, and would have prevented the excursion train from entering on
that portion of the line until it was signalled "clear;" but the block
system had been only partially introduced on the line.  A sufficient
interval of _time_ had been allowed after the mineral train had passed
the last station, and then, as we have seen, the excursion train was
permitted to proceed.  Thus it came to pass that at a part of the line
where there was a slight curve and a deep cutting, John Marrot looking
anxiously through his circular window, saw the red tail-light of the
mineral train.

Instantly he cried, "Clap on the brakes, Bill!"

Almost at the same moment he reversed the engine and opened the whistle
to alarm the guard, who applied his brakes in violent haste.  But it was
too late.  The speed could not be checked in time.  The rails were
slippery, owing to rain.  Almost at full speed they dashed into the
mineral train with a noise like thunder.  The result was appalling.  The
engine was smashed and twisted in a manner that is quite indescribable,
and the tender was turned completely over, while the driver and fireman
were shot as if from a cannon's mouth, high into the air.  The first two
carriages of the passenger-train, and the last van of the mineral, were
completely wrecked; and over these the remaining carriages of the
passenger-train were piled until they reached an incredible height.  The
guard's van was raised high in the air, with its ends resting on a
third-class carriage, which at one end was completely smashed in by the
van.

At the time of the concussion--just after the terrible crash--there was
a brief, strange, unearthly silence.  All was still for a few seconds,
and passengers who were uninjured gazed at each other in mute and
horrified amazement.  But death in that moment had passed upon many,
while others were fearfully mangled.  The silence was almost immediately
broken by the cries and groans of the wounded.  Some had been forcibly
thrown out of the carriages, others had their legs and arms broken, and
some were jammed into fixed positions from which death alone relieved
them.  The scenes that followed were heart-rending.  Those who were
uninjured, or only slightly hurt, lent willing aid to extricate their
less fortunate fellow-travellers, but the howling of the wind, the
deluging rain, and the darkness of the night, retarded their efforts,
and in many cases rendered them unavailing.

John Marrot, who, as we have said, was shot high into the air, fell by
good fortune into a large bush.  He was stunned at first, but otherwise
uninjured.  On regaining consciousness, the first thoughts that flashed
across him were his wife and child.  Rising in haste he made his way
towards the engine, which was conspicuous not only by its own fire, but
by reason of several other fires which had been kindled in various
places to throw light on the scene.  In the wreck and confusion, it was
difficult to find out the carriage, in which Mrs Marrot had travelled,
and the people about were too much excited to give very coherent answers
to questions.  John, therefore, made his way to a knot of people who
appeared to be tearing up the _debris_ at a particular spot.  He found
Joe Turner, the guard, there, with his head bandaged and his face
covered with blood.

"I've bin lookin' for 'ee everywhere, John," said Joe.  "She's _there_!"
he added, pointing to a mass of broken timbers which belonged to a
carriage, on the top of which the guard's van had been thrown, crushing
it almost flat.

John did not require to ask the meaning of his words.  The guard's look
was sufficiently significant.  He said not a word, but the deadly pallor
of his countenance showed how much he felt.  Springing at once on the
broken carriage, and seizing an axe from the hand of a man who appeared
exhausted by his efforts, he began to cut through the planking so as to
get at the interior.  At intervals a half-stifled voice was heard crying
piteously for "John."

"Keep up heart, lass!" said John, in his deep, strong voice.  "I'll get
thee out before long--God helping me."

Those who stood by lent their best aid, but anxious though they were
about the fate of those who lay buried beneath that pile of rubbish,
they could not help casting an occasional look of wonder, amounting
almost to awe, on the tall form of the engine-driver, as he cut through
and tore up the planks and beams with a power that seemed little short
of miraculous.

Presently he stopped and listened intently for a moment, while the
perspiration rolled in big drops from his brow.

"Dost hear me, Mary?" he asked in a deeply anxious tone.

If any reply were uttered it was drowned by the howling of the wind and
the noise of the workmen.

Again he repeated the question in an agonising cry.

His wife did not reply, but Gertie's sweet little voice was heard saying
faintly--

"I think mother is dead.  Oh, take us out, dear father, take us out,--
quick!"

Again John Marrot bowed himself to the task, and exerting his colossal
strength to the utmost, continued to tear up and cast aside the broken
planks and beams.  The people around him, now thoroughly aroused to the
importance of haste, worked with all their might, and, ere long, they
reached the floor of the carriage, where they found mother and child
jammed into a corner and arched over by a huge mass of broken timber.

It was this mass that saved them, for the rest of the carriage had been
literally crushed into splinters.

Close beside them was discovered the headless trunk of a young man, and
the dead body of a girl who had been his companion that day.

Gertie was the first taken out.  Her tender little frame seemed to have
yielded to the pressure and thus escaped, for, excepting a scratch or
two, she was uninjured.

John Marrot did not pause to indulge in any expression of feeling.  He
sternly handed her to the bystanders, and went on powerfully but
carefully removing the broken timbers and planks, until he succeeded in
releasing his wife.  Then he raised her in his arms, staggered with her
to the neighbouring bank and laid her down.

Poor Mrs Marrot was crushed and bruised terribly.  Her clothes were
torn, and her face was so covered with blood and dust as to be quite
unrecognisable at first.  John said not a word, but went down on his
knees and began carefully to wipe away the blood from her features, in
which act he was assisted by the drenching rain.  Sad though his case
was, there was no one left to help him.  The cries of the unfortunate
sufferers still unextricated, drew every one else away the moment the
poor woman had been released.

Ere long the whole scene of the catastrophe was brilliantly illuminated
by the numerous fires which were kindled out of the _debris_, to serve
as torches to those who laboured might and main for the deliverance of
the injured.  Troops of people from the surrounding district quickly
made their appearance on the scene, and while some of these lent
effective aid in the work of rescue, others brought blankets, water, and
spirits, to cover and comfort those who stood so much in need of help.
As the wounded were got out, and laid upon the banks of the line,
several surgeons busied themselves in examining and binding their
wounds, and the spot bore some resemblance to a battle-field after the
tide of war had passed over it.  Seventeen dead and one hundred and
fifty injured already lay upon the wet ground, while many of the living,
who went about with blanched, solemn faces, yet with earnest helpful
energy, were bruised and cut badly enough to have warranted their
retiring from the spot, and having their own cases considered.
Meanwhile a telegram had been sent to Clatterby, and, in a short time, a
special train arrived with several of the chief men of the line, and a
gang of a hundred surface-men to clear away the wreck and remove the
dead and injured.

Many of those unhurt had made singularly narrow escapes.  One man was
seated in a third-class carriage when the concussion took place.  The
