
The season had now come when operations could again be carried on,
and the general was anxious to strike a decisive blow at the enemy,
and then to set forward on the march towards Ava. As to the result
of the fight, no one entertained the slightest doubt; although the
disparity in numbers was very great for, while the Burmese
commander had nearly 70,000 men at his disposal, Sir Archibald
Campbell had no more than 6,000, of whom about one half were
British.

It was determined that the main attack should be made on the
division of Maha Nemiow. This was now some six or seven miles away
and, beyond the fact that it was very strongly intrenched in the
jungle, no information whatever could be gained; for the most
vigilant watch was kept up by them, and all efforts to pass native
spies into their lines failed. But it was known that among his
division were 8,000 Shans, from Upper Burma and, as these men had
not hitherto come in contact with us, it was expected that they
would fight with more courage and resolution than those who had
become acquainted with our power.

A large number of princes and nobles were with the force; and great
reliance was placed, by the Burmese, upon three young ladies of
high rank; who were believed by them to be endowed with
supernatural gifts, and to have the power of rendering the missiles
of the English innocuous. These young women, dressed in warlike
costume, constantly rode among the troops; animating them by their
presence, and exhorting them to deeds of courage. The English had
received vague rumours of the doings of these Burmese Joans of Arc,
and thought it probable that the enemy would fight better than
usual.

On November 30th, arrangements were made for attacking the enemy on
the following morning. The flotilla were to open a furious
cannonade upon their works, on both sides of the river. A body of
native infantry were to drive in the advance posts of the centre;
while the main force was to attack their left in two columns, one
moving directly against it, while the other was to attack on the
right flank--thus preventing the enemy from retreating in the
direction of the centre. Four regiments of native infantry were
left in Prome.

General Cotton commanded the main attack and, soon after the column
moved out from the camp, a tremendous cannonade showed that the
flotilla was engaged with the Burmese, on both sides of the river.
The column, which was composed of the 41st and 89th Regiments, with
two battalions of native infantry, proceeded some distance before
becoming engaged with the enemy's outposts; as the Burmese had been
deceived by the cannonade, and believed that the attack was
entirely upon the centre. The troops therefore reached their main
position, around two native villages, without serious opposition.

Illustration: The old Burmese general was carried from point to
point in a litter.

As they issued from the jungle into the cleared space in front of
the stockade they rapidly formed up, under a tremendous fire, and
rushed forward to the attack. The old Burmese general--who was too
infirm to walk--could be seen, carried from point to point in a
litter, cheering on his men, while the three Amazons exposed
themselves fearlessly to the fire. The ladder parties, however,
rushed forward unchecked and, in spite of the opposition of the
enemy, scaled the stockade at one point, and won a footing on the
rampart of earth behind it. Others pressed after them and, soon, a
destructive fire was opened upon the crowded mass, pent up between
the outer stockade and the next. The Burmese method of forming
stockade behind stockade was useful, against a foe of no greater
dash and energy than themselves; but was absolutely fatal when
opposed to English troops, who gave them no time to fall back
through the narrow openings in the palings. These were soon blocked
by the dying and dead.

Some of the Shans, led by their chiefs, fought with desperate
courage; but were unable to stand the advance of the British, whose
steady volleys, poured in at distances of a few yards, swept them
away. Wounded horses, rushing wildly about in the throng, added to
the terrible confusion. Groups of men endeavoured to cut a way
through the stockades behind, others strove to climb over. Maha
Nemiow was killed, while bravely exhorting his men to stand their
ground, and one of the heroic Amazons was shot. As soon as the
troops reached the spot where she fell, and saw that she was a
woman, she was carried into a cottage; and there died, a few hours
afterwards. Stockade after stockade was carried, until the whole
position fell into our hands.

In the meantime the other column, commanded by General Campbell
himself, and consisting of the 13th, 38th, 47th, and 87th
Regiments, and the 38th Madras Infantry, had moved down on the
other side of the Nawine river; and taken up a position to command
the ford there, by which the fugitives from the stockade must
cross, on their way to join the centre. As the crowd of frightened
men issued from the jungle, and poured across the ford, the
artillery opened upon them with shrapnel, and completed their
discomfiture. All thought of joining the centre was abandoned and,
re-entering the jungle, they scattered; and the greater portion of
them started for their homes, intent only on avoiding another
contest with their foes. Another of the Burmese heroines was
killed, at the ford.

Three hundred men had been killed, at the storming of the stockade;
but a far greater loss took place in the retreat--very few of the
Shans ever regaining their country; the greater portion perishing
from starvation, in the great forests through which they travelled
in order to escape the Burmese authorities, who would have forced
them to rejoin the army.



Chapter 17: The Pride Of Burma Humbled.


As soon as the victory was completed, the troops piled arms; and
were allowed two hours' rest. Then they marched back, to the point
where General Campbell's division had forded the Nawine river in
the morning. From this point, a path led towards the enemy's
centre; this it was determined to attack, at daybreak on the
following morning, before the news of the defeat of its left could
reach it.

The day had been a long and fatiguing one, and it was late before
the troops all reached their halting place. A meal was served out,
and then all lay down to rest. A messenger was sent to Prome, to
announce the success that had been gained; and to request the
commander of the flotilla to open fire, in the morning, as soon as
the foe was seen to issue from the jungle in front of the Wongee's
main position at Napadee.

Long before daylight, the troops were in motion. General Campbell's
division led the way, along the narrow track leading towards the
river; while General Cotton, who followed, was ordered to break off
at any path which led towards the Burmese division, to make his way
through the forest, and to attack the stockades directly he reached
them. The main division would attack, as soon as they heard his
guns.

After a two hours' march, the first division came out on open
ground by the river side, signalled their arrival to the flotilla,
and formed up in front of the stockaded heights of Napadee. The
position was an extremely strong one. The enemy occupied three
ranges of hills, rising one behind the other, and each commanding
the one in front of it. One flank of these hills was protected by
the river, the other by the almost impenetrable forest. The hills
were all covered with stockades and, as they moved forward, the
troops were exposed to so heavy a fire from an enemy entrenched at
the edge of the jungle on the right that, before they could advance
further, it was necessary to first drive them from this position.
Six companies of the 87th were sent back into the forest and,
making their way through this, came down in the rear of the
stockades, speedily cleared them of their defenders, and compelled
the advance force of the enemy to join their main body.

The troops then moved forward to the foot of the first hill, where
two strong redoubts had been erected by the enemy. The fleet opened
fire; but the column was halted, for a time, awaiting the sound of
firing that should tell them General Cotton's column was engaged.
No sound, however, was heard, for this force had been unable to
make its way through the dense forest; and General Campbell, at
last, gave the order for the attack.

It was commenced by the 47th and 38th Native Infantry, under
Colonel Elvington; who pushed through the jungle and forest, until
they reached some of the flanking outworks on the hill. These they
attacked with such dash and determination that they speedily
obtained possession of them, and thus produced a favourable
diversion for the main attack.

This, consisting of the 13th, 38th, and 87th Regiments, advanced
steadily, without returning a shot to the incessant fire from the
enemy's various entrenchments; captured the two redoubts at the
bottom of the hill; and then pressed upwards, carrying position
after position at the point of the bayonet, till they arrived at
the summit of the first hill.

The Burmese fugitives, as they fled to the next line of defence,
shook the courage of the troops there; and the British, pushing
forward hotly on the rear of the flying crowd, carried work after
work until, in the course of an hour, the whole position, nearly
three miles in extent, was entirely in their possession. Between
forty and fifty guns were captured, and the enemy's loss in killed
and wounded was very great while, by desertion alone, the Wongee
lost a third of his army. While the attack had been going on, the
flotilla had passed the works protecting the river face of the
hills, and had captured all the boats and stores, filled with
supplies for the use of the Burmese army.

Thus, two of the three Burmese divisions had now been completely
routed; and there remained only that of Sudda Woon, on the other
side of the river. The troops were allowed two days' rest and, on
the morning of the 5th, a force advanced on board the flotilla.
Their passage across the river was covered by the fire of a rocket
brigade and a mortar battery--which had on the previous night been
established on an island--and they landed at some distance above
the enemy's stockades. They then marched round and attacked these
in flank and rear, while the batteries and boats of the flotilla
cannonaded them in front.

The enemy's troops were already disheartened, by the defeat they
had seen inflicted upon the Wongee's army and, after a feeble
resistance, fled to a second line of stockades in the jungle to
their rear. The troops, however, pressed so hotly upon them that
they were unable to make any effectual opposition here. Numbers
fell, while endeavouring to pass through the narrow entrances of
the work; and the rest fled, in terror, into the woods.

These extensive operations had been carried out with the loss of
six officers, and some seventy or eighty men, only.

It was known that the enemy had very strongly fortified several
positions, in and around Meaday; and it was determined to push
forward, at once, on the long march of three hundred miles to Ava,
before the enemy could rally from their defeat, and gather for the
defence of these positions. On the 9th the first division, under
General Campbell himself, started from Prome. The roads were
extremely bad, and they were able to move but slowly.

Their course was first directed inland; as it was intended to turn
the enemy's position at Meaday, by following a road several miles
from the river, and thus forcing them to fall back as we advanced.
On the next day the force reached the spot where Colonel M'Dowall
had been killed, in the unsuccessful attack upon Maha Nemiow; and
it then turned north, and followed the road parallel to the river.

On the 12th tremendous rains, for some hours, converted the road
into a morass and, although the march was but five miles long, the
greater portion of the column failed to reach its destination.
This, however, was not the worst. Cholera broke out at once, and
carried off a large number of victims--two of the British regiments
being rendered almost unfit for service by its ravages.

On the 14th the division encamped on dry ground, on a ridge of
wooded hills, and waited for a couple of days to allow the baggage
train to come up. The change greatly benefited the health of the
troops, and amusement was afforded by the partridges, jungle fowl,
and deer which abounded in the neighbourhood of the camp.

Up to this point, no single native had been seen. The villages were
all destroyed, and the country was completely deserted. On the 16th
a strong Burmese fortification was taken, it being unoccupied save
by a small picket, which retired on our advance. This had evidently
been erected for the purpose of preventing the river fortifications
from being turned, and its abandonment proved that the object of
the land march had been gained; and that the enemy had abandoned
the positions they had, with so much care, prepared for the defence
of the river.

On the 18th they joined General Cotton's column and, the next day,
entered Meaday. Here a terrible spectacle was met with. The town
and the ground within the stockades was strewn with dead and dying;
some from wounds, others from cholera--for the ravages of this
plague had been as great, among the Burmese, as in the British
force. A number of men were found crucified on gibbets, doubtless
as a punishment for attempting to desert. The air was pestilent;
and the force was glad, indeed, to march on the next morning from
the locality.

They gained something, but not much, from the change. For the next
fifty miles, dead bodies were met with at very short intervals and,
each day before camping, many corpses had to be removed before the
tents could be fixed.

It was now known that the Burmese army, in its retreat, had been
concentrated at Melloon, where the reserve of 10,000 men had been
posted. On the 27th, the division encamped within four miles of
that town. They had now marched a hundred and forty miles, from
Prome, without meeting a single inhabitant of the country, or being
enabled to obtain any cattle, whatever, for the supply of the
troops, so effectually had the enemy wasted the country as they
retired.

Melloon stood on the opposite bank of the Irrawaddy; and letters
had arrived from that town saying that a commissioner had arrived,
from Ava, with full powers from the king to conclude a treaty of
peace. Colonel Adair and Stanley, accordingly, were sent off the
next morning to Melloon, to arrange for an immediate meeting for
the commissioners. However, they could come to no arrangement, the
Burmese leaders insisting that so important a business could only
be carried on when a favourable day arrived; and that no time
could, at present, be stated. Seeing that the principal object of
the Burmese was to gain time, the colonel informed them through
Stanley that, as no arrangements had been made, the troops would
recommence their advance as soon as he returned to the camp and,
accordingly, the next morning the division moved forward to a town
immediately opposite Melloon.

That place stood on the face of a sloping hill and, as the
Irrawaddy was here but 600 yards broad, a good view was obtained of
the fortifications. The principal stockade was in the form of a
square, about a mile on each face, mounting a considerable number
of guns--especially on the side facing the river; and a succession
of stockades extended for a mile farther along the banks. The great
work was crowded with men. In front of the town lay a large fleet
of war boats, and larger craft with stores.

A short time after the troops reached the spot, a great noise of
gongs, drums, and other warlike instruments arose on the other
side, and crowds of boatmen were seen running down to the vessels.
These were soon manned, and oars got out, and they began to row up
the river. As, owing to the intricacy of the channel, the steamboat
and flotilla had not yet arrived, a few shots were fired at the
boats by the field guns. This had the desired effect, many of the
boatmen jumping overboard, leaving their craft to drift down the
river; while the great bulk hastily turned their vessels about, and
anchored in their former position.

As soon as the steamer with the flotilla came up, two war boats
pushed off from shore, saluted the steamer, and rowed alongside of
her until she and the flotilla were safely anchored above the town.
This was so evidently a mark of a real desire for the suspension of
hostilities that the two officers were again sent across the river.
A truce was agreed upon, and an arrangement made for the meeting of
the negotiators, upon the following day.

Four meetings were held, between the two commissioners and those
appointed by the British general, the meetings taking place on
boats moored in the centre of the river. At length the treaty was
accepted and signed, by the Burmese, and fifteen days' truce
allowed for the ratification of the treaty by the king. As the end
of that period approached, the Burmese protested that they had not
yet received an answer, and asked for further time; which was
refused, unless on the condition that Melloon was evacuated, and
the Burmese army fell back until the ratification of the treaty
reached them. As had been for some time strongly suspected, the
negotiations were simply a device to arrest our advance; and the
treaty was afterwards found in the Burmese camp, it never having
been forwarded to Ava.

At midnight on the 18th, when the armistice came to a conclusion,
the troops began throwing up earthworks, the heavy guns were landed
from the flotilla and, at ten o'clock the next morning,
twenty-eight guns were in position ready to open fire. In spite of
remonstrances that had been made, the Burmese had, night after
night during the armistice, continued to work surreptitiously at
their entrenchments. It was hoped for a moment that, when they saw
the speed with which our batteries had been thrown up and armed,
they would offer no farther resistance. As, however, they were
evidently preparing for action, our guns opened fire at eleven
o'clock.

This was kept up for two hours. While it was going on, the troops
intended for the assault were embarked in boats, some distance up
the river, so as to ensure their not being carried by the force of
the stream across the face of the Burmese works, and exposed to the
concentrated fire of the enemy. They were divided into four
brigades; the first of which--consisting of the 13th and 38th
Regiments, under Lieutenant Colonel Sale--were to land below the
stockade, and to attack its south-western angle; while the other
three brigades were to land above it, to carry some outworks there,
and to attack the northern face.

A strong northerly wind, and the violent current, prevented the
assaults being made simultaneously. The first brigade was carried
too far across and, as it passed the stockade, was exposed to the
fire of the guns and musketry of the river defences; while the
three other brigades were unable, for some time, to reach their
intended landing places. Colonel Sale was among those wounded by
the Burmese fire but, directly the first brigade reached the shore,
they formed up under the partial cover of a shelving bank and, led
by Lieutenant Colonel Frith, moved forward to the assault in
admirable order. When within a short distance there was a forward
rush, in spite of the storm of shot. The ladder party gained the
foot of the stockade and, placing the ladders, climbed up, and
leapt down among the surging crowd of the enemy. Others followed
and, soon, a firm footing was obtained in the works. Then the men
of the two regiments--whose total strength did not exceed five
hundred--advanced steadily, drove before them some 10,000 armed
men, and expelled them from the works that the Burmese had deemed
impregnable.

While this was going on, the other three brigades had landed above
the stockade and, now falling upon the enemy as they poured out
from their works, completed their defeat. All the stockades were
carried, and the whole of the artillery and stores fell into our
possession.

Four days later, the army again began its advance. They were met by
four Englishmen, who had been taken prisoners; and an American, who
had also been held in confinement. These had been sent to assure
the English general that the king was in earnest in his desire for
peace. It was but too evident, however, that no confidence could be
placed in Burmese negotiations; and it was, moreover, known that
another army was being assembled, in the greatest haste, to bar the
advance.

On the 14th of February the British reached Pakang-Yay, having
passed Sembeughewn on the opposite shore. This was the point where
the road from Aracan reached the Irrawaddy, and it had been
arranged that the force that had been operating in Aracan should,
if possible, effect a junction with Sir Archibald Campbell here. A
message brought down by a native was, however, received; stating
that the force had suffered very severely from fever and cholera,
and that the natural obstacles were found to be too great to be
overcome by troops debilitated by disease--that the attempt had,
therefore, been abandoned. Fortunately, the English general was
well able to do without this addition to his strength. He had
already proved that his command was perfectly capable of defeating
