
That night, as I lay in the dark in my new quarters, I had leisure to
think over the strange turn which my fortune had taken.  Here I was in a
town where three of those whom at some time or other I had called master
were living.  One was a common prisoner, one a hard-working curate, and
one a raw recruit.  Of my other masters, one was a London thief, one lay
in his grave, and the other, and best loved of all, was far away in
scenes and perils which I could not so much as picture to myself.  What
would become of me?  I knew not; but I could not help feeling the best
part of my life was spent, for who could be to me again what some of
those whom I now remembered had been?

I had arrived thus far in my meditations when I all of a sudden turned
faint.  I knew what the matter was at once, and what did this lump of an
Irishman understand about watch-keys and winding up?

I called faintly to the watered ribbon--

"I'm running down!"

"Down where?" ejaculated he, in well-feigned alarm.

"Wretch!" gasped I, "somebody ought to wind me up."

"Up where?" again asked my unsympathetic tormentor.

"Brute!" was all I could say.

"That's just the way with you clever people," began the ribbon; "as long
as you are all right no name's bad enough for poor people like us; but
as soon as ever you get into trouble--"

Here with a groan I ran down, and was spared the end of his speech.

I only had a vague, dim idea of what took place for the next few months.
I was conscious of long railway journeys, and arriving at a big,
dreary-looking sort of prison where there was nothing but soldiers.

All day long the place rang with bugle notes and words of command; and
all night my master slept in a great room with a lot of noisy men, of
whom I have an impression he was not the most silent.  In due time he
put a coat over the waistcoat in which I lived, and was mightily proud
the first time he walked abroad in his new dress.  And so things went on
for nearly a year.

But one day it was evident some great excitement had come to vary the
monotony of our barrack life.  Officers talked in clusters instead of
drilling their men, and the men instead of doing their ordinary work
crowded into the long shed to talk over the news.

And it soon came out what the news was.  The regiment had been ordered
to hold itself in readiness for immediate service at the seat of war in
India!  What excitement there was!  What cheers and exultation!  What
spirits the men were in, and what friends every one became all of a
sudden with everybody else!  Among the rest my young master's blood rose
within him at the thought of fighting.  He had grown sick of the dull
routine of barrack life, and more than once half repented his easy
acceptance of the Queen's shilling, but now he thought of nothing but
the wars, and his spirits rose so high that the sergeant on duty had to
promise him an arrest before he could be reduced to order.

At night the room where we slept was a perfect Babel.  Men talked of
nothing but the voyage and the campaign that was to follow, and wished
the marching orders had been for to-morrow instead of next week.

Suddenly (and I don't exactly know why) my master remembered my
existence, and I heard him call out,--

"Does any of you boys know anything about a watch, at all?"

"Duck Downie does," replied one or two voices.

"Duck Downie, me jewil, will ye step this way just?" called out my
master, "and cast your eye on my watch?"

The gentleman rejoicing in the name of Duck Downie was a ferocious-
looking little fellow who had, before he decided to devote his energies
to the extermination of her Majesty's foes, been a watchmaker's
apprentice.  He came, forward at the invitation, and cast his eye in the
direction indicated.  It was evidently the first time he had known that
Paddy so much as owned a watch; for he stared hard at me, and then said
with a knowing wink,--

"Did he struggle much?"

"Faith and he did a wee bit, Duck, but so did I too, ye see," said
Paddy, entering into the joke.

"Let's have a look at him," said Duck, taking me and stripping the coat
off my back.  "Give us the key."

"The kay!" said Paddy, whose notions of a watch's interior were
delightfully vague; "sure there's no kay.  Here, Edward I will ye lend
Mister Downie a kay!"

The youth addressed as Edward fumbled in his pocket and pulled out the
key of his locker, which he handed to my master.

"That's the boy!  Here's a kay, Duck darlint, since ye want one."

Duck was rude enough to laugh immoderately at this--so much so, that my
master, who was unconscious of a joke, grew quite angry.

"Ef that's all ye can do--gape like an ould money-box--I can do that as
well myself; so hand up the watch!"

Duck Downie laughed again at this, and then said,--

"I want the key of the watch, puddin'-head, not this thing!"

"Arrah, it's got no kay, I tell ye.  What ud _it_ want a kay for?"

Duck laughed again at this.

"Paddy," said he, "next time you borrow a gentleman's watch be sure you
ask 'im for the key, do you hear?  You want the key to wind the thing
up--that's why he don't go."

Paddy, who had sense enough to see that Mr Downie knew more about a
watch than he did, held his peace, and took no trouble to refute the
imputation on the way in which he had come by me.

Duck Downie having, with some difficulty, borrowed a watch-key, wound me
up, greatly to my delight and that of my master.  It was delicious to
feel the blood tingling through my veins once more, and to have my heart
beat again with renewed animation.  My master's glee was only equalled
by his astonishment.  He looked at first as if he suspected Duck Downie
of being in league with supernatural powers; but when that eminent
mechanic took the trouble to explain to him the value of the operation
he had just performed on me, Paddy without a word rushed out, at the
risk of all sorts of penalties, into the town, and knew no peace till he
had possessed himself of a "kay," which henceforth became the
inseparable companion of me and the watered ribbon.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

HOW I MADE A LONG JOURNEY, AND REACHED THE HAPPIEST MOMENT OF MY LIFE.

One morning, in the autumn of the same year, a small cluster of men
standing on the deck of the troopship "Lizard," as she tumbled lazily
forward over the waves, descried in the far horizon before them a dim
low line of blue.  My master was one of this cluster, and having
recovered from the depression which had afflicted both his spirits and
his stomach during the early part of the voyage, now celebrated the
"discovery of India" with a cry so outlandish, and other manifestations
of joy so extravagant (one of which was pitching one of the sergeants'
caps overboard) that he was instantly summoned before the officer in
command, and ordered to remain below for the next twelve hours.  This
was, I need hardly say, a disappointment to both of us.

All day long we heard overhead the crowding of footsteps, the clanking
of chains, and the banging about of baggage.  The men were paraded on
deck and one or two servants down where we were were very busy polishing
the officers' swords.  Altogether it looked as if we were not intended
to remain an hour longer in Bombay than was necessary before marching to
the front.  Indeed, the arrival of a newspaper on board, along with the
pilot, created such a ferment among the officers and men that it was
evident something unusual had happened since we last heard the news.

When, towards evening, my master was allowed once more to come on deck,
we were not long in discovering the cause of all this.

The Indian Mutiny, which had just broken out when we left England, had
suddenly assumed enormous and hideous dimensions.  The rebels, taking
advantage of their first success, seemed to have gone mad with a most
cruel madness.  Helpless Englishwomen and children had been massacred
and outraged; gallant Englishmen, overpowered by numbers, had been put
to shameful deaths.  One by one our strongholds had been surprised and
captured; and, carrying all before them, the traitors bade fair to leave
England not so much as a foothold in India.

This was enough to make the blood of the tamest among us boil with
indignation, and, as the dreadful truth, bit by bit, dawned on our
gallant fellows, their impatience became almost beyond control.  My
master was in sad peril of another arrest by reason of his excitement.

"Show me the spalpeens!  Show me 'em!" roared he, almost beside himself.
"Let me at 'em, Duck, ye blackguard; let me at 'em!"

And so saying he seized Mr Downie, who happened to be standing near
him, and nearly shook the bones out of that unoffending hero's body.

"Do ye hear?" roared Paddy, quite out of his senses.

"I hear," said Downie, coolly, proceeding to take off his coat and tuck
up his shirt-sleeves as if he were going to wash his hands.

"What's the gossoon about at all?" cried my master, taken aback by this
unexpected reply to his question.

"On'y going to smash you!" calmly replied the imperturbable Duck,
beginning to spar--"so come on, my lad!"

That Patrick would have joyfully accepted the invitation I have no
doubt, had not an accident at that moment befallen him.

A trolly coming up behind, took him off his feet.  To recover himself,
he took a spring forward, and landed full on the top of the junior
ensign of the regiment, a mild youth with a very little voice, and for
the next minute the two were rolling, one on the top of the other, over
and over, along the wet deck, amid the laughter of everybody.

By the time Paddy had picked himself up, and helped the poor young
ensign to his feet, his ardour was sufficiently damped.  He apologised
with as good grace as he could to his late victim, and made very humble
excuses to the sergeant in charge, who, fortunately for him, had
witnessed that the affair was an accident.

Duck Downie, however, with his coat off and his sleeves tucked up, still
awaited his man as if nothing had happened, and seemed surprised that
Paddy was not as eager as before for the fray.  The latter, however,
quite sobered by this time, merely cried out in the hearing of
everybody,--

"Arrah!  Downie, darlint, ye may put on your coat, because I forgive you
this onst; but, man dear, don't do it again!" and was thereby considered
by everybody to have had the best of the whole adventure.

Under such dignified circumstances did we set foot on Indian soil.

The reader will be surprised that I have never yet remembered that when
I last heard of him, Charlie, my first master, was in India.  I did
remember it often and often--during the voyage and after landing.  And
yet I quite despised myself for imagining (as I did) that the next white
face I saw would surely be his.  India is a big place--a dreadfully big
place--and the chances of finding any one particular person there are
about as great as of discovering a needle in a haystack.  He might have
left India long ago; he might have fallen in the massacres of the past
few months; he might be somewhere right across the continent.  And so,
though I could not get rid of a vague sort of expectation, during the
first few days of my being in India, I always laughed at myself for a
simpleton for thinking such a chance possible.

However, we had no time for thinking just then.  From the moment we
landed in Bombay, and for a week or two afterwards, we were continually
on the move.  Long forced marches under a broiling sun, it was enough to
wear out any ordinary troops.  But our men, and the column to which they
were now attached, formed no ordinary body of men.  They were Englishmen
hastening to the rescue, and nothing on earth could stop them.  It was
strange how slowly the news of those stirring times came to our ears.

One day we heard with a horror that I can never describe of that foul
massacre at Cawnpore, where in cold blood gentle English ladies and
innocent children had been brutally massacred, and their bodies flung
into a well.  Then the news came of the achievements of that wonderful
army of relief led by Havelock.

Day after day came the news of his march on Lucknow, where our besieged
fellow-countrymen lay.  Every one knows of that heroic march.  Inch by
inch, almost, that handful of men fought their way, fighting a battle a
day, and never yielding a step.

One day a horseman galloped into our camp in a great state of
excitement.  As he flung himself from his horse he shouted something,
but we only caught the two words, "Havelock," "Lucknow."  It was enough.
Lucknow was saved!  There rose cheer upon cheer at the news, and shout
upon shout.  Men and officers alike waved their hats and shook hands,
Paddy, as usual, let his feelings get the better of him, and nearly
broke Larry's spine with the joyful thump he gave it; indeed, it is safe
to say our men were almost as proud as if they had themselves achieved
the relief.

Presently, however, there spread a rumour that though Lucknow was saved,
it was not yet relieved.

Havelock had fought his way in, but until help arrived, he, too, would
be a prisoner within its walls; and almost in the same breath came the
grand news; our column was the one destined for this glorious work!  How
our hearts beat!  What mattered it now how long the marches were, and
how grilling the sun?

"Lucknow" was the cry; and that magic word sustained us in every
hardship and peril.

We reached Cawnpore at last, and there joined Sir Colin Campbell's
force.  The sight of this house of murder was simply maddening to the
men.  They left the place next morning with a sort of shudder, and set
their faces towards Lucknow.  It was not till we were well on the march
that I had leisure to look about me and notice how our force was
increased.

Several now regiments were with us, and the commander-in-chief and his
staff and heavy guns and siege trains accompanied the march.  With the
exception of a few skirmishes, my master had yet to learn what a battle
was.  We crept on, halting sometimes, and sometimes pushing on, until
one jubilant afternoon the distant walls of Lucknow appeared in sight.
Then indeed our brave fellows began to breathe again.

To-morrow would bring them to the city walls, and--what was equally
after their hearts--face to face with the enemy.  We bivouacked here for
the night.

Now it happened on this particular night that my master was on sentinel
duty for the first time in his life, and mightily proud of his charge.
There he stood as stiff as a poker, with his rifle at his side, and I
verily believe would have thought nothing of running his bayonet through
the body of the commander-in-chief if he had presented himself without
the password.

Patrick was not a dreamer; and as he looked across in the direction of
Lucknow I don't suppose his meditations were of the loftiest kind.  He
knew there would be a fight to-morrow, and so he was happy; he knew duty
might call him to action even to-night, and so he kept a very sharp
look-out at his post; but otherwise his mind was profoundly untroubled.
It was not so with me.  On the eve of the battle I could not but feel
that in a few hours I might be ownerless, and in a dead man's pocket;
and, as I looked back upon my strangely eventful life, I sighed, and
half hoped, if he were slain, they would in mercy bury me with him, and
so end my cares once and for all.  Little I knew!

It was scarcely ten o'clock when Paddy was startled by approaching
footsteps.  They belonged to an officer of our force who was returning
at this hour from an outpost.  Paddy eyed him suspiciously, and even
when he gave the word looked disappointed at not having the privilege of
using his bayonet upon him.  Just as he was going on his way, the
officer turned and said, in a voice which startled me,--

"Is it ten yet, my man?"

Why did the voice startle me?  I could not see the speaker's face, but
