places in the neighbourhood. Each sent their two best champions; the
prize, a large brass shield mounted on oak, becoming for the year the
property of the winners. Though Rodenhurst usually did fairly well, it
had not been able to compete with some of the boarding schools in the
district, and at each successive tournament had been obliged to see
others bearing away the coveted honours. Last time the Radcaster High
School had come off victorious, a circumstance particularly annoying
to Rodenhurst, as they felt they had been beaten by day girls like
themselves.

"Boarding schools get more time to practise, and have always more
courts in proportion than we have," so they grumbled. "One expects a
boarding school to have an advantage, but we mustn't let the Radcaster
High score over us again."

The tournament always occupied a whole Saturday, and was held at the
Stedburgh Pavilion Gardens, an excellent place for the purpose, for
not only could the best-kept courts in the county be hired, but there
was plenty of accommodation for spectators, and refreshments could be
obtained at the restaurant, a consideration for those schools which
came from a distance. It was necessary for entries to be sent in at
once, and when, as Bessie Manners had suggested, Olga Hunter and Gwen
Gascoyne were appointed champions, all Rodenhurst joined in approval
of the choice.

"But it's to-morrow week!" quavered Gwen.

"You'll just have to practise like billy-ho!" said Betty Brierley, who
was addicted to slang.

Nobody dared to indulge in any very particular hopes. It was one thing
to gain a Form trophy, but quite another to win the shield of the
league.

"I hear Miss Crawford's girls are in good form this year," said Rachel
Hunter, who had a cousin at a school at the other side of Stedburgh.
"Nell says they're pretty confident."

"They won't beat those twins from Appleton House. Their serves were
ripping," returned Betty. "I forget their names, but I sometimes see
them on the Parade."

"Unless they've gone off in their play."

"Yes, of course--people occasionally do. One can never tell from year
to year. Do you remember Freda Harmon? She swept everything before
her, and then she grew too fat and was a dismal failure."

"Would you like me to bant in case of accidents?" laughed Gwen.
"You'd better weigh me daily, like they do jockeys."

"There's a great deal in luck," said Charlotte Perry. "If you draw the
crack school you may be done for straight away."

Gwen practised her utmost during the brief week before the tournament,
and congratulated herself that her play improved. She had her choice
of rackets, for everyone was not only willing but anxious to lend her
the best obtainable. She tried a selection, until she found the one
that suited her best. It was the property of Natalie Preston, who
gladly relinquished it in her favour.

"If it wins the tournament I shall be proud!" declared Natalie.

"'If' is sometimes an important word!" answered Gwen, with a dubious
shake of her head.

On the eventful Saturday every member of the Fifth and Sixth and
numbers of the Juniors turned up at the Pavilion Gardens to watch the
contest. Miss Roscoe and most of the mistresses were there, and many
friends who were interested in the fortunes of Rodenhurst. Most of the
other schools were equally well represented, so that the audience was
a large one. Olga Hunter, who was a pretty girl with chestnut hair,
looked charming in a white dress, and large ribbon knots of pink and
light blue--the Rodenhurst colours--pinned beside her badge. Gwen, in
plain serge skirt and low-necked muslin blouse looked prepared for
business, if not so ornamental as her companion. Winnie had made her a
little bouquet of roses and forget-me-nots to match her colours, and
Beatrice had lent her a pale-blue belt for the occasion.

"I haven't got a hobble skirt, at any rate!" laughed Gwen. "Do you
remember that girl from Ravensfield last year, and how fearfully
hampered she was?"

Gwen was most tremendously excited at the greatness thrust upon her.
To represent Rodenhurst at the tournament seemed honour enough even if
she were vanquished in the very beginning.

"I wish Dad could have been here!" she sighed.

But neither Mr. Gascoyne nor Beatrice could spare the time on this
particular Saturday, so Winnie and Lesbia were the only members of the
family present.

Rodenhurst had been drawn against Hetherby College for the first set,
much to their relief, for Hetherby had no particular reputation. Gwen
and Olga played carefully nevertheless, for, as Olga justly remarked,
"You can never tell beforehand how a school may have improved." The
Collegians were better, certainly, than last year, but their game was
not up to much, and they were easily beaten. At the conclusion of the
first round, Rodenhurst, being among the winning couples, drew again,
and this time was matched against Appleton House. The twins of whom
Betty Brierley had spoken were again champions, and proved no mean
rivals. Gwen had an anxious moment or two when she thought the credit
of Rodenhurst trembled in the balance, but by frantic efforts on her
part and Olga's, the set was secured, and the twins conquered.

"You're getting on splendidly!" said Bessie Manners at lunchtime,
plying the so-far victorious pair with ham sandwiches and lemonade.
"Everybody says Rodenhurst is looking up. I feel so proud of you!"

"Too soon to rejoice! We haven't tackled Miss Crawford's girls yet,
and then there'd be Radcaster," replied Gwen.

"It makes one wildly hungry!" declared Olga.

"You mustn't have more than four sandwiches and a bun, or it'll spoil
your play," interposed Bessie, who considered herself in the light of
a trainer for her special champions, and enforced her rules with
Spartan severity.

Olga sighed humorously, but obeyed.

"There was a rumour that Ravensfield lost the shield one year on
buns," she remarked. "I don't wish a like fate to befall Rodenhurst."

It was immensely encouraging to hear that their play had attracted
notice; they felt braced up for the next contest, and went back to the
fray in quite good spirits.

"One wants to strike the happy medium between faint heart and over
confidence," said Olga.

"I prefer to strike the ball!" laughed Gwen.

There was no doubt that Rodenhurst was this year increasing its
reputation by leaps and bounds. Instead of falling out among the early
sets it had kept steadily on, and spectators began to speak of it as
likely to carry off the prize. Radcaster had also done excellently, so
when it came to a final struggle between those two rivals, the
excitement of their respective adherents knew no bounds. The
Rodenhurst girls could hardly keep still, and each held a handkerchief
ready to wave in case of victory. That it would be a tremendous
battle Gwen and Olga knew only too well. The Radcaster champions were
the same girls who had won the tournament the year before, and many
people deemed them invincible. They seemed inclined to hold that
opinion themselves, for they glanced at their opponents with a rather
superior and almost pitying smile. That look put Gwen on her mettle.
"They shan't have it this time!" she murmured grimly as she took her
place. Whether Gwen really excelled herself, or whether the Radcaster
girls were a little tired or too secure of victory was a debatable
point, but at the end of a splendidly played set Rodenhurst stood as
the winner. The two successful champions turned to each other almost
incredulously. The shield was theirs! A perfect storm of applause came
from the crowd. The Rodenhurst girls were beside themselves with joy,
and clapped and waved and hurrahed till they were hoarse.

"Well done! This is indeed a triumph!" said Miss Roscoe, who hurried
up to congratulate her victorious pair, looking as pleased as any of
her pupils. This afternoon's success would wipe away the former
reproach of the school, and lift it to a point of importance in the
tennis league.

"The shield will hang in the lecture hall!" rejoiced Bessie Manners.
"It will be sent to us as soon as our name is engraved upon it."

"I wish we could erase Radcaster!" said Gwen.

"Oh! I like to see the names of the other schools upon it. It gives me
all the more joy of present possession."

"Gwen, you were just splendid!" declared Olga. "How you managed it I
can't imagine, but you seemed to jump at the balls and catch them."

"I'm a spread-eagle player, I know; not nearly so graceful as you,"
laughed Gwen. "Well, I've 'done my possible', as the French say. Now I
shall have to drop tennis and grind, for Miss Douglas has been
grumbling most horribly, and declares she'd have stopped my being
champion if she'd known how my prep. was going to suffer. It's been
Latin and maths. versus tennis this last week."

"She'll forgive you when she sees the shield!" chuckled Bessie
Manners.




CHAPTER XXIII

Gwen to the Rescue


It was now the middle of June, and the weather, even at Skelwick, was
hot and enervating. There was thunder about, and frequent rain. It was
trying for everybody. The constant heavy showers necessitated carrying
mackintoshes to school, as if it were winter; the lawn was too wet and
sopping for tennis, and most outdoor plans had to be abandoned. The
boys, overflowing with high spirits, chafed at confinement to the
house, and their noise was a serious impediment to Gwen, whose evening
preparation was a matter of vital importance at present. It was
impossible to get out of earshot in the little Parsonage, and though
she retired to her bedroom and stuffed her fingers in her ears, Latin
translation and mathematical problems were sadly disturbed by the din
below. Gwen was working tremendously hard just now. Miss Roscoe had
not yet announced the names of those who were to take the Senior
Oxford. It was rather a curious notion of hers to preserve silence on
the subject, for she was obliged to send in the entry forms for her
candidates early in May, and must therefore already have made her
decision. Her motive was to spur on the whole of the Fifth to equal
effort. Her past experience had shown her that when a few top girls
only were taking an examination, the rest of the Form was apt to slack
and lose interest, and she considered there were several who, though
not actually candidates, would benefit by the special preparation, and
would make efforts on the chance of having been selected. Gwen did
not, of course, know whether her name was on Miss Roscoe's private
list, but she secretly cherished the possibility. She knew her work
had improved; indeed that it was equal to that of anyone in the Fifth.
There was no age limit for the Senior Oxford, and though she was the
youngest in her Form, her fifteenth birthday would fall on the first
day of the examination. Gwen was very ambitious; to be chosen as a
candidate, and to pass with distinction, seemed a goal worth all the
hard work of the school year. It brought visions of other and higher
examinations in years to come; honours and scholarships which were
waiting for those who had the pluck and the ability to win them, a
rosy dream of college and university success on a distant horizon.

"I'm going to be Gwen Gascoyne, B.A., somehow before I've finished,"
she thought. "I've made up my mind to that!"

It was just at this crisis that Beatrice caught a severe chill.
She--the wisest at health precautions where others were concerned--did
a series of exceedingly rash and foolish things, with the result that
she was obliged most reluctantly to give in, and allow Dr. Chambers to
be sent for. Though Beatrice tried to make light of her own illness,
the doctor took a different view of the case, and greatly to her
consternation ordered her promptly to bed.

"I can't stop in bed! It's impossible!" she protested indignantly.
"What's to become of the household? Nellie can't do everything;
besides, she's no head, and she'd forget to feed the chickens, or
she'd burn the bread, and let Martin tumble down the well if nobody
was there to look after her."

"Then one of your sisters must stop at home, for you've got to stay in
bed!" commanded Dr. Chambers. "Yes, I insist, and if you won't obey
me, I shall send for a hospital nurse to make you!"

At this awful threat Beatrice subsided into unwilling obedience, only
stipulating that her enforced retirement should be as brief as
possible, and that she might be allowed to direct domestic affairs
from her bedroom.

"I suppose I can't stop you worrying over the household, but you're
not to stir out of bed till I give you permission, and I'll probably
keep you there for a fortnight. The rest will do you all the good in
the world," replied the doctor. "As for managing without you, they'll
just have to manage!"

Dr. Chambers's autocratic orders were, of course, to be followed to
the letter, everybody realized that; the only difficulty was how it
was going to be done. The family held an immediate conclave on the
subject in the invalid's room.

"I suppose I shall have to stay at home," said Winnie, "though I
hardly dare suggest it to Miss Roscoe. With Miss Roberts still away,
it makes things doubly difficult. I'm already taking four extra
classes, and who's to teach those, and my own as well? It's enough to
disorganize the school."

"Miss Roscoe would be furious if you stopped away!" said Gwen. "I
don't see how you can."

"I'll write to Cousin Edith, and ask if she can help us," suggested
Mr. Gascoyne.

"No, don't!" groaned Beatrice. "If Cousin Edith comes, I shall get
straight out of bed, in spite of Dr. Chambers. I warn you I will! She
and I don't get on."

Nobody was anxious for Cousin Edith's presence, so the suggestion
dropped.

"A charwoman wouldn't meet the want," sighed Winnie. "It must be
somebody who knows all the ropes of the household, or she'd be no use.
Lesbia's too young; but how about Gwen? She ought to be able to
manage."

Gwen did not wait to hear Beatrice's reply, but bolted straightway to
her own bedroom. The proposal was as unwelcome as it was unexpected.
To stop at home now, for a whole fortnight, just when every moment at
school was of such great importance! Why, such a proceeding might
wreck every chance she had for the exam.! Of course she was not sure
whether she was really a candidate, but she had a shrewd suspicion
that she was one of the selected number. She wished Miss Roscoe had
openly given out the names, then she would have known exactly what to
do in the circumstances. Could anything be more exasperating? It was
impracticable for Winnie to fill the breach; with one teacher short,
Miss Roscoe could not possibly spare her, especially at such a busy
time as the end of the term. Gwen realized that perfectly.
Lesbia--little, childish Lesbia--would be about as much use as Stumps
or Basil--why, she would be playing with Martin in the orchard while
the fowls went hungry and Nellie burnt the bread. As for Cousin Edith,
she was not a favourite with the Gascoynes, and the fact of her
presence would be hardly conducive to the invalid's recovery.

"I verily believe Bee would get up if she knew Cousin Edith were
poking about downstairs," thought Gwen. "I know I ought to stay--but I
can't, I can't! It means so much to pass that exam. It would be horrid
to stop at home, too, with Bee in bed directing everything. If she
were going away, and would leave me to it, I shouldn't mind. It's not
