one of the riflemen, an old hunter like himself, he whispered--I
overheard him:

"I'll tell yer what it is, Nat: he kin whip his weight in wild-cats or
grizzly b'ars any day in the year--_he_ kin, or my name ain't Bob
Linkin."

Saying this, he stepped forward on the cliff and looked over; and then
he examined the tree, and then the piece of lazo, and then the tree
again, and then he commenced dropping pebbles down, as if he was
determined to measure every object, and fix it in his memory with a
proper distinctness.

Twing and the others had now dismounted.  As I turned towards them
Clayley was taking a pull at the major's pewter--and a good long pull,
too.  I followed the lieutenant's example, and felt the better for it.

"But how did you find us, Major?"

"This little soldier," said he, pointing to Jack, "brought us to the
rancho where you were taken.  From there we easily tracked you to a
large hacienda."

"Ha! you routed the guerilla, then?"

"Routed the guerilla!  We saw no guerilla."

"What! at the hacienda?"

"Peons and women; nothing more.  Yes, there was, too--what am I thinking
about?  There was a party there that routed _us_; Thornley and Hillis
here have both been wounded, and are not likely to recover--poor
fellows!"

I looked towards these gentlemen for an explanation.  They were both
laughing, and I looked in vain.

"Hennessy, too," said the major, "has got a stab under the ribs."

"Och, by my soul have I, and no mistake!" cried the latter.

"Come, Major--an explanation, if you please."

I was in no humour to enjoy this joke.  I half divined the cause of
their mirth, and it produced in me an unaccountable feeling of
annoyance, not to say pain.

"Be my faith, then, Captain," said Hennessy, speaking for the major, "if
ye must know all about it, I'll tell ye myself.  We overhauled a pair of
the most elegant crayteurs you ever clapped eyes upon; and rich--rich as
Craysus--wasn't they, boys?"

"Oh, plenty of tin," remarked Hillis.

"But, Captain," continued Hennessy, "how they took on to your `tiger'!
I thought they would have eaten the little chap, body, bones, and all."

I was chafing with impatience to know more, but I saw that nothing worth
knowing could be had in that quarter.  I determined, therefore, to
conceal my anxiety, and find an early opportunity to talk to Jack.

"But beyond the hacienda?"  I inquired, changing the subject.

"We trailed you down stream to the canon, where we found blood upon the
rocks.  Here we were at fault, when a handsome, delicate-looking lad,
known somehow or other to your Jack, came up and carried us to the
crossing above, where the lad gave us the slip, and we saw no more of
him.  We struck the hoofs again where he left us, and followed them to a
small prairie on the edge of the woods, where the ground was strangely
broken and trampled.  There they had turned back, and we lost all
trace."

"But how, then, did you come here?"

"By accident altogether.  We were striking to the nearest point on the
National Road when that tall sergeant of yours dropped down upon us out
of the branches of a tree."

"Whom did you see, Jack?"  I whispered to the boy, after having drawn
him aside.

"I saw them all, Captain."

"Well?"

"They asked where you were, and when I told them--"

"Well--well!"

"They appeared to wonder--"

"Well?"

"And the young ladies--"

"And the young ladies?"

"They ran round, and cried, and--"

Jack was the dove that brought the olive-branch.

"Did they say where they were going?"  I inquired, after one of those
sweet waking dreams.

"Yes, Captain, they are going up the country to live."

"Where--where?"

"I could not recollect the name--it was so strange."

"Jalapa?  Orizava?  Cordova?  Puebla?  Mexico?"

"I think it was one of them, but I cannot tell which.  I have forgotten
it, Captain."

"Captain Haller!" called the voice of the major; "here a moment, if you
please.  These are some of the men who were going to hang you, are they
not?"

Twing pointed to _five_ of the Jarachos who had been captured in the
skirmish.

"Yes," replied I, "I think so; yet I could not swear to their identity."

"By the crass, Major, I can swear to ivery mother's son av thim!  There
isn't a scoundhrel among thim but has given me rayzon to remimber him,
iv a harty kick in the ribs might be called a rayzon.  Oh! ye ugly
spalpeens! kick me now, will yez?--will yez jist be plazed to trid upon
the tail av my jacket?"

"Stand out here, my man," said the major.

Chane stepped forward, and swore away the lives of the five Jarochos in
less than as many minutes.

"Enough!" said the major, after the Irishman had given his testimony.
"Lieutenant Claiborne," continued he, addressing an officer the youngest
in rank, "what sentence?"

"Hang!" replied the latter in a solemn voice.

"Lieutenant Hillis?"

"Hang!" was the reply.

"Lieutenant Clayley?"

"Hang!" said Clayley in a quick and emphatic tone.

"Captain Hennessy?"

"Hang them!" answered the Irishman.

"Captain Haller?"

"Have you determined, Major Twing?"  I asked, intending, if possible, to
mitigate this terrible sentence.

"We have no time, Captain Haller," replied my superior, interrupting me,
"nor opportunity to carry prisoners.  Our army has reached Plan del Rio,
and is preparing to attack the pass.  An hour lost, and we may be too
late for the battle.  You know the result of that as well as I."

I knew Twing's determined character too well to offer further
opposition, and the Jarochos were condemned to be hung.

The following extract from the major's report of the affair will show
how the sentence was carried out:

  _We killed five of them, and captured as many more, but the leader
  escaped.  The prisoners were tried, and sentenced to be hung.  They
  had a gallows already rigged for Captain Haller and his companions,
  and for want of a better we hanged them upon that_.



CHAPTER FIFTY ONE.

A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF A BATTLE.

It was still only an hour by sun as we rode off from the Eagle's Cave.
At some distance I turned in my saddle and looked back.  It was a
singular sight, those _five_ hanging corpses, and one not easily
forgotten.  What an appalling picture it must have been to their own
comrades, who doubtless watched the spectacle from some distant
elevation!

Motionless they hung, in all the picturesque drapery of their strange
attire--draggling--dead!  The pines bent slightly over, the eagle
screamed as he swept past, and high in the blue air a thousand bald
vultures wheeled and circled, descending at every curve.

Before we had ridden out of sight the Eagle's Cliff was black with
zopilotes, hundreds clustering upon the pines, and whetting their fetid
beaks over their prey, still warm.  I could not help being struck with
this strange transposition of victims.

We forded the stream below, and travelled for some hours in a westerly
course over a half-naked ridge.  At mid-day we reached an arroyo--a
clear, cool stream that gurgled along under a thick grove of the _palma
redonda_.  Here we "nooned", stretching our bodies along the
green-sward.

At sundown we rode into the _pueblito_ (hamlet) of Jacomulco, where we
had determined to pass the night.  Twing levied on the _alcalde_ for
forage for "man and beast".  The horses were picketed in the plaza,
while the men bivouacked by their fires--strong mounted pickets having
been thrown out on the roads or tracks that led to the village.

By daybreak we were again in our saddles, and, riding across another
ridge, we struck the Plan River five miles above the bridge, and
commenced riding down the stream.  We were still far from the water,
which roared and "soughed" in the bottom of a barranca, hundreds of feet
below our path.

On crossing an eminence a sight suddenly burst upon us that caused us to
leap in our saddles.  Directly before us, and not a mile distant, rose a
high round hill like a semi-globe, and from a small tower upon its top
waved the standard of Mexico.

Long lines of uniformed men girdled the tower, formed in rank.  Horsemen
in bright dresses galloped up and down the hill.  We could see the
glitter of brazen helmets, and the glancing of a thousand bayonets.  The
burnished howitzer flashed in the sunbeams, and we could discern the
cannoniers standing by their posts.  Bugles were braying and drums
rolling.  So near were they that we could distinguish the call.  _They
were sounding the "long roll_!"

"Halt!  Great Heaven!" cried Twing, jerking his horse upon its haunches;
"we are riding into the enemy's camp!  Guide," he added, turning
fiercely to Raoul, and half-drawing his sword, "what's this?"

"The hill, Major," replied the soldier coolly, "is `El Telegrafo'.  It
is the Mexican head-quarters, I take it."

"And, sir, what mean you?  It is not a mile distant?"

"It is ten miles, Major."

"Ten!  Why, sir, I can trace the eagle upon that flag!  It is not one
mile, by Heaven!"

"By the eye, true; but by the road, Major, it is what I have said--ten
miles.  We passed the crossing of the barranca some time ago; there is
no other before we reach El Plan."

It was true.  Although within range of the enemy's lightest metal, we
were ten miles off!

A vast chasm yawned between us and them.  The next moment we were upon
its brink, and, wheeling sharply to the right, we trotted on as fast as
the rocky road would allow us.

"O heavens!  Haller, we shall be too late.  Gallop!" shouted Twing, as
we pressed our horses side by side.

The troop at the word sprang into a gallop.  El Plan, the bridge, the
hamlet, the American camp with its thousand white pyramids, all burst
upon us like a flash--below, far below, lying like a map.  We are still
opposite El Telegrafo!

"By heavens!" cried Twing, "our camp is empty!"

A few figures only were visible, straggling among the tents: the
teamster, the camp-guard, the invalid soldier.

"Look! look!"

I followed the direction indicated.  Against the long ridge that rose
over the camp a dark-blue line could be traced--a line of uniformed men,
glistening as they moved with the sparkle of ten thousand bayonets.  It
wound along the hill like a bristling snake, and, heading towards El
Telegrafo, disappeared for a moment behind the ridge.

A gun from the globe-shaped hill--and then another! another! another!--a
roll of musketry!--drums--bugles--shouts--cheering!

"The battle's begun!"

"We are too late!"

We were still eight miles from the scene of action.  We checked up, and
sat chafing in our saddles.

And now the roll of musketry became incessant, and we could hear the
crack! crack! of the American rifles.  And bombs hurtled and rockets
hissed through the air.

The round hill was shrouded in a cloud of sulphur, and through the smoke
we could see small parties creeping up from rock to rock, from bush to
bush, firing as they went.  We could see some tumbling back under the
leaden hail that was poured upon them from above.

And then a strong band debouched from the woods below, and strained
upwards, daring all danger.  Up, up!--and bayonets were crossed, and
sabres glistened and grew red, and wild cries filled the air.  And then
came a cheer, long, loud, and exulting, and under the thinning smoke
thousands were seen rushing down the steep, and flinging themselves into
the woods.

We knew not as yet which party it was that were thus flying.  We looked
at the tower in breathless suspense.  The cloud was around its base,
where musketry was still rolling, sending its deadly missiles after the
fugitives below.

"Look! look!" cried a voice: "the Mexican flag--it is down!  _See_!
`_the star-spangled banner_!'"

The American standard was slowly unfolding itself over the blue smoke,
and we could easily distinguish the stripes, and the dark square in the
corner with its silvery stars; and, as if with one voice, our troops
broke into a wild "Hurrah!"

In less time than you have taken in reading this account of it the
battle of Cerro Gordo was lost and won.



CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

AN ODD WAY OF ESCAPING FROM A BATTLE-FIELD.

We sat on our horses, facing the globe-shaped summit of El Telegrafo,
and watching our flag as it swung out from the tower.

"Look yonder! what is that?" cried an officer, pointing across the
barranca.

All eyes were now turned in the direction indicated.  A white line was
slowly moving down the face of the opposite cliff.

"Rein back, men! rein back!" shouted Twing, as his eye rested upon the
strange object.  "Throw yourselves under cover of the hill!"

In a minute our whole party--dragoons, officers, and all--had galloped
our horses into the bed of a dry arroyo, where we were completely
screened from observation.  Three or four of us, dismounting, along with
Twing, crept cautiously forward to the position we had just left, and,
raising our heads over the bunch-grass, looked across the chasm.  We
were close to its edge, and the opposite "cheek" of the barranca, a huge
wall of trap-rock, about a mile horizontally distant, rose at least a
thousand feet from the river bottom.  Its face was almost perpendicular,
with the exception of a few stairs or platforms in the basaltic strata,
and from these hung out stunted palms, cedars, and dark, shapeless
masses of cacti and agave.

Down this front the living line was still moving--slowly, zigzag--along
narrow ledges and over jutting points, as though some white liquid or a
train of gigantic insects were crawling down the precipice.  The
occasional flash of a bright object would have told us the nature of
this strange phenomenon, had we not guessed it already.  They were armed
men--Mexicans--escaping from the field of battle; and in a wood upon the
escarpment of the cliff we could perceive several thousands of their
comrades huddled up, and waiting for an opportunity to descend.  They
were evidently concealed, and out of all danger from their pursuers on
the other side.  Indeed, the main body of the American army had already
passed their position, and were moving along the Jalapa road, following
up the clouds of dust that hung upon the retreating squadrons of Santa
Anna.

We lay for some time observing the motions of these cunning fugitives as
they streamed downward.  The head of their line had nearly reached the
timbered bottom, through whose green fringes the Plan River swept
onward, curving from cliff to cliff.

Impatient looks were cast towards the major, whose cold grey eye showed
no signs of action.

"Well, Major--what's to be done?" asked one.

"Nothing!" was the impressive reply.

"Nothing!" echoed everyone.

"Why, what could we do?"

"Take them prisoners--every one of them."

"Whom prisoners?"

"These Mexicans--these before us."

"Ha! before you they are--a long way, too.  Bah! they are ten miles off,
and, even if we could ride straight down the bluff with winged horses,
what could our hundred men do in that jungle below?  Look yonder!--there
are a thousand of them crawling over the rocks?"

"And what signify numbers?" asked I, now speaking for the first time.
"They are already defeated and flying--half of them, I'll wager, without
arms.  Come, Major, let us go!  We can capture the whole party without
firing a shot."

"But, my dear Captain, we cannot reach them where they are."

