Hake shook his head.

"What wild thoughts are these, brother?  Who ever heard of a man
crossing the ocean in a small boat?"

"The thing may be done," replied Heika.  "It is risky, no doubt; but is
not everything more or less risky?  Besides, I had rather die than
remain in thraldom."

He paused, and Hake gazed at the ground in silence.

"I see," he continued sadly, "you do not like my project, and will not
aid me in the enterprise.  After all, how could I expect that you would
be willing to forsake Bertha and face so great a danger?"

Hake still continued to gaze in silence, and with a strangely perplexed
air, at the ground.

"Well, well, Hake," resumed the other, in a tone of reproach, "I did not
expect that ye would go with me on this venture, but truly I had counted
on your sympathy and counsel as well as your aid."

"Ye do wrong me," cried Hake, suddenly starting up and seizing his
brother's hand; "I not only sympathise with you, but I will go with you.
It is not easy all at once to make up one's mind on a point of such
importance.  Forsake Bertha I never will as long as one drop of Scottish
blood flows in my veins, for I know that she loves me, though her sense
of duty keeps her aloof--for which I love her all the more.
Nevertheless, I will leave her for a time.  I will make this venture
with you.  If we perish, we perish.  If we succeed I will return to
Greenland with a force that will either induce or compel the surrender
of my bride."

"Thou art a bold lover," said Heika, smiling.  "What! wilt thou carry
her off whether she will or no?"

"Not so; but I will carry her off whether Leif or Karlsefin, or Biarne
or Thorward, or all Greenland put together, will or no!"

"Nay, brother, that may not be.  It were the maddest venture of all.  I
will run this risk alone."

For some time the brothers disputed upon this point and held out against
each other pretty stoutly.  At length Heika reluctantly gave in, and it
was finally agreed that Hake should join him in the proposed attempt to
regain his liberty.

It did not take long to make the necessary arrangements for leaving
Vinland.  The little colony had not struck its roots very deeply into
the soil.  They were easily torn out without damage to the feelings of
any one, for little Snorro, as Krake said, was the only creature that
had to bid farewell to his _native_ land--always excepting some of the
cattle and chickens--and he was too young to take it much to heart.

In a few weeks the _Snake_, and Thorward's ship, the _Dragon_, were
loaded with everything that was of value in the colony, including much
even of the rude furniture of the huts.

Before leaving, Karlsefin resolved to give a last grand feast to the
savages.  He therefore called them together and explained, as he best
could, that he and his friends were going to leave them, but that
perhaps some of them might return again with large supplies of the gay
cloth and ornaments they were so fond of, and he recommended them in the
meantime to make as large a collection of furs as they could, in order
to be ready to trade when the white men returned.  He then spread before
them the most sumptuous feast the land could provide, including a large
quantity of dairy produce, which the savages regarded as the most
luxurious of fare.

After the feast he presented Whitepow, Utway, and Powlet with a large
quantity of bright-coloured cloth and a few silver and iron ornaments,
to be distributed among the members of the tribe as they should see fit
after helping themselves.  He also gave them a few cattle and domestic
fowls, after which, weighing anchors, putting out the oars, and hoisting
their sails, the Norsemen bade farewell to Leifsgaard.  As they swept
round the point which shut it out from view, they gave vent to one
vigorous parting cheer, which was replied to by the savages with a
feeble imitation and a waving of arms.

Dropping down the river, they passed the spit of sand where the first
night in Vinland had been spent so pleasantly; caught an offshore breeze
that carried them swiftly beyond the island betwixt which and the shore
they had captured the whale, and finally leaped out upon the swell of
the great ocean.

"Aha! now am I at home," exclaimed Karlsefin, with heightened colour and
sparkling eyes, as he stood at the helm, and glanced from the bulging
sail to the heaving swell, where Thorward's _Dragon_ was bending over to
the breeze about a cable's length to leeward,--"Now am I at home once
more!"

"So am not I," murmured poor Bertha, whose white face betrayed the
miserable emotions--or commotions--within.

All the women, we may remark, had expressed a desire to keep together
during the voyage, hence they had embarked in the _Snake_, which was a
better sea-boat than Thorward's vessel.

"Of course _you_ are not at home.  You are never contented or at home
anywhere!" cried Freydissa sharply.

Hake wished with all his heart that Bertha was at home in Scotland, and
that her home was his; and Snorro, who was seated on Olaf's knee, said--

"Never mind, Bert'a, oos be a tome soon."

There was a general laugh at this consolatory remark; even Bertha smiled
faintly as she patted Snorro's head, while Astrid and Thora--not to
mention Gudrid--agreed between themselves that he was the dearest,
sweetest, and in every way the most delightful Vinlander that had ever
been born.

"Of that there can be no doubt," said Leif, with a laugh, "since he is
the only white Vinlander that ever _was_ born."

But although the party assembled on the poop indulged at first in a few
humorous remarks, they soon became silent and sad, for they were fast
leaving behind them a spot which, with all its drawbacks, had been a
pleasant and happy home for upwards of three years.

As they stood leaning on the rails that guarded the poop, and gazed
regretfully on the lessening hills, each recalled many pleasant or
stirring incidents which had occurred there, incidents which would
remain--however far or long that land might be left behind--for ever
engraven on their memories.  And, long after twilight and distance had
concealed the coast from view, the Norsemen continued to strain their
vision towards the horizon, mentally bidding a long and last farewell to
Vinland.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

CHANGES IN BRATTALID--THE SCOTS CONTINUE TO PLOT AND PLAN.

Greenland again!  Flatface standing on the wharf at Brattalid; Anders
beside him; groups of Norse men, women, and children, and Skraelingers,
around and scattered along the bay.

What a commotion there was in the colony, to be sure, when it was
discovered that two large ships were sailing up the fiord; and what a
commotion it created in the breasts of those on board these ships when
it was discovered that two other large ships were already at anchor in
the harbour!

It is not necessary to detain the reader with the details of question
and reply, by which the truth was at last elicited on both sides.
Suffice it to say that the two ships were found to be merchant-vessels
from Iceland, and that, among other colonists, they had brought out
several men whose purpose was to teach and plant the new religion.
Already a small building had been set up, with a short tower on the
roof, which the Norsemen were told was a church, and in which some of
the services of the Christian religion were performed.  Elsewhere
several new houses had been built, and everywhere there were signs of
increasing population and prosperity.

Leif was half pleased, half disappointed at all this.  It was gratifying
to find things prospering so well, but it was not pleasant to see the
old place so greatly changed, and to have much of the old home-feeling
done away.

However, little was said on the subject.  The Vinland colonists were too
busy at first, meeting with relations and old companions, and being
introduced to new friends, to say or think much about the matter.  After
a few days they became reconciled to the change, and settled down into a
regular busy life.

One evening Heika went to the house of his friend Edwinsson, who owned
the boat that he wished to become possessed of.  He found that the man
was not at home, but there was a serving-woman in the house.

"Edwinsson no longer lives here," said the girl.  "He has gone to live
with old Haraldson and manage his boats, for the old man is not able for
that work now."

"Do you mean Bertha's father?" asked Heika.

"Yes; Haraldson is Bertha's father."

Heika went at once to search for his friend.  By the way he chanced to
meet with his brother.

"Come, Hake," said he, "I want you to go with me to find Edwinsson."

"With all my heart," said Hake.

They soon came to old Haraldson's house, which lay at the extreme west
of Brattalid; and when Heika opened the door, there he saw the old man
seated in a large chair, propped up with eider-down pillows.  Bertha was
seated on a stool at his feet holding one of his hands.

"Come in, Heika," she cried, springing up and hasting forward with
pleasure.  "I have been trying to tell dear father about the whale you
killed in Vinland."

She stopped abruptly on observing that Hake was behind his brother.
Recovering herself quickly, however, she welcomed him also with a slight
blush.

"I want you, Heika," she continued, "to tell the story to my father."

"Ay, sit down here, young man, and tell it me," said Haraldson, in a
tremulous voice.  "I love to hear anything about Vinland, especially
what pleases Bertha.  Dear Bertha!  I have become very frail since she
went away--very frail; and it has been a weary time--a weary time.  But
come, tell me about the whale."

"Gladly would I do that," said Heika; "but I have business with your man
Edwinsson--business which I want to put out of hands at once.  But Hake
will tell the story of the whale.  He is a better sagaman than I."

"Let Hake tell it, then," returned the old man.  "You will find
Edwinsson somewhere about among my boats."

Hake gladly sat down beside Bertha, and began the story of the whale,
while his brother went down to the beach, where he found his friend.

"Edwinsson," said Heika, after some conversation had passed between
them, "you have a good boat near Leif's wharf.  Will you lend it to me?"

"Right willingly," replied his friend.

"But I am bound on an excursion that may chance to end in the wreck of
the boat," said Heika.  "Will you hold me responsible if I lose it?"

"'Twill be difficult to hold thee responsible," returned Edwinsson,
laughing, "if ye lose your life along with it.  But that matters not.  I
gift thee the boat if thou wilt have it.  I count it a small gift to the
man who saved my life."

"Thanks, Edwinsson--thanks.  I accept the gift, and, if my venture is
successful, I shall try to let you share the benefit in some way or
other."

"Hast discovered a new fishing-ground, Heika?  What venture do ye
intend?" asked the other.

"That I will keep secret just now," said Heika, laughing carelessly.  "I
don't want to be followed at first.  Ye shall know all about it soon.
But hearken, friend, make no mention of it.  One does not like to be
laughed at if one fails, you know."

So saying, Heika went off to Leif's wharf, loosed the boat which he
found there, hoisted the sail, and dropped down with the tide to the
mouth of the fiord.  Here a light breeze was blowing, under the
influence of which he soon ran round the point of land that divided
Ericsfiord from Heriulfness.  In the course of another hour he reached
the western skerries.

The skerries or islets in question were little better than bare rocks,
which lay about fifty yards from the mainland, along which they formed a
sort of breakwater for a distance of nearly a quarter of a mile.  Within
this breakwater there were several narrow and well-sheltered inlets.
Into one of these Heika ran his boat, and made it fast in a place which
was so well overshadowed by rocks, that the boat could neither be seen
from the land nor from the sea.

On the landward side this inlet could be reached by a path, which,
though it appeared somewhat rugged, was nevertheless easy to traverse.
Up this path Heika hastened after making the boat fast, intending to
return to Brattalid by land.  The distance over land was much shorter
than by water, so that he could soon reach Leif's house, and his brief
absence would attract no attention.

Just as the Scot issued from behind the rocks which concealed the path
to the inlet, he was suddenly bereft almost of the power to move by the
unexpected sight of Leif himself advancing towards him!

Poor Heika's heart died within him.  He felt that all his long-cherished
and deeply-laid plans were crushed, just as they were about to be
carried into effect, and a feeling of fierce despair prompted him, for a
moment, to commit some wild deed of violence, but he observed that
Leif's head was bent forward and his eyes rested on the ground, as he
advanced slowly, like one who meditates.  Heika drew swiftly back behind
the rock, from the shelter of which he had barely passed, and breathed
freely again when Leif passed by, without showing any symptom of having
observed him.  Waiting till he had sauntered beyond the next turn in the
path, he started at his utmost speed, and was soon beyond the reach of
Leif's eyes, and back in Brattalid with a relieved mind.

Had the Scot waited to observe the motions of his master after passing
the turn in the path above mentioned, he would not have experienced so
much mental relief; for no sooner had Leif got behind a small but thick
bush than he turned abruptly, raised his head with an intelligent smile,
lay down behind the bush, and looked quietly through its foliage.  He
saw Heika issue from behind the rock, observed his cautious glances from
side to side, and, with something like a chuckle, witnessed his rapid
flight in the direction of the settlement.

"Hem! something i' the wind," muttered Leif, rising and walking towards
the spot whence his thrall had issued.

He found the rugged path, descended to the inlet, discovered the boat,
and stood looking at it with a perplexed air for full ten minutes.
Thereafter he shook his head once or twice, smiled in a grave manner,
and slowly sauntered home absorbed in meditation.

"Hake," whispered Heika to his brother that night, as they sat down
together in the little sleeping-closet off Leif's hall, that had been
allotted to their use, "all my hopes and plans were on the point of
being ruined to-day."

"Ruined! brother.  How was that?"

Heika related to him all that had occurred at the inlet near the western
skerries.

"Art thou sure he saw thee not?" asked Hake earnestly.

"There can be no doubt of that," replied Heika, "for he had no cause to
suspect that anything was wrong; and if he had seen me as I first stood
before him, motionless with surprise, he would doubtless have hailed me.
No, no; something was working very hard in his brain, for he passed on
without the least sign of having seen me."

"That is well, brother, yet I do not feel easy, for it is well-known
that Leif is a shrewd man, with great command over his feelings.  But
now, tell me how best I shall aid you in this enterprise."

"That is best done by using your bow well, for we shall require a large
supply of dried meat for the voyage, and we must work diligently as well
as secretly during our few hours of leisure, if we would get ready in
time to sail before the rough winds of autumn set in.  There are some
tight casks in Leif's old store which I mean to take possession of, at
the last, for water.  Our service will more than pay for these and any
other trifles we may find it needful to appropriate."

Hake thought in his heart that the enterprise was a wild and foolish
one, but, having promised to engage in it, he resolved not to cast the
slightest hindrance in the way, or to say a single word of
discouragement.  He therefore approved of all that Heika suggested, and
said that he would give his aid most vigorously.

"Moreover," he continued, "I have had some consolation to-day which will
spur me on, for I have got Bertha to admit that she loves me, and to
promise that if I can obtain my freedom she will wed me.  She even gave
me to understand that she would wed me as a thrall, if only Leif and
Karlsefin would give their consent.  But that shall not be.  Bertha
shall never be a thrall's bride.  I will return and claim her, as I have
said."

Heika made no reply, but continued to gaze at the floor in silence.

"Methinks ye are perplexed by something, brother," said Hake.

"I am thinking," replied Heika, "that it is a pity we cannot use those
curious marks made on skins, wherewith, we are told, men can communicate
