
"But what do you mean?" said Miss Carter. "Why should little Agnes be
taken from you?"

"I don't suppose anybody would dare to take her from me. Frosty
wouldn't, and mother wouldn't; the school wouldn't; but there is a
wicked girl who tried her very best to frighten little Agnes, only
Rosamund brought her back to her senses. The darling knows that whoever
else I might hurt at one time, I never could and never would hurt one
hair of her head. And she loves me in return."

"Then that's all right," said Miss Carter.

Just at that moment a slight rustling was heard at the back of the
little bower. Irene did not notice it, but Miss Carter did.

"I wonder if anybody is listening?" she said.

"Who cares? I don't mind if the whole world hears. There's that spy,
Lucy Merriman; she is as likely as not to do mean things. But I don't
mind even her."

"Oh, don't you?" thought Lucy, who had that moment come a little nearer
the back of the bower.

"No, I don't mind even her," repeated Irene. "I only say that as long as
Rosamund is with me I shall be a good girl, just because I can't help
myself; and if any one were to take my Rosamund from me I should be
worse than ever."

"You were pretty bad. I don't know how you could be worse than you used
to be."

"Well, you see, I know more. I have more knowledge. I could be more
refined in my acts of terrorism, or whatever you like to call them.
Anyhow, people had better not try."

"People had better not try!" thought Lucy. "But, my fine Irene, somebody
is going to try."

The evening passed, and the children came back again to have supper at
Sunnyside. Lucy was biding her time. She disliked Irene even more than
she disliked Rosamund. As to little Agnes, she was not of the smallest
interest to her. She simply wished to divide her effectually from Irene,
in order to punish both Irene and Rosamund; and nothing could give her
greater pleasure than that Irene should burst into one of her worst
frenzies. She thought she saw a way.

The family were all sitting contentedly at their supper when a telegram
was brought in which was handed to Rosamund. It was from her mother,
telling her that her father was seriously ill, and wanted her to come to
London on the following day. Rosamund, who was intensely devoted to both
her parents, was much distressed. She handed the telegram to Mrs.
Merriman, who immediately gave her the necessary permission.

"You must start by the very first train to-morrow morning," said Mrs.
Merriman, "and one of the governesses must go with you. Miss Frost might
be the best."

"Of course, Miss Frost would be the right person," said Lucy, suddenly
raising her voice, for it seemed to her that she saw the very
opportunity she wished for in this unexpected absence of Rosamund.

"I shall probably only be away for a day. I cannot think there can be
anything seriously wrong with dear father," said Rosamund. "But, of
course, after mother's telegram I must go."

Accordingly, a reply stating the hour of Rosamund's arrival at
Paddington was wired back to London, and shortly afterwards the girl
went up to her own room to pack a few things. She was not depressed, for
her father was subject to sudden attacks, which, although distressful,
were not of a painful nature.

Presently Irene came and sat in the room with her. She sat down on the
edge of the bed.

"I should almost die here," she said, "if it were not for Agnes. As it
is, I feel dreadful. I feel quite frightened at the thought of your
going."

"But for my sake you will do your utmost to try to be good while I am
away, won't you, Irene? I shall probably only be in London one night, or
two at the very most; and Frosty is coming too. You won't mind that?
Miss Frost is coming back at once; she will return in time for to-morrow
evening."

"Oh! I suppose it will be all right," said Irene restlessly.

Rosamund went on putting a few things into her little trunk. Then she
went up to Irene, put her arm round her waist, and kissed her.

"I am proud of you, Irene," she said. "I shall always feel that I have
not lived in vain when I think how different you are from the child I
first saw only a few months ago."

"I feel different," said Irene. "I begin to have a sort of pleasure in
being--I mean in trying to be--good. It is you, of course--you and dear
little Agnes."

"Well, Agnes will be more than ever in your care now."

"Oh! I shall look after her, there's no fear of that. I shall be
terribly lonely without you, darling; but she and I will be all in all
to each other while you are away. If it wasn't for--for Lucy Merriman I
should be quite happy, for I think the other girls are inclined to be
nice; but I hate Lucy."

"Well, I must say, Irene, speaking honestly, I hate her too. But we must
both make up our minds not to mind her. She cannot really hurt us."

"Hurt us?" said Irene. "I'm sure I'm not afraid of her, if that is what
you mean."

"Well, that's all right. Now, let us go to bed."

"I believe I am very tired too. I will promise to be quite good while
you are away, so you need not have any anxiety on my account, darling,"
said Irene; and she kissed Rosamund several times.

The night passed, and early the next morning Rosamund, accompanied by
Miss Frost, took her departure. There was a certain loneliness felt in
the school, for Rosamund was exceedingly popular with every girl in the
place, with the sole exception of Lucy Merriman. Busy school-life,
however, gives little time for regrets or even for loneliness. Each
moment of time is carefully marked out, each hour has its appointed
task, and the girls were, to all appearance, as happy as usual. Little
Agnes did not in the very least miss Rosamund or her own sister Emily.
Her whole soul was set upon Irene, who helped her with her lessons,
walked with her, and hardly ever let her out of her sight.

In the course of the evening Lucy was seen to go up to Phyllis Flower.

"Now, Phyllis," she said, "here is your chance. I've got the very thing
that will do the business. We must get Agnes to bed, and a little later,
when she is asleep, you shall creep into the room and just slip this
thing under the bedclothes. She won't know who has done it. She will
wake out of her first sleep, and naturally think that it is Irene's
doing."

As Lucy spoke she drew Phyllis towards a corner of the playground, where
a large, rather ferocious-looking hedgehog was curled up in a ball.

"But that--that would almost kill the child," said Phyllis, starting
back.

"We must give her a good fright; it is the only way to effect our
purpose. Then one or other of us must be near, and intercept her, and
tell her that we will be her friends. Then you will have your week with
me in London; but you must do it."

"I almost think," said Phyllis, turning very white, "that I'd rather not
have my week. You can do it yourself if you like. It seems so cruel, and
they are very happy together, and she is a very timid little thing. And
just when her sister is not at home!"

"That is the very time. I am going to have a chat with little Agnes this
evening. I am going in a certain way to prepare her--not much. Now,
don't be a goose, Phyllis. Think what a jolly time you will have in
London. It will be quite impossible for us to be found out."

Lucy talked to Phyllis for some time, and finally persuaded her to act
as her accomplice in the matter.

It was a rule at Sunnyside that the smaller girls, consisting of Phyllis
Flower, Agnes Sparkes, and little Agnes Frost, should go to bed quite an
hour before the other girls. They usually had supper of milk and a few
biscuits, and went to their room not later than eight o'clock. The other
girls did not go to bed until half-past nine, and had a more substantial
meal at eight o'clock. Phyllis Flower, therefore, for every reason, was
best able to perform the mean trick by which Lucy meant to sever the
friendship between Irene and little Agnes; but the child must be
slightly alarmed, otherwise the hedgehog might be put into the bed and
she know nothing about it.

Consequently, just before the younger children's simple supper was
brought in on a tray, Lucy came and sat down near Agnes Frost.

"You must miss your Emily," she said.

Her tone was quite caressing and gentle. Little Agnes--who did not like
Lucy, but could not in her heart of hearts cherish ill-will towards any
one--raised her eyes now and said gently, "Of course I miss her; but
then, I have my dear Irene."

Lucy put on a smile which meant wonderful things.

"You are a very courageous little girl," she said after a pause.

Little Agnes was silent for a minute; then she said gravely, "I know
exactly what you mean by that, and I think you are mistaken. You said
things about my Irene which are not true."

"Oh, indeed! you accuse me of falsehood, do you?" said Lucy.

"Well, perhaps not exactly of falsehood; but I don't think it was kind
of you to tell me, for Irene is changed now. She could never do cruel
things now."

"She will never be changed. Don't you understand that she is not like
ordinary people? She is a sort of fairy, hardly like a human being at
all. I may as well tell you, now that Rosamund and Miss Frost are away,
that while Rosamund slept in the next room you were practically safe. I
will admit, although I have no love for Rosamund Cunliffe, that she is a
very brave and plucky girl. To-night, however----But I trust it will be
all right. I don't want to make you nervous. I trust it will be all
right."

Lucy moved off and sat down before her books and pretended to read.
By-and-by Irene, looking lovely in one of her prettiest pale-blue
dresses, entered the room. Little Agnes was sipping her milk very
slowly. Irene ran straight up to her. She had the power of almost
divining a person's thoughts, and she was conscious that the child was
troubled.

"What is it, pet?" she said. "Has anybody vexed you?"

"Oh, nobody--nobody, indeed, dear Irene."

"Well, that is all right. I wish I could go to bed with you to-night."

"I wish you could," said the child nervously.

"But I can't. I have an awfully stiff piece of work to get through
before the morning, and I am determined to be first in my form,
otherwise Lucy Merriman will get ahead of me, and that she shall not."

"But I sha'n't be nervous really."

"No, of course not, dear. What is there to be nervous about?"

Irene was really absorbed in an intricate calculation which she had to
make with regard to a very advanced sum, and sat down at a distant
table, and forgot for the time being even little Agnes. Agnes,
therefore, went up to bed alone. There was no Miss Frost to help her to
undress, there was no one to take any notice of her, and there were the
fearful stories that Lucy kept hinting at ringing in her ears. Yes,
Irene had done dreadful things. Yes, she had. But Irene to her was
perfect. She had no fear with her; she was happy with her. But then,
Lucy Merriman had said that that was because little Agnes was so well
protected. She had Rosamund sleeping practically in the same room, and
Miss Frost, her own sister, not far away. Irene did not dare to do
anything dreadful. But she had done dreadful things. She had nearly
killed poor Miss Carter. She had made her own beloved sister swallow
insects instead of pills. In short, she was just what Lucy had described
her to be. And Lucy had said another dreadful thing to-night. She had
hinted that Irene was not exactly to blame, for she was not like an
ordinary girl; she was a sort of fairy girl. Now, Agnes had read several
fairy-tales, and knew, supposing such a wonderful thing as a fairy
really lived in the world, that she might be influenced by some other
fairies, who would guide her, and help her, and force her to do things
whether she liked them or not. But still she never would be unkind to
little Agnes.

"It is a perfect shame of me even to think of it," said the little girl
to herself. "I am ever so sleepy, but still I'll just look under the
pillow. Oh, suppose Fuzz or Buzz were there, wouldn't I just scream with
terror?"

But the pillow was quite innocent and harbored no obnoxious thing; the
bed was smooth and white as usual; and little Agnes undressed, not quite
as carefully as when Miss Frost was looking after her, and getting into
bed, laid her head on the pillow, and presently fell fast asleep.

She had not been asleep more than a quarter of an hour before the room
door was opened most carefully (the lock had been oiled in advance by
Lucy), and Phyllis Flower, carrying the hedgehog, came in. She drew down
the bedclothes and laid the hedgehog so that its prickles would just
touch the child in case she moved, and then as carefully withdrew. She
hated herself for having done it. All was quiet in that part of the
house, which was far away from the schoolrooms, and no one heard a child
give a terrible scream a few minutes later; and no one saw that same
child spring out of bed, hastily put on her clothes, and rush downstairs
in wild distress and despair.

Lucy had meant to be close at hand to comfort little Agnes when fright
overtook her. But she had been called away to do some writing for her
father. Laura Everett was busy attending to her own work. Phyllis Flower
was in bed and asleep. She had earned her trip to London, and was
dreaming about the delights of that time. No one heard that scream,
which was at once faint and piteous. No one heard the little feet speed
through the hall, and no one saw the little figure stealthily leave the
house. Little Agnes was going to run away. Yes, there was no doubt
whatever now in her mind: her darling Irene was a fairy, a changeling.
She had done the most cruel and awful thing.

When little Agnes had seen the hedgehog in her bed she was far too
terrified even to recognize the nature of the creature that had been
made her bedfellow. But she felt sure that Lucy's words were right: that
Irene was a wicked changeling, and that the sooner she got away from her
the better. The child was too young to reason, too simple by nature to
give any thought to double-dealing. All she wanted now was to get away.
She could not stay another minute in the house. Her love for Irene was
swallowed up altogether by her wild terror. She trembled; she shook from
head to foot.

It was a bitterly cold winter's night, and the child was only
half-clothed. She had forgotten to put on anything but her house-shoes,
and had not even a hat on her head. But that did not matter. She was
out, and there was no terrible Irene to come near her, no wicked fairy
to do her damage. She would stay out all night if necessary. She would
hide from Irene. She could never be her friend again.

The terror in her little heart rendered her quite unreasonable for the
time being. She was, in short, past reason. By-and-by she crept into the
old bower where Rosamund and Irene had spent a midsummer night--a night
altogether very different from the present one, for the bower was not
waterproof, and the cold sleet came in and fell upon the half-dressed
child. She sank down on the seat, which was already drenched; but little
she cared. She crouched there, wondering what was to be the end, and
giving little cries of absolute anguish now and then.




CHAPTER XXVII.

"MY OWN IRENE!"


Irene went up to bed that night in her usual spirits. She longed for the
moment when she could, as usual, kiss little Agnes; but she was extra
tired, for she had passed a stimulating day, and had been on her best
behavior. She felt quite happy, and wondered if her mother, when her
allotted time at the Merrimans' was over, would send her and little
Agnes and Rosamund to another school somewhere else. She liked the
excitement of school-life, and thought that if she could find a home
where there was no girl like Lucy she would be perfectly happy. She
little knew that in all schools there are girls of the Lucy type, who
are not amiable, whose faults are far worse than those of ordinary
wildness or even ordinary disobedience. But on this occasion she felt
almost kindly toward Lucy, who nodded to her and said, "You and Agnes
must make the most of yourselves together, for you will miss Rosamund."

"Oh! we'll be quite happy together," said Irene, with a careless nod;
and then she went up to her room, opened the door gently, shut it
quietly behind her, and shading the candle with one hand, went over to
little Agnes's bed.

There was no Agnes there. But a huge hedgehog had curled itself up in a
ball close to the pillow where the little delicate head had been
pressed. Irene was afraid of no living creature, and she recognized the
hedgehog at once. She took it up and laid it on the window-sill. Then
she looked round her. Her face was white as death; her teeth chattered.
She suddenly left the room and went straight to Lucy's. She opened the
door without knocking.

"Lucy!" she said.

"What is it?" said Lucy, who was brushing out her long fair hair.

"Did you put a hedgehog into Agnes's bed?"

"Certainly not," said Lucy.

"Well, some one did as a trick, and the child isn't there."

"The child isn't there? There's only one person who could do that sort
of thing, and that is yourself, as you know very well," said Lucy. "But
is the child nowhere in the room?"

"You come and look for her, will you?" said Irene. Her tone and manner
had completely altered. She was forcing herself to use self-control. Had
Fuzz and Buzz, and Thunder and Lightning, and the Stars been present at
that moment, there is not the least doubt that Irene would have elected
them to wreak their vengeance on Lucy; but she was keeping herself in
for all she was worth at the present moment, for after all even Lucy did
not much matter--it was little Agnes who mattered.

"Here's the hedgehog," said Irene when they entered her bedroom--"a
great big one--and some one had put it into the little one's bed, and
she's not there, and you know how timid she is. Where is she? You know I
didn't do it. Is it likely I'd do it to one I love?"
