emptying its golden contents on the table in a little heap, from which
he counted fifteen sovereigns.  "My debt to you amounts, I believe, to
twenty pounds; five I have just paid to your landlord, here is the
balance.  You needn't mind a receipt.  Send me the discharged account at
your leisure, and think over what I have suggested.  Aileen, my dear, we
will go now."

Aileen said good-night at once to the sick woman and followed her father
as he went out, repeating--"Good-evening, Timms, think over my
suggestion."

They walked slowly home without speaking.  Soon they reached the cottage
by the sea.  As they stood under the trellis-work porch the merchant
turned round and gazed at the sun, which was just dipping into the
horizon, flooding sea and sky with golden glory.

"Aileen," he said in a low voice, "I have commenced life at last--life
in earnest.  I was a poor fool once.  Through grace I am a rich man
now."



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

SHOWS HOW OUR HERO FORMED PLANS, HOW MISS PRITTY FORMED PLOTS, AND HOW
THE SMALL DOMESTIC AMUSED HERSELF.

On a certain cold, raw, bleak, biting, bitter day in November, our hero
found himself comfortably situated at the bottom of the sea.

We say `comfortably' advisedly and comparatively, for, as compared with
the men whose duty it was to send air down to him, Edgar Berrington was
in a state of decided comfort.  Above water nought was to be seen but a
bleak, rocky, forbidding coast, a grey sky with sleet driving across it,
and an angry indigo sea covered with white wavelets.  Nothing was to be
felt but a stiff cutting breeze, icy particles in the air, and cold
blood in the veins.  Below water all was calm and placid; groves of
sea-weed delighted the eye; patches of yellow sand invited to a siesta;
the curiously-twisted and smashed-up remains of a wreck formed a subject
of interesting contemplation, while a few wandering crabs, and an
erratic lobster or two, gave life and variety to the scene, while the
temperature, if not warm, was at all events considerably milder than
that overhead.  In short, strange though it may seem, Edgar was in
rather an enviable position than otherwise, on that bleak November day.

Some two years or so previous to the day to which we refer, Edgar, with
his diving friends, had returned to England.  Mr Hazlit had preceded
them by a month.  But Edgar did not seek him out.  He had set a purpose
before him, and meant to stick to it.  He had made up his mind not to go
near Aileen again until he had made for himself a position, and secured
a steady income which would enable him to offer her a home at least
equal to that in which she now dwelt.

Mr Hazlit rather wondered that the young engineer never made his
appearance at the cottage by the sea, but, coming to the conclusion that
his passion had cooled, he consoled himself with the thought that, after
all, he was nearly penniless, and that it was perhaps as well that he
had sheered off.

Aileen also wondered, but _she_ did not for a moment believe that his
love had cooled, being well aware that that was an impossibility.  Still
she was perplexed, for although the terms on which they stood to each
other did not allow of correspondence, she thought, sometimes, that he
_might_ have written to her father--if only to ask how they were after
their adventures in the China seas.

Miss Pritty--to whom Aileen confided her troubles--came nearer the mark
than either of them.  She conceived, and stoutly maintained, that Edgar
had gone abroad to seek his fortune, and meant to return and marry
Aileen when he had made it.

Edgar, however, had not gone abroad.  He had struck out a line of life
for himself, and had prosecuted it during these two years with untiring
energy.  He had devoted himself to submarine engineering, and, having an
independent spirit, he carved his way very much as a freelance.  At
first he devoted himself to studying the subject, and ere long there was
not a method of raising a sunken vessel, of building a difficult
breakwater, of repairing a complicated damage to a pier, or a well, or
anything else subaqueous, with which he was not thoroughly acquainted,
and in regard to which he had not suggested or carried out bold and
novel plans and improvements, both in regard to the machinery employed
and the modes of action pursued.

After a time he became noted for his success in undertaking difficult
works, and at last employed a staff of divers to do the work, while he
chiefly superintended.  Joe Baldwin became his right-hand man and
constant attendant.  Rooney and Maxwell, preferring steadier and less
adventurous work, got permanent employment on the harbour improvements
of their own seaport town.

Thus engaged, Edgar and his man Joe visited nearly all the wild places
round the stormy shores of Great Britain and Ireland.  They raised many
ships from the bottom of the sea that had been pronounced by other
engineers to be hopelessly lost.  They laid foundations of piers and
breakwaters in places where old Ocean had strewn wrecks since the
foundation of the world.  They cleared passages by blasting and
levelling rocks whose stern crests had bid defiance to winds and waves
for ages, and they recovered cargoes that had been given up for years to
Neptune's custody.  In short, wherever a difficult submarine operation
had to be undertaken, Edgar Berrington and his man Joe, with, perhaps, a
gang of divers under them, were pretty sure to be asked to undertake it.

The risk, we need scarcely say, was often considerable; hence the
remuneration was good, and both Edgar and his man speedily acquired a
considerable sum of money.

At the end of two years, the former came to the conclusion that he had a
sufficient sum at his credit in the bank to warrant a visit to the
cottage by the sea; and it was when this idea had grown into a fixed
intention that he found himself, as we have mentioned, in rather
comfortable circumstances at the bottom of the sea.

The particular part of the bottom lay off the west coast of England.
Joe and a gang of men were hard at work on a pier when Edgar went down.
He carried a slate and piece of pencil with him.  The bottom was not
very deep down.  There was sufficient light to enable him to find his
man easily.

Joe was busy laying a large stone in its bed.  When he raised his burly
form, after fixing the stone, Edgar stepped forward, and, touching him
on the shoulder, held out the slate, whereon was written in a bold
running hand:--

"Joe, I'm going off to get engaged, and after that, as soon as possible,
to be married."

Through the window of his helmet, Joe looked at his employer with an
expression of pleased surprise.  Then he took the slate, obliterated the
information on it, and printed in an equally bold, but very sprawly
hand:--

"Indeed?  I wish you joy, sir."

Thereupon Edgar took the slate and wrote:--

"Thank you, Joe.  Now, I leave you in charge.  Keep a sharp eye on the
men--especially on that lazy fellow who has a tendency to sleep and
shirk duty.  If the rock in the fair-way is got ready before my return,
blast it at once, without waiting for me.  You will find one of Siebe
and Gorman's voltaic batteries in my lodging, also a frictional
electrical machine, which you can use if you prefer it.  In the store
there is a large supply of tin-cases for gunpowder and compressed
gun-cotton charges.  There also you will find one of Heinke and Davis's
magneto-electric exploders.  I leave it entirely to your own judgment
which apparatus to use.  All sorts are admirable in their way; quite
fresh, and in good working order.  Have you anything to say to me before
I go?"

"All right, sir," replied Joe, in his sprawly hand; "I'll attend to
orders.  When do you start, and when do you expect to be back?"

"I start immediately.  The day of my return is uncertain, but I'll write
to you."

Rubbing this out, Joe wrote:--

"You'll p'r'aps see my old 'ooman, sir.  If you do, just give her my
respects, an' say the last pair o' divin' drawers she knitted for me was
fust-rate.  Tightish, if anything, round the waist, but a bit o'
rope-yarn putt that all right--they're warm an' comfortable.  Good-bye,
I wish you joy again, sir."

"Good-bye," replied Edgar.

It was impossible that our hero could follow his inclination, and nod
with his stiff-necked iron head-piece at parting.  He therefore made the
motion of kissing his hand to his trusty man, and giving the requisite
signal, spread his arms like a pair of wings, and flew up to the realms
of light!

Joe grinned broadly, and made the motion of kissing his hand to the
ponderous soles of his employer's leaden boots as they passed him, then,
turning to the granite masonry at his side, he bent down and resumed his
work.

Arrived at the region of atmospheric air, Edgar Berrington clambered on
board the attending vessel, took off his amphibious clothing, and
arrayed himself in the ordinary habiliments of a gentleman, after which
he went ashore, gave some instructions to the keeper of his lodgings,
ordered his horse, galloped to the nearest railway station, flashed a
telegraphic message to Miss Pritty to expect to see him that evening,
and soon found himself rushing at forty miles an hour, away from the
scene of his recent labours.

Receiving a telegraph envelope half-an-hour later, Miss Pritty turned
pale, laid it on the table, sank on the sofa, shut her eyes, and
attempted to reduce the violent beating of her heart, by pressing her
left side tightly with both hands.

"It _must_ be death!--or accident!" she murmured faintly to herself, for
she happened to be alone at the time.

Poor Miss Pritty had no near relations in the world except Edgar, and
therefore there was little or no probability that any one would
telegraph to her in connection with accident or death, nevertheless she
entertained such an unconquerable horror of a telegram, that the mere
sight of the well-known envelope, with its large-type title, gave her a
little shock; the reception of one was almost too much for her.

After suffering tortures for about as long a time as the telegram had
taken to reach her, she at last summoned courage to open the envelope.

The first words, "Edgar Berrington," induced a little scream of alarm.
The next, "to Miss Pritty," quieted her a little.  When, however, she
learned that instead of being visited by news of death and disaster, she
was merely to be visited by her nephew that same evening, all anxiety
vanished from her speaking countenance, and was replaced by a mixture of
surprise and amusement.  Then she sat down on the sofa--from which, in
her agitation, she had risen--and fell into a state of perplexity.

"Now I _do_ wish," she said, aloud, "that Eddy had had the sense to tell
me whether I am to let his friends the Hazlits know of his impending
visit.  Perhaps he telegraphed to me on purpose to give me time to call
and prepare them for his arrival.  On the other hand, perhaps he wishes
to take them by surprise.  It may be that he is not on good terms with
Mr Hazlit, and intends to use me as a go-between.  What _shall_ I do?"

As her conscience was not appealed to in the matter, it gave no reply to
the question; having little or no common sense to speak of, she could
scarcely expect much of an answer from that part of her being.  At last
she made up her mind, and, according to a habit induced by a life of
solitude, expressed it to the fireplace.

"Yes, that's what I'll do.  I shall wait till near the time of the
arrival of the last train, and then go straight off to Sea Cottage to
spend the evening, leaving a message that if any one should call in my
absence I am to be found there.  This will give him an excuse, if he
wants one, for calling, and if he does not want an excuse he can remain
here till my return.  I'll have the fire made up, and tell my domestic
to offer tea to any one who should chance to call."

Miss Pritty thought it best, on the whole, to give an ambiguous order
about the tea to her small domestic, for she knew that lively creature
to be a compound of inquisitiveness and impudence, and did not choose to
tell her who it was that she expected to call.  She was very emphatic,
however, in impressing on the small domestic the importance of being
very civil and attentive, and of offering tea, insomuch that the child
protested with much fervour that she would be _sure_ to attend to
orders.

This resulted in quite an evening's amusement to the small domestic.

After Miss Pritty had gone out, the first person who chanced to call was
the spouse of Mr Timms, the green-grocer, who had obviously recovered
from her illness.

"Is Miss Pritty at 'ome?" she asked.

"No, ma'am, she ain't, she's hout," answered the small domestic.

"Ah!  Well, it don't much matter.  I on'y called to leave this 'ere
little present of cabbidges an' cawliflowers--with Mr Timms' kind
compliments and mine.  She's been wery kind to us, 'as Miss Pritty, an'
we wishes to acknowledge it."

"Please, ma'am," said the domestic with a broad smile, as she took the
basket of vegetables, "would you like a cup of tea?"

"What d'you mean, girl?" asked the green-grocer's wife in surprise.

"Please, ma'am, Miss Pritty told me to be sure to offer you a cup of
tea."

"Did she, indeed?  That's was wery kind of her, wery kind, though 'ow
she come for to know I was a-goin' to call beats my comprehension.
'Owever, tell her I'm greatly obleeged to her, but 'avin 'ad tea just
afore comin' out, an' bein' chock-full as I can 'old, I'd rather not.
Best thanks, all the same."

Mrs Timms went away deeply impressed with Miss Pritty's thoughtful
kindness, and the small domestic, shutting the door, indulged in a fit
of that species of suppressed laughter which is usually indicated by a
series of spurts through the top of the nose and the compressed lips.

She was suddenly interrupted by a tap at the knocker.

Allowing as many minutes to elapse as she thought would have sufficed
for her ascent from the kitchen, she once more opened the door.  It was
only a beggar--a ragged disreputable man--and she was about to shut the
door in his face, with that summary politeness so well understood by
servant girls, when a thought struck her.

"Oh, sir," she said, "would you like a cup of tea?"

The man evidently thought he was being made game of, for his face
assumed such a threatening aspect that the small domestic incontinently
shut the door with a sudden bang.  The beggar amused himself by
battering it with his stick for five minutes and then went away.

The next visitor was a lady.

"Is Miss Pritty at home, child?" she asked, regarding the domestic with
a half-patronising, half-pitying air.

"No, ma'am, she's hout."

"Oh!  That's a pity," said the lady, taking a book out of her pocket.
"Will you tell her that I called for her subscription to the new
hospital that is about to be built in the town?  Your mistress does not
know me personally, but she knows all about the hospital, and this book,
which I shall call for to-morrow, will speak for itself.  Be sure you
give it to her, child."

"Yes, ma'am.  And, please, ma'am, would you like a cup of tea?"

The lady, who happened to possess a majestic pair of eyes, looked so
astonished that the small domestic could scarcely contain herself.

"Are you deranged, child?" asked the lady.

"No, ma'am, if you please; but Miss Pritty told me to be sure to offer
you a cup."

"To offer _me_ a cup, child!"

"Yes, ma'am.  At least to offer a cup to any one who should call."

It need scarcely be added that the lady declined the tea, and went away,
observing to herself in an undertone, that "she _must_ be deranged."

The small domestic again shut the door and spurted.

It was in her estimation quite a rare, delicious, and novel species of
fun.  To one whose monotonous life was spent underground, with a
prospect of bricks at two feet from her window, and in company with
pots, pans, potato-peelings, and black-beetles, it was as good as a
scene in a play.

The next visitor was the butcher's boy, who came round to take "orders"
for the following day.  This boy had a tendency to chaff.

"Well, my lady, has your ladyship any orders?"

"Nothink to-day," answered the domestic, curtly.

"What!  Nothink at all?  Goin' to fast to-morrow, eh?  Or to live on
stooed hatmospheric hair with your own sauce for gravey--hey?"

"No, we doesn't want nothink," repeated the domestic, stoutly.  "Missus
said so, an' she bid me ask you if you'd like a cup of tea?"

The butcher's boy opened his mouth and eyes in amazement.  To have his
own weapons thus turned, as he thought, against him by one who was
usually rather soft and somewhat shy of him, took him quite aback.  He
recovered, however, quickly, and made a rush at the girl, who, as
before, attempted to shut the door with a bang, but the boy was too
sharp for her.  His foot prevented her succeeding, and there is no doubt
that in another moment he would have forcibly entered the house, if he
had not been seized from behind by the collar in the powerful grasp of
Edgar Berrington, who sent him staggering into the street.  The boy did
not wait for more.  With a wild-Indian war-whoop he turned and fled.

Excited, and, to some extent, exasperated by this last visit, the small
domestic received Edgar with a one-third timid, one-third gleeful, and
one-third reckless spirit.

"What did the boy mean?" asked Edgar, as he turned towards her.
