plenty of room in the great dancing-hall at the hotel, and the band in
the pavilion played such inspiring music that, as the bicycle boy said,
"Every one who had a leg couldn't help shaking it." Molly was twirled
about to her heart's content, and flew hither and thither like a blue
butterfly; for all the lads liked her, and she kept running up to tell
Jill the funny things they said and did.

As night darkened from all the houses in the valley, on the cliffs and
along the shore lights shone and sparkled; for every one decorated with
gay lanterns, and several yachts in the bay strung colored lamps about
the little vessels, making a pretty picture on the quiet sea. Jill
thought she had never seen anything so like fairy-land, and felt very
like one in a dream as she drove slowly up and down with Mamie, Gerty,
Molly, and Mrs. Cox in the carriage, so that she might see it all
without too much fatigue. It was very lovely; and when rockets began
to whizz, filling the air with golden rain, a shower of colored stars,
fiery dragons, or glittering wheels, the girls could only shriek with
delight, and beg to stay a little longer each time the prudent lady
proposed going home.

It had to be at last; but Molly and Jill comforted themselves by a long
talk in bed, for it was impossible to sleep with glares of light coming
every few minutes, flocks of people talking and tramping by in the road,
and bursts of music floating down to them as the older but not wiser
revellers kept up the merriment till a late hour. They dropped off at
last; but Jill had the nightmare, and Molly was waked up by a violent
jerking of her braid as Jill tried to tow her along, dreaming she was a
boat.

They were too sleepy to laugh much then, but next morning they made
merry over it, and went to breakfast with such happy faces that all the
young folks pronounced Jill's friend a most delightful girl. What a good
time Molly did have that week! Other people were going to leave also,
and therefore much picnicking, boating, and driving was crowded into
the last days. Clambakes on the shore, charades in the studio,
sewing-parties at the boat, evening frolics in the big dining-room,
farewell calls, gifts, and invitations, all sorts of plans for next
summer, and vows of eternal friendship exchanged between people who
would soon forget each other. It was very pleasant, till poor Boo
innocently added to the excitement by poisoning a few of his neighbors
with a bad lobster.

The ambitious little soul pined to catch one of these mysterious but
lovely red creatures, and spent days fishing on the beach, investigating
holes and corners, and tagging after the old man who supplied the house.
One day after a high wind he found several "lobs" washed up on the
beach, and, though disappointed at their color, he picked out a big one,
and set off to show his prize to Molly. Half-way home he met the old
man on his way with a basket of fish, and being tired of lugging his
contribution laid it with the others, meaning to explain later. No one
saw him do it, as the old man was busy with his pipe; and Boo ran back
to get more dear lobs, leaving his treasure to go into the kettle and
appear at supper, by which time he had forgotten all about it.

Fortunately none of the children ate any, but several older people were
made ill, and quite a panic prevailed that night as one after the other
called up the doctor, who was boarding close by; and good Mrs. Grey,
the hostess, ran about with hot flannels, bottles of medicine, and
distracted messages from room to room. All were comfortable by morning,
but the friends of the sufferers lay in wait for the old fisherman,
and gave him a good scolding for his carelessness. The poor man was
protesting his innocence when Boo, who was passing by, looked into the
basket, and asked what had become of his lob. A few questions brought
the truth to light, and a general laugh put every one in good humor,
when poor Boo mildly said, by way of explanation,--

"I fought I was helpin' Mrs. Dray, and I did want to see the dreen lob
come out all red when she boiled him. But I fordot, and I don't fink
I'll ever find such a nice big one any more."

"For our sakes, I hope you won't, my dear," said Mrs. Hammond, who had
been nursing one of the sufferers.

"It's lucky we are going home to-morrow, or that child would be the
death of himself and everybody else. He is perfectly crazy about fish,
and I've pulled him out of that old lobster-pot on the beach a dozen
times," groaned Molly, much afflicted by the mishaps of her young
charge.

There was a great breaking up next day, and the old omnibus went off to
the station with Bacon hanging on behind, the bicycle boy and his
iron whirligig atop, and heads popping out of all the windows for last
good-byes. Our party and the Hammonds were going by boat, and were all
ready to start for the pier when Boo and little Harry were missing.
Molly, the maid, and both boys ran different ways to find them; and all
sorts of dreadful suggestions were being made when shouts of laughter
were heard from the beach, and the truants appeared, proudly dragging
in Harry's little wagon a dead devil-fish, as the natives call that ugly
thing which looks like a magnified tadpole--all head and no body.

"We've dot him!" called the innocents, tugging up their prize with such
solemn satisfaction it was impossible to help laughing.

"I always wanted to tatch a whale, and this is a baby one, I fink. A boy
said, when they wanted to die they comed on the sand and did it, and we
saw this one go dead just now. Ain't he pretty?" asked Boo, displaying
the immense mouth with fond pride, while his friend flapped the tail.

"What are you going to do with him?" said Mrs. Hammond, regarding her
infant as if she often asked herself the same question about her boy.

"Wap him up in a paper and tate him home to pay wid," answered Harry,
with such confidence in his big blue eyes that it was very hard to
disappoint his hopes and tell him the treasure must be left behind.

Wails of despair burst from both children as the hard-hearted boys
tipped out the little whale, and hustled the indignant fishermen on
board the boat, which had been whistling for them impatiently. Boo
recovered his spirits first, and gulping down a sob that nearly shook
his hat off, consoled his companion in affliction and convulsed his
friends by taking from his pocket several little crabs, the remains of
a jelly-fish, and such a collection of pebbles that Frank understood why
he found the fat boy such a burden when he shouldered him, kicking and
howling, in the late run to the boat. These delicate toys healed the
wounds of Boo and Harry, and they were soon happily walking the little
"trabs" about inside a stone wall of their own building, while the
others rested after their exertions, and laid plans for coming to the
Willows another year, as people usually did who had once tasted the
wholesome delights and cordial hospitality of this charming place.




Chapter XXIII. Cattle Show


The children were not the only ones who had learned something at
Pebbly Beach. Mrs. Minot had talked a good deal with some very superior
persons, and received light upon various subjects which had much
interested or perplexed her. While the ladies worked or walked together,
they naturally spoke oftenest and most earnestly about their children,
and each contributed her experience. Mrs. Hammond, who had been a
physician for many years, was wise in the care of healthy little bodies,
and the cure of sick ones. Mrs. Channing, who had read, travelled, and
observed much in the cause of education, had many useful hints about
the training of young minds and hearts. Several teachers reported their
trials, and all the mothers were eager to know how to bring up their
boys and girls to be healthy, happy, useful men and women.

As young people do not care for such discussions, we will not describe
them, but as the impression they made upon one of the mammas affected
our hero and heroine, we must mention the changes which took place in
their life when they all got home again.

"School begins to-morrow. Oh, dear!" sighed Jack, as he looked up his
books in the Bird Room, a day or two after their return.

"Don't you want to go? I long to, but don't believe I shall. I saw our
mothers talking to the doctor last night, but I haven't dared to ask
what they decided," said Jill, affectionately eying the long-unused
books in her little library.

"I've had such a jolly good time, that I hate to be shut up all day
worse than ever. Don't you, Frank?" asked Jack, with a vengeful slap at
the arithmetic which was the torment of his life.

"Well, I confess I don't hanker for school as much as I expected. I'd
rather take a spin on the old bicycle. Our roads are so good, it is a
great temptation to hire a machine, and astonish the natives. That's
what comes of idleness. So brace up, my boy, and go to work, for
vacation is over," answered Frank, gravely regarding the tall pile of
books before him, as if trying to welcome his old friends, or tyrants,
rather, for they ruled him with a rod of iron when he once gave himself
up to them.

"Ah, but vacation is not over, my dears," said Mrs. Minot, hearing the
last words as she came in prepared to surprise her family.

"Glad of it. How much longer is it to be?" asked Jack, hoping for a week
at least.

"Two or three years for some of you."

"What?" cried all three, in utter astonishment, as they stared at Mamma,
who could not help smiling, though she was very much in earnest.

"For the next two or three years I intend to cultivate my boys' bodies,
and let their minds rest a good deal, from books at least. There is
plenty to learn outside of school-houses, and I don't mean to shut you
up just when you most need all the air and exercise you can get. Good
health, good principles, and a good education are the three blessings
I ask for you, and I am going to make sure of the first, as a firm
foundation for the other two."

"But, mother, what becomes of college?" asked Frank, rather disturbed at
this change of base.

"Put it off for a year, and see if you are not better fitted for it then
than now."

"But I am already fitted: I've worked like a tiger all this year, and
I'm sure I shall pass."

"Ready in one way, but not in another. That hard work is no preparation
for four years of still harder study. It has cost you these round
shoulders, many a headache, and consumed hours when you had far better
have been on the river or in the fields. I cannot have you break down,
as so many boys do, or pull through at the cost of ill-health afterward.
Eighteen is young enough to begin the steady grind, if you have a strong
constitution to keep pace with the eager mind. Sixteen is too young to
send even my good boy out into the world, just when he most needs his
mother's care to help him be the man she hopes to see him."

Mrs. Minot laid her hand on his shoulder as she spoke, looking so fond
and proud that it was impossible to rebel, though some of his most
cherished plans were spoilt.

"Other fellows go at my age, and I was rather pleased to be ready at
sixteen," he began. But she added, quickly,--

"They go, but how do they come out? Many lose health of body, and many
what is more precious still, moral strength, because too young and
ignorant to withstand temptations of all sorts. The best part of
education does not come from books, and the good principles I value more
than either of the other things are to be carefully watched over till
firmly fixed; then you may face the world, and come to no real harm.
Trust me, dear, I do it for your sake; so bear the disappointment
bravely, and in the end I think you will say I'm right."

"I'll do my best; but I don't see what is to become of us if we don't go
to school. You will get tired of it first," said Frank, trying to set
a good example to the others, who were looking much impressed and
interested.

"No danger of that, for I never sent my children to school to get rid of
them, and now that they are old enough to be companions, I want them
at home more than ever. There are to be some lessons, however, for busy
minds must be fed, but not crammed; so you boys will go and recite at
certain hours such things as seem most important. But there is to be
no studying at night, no shutting up all the best hours of the day, no
hurry and fret of getting on fast, or skimming over the surface of many
studies without learning any thoroughly."

"So I say!" cried Jack, pleased with the new idea, for he never did love
books. "I do hate to be driven so I don't half understand, because there
is no time to have things explained. School is good fun as far as
play goes; but I don't see the sense of making a fellow learn eighty
questions in geography one day, and forget them the next.

"What is to become of me, please?" asked Jill, meekly.

"You and Molly are to have lessons here. I was a teacher when I was
young, you know, and liked it, so I shall be school-ma'am, and leave my
house-keeping in better hands than mine. I always thought that mothers
should teach their girls during these years, and vary their studies to
suit the growing creatures as only mothers can.

"That will be splendid! Will Molly's father let her come?" cried Jill,
feeling quite reconciled to staying at home, if her friend was to be
with her.

"He likes the plan very much, for Molly is growing fast, and needs a
sort of care that Miss Dawes cannot give her. I am not a hard mistress,
and I hope you will find my school a pleasant one."

"I know I shall; and I'm not disappointed, because I was pretty sure I
couldn't go to the old school again, when I heard the doctor say I must
be very careful for a long time. I thought he meant months; but if it
must be years, I can bear it, for I've been happy this last one though
I was sick," said Jill, glad to show that it had not been wasted time by
being cheerful and patient now.

"That's my good girl!" and Mrs. Minot stroked the curly black head as if
it was her own little daughter's. "You have done so well, I want you to
go on improving, for care now will save you pain and disappointment by
and by. You all have got a capital start during these six weeks, so it
is a good time to begin my experiment. If it does not work well, we will
go back to school and college next spring."

"Hurrah for Mamma and the long vacation!" cried Jack, catching up two
big books and whirling them round like clubs, as if to get his muscles
in order at once.

"Now I shall have time to go to the Gymnasium and straighten out my
back," said Frank, who was growing so tall he needed more breadth to
make his height symmetrical.

"And to ride horseback. I am going to hire old Jane and get out the
little phaeton, so we can all enjoy the fine weather while it lasts.
Molly and I can drive Jill, and you can take turns in the saddle when
you are tired of ball and boating. Exercise of all sorts is one of the
lessons we are to learn," said Mrs. Minot, suggesting all the pleasant
things she could to sweeten the pill for her pupils, two of whom did
love their books, not being old enough to know that even an excellent
thing may be overdone.

"Won't that be gay? I'll get down the saddle to-day, so we can begin
right off. Lem rides, and we can go together. Hope old Jane will like it
as well as I shall," said Jack, who had found a new friend in a pleasant
lad lately come to town.

"You must see that she does, for you boys are to take care of her. We
will put the barn in order, and you can decide which shall be hostler
and which gardener, for I don't intend to hire labor on the place any
more. Our estate is not a large one, and it will be excellent work for
you, my men."

"All right! I'll see to Jane. I love horses," said Jack, well pleased
with the prospect.

"My horse won't need much care. I prefer a bicycle to a beast, so I'll
get in the squashes, pick the apples, and cover the strawberry bed when
it is time," added Frank, who had enjoyed the free life at Pebbly Beach
so much that he was willing to prolong it.

"You may put me in a hen-coop, and keep me there a year, if you like.
I won't fret, for I'm sure you know what is best for me," said Jill,
gayly, as she looked up at the good friend who had done so much for her.

"I'm not sure that I won't put you in a pretty cage and send you to
Cattle Show, as a sample of what we can do in the way of taming a wild
bird till it is nearly as meek as a dove," answered Mrs. Minot, much
gratified at the amiability of her flock.

"I don't see why there should not be an exhibition of children, and
prizes for the good and pretty ones, as well as for fat pigs, fine
horses, or handsome fruit and flowers--I don't mean a baby show, but
boys and girls, so people can see what the prospect is of a good crop
for the next generation," said Frank, glancing toward the tower of the
building where the yearly Agricultural Fair was soon to be held.

"Years ago, there was a pretty custom here of collecting all the schools
together in the spring, and having a festival at the Town Hall. Each
school showed its best pupils, and the parents looked on at the blooming
flower show. It was a pity it was ever given up, for the schools have
never been so good as then, nor the interest in them so great;" and Mrs.
Minot wondered, as many people do, why farmers seem to care more for
their cattle and crops than for their children, willingly spending large
sums on big barns and costly experiments, while the school-houses are
shabby and inconvenient, and the cheapest teachers preferred.

"Ralph is going to send my bust. He asked if he might, and mother said
Yes. Mr. German thinks it very good, and I hope other people will," said
Jill, nodding toward the little plaster head that smiled down from its
bracket with her own merry look.

"I could send my model; it is nearly done. Ralph told me it was a clever
piece of work, and he knows," added Frank, quite taken with the idea of
exhibiting his skill in mechanics.
