
"I have met them. Good morning." And with bows the gentlemen parted, for
at that instant the young man caught sight of a tall lady going down the
church steps with a devout expression in her fine eyes and a prayer-book
in her hand.

Hastening after her, the serious-minded young man accosted her just as
she turned into a quiet street.

"Phebe!"

Only a word, but it wrought a marvelous change, for the devout
expression vanished in the drawing of a breath, and the quiet face
blossomed suddenly with color, warmth, and "the light that never was on
sea or land" as she turned to meet her lover with an answering word as
eloquent as his.

"Archie!"

"The year is out today. I told you I should come. Have you forgotten?"

"No I knew you'd come."

"And are you glad?"

"How can I help it?"

"You can't don't try. Come into this little park and let us talk." And
drawing her hand through his arm, Archie led her into what to other
eyes was a very dismal square, with a boarded-up fountain in the middle,
sodden grass plots, and dead leaves dancing in the wintry wind.

But to them it was a summery Paradise, and they walked to and fro in the
pale sunshine, quite unconscious that they were objects of interest
to several ladies and gentlemen waiting anxiously for their dinner or
yawning over the dull books kept for Sunday reading. "Are you ready
to come home now, Phebe?" asked Archie tenderly as he looked at the
downcast face beside him and wondered why all women did not wear
delightful little black velvet bonnets with one deep red flower against
their hair.

"Not yet. I haven't done enough," began Phebe, finding it very hard to
keep the resolution made a year ago.

"You have proved that you can support yourself, make friends, and earn a
name, if you choose. No one can deny that, and we are all getting proud
of you. What more can you ask, my dearest?"

"I don't quite know, but I am very ambitious. I want to be famous, to do
something for you all, to make some sacrifice for Rose, and, if I can,
to have something to give up for your sake. Let me wait and work longer
I know I haven't earned my welcome yet," pleaded Phebe so earnestly
that her lover knew it would be in vain to try and turn her, so wisely
contented himself with half, since he could not have the whole.

"Such a proud woman! Yet I love you all the better for it, and
understand your feeling. Rose made me see how it seems to you, and I
don't wonder that you cannot forget the unkind things that were looked,
if not said, by some of my amiable aunts. I'll try to be patient on one
condition, Phebe."

"And what is that?"

"You are to let me come sometimes while I wait, and wear this lest you
should forget me," he said, pulling a ring from his pocket and gently
drawing a warm, bare hand out of the muff where it lay hidden.

"Yes, Archie, but not here not now!" cried Phebe, glancing about her as
if suddenly aware that they were not alone.

"No one can see us here I thought of that. Give me one happy minute,
after this long, long year of waiting," answered Archie, pausing just
where the fountain hid them from all eyes, for there were houses only on
one side.

Phebe submitted and never did a plain gold ring slip more easily to its
place than the one he put on in such a hurry that cold December day.
Then one hand went back into the muff red with the grasp he gave it, and
the other to its old place on his arm with a confiding gesture, as if it
had a right there.

"Now I feel sure of you," said Archie as they went on again, and no one
the wiser for that tender transaction behind the ugly pyramid of boards.
"Mac wrote me that you were much admired by your church people, and that
certain wealthy bachelors evidently had designs on the retiring Miss
Moore. I was horribly jealous, but now I defy every man of them."

Phebe smiled with the air of proud humility that was so becoming and
answered briefly: "There was no danger kings could not change me,
whether you ever came or not. But Mac should not have told you."

"You shall be revenged on him, then, for, as he told secrets about you,
I'll tell you one about him. Phebe, he loves Rose!" And Archie looked as
if he expected to make a great sensation with his news.

"I know it." And Phebe laughed at his sudden change of countenance as he
added inquiringly, "She told you, then?"

"Not a word. I guessed it from her letters, for lately she says nothing
about Mac, and before there was a good deal, so I suspected what the
silence meant and asked no questions."

"Wise girl! Then you think she does care for the dear old fellow?"

"Of course she does. Didn't he tell you so?"

"No, he only said when he went away, 'Take care of my Rose, and I'll
take care of your Phebe,' and not another thing could I get out of him,
for I did ask questions. He stood by me like a hero, and kept Aunt Jane
from driving me stark mad with her 'advice.' I don't forget that, and
burned to lend him a hand somewhere, but he begged me to let him manage
his wooing in his own way. And from what I see, I should say he knew how
to do it," added Archie, finding it very delightful to gossip about love
affairs with his sweetheart.

"Dear little mistress! How does she behave?" asked Phebe, longing
for news, but too grateful to ask at headquarters, remembering how
generously Rose had tried to help her, even by silence, the greatest
sacrifice a woman can make at such interesting periods.

"Very sweet and shy and charming. I try not to watch but upon my word I
cannot help it sometimes, she is so 'cunning,' as you girls say. When I
carry her a letter from Mac she tries so hard not to show how glad she
is that I want to laugh and tell her I know all about it. But I look as
sober as a judge and as stupid as an owl by daylight, and she enjoys her
letters in peace and thinks I'm so absorbed in my own passion that I'm
blind to hers."

"But why did Mac come away? He says lectures brought him, and he goes,
but I am sure something else is in his mind, he looks so happy at times.
I don't see him very often, but when I do I'm conscious that he isn't
the Mac I left a year ago," said Phebe, leading Archie away, for
inexorable propriety forbade a longer stay, even if prudence and duty
had not given her a reminding nudge, as it was very cold, and afternoon
church came in an hour.

"Well, you see Mac was always peculiar, and he cannot even grow up like
other fellows. I don't understand him yet, and am sure he's got some
plan in his head that no one suspects, unless it is Uncle Alec. Love
makes us all cut queer capers, and I've an idea that the Don will
distinguish himself in some uncommon way. So be prepared to applaud
whatever it is. We owe him that, you know."

"Indeed we do! If Rose ever speaks of him to you, tell her I shall see
that he comes to no harm, and she must do the same for my Archie."

That unusual demonstration of tenderness from reserved Phebe very
naturally turned the conversation into a more personal channel, and
Archie devoted himself to building castles in the air so successfully
that they passed the material mansion without either being aware of it.

"Will you come in?" asked Phebe when the mistake was rectified and she
stood on her own steps looking down at her escort, who had discreetly
released her before a pull at the bell caused five heads to pop up at
five different windows.

"No, thanks. I shall be at church this afternoon, and the oratorio this
evening. I must be off early in the morning, so let me make the most of
precious time and come home with you tonight as I did before," answered
Archie, making his best bow, and quite sure of consent.

"You may." And Phebe vanished, closing the door softly, as if she found
it hard to shut out so much love and happiness as that in the heart of
the sedate young gentleman who went briskly down the street humming a
verse of old "Clyde" like a tuneful bass viol:

    "Oh, let our mingling voices rise
    In grateful rapture to the skies,
    Where love has had its birth.

    Let songs of joy this day declare
    That spirits come their bliss to share
    With all the sons of earth."

That afternoon Miss Moore sang remarkably well, and that evening quite
electrified even her best friends by the skill and power with which she
rendered "Inflammatus" in the oratorio.

"If that is not genius, I should like to know what it is?" said one
young man to another as they went out just before the general crush at
the end.

"Some genius and a great deal of love. They are a grand team, and,
when well driven, astonish the world by the time they make in the great
race," answered the second young man with the look of one inclined to
try his hand at driving that immortal span.

"Daresay you are right. Can't stop now she's waiting for me. Don't sit
up, Mac."

"The gods go with you, Archie."

And the cousins separated one to write till midnight, the other to bid
his Phebe good-bye, little dreaming how unexpectedly and successfully
she was to earn her welcome home.




Chapter 20 WHAT MAC DID

Rose, meantime, was trying to find out what the sentiment was with
which she regarded her cousin Mac. She could not seem to reconcile the
character she had known so long with the new one lately shown her, and
the idea of loving the droll, bookish, absentminded Mac of former times
appeared quite impossible and absurd, but the new Mac, wide awake, full
of talent, ardent and high-handed, was such a surprise to her, she felt
as if her heart was being won by a stranger, and it became her to study
him well before yielding to a charm which she could not deny.

Affection came naturally, and had always been strong for the boy; regard
for the studious youth easily deepened to respect for the integrity of
the young man, and now something warmer was growing up within her; but
at first she could not decide whether it was admiration for the rapid
unfolding of talent of some sort or love answering to love.

As if to settle that point, Mac sent her on New Year's Day a little book
plainly bound and modestly entitled Songs and Sonnets. After reading
this with ever-growing surprise and delight, Rose never had another
doubt about the writer's being a poet, for though she was no critic, she
had read the best authors and knew what was good. Unpretentious as it
was, this had the true ring, and its very simplicity showed conscious
power for, unlike so many first attempts, the book was not full of "My
Lady," neither did it indulge in Swinburnian convulsions about

    "The lilies and languors of peace,
    The roses and raptures of love.";

or contain any of the highly colored medieval word pictures so much
in vogue. "My book should smell of pines, and resound with the hum of
insects," might have been its motto, so sweet and wholesome was it with
a springlike sort of freshness which plainly betrayed that the author
had learned some of Nature's deepest secrets and possessed the skill to
tell them in tuneful words. The songs went ringing through one's memory
long after they were read, and the sonnets were full of the subtle
beauty, insight, and half-unconscious wisdom, which seem to prove that
"genius is divine when young."

Many faults it had, but was so full of promise that it was evident Mac
had not "kept good company, read good books, loved good things, and
cultivated soul and body as faithfully as he could" in vain. It all
told now, for truth and virtue had blossomed into character and had a
language of their own more eloquent than the poetry to which they were
what the fragrance is to the flower. Wiser critics than Rose felt and
admired this; less partial ones could not deny their praise to a first
effort, which seemed as spontaneous and aspiring as a lark's song; and,
when one or two of these Jupiters had given a nod of approval, Mac found
himself, not exactly famous, but much talked about. One set abused, the
other set praised, and the little book was sadly mauled among them, for
it was too original to be ignored, and too robust to be killed by hard
usage, so it came out of the fray none the worse but rather brighter, if
anything, for the friction which proved the gold genuine.

This took time, however, and Rose could only sit at home reading all the
notices she could get, as well as the literary gossip Phebe sent
her, for Mac seldom wrote, and never a word about himself, so Phebe
skillfully extracted from him in their occasional meetings all the
personal news her feminine wit could collect and faithfully reported it.

It was a little singular that without a word of inquiry on either side,
the letters of the girls were principally filled with tidings of their
respective lovers. Phebe wrote about Mac; Rose answered with minute
particulars about Archie; and both added hasty items concerning their
own affairs, as if these were of little consequence.

Phebe got the most satisfaction out of the correspondence, for soon
after the book appeared Rose began to want Mac home again and to be
rather jealous of the new duties and delights that kept him. She was
immensely proud of her poet, and had little jubilees over the beautiful
fulfillment of her prophecies, for even Aunt Plenty owned now with
contrition that "the boy was not a fool." Every word of praise was
read aloud on the housetops, so to speak, by happy Rose; every adverse
criticism was hotly disputed; and the whole family was in a great state
of pleasant excitement over this unexpectedly successful first flight of
the Ugly Duckling, now generally considered by his relatives as the most
promising young swan of the flock.

Aunt Jane was particularly funny in her new position of mother to a
callow poet and conducted herself like a proud but bewildered hen when
one of her brood takes to the water. She pored over the poems, trying
to appreciate them but quite failing to do so, for life was all prose to
her, and she vainly tried to discover where Mac got his talent from. It
was pretty to see the new respect with which she treated his possessions
now; the old books were dusted with a sort of reverence; scraps of paper
were laid carefully by lest some immortal verse be lost; and a certain
shabby velvet jacket fondly smoothed when no one was by to smile at
the maternal pride with filled her heart and caused her once severe
countenance to shine with unwonted benignity.

Uncle Mac talked about "my son" with ill-concealed satisfaction, and
evidently began to feel as if his boy was going to confer distinction
upon the whole race of Campbell, which had already possessed one poet.
Steve exulted with irrepressible delight and went about quoting Songs
and Sonnets till he bored his friends dreadfully by his fraternal
raptures.

Archie took it more quietly, and even suggested that it was too soon to
crow yet, for the dear old fellow's first burst might be his last, since
it was impossible to predict what he would do next. Having proved that
he could write poetry, he might drop it for some new world to conquer,
quoting his favorite Thoreau, who, having made a perfect pencil, gave
up the business and took to writing books with the sort of indelible ink
which grows clearer with time.

The aunts of course had their "views," and enjoyed much prophetic gossip
as they wagged their caps over many social cups of tea. The younger boys
thought it "very jolly," and hoped the Don would "go ahead and come
to glory as soon as possible," which was all that could by expected of
"Young America," with whom poetry is not usually a passion.

But Dr. Alec was a sight for "sair een," so full of concentrated
contentment was he. No one but Rose, perhaps, knew how proud and pleased
the good man felt at this first small success of his godson, for he had
always had high hopes of the boy, because in spite of his oddities he
had such an upright nature, and promising little, did much, with the
quiet persistence which foretells a manly character. All the romance
of the doctor's heart was stirred by this poetic bud of promise and
the love that made it bloom so early, for Mac had confided his hopes to
Uncle, finding great consolation and support in his sympathy and advice.
Like a wise man, Dr. Alec left the young people to learn the great
lesson in their own way, counseling Mac to work and Rose to wait till
both were quite certain that their love was built on a surer foundation
than admiration or youthful romance.

Meantime he went about with a well-worn little book in his pocket,
humming bits from a new set of songs and repeating with great fervor
certain sonnets which seemed to him quite equal, if not superior, to
any that Shakespeare ever wrote. As Rose was doing the same thing, they
often met for a private "read and warble," as they called it, and while
discussing the safe subject of Mac's poetry, both arrived at a pretty
clear idea of what Mac's reward was to be when he came home.

He seemed in no hurry to do this, however, and continued to astonish his
family by going into society and coming out brilliantly in that line.
It takes very little to make a lion, as everyone knows who has seen what
poor specimens are patted and petted every year, in spite of their bad
manners, foolish vagaries, and very feeble roaring. Mac did not want to
be lionized and took it rather scornfully, which only added to the charm
that people suddenly discovered about the nineteenth cousin of Thomas
Campbell, the poet. He desired to be distinguished in the best sense
of the word, as well as to look so, and thought a little of the polish
society gives would not be amiss, remembering Rose's efforts in that
line. For her sake he came out of his shell and went about seeing and
testing all sorts of people with those observing eyes of his, which saw
so much in spite of their nearsightedness. What use he meant to make of
these new experiences no one knew, for he wrote short letters and,
when questioned, answered with imperturbable patience: "Wait till I get
through; then I'll come home and talk about it."
