they did, I might have acted mean and measly, too, but I was so tickled
over the way they did come out that I just laughed at your boyish mischief
of letting the old shack slide downhill."

"But I had no hand in anything of the sort," declared Frank stoutly.

"Let it pass, Frank, let it pass," chuckled Dobbins unbelievingly. "You
see, when I came to look over the old ruins I come to where the old
storeroom wall had busted out. You know it's always been a mystery to me
what had become of my wife Sairey's scrapings and earnings?"

"I've heard you tell so--yes," nodded Frank.

"There they were, boy!" cried old Dobbins in a sort of ecstasy. "She'd
hidden them in a hole in the wall. The wall broke out in the crash.
Confidentially," and the narrator looked around cautiously and lowered his
voice to a mysterious whisper, "I found in gold and silver a heap of money
amounting to nigh three thousand dollars."

"Well!" ejaculated Frank.

"So, you see, it was a lucky day for me when you cut that rope."

"Which I never did," replied Frank vigorously. "If you will come over to
the house, Mr. Dobbins, my aunt will assure you that I was in bed hours
before and after the crash happened."

"Well, anyway, it was your knife."

"Yes," assented Frank, and explained about it being mislaid. Apparently
Dobbins was convinced. He was thoughtful for a moment or two, exchanged the
coin in hand for another in his pocket, and extended this to Frank with the
words:

"I guess it's worth ten dollars, then."

"No, Mr. Dobbins," said Frank positively, "I can't take your money. I'll
tell you, though, if you really feel kindly toward me."

"I do, for a fact, Frank."

"And want to do me a favor?"

"Try me, Frank."

"I want you to come up to the house and satisfy yourself that I have told
you the truth about being home last night, and then I want you to go to
town with me."

"Why, Frank, I don't doubt your word."

"No; but others may, and I want to settle this affair."

"All right, Frank, though I'd feel better if you took the money."

Miss Brown looked rather curious and perplexed when confronted by Frank and
Dobbins, but satisfactorily answered the questions put by her nephew.

"Oh, Frank," she said, as he and his companion left the place, "if you are
going to town I wish you would stop at the post-office."

"I will," replied Frank. "I hope there will be a letter from the folks. I
shall not take much of your time, Mr. Dobbins," he explained to his
companion as they started for the village.

Frank ran into the post-office as they reached it. The postmistress handed
out a paper from the Jordan letter-box. Frank stuck it in his pocket a
little disappointedly, for he had expected a letter from his father.

He led Dobbins from the post-office to the village tavern. As he had
expected, Judge Roseberry was lounging on the bench outside, spouting
politics to some loafer companions.

"Keep right with me, Mr. Dobbins," directed Frank. "I shall need your
services."

"Drat me, if I can understand what you're getting at, lad," said Dobbins
desperately, "but I'll stick, if I can be of any use to you."

Frank marched straight up to the crowd in front of the tavern.

"Judge Roseberry," he said calmly, but with an impressive seriousness, "I
will thank you to return my pocket knife."

"Hey--h'm!" spluttered the judge, taken off his balance. "Your knife?"

"Precisely," insisted Frank.

"Why--how--who says I've got your knife?" stammered the judge, growing
redder in the face than usual.

"Mr. Dobbins, here, informs me that he does," replied Frank.

"That's so," echoed Dobbins; "inasmuch as you showed it to me this
morning."

"Well, if I have," observed the judge, bracing up a little, "I hold it as
evidence of a crime. As an emissary of the law--"

"That's the right word, judge," grinned Dobbins--"'emissary' fits. It don't
go in this instance, though. The evidence is all on Frank's side, as I have
found out. He was in bed when that smash-up took place, so I reckon I won't
go into any plot to ruin the character of an honest boy, this time."

Judge Roseberry gave up the knife reluctantly and felt pretty sheepish in
the act, for his cronies were winking and chuckling over his discomfiture.

"I thank you very much for what you have done for me, Mr. Dobbins," said
Frank as they left the spot.

"That's all right, boy," replied Dobbins heartily; "and if these varmints
make you any more threats, just sue them and I'll stand the costs--that is,
if they aren't too heavy."

Frank felt quite lighthearted as he left old Dobbins and started homeward.
He entered the house whistling, and threw the newspaper he had just got at
the post-office into his aunt's lap. As he went outside and was passing the
open window of the sitting-room, a cry brought him to a halt.

"What is the matter, Aunt Tib?" he inquired quickly.

Miss Brown held an open letter in her hand and looked fluttering and
excited.

"It was inside the paper, Frank," she explained.

"Is it from the folks?" inquired Frank eagerly.

"It is," assented his aunt

"Father is well?" asked Frank breathlessly.

"He is getting better every day. But, Frank," and his aunt looked
profoundly grave and important, "the serious duties of life are grave. A
false step may change the whole course of a young life. There is a tide in
the affairs of men----"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Frank. "I know all about that; but what are you
getting at?"

Miss Brown did not fancy being interrupted in one of her famous homilies,
and she answered tart and terse:

"Your father has made arrangements to send you to Bellwood School, and you
are to start at once."

Frank fairly staggered at the glad news. He was so overcome that he could
not speak. He just bobbed his head and smiled.

The instant the youth got out of range of the house, however, a riotous,
echoing yell rang from his lips as he turned a mad, capering somersault:

"Hurrah!"




CHAPTER VII

THE CONFIDENCE MAN


"All aboard!"

Frank fancied that he had never listened to a more cheery command than this
given as the Western Express rolled out of the depot at Tipton.

It was beautiful weather, a glorious day that would put life and sunshine
into an invalid, let alone a lively, happy boy escaping from what he
considered thralldom, believing that all the joys of life were awaiting him
at the end of his trip.

Frank's aunt actually smiled and waved the lad a gracious adieu from the
depot platform. She had been quite gentle and kind to him the few hours
preceding his departure. She had put up a generous lunch for him, and had
even unbent so far as to declare that she had believed from the first that
he knew nothing about the missing diamond bracelet. All this, however, had
been the preface to a dozen brief lectures on thorny ways and the dark
pitfalls of life. Frank was genuinely glad to escape from the gloomy
influence Miss Brown cast on everything bright and happy about her.

At another part of the platform was Mace, the jeweler. He had a sullen
frown on his face, and he fixed his glance on Frank as though his eyes were
boring him through and through to discover the missing diamond bracelet.

The wrecking of old Dobbins' house had remained a mystery. Some thought the
rope had been cut, while others were of the opinion that it had broken
because of the heavy strain put upon it.

"Good--we're off!" jubilated Frank, as he waved a last adieu to his aunt
through the open car window, and Tipton faded away in the distance. Then he
settled down in his comfortable seat to enjoy the all-day ride to Bellwood.

Miss Brown had doled out twenty-five cents at the depot news-stand for a
book full of jokes and funny pictures. Frank soon exhausted this literary
fund. Then he bought some oranges from the train boy and had a lively chat
with him. He bought a daily paper and read it through and through, and by
noon the trip began to get a trifle monotonous.

It was about one o'clock when the train arrived at a junction, where there
was a stop for half an hour. Frank was glad to walk about and stretch his
limbs. When leaving time came and he returned to the train he became
interested in studying two passengers.

A husky, farmer-looking man had entered the coach, followed by a
stocky-built lad about the age of Frank. The latter bore the appearance
of a boy sullen and unhappy over some circumstance. Frank thought he had
never seen a more dissatisfied face than that of this lad. He shuffled
along after the farmer in an ungracious fashion, and taking the first
empty seat flopped into it unceremoniously.

"All right," said his companion. "You're probably better by yourself when
you're in one of your tantrums. Just see if you can't get some of your
natural meanness out of you while looking at the beauties of nature along
the route."

The boy hunched up his shoulders contemptuously without saying a word in
reply, while the farmer selected a seat across the aisle and directly in
front of Frank. He occupied himself looking over a weekly farm paper. After
a while Frank crossed over to the seat occupied by the boy who had
accompanied the farmer.

"Going far?" inquired Frank in a friendly tone.

The lad did not move to make room for him in the seat. He turned a sullen
face on Frank. There was dark suspicion and open animosity in his eyes.

"Far enough," he muttered.

"It's pleasant weather, isn't it?" propounded Frank, bound to be
companionable.

"Say," said the boy, staring pugnaciously at our hero, "trying to pick on
me, are you?"

"Why," answered the astonished Frank, "I never dreamed of such a thing."

"Yes, you did! Lemme alone!"

"All right," returned Frank pleasantly. "Only here's an orange and a funny
book I want you to enjoy," and he placed the articles in question beside
the boy and stepped back to his own seat.

As he did so he met the big round face of the farmer on a broad grin. The
latter turned around and accosted him.

"Not very sociable, hey?" he remarked.

"Oh, I probably seem strange to him," observed Frank.

"He's that way all along," declared the farmer. "If he is my son, I say
it."

"You are his father, then?"

"The only one he's got," replied the farmer. "You see, I married his
mother. She's dead, now. That boy always was a sulky, ugly varmint. Why,
he'd ought to be the happiest critter in Christendom. He's got eight
step-brothers and step-sisters. Won't jibe, though. He's just unnateral,
that fellow is. No living at home with him, so I'm taking his to a
boarding-school."

"Maybe he doesn't feel well all the time," suggested Frank gently.

"What, that big, husky boy? Why, he's strong as an ox. No, sir-ree, nateral
depravity, I say. I tried to whip it out of him. It did him no good."

"I shouldn't think it would," decided Frank mentally, and then the
conversation dropped and the man returned to his paper.

Frank felt sorry for the grumpy, sad-looking boy across the aisle. His own
loveless experience with his aunt at Tipton gave him some reason for this.
The boy was worse off than he was, though, for Frank had kind-hearted,
affectionate parents, while the farmer boy was motherless. The latter had
eaten half of the orange and was quite engrossed in the book given him.
Frank was about to start another effort to make friends, when the train
came to a station and a passenger came aboard who diverted his interest.

The newcomer was a tall, dark man of middle age. He had a very solemn face
and wore a black tie and choker and clothes that suggested mourning.

There were plenty of vacant seats, but after a sharp look about the coach
this new passenger came to where the farmer sat.

"Seat engaged, sir?" he inquired in a polite, ingratiating way.

"No, sure not," responded the farmer heartily. "Sit down. Glad to have
company."

"I fear I shall not be very good company," observed the new passenger with
a dismal sigh.

"How's that, sir?" questioned the farmer curiously.

"I'm going to a funeral."

"Ah! Nigh relative?"

"Yes; a brother."

"Too bad," commiserated the farmer. "Lost my own brother last year. Bill
was a hustling chap. Missed him dreadfully last plowing season."

"My brother lives at Jayville," explained the man, naming a station two
stops ahead.

"Jayville, eh?" repeated the farmer. "Been there. Went to the bank there
once to sell a mortgage."

"Indeed. An uncle of mine is an official of the bank."

"Is that so, now?" said the farmer. "There's the mayor, there, too; sort of
a distant relative of my first wife. Don't know him, do you?"

Frank interestedly watched the stranger deftly draw from a side pocket a
book. It seemed to be some kind of a country directory. Without attracting
the attention of his companion, the stranger glanced over its pages,
meantime suspending conversation by pretending to have a violent fit of
coughing.

"The mayor," he said finally. "You mean Mr. David Norris?"

"That's him!" exclaimed the farmer.

"Oh, yes, I know him. He is a cousin of mine."

"Is that so? Shake!" said the farmer. "Why, we're quite acquainted, hain't
we? Almost relatives, hey?"

"Well!" muttered Frank under his breath. "This is getting interesting. Sure
as sugar, that fellow is a confidence man."




CHAPTER VIII

NIPPED IN THE BUD


Frank had traveled some in his young career, had read considerable, and had
thought a good deal. The talk of the melancholy man in the white choker had
led up to a point where Frank felt pretty sure he was up to some trick or
other. While pretending to be interested in the newspaper he had read over
and over, our hero kept eyes and ears wide open.

The stranger talked of things in general now. He asked the farmer
concerning his crops, and particularly about the wife who must be a distant
relative of his. Finally he observed:

"It's a pretty bad prospect for the family of my dead brother."

"How's that, neighbor?" asked the farmer.

"Left them without much of anything--that is, in the way of ready money. In
fact, I must bear all the burden of the funeral expenses. I'm short myself,
and it's going to cramp me to get hold of ready cash. I've got to make
something of a sacrifice, and it's worrying me."

"Hope you don't have to sacrifice your homestead, or anything like that,"
observed the farmer sympathetically.

"I won't, just the same," declared the stranger with some force. "I
promised my father I'd never let the old home go."

"That's the right sentiment, friend."

"I was offered ten thousand for it, and refused it. Then fifteen
thousand--I would not listen to it. I may have to borrow on it, but it
will be a small amount. I'm trying to avoid even that. Let me show you
something. See those documents?" and the speaker showed a neat little
package of papers secured with a rubber band. He selected the outside
one and spread it open. It was a certificate of stock, printed in green
and red on fine parchment paper. Its blanks were filled in with writing
in great flourishes, and there was an immense gold seal in one corner.

"What's that, now?" inquired the farmer with bulging eyes. "Government
bond?"

"Better than a government bond, my friend," assured the stranger. "A
government bond brings a man only four per cent. a year. This stock paid me
ten per cent. in January, twenty per cent. in March, and I was offered
double its face value last week."

"A hundred dollars," said the farmer musingly, noting the handsome
medallion figure at the top of the stock certificate.

"Yes, and worth two hundred, as I tell you. I wouldn't sell it at any
price, but I'm short of ready cash, and I'll pay eight per cent. interest
and give the next dividend as a bonus, for a loan of seventy-five dollars
for thirty days. I'm proud and particular about my business, and I dislike
to ask my friends for the loan."

"Say," observed the farmer, dazzled at the sight of the pretty document,
"you mean you'll give all that security and interest for a loan of
seventy-five dollars?"

"To an honest man who won't run away with the security, yes."

"I can show you letters telling you who I am," declared the farmer, perking
up with pride. "Straight business with me, neighbor. I reckon I can dig up
seventy-five dollars on any occasion."

"Look over the certificate, friend. You'll find the signatures all right.
D. Burlingame Gould, president--you've heard of the Goulds?"

"In the paper, certainly."

"He's one of them. Robert Winstanley Astorbilt, secretary, prominent New
York banker. Excuse me, I've got to get a drink of water. You won't find
better security in this country than a share of stock of the Little Wonder
Bonanza Mining & Milling Company of Montana."

"Hello!" said Frank to himself with a start "The Little Wonder--why, where
did I see that name? I've got it! There's an item in the very newspaper
I've been reading about it."

The stranger had proceeded to the water tank. He purposely left the farmer
dazzled with his proposition to think over it. The latter sat in a sort of
trance of avarice, staring at the enticing stock certificate.

A plan to confuse and outwit the swindler occurred to our hero. He was
intent on locating the brief item he remembered having seen in the
newspaper. He wanted to act on his plan before the stranger returned.
Frank's eye ran over column after column, page after page.

"Got it," he breathed at last, and neatly tore out of place an item near
the bottom of a page. It told of a swindle astoundingly perpetrated by a
gang of confidence men in the city where the paper was published. The
scheme was to induce greenhorns to invest in or loan money on mining stock
of some companies that had no existence except on paper. The Little Wonder
Bonanza Mining & Milling Company of Arizona headed the list of the
worthless concerns.

"Quick--before the man comes back, read that," said Frank, leaning over the
seat in front of him and placing the clipping in the hands of the former.

"Hey! What----"

"And then give it to him to read," added Frank with a chuckle.

"Hemlock and asparagus!" ejaculated the farmer as his glance ran over the
item. "A bunko man, eh? And I was nearly gulled!"

"Well, friend," spoke the swindler suavely, returning down the aisle, "how
about that little loan? You'll have to decide quick, for this is my station
they're coming to."

"I see 'tis," responded the farmer, arising with a grim face that should
have warned the man, who had taken him for an easy victim. "Say, you
measly, flaggerbusted scrub, read that!"

The farmer did not wait to have the swindler read the newspaper item. He
only thrust it near enough to his discomfited face to allow the fellow to
get an inkling of its meaning. Then his sinewy hand closed on the collar of
the swindler's coat.

The train was slowing up just then, and a brake-man threw open the door of
the coach with the announcement:

"Jayville!"

"I'm going to introduce you to the town," grinned the farmer. "Bolt, you
varmint!"

He ran the fellow down the car, the other passengers arising from their
seats in excitement. Straight through the open doorway he rushed the
swindler, and out upon the platform. Arrived there, the farmer changed his
mind. The depot was about two hundred feet ahead. Just where the coach was
running was a deep ditch.

Frank saw the stalwart farmer lift his prisoner bodily, he heard a yell and
then a splash, and saw the baffled swindler land waist-deep in the ditch,
deluged, silk hat, white choker and dress coat, in a cascade of murky mud.

"My wife's cousin, the banker, and his friend, the mayor of the town, can
help him out of that fix if they want to," chuckled the farmer, coming back
into the car and rubbing his hands as if to wash the dirt from them.




CHAPTER IX

A BOY GUARDIAN


The conductor grinned and the passengers roared with laughter when the
farmer explained the incident. Even the glum-faced stepson of the narrator
roused up into some interest.

"Thankee, neighbor," spoke the farmer, effusively grasping Frank's hand.
"You're the right sort, sure enough--eyes wide open and up to snuff. Guess
I'd better keep close to home after this. I ain't to be trusted along with
them gold-brick fellows."

The old man took a great fancy to Frank and became quite confidential with
him. He piled candy and peanuts on him from the train boy's supply, invited
him to the farm, and wanted to know Frank's name so he could tell the folks
about him.

"I am Frank Jordan, live at Tipton, and am bound for school at Bellwood,"
said Frank.

"Hey! how--what?" exclaimed the farmer explosively. "You don't mean to say
that you're traveling to school, too?"

"Yes," replied Frank. "But who else do you mean?"

"Why, my son, Robert, over there--Robert Upton. Now, isn't it funny--he's
going right to the very school you are?"

"To Bellwood?"

"That's the name--Bellwood is the place," assented Mr. Upton. "Wish you'd
tell me what you know about it."

"I don't know anything about it, except what I've read and what I've heard
from friends who went there," said Frank. But it seemed he had enough
information to quite interest the farmer. Then the latter told him about
his stepson.

"Robert's been no good at home," he said. "You can see what a sulky,
unsociable fellow he is. No interest in nothing--thinks everybody hates
him, and won't make up to anybody. He says he'll run away if I put him in
school. If he does, I certainly will put him in the reformatory until he's
of age."

Frank stole a rather pitying glance at the lad. The latter was hunched down
in his seat, his hands rammed into his pockets, looking bored and
miserable. Frank wondered what kind of a queer make-up his nature could be,
to mope and scowl that bright, beautiful day, with the prospect of the
useful chance for study and the gay life of schoolboy sport.

"Why, say," suddenly ejaculated Farmer Upton, starting under the spur of
some exciting idea, "why can't Robert go with you to Bellwood?"

"He is doing so, isn't he?" said Frank with a smile.

"I mean why can't you sort of take charge of him and introduce him around,
and save me the time and the expense. You see, if I go with him I can't get
home until to-morrow. I can get off the train at Chester, and not buy any
ticket to Bellwood, but go right back home. I've made all the arrangements
for him by letter at Bellwood. The only reason I was going with him was to
deliver him into the hands of the teachers and give them an inkling of what
a troublesome fellow he is."

"Doesn't it strike you that that would hurt his chances with them and
discourage him?" suggested Frank.

"I never thought of that."

"Excuse me, Mr. Upton," said Frank, "but maybe you're too hard on your
stepson. It's hard to understand people, and a boy is a queer make-up. I
will be glad to have him come with me to Bellwood, and I'll put myself out
to make it agreeable for him."

"But he won't be agreeable; that's the trouble, you see," declared the
farmer. "When he gets in one of them tantrums of his, you simply can't
reason with him."

"Well, I'll take charge of him, if you don't wish to make the long journey,
Mr. Upton."

"I'll never know how to thank you, if you will," said the farmer
gratefully. "Hi, there, Robert."

"Me?" droned the boy in the seat across the aisle.

"Who else do you suppose?" snapped his stepfather testily. "Come, rout out
there, or I'll unhitch a strap somewhere and make you step lively."

Frank made up his mind that he would interest himself in the drifting waif
of a fellow. As he thought of the big, husky farmer and his houseful of
