
"No, sir; Caretto has forbidden any to show themselves on the walls."

"He has done well. This is no time for rash exposure, and where there is
naught to be gained, it is a grave fault to run risks."

On arriving at the end of the mole, D'Aubusson, accompanied by Caretto,
made an investigation of the effect of the Turks' fire.

"'Tis worse than I expected," he said. "When we laid out our
fortifications the thought that such guns as these would be used against
them never entered our minds. Against ordinary artillery the walls would
stand a long battering; but it is clear that we shall have to depend
more upon our swords than upon our walls for our defence. Fortunately,
although the Turks have indeed chosen the spot where our walls are most
open to the assaults of their battery, they have to cross the water to
attack the breach when it is made, and will have to fight under heavy
disadvantage."

"Tresham was last night saying to me, that it seemed to him it would not
be a difficult matter for one who spoke Turkish well, to issue at night
on the other side of the town, and to make his way round to the battery,
disguised of course as a Turkish soldier, and then, mixing with the
artillery men, to drive a spike into one of the touch holes. He said
that he would gladly volunteer for the task."

D'Aubusson shook his head decidedly. "It would be too dangerous; and
even were a spike driven in, the Turks would have no great difficulty
in extracting it, for the tubes are so big that a man might crawl in and
drive the spike up from the inside. Moreover, could one or more of the
guns be disabled permanently, others would be brought down and set in
their place, so that nothing would be gained but a very short delay,
which would be of no advantage to us, and certainly would in no way
justify the risking of the life of so distinguished a young knight."

The bombardment of St. Nicholas continued for some days. A breach was
fast forming in the wall, and a slope composed of the fallen rubbish
extended from the front of the breach to the water's edge. The grand
master was frequently on the spot, and as this was at present the sole
object of attack, the garrison was strengthened by as many knights as
could be sheltered within its walls. At night the shattered masonry
that had fallen inside was carried out, and with it a new work thrown
up across the mole, to strengthen the defence on that side, should the
enemy land between the town and the fort. Small batteries were planted
wherever they could sweep the approaches to the breach, and planks
studded with nails were sunk in the shallow water of the harbour, to
impede the progress of those who might attempt to swim or wade across.
For the time, therefore, the functions of Gervaise were in abeyance, and
he laboured with the rest of the garrison at the defences.

At daybreak on the 9th of June, a great number of vessels and boats,
crowded with soldiers, bore down on St. Nicholas. As they approached,
every gun on the fortifications that could be brought to bear upon them
opened fire; but in a dense mass they advanced. Some made their way to
the rocks and landed the soldiers there; others got alongside the mole;
but the majority grounded in the shallow water of the harbour, and
the troops, leaping out, waded to the foot of the breach. On its crest
D'Aubusson himself had taken up his station. Beside him stood Caretto,
and around them the most distinguished knights of the Order. With wild
shouts the Turks rushed up the breach, and swarmed thickly up the ruined
masonry until, at its summit, they encountered the steel clad line of
the defenders. For hours the terrible struggle continued. As fast as the
head of the Turkish column broke and melted away against the obstacle
they tried in vain to penetrate, fresh reinforcements took the place
of those who had fallen, and in point of valour and devotion the Moslem
showed himself a worthy antagonist of the Christian. It was not only
at the breach that the conflict raged. At other points the Turks, well
provided with ladders, fixed them against the walls, and desperately
strove to obtain a footing there. From the breach clouds of dust rose
from under the feet of the combatants, mingling with the smoke of
the cannon on the ramparts, the fort, and Turkish ships, and at times
entirely hid from the sight of the anxious spectators on the walls of
the town and fortress, and of the still more numerous throng of Turks
on St. Stephen's Hill, the terrible struggle that continued without a
moment's intermission.

The combatants now fought in comparative silence. The knights, exhausted
and worn out by their long efforts beneath the blazing sun, still showed
an unbroken front; but it was only occasionally that the battle cry of
the Order rose in the air, as a fresh body of assailants climbed up the
corpse strewn breach. The yell of the Moslems rose less frequently;
they sacrificed their lives as freely and devotedly as those who led the
first onset had done; but as the hours wore on, the assurance of victory
died out, and a doubt as to whether it was possible to break through the
line of their terrible foes gained ground. D'Aubusson himself, although,
in spite of the remonstrances of the knights, always in the thickest
of the fray, was yet ever watchful, and quickly perceived where the
defenders were hotly pressed, and where support was most needed.
Gervaise fought by his side, so that, when necessary, he could carry his
orders to a little body of knights, drawn up in reserve, and despatch
them to any point where aid was needed. The cannon still continued their
fire on both sides. A fragment of one of the stone balls from a basilisk
struck off D'Aubusson's helmet. He selected another from among the
fallen knights, and resumed his place in the line. Still the contest
showed no signs of terminating. The Turkish galleys ever brought up
reinforcements, while the defenders grew fewer, and more exhausted.
During a momentary pause, while a fresh body of Turks were landing,
Gervaise said to the grand master,

"If you will give me leave, sir, I will go out at the watergate, swim
up the inner harbour, and in a very short time turn a few of the craft
lying there into fire ships, and tow them out with a couple of galleys.
At any rate, we can fire all these craft that have grounded, and create
a panic among the others."

"Well thought of, Gervaise! I will write an order on one of my tablets.
Do you take my place for a minute." Withdrawing behind the line, the
grand master sat down on a fragment of stone, and, drawing a tablet
from a pouch in his girdle, he wrote on it, "In all things carry out
the instructions of Sir Gervaise Tresham: he is acting by my orders and
authority, and has full power in all respects."

He handed the slip of parchment to Gervaise, who hurried to the water
gate in the inner harbour, threw off his helmet and armour, issued out
at the gate, and plunged into the sea. He swam out some distance, in
order to avoid the missiles of the Turks, who were trying to scale the
wall from the mole, and then directed his course to St. Michael's, which
guarded the inner entrance to the fort. He had fastened the parchment
in his hair, and as some of the garrison of the tower, noticing his
approach, came down to assist him, he handed it to them and was at once
taken to the commander of St. Michael, answering as he went the anxious
questions as to how matters stood at the breach.

"Aid is sorely needed. The Turks have gained no foot of ground as
yet, but many of the knights are killed and most of the others utterly
exhausted with heat and labour. Unless aid reaches them speedily, the
tower, with all its defenders, will be lost."

The instant the commander knew what was required, he bade six of the
knights embark with Gervaise in a boat moored behind the tower, and row
up the harbour to the spot where the shipping was all massed together,
protected by the high ground of the fortress from the Turkish fire.
Gervaise waved his hand, as he neared the end of the harbour, to the
officer on the walls, and while the six knights who were with him ran
off to tell the master of the galleys to prepare two of them to leave
the port instantly, Gervaise explained to the officer in charge of the
wall at that point the plan that he was charged to carry out, and asked
for twenty knights to assist him.

"It will leave us very weak along here," the officer said. "Then let me
have ten, and send for another ten from other parts of the wall. Here is
the grand master's order, giving me full power and authority, and it is
all important that no single moment shall be wasted."

"You shall have twenty of mine," the officer said, "and I will draw ten
from the langue next to us to fill their places."

In a few minutes the quay was a scene of bustle and activity. Gervaise
picked out ten of the smallest vessels; the knights went among the other
ships, seized all goods and stores that would be useful as combustibles,
and compelled the crews to carry them on board the craft chosen as fire
ships. Then barrels were broken open, old sails and faggots saturated
with oil and pitch, and in little more than a quarter of an hour after
his arrival, Gervaise had the satisfaction of seeing that the ten boats
were all filled with combustibles, and ready to be set on fire. He now
called for volunteers from the sailors, and a number of them at once
came forward, including many of the captains. He placed one of these in
command of each fire ship, and gave him four of the sailors.

"The galleys will tow you out," he said, "and take you close to the
enemy's ships. We shall range you five abreast, and when I give the
word, the one at the end of the line will steer for the nearest Turk,
and, with oars and poles, get alongside. The captain will then light the
train of powder in the hold, throw the torch among the straw, and see
that, if possible, the men fasten her to the Turk; but if this cannot
be done, it is not essential, for in the confusion the enemy will not
be able to get out of the way of the fire ship as it drives down against
her. At the last moment you will take to your boats and row back here.
We will protect you from the assaults of any of the Turkish ships."

Having made sure that all the captains understood the orders, Gervaise
took command of one of the galleys, the senior knight going on board
the other. The ten fire ships were now poled out until five were ranged
abreast behind each craft; Gervaise requested the commander of the other
galley to lie off the point of St. Nicholas until he had got rid of his
five fire ships, then to advance and launch his craft against the Turks.
The smoke of the guns lay so heavy on the water, and the combatants were
so intent upon the struggle at the breach, that Gervaise steered his
galley into the midst of the Turkish vessels laden with troops ready
to disembark, without attracting any notice; then, standing upon the
taffrail, he signalled to the two outside boats to throw off their ropes
and make for the Turkish ship nearest to them. This they did, and it was
not until a sheet of flame rose alongside, that the enemy awoke to the
sense of danger.

The other three fire ships were almost immediately cast off. Two of them
were equally successful, but the Turks managed to thrust off the third.
She drifted, however, through the shipping, and presently brought
up alongside one of the vessels fast aground. With but ten knights,
Gervaise could not attack one of the larger vessels, crowded with
troops; but there were many fishing boats that had been pressed into the
service, and against one of these Gervaise ordered the men to steer the
galley. A shout to the rowers made them redouble their efforts. A yell
of dismay arose from the Turkish troops as they saw the galley bearing
down upon them, and frantic efforts were made to row out of her way.
These were in vain, for her sharp prow struck them amidships, cutting
the boat almost in two, and she sank like a stone, the galley, without a
pause, making for another boat.

Looking back, Gervaise saw that his consort was already in the midst of
the Turks, among whom the wildest confusion prevailed, each ship trying
to extricate herself from the mass, upon which the batteries of the
fortress now concentrated their efforts. Two fresh columns of flame
had already shot up, and satisfied that all was going well, Gervaise
continued his attack upon the smaller craft, six of whom were overtaken
and sunk. Three or four of the larger vessels endeavoured to lay
themselves alongside the galley, but her speed was so superior to theirs
that she easily evaded the attempts, and, sweeping round, rejoined
the other galley which had just issued from among the Turks, who were
already in full retreat. The defenders of St. Nicholas, reanimated by
the sight of the discomfiture of the Turkish fleet, with a loud shout
rushed down from the spot which they had held for so many hours, drove
their assailants before them, and flung themselves upon the crowd
assembled at the foot of the breach.

These had already suffered terribly from the fire of the batteries.
Again and again they had striven to storm the mound of rubbish, and had
each time been repulsed, with the loss of their bravest leaders. Seeing
themselves abandoned by the ships, a panic seized them, and as the
knights rushed down upon them they relinquished all thoughts of
resistance, and dashed into the shallow water. Many were drowned in the
attempt to swim across the deep channel in the middle, some succeeded,
while others made their escape in the boats in which they had been
brought ashore from the ships.

The struggle was over. The two galleys made for the breach, and the
knights leapt out as soon as the boats grounded, and, wading ashore,
joined the group that had so long and gallantly sustained the unequal
fight. Fatigue, exhaustion, and wounds, were forgotten in the triumph
of the moment, and they crowded round the grand master and Caretto, to
whose joint exertions the success of the defence was so largely due.

"Do not thank me, comrades," D'Aubusson said. "No man has today fought
better than the rest. Every knight has shown himself worthy of the fame
of our Order. The meed of praise for our success is first due to Sir
Gervaise Tresham. At the moment when I began to doubt whether we could
much longer withstand the swarms of fresh foes who continued to pour
against us, while we were overcome by heat and labour, Sir Gervaise, who
had throughout been fighting at my side, offered to swim into the port,
to fit out a dozen of the merchant craft there as fire ships, and to tow
them round into the midst of the Turkish vessels behind the two galleys
that were lying ready for service. I remembered how he had before
destroyed the corsair fleet at Sardinia with fire ships, and the
proposal seemed to me as an inspiration sent from Heaven, at this moment
of our great peril. I wrote him an order, giving him full authority to
act in my name, and in a time that seemed to me incredibly short I saw
him round the point with the fire ships in tow. You saw, as well as
I did, how completely the plan was carried out. Ten or twelve of the
Turkish ships are a mass of flames, and besides these I noted that
the galley ran down and destroyed several smaller craft filled with
soldiers. The panic in the ships spread to the troops on shore, and
rendered the last part of our task an easy one. I say it from my heart
that I consider it is to Sir Gervaise Tresham that we owe our success,
and that, had it not been for his happy thought, the sun would have gone
down on our dead bodies lying on the summit of the breach, and on the
Turkish flag waving over the fort of St. Nicholas."

Until now none of the defenders of the breach had known how what seemed
to them an almost miraculous change in the fortune of the fight had come
about, and they thronged round Gervaise, shaking his hand, and many of
them warmly embracing him, according to the custom of the time.

"It was but natural that the idea should occur to me," he said, "having
before successfully encountered them with fire ships; and as all on
shore, and especially these knights, aided me with all their power, it
took but a brief time to get the boats in readiness for burning. Much
credit, too, is due to the merchant captains and sailors who volunteered
to take charge of the fire ships and to manoeuver them alongside the
Turks."

The grand master and the knights who had borne the brunt of the battle
now retired along the mole to the town, bearing with them their most
seriously wounded comrades, and assisting those whose wounds were less
severe. The twenty knights who had manned the two galleys remained in
the fort. Caretto continued in command, as, although he had suffered
several wounds, he refused to relinquish his post. Gervaise, who
had,--thanks partly to his skill with his weapons, but still more to
the temper of the splendid suit of armour presented to him by
Genoa,--escaped without a scratch, volunteered to remain with him until
next morning, his principal motive for making the request being his
desire to escape from further congratulations and praise for the success
of his plan. After Caretto's wounds had been dressed by the knights, and
he and Gervaise had partaken of some food and wine, which they greatly
needed, Caretto was persuaded to lie down for a time, the knights
promising to bring him word at once if they perceived any movement
whatever on the part of the enemy. Gervaise remained with him, feeling,
now the excitement was over, that he sorely needed rest after his
exertions in the full heat of the summer sun.

"It has been a great day, Gervaise," Caretto said, "and I only hope that
when again I go into battle with the infidel, I shall have you at hand
to come forward at the critical moment with some master stroke to secure
victory. Claudia will be pleased indeed when she hears how the knight
who bears her gage has again distinguished himself. She will look on the
gay and idle young fops of Genoa with greater disdain than ever. Now you
need not say anything in protest, the more so as I feel grievously weak,
and disposed for sleep."



CHAPTER XXII THE STRUGGLE AT THE BREACH


Two hours later Caretto and Gervaise were roused by the arrival of a
hundred knights in place of the previous garrison; these bore the news
that the pasha had sent in a flag of truce to ask for an armistice until
sundown, to enable him to carry off for burial the bodies of those who
had fallen in the attack. The request had been willingly granted; but
D'Aubusson had at the same time thought it well to send down a strong
reinforcement to the garrison to prevent any attempt at treachery on the
part of the Turks.

"I have seldom heard pleasanter news," Caretto said; "for just as I fell
asleep I was wondering how we were to rid ourselves of the corpses of
the infidels. By tomorrow the place would have become unbearable; and
though, living, the Turks could not turn us out of the tower, they would
when dead speedily have rid the place of us."

In half an hour a number of Moslem vessels were seen approaching.
Caretto did not wish the Turks to imagine that he doubted their good
faith, and while directing the main body of knights to remain in
concealment near the breach, he placed two on sentry duty on the crest
of the ruins, and, with four other knights and Gervaise, went down in
complete armour to salute the officer in command of the burying party,
as he landed from the boats. The ships anchored a short distance out,
and a number of boats rowed from them to the shore. As the Turkish
officer landed, Caretto saluted him, and said in Arabic,

"I give you courteous greeting, Sir. When the cannon cease to sound and
swords are sheathed, there is no longer animosity between brave men; and
no braver than those whose bodies lie stretched there, breathed the air
of heaven. If, sir, I and the knights with me do not uncover our heads,
it is from no want of respect for the dead, but solely because we dare
not stand bareheaded under the fierce rays of the sun."

The Turk answered with equal courtesy, complimenting the knights on
their defence.

"Had I not seen it with my own eyes," he said, "I should have deemed it
altogether impossible that so small a number of men could thus for hours
have withstood the attacks of some of the best of the sultan's troops.
Tales have come down to us from our fathers of the marvellous prowess
of the knights of your Order, and how at Smyrna, at Acre, and elsewhere,
they performed such feats of valour that their name is still used by
Turkish mothers as a bugbear to frighten their children. But the stories
have always seemed to me incredible; now I perceive they were true, and
that the present members of the Order in no way fall short of the valour
of their predecessors."

The knights remained with the Turkish commander and some of his officers
while the work of collecting and carrying away the dead was performed,
the conversation on their side being supported by Caretto and Gervaise.
No less than seven hundred bodies were carried down to the boats,
besides a great many wounded by the artillery fire. None were, however,
found breathing among the great pile of dead at the upper part of the
breach, for the axes and double handed swords of the knights had, in
most of the cases, cleft through turban and skull.

"This represents but part of our loss," the Turkish commander said
sadly, as the last party came down with their burdens to the boats.
"At least as many more must have perished in the sea, either in their
endeavours to escape when all was lost, in the destruction of their
vessels by fire, by the shot from your batteries, or by being run down
by your galleys. Ah, Sir Knight, if it had not been for the appearance
of your fire ships, methinks the matter might have ended differently."

"In that I altogether agree with you," Caretto said. "We were indeed,
well nigh spent, and must have soon succumbed had it not been that the
fire ships arrived to our rescue. You have a fair right to claim that
the victory would have remained in your hands, had not those craft gone
out and snatched it from you."

Then, with salutes on both sides, the Turks took their places in the
boats, and the knights returned to the fort. As soon as darkness came
on, a large body of slaves were marched down from the town, and, under
the direction of the knights, laboured all night at the mound, removing
great quantities of the fallen stones and rubbish in a line halfway up
it, and piling them above so as to form a scarp across the mound that
would need ladders to ascend. Another party worked at the top of the
mound, and there built up a wall eight feet high. The work was completed
by daylight, and the knights felt that they were now in a position to
resist another attack, should Paleologus again send his troops to the
assault.

The night had passed quietly. There was a sound of stir and movement in
the Turkish battery, but nothing that would excite the suspicion of a
large body of troops being in motion. When it became light it was seen
that the Turkish ships had sailed away to their previous anchorage on
the other side of the Island, and although at considerable intervals
the great cannon hurled their missiles against the fort, it was evident
that, for the time at least, the attack was not to be pressed at that
point. A fresh body of slaves, however, came down from the town to
relieve those who had been all night at work, and the repair of the
defences was continued, and with greater neatness and method than had
been possible in the darkness.

At eight o'clock the bells of St. John's Church gave notice that a
solemn service of thanksgiving for the repulse of the enemy was about
to be held. Notice had been sent down early to the tower; and all the
knights who could be spared, without too greatly weakening the garrison,
went up to attend it; the service was conducted with all the pomp and
ceremony possible, and after it was over a great procession was formed
to proceed to the shrine, where a picture of the Virgin held in special
reverence by the Order was placed.

As it wound through the streets in splendid array, the grand master and
officials in all their robes of state, the knights in full armour and
the mantles of the Order, while the inhabitants in gala costume lined
the streets, windows, and housetops, the ladies waving scarves and
scattering flowers down on the knights, the roar of great cannon on the
south side of the city showed that the Turks had commenced the attack in
another quarter. Without pausing, the procession continued its way, and
it was not until the service in the chapel had been concluded that any
steps were taken to ascertain the direction of the attack. As soon as it
was over, the knights hastened to the walls. During the night the
Turks had transported their great basilisks, with other large pieces of
artillery, from the camp to the rising ground on the south side of the
city, and had opened fire against the wall covering the Jews' quarter,
and at the same time against the tower of St. Mary on the one hand and
the Italian tower on the other.

From other commanding spots huge mortars were hurling great fragments of
rock and other missiles broadcast into the town. The portion of the wall
selected for the attack showed that the Turks had been well informed by
their spies of the weak points of the defence. The wall behind which the
Jews' quarter lay, was, to all appearance, of thick and solid masonry;
but this was really of great age, having formed part of the original
defences of the town, before the Order had established itself there.
The masonry, therefore, was ill fitted to resist the huge balls hurled
against it by the basilisks. The langue of Provence was in charge of
this part of the wall, and, leaving them for the present to bear the
brunt of the storm, the grand master sent the knights who could be
spared, to assist the inhabitants to erect shelters against the storm of
missiles falling in the town.

Sheds with sharply sloping roofs, constructed of solid timber, were
built against the inner side of the walls, and beneath these numbers of
the inhabitants found refuge. The work was performed with great celerity
by the inhabitants, aided by the gangs of slaves, and in two or three
days the townspeople were all in shelter, either in these sheds, in the
vaults of the churches, or in other strongly constructed buildings.

Among the missiles hurled into the town were balls filled with Greek
fire, but the houses being entirely built of stone, no conflagrations
of importance were caused by them, as a band of knights was organised
specially to watch for these bombs, and whenever one of them was seen to
fall, they hurried from their lookout to the spot, with a gang of slaves
carrying baskets of earth and buckets of water, and quenched the flames
before they had made any great headway.

The roar of the bombardment was almost continuous, and was heard at
islands distant from Rhodes, telling the inhabitants how the battle
between the Christians and the Moslems was raging.

It was not long before the wall in the front of the Jews' quarter began
to crumble, and it was soon evident that it must, ere many days, succumb
to the storm of missiles hurled against it. D'Aubusson lost no time in
making preparations to avert the danger. He ordered all the houses in
rear of the wall to be levelled; a deep semicircular ditch was then dug,
and behind this a new wall, constructed of the stones and bricks from
the houses destroyed, was built, and backed with an earthen rampart of
great thickness and solidity.

The work was carried on with extraordinary rapidity. The grand master
