risk-- there was a decided risk-- but Rosalind's vanity was greater
than her fears.

There came a knock at her room door. To Rosalind's surprise, Annie
Day's voice, with an extremely friendly tone in it, was heard outside.

"Are you ready, Rosie?" she cried; "for, if you are, there is just
room for you in the fly with Lucy Marsh and Miss Singleton and
myself."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Rosalind from the other side of the door; "just
wait one moment, Annie, and I will be with you."

Both fear and hesitation vanished at the friendly tones of Annie's
voice. She hastily fastened on her necklace and earrings, slipped on
her bracelets and stuck the coral pins in her hair. She saw a dazzling
little image in the glass and turned away with a glad, proud smile.

"We can't be kept waiting. Are you ready?" called Miss Day's voice in
the passage.

"Yes, yes; in one moment, Annie, dear," replied Rosalind. She wrapped
herself from head to foot in a long white opera cloak, pulled the hood
over her head, seized her gloves and fan and opened the door. The
coral could not be seen now, and Annie, who was also in white, took
her hand and ran with her down the corridor.

A few moments later the four girls arrived at the Elliot-Smiths' and
were shown into a dressing-room on the ground floor to divest
themselves of their wraps. They were among the earliest of the
arrivals, and Annie Day had both space and opportunity to rush up to
Rosalind and exclaim at the perfect combination of white silk and pink
coral.

"Lucy, Lucy!" she said, "do come and look at Rosalind's coral! Oh,
poor Polly! you must miss your ornaments; but I am obliged frankly to
confess, my dear, that they are more becoming to this little cherub
than they ever were to you."

Polly was loudly dressed in blue silk. She came up and turned Rosalind
round, and, putting her hand on her neck, lifted the necklace and
looked at it affectionately.

"I did love those ornaments," she said; "but, of course, I can't
grudge them to you, Rose. You paid a good sum for them-- didn't you,
dear?-- although nothing like what they were worth, so, of course,
they are yours by every right."

"You have paid off the debt? I congratulate you, Rose," said Annie
Day.

"Yes," said Rosalind, blushing.

"I am glad you were able to get the money, my dear."

"And I wish she hadn't got it," retorted Polly. "Money is of no moment
to me now. Dad is just rolling in wealth, and I have, in consequence,
more money than I know what to do with. I confess I never felt crosser
in my life than when you brought me that five-pounds note last Monday
night, Miss Merton."

Rosalind colored, then grew very pale; she saw Annie Day's eyes blaze
and darken. She felt that her friend was putting two and two together
and drawing a conclusion in her own mind. Annie turned abruptly from
Rosalind, and, touching Lucy Marsh on the arm, walked with her out of
the dressing-room. The unsuspecting Polly brought up the rear with
Rosalind.

The four girls entered the drawing-room, and Rosalind tried to forget
the sick fear which was creeping round her heart in the excitement of
the moment.

Nearly an hour later Maggie Oliphant arrived. She was also in white,
but without any ornament, except a solitary diamond star which blazed
in the rich coils of her hair. The beautiful Miss Oliphant was
received with enthusiasm. Until her arrival Rose had been the
undoubted belle of the evening, but beside Maggie the petite charms
which Rose possessed sank out of sight. Maggie herself never felt less
conscious of beauty; the heaviness of her heart made her cheeks look
pale and gave her brown eyes a languid expression; she was indifferent
to the admiration which greeted her. The admiration which greeted her
gave her a momentary feeling of surprise-- almost of displeasure.

Meta Elliot-Smith and her mother buzzed round Maggie and expressed
their gratitude to her for coming.

"We expect a friend of yours to arrive presently," said Meta-- "Mr.
Hammond. You know Mr. Hammond, don't you? I have had a note from him.
He says he will look in as soon after ten as possible. I am so glad; I
was dreadfully afraid he couldn't come, for he had to go suddenly into
the country at the beginning of this week. You know Mr. Hammond very
well, don't you, Miss Oliphant?"

"Yes," replied Maggie in her careless voice; "he is quite an old
friend of mine."

"You will be glad to see him?"

"Very glad."

Meta looked at her in a puzzled way. Reports of Hammond's love affair
had reached her ears. She had expected to see emotion and confusion on
Maggie's face; it looked bright and pleased. Her "very glad" had a
genuine ring about it.

"I am so delighted he is coming!" repeated Meta. "I do trust he will
be here in good time."

She led Miss Oliphant to a prominent seat at the top of the room as
she spoke.

"I shall have to leave soon after ten," replied Maggie, "so, if Mr.
Hammond cannot arrive until after that hour, I shall not have the
pleasure of seeing him."

"Oh, but you must really stay later than that; it would be too cruel
to leave us so early."

"I am afraid I cannot. The gates are closed at St. Benet's at eleven
o'clock, and I do not care to remain out until the last moment."

Meta was obliged, with great reluctance, to leave her guest, and a
moment later Annie Day came up eagerly to Maggie's side.

"It's all right," she said, drawing Miss Oliphant into the shelter of
a window; "I have found out all I want to know."

"What is that?" asked Maggie.

"Rosalind Merton is the thief."

"Miss Day, how can you say such dreadful things?"

"How can Rosalind do them? I am awfully sorry-- indeed, I am
disgusted-- but the facts are too plain." Miss Day then in a few eager
whispers, which Maggie in vain endeavored to suppress, gave her chain
of evidence. Rosalind's distress; her passionate desire to keep the
coral; her entreaties that Miss Day would lend her four guineas; her
assurances that she had not a penny in the world to pay her debt; her
fears that it was utterly useless for her to expect the money from her
mother. Then the curious fact that, on the very same evening, Polly
Singleton should have been given a five-pound note by her. "There is
not the least doubt," concluded Miss Day, "that Rosalind must have
gone into your room, Miss Oliphant, and stolen the note while
Priscilla was absent. You know Miss Peel said that she did leave your
room for a moment or two to fetch her Lexicon. Rosalind must have
seized the opportunity; there cannot be a doubt of it."

Maggie's face turned white; her eyes were full of indignation and
horror.

"Something must be done," continued Annie. "I am no prude, but I draw
the line at thieves. Miss Merton ought to be expelled; she is not fit
to speak to one of us."

"The affair is mine," said Maggie after a pause. "You must let me deal
with it."

"Will you?"

"I certainly will."

"To-night?"

"I cannot say. I must think. The whole thing is terrible, it upsets
me."

"I thought you would feel it. I am a good bit upset myself and so is
Lucy Marsh."

"Does Miss Marsh know, too? In that case, Miss Day, it will, I fear,
be my duty to consult Miss Heath. Oh, I must think; I can do nothing
hastily. Please, Miss Day, keep your own counsel for the present, and
ask Miss Marsh to do the same."

Annie Day ran off, and Maggie stood by the open window looking out at
the starry night. Her head ached; her pulses beat; she felt sick and
tired. The noise and laughter which filled the gaily thronged rooms
were all discordant to her-- she wished she had not come. A voice
close by made her start-- a hand not only clasped hers, but held it
firmly for a moment. She looked up and said with a sudden impulse,
"Oh, Geoffrey! I am glad you are here." Then, with a burning blush,
she withdrew her hand from Hammond's.

"Can I help you?" he asked. His heart was beating fast; her words were
tingling in his ears, but his tone was quiet. "Can I help you?" he
repeated. "Here is a seat." He pulled a chair from behind a curtain,
and Maggie dropped into it.

"Something is wrong," she said; "something dreadful has happened."

"May I know what it is?"

"I don't think I have any right to tell you. It is connected with the
college; but it has given me a blow, and I was tired beforehand. I
came here against my will, and now I don't want to talk to any one."

"That can be easily managed. I will stand here and keep off all
intruders."

"Thank you." Maggie put her hand to her forehead.

The headache, which had scarcely left her for a fortnight, was now so
acute that all her thoughts were confused; she felt as if she were
walking in a dream. It seemed perfectly right and natural that Hammond
should stand by her side and protect her from the crowd; it seemed
natural to her at that moment, natural and even right to appeal to
him.

After a long pause he said:

"I am afraid I also have bad news!"

"How?"

"I went to see my uncle, Mr. Hayes."

"Yes; it was good of you-- I remember."

"I failed in my mission. Mr. Hayes says that Miss Peel, our Prissie's
aunt, would rather die than accept help from any one."

"Oh, how obstinate some people are!" replied Maggie wearily.
"Happiness, help and succor come to their very door and they turn
these good things away."

"That is true," replied Hammond. "I am firmly convinced," he added,
"that the good angel of happiness is within the reach of most of us
once at least in our lives, but for a whim-- often for a mere whim--
we tell him to go."

Maggie's face grew very white. "I must say 'good-by': I am going
home," she said, rising. Then she added, looking full at Hammond,
"Sometimes it is necessary to reject happiness; and necessity ought
not to be spoken of as a whim."

  CHAPTER XXX

 "IF I HAD KNOWN YOU SOONER"

AS MAGGIE was leaving the crowded drawing-room she came face to face
with Rosalind. One of those impulses which always guided her, more or
less, made her stop suddenly and put her hand on the young girl's
shoulder.

"Will you come home with me?" she asked.

Rosalind was talking gaily at the moment to a very young
undergraduate.

"I am obliged to you," she began; "you are kind, but I have arranged
to return to St. Benet's with Miss Day and Miss Marsh."

"I should like you to come now with me," persisted Maggie in a grave
voice.

Something in her tone caused Rosalind to turn pale. The sick fear,
which had never been absent from her heart during the evening, became
on the instant intolerable. She turned to the young lad with whom she
had been flirting, bade him a hasty and indifferent "good night" and
followed Maggie out of the room.

Hammond accompanied the two girls downstairs, got their cab for them
and helped them in.

After Rosalind consented to come home Miss Oliphant did not address
another word to her. Rosalind sat huddled up in a corner of the cab;
Maggie kept the window open and looked out. The clear moonlight shone
on her white face and glistened on her dress. Rosalind kept glancing
at her. The guilty girl's terror of the silent figure by her side grew
greater each moment.

The girls reached Heath Hall and Maggie again touched Rosalind on her
arm.

"Come to my room," she said; "I want to say something to you."

Without waiting for a reply she went on herself in front. Rosalind
followed abjectly; she was shaking in every limb.

The moment Maggie closed her room door Rosalind flung her cloak off
her shoulders, and, falling on her knees, caught the hem of Maggie's
dress and covered her face with it.

"Don't, Rosalind; get up," said Miss Oliphant in a tone of disgust.

"Oh, Maggie, Maggie, do be merciful! Do forgive me! Don't send me to
prison, Maggie-- don't!"

"Get off your knees at once, or I don't know what I shall do," replied
Maggie.

Rosalind sprang to her feet; she crouched up against the door; her
eyes were wide open. Maggie came and, faced her.

"Oh, don't!" said Miss Merton with a little shriek, "don't look at me
like that!" She put up her hand to her neck and began to unfasten her
coral necklace. She took it off, slipped her bracelets from her arms,
took her earrings out and removed her pins.

"You can have them all," she said, holding out the coral; "they are
worth a great deal more-- a great deal more than the money I-- took!"

"Lay them down," said Maggie. "Do you think I could touch that coral?
Oh, Rosalind," she added, a sudden rush of intense feeling coming into
her voice, "I pity you! I pity any girl who has so base a soul."

Rosalind began to sob freely. "You don't know how I was tempted," she
said. "I went through a dreadful time, and you were the cause-- you
know you were, Maggie. You raised the price of that coral so wickedly,
you excited my feelings. I felt as if there was a fiend in me. You did
not want the sealskin jacket, but you bid against me and won it. Then
I felt mad, and, whatever you had offered for the coral, I should have
