that I MUST OBEY MA BETTER than I used to do. If ANYTHING HAPPENS to
Peter and you are let see him BEFORE IT HAPPENS give him MY LOVE and
tell him HOW SORRY I AM, and that I hope we will ALL meet in A BETTER
WORLD Everything in school is about the same. The master is awful cross
by spells. Jimmy Frewen walked home with Nellie Bowan last night
from prayer-meeting and HER ONLY FOURTEEN. Don't you think it horrid
BEGINNING SO YOUNG? YOU AND ME would NEVER do anything like that till we
were GROWN UP, would we? Willy Fraser looks SO LONESOME in school these
days. I must stop for ma says I waste FAR TOO MUCH TIME writing letters.
Tell Judy ALL THE NEWS for me.

"Your OWN TRUE FRIEND,

"SARA RAY.

"P.S. Oh I DO hope Peter will get better. Ma is going to get me a new
brown dress for the winter.

"S. R."

When evening came we went to our seats under the whispering, sighing
fir trees. It was a beautiful night--clear, windless, frosty. Some one
galloped down the road on horseback, lustily singing a comic song. How
dared he? We felt that it was an insult to our wretchedness. If Peter
were going to--going to--well, if anything happened to Peter, we felt so
miserably sure that the music of life would be stilled for us for ever.
How could any one in the world be happy when we were so unhappy?

Presently Aunt Olivia came down the long twilight arcade. Her bright
hair was uncovered and she looked slim and queen-like in her light
dress. We thought Aunt Olivia very pretty then. Looking back from
a mature standpoint I realize that she must have been an unusually
beautiful woman; and she looked her prettiest as she stood under the
swaying boughs in the last faint light of the autumn dusk and smiled
down at our woebegone faces.

"Dear, sorrowful little people, I bring you glad tidings of great
joy," she said. "The doctor has just been here, and he finds Peter much
better, and thinks he will pull through after all."

We gazed up at her in silence for a few moments. When we had heard the
news of Paddy's recovery we had been noisy and jubilant; but we were
very quiet now. We had been too near something dark and terrible and
menacing; and though it was thus suddenly removed the chill and shadow
of it were about us still. Presently the Story Girl, who had been
standing up, leaning against a tall fir, slipped down to the ground in
a huddled fashion and broke into a very passion of weeping. I had never
heard any one cry so, with dreadful, rending sobs. I was used to hearing
girls cry. It was as much Sara Ray's normal state as any other, and even
Felicity and Cecily availed themselves occasionally of the privilege of
sex. But I had never heard any girl cry like this. It gave me the same
unpleasant sensation which I had felt one time when I had seen my father
cry.

"Oh, don't, Sara, don't," I said gently, patting her convulsed shoulder.

"You ARE a queer girl," said Felicity--more tolerantly than usual
however--"you never cried a speck when you thought Peter was going to
die--and now when he is going to get better you cry like that."

"Sara, child, come with me," said Aunt Olivia, bending over her. The
Story Girl got up and went away, with Aunt Olivia's arms around her. The
sound of her crying died away under the firs, and with it seemed to go
the dread and grief that had been our portion for hours. In the reaction
our spirits rose with a bound.

"Oh, ain't it great that Peter's going to be all right?" said Dan,
springing up.

"I never was so glad of anything in my whole life," declared Felicity in
shameless rapture.

"Can't we send word somehow to Sara Ray to-night?" asked Cecily, the
ever-thoughtful. "She's feeling so bad--and she'll have to feel that way
till to-morrow if we can't."

"Let's all go down to the Ray gate and holler to Judy Pineau till she
comes out," suggested Felix.

Accordingly, we went and "hollered," with a right good will. We were
much taken aback to find that Mrs. Ray came to the gate instead of Judy,
and rather sourly demanded what we were yelling about. When she heard
our news, however, she had the decency to say she was glad, and to
promise she would convey the good tidings to Sara--"who is already in
bed, where all children of her age should be," added Mrs. Ray severely.

WE had no intention of going to bed for a good two hours yet. Instead,
after devoutly thanking goodness that our grown-ups, in spite of some
imperfections, were not of the Mrs. Ray type, we betook ourselves to the
granary, lighted a huge lantern which Dan had made out of a turnip, and
proceeded to devour all the apples we might have eaten through the day
but had not. We were a blithe little crew, sitting there in the light of
our goblin lantern. We had in very truth been given beauty for ashes and
the oil of joy for mourning. Life was as a red rose once more.

"I'm going to make a big batch of patty-pans, first thing in the
morning," said Felicity jubilantly. "Isn't it queer? Last night I felt
just like praying, and tonight I feel just like cooking."

"We mustn't forget to thank God for making Peter better," said Cecily,
as we finally went to the house.

"Do you s'pose Peter wouldn't have got better anyway?" said Dan.

"Oh, Dan, what makes you ask such questions?" exclaimed Cecily in real
distress.

"I dunno," said Dan. "They just kind of come into my head, like. But of
course I mean to thank God when I say my prayers to-night. That's only
decent."



CHAPTER XXX. A COMPOUND LETTER

Once Peter was out of danger he recovered rapidly, but he found his
convalescence rather tedious; and Aunt Olivia suggested to us one day
that we write a "compound letter" to amuse him, until he could come to
the window and talk to us from a safe distance. The idea appealed to
us; and, the day being Saturday and the apples all picked, we betook
ourselves to the orchard to compose our epistles, Cecily having first
sent word by a convenient caller to Sara Ray, that she, too, might have
a letter ready. Later, I, having at that time a mania for preserving all
documents relating to our life in Carlisle, copied those letters in the
blank pages at the back of my dream book. Hence I can reproduce them
verbatim, with the bouquet they have retained through all the long years
since they were penned in that autumnal orchard on the hill, with
its fading leaves and frosted grasses, and the "mild, delightsome
melancholy" of the late October day enfolding.


CECILY'S LETTER

"DEAR PETER:--I am so very glad and thankful that you are going to
get better. We were so afraid you would not last Tuesday, and we felt
dreadful, even Felicity. We all prayed for you. I think the others have
stopped now, but I keep it up every night still, for fear you might have
a relaps. (I don't know if that is spelled right. I haven't the dixonary
handy, and if I ask the others Felicity will laugh at me, though she
cannot spell lots of words herself.) I am saving some of the Honourable
Mr. Whalen's pears for you. I've got them hid where nobody can find
them. There's only a dozen because Dan et all the rest, but I guess you
will like them. We have got all the apples picked, and are all ready to
take the measles now, if we have to, but I hope we won't. If we have to,
though, I'd rather catch them from you than from any one else, because
we are acquainted with you. If I do take the measles and anything
happens to me Felicity is to have my cherry vase. I'd rather give it to
the Story Girl, but Dan says it ought to be kept in the family, even if
Felicity is a crank. I haven't anything else valuable, since I gave Sara
Ray my forget-me-not jug, but if you would like anything I've got let me
know and I'll leave instructions for you to have it. The Story Girl has
told us some splendid stories lately. I wish I was clever like her. Ma
says it doesn't matter if you're not clever as long as you are good, but
I am not even very good.

"I think this is all my news, except that I want to tell you how much
we all think of you, Peter. When we heard you were sick we all said nice
things about you, but we were afraid it was too late, and I said if you
got better I'd tell you. It is easier to write it than to tell it out
to your face. We think you are smart and polite and obliging and a great
worker and a gentleman.

"Your true friend,

"CECILY KING.

"P.S. If you answer my letter don't say anything about the pears,
because I don't want Dan to find out there's any left. C. K."


FELICITY'S LETTER

"DEAR PETER:--Aunt Olivia says for us all to write a compound letter to
cheer you up. We are all awful glad you are getting better. It gave us
an awful scare when we heard you were going to die. But you will soon be
all right and able to get out again. Be careful you don't catch cold. I
am going to bake some nice things for you and send them over, now that
the doctor says you can eat them. And I'll send you my rosebud plate to
eat off of. I'm only lending it, you know, not giving it. I let very few
people use it because it is my greatest treasure. Mind you don't break
it. Aunt Olivia must always wash it, not your mother.

"I do hope the rest of us won't catch the measles. It must look horrid
to have red spots all over your face. We all feel pretty well yet. The
Story Girl says as many queer things as ever. Felix thinks he is getting
thin, but he is fatter than ever, and no wonder, with all the apples he
eats. He has give up trying to eat the bitter apples at last. Beverley
has grown half an inch since July, by the mark on the hall door, and
he is awful pleased about it. I told him I guessed the magic seed was
taking effect at last, and he got mad. He never gets mad at anything
the Story Girl says, and yet she is so sarkastic by times. Dan is pretty
hard to get along with as usul, but I try to bear pashently with him.
Cecily is well and says she isn't going to curl her hair any more. She
is so conscienshus. I am glad my hair curls of itself, ain't you?

"We haven't seen Sara Ray since you got sick. She is awful lonesome,
and Judy says she cries nearly all the time but that is nothing new. I'm
awful sorry for Sara but I'm glad I'm not her. She is going to write you
a letter too. You'll let me see what she puts in it, won't you? You'd
better take some Mexican Tea now. It's a great blood purifyer.

"I am going to get a lovely dark blue dress for the winter. It is ever
so much prettier than Sara Ray's brown one. Sara Ray's mother has no
taste. The Story Girl's father is sending her a new red dress, and a red
velvet cap from Paris. She is so fond of red. I can't bear it, it looks
so common. Mother says I can get a velvet hood too. Cecily says she
doesn't believe it's right to wear velvet when it's so expensive and
the heathen are crying for the gospel. She got that idea from a Sunday
School paper but I am going to get my hood all the same.

"Well, Peter, I have no more news so I will close for this time.

"hoping you will soon be quite well, I remain

"yours sincerely,

"FELICITY KING.

"P.S. The Story Girl peeked over my shoulder and says I ought to have
signed it 'yours affeckshunately,' but I know better, because the
_Family Guide_ has told lots of times how you should sign yourself when
you are writing to a young man who is only a friend. F. K."


FELIX' LETTER

"DEAR PETER:--I am awful glad you are getting better. We all felt bad
when we thought you wouldn't, but I felt worse than the others because
we hadn't been on very good terms lately and I had said mean things
about you. I'm sorry and, Peter, you can pray for anything you like and
I won't ever object again. I'm glad Uncle Alec interfered and stopped
the fight. If I had licked you and you had died of the measles it would
have been a dreadful thing.

"We have all the apples in and haven't much to do just now and we are
having lots of fun but we wish you were here to join in. I'm a lot
thinner than I was. I guess working so hard picking apples is a good
thing to make you thin. The girls are all well. Felicity puts on as
many airs as ever, but she makes great things to eat. I have had some
splendid dreams since we gave up writing them down. That is always the
way. We ain't going to school till we're sure we are not going to have
the measles. This is all I can think of, so I will draw to a close.
Remember, you can pray for anything you like. FELIX KING."


SARA RAY'S LETTER

"DEAR PETER:--I never wrote to A BOY before, so PLEASE excuse ALL
mistakes. I am SO glad you are getting better. We were SO afraid you
were GOING TO DIE. I CRIED ALL NIGHT about it. But now that you are OUT
OF DANGER will you tell me WHAT IT REALLY FEELS LIKE to think you are
going to die? Does it FEEL QUEER? Were you VERY badly frightened?

"Ma won't let me go up the hill AT ALL now. I would DIE if it was not
for Judy Pinno. (The French names are SO HARD TO SPELL.) JUDY IS VERY
OBLIGING and I feel that she SIMPATHISES WITH ME. In my LONELY HOURS I
read my dream book and Cecily's old letters and they are SUCH A COMFORT
to me. I have been reading one of the school library books too. I is
PRETTY GOOD but I wish they had got more LOVE STORIES because they are
so exciting. But the master would not let them.

"If you had DIED, Peter, and YOUR FATHER had heard it wouldn't he have
FELT DREADFUL? We are having BEAUTIFUL WEATHER and the seenary is fine
since the leaves turned. I think there is nothing so pretty as Nature
after all.

"I hope ALL DANGER from the measles will soon be over and we can ALL
MEET AGAIN AT THE HOME ON THE HILL. Till then FAREWELL.

"Your true friend,

"SARA RAY.

"P. S. Don't let Felicity see this letter. S. R."


DAN'S LETTER

"DEAR OLD PETE:--Awful glad you cheated the doctor. I thought you
weren't the kind to turn up your toes so easy. You should of heard the
girls crying.

"They're all getting their winter finery now and the talk about it would
make you sick. The Story Girl is getting hers from Paris and Felicity is
awful jealous though she pretends she isn't. I can see through her.

"Kitt Mar was up here Thursday to see the girls. She's had the measles
so she isn't scared. She's a great girl to laugh. I like a girl that
laughs, don't you?

"We had a call from Peg Bowen yesterday. You should of seen the Story
Girl hustling Pat out of the way, for all she says she don't believe he
was bewitched. Peg had your rheumatism ring on and the Story Girl's blue
beads and Sara Ray's lace soed across the front of her dress. She wanted
some tobacco and some pickles. Ma gave her some pickles but said we
didn't have no tobacco and Peg went off mad but I guess she wouldn't
bewitch anything on account of the pickles.

"I ain't any hand to write letters so I guess I'll stop. Hope you'll be
out soon. DAN."


THE STORY GIRL'S LETTER

"DEAR PETER:--Oh, how glad I am that you are getting better! Those
days when we thought you wouldn't were the hardest of my whole life. It
seemed too dreadful to be true that perhaps you would die. And then when
we heard you were going to get better that seemed too good to be true.
Oh, Peter, hurry up and get well, for we are having such good times and
we miss you so much. I have coaxed Uncle Alec not to burn his potato
stalks till you are well, because I remember how you always liked to see
the potato stalks burn. Uncle Alec consented, though Aunt Janet said it
was high time they were burned. Uncle Roger burned his last night and it
was such fun.

"Pat is splendid. He has never had a sick spell since that bad one.
I would send him over to be company for you, but Aunt Janet says no,
because he might carry the measles back. I don't see how he could, but
we must obey Aunt Janet. She is very good to us all, but I know she
does not approve of me. She says I'm my father's own child. I know that
doesn't mean anything complimentary because she looked so queer when she
saw that I had heard her, but I don't care. I'm glad I'm like father. I
had a splendid letter from him this week, with the darlingest pictures
in it. He is painting a new picture which is going to make him famous. I
wonder what Aunt Janet will say then.

"Do you know, Peter, yesterday I thought I saw the Family Ghost at last.
I was coming through the gap in the hedge, and I saw somebody in blue
standing under Uncle Alec's tree. How my heart beat! My hair should have
stood up on end with terror but it didn't. I felt to see, and it was
lying down quite flat. But it was only a visitor after all. I don't know
whether I was glad or disappointed. I don't think it would be a pleasant
experience to see the ghost. But after I had seen it think what a
heroine I would be!

"Oh, Peter, what do you think? I have got acquainted with the Awkward
Man at last. I never thought it would be so easy. Yesterday Aunt Olivia
wanted some ferns, so I went back to the maple woods to get them for
her, and I found some lovely ones by the spring. And while I was sitting
there, looking into the spring who should come along but the Awkward Man
himself. He sat right down beside me and began to talk. I never was so
surprised in my life. We had a very interesting talk, and I told him
two of my best stories, and a great many of my secrets into the bargain.
They may say what they like, but he was not one bit shy or awkward,
and he has beautiful eyes. He did not tell me any of his secrets, but
I believe he will some day. Of course I never said a word about his
