"Oh!" cried Polly, when this new alarm sprang up, and everybody was
running hither and thither to comfort him by the assurance that Joel
was not much hurt, "do, Uncle Mason and Jasper, let me go with you."

"No, no, you stay here, Polly," cried Jasper, throwing wide the heavy
front door. "Brother Mason and I will find him. Don't worry, Polly."

"I know I could help," said Polly, hanging over the stair-railing. "Oh!
do let me," she begged.

"No, no, child," said Mr. Whitney, quickly. "Stay where you are, and
take care of the others. Now, then, Jasper, is Jencks ready with the
lantern?"

"All right," said Jasper. "Come on."

Polly, longing to fly to the window to watch, at least, the lantern's
twinkling light across the lawn, hurried off to comfort Aunt Whitney,
who at this new stage in the affairs, was walking her room, biting her
lips to keep from screaming the terror that clutched at her heart.

"Oh, Polly!" she cried, "I'm so glad you've come. I should die if left
alone here much longer;" her soft hair floated down the white robe, and
the blue eyes were filled with tears. "Do tell me, don't you think they
will find Percy?"

"Yes, indeed!" declared Polly, cuddling up to the little woman. "Oh,
Auntie! remember when Dicky's leg was broken."

"But this is much worse," said Mrs. Whitney, sobbing, and holding close
to Polly's warm hand.

"But we thought he was dead," and Polly gave a little shiver.

"Don't--don't," begged Mrs. Whitney, clasping her hands; "Oh, Polly!
don't."

"But he wasn't, you see, Auntie," Polly hurried on, "and so now you
know it will come out all right about Per--There! Oh! they've found
him!" as a shout from the lawn rang out.

"Do you suppose it, Polly?" cried Mrs. Whitney, breathlessly. "Oh! do
run to the window and see!"

So Polly ran to the window in the next room that overlooked that part
of the lawn where Mr. Whitney and Jasper were searching, and strained
her gaze up and down, and in every direction.

"Have they? oh! have they?" cried Mrs. Whitney. "Oh, Polly! do tell me."

"I don't see any of them," said Polly, listening eagerly for another
cry, "but I do believe they've found him."

"Do come back," implored Mrs. Whitney; "there, now, don't go again,
Polly," as Polly hurried to her side, "but just hold my hand."

"I will," said Polly, "just as tight as I can, Auntie."

"Oh--oh! Percy is so much worse off than Joel," wailed Mrs. Whitney.
"Oh! to do such a thing, Polly!" she groaned.

"They only meant it in fun," said Polly, swallowing hard the lump in
her throat, "don't let us talk about it, Auntie."

"And Van," cried Mrs. Whitney, running on. "Oh! my poor, poor boys.
Will your mother ever forgive me, Polly?"

"Oh, Auntie! don't talk so," said Polly tenderly; "and we both ought to
be out helping. There's Van, Auntie; just think how he feels."

"I can't go near him," cried Mrs. Whitney in distress, "as long as he
is in Joel's room, for I can see your mother's eyes, Polly. It would
kill me to have her look at me."

The door opened at this, and the trail of a long silken wrapper was
heard on the floor.

"Mrs. Chatterton," said Mrs. Whitney, raising her head and looking at
the new-comer with as much anger as her gentle face could contain, "I
really cannot see you in my room to-night. Excuse me, but I am unstrung
by all that has occurred. Will you please not come in"--

"I thought I might sit with you," said Mrs. Chatterton. In the brief
interval since the arousing of the household, she had contrived to make
a perfect breakfast toilet, and she folded her hands over her handsome
gown. "Polly might then be with her mother. But if you don't wish me to
remain, I will go."

"I do not need you," said Mrs. Whitney, decidedly, and she turned to
Polly again.

Mrs. Chatterton moved away, and closed the door after her.

"Auntie," said Polly, "she really wants to help you."

"Polly, you needn't say anything about it," exclaimed Mrs. Whitney,
like many other gentle creatures, when roused, becoming unreasonably
prejudiced; "I cannot bear the sight of that woman. She has been here
so long, and is so intensely disagreeable to us all."

Polly's eyes became very round, and she held her breath in astonishment.

"Don't look so, child," said Mrs. Whitney at length, "you don't
understand, my dear. But you would if you were in my place"--

"She's sorry for it," said Polly, finding her tongue at last.

"And father is nearly worn out with her," continued Mrs. Whitney. "And
now to come parading her attentions upon me, it"--

"Who--who?" Dicky, now that the excitement in Joel's room had died
down, had lost his relish for it, and he now pranced into Mrs.
Whitney's room. "Who, mamma?"

"Mrs. Chatterton," said Mrs. Whitney unguardedly. "She has disagreeably
intruded herself upon me."

"Has she been in here?" asked Dick in astonishment.

"Yes; asking if she can sit with me," and Polly started at the look in
the usually soft blue eyes.

"And you wouldn't let her?" asked Dick, stopping short and regarding
his mother curiously.

"Of course not, Dicky," she made haste to say.

"Then I think you did very wrong," declared Dick flatly.

"Oh, Dick!" exclaimed Polly in consternation.

"And you don't act like my mother at all," said Dick, standing quite
stiffly on his sturdy legs, and gazing at her with disapprobation.
"Didn't Mrs. Chatterton save my life," he exploded, "when the real
burglar was going for me? Say, didn't she?" he cried.

"I have yet to find out that is the truth," said Mrs. Whitney, finding
her voice. "Oh, Dicky," she added, hurt that he should defend another,
worst of all, Mrs. Chatterton, "don't talk about her."

"But I ought to talk about her," persisted Dick. "She saved me as much
as she could. Because she won't let anybody thank her, I like her more
myself. I'm going to stay with her."

With that, he held his head high, and marched to the door.

"Dick, Dick!" called his mother, "come back, dear."

Dick slowly turned and made his way to her side, but he still regarded
her with disapproval.

"Dick, I want you to go to Mrs. Chatterton's room, and say that I am
sorry I refused her offer to help, and that I would like to have her
sit with me. Remember, say I am sorry I refused her offer to help,
Dicky." She leaned forward and kissed her boy, her long, soft hair
falling like a veil around the two faces.

Dick threw his arms around her neck.

"Now, you're a brick!" he declared impulsively. "I'll bring the old
lady, and we'll both sit with you."

So Polly was free to run back to Mamsie. On the way there she opened
the door of Phronsie's little room, just out of Father and Mother
Fisher's.

"How good it is that she sleeps through it all," said Polly, listening
to the regular breathing. Then she stole across the room and stood
beside the small bed.

"She looks just as she did the night she took her new shoes to bed,"
thought Polly; "one hand is over her head, exactly as it was then. Oh,
Phronsie! to think that you're to have no party to-morrow," and she
turned off with a sigh, went out, and closed the door.

"Percy's here--all right!" cried Jasper, running over the stairs to
meet her at the top.

His eyes were gleaming with excitement, and his face was torn and
bleeding.

"Are you hurt?" cried Polly, feeling as if the whole family were bound
to destruction. "Oh, Jasper! did you fall?"

"Nothing but a scratch. I was fool enough to forget the ledge, and
walked off for my pains"--

"Oh, Jasper!" cried Polly, with paling cheeks, "let me bathe it for
you, do;" her strength began to return at the thought of action, and
she sprang for a basin of water.

"Nonsense. No, Polly!" cried Jasper, with a quick hand detaining her,
"it's nothing but a mere scratch, I tell you, but I suppose it looks
terribly. I'll go and wash it off. Run and tell his mother that Percy
is found."

"Is he all right?" asked Polly fearfully, holding her breath for the
answer.

"Sound as a nut," declared Jasper; "we found him streaking it down the
locust path; he said he was going to run off to sea."

"Run off to sea!" repeated Polly. "Oh, Jasper!"

"Well, he was so frightened, of course he didn't know what to say,"
replied Jasper. "And ashamed, too. He didn't care to show his head at
home. I don't know as I blame him, Polly. Well, it's too bad about
Phronsie's party, isn't it?" added Jasper, mopping up his face as the
two went down the hall.

"Yes," said Polly with a sigh, stopping at Mrs. Whitney's door, "but,
oh! think how happy we are now that Percy is safe, Jasper."

"Still, it's too bad for Phronsie," repeated Jasper, looking back.

But Joel flatly declared that the first one that even so much as hinted
that a single item of the arrangements for Phronsie's getting-well
party should be changed, he'd make it disagreeable as only he knew how,
for that one when he got up from his bed. "Yes, sir!" and he scolded,
and fretted, and fussed, and laid down the law so generally to all, not
excepting the doctor, that at last it was decided to let the party go
on. Then he lay back against the pillows quite exhausted, but with a
beatific face.

"I should think you would be tired, Joe," exclaimed Jasper, "you've
bullied us so. Dear me! people ought to be angelic when they're sick,
at least."

"If you'd had him to take care of as I did," observed Dr. Fisher,
"you'd know better; goodness me! the little brown house scarcely held
him when he was getting over the measles."

"What's the use of being sick," said Joel reflectively, turning on his
pillow, "if you can't make people stand around, I'd like to know. Now
that point's settled about Phronsie's party, won't you all go out? I'd
like to speak to Father Fisher a moment."

"You don't mean me, Joey?" said Mother Fisher at the head of the bed,
holding her boy's hand.

"Yes; you, too, Mamsie," said Joel, giving her an affectionate glance,
"it's something that only the doctor and I are to know."

"You're not hurt anywhere else, are you, Joey?" asked his mother, a
sudden alarm leaping to her black eyes.

"Not a scratch," said Joel promptly. "I want to see Father Fisher about
something. Sometime you shall know, Mamsie." He gave her hand a sudden
pressure, then let it go.

"Perhaps you would better step out, my dear," said the little doctor,
nodding to his wife. So Mrs. Fisher, smothering a sigh, went out
reluctantly.

"All out?" asked Joel, trying to raise his head to see for himself.

"Every soul," said Dr. Fisher.

"Well, see here, will you," said Joel, pointing to the table, the
schoolbooks scattered as he had left them, "pack those things all away
in the closet on the shelf, you know, and put the rubbish on the floor
there, back on the table?"

Dr. Fisher could not for his life, refrain from asking curiously, as he
did as requested, "Been having a pull at the books, eh, Joe?"

"Um--um--maybe," said Joel, twisting uneasily. "Well, now, come here,
please, Father Fisher."

The little man turned away from the table, with its sprawling array of
delightful things, to stand by the bedside.

"You must get me well as soon as you can," said Joel confidentially.

"All right; I understand," Dr. Fisher nodded professionally.

"And whatever you say, don't let it be that I must be careful of my
eyes," said Joel.

"All right; that is, if you get up quickly," agreed the doctor.

"That's all," said Joel in great satisfaction. "Now, call Mamsie in and
the others."

And in the morning, no one told Phronsie what had happened the night
before. She only knew that Joel was not very well, and was going to
keep his room; all her pleadings to do something for him being set one
side by Grandpapa's demands upon her instant attention whenever the
idea suggested itself to her. And so the time wore along till the party
began.

Alexia was the first to arrive, her bowl of orange jelly in her hand,
and after her, a tall slight figure jumped from the carriage, her
flaxen hair streaming out in two pale braids.

"I thought I'd pick Cathie up," said Alexia carelessly; "had to pass
her door, you know. O dear me, what perfectly dreadful times you had
last night, Polly Pepper."

"I didn't bring macaroons," said Cathie, "as I really think that they
wouldn't be good for Phronsie. Besides, I've forgotten how to make
them, and our cook was cross and said I shouldn't come into her
kitchen. But I bought a doll for Phronsie; my mother said it would be a
great deal more sensible present," and she hugged the long box under
her arm with great satisfaction.

"O dear! dear!" groaned Alexia, falling back with Polly as the three
raced along the hall, "she showed it to me in the carriage, and it's a
perfect guy, besides counting one more."

But afflictions like this were small to Polly now, and although for the
next hour it rained dolls into Phronsie's puzzled hands, Polly helped
her to thank the givers and to dispose them safely on neighboring
chairs and tables and sofas.

Mrs. Chatterton's was the pattern of old Mr. King's phonograph doll, at
which discovery he turned upon her with venom in his eye.

