she will have twelve sons.'

The judge thanked him joyfully as he took the apples, and went to seek
his wife. 'Eat these apples at once,' he cried, 'and you will have
twelve sons.'

So she sat down and ate eleven of them, but just as she was in the
middle of the twelfth her sister came in, and she gave her the half that
was left.

The eleven sons came into the world, strong and handsome boys; but when
the twelfth was born, there was only half of him.

By-and-by they all grew into men, and one day they told their father it
was high time he found wives for them. 'I have a brother,' he answered,
'who lives away in the East, and he has twelve daughters; go and marry
them.' So the twelve sons saddled their horses and rode for twelve days,
till they met an old woman.

'Good greeting to you, young men!' said she, 'we have waited long for
you, your uncle and I. The girls have become women, and are sought, in
marriage by many, but I knew you would come one day, and I have kept
them for you. Follow me into my house.'

And the twelve brothers followed her gladly, and their father's brother
stood at the door, and gave them meat and drink. But at night, when
every one was asleep, Halfman crept softly to his brothers, and said to
them, 'Listen, all of you! This man is no uncle of ours, but an ogre.'

'Nonsense; of course he is our uncle,' answered they.

'Well, this very night you will see!' said Halfman. And he did not go to
bed, but hid himself and watched.

Now in a little while he saw the wife of the ogre steal into the room
on tiptoe and spread a red cloth over the brothers and then go and cover
her daughters with a white cloth. After that she lay down and was soon
snoring loudly. When Halfman was quite sure she was sound asleep, he
took the red cloth from his brothers and put it on the girls, and laid
their white cloth over his brothers. Next he drew their scarlet caps
from their heads and exchanged them for the veils which the ogre's
daughters were wearing. This was hardly done when he heard steps coming
along the floor, so he hid himself quickly in the folds of a curtain.
There was only half of him!

The ogress came slowly and gently along, stretching out her hands before
her, so that she might not fall against anything unawares, for she had
only a tiny lantern slung at her waist, which did not give much light.
And when she reached the place where the sisters were lying, she stooped
down and held a corner of the cloth up to the lantern. Yes! it certainly
was red! Still, to make sure that there was no mistake, she passed her
hands lightly over their heads, and felt the caps that covered them.
Then she was quite certain the brothers lay sleeping before her, and
began to kill them one by one. And Halfman whispered to his brothers,
'Get up and run for your lives, as the ogress is killing her daughters.'
The brothers needed no second bidding, and in a moment were out of the
house.

By this time the ogress had slain all her daughters but one, who awoke
suddenly and saw what had happened. 'Mother, what are you doing?' cried
she. 'Do you know that you have killed my sisters?'

'Oh, woe is me!' wailed the ogress. 'Halfman has outwitted me after
all!' And she turned to wreak vengeance on him, but he and his brothers
were far away.

They rode all day till they got to the town where their real uncle
lived, and inquired the way to his house.

'Why have you been so long in coming?' asked he, when they had found
him.

'Oh, dear uncle, we were very nearly not coming at all!' replied they.
'We fell in with an ogress who took us home and would have killed us if
it had not been for Halfman. He knew what was in her mind and saved us,
and here we are. Now give us each a daughter to wife, and let us return
whence we came.'

'Take them!' said the uncle; 'the eldest for the eldest, the second for
the second, and so on to the youngest.'

But the wife of Halfman was the prettiest of them all, and the other
brothers were jealous and said to each other: 'What, is he who is only
half a man to get the best? Let us put him to death and give his wife to
our eldest brother!' And they waited for a chance.

After they had all ridden, in company with their brides, for some
distance, they arrived at a brook, and one of them asked, 'Now, who will
go and fetch water from the brook?'

'Halfman is the youngest,' said the elder brother, 'he must go.'

So Halfman got down and filled a skin with water, and they drew it up by
a rope and drank. When they had done drinking, Halfman, who was standing
in the middle of the stream, called out: 'Throw me the rope and draw me
up, for I cannot get out alone.' And the brothers threw him a rope to
draw him up the steep bank; but when he was half-way up they cut the
rope, and he fell back into the stream. Then the brothers rode away as
fast as they could, with his bride.

Halfman sank down under the water from the force of the fall, but
before he touched the bottom a fish came and said to him, 'Fear nothing,
Halfman; I will help you.' And the fish guided him to a shallow place,
so that he scrambled out. On the way it said to him, 'Do you understand
what your brothers, whom you saved from death, have done to you?'

'Yes; but what am I to do?' asked Halfman.

'Take one of my scales,' said the fish, 'and when you find yourself in
danger, throw it in the fire. Then I will appear before you.'

'Thank you,' said Halfman, and went his way, while the fish swam back to
its home.

The country was strange to Halfman, and he wandered about without
knowing where he was going, till he suddenly found the ogress standing
before him. 'Ah, Halfman, have I got you at last? You killed my
daughters and helped your brothers to escape. What do you think I shall
do with you?'

'Whatever you like!' said Halfman.

'Come into my house, then,' said the ogress, and he followed her.

'Look here!' she called to her husband, 'I have got hold of Halfman. I
am going to roast him, so be quick and make up the fire!'

So the ogre brought wood, and heaped it up till the flames roared up the
chimney. Then he turned to his wife and said: 'It is all ready, let us
put him on!'

'What is the hurry, my good ogre?' asked Halfman. 'You have me in your
power, and I cannot escape. I am so thin now, I shall hardly make one
mouthful. Better fatten me up; you will enjoy me much more.'

'That is a very sensible remark,' replied the ogre; 'but what fattens
you quickest?'

'Butter, meat, and red wine,' answered Halfman.

'Very good; we will lock you into this room, and here you shall stay
till you are ready for eating.'

So Halfman was locked into the room, and the ogre and his wife brought
him his food. At the end of three months he said to his gaolers: 'Now I
have got quite fat; take me out, and kill me.'

'Get out, then!' said the ogre.

'But,' went on Halfman, 'you and your wife had better go to invite your
friends to the feast, and your daughter can stay in the house and look
after me!'

'Yes, that is a good idea,' answered they.

'You had better bring the wood in here,' continued Halfman, 'and I will
split it up small, so that there may be no delay in cooking me.'

So the ogress gave Halfman a pile of wood and an axe, and then set out
with her husband, leaving Halfman and her daughter busy in the house.

After he had chopped for a little while he called to the girl, 'Come and
help me, or else I shan't have it all ready when your mother gets back.'

'All right,' said she, and held a billet of wood for him to chop.

But he raised his axe and cut off her head, and ran away like the wind.
By-and-by the ogre and his wife returned and found their daughter
lying without her head, and they began to cry and sob, saying, 'This is
Halfman's work, why did we listen to him?' But Halfman was far away.

When he escaped from the house he ran on straight before him for some
time, looking for a safe shelter, as he knew that the ogre's legs were
much longer than his, and that it was his only chance. At last he saw
an iron tower which he climbed up. Soon the ogre appeared, looking right
and left lest his prey should be sheltering behind a rock or tree, but
he did not know Halfman was so near till he heard his voice calling,
'Come up! come up! you will find me here!'

'But how can I come up?' said the ogre, 'I see no door, and I could not
possibly climb that tower.'

'Oh, there is no door,' replied Halfman.

'Then how did you climb up?'

'A fish carried me on his back.'

'And what am I to do?'

'You must go and fetch all your relations, and tell them to bring plenty
of sticks; then you must light a fire, and let it burn till the tower
becomes red hot. After that you can easily throw it down.'

'Very good,' said the ogre, and he went round to every relation he had,
and told them to collect wood and bring it to the tower where Halfman
was. The men did as they were ordered, and soon the tower was glowing
like coral, but when they flung themselves against it to overthrow it,
they caught themselves on fire and were burnt to death. And overhead sat
Halfman, laughing heartily. But the ogre's wife was still alive, for she
had taken no part in kindling the fire.

'Oh,' she shrieked with rage, 'you have killed my daughters and my
husband, and all the men belonging to me; how can I get at you to avenge
myself?'

'Oh, that is easy enough,' said Halfman. 'I will let down a rope, and if
you tie it tightly round you, I will draw it up.'

'All right,' returned the ogress, fastening the rope which Halfman let
down. 'Now pull me up.'

'Are you sure it is secure?'

'Yes, quite sure.'

'Don't be afraid.'

'Oh, I am not afraid at all!'

So Halfman slowly drew her up, and when she was near the top he let go
the rope, and she fell down and broke her neck. Then Halfman heaved a
great sigh and said, 'That was hard work; the rope has hurt my hands
badly, but now I am rid of her for ever.'

So Halfman came down from the tower, and went on, till he got to a
desert place, and as he was very tired, he lay down to sleep. While
it was still dark, an ogress passed by, and she woke him and said,
'Halfman, to-morrow your brother is to marry your wife.'

'Oh, how can I stop it?' asked he. 'Will you help me?'

'Yes, I will,' replied the ogress.

'Thank you, thank you!' cried Halfman, kissing her on the forehead. 'My
wife is dearer to me than anything else in the world, and it is not my
brother's fault that I am not dead long ago.'

'Very well, I will rid you of him,' said the ogress, 'but only on one
condition. If a boy is born to you, you must give him to me!'

'Oh, anything,' answered Halfman, 'as long as you deliver me from my
brother, and get me my wife.'

'Mount on my back, then, and in a quarter of an hour we shall be there.'

The ogress was as good as her word, and in a few minutes they arrived at
the outskirts of the town where Halfman and his brothers lived. Here
she left him, while she went into the town itself, and found the wedding
guests just leaving the brother's house. Unnoticed by anyone, the ogress
crept into a curtain, changing herself into a scorpion, and when the
brother was going to get into bed, she stung him behind the ear, so that
he fell dead where he stood. Then she returned to Halfman and told him
to go and claim his bride. He jumped up hastily from his seat, and
took the road to his father's house. As he drew near he heard sounds
of weeping and lamentations, and he said to a man he met: 'What is the
matter?'

'The judge's eldest son was married yesterday, and died suddenly before
night.'

'Well,' thought Halfman, 'my conscience is clear anyway, for it is quite
plain he coveted my wife, and that is why he tried to drown me.' He
went at once to his father's room, and found him sitting in tears on
the floor. 'Dear father,' said Halfman, 'are you not glad to see me? You
weep for my brother, but I am your son too, and he stole my bride from
me and tried to drown me in the brook. If he is dead, I at least am
alive.'

'No, no, he was better than you!' moaned the father.

'Why, dear father?'

'He told me you had behaved very ill,' said he.

'Well, call my brothers,' answered Halfman, 'as I have a story to tell
them.' So the father called them all into his presence. Then Halfman
began: 'After we were twelve days' journey from home, we met an ogress,
who gave us greeting and said, "Why have you been so long coming? The
daughters of your uncle have waited for you in vain," and she bade us
follow her to the house, saying, "Now there need be no more delay; you
can marry your cousins as soon as you please, and take them with you to
your own home." But I warned my brothers that the man was not our uncle,
but an ogre.

'When we lay down to sleep, she spread a red cloth over us, and covered
her daughters with a white one; but I changed the cloths, and when the
ogress came back in the middle of the night, and looked at the cloths,
she mistook her own daughters for my brothers, and killed them one by
one, all but the youngest. Then I woke my brothers, and we all stole
softly from the house, and we rode like the wind to our real uncle.

'And when he saw us, he bade us welcome, and married us to his twelve
daughters, the eldest to the eldest, and so on to me, whose bride was
the youngest of all and also the prettiest. And my brothers were filled
with envy, and left me to drown in a brook, but I was saved by a fish
who showed me how to get out. Now, you are a judge! Who did well, and
who did evil--I or my brothers?'

'Is this story true?' said the father, turning to his sons.

'It is true, my father,' answered they. 'It is even as Halfman has said,
and the girl belongs to him.'

Then the judge embraced Halfman and said to him: 'You have done well, my
son. Take your bride, and may you both live long and happily together!'

At the end of the year Halfman's wife had a son, and not long after she
came one day hastily into the room, and found her husband weeping. 'What
is the matter?' she asked.

'The matter?' said he.

'Yes, why are you weeping?'

'Because,' replied Halfman, 'the baby is not really ours, but belongs to
an ogress.'

'Are you mad?' cried the wife. 'What do you mean by talking like that?'

'I promised,' said Halfman, 'when she undertook to kill my brother and
to give you to me, that the first son we had should be hers.'

'And will she take him from us now?' said the poor woman.

'No, not quite yet,' replied Halfman; 'when he is bigger.'

'And is she to have all our children?' asked she.

'No, only this one,' returned Halfman.

Day by day the boy grew bigger, and one day as he was playing in the
street with the other children, the ogress came by. 'Go to your father,'
she said, 'and repeat this speech to him: "I want my forfeit; when am I
to have it?"'

'All right,' replied the child, but when he went home forgot all about
it. The next day the ogress came again, and asked the boy what answer
the father had given. 'I forgot all about it,' said he.

'Well, put this ring on your finger, and then you won't forget.'

'Very well,' replied the boy, and went home.

The next morning, as he was at breakfast, his mother said to him,
'Child, where did you get that ring?'

'A woman gave it to me yesterday, and she told me, father, to tell you
that she wanted her forfeit, and when was she to have it?'

Then his father burst into tears and said, 'If she comes again you
must say to her that your parents bid her take her forfeit at once, and
depart.'

At this they both began to weep afresh, and his mother kissed him, and
put on his new clothes and said, 'If the woman bids you to follow her,
you must go,' but the boy did not heed her grief, he was so pleased
with his new clothes. And when he went out, he said to his play-fellows,
'Look how smart I am; I am going away with my aunt to foreign lands.'

At that moment the ogress came up and asked him, 'Did you give my
message to your father and mother?'

'Yes, dear aunt, I did.'

'And what did they say?'

'Take it away at once!'

So she took him.

But when dinner-time came, and the boy did not return, his father and
mother knew that he would never come back, and they sat down and wept
all day. At last Halfman rose up and said to his wife, 'Be comforted; we
will wait a year, and then I will go to the ogress and see the boy, and
how he is cared for.'

'Yes, that will be the best,' said she.

The year passed away, then Halfman saddled his horse, and rode to the
place where the ogress had found him sleeping. She was not there, but
not knowing what to do next, he got off his horse and waited. About
midnight she suddenly stood before him.
