to his mother and said: 'That old scoundrel of a landlord has done me
once more; but he will live to repent it, for if I ever enter his inn
again, I will make him suffer for the loss of my donkey and the other
treasures he has robbed me of.'

Masella was in such a rage over her fresh disappointment that she could
not restrain her impatience, and, turning on Antonio, she abused him
soundly, and told him to get out of her sight at once, for she would
never acknowledge him as a son of hers again. The poor boy was very
depressed by her words, and slunk back to his master like a dog with his
tail between his legs. When the ogre saw him, he guessed at once what
had happened. He gave Antonio a good scolding, and said, 'I don't know
what prevents me smashing your head in, you useless ne'er-do-well! You
blurt everything out, and your long tongue never ceases wagging for
a moment. If you had remained silent in the inn this misfortune would
never have overtaken you, so you have only yourself to blame for your
present suffering.'

Antonio listened to his master's words in silence, looking for all
the world like a whipped dog. When he had been three more years in the
ogre's service he had another bad fit of home-sickness, and longed very
much to see his mother and sisters again.

So he asked for permission to go home on a visit, and it was at once
granted to him. Before he set out on his journey the ogre presented
him with a beautifully carved stick and said, 'Take this stick as a
remembrance of me; but beware of saying, "Rise up, Stick," and "Lie
down, Stick," for if you do, I can only say I wouldn't be in your shoes
for something.'

Antonio took the stick and said, 'Don't be in the least alarmed, I'm not
such a fool as you think, and know better than most people what two and
two make.'

'I'm glad to hear it,' replied the ogre, 'but words are women, deeds are
men. You have heard what I said, and forewarned is forearmed.'

This time Antonio thanked his master warmly for all his kindness, and
started on his homeward journey in great spirits; but he had not gone
half a mile when he said 'Rise up, Stick.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth when the stick rose and began to
rain down blows on poor Antonio's back with such lightning-like rapidity
that he had hardly strength to call out, 'Lie down, Stick;' but as soon
as he uttered the words the stick lay down, and ceased beating his back
black and blue.

Although he had learnt a lesson at some cost to himself, Antonio was
full of joy, for he saw a way now of revenging himself on the wicked
landlord. Once more he arrived at the inn, and was received in the
most friendly and hospitable manner by his host. Antonio greeted him
cordially, and said: 'My friend, will you kindly take care of this stick
for me? But, whatever you do, don't say "Rise up, Stick." If you do, you
will be sorry for it, and you needn't expect any sympathy from me.'

The landlord, thinking he was coming in for a third piece of good
fortune, gave Antonio an excellent supper; and after he had seen him
comfortably to bed, he ran to the stick, and calling to his wife to
come and see the fun, he lost no time in pronouncing the words 'Rise up,
Stick.'

The moment he spoke the stick jumped up and beat the landlord so
unmercifully that he and his wife ran screaming to Antonio, and, waking
him up, pleaded for mercy.

When Antonio saw how successful his trick had been, he said: 'I refuse
to help you, unless you give me all that you have stolen from me,
otherwise you will be beaten to death.'

The landlord, who felt himself at death's door already, cried out: 'Take
back your property, only release me from this terrible stick;' and with
these words he ordered the donkey, the table-cloth, and other treasures
to be restored to their rightful owner.

As soon as Antonio had recovered his belongings he said 'Stick, lie
down,' and it stopped beating the landlord at once.

Then he took his donkey and table-cloth and arrived safely at his home
with them. This time the magic words had the desired effect, and the
donkey and table-cloth provided the family with treasures untold.
Antonio very soon married off his sister, made his mother rich for life,
and they all lived happily for ever after.

[From the Italian, Kletke.]




A Fairy's Blunder


Once upon a time there lived a fairy whose name was Dindonette. She was
the best creature in the world, with the kindest heart; but she had
not much sense, and was always doing things, to benefit people, which
generally ended in causing pain and distress to everybody concerned. No
one knew this better than the inhabitants of an island far off in the
midst of the sea, which, according to the laws of fairyland, she had
taken under her special protection, thinking day and night of what she
could do to make the isle the pleasantest place in the whole world, as
it was the most beautiful.

Now what happened was this:

As the fairy went about, unseen, from house to house, she heard
everywhere children longing for the time when they would be 'grown-up,'
and able, they thought, to do as they liked; and old people talking
about the past, and sighing to be young again.

'Is there no way of satisfying these poor things?' she thought. And
then one night an idea occurred to her. 'Oh, yes, of course! It has been
tried before; but I will manage better than the rest, with their old
Fountain of Youth, which, after all, only made people young again. I
will enchant the spring that bubbles up in the middle of the orchard,
and the children that drink of it shall at once become grown men and
women, and the old people return to the days of their childhood.'

And without stopping to consult one single other fairy, who might have
given her good advice, off rushed Dindonette, to cast her spell over the
fountain.

It was the only spring of fresh water in the island, and at dawn was
crowded with people of all ages, come to drink at its source. Delighted
at her plan for making them all happy, the fairy hid herself behind a
thicket of roses, and peeped out whenever footsteps came that way.
It was not long before she had ample proof of the success of her
enchantments. Almost before her eyes the children put on the size
and strength of adults, while the old men and women instantly became
helpless, tiny babies. Indeed, so pleased was she with the result of
her work, that she could no longer remain hidden, and went about telling
everybody what she had done, and enjoying their gratitude and thanks.

But after the first outburst of delight at their wishes being granted,
people began to be a little frightened at the rapid effects of the magic
water. It was delicious to feel yourself at the height of your power and
beauty, but you would wish to keep so always! Now this was exactly what
the fairy had been in too much of a hurry to arrange, and no sooner had
the children become grown up, and the men and women become babies, than
they all rushed on to old age at an appalling rate! The fairy only found
out her mistake when it was too late to set it right.

When the inhabitants of the island saw what had befallen them, they were
filled with despair, and did everything they could think of to escape
from such a dreadful fate. They dug wells in their places, so that they
should no longer need to drink from the magic spring; but the sandy soil
yielded no water, and the rainy season was already past. They stored up
the dew that fell, and the juice of fruits and of herbs, but all this
was as a drop in the ocean of their wants. Some threw themselves
into the sea, trusting that the current might carry them to other
shores--they had no boats--and a few, still more impatient, put
themselves to death on the spot. The rest submitted blindly to their
destiny.

Perhaps the worst part of the enchantment was, that the change from
one age to another was so rapid that the person had no time to prepare
himself for it. It would not have mattered so much if the man who stood
up in the assembly of the nation, to give his advice as to peace or war,
had looked like a baby, as long as he spoke with the knowledge and sense
of a full-grown man. But, alas! with the outward form of an infant, he
had taken on its helplessness and foolishness, and there was no one who
could train him to better things. The end of it all was, that before a
month had passed the population had died out, and the fairy Dindonette,
ashamed and grieved at the effects of her folly, had left the island for
ever.

Many centuries after, the fairy Selnozoura, who had fallen into bad
health, was ordered by her doctors to make the tour of the world twice
a week for change of air, and in one of these journeys she found herself
at Fountain Island. Selnozoura never made these trips alone, but always
took with her two children, of whom she was very fond--Cornichon, a boy
of fourteen, bought in his childhood at a slave-market, and Toupette, a
few months younger, who had been entrusted to the care of the fairy by
her guardian, the genius Kristopo. Cornichon and Toupette were intended
by Selnozoura to become husband and wife, as soon as they were old
enough. Meanwhile, they travelled with her in a little vessel, whose
speed through the air was just a thousand nine hundred and fifty times
greater than that of the swiftest of our ships.

Struck with the beauty of the island, Selnozoura ran the vessel to
ground, and leaving it in the care of the dragon which lived in the hold
during the voyage, stepped on shore with her two companions. Surprised
at the sight of a large town whose streets and houses were absolutely
desolate, the fairy resolved to put her magic arts in practice to
find out the cause. While she was thus engaged, Cornichon and Toupette
wandered away by themselves, and by-and-by arrived at the fountain,
whose bubbling waters looked cool and delicious on such a hot day.
Scarcely had they each drunk a deep draught, when the fairy, who by this
time had discovered all she wished to know, hastened to the spot.

'Oh, beware! beware!' she cried, the moment she saw them. 'If you drink
that deadly poison you will be ruined for ever!'

'Poison?' answered Toupette. 'It is the most refreshing water I have
ever tasted, and Cornichon will say so too!'

'Unhappy children, then I am too late! Why did you leave me? Listen,
and I will tell you what has befallen the wretched inhabitants of this
island, and what will befall you too. The power of fairies is great,'
she added, when she had finished her story, 'but they cannot destroy the
work of another fairy. Very shortly you will pass into the weakness and
silliness of extreme old age, and all I can do for you is to make it as
easy to you as possible, and to preserve you from the death that others
have suffered, from having no one to look after them. But the charm is
working already! Cornichon is taller and more manly than he was an hour
ago, and Toupette no longer looks like a little girl.'

It was true; but this fact did not seem to render the young people as
miserable as it did Selnozoura.

'Do not pity us,' said Cornichon. 'If we are fated to grow old so soon,
let us no longer delay our marriage. What matter if we anticipate our
decay, if we only anticipate our happiness too?'

The fairy felt that Cornichon had reason on his side, and seeing by a
glance at Toupette's face that there was no opposition to be feared from
her, she answered, 'Let it be so, then. But not in this dreadful place.
We will return at once to Bagota, and the festivities shall be the most
brilliant ever seen.'

They all returned to the vessel, and in a few hours the four thousand
five hundred miles that lay between the island and Bagota were passed.
Everyone was surprised to see the change which the short absence had
made in the young people, but as the fairy had promised absolute silence
about the adventure, they were none the wiser, and busied themselves in
preparing their dresses for the marriage, which was fixed for the next
night.

Early on the following morning the genius Kristopo arrived at the Court,
on one of the visits he was in the habit of paying his ward from time to
time. Like the rest, he was astonished at the sudden improvement in the
child. He had always been fond of her, and in a moment he fell violently
in love. Hastily demanding an audience of the fairy, he laid his
proposals before her, never doubting that she would give her consent to
so brilliant a match. But Selnozoura refused to listen, and even
hinted that in his own interest Kristopo had better turn his thoughts
elsewhere. The genius pretended to agree, but, instead, he went straight
to Toupette's room, and flew away with her through the window, at the
very instant that the bridegroom was awaiting her below.

When the fairy discovered what had happened, she was furious, and sent
messenger after messenger to the genius in his palace at Ratibouf,
commanding him to restore Toupette without delay, and threatening to
make war in case of refusal.

Kristopo gave no direct answer to the fairy's envoys, but kept Toupette
closely guarded in a tower, where the poor girl used all her powers of
persuasion to induce him to put off their marriage. All would, however,
have been quite vain if, in the course of a few days, sorrow, joined
to the spell of the magic water, had not altered her appearance so
completely that Kristopo was quite alarmed, and declared that she needed
amusement and fresh air, and that, as his presence seemed to distress
her, she should be left her own mistress. But one thing he declined to
do, and that was to send her back to Bagota.

In the meantime both sides had been busily collecting armies, and
Kristopo had given the command of his to a famous general, while
Selnozoura had placed Cornichon at the head of her forces. But before
war was actually declared, Toupette's parents, who had been summoned
by the genius, arrived at Ratibouf. They had never seen their daughter
since they parted from her as a baby, but from time to time travellers
to Bagota had brought back accounts of her beauty. What was their
amazement, therefore, at finding, instead of a lovely girl, a
middle-aged woman, handsome indeed, but quite faded--looking, in fact,
older than themselves. Kristopo, hardly less astonished than they were
at the sudden change, thought that it was a joke on the part of one of
his courtiers, who had hidden Toupette away, and put this elderly lady
in her place. Bursting with rage, he sent instantly for all the servants
and guards of the town, and inquired who had the insolence to play him
such a trick, and what had become of their prisoner. They replied that
since Toupette had been in their charge she had never left her rooms
unveiled, and that during her walks in the surrounding gardens, her food
had been brought in and placed on her table; as she preferred to eat
alone no one had ever seen her face, or knew what she was like.

The servants were clearly speaking the truth, and Kristopo was obliged
to believe them. 'But,' thought he, 'if they have not had a hand in
this, it must be the work of the fairy,' and in his anger he ordered the
army to be ready to march.

On her side, Selnozoura of course knew what the genius had to expect,
but was deeply offended when she heard of the base trick which she
was believed to have invented. Her first desire was to give battle to
Kristopo at once, but with great difficulty her ministers induced her to
pause, and to send an ambassador to Kristopo to try to arrange matters.

So the Prince Zeprady departed for the court of Ratibouf, and on his way
he met Cornichon, who was encamped with his army just outside the gates
of Bagota. The prince showed him the fairy's written order that for the
present peace must still be kept, and Cornichon, filled with longing to
see Toupette once more, begged to be allowed to accompany Zeprady on his
mission to Ratibouf.

By this time the genius's passion for Toupette, which had caused all
these troubles, had died out, and he willingly accepted the terms of
peace offered by Zeprady, though he informed the prince that he still
believed the fairy to be guilty of the dreadful change in the girl. To
this the prince only replied that on that point he had a witness who
could prove, better than anyone else, if it was Toupette or not, and
desired that Cornichon should be sent for.

When Toupette was told that she was to see her old lover again, her
heart leapt with joy; but soon the recollection came to her of all that
had happened, and she remembered that Cornichon would be changed as well
as she. The moment of their meeting was not all happiness, especially
on the part of Toupette, who could not forget her lost beauty, and the
genius, who was present, was at last convinced that he had not been
deceived, and went out to sign the treaty of peace, followed by his
attendants.

'Ah, Toupette: my dear Toupette!' cried Cornichon, as soon as they were
left alone; 'now that we are once more united, let our past troubles be
forgotten.'

'Our past troubles!' answered she, 'and what do you call our lost beauty
and the dreadful future before us? You are looking fifty years older
than when I saw you last, and I know too well that fate has treated me
no better!'

'Ah, do not say that,' replied Cornichon, clasping her hand. 'You are
different, it is true; but every age has its graces, and surely no woman
of sixty was ever handsomer than you! If your eyes had been as bright as
of yore they would have matched badly with your faded skin. The wrinkles
which I notice on your forehead explain the increased fulness of your
cheeks, and your throat in withering is elegant in decay. Thus the
harmony shown by your features, even as they grow old, is the best proof
of their former beauty.'

'Oh, monster!' cried Toupette, bursting into tears, 'is that all the
comfort you can give me?'

'But, Toupette,' answered Cornichon, 'you used to declare that you did
not care for beauty, as long as you had my heart.'

'Yes, I know,' said she, 'but how can you go on caring for a person who
is as old and plain as I?'

'Toupette, Toupette,' replied Cornichon, 'you are only talking nonsense.
My heart is as much yours as ever it was, and nothing in the world can
make any difference.'

At this point of the conversation the Prince Zeprady entered the room,
with the news that the genius, full of regret for his behaviour, had
given Cornichon full permission to depart for Bagota as soon as he
liked, and to take Toupette with him; adding that, though he begged they
would excuse his taking leave of them before they went, he hoped, before
long, to visit them at Bagota.

Neither of the lovers slept that night--Cornichon from joy at returning
home, Toupette from dread of the blow to her vanity which awaited her at
Bagota. It was hopeless for Cornichon to try to console her during the
journey with the reasons he had given the day before. She only grew
worse and worse, and when they reached the palace went straight to her
old apartments, entreating the fairy to allow both herself and Cornichon
to remain concealed, and to see no one.

For some time after their arrival the fairy was taken up with the
preparations for the rejoicings which were to celebrate the peace, and
with the reception of the genius, who was determined to do all in his
power to regain Selnozoura's lost friendship. Cornichon and Toupette
were therefore left entirely to themselves, and though this was only
what they wanted, still, they began to feel a little neglected.

At length, one morning, they saw from the windows that the fairy and
the genius were approaching, in state, with all their courtiers in
attendance. Toupette instantly hid herself in the darkest corner of
the room, but Cornichon, forgetting that he was now no longer a boy of
fourteen, ran to meet them. In so doing he tripped and fell, bruising
one of his eyes severely. At the sight of her lover lying helpless on
the floor, Toupette hastened to his side; but her feeble legs gave way
under her, and she fell almost on top of him, knocking out three of her
loosened teeth against his forehead. The fairy, who entered the room at
