As the poor boy spoke he stooped down and kissed the burning hands, and
looked longingly at the strangely flushed and altered face; then he
went out into the forest. Any action was a relief to his oppressed and
overstrained heart, and he knew he had not a moment to lose in trying
to find a doctor for Cecile.

He went straight to the village and inquired if such a person dwelt
there.

"Yes," an old peasant woman told him; "certainly they had a doctor, but
he was out just now; he was with Mme. Chillon up at a farm a mile away.
There was no use in going to the doctor's house, but if the boy would
follow him there, to the said farm, he might catch him before he went
farther away, for there were to be festivities that night, and their
good doctor was always in requisition as the best dancer in the place."

So Joe followed the doctor to the farm a mile away, and was so
fortunate as to find him just before he was about to ride off to the
fete mentioned by the old peasant.

Joe, owing to his long residence in England, could only speak broken
French, but his agitation, his great earnestness, what little French he
could muster, were so far eloquent as to induce the young doctor,
instead of postponing his visit to the hut in the forest until the
morning, to decide to give up his dance and go with the boy instead.

Joe's intention was to direct the doctor to the hut, and then, without
returning thither himself, set off at once on his search for Anton.
This, however, the medical man would not permit. He was not acquainted
with the forest; he would not go there at so late an hour on any
consideration without a guide, so Joe had to change his mind and go
with him.

They walked along rapidly, the doctor wondering if there was any chance
of his still being in time for his promised dance, the boy too unhappy,
too plunged in gloom, to be able to utter a word. It was nearly dark in
the forest shade when at last they reached the little tumbledown hut.

But what was the matter? The place Joe had left so still, so utterly
without any sound except that made by one weak and wandering voice,
seemed suddenly alive. When the doctor and the boy entered, voices,
more than one, were speaking eagerly. There was life, color, and
movement in the deserted little place.

Bending over the sick child, and tenderly placing a cool handkerchief
dipped in cold water on her brow, was a young woman of noble height and
proportions. Her face was sunshiny and beautiful, and even in the
gathering darkness Joe could see that her head was crowned with a great
wealth of golden hair. This young woman, having laid the handkerchief
on Cecile's forehead, raised her then tenderly in her arms. As she did
so, she turned to address some words in rather broken French to a tall,
dark-eyed old woman who stood at the foot of the bed of pine needles.

Both women turned when the boy and the man came in, and at sight of the
doctor, whom they evidently knew well, they uttered many exclamations
of pleasure.

The young doctor went over at once to his little patient, but Joe,
suddenly putting his hand to his heart, stood still in the door of the
hut.

_Who_ was that old woman who held Maurice in her arms--that old woman
with the upright figure, French from the crown of her head to the sole
of her feet? Of what did she remind the boy as she stood holding the
tired little child in her kind and motherly clasp?

Ah! he knew, he knew. Almost at the second glance his senses seemed
cleared, his memory became vivid, almost too vivid to be borne. He saw
those same arms, that same kind, dear, and motherly face, only the arms
held another child, and the eyes looked into other eyes, and that child
was her own child, and they were in the pretty cottage in the Pyrenees,
and brother Jean was coming in from his day's work of tying up the
vines.

Yes, Joe knew that he was looking at his mother; once again he had seen
her. Though he must not stay with her, though he must give her up,
though he must go back to the old dreadful life, still for this one
blessed glimpse he would all the rest of his life acknowledge that God
was good.

For a moment he stood still, almost swaying from side to side in the
wonderful gladness that came over him, then with a low cry the poor boy
rushed forward; he flung his arms round the old woman's neck; he
strained her to his heart.

"Ah, my mother!" he sobbed, speaking in this sudden excitement in the
dear Bearnais of his childhood, "I am Alphonse. Do you not know your
little lost son Alphonse?"




CHAPTER XXVI.

LAND OF BEULAH.


The whole scene had changed. She had closed her eyes in a deserted hut
lying on a bed of pine needles. She had closed her eyes to the
consciousness of Maurice gone, of everything lost and over in her life.
It seemed but a moment, but the working of an ugly dream, and she
opened them again. Where was she? The hut was gone, the pine-needle bed
had vanished; instead she found herself in a pretty room, with dimity
curtains hanging before latticed windows; she felt soft white sheets
under her, and knew that she was lying in a little bed, in the
prettiest child's cot, with dimity curtains fastened back from it also.
The room in its freshness and whiteness and purity looked something
like an English room, and from the open windows came in a soft, sweet
scent of roses.

Had Cecile then gone back to England, and, if so, what English home had
received her?

She was too tired, too peaceful, to think much just then. She closed
her languid eyes, only knowing that she was comfortable and happy, and
feeling that she did not care much about anything if only she might
rest on forever in that delicious white bed.

Then, for she was still very weak, she found herself with her thoughts
wandering. She was back in England, she was in London. Kind Mrs.
Moseley had taken her in; kind Mrs. Moseley was taking great care of
Maurice and of her. Then she fancied herself in a vast place of worship
where everybody sang, and she heard the words of a very loud and joyful
refrain:

  "The angels stand on the hallelujah strand,
  And sing their welcome home."

Had she then got home? Was this happy, restful place not even England?
Was all the dull and weary wandering over, and had she got home--to the
best home--the home where Jesus dwelt? She really thought it must be
so, and this would account for the softness of this little bed, and the
delicious purity of the beautiful room. Yes, she heard the singing very
distinctly; "welcome home" came over and over again to her ears. She
opened her eyes. Yes, surely this was heaven, and those were the angels
singing. How soft and full and rich their voices sounded.

She tried to raise her head off her pillow, but this she found she
could not manage. Where she lay, however, she could see all over the
small room. She was alone, with just the faint, sweet breath of roses
fanning her cheeks, and that delicious music in the distance. Yes, she
certainly must be in the home of Jesus, and soon He would come to see
her, and she would talk with Him face to face.

She remembered in a dim kind of way that she had gone to sleep in great
trouble and perplexity. But there was no trouble lying on her heart
now. She was in the home where no one had any trouble; and when she
told Jesus all her story, he would make everything right. Just then a
voice, singing the same sweet refrain, came along the passage. As it
got near, the music ceased, the door softly opened, and a young woman
with golden hair and the brightest of bright faces came softly in.
Seeing Cecile with her eyes open, she went gladly up to the bed, and,
bending over her, said in a full but gentle voice:

"Ah! dear English little one, how glad I am that you are better!"

"Yes, I'm quite well," answered Cecile, in her feeble tone. Then she
added, looking up wistfully: "Please, how soon may I see Jesus?"

At these words the pleased expression vanished from the young woman's
face. She looked at Cecile in pity and alarm, and saying softly to
herself, "Ah! she isn't better, then," turned away with a sigh; but
Cecile lifted a feeble hand to detain her.

"Please, I'm much better. I'm quite well," she said. "This is heaven,
isn't it?"

"No," answered the young woman. She was less alarmed now, and she
turned and gazed hard at the child. "No," she said, "we thought you
were going to heaven. But I do believe you really are better. No, my
dear little girl! this is very different from heaven. This is only a
French farm; a farm in the Landes--pretty enough! but still very
different from heaven. You have been very ill, and have been lying on
that little bed for the last fortnight, and we did fear that you'd die.
We brought you here, and, thanks to my good mother-in-law and our
doctor, we have, I do trust, brought you through, and now you must
sleep and not talk any more."

"But please, ma'am, if this is a French farm, how do you speak English?"

"I am English by birth, child; though 'tis a long time now since I have
seen my native land. Not that I feel very English, for my good Jean's
country is my country, and I only spoke English to you because you
don't know French. Now, little girl, lie very still. I shall be back in
a minute."

The young woman did come back in a minute, holding, of all people in
the world, Maurice by the hand.

Maurice then, who Cecile thought was quite lost, was back again, and
Cecile looked into his dear brown eyes, and got a kiss from his sweet
baby lips. A grave, grave kiss from lips that trembled, and a grave
look from eyes full of tears; for to little Maurice his Cecile was
sadly changed; but the young woman with the bright hair would not allow
him to linger now. She held a cup of some delicious cooling drink to
the sick child's lips, and then sat down by her side until she slept,
and this was the beginning of a gentle but slow recovery.

Pretty young Mme. Malet sat most of the day in Cecile's room, and
Maurice came in and out, and now and then an old woman, with an upright
figure and French face, came and stood by the bedside and spoke softly
and lovingly, but in a tone Cecile could not understand, and a lovely
little boy was brought in once a day by his proud young mother, and
suffered to give Cecile one kiss before he was taken away again. And
the kindest care and the most nourishing food were always at hand for
the poor little pilgrim, who lay herself in a very land of Beulah of
rest and thankfulness.

Her memory was still very faint; her lost purse did not trouble her;
even Lovedy became but a distant possibility; all was rest and peace,
and that dreadful day when she thought her heavenly Guide had forsaken
her had vanished forever from her gentle heart.

One afternoon, however, when Mme. Malet sat by the open window quietly
knitting a long stocking, a disturbing thought came to Cecile; not very
disturbing, but still enough for her to start and ask anxiously:

"Why doesn't Joe ever come to see me?"

At these words a shade came over the bright face of the young wife and
mother; she hesitated for a moment, then said, a trifle uneasily:

"I wouldn't trouble about Joe just now, deary."

"Oh! but I must," answered Cecile. "How is it that I never missed him
before? I do love Joe. Oh! don't tell me that anything bad has happened
to my dear, dear Joe."

"I don't know that anything bad has happened to him, dear. I trust not.
I will tell you all I know. The night my mother-in-law and I found you
in that little hut I saw a tall dark boy. He had gone to fetch the
doctor for you, and he stood in the gloom, for we had very little light
just then. All on a sudden he gave a cry, and ran to my mother-in-law,
and threw his arms round her neck, and said strange words to her. But
before she could answer him, or say one single sentence in reply, he
just ran out of the hut and disappeared. Then we brought you and
Maurice and Toby home, and we have not heard one word of Joe since,
dear."




CHAPTER XXVII.

REVELATIONS.


After this little conversation with Mme. Malet Cecile's sojourn in the
land of Beulah seemed to come to an end. Not that she was really
unhappy, but the peace which gave a kind of unreal sweetness to this
time of convalescence had departed; her memory, hitherto so weak, came
back fully and vividly, she remembered all that dreadful conversation
with Joe, she knew again and felt it through and through her sensitive
heart that _her_ Joe had proved unfaithful. He had stolen the piece of
paper with the precious address, he had given over the purse of gold
into the hands of the enemy. Not lightly had he done this thing, not
lightly had he told her of his wrongdoing. Could she ever forget the
agony in his eyes or the horror in his poor voice as he told her of the
life from which he had thus freed himself. No, all through her illness
she had seen that troubled face of Joe's, and now even she could
scarcely bear to dwell upon it. Joe had been sorely tempted, and he had
fallen. Poor Joe! No, she could not, she would not blame Joe, but all
the same her own life seemed ended; God had been very good. The dear
Guide Jesus, when He restored to her little Maurice, had assuredly not
forsaken her; but still, all the same, _she_ had been faithless. Her
dying stepmother had put into her hands a sacred trust, and she never
now could fulfill that trust.

"Though I tried to do my best--I did try to do my very, very best,"
sighed the poor little girl, wiping the tears from her eyes.

Cecile was now sufficiently recovered to leave her pretty and bowery
bedroom and come down to the general living room. This room, half
kitchen, half parlor, again in an undefined way reminded her of the old
English farmhouse where she and Maurice had been both happy and unhappy
not so long ago. Here Cecile saw for the first time young Mme. Malet's
husband. He was a big and handsome fellow, very dark--as dark as Joe;
he had a certain look of Joe which rather puzzled Cecile and caused her
look at him a great deal. Watching him, she also noticed something
else. That handsome young matron, Mme. Malet, that much idolized wife
and mother, was not quite happy. She had high spirits; she laughed a
full, rich laugh often through the day; she ran briskly about; she sang
at her work; but for all that, when for a few moments she was quiet, a
shadow would steal over her bright face. When no one appeared to
notice, sighs would fall from her cherry lips. As she sat by the open
lattice window, always busy, making or mending, she would begin an
English song, then stop, perhaps to change it for a gay French one,
perhaps to wipe away a hasty tear. Once when she and Cecile were alone,
and the little girl began talking innocently of the country where she
had been brought up, she interrupted her almost petulantly:

"Stop," she said, "tell me nothing about England. I was born there, but
I don't love it; France is my country now."

Then seeing her husband in the distance, she ran out to meet him, and
presently came in leaning on his arm, but her blue eyes were wet with
sudden tears.

These things puzzled Cecile. Why should Mme. Malet dislike England? Why
was Mme. Malet sad?

But the young matron was not the only one who had a sad face in this
pretty French farm just now; the elderly woman, the tall and upright
old Frenchwoman, Cecile saw one day crying bitterly by the fire. This
old woman had from the first been most kind to Cecile, and had petted
Maurice, often rocking him to sleep in her arms, but as she did not
know even one word of English, she left the real care of the children
to her daughter-in-law Suzanne. Consequently Cecile had seen very
little of her while she stayed in her own room, but when she came
downstairs she noticed her sad old face, and when she heard her bitter
sobs, the loving heart of the child became so full she could scarcely
bear her own feelings. She ran up to the old Frenchwoman and threw her
arms round her neck, and said "Don't cry; ah, don't cry!" and the
Frenchwoman answered "_La pauvre petite_!" to her, and though neither
of them understood one word that the other said, yet they mingled their
tears together, and in some way the sore heart of the elder was
comforted.

That evening, that very same evening, Cecile, sitting in the porch by
the young Mme. Malet's side, ventured to ask her why her mother-in-law
looked so sorry.

"My poor mother-in-law," answered Suzanne readily, "she has known great
trouble, Cecile. My Jean was not her only child. My mother-in-law is
