When they had gone about half-way along, examining each stone with the
greatest care, Bertie, who was ahead of the rest, and passing the
candle he held along the edge of every joint, said, "Look here! this
stone projects nearly half an inch beyond the rest."

The others gathered round him. The stone was of unusual size, being
fully two and a half feet wide and four feet long, the bottom joint
being two feet above the floor.

Bertie moved along to let the others look at the edge. He was keeping
his finger on the joint, and they had scarcely come up when he said,
"The other end of the stone's sunk in about as much as this end
projects."

"Something certainly occurred to shift this stone a little," Harry
said, examining it carefully. "It is curious. If others had been
displaced, one would have put it down to the shock of an earthquake--a
common enough occurrence here--but both above and below it the stones
are level with the others, and nowhere about the house have we seen
such another displacement. Look! there is a heap of rubbish along the
foot of the wall here. Stir it up, Dias, and let us see what it is."

"It is sand and small stones, and some chips that look like chips of
rock."

"Yes, these bits look, as you say, as if they had been chipped off a
rock, not like water-worn stones. Though how they got here, where
everywhere else things are perfectly tidy, I cannot say. However, we
can think that over afterwards. Now for the stone! Let us all put our
weight against this projecting end. I don't in the least expect that we
can move it, but at any rate we can try."

They all pushed together.

"I think it moved a little," Harry said, and looked at the edge.

"Yes, it is not above half as far out now as it was."

"That is curious, for if it is as thick as we took it to be, it would
weigh at least a couple of tons. We won't try to push it in any
farther. I am sorry we pushed it at all. Now, give me that heavy
sledge, Jose, possibly there may be a hollow sound to it. I will hit at
the other end, for I don't want this to go in any farther."

He went to the stone beyond it first and struck two or three blows with
all his strength. Then he did the same with the stone that they were
examining.

"I don't think it gives such a dead sound," he said.

The others were all of the same opinion.

"Good! This is another piece of luck," he said. "We have certainly hit
on something out of the way."

"Your hammering has brought this end out again, Harry," Bertie said.

"So it has, and it has pushed this end in a little. Let us try again."
But although all took turns with the sledges, they could make no
further impression on the stone.

"Well, we will try the drills," Harry said. "In the first place, we
will find out how thick it is."

They at once set to work with the drill. Progress was slower than it
had been before, because, instead of striking down on the head of the
drill, they had now to swing the hammer sideways and lost the advantage
of its weight; and they were obliged to work very carefully, as a miss
would have seriously damaged the one holding the drill. It took them
four hours' steady work to get the hole in three inches. Ten minutes
later, to their astonishment, the drill suddenly disappeared. Dias, who
was striking, nearly fell, for instead of the resistance he had
expected, the drill shot forward; the hammer hit Jose, who had this
time been holding the drill, a heavy blow on the arm, causing him to
utter a shout of pain.

Harry, who was sitting down having breakfast, having just handed his
hammer to Bertie, jumped to his feet.

"How did you manage that, Dias? I suppose it slipped off the head. You
must have hit Jose a very heavy blow."

"I have hit him a heavy blow, senor, and nearly tumbled down myself;
but I struck the drill fairly enough, and it has gone."

"Gone where, Dias?"

"I think it must have gone right through the hole, senor."

"Then there is an empty space behind!" Harry shouted joyfully.
"However," he went on in changed tones, "we must see to Jose first.
That blow may have fractured his arm. Let me look, Jose. No, I don't
think anything is broken, but there is a nasty cut on the wrist. It is
fortunate that you were not striking straight down, Dias, for I am sure
we have not put anything approaching the strength into our blows, now
we are hitting sideways, that we exerted before. You had better go up
to Maria, Jose, and get her to bathe your wrist with cold water, and
put on a bandage."

"Now, senor, what shall we do next?"

"Well, now that we know that its weight cannot be anything very great,
and that certainly to some extent it can be moved, we will try
hammering again at that end. Do you stand three or four feet beyond it,
so as to be able to bring your sledge down with all your strength just
on the lower corner. I will face you and strike six or eight inches
above where you hit. Of course we must both bring our hammers down at
the same instant. We shall be able to do that after two or three
trials. Stand at the other end of the stone, Bertie, and tell us if it
moves at all."

After one or two attempts the two men got to swing their hammers so as
to strike precisely at the same moment, and when half a dozen blows had
fallen, Bertie said: "It comes out a little at each blow. It is not
much, but it comes."

Three or four minutes later he reported, "It is an inch and a half out
now, and there is room to get the end of a crowbar in here."

"That is curious," Harry said as he lowered his sledgehammer, and,
taking up the candle, examined the end where he had been striking.

"This is sunk about the same distance, Bertie. The stone must work
somehow on a pivot."

They now put a crowbar into the end Bertie had been watching, and all
three threw their weight on the lever. Slowly the stone yielded to the
pressure, and moved farther and farther out. It was pushed open until
the crowbar could act no longer as a lever, but they could now get a
hold of the inside edge. It was only very slowly and with repeated
efforts that they could turn the stone round, and at last it stood
fairly at right angles to the wall, dividing the opening into equal
parts about two feet four each.

"There is a pivot under it; that is quite evident. It may be a copper
ball in the stone below, or it may be that a knob of the upper stone
projects into a hole in the lower. However, it does not matter how it
works. Here is an opening into something. Dias, will you go upstairs
and tell your wife and Jose to come down? They had better bring half a
dozen more torches. Our stock here is getting low, and we shall want as
much light as possible. It is only fair that we should all share in the
discovery."

Dias went off.

"Now, Bertie, we must not let our hopes grow too high. I think it is
more likely than not that we shall find nothing here."

"Why do you think so, Harry? I made sure we had as good as got the
treasure."

"I think, if there had been treasure," Harry went on, "that this stone
would have been closed with the greatest care. They would hardly have
left it so carelessly closed that anyone who examined the wall would
have noticed it, just as we did. We found the other places most
carefully closed, though there was nothing in them."

"Perhaps there was something that prevented them from shutting--a
little stone or something."

"But we know that that wasn't so, Bertie, because the stone yielded to
our weight; and if it did so now, it could have been shut with the
greatest ease originally, when no doubt the pivot was kept oiled, and
the whole worked perfectly smoothly. It is almost certain that they
were able in some way to fasten it securely when it was shut. What is
that piece of square stone lying there?"

"It fell down from above just as the slab opened."

Harry took it up. It was about six inches long by two inches square.

"It is a very hard stone," he said--"granite, I should say. I expect
you will find that it fits into a hole in the stone above."

"Yes, there is a hole here," Bertie said, feeling it; "the stone goes
right in."

"Well, I think, Bertie, you will find a hole in that end of the stone
we moved that it will fit."

Bertie crept in, and felt along the top of the stone.

"Yes, there is a hole here about the same size as the stone, but it is
not more than three inches deep."

"Then, that stone was the bolt, Bertie. You see it was pushed up, and
the door then closed; and when the stone was exactly in its place, it
would drop into the hole and keep it from moving, and nothing short of
breaking up the bolt would give an entrance. It is lucky that we did
not push it quite to; another quarter of an inch and that bolt would
have fallen, and we could not have moved it unless by smashing the
whole thing into bits. That was why they did not quite close the stone;
they wanted to get in again."

"Here come the others!"

Maria had been washing some clothes in the stream, and they had
therefore been longer in coming than if she had been in the room. They
all looked greatly excited.

"So you have found it, senor!" Dias exclaimed in delight.

"We have found an entrance into somewhere, but I am afraid it will be
as empty as the other chambers."

"Why do you think so, senor?" Dias asked in dismay.

Harry repeated the reasons he had given Bertie for his belief that the
stone must have been left in such a position as to be easily opened
when required.

"Why should it have been left so?"

"Because the treasure they expected had never arrived. It is possible
that when the Incas discovered the treasure in that chamber we
searched, they may also have found this entrance. It may have been
shown to them by one of the prisoners, and they may have broken the
stone here into pieces as they broke that over the chamber afterwards.
Seeing what a splendid hiding-place it was, they may have, when the
Spaniards first arrived, made another stone to fit, with the intention
of using it for a hiding-place themselves. The fact that the stone was
left so that it could be at once opened is conclusive proof to my mind
that the treasure never came. That heap of sand, small stones, and
chips of rock is another proof that they were ready to receive
treasure, and it was probably swept out of the chamber that is behind
here, and would, of course, have been removed when the treasure was put
in and the door closed; but as the treasure never did come, it was left
where it lay. However, we will now go and see. I have only kept you
waiting because I did not want you to be disappointed."

One by one they crept through the opening. For four feet in, the
passage was the same width as the stone, but two feet deeper; then it
at once opened into a large cavern.

"This wall was four feet thick, you see, Dias. Apparently squared stone
was only used for the facing, as the stones are of irregular shape on
the back. This would be a natural cavern, and a splendid hiding-place
it makes. No doubt its existence was one of the reasons for building
this castle."

The cavern was some twelve feet wide and thirty feet high at the mouth;
the floor sloped up sharply, and the sides contracted, and met forty
feet from the mouth. The floor had been cut into steps two feet wide,
running across the cave and extending to the back. These steps were
faced with a perfectly flat slab of stone. The cave was empty.

The natives uttered loud exclamations of disappointment and regret.

Harry had so thoroughly made up his mind that nothing would be found
there that he surveyed the place calmly and in silence. Bertie imitated
his example with some difficulty, for he too was bitterly disappointed.

"You see, Dias," Harry went on quietly, "this place was prepared to
receive treasure. The steps have all been swept perfectly clean. You
see, the gold could be piled up, and no doubt the steps were cut and
faced with stone to prevent any gold-dust that might fall from the
bags, in which, no doubt, it would be brought, and small nuggets, from
falling into the cracks and crevices of the rock. I should say that in
all probability they expected that treasure ship that was lost, and had
everything in readiness for hiding the cargo here directly it came. It
never did come. The door was shut as far as it could be without the
bolt falling down and fastening it; then they waited for the ship; and
if it did not arrive, other treasure might be brought by land. Well, it
cannot be helped. So far we have failed. There may still be treasure
hidden somewhere. We cannot say that we have searched the place
thoroughly yet."

For another six weeks they worked hard. The wall was broken through in
several places, but no signs of the existence of any other cavern or
hiding-place was discovered.

"I should give it up," Harry said, when at the end of that time they
were sitting gloomily round the fire, "but for one thing: I can see no
possible explanation why a party of men should have been left here, and
a guard kept, for perhaps a hundred years, perhaps more, and the
stories about demons been circulated, and people who ventured to
approach been murdered, unless there had been some good reason for it.
That reason could only have been, as far as I can see, that there was a
treasure hidden here. I have turned it over and over in my mind a
thousand times, and I can think of no other reason. Can you, Bertie, or
you, Dias?"

"No," Bertie replied. "I have often thought about it; but, as you say,
there must have been some good reason, for no people in their senses
would have spent their lives in this old place, and starved here,
unless they had some cause for it."

Dias made no reply beyond shaking his head.

"You see," Harry went on, "they kept up their watch to the end. There
were those two skeletons of men who had died at their post at that
curious window where nothing could be seen. I hate to give up the
search, and yet we seem to have tried every point where there was a
possibility of a hiding-place existing."




CHAPTER XIX

THE TREASURE


The next morning Harry said:

"I will go upstairs to that look-out place again. I have been up there
pretty nearly every day, and stared down. I can't get it out of my mind
that the key of the mystery lies there, and that that hole was made for
some other purpose than merely throwing stones out on to any of those
who might go in behind the rocks. I have puzzled and worried over it."

"Shall I come up with you, Harry?"

"No, I would rather you didn't. I will go up by myself and spend the
morning there; some idea may occur to me. You may as well all have a
quiet day of it."

He lit his pipe and went upstairs. Jose went off to the mules, and
Bertie descended the ladder, and strolled round what they called the
courtyard, looking for eggs among the rocks and in the tufts of grass
growing higher up. Dias scattered a few handfuls of maize to the
chickens and then assisted Maria to catch two of them; after which he
descended the ladder and sat down gloomily upon a stone. He had become
more and more depressed in spirits as the search became daily more
hopeless; and although he worked as hard as anyone, he seldom spoke,
while Harry and his brother often joked, and showed no outward signs of
disappointment. An hour passed, and then Harry appeared suddenly at the
window.

"Bertie, Dias, come up at once, I have an idea!"

They ran to the ladder and climbed up. The excitement with which he
spoke showed that the idea was an important one. "Now, Dias," he broke
out as they joined him, "we know, don't we, that a part of the Incas'
treasure was sent off by boat, and the belief of the Indians was that
it was never heard of again."

"That is so, senor. There was certainly a storm the day after it
started, and, as I have told you, it was never heard of again. Had it
been, a report of it would surely have come down."

"I believe, Dias, that the boat was dashed to pieces against that line
of rocks outside the entrance to the passage. We have reason to believe
that the people here were expecting the treasure to arrive, and had the
entrance to the cave in readiness to receive it. Certainly no better
place could have been chosen for concealment. The boat may have been
coming here when the storm broke and drove them towards the shore. They
probably attempted to gain the mouth of the cove, but missed it, and
were dashed to pieces against the rocks. The Indians on guard here no
doubt saw it, and would be sure that the heavy sacks or boxes
containing the gold would sink to the bottom. They would lie perfectly
secure there, even more secure than if they had been removed and placed
in the cave, and could always be recovered when the Spaniards left, so
they were content to leave them there. Still, they obeyed the orders
they had received to keep watch for ever over the treasure, and to do
so knocked that strange hole through the wall and always kept two men
on guard there.

"So it must have gone on. They and those who succeeded them never
wavered. Doubtless they received food from their friends outside, or
some of them went out, as you have done, to fetch it in. Then came a
time when, for some reason or other--doubtless, as I supposed before,
when the Spaniards swept pretty nearly all the natives up to work in
the mines, and they themselves dared not issue out--the attempt to get
food was made, when too late, by the men whose skeletons we found on
the steps when we first came here; and the rest were all too feeble to
repeat the experiment, and died--the two sentinels at their post, the
rest in the room where we found them."

"Hurrah!" Bertie shouted, "I have no doubt you have hit it, Harry. I
believe, after all, that we are going to find it. That is splendid! I
shall dance at your wedding, Harry, which I had begun to think I never
should do."

"Don't be a young ass, Bertie. It is only an idea, and we have had
several ideas before, but nothing has come of them."

"Something is going to come of this, I am convinced; I would bet any
money on it. Well, shall we go and have a trial at once?"

"What do you think, Dias?" Harry said, paying no attention to Bertie's
last remark.

"I think it is quite possible, senor. Certainly, if the Indians had
been told to guard the treasure, they would do so always. You know how
they kept the secrets entrusted to them whatever tortures they were put
to. If the gold had been, as you say, lost amongst the rocks, I do
think they would have still watched the place. I thought it strange
that they should have made that hole, but when you said that they might
have made it to throw stones down it seemed to me to be likely enough;
but the other suggestion is more probable. Well, senor, I am ready to
try it, but I am not a very good swimmer."

"My brother and I are both good swimmers, and we will do that part of
the work. The hardest part will be getting it up, and you will be able
to give us your help at that."

"Well, let us be off," Bertie said; "I am all on thorns to begin. We
shall soon find it out. If it is there, it is almost certain to be at
the foot of the rocks, though, of course, it is possible that the boat
sank before striking them. At any rate, I feel sure she went down
somewhere within the area that can be seen through that hole. It won't
take many days' diving to search every yard of the bottom."

They hastily descended the ladder, and, divesting themselves of their
clothes, swam out through the opening. Dias climbed up on the rocks,
the others swam round by the ends of the barrier. The water was so warm
that they would be able to remain in it for any time without
inconvenience.

"We need not begin here, Bertie; we are outside the line of sight. From
that hole I could not see the end of these rocks. We will start at the
middle, and work in opposite directions."

On arriving off the centre of the wall both dived. The depth was about
twelve feet, and as the water was perfectly clear, Harry could see four
or five feet round him. He was obliged to swim carefully, for the
bottom was covered with rocks, for the most part rounded by the action
of the sea. For an hour he continued his search, by which time he had
reached nearly the end of the line of rocks. Then he landed on a ledge
of rock and sat down, calling to Bertie to join him.

"We will rest for a quarter of an hour," he said, "and then begin
again. This time we will keep twenty or thirty feet farther out; it is
more likely to be there than close in. If the boat struck, the next
wave would sweep over her, and she would probably go down stern first,
and her cargo would fall out that way."

After their rest they started again, swam out a few strokes, and then
dived. Harry had gone down five or six times, when, on his coming to
the surface, he heard a shout, and saw Bertie swimming towards him.

"I have found them, Harry! There are a number of ingots, but they were
so heavy that I could not bring one of them to the surface."

As Harry reached him the lad turned round and swam back. "There they
are, just opposite that cleft in the rock! I looked directly I came up
so as to know the exact spot."

Harry trod water for half a minute, then took a long breath and dived.
