from what I know of the man, I don't think he will," and the old
gentleman's face, despite his extreme care, began to look troubled at
once.

"Oh! maybe he will," cried Polly warmly. "Grandpapa, I shouldn't wonder
at all--he must!" she added positively.

"I don't know, Polly," he said, in a worried way. "I think it's very
doubtful; indeed, from what I know of business now, I don't believe at
all that he will. But then, we can try."

"Oh! we can try," echoed Polly hopefully, and feeling as if, since God
was good, he would let Jasper back into his chosen life-work.

"Well, we'll start early to-morrow morning on our little trip, Polly,"
said the old gentleman, catching her infectious spirit, and giving the
old horse a fillip with the whip. "Meantime, not a word, my dear, of our
little plan!"

So Polly promised the deepest secrecy, and that no one should even have
a hint from her looks, of what Grandpapa and she were to do.

And the next morning, although everybody was nearly devoured by
curiosity, no one dared to ask questions; so old Mr. King and Polly,
with two well-filled portmanteaus, departed for a journey of apparently
a few days; and Polly didn't dare to trust herself alone with Jasper,
but ran a race with him around all the angles of the old farmhouse,
always cleverly disappearing with a merry laugh when there was the least
chance of his overtaking her and cornering her for an explanation.

And Pickering Dodge, in his invalid chair drawn close to the window,
heard the merry preparations for the journey, and fretfully declared
"that people seem to be happy, with never a thought for a poor dog like
me," while old Mr. Loughead, who, despite Doctor Bryce's verdict, had
never seemed quite well enough in his own estimation for his departure
from the "Higby hospital," on the contrary brightened up, exclaiming,
"Now, that is something like--to hear Miss Polly laugh like that--bless
her!"

"Good-by, Pickering," said Polly, coming into his room, old Mr. King
close behind; "I am going away with Grandpapa for a day or two," and she
came up in her traveling hat and gown close to his chair.

"So I heard," said Pickering, lifting his pale face, and trying to seem
glad, for Polly's joy was bubbling over. But he made rather a poor show
of it.

"Good-by to you, my boy," said Mr. King, laying a soft palm over the
thin fingers on Pickering's knee. "Now see that you get up a little more
vigor by the time we are back. Goodness! all you want is a trifle more
backbone. Why, an old fellow like me would beat you there, I do believe.
I am surprised at you," cried the old gentleman, shaking his fingers at
Mr. Loughead, with whom he was on the best of terms, but never feeling
the necessity to weigh his words, "that you, being chief nurse, don't
set up with that boy and make him get on his feet quicker."

"So I could do," cried old Mr. Loughead, whose chief object in life
since Pickering had been pronounced out of danger, had been to browbeat
the trained nurse, and usurp the authority in Pickering's sick-room, "if
Mrs. Cabot would keep out, or take it into her head to return home. To
state it mildly," continued the old gentleman, not lowering his tone in
the least, "that lady doesn't seem to be gifted with the qualities of a
nurse. Providence never intended that she should be one, in my opinion."

"Don't tell him to bully me worse than he does," cried Pickering. "He
shows a frightful hand when he wants his own way."

"That's it," cried old Mr. King delightedly; "only just keep it up.
You'll get well fast, as long as you can fight. Come on, Polly, my girl,
or we shall be late for the train."

The evening before, Jack Loughead ran up the steps to Miss Salisbury's
"Select School for Young Ladies," and pulled the bell hastily.

Amy ran down as quickly to the little room where she was always allowed
to see her brother.

"Well, Amy, child," cried Jack, when they had gone through with the
preliminaries always religiously observed on his visits: how she had
progressed in her music under the new teacher Miss Pepper had
recommended during her enforced absence, and how far she had pleased
Miss Salisbury, and all the other things an elder brother who had come
to his conscience rather late, would be apt to look into. "And so you
really think you are getting on in your practice?"

"O, yes, Jack!" cried Amy confidently. "Come and see; I've a new
Beethoven for you," and she laid hold of his arm with eager fingers.
"Now, you'll be immensely surprised, Jack--immensely."

"No doubt, no doubt," answered Jack hastily, and not offering to get up
from the sofa, "but you needn't play it now."

"Why, Jack," cried Amy, no little offended, "what's the matter? You've
asked me regularly to play you my pieces, and now to-night when I offer
to, you won't have any of it," and she began to pout.

"That's shabby in me," declared Jack, with remorse; and getting off the
sofa, to his feet, he dutifully spread the music on the rack, and paid
his little sister such attention, that she was soon smilingly launched
into the new piece, and lost to everything else but her own melody.

"That's fine!" pronounced Jack, as Amy declared herself through, and
whirled around on the music-stool for his applause. But his heart wasn't
in it, and Amy's blue eyes soon found it out.

"You're not a bit like yourself to-night, Brother Jack," she cried, with
another pout and staring at him.

"You're right; I'm not, Amy," declared Jack. "Come over to the sofa, and
I'll tell you about it."

So the two turned their backs on the piano; and pretty soon, Amy, her
hand in her brother's big brown palm, was nestled up against him, and
hearing a confidence that made her small soul swell with delight.

"Amy," said Jack, putting his arm closer around her, "when Miss Pepper
had the courage to tell me of my duty to you, I made up my mind that you
should never want for anything that my hand could supply."

"And I never have," cried little Amy, poking her head up from its nest
to look at him. "All the girls say you are just splendid to me; that
they never saw such a brother; and I don't believe they ever did, Jack,"
she added proudly.

"So now, what I am about to do," said Jack, speaking with great effort,
"isn't to bring anything but the greatest happiness to you, Amy, as well
as to me. If only I can secure it!" he added under his breath.

"What are you going to do, Jack?" demanded Amy, springing away from him
to stare into his bronzed face. "Oh! I know; you are going to Europe
again, and will take me this time--oh! goody, goody!" She screamed like
a child, clapping her hands gaily.

"Hush, Amy," cried Jack, trying to speak lightly, "or Miss Salisbury
will come in, and send me off, saying I spoil your manners. There, come
back here to me; I can talk better then," and he drew her to his side
again. "No, it is something much more beautiful than any trip to Europe
would be."

"It can't be. Jack," cried Amy positively, and burrowing her sunny head
into his waistcoat.

[Illustration: AMY.]

"Listen--and don't interrupt again," said her big brother. "Amy--how can
I tell it? Amy, if Miss Pepper will--will marry me, I will bless God all
my life!"

This time Amy sprang to the middle of the floor of Miss Salisbury's
small reception-room. "Marry you, Brother Jack!" she screamed. "Oh! how
perfectly elegant! It's too lovely for anything--oh! my darling Miss
Pepper," and so on, till Jack couldn't make her hear a word.

"Amy--Amy," at last he said, getting up to her, to lay an imperative
hand on her arm, "what would Miss Pepper say--don't get so excitable,
child--to see you now? Do hush!"

"I know it," said Amy, stopping instantly, and creeping humbly back to
the sofa; "Miss Pepper was always telling me how to stop screaming at
everything I liked; and not to cry at things I didn't like," she
confessed frankly.

"Well, then, if you love her," said Jack, going back to sit down by her
again, "you will try to do what she says. And you do love her, I am
quite sure, Amy."

"I love her so," declared Amy, "that I would do any and everything she
ever asked me to, Brother Jack."

"I thought so," said Jack. "Well, now, Amy, I must tell you that I went
to see Mrs. Fisher to-day, to ask her if I may speak to Miss Pepper. And
she gives me full permission; and so I shall go to Brierly to-morrow,
and try my fate."

"It won't be any trying at all," cried Amy superbly, and stretching her
neck to look up with immense pride at her tall brother. "She can't help
loving you, Jack! Oh! I am so happy."

Jack Loughead's dark face had a grave look on it as he glanced down at
her. "I hope so," he said simply.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THAT SETTLES MANY THINGS.


"It's perfectly dreadful," cried Alexia Rhys, wrinkling her brows, "to
try to get up anything with Polly away. If we only had Joel to help us,
that would be something"--

"Well, it's got to be done," said Clem Forsythe, in a matter-of-fact
way.

"Of course it has," cried Alexia gustily. "Dear me," in a tone of
horror, "did you suppose that we'd let Polly Pepper go on year after
year getting up perfectly elegant things for us, and then we not
celebrate for her, when she comes home, and with a broken arm, too? The
idea, Clem!"

"Well, then I think we much better set to work to think up something,"
observed Clem wisely, "if we are going to do anything."

"We can't think of a single thing--not one," bemoaned Alexia; "it will
be a perfectly horrid fright, whatever we get up. Oh, dear! what shall
we do, girls?"

"Alexia, you are enough to drive anybody wild," cried Sally Moore; "it's
bad enough to know there isn't an idea in all our heads put together,
without having you tell us of it every minute. Cathie Harrison, why
don't you say something, instead of staring that wall out of
countenance?"

"Because I haven't anything to say," replied Cathie, laughing grimly and
leaning back in her chair resignedly. "Oh, dear! I think just as Alexia
does, it will be utterly horrid whatever we do."

"Don't you be a wet blanket," cried two or three of the girls, "if
Alexia is. Oh, dear! Miss Chatterton, you are the only one of sense in
this company. Now do give us an idea," added one.

"I don't know in the least how to help," said Charlotte Chatterton
slowly, and leaning her elbows on her knees she rested her head in her
hands. "I never got up a play or tableau, nor anything of the kind in my
life; and we never celebrated anything either; there was never anything
to celebrate--but I should think perhaps it would be better not to try
to do great things."

"Why, Miss Chatterton," exclaimed Alexia Rhys, in great disapproval, and
starting forward in the pretty pink-trimmed basket chair. "I'm perfectly
surprised at you--nothing can be too good for Polly Pepper. We must get
up something perfectly magnificent, or else I shall die!" she cried
tragically.

"Nothing can be too good for Polly," repeated Charlotte, taking her head
out of her hands and looking at Alexia, "but isn't it better not to try
to be too grand, and have something simple, because, whatever we do,
Polly must always have had things so much nicer."

"In other words, it's better to hit what you aim at, than to shoot at
the clouds and bring down nothing," said Clem sententiously.

"Yes--yes, I think so," cried Cathie, clapping her hands; "it's awfully
vulgar to try to cut a dash--that is, if you can't do it," she added
quickly.

[Illustration: "NOTHING CAN BE TOO GOOD FOR POLLY PEPPER!" CRIED ALEXIA,
STARTING FORWARD.]

"Don't say 'awfully,'" corrected Alexia, readjusting herself in her
pink-and-white chair. "Well, I suppose you are right, Miss Chatterton;
you're always right; being, as I said, a person of sense."

Charlotte gave a short laugh, but with a little bitter edge to it. Why
would the girls who now seemed to be so glad to have her in the center
of all their plans, persist in calling her Miss Chatterton? It gave her
a chill every time, and she fairly hated the name.

"And now since we are going to follow your advice," went on Alexia, "be
so good as to tell us a little bit more. Now what shall we do in the way
of a simple, appropriate fandango--a perfect idyl of a thing, you know?"

"Well," said Charlotte quietly, "you know in the olden time at
Christmas"--

"But this isn't Christmas," cried Alexia, interrupting with an uneasy
gesture.

"Do be still," cried the other girls, pulling at her, "and let Miss
Chatterton finish"--

"At Christmas ages ago, when special honor was done to entertain the
King wherever he was lodged," went on Charlotte, "there was a Lord of
Misrule, who gathered together a company of ladies and gentlemen, who
rummaged the old castles for grotesque costumes and furbelows. And then
masked, they all came in and marched before the King, and danced,
oh--everything--we might have Minuets and Highland Flings, and all the
rest. And they did everything the Lord of Misrule directed, and"--

"Charlotte Chatterton, you are a jewel!" cried Alexia, tumbling out of
her chair, and flying at her, which example was followed by all the
other girls.

"Thank you," cried Charlotte, with glistening eyes.

"Thank you? I guess we do thank you," cried Sally Moore heartily, "for
getting us out of this scrape."

"Oh! I don't mean that," said Charlotte indifferently, "I mean because
you called me by my first name, the same as you girls always talk to
each other."

There was a little pause. "Oh! we didn't know as you'd like it," broke
in Alexia hastily, "you are so tall, and you never seem in a hurry, nor
as if you cared a straw about being like a girl, and we didn't dare. But
now, oh, Charlotte--Charlotte!" And she gave her a hug that well repaid
Charlotte for all the past.

"That's a regular bear-hug," she cried at last, releasing her and taking
a long breath, "and equal to a few dozen common every-day ones."

"If Charlotte can breathe after that," said Clem, turning on Charlotte a
pair of glowing eyes, "she'll do well. We are just as glad to call you
Charlotte, aren't we, girls," whirling around on the group, "as Alexia,
for all her bear-hug."

"Yes--yes," cried the whole bevy.

"Well, now, girls," said Alexia, running over to give Clem a small
shake, "let's to business. There isn't any time to waste. Charlotte
Chatterton, will you tell us the rest of it, and who will be the Lord of
Misrule?--dear me, if we only had Joel here!"

"I think Doctor Fisher would be the Lord of Misrule," said Charlotte;
"he said he'd do anything we wanted of him, to help out."

The girls one and all gave a small howl, and clapped their hands,
crying, "Capital--capital!"

"Let's go and ask him now!" cried Alexia, who wasn't anything if not
energetic; and running to her closet, she picked off her hat from the
shelf and tossed it on her head. "Oh, how slow you are, girls--do
hurry!" as the others flew to the bed where their different head-gear
had been thrown.

"But it's his office hours," said Charlotte, hating in her new-found
happiness at being one with the girls, to put a damper on their plan.

"Bother! supposing it is," exclaimed Alexia, in front of her
pink-and-white draped mirror, while she ran the long hat pins through
her fluffy hair, "it's as important to take care of us girls, as if we
were a lot of patients. We shall be, if we don't get this fixed. Come
on, girls!" she seized a lace scarf from some mysterious corner, and
pranced to the door, shaking her gloves at the group.

"I don't think we ought to go, now," said Charlotte distinctly, not
offering to join the merry scramble for the wearing apparel on the bed.

"Charlotte Chatterton!" cried Alexia, thoroughly annoyed, "aren't you
ashamed of yourself? Don't listen to her, girls, but come on," and she
ran out to the head of the stairs.

The other girls all stopped short.

"I don't think Polly would like it, and it isn't right," said Charlotte,
hating to preach, but standing her ground. At this Alexia, out in the
hall, came running back.

"Oh! dear--dear, it's perfectly dreadful to be with such good people!
There, now, Charlotte, don't look like that," rushing up to the tall
girl and standing on tiptoe to drop a kiss on the sallow cheek--"we
won't go; we'll stay at home and be martyrs," and she began to tear off
her hat with a tragic air.

"Why not go to Madam Dyce's and ask her to loan us some of her old
brocades and bonnets?" proposed Cathie Harrison suddenly. "She's got a
perfect lot of horrible antiques."

"The very thing!" cried Alexia, the others coming in as chorus.
