spread abroad only too much, and one day Placida was surprised by
a visit from the Fairy Queen, who was attended by a very grave and
severe-looking fairy.

The queen began at once: 'I have been much surprised by your behaviour
to Mutinosa; she had insulted our whole race, and deserved punishment.
You might forgive your own wrongs if you chose, but not those of others.
You treated her very gently whilst she was with you, and I come now to
avenge our wrongs on her daughter. You have ensured her being lovely and
clever, and not subject to change of form, but I shall place her in an
enchanted prison, which she shall never leave till she finds herself
in the arms of a lover whom she herself loves. It will be my care to
prevent anything of the kind happening.'

The enchanted prison was a large high tower in the midst of the sea,
built of shells of all shapes and colours. The lower floor was like a
great bathroom, where the water was let in or off at will. The first
floor contained the princess's apartments, beautifully furnished. On
the second was a library, a large wardrobe-room filled with beautiful
clothes and every kind of linen, a music-room, a pantry with bins
full of the best wines, and a store-room with all manner of preserves,
bonbons, pastry and cakes, all of which remained as fresh as if just out
of the oven.

The top of the tower was laid out like a garden, with beds of the
loveliest flowers, fine fruit trees, and shady arbours and shrubs, where
many birds sang amongst the branches.

The fairies escorted Graziella and her governess, Bonnetta, to the
tower, and then mounted a dolphin which was waiting for them. At a
little distance from the tower the queen waved her wand and summoned two
thousand great fierce sharks, whom she ordered to keep close guard, and
not to let a soul enter the tower.

The good governess took such pains with Graziella's education that when
she was nearly grown up she was not only most accomplished, but a very
sweet, good girl.

One day, as the princess was standing on a balcony, she saw the most
extraordinary figure rise out of the sea. She quickly called Bonnetta to
ask her what it could be. It looked like some kind of man, with a bluish
face and long sea-green hair. He was swimming towards the tower, but the
sharks took no notice of him.

'It must be a merman,' said Bonnetta.

'A man, do you say?' cried Graziella; 'let us hurry down to the door and
see him nearer.'

When they stood in the doorway the merman stopped to look at the
princess and made many signs of admiration. His voice was very hoarse
and husky, but when he found that he was not understood he took to
signs. He carried a little basket made of osiers and filled with rare
shells, which he presented to the princess.

She took it with signs of thanks; but as it was getting dusk she
retired, and the merman plunged back into the sea.

When they were alone, Graziella said to her governess: 'What a
dreadful-looking creature that was! Why do those odious sharks let him
come near the tower? I suppose all men are not like him?'

'No, indeed,' replied Bonnetta. 'I suppose the sharks look on him as a
sort of relation, and so did not attack him.'

A few days later the two ladies heard a strange sort of music, and
looking out of the window, there was the merman, his head crowned with
water plants, and blowing a great sea-shell with all his might.

They went down to the tower door, and Graziella politely accepted some
coral and other marine curiosities he had brought her. After this he
used to come every evening, and blow his shell, or dive and play antics
under the princess's window. She contented herself with bowing to him
from the balcony, but she would not go down to the door in spite of all
his signs.

Some days later he came with a person of his own kind, but of another
sex. Her hair was dressed with great taste, and she had a lovely voice.
This new arrival induced the ladies to go down to the door. They were
surprised to find that, after trying various languages, she at last
spoke to them in their own, and paid Graziella a very pretty compliment
on her beauty.

The mermaid noticed that the lower floor was full of water. 'Why,' cried
she, 'that is just the place for us, for we can't live quite out of
water.' So saying, she and her brother swam in and took up a position in
the bathroom, the princess and her governess seating themselves on the
steps which ran round the room.

'No doubt, madam,' said the mermaid, 'you have given up living on land
so as to escape from crowds of lovers; but I fear that even here you
cannot avoid them, for my brother is already dying of love for you, and
I am sure that once you are seen in our city he will have many rivals.'

She then went on to explain how grieved her brother was not to be able
to make himself understood, adding: 'I interpret for him, having been
taught several languages by a fairy.'

'Oh, then, you have fairies, too?' asked Graziella, with a sigh.

'Yes, we have,' replied the mermaid; 'but if I am not mistaken you have
suffered from the fairies on earth.'

The princess, on this, told her entire history to the mermaid, who
assured her how sorry she felt for her, but begged her not to lose
courage; adding, as she took her leave: Perhaps, some day, you may find
a way out of your difficulties.'

The princess was delighted with this visit and with the hopes the
mermaid held out. It was something to meet someone fresh to talk to.

'We will make acquaintance with several of these people,' she said to
her governess, 'and I dare say they are not all as hideous as the first
one we saw. Anyhow, we shan't be so dreadfully lonely.'

'Dear me,' said Bonnetta, 'how hopeful young people are to be sure! As
for me I feel afraid of these folk. But what do you think of the lover
you have captivated?'

'Oh, I could never love him,' cried the princess; 'I can't bear him.
But, perhaps, as his sister says they are related to the fairy Marina,
they may be of some use to us.'

The mermaid often returned, and each time she talked of her brother's
love, and each time Graziella talked of her longing to escape from her
prison, till at length the mermaid promised to bring the fairy Marina to
see her, in hopes she might suggest something.

Next day the fairy came with the mermaid, and the princess received her
with delight. After a little talk she begged Graziella to show her the
inside of the tower and let her see the garden on the top, for with the
help of crutches she could manage to move about, and being a fairy could
live out of water for a long time, provided she wetted her forehead now
and then.

Graziella gladly consented, and Bonnetta stayed below with the mermaid.

When they were in the garden the fairy said: 'Let us lose no time, but
tell me how I can be of use to you.' Graziella then told all her story
and Marina replied: 'My dear princess, I can do nothing for you as
regards dry land, for my power does not reach beyond my own element. I
can only say that if you will honour my cousin by accepting his hand,
you could then come and live amongst us. I could teach you in a moment
to swim and dive with the best of us. I can harden your skin without
spoiling its colour. My cousin is one of the best matches in the sea,
and I will bestow so many gifts on him that you will be quite happy.'

The fairy talked so well and so long that the princess was rather
impressed, and promised to think the matter over.

Just as they were going to leave the garden they saw a ship sailing
nearer the tower than any other had done before. On the deck lay a young
man under a splendid awning, gazing at the tower through a spy-glass;
but before they could see anything clearly the ship moved away, and the
two ladies parted, the fairy promising to return shortly.

As soon as she was gone Graziella told her governess what she had said.
Bonnetta was not at all pleased at the turn matters were taking, for she
did not fancy being turned into a mermaid in her old age. She thought
the matter well over, and this was what she did. She was a very clever
artist, and next morning she began to paint a picture of a handsome
young man, with beautiful curly hair, a fine complexion, and lovely blue
eyes. When it was finished she showed it to Graziella, hoping it would
show her the difference there was between a fine young man and her
marine suitor.

The princess was much struck by the picture, and asked anxiously whether
there could be any man so good looking in the world. Bonnetta assured
her that there were plenty of them; indeed, many far handsomer.

'I can hardly believe that,' cried the princess; 'but, alas! If there
are, I don't suppose I shall ever see them or they me, so what is the
use? Oh, dear, how unhappy I am!'

She spent the rest of the day gazing at the picture, which certainly had
the effect of spoiling all the merman's hopes or prospects.

After some days, the fairy Marina came back to hear what was decided;
but Graziella hardly paid any attention to her, and showed such dislike
to the idea of the proposed marriage that the fairy went off in a
regular huff.

Without knowing it, the princess had made another conquest. On board the
ship which had sailed so near was the handsomest prince in the world. He
had heard of the enchanted tower, and determined to get as near it as he
could. He had strong glasses on board, and whilst looking through them
he saw the princess quite clearly, and fell desperately in love with her
at once. He wanted to steer straight for the tower and to row off to it
in a small boat, but his entire crew fell at his feet and begged him not
to run such a risk. The captain, too, urged him not to attempt it. 'You
will only lead us all to certain death,' he said. 'Pray anchor nearer
land, and I will then seek a kind fairy I know, who has always been most
obliging to me, and who will, I am sure, try to help your Highness.'

The prince rather unwillingly listened to reason. He landed at the
nearest point, and sent off the captain in all haste to beg the fairy's
advice and help. Meantime he had a tent pitched on the shore, and spent
all his time gazing at the tower and looking for the princess through
his spyglass.

After a few days the captain came back, bringing the fairy with him. The
prince was delighted to see her, and paid her great attention. 'I have
heard about this matter,' she said; 'and, to lose no time, I am going to
send off a trusty pigeon to test the enchantment. If there is any weak
spot he is sure to find it out and get in. I shall bid him bring a
flower back as a sign of success; and if he does so I quite hope to get
you in too.'

'But,' asked the prince, 'could I not send a line by the pigeon to tell
the princess of my love?'

'Certainly,' replied the fairy, 'it would be a very good plan.'

So the prince wrote as follows:---

 'Lovely Princess,---I adore you, and beg you to accept my heart,
and to believe there is nothing I will not do to end your
misfortunes.---BLONDEL.

This note was tied round the pigeon's neck, and he flew off with it at
once. He flew fast till he got near the tower, when a fierce wind blew
so hard against him that he could not get on. But he was not to be
beaten, but flew carefully round the top of the tower till he came to
one spot which, by some mistake, had not been enchanted like the rest.
He quickly slipped into the arbour and waited for the princess.

Before long Graziella appeared alone, and the pigeon at once fluttered
to meet her, and seemed so tame that she stopped to caress the pretty
creature. As she did so she saw it had a pink ribbon round its neck, and
tied to the ribbon was a letter. She read it over several times and then
wrote this answer:---

'You say you love me; but I cannot promise to love you without seeing
you. Send me your portrait by this faithful messenger. If I return it to
you, you must give up hope; but if I keep it you will know that to help
me will be to help yourself.---GRAZIELA.

Before flying back the pigeon remembered about the flower, so, seeing
one in the princess's dress, he stole it and flew away.

The prince was wild with joy at the pigeon's return with the note. After
an hour's rest the trusty little bird was sent back again, carrying a
miniature of the prince, which by good luck he had with him.

On reaching the tower the pigeon found the princess in the garden. She
hastened to untie the ribbon, and on opening the miniature case what was
her surprise and delight to find it very like the picture her governess
had painted for her. She hastened to send the pigeon back, and you can
fancy the prince's joy when he found she had kept his portrait.

'Now,' said the fairy, 'let us lose no more time. I can only make you
happy by changing you into a bird, but I will take care to give you back
your proper shape at the right time.'

The prince was eager to start, so the fairy, touching him with her wand,
turned him into the loveliest humming-bird you ever saw, at the same
time letting him keep the power of speech. The pigeon was told to show
him the way.

Graziella was much surprised to see a perfectly strange bird, and still
more so when it flew to her saying, 'Good-morning, sweet princess.'

She was delighted with the pretty creature, and let him perch on her
finger, when he said, 'Kiss, kiss, little birdie,' which she gladly did,
petting and stroking him at the same time.

After a time the princess, who had been up very early, grew tired, and
as the sun was hot she went to lie down on a mossy bank in the shade
of the arbour. She held the pretty bird near her breast, and was just
falling asleep, when the fairy contrived to restore the prince to his
own shape, so that as Graziella opened her eyes she found herself in the
arms of a lover whom she loved in return!

At the same moment her enchantment came to an end. The tower began to
rock and to split. Bonnetta hurried up to the top so that she might at
least perish with her dear princess. Just as she reached the garden, the
kind fairy who had helped the prince arrived with the fairy Placida, in
a car of Venetian glass drawn by six eagles.

'Come away quickly,' they cried, 'the tower is about to sink!' The
prince, princess, and Bonnetta lost no time in stepping into the car,
which rose in the air just as, with a terrible crash, the tower sank
into the depths of the sea, for the fairy Marina and the mermen had
destroyed its foundations to avenge themselves on Graziella. Luckily
their wicked plans were defeated, and the good fairies took their way to
the kingdom of Graziella's parents.

They found that Queen Mutinosa had died some years ago, but her kind
husband lived on peaceably, ruling his country well and happily. He
received his daughter with great delight, and there were universal
rejoicings at the return of the lovely princess.

The wedding took place the very next day, and, for many days after,
balls, dinners, tournaments, concerts and all sorts of amusements went
on all day and all night.

All the fairies were carefully invited, and they came in great state,
and promised the young couple their protection and all sorts of good
gifts. Prince Blondel and Princess Graziella lived to a good old age,
beloved by every one, and loving each other more and more as time went
on.




The Story Of Dschemil and Dschemila


There was once a man whose name was Dschemil, and he had a cousin who
was called Dschemila. They had been betrothed by their parents when they
were children, and now Dschemil thought that the time had come for them
to be married, and he went two or three days' journey, to the nearest
big town, to buy furniture for the new house.

While he was away, Dschemila and her friends set off to the neighbouring
woods to pick up sticks, and as she gathered them she found an iron
mortar lying on the ground. She placed it on her bundle of sticks, but
the mortar would not stay still, and whenever she raised the bundle to
put it on her shoulders it slipped off sideways. At length she saw the
only way to carry the mortar was to tie it in the very middle of
her bundle, and had just unfastened her sticks, when she heard her
companions' voices.

'Dschemila, what are you doing? it is almost dark, and if you mean to
come with us you must be quick!'

But Dschemila only replied, 'You had better go back without me, for I am
not going to leave my mortar behind, if I stay here till midnight.'

'Do as you like,' said the girls, and started on their walk home.

The night soon fell, and at the last ray of light the mortar suddenly
became an ogre, who threw Dschemila on his back, and carried her off
into a desert place, distant a whole month's journey from her native
town. Here he shut her into a castle, and told her not to fear, as her
life was safe. Then he went back to his wife, leaving Dschemila weeping
over the fate that she had brought upon herself.

Meanwhile the other girls had reached home, and Dschemila's mother came
out to look for her daughter.

'What have you done with her?' she asked anxiously.

'We had to leave her in the wood,' they replied, 'for she had picked up
an iron mortar, and could not manage to carry it.'

So the old woman set off at once for the forest, calling to her daughter
as she hurried along.

'Do go home,' cried the townspeople, as they heard her; 'we will go
and look for your daughter; you are only a woman, and it is a task that
needs strong men.'

But she answered, 'Yes, go; but I will go with you! Perhaps it will be
only her corpse that we shall find after all. She has most likely been
stung by asps, or eaten by wild beasts.'

The men, seeing her heart was bent on it, said no more, but told one of
the girls she must come with them, and show them the place where they
had left Dschemila. They found the bundle of wood lying where she had
dropped it, but the maiden was nowhere to be seen.

'Dschemila! Dschemila!' cried they; but nobody answered.

'If we make a fire, perhaps she will see it,' said one of the men. And
they lit a fire, and then went, one this way, and one that, through the
forest, to look for her, whispering to each other that if she had been
killed by a lion they would be sure to find some trace of it; or if she
had fallen asleep, the sound of their voices would wake her; or if a
snake had bitten her, they would at least come on her corpse.
