
The dusk deepened, and Pheles, crouched beside a dim lantern, steered by
the shilling compass from the Crystal Palace.

No one ever knew how the other ship sailed, but suddenly, in the deep
night, the look-out man at the stern cried out in a terrible voice--

'She is close upon us!'

'And we,' said Pheles, 'are close to the harbour.' He was silent a
moment, then suddenly he altered the ship's course, and then he stood up
and spoke.

'Good friends and gentlemen,' he said, 'who are bound with me in this
brave venture by our King's command, the false, foreign ship is close
on our heels. If we land, they land, and only the gods know whether they
might not beat us in fight, and themselves survive to carry back the
tale of Tyre's secret island to enrich their own miserable land. Shall
this be?'

'Never!' cried the half-dozen men near him. The slaves were rowing hard
below and could not hear his words.

The Egyptian leaped upon him; suddenly, fiercely, as a wild beast leaps.
'Give me back my Amulet,' he cried, and caught at the charm. The chain
that held it snapped, and it lay in the Priest's hand.

Pheles laughed, standing balanced to the leap of the ship that answered
the oarstroke.

'This is no time for charms and mummeries,' he said. 'We've lived like
men, and we'll die like gentlemen for the honour and glory of Tyre, our
splendid city. "Tyre, Tyre for ever! It's Tyre that rules the waves." I
steer her straight for the Dragon rocks, and we go down for our city,
as brave men should. The creeping cowards who follow shall go down as
slaves--and slaves they shall be to us--when we live again. Tyre, Tyre
for ever!'

A great shout went up, and the slaves below joined in it.

'Quick, the Amulet,' cried Anthea, and held it up. Rekh-mara held up the
one he had snatched from Pheles. The word was spoken, and the two great
arches grew on the plunging ship in the shrieking wind under the dark
sky. From each Amulet a great and beautiful green light streamed and
shone far out over the waves. It illuminated, too, the black faces and
jagged teeth of the great rocks that lay not two ships' lengths from the
boat's peaked nose.

'Tyre, Tyre for ever! It's Tyre that rules the waves!' the voices of the
doomed rose in a triumphant shout. The children scrambled through the
arch, and stood trembling and blinking in the Fitzroy Street parlour,
and in their ears still sounded the whistle of the wind, and the rattle
of the oars, the crash of the ships bow on the rocks, and the last shout
of the brave gentlemen-adventurers who went to their deaths singing, for
the sake of the city they loved.


'And so we've lost the other half of the Amulet again,' said Anthea,
when they had told the Psammead all about it.

'Nonsense, pooh!' said the Psammead. 'That wasn't the other half. It was
the same half that you've got--the one that wasn't crushed and lost.'

'But how could it be the same?' said Anthea gently.

'Well, not exactly, of course. The one you've got is a good many years
older, but at any rate it's not the other one. What did you say when you
wished?'

'I forget,' said Jane.

'I don't,' said the Psammead. 'You said, "Take us where YOU are"--and it
did, so you see it was the same half.'

'I see,' said Anthea.

'But you mark my words,' the Psammead went on, 'you'll have trouble with
that Priest yet.'

'Why, he was quite friendly,' said Anthea.

'All the same you'd better beware of the Reverend Rekh-mara.'

'Oh, I'm sick of the Amulet,' said Cyril, 'we shall never get it.'

'Oh yes we shall,' said Robert. 'Don't you remember December 3rd?'

'Jinks!' said Cyril, 'I'd forgotten that.'

'I don't believe it,' said Jane, 'and I don't feel at all well.'

'If I were you,' said the Psammead, 'I should not go out into the Past
again till that date. You'll find it safer not to go where you're likely
to meet that Egyptian any more just at present.'

'Of course we'll do as you say,' said Anthea soothingly, 'though there's
something about his face that I really do like.'

'Still, you don't want to run after him, I suppose,' snapped the
Psammead. 'You wait till the 3rd, and then see what happens.'

Cyril and Jane were feeling far from well, Anthea was always obliging,
so Robert was overruled. And they promised. And none of them, not even
the Psammead, at all foresaw, as you no doubt do quite plainly, exactly
what it was that WOULD happen on that memorable date.



CHAPTER 14. THE HEART'S DESIRE

If I only had time I could tell you lots of things. For instance, how,
in spite of the advice of the Psammead, the four children did, one very
wet day, go through their Amulet Arch into the golden desert, and there
find the great Temple of Baalbec and meet with the Phoenix whom they
never thought to see again. And how the Phoenix did not remember them at
all until it went into a sort of prophetic trance--if that can be called
remembering. But, alas! I HAVEN'T time, so I must leave all that out
though it was a wonderfully thrilling adventure. I must leave out, too,
all about the visit of the children to the Hippodrome with the Psammead
in its travelling bag, and about how the wishes of the people round
about them were granted so suddenly and surprisingly that at last the
Psammead had to be taken hurriedly home by Anthea, who consequently
missed half the performance. Then there was the time when, Nurse having
gone to tea with a friend out Ivalunk way, they were playing 'devil in
the dark'--and in the midst of that most creepy pastime the postman's
knock frightened Jane nearly out of her life. She took in the letters,
however, and put them in the back of the hat-stand drawer, so that they
should be safe. And safe they were, for she never thought of them again
for weeks and weeks.

One really good thing happened when they took the Psammead to a
magic-lantern show and lecture at the boys' school at Camden Town. The
lecture was all about our soldiers in South Africa. And the lecturer
ended up by saying, 'And I hope every boy in this room has in his heart
the seeds of courage and heroism and self-sacrifice, and I wish that
every one of you may grow up to be noble and brave and unselfish, worthy
citizens of this great Empire for whom our soldiers have freely given
their lives.'

And, of course, this came true--which was a distinct score for Camden
Town.

As Anthea said, it was unlucky that the lecturer said boys, because now
she and Jane would have to be noble and unselfish, if at all, without
any outside help. But Jane said, 'I daresay we are already because of
our beautiful natures. It's only boys that have to be made brave by
magic'--which nearly led to a first-class row.

And I daresay you would like to know all about the affair of the fishing
rod, and the fish-hooks, and the cook next door--which was amusing from
some points of view, though not perhaps the cook's--but there really is
no time even for that.

The only thing that there's time to tell about is the Adventure of
Maskelyne and Cooke's, and the Unexpected Apparition--which is also the
beginning of the end.

It was Nurse who broke into the gloomy music of the autumn rain on the
window panes by suggesting a visit to the Egyptian Hall, England's Home
of Mystery. Though they had good, but private reasons to know that their
own particular personal mystery was of a very different brand, the
four all brightened at the idea. All children, as well as a good many
grown-ups, love conjuring.

'It's in Piccadilly,' said old Nurse, carefully counting out the proper
number of shillings into Cyril's hand, 'not so very far down on the left
from the Circus. There's big pillars outside, something like Carter's
seed place in Holborn, as used to be Day and Martin's blacking when I
was a gell. And something like Euston Station, only not so big.'

'Yes, I know,' said everybody.

So they started.

But though they walked along the left-hand side of Piccadilly they saw
no pillared building that was at all like Carter's seed warehouse or
Euston Station or England's Home of Mystery as they remembered it.

At last they stopped a hurried lady, and asked her the way to Maskelyne
and Cooke's.

'I don't know, I'm sure,' she said, pushing past them. 'I always shop
at the Stores.' Which just shows, as Jane said, how ignorant grown-up
people are.

It was a policeman who at last explained to them that England's
Mysteries are now appropriately enough enacted at St George's Hall.

So they tramped to Langham Place, and missed the first two items in
the programme. But they were in time for the most wonderful magic
appearances and disappearances, which they could hardly believe--even
with all their knowledge of a larger magic--was not really magic after
all.

'If only the Babylonians could have seen THIS conjuring,' whispered
Cyril. 'It takes the shine out of their old conjurer, doesn't it?'

'Hush!' said Anthea and several other members of the audience.

Now there was a vacant seat next to Robert. And it was when all eyes
were fixed on the stage where Mr Devant was pouring out glasses of all
sorts of different things to drink, out of one kettle with one spout,
and the audience were delightedly tasting them, that Robert felt someone
in that vacant seat. He did not feel someone sit down in it. It was just
that one moment there was no one sitting there, and the next moment,
suddenly, there was someone.

Robert turned. The someone who had suddenly filled that empty place was
Rekh-mara, the Priest of Amen!

Though the eyes of the audience were fixed on Mr David Devant, Mr David
Devant's eyes were fixed on the audience. And it happened that his eyes
were more particularly fixed on that empty chair. So that he saw quite
plainly the sudden appearance, from nowhere, of the Egyptian Priest.

'A jolly good trick,' he said to himself, 'and worked under my own eyes,
in my own hall. I'll find out how that's done.' He had never seen a
trick that he could not do himself if he tried.

By this time a good many eyes in the audience had turned on the
clean-shaven, curiously-dressed figure of the Egyptian Priest.

'Ladies and gentlemen,' said Mr Devant, rising to the occasion, 'this
is a trick I have never before performed. The empty seat, third from
the end, second row, gallery--you will now find occupied by an Ancient
Egyptian, warranted genuine.'

He little knew how true his words were.

And now all eyes were turned on the Priest and the children, and the
whole audience, after a moment's breathless surprise, shouted applause.
Only the lady on the other side of Rekh-mara drew back a little. She
KNEW no one had passed her, and, as she said later, over tea and cold
tongue, 'it was that sudden it made her flesh creep.'

Rekh-mara seemed very much annoyed at the notice he was exciting.

'Come out of this crowd,' he whispered to Robert. 'I must talk with you
apart.'

'Oh, no,' Jane whispered. 'I did so want to see the Mascot Moth, and the
Ventriloquist.'

'How did you get here?' was Robert's return whisper.

'How did you get to Egypt and to Tyre?' retorted Rekh-mara. 'Come, let
us leave this crowd.'

'There's no help for it, I suppose,' Robert shrugged angrily. But they
all got up.

'Confederates!' said a man in the row behind. 'Now they go round to the
back and take part in the next scene.'

'I wish we did,' said Robert.

'Confederate yourself!' said Cyril. And so they got away, the audience
applauding to the last.

In the vestibule of St George's Hall they disguised Rekh-mara as well as
they could, but even with Robert's hat and Cyril's Inverness cape he was
too striking a figure for foot-exercise in the London streets. It had to
be a cab, and it took the last, least money of all of them. They stopped
the cab a few doors from home, and then the girls went in and engaged
old Nurse's attention by an account of the conjuring and a fervent
entreaty for dripping-toast with their tea, leaving the front door open
so that while Nurse was talking to them the boys could creep quietly
in with Rekh-mara and smuggle him, unseen, up the stairs into their
bedroom.

When the girls came up they found the Egyptian Priest sitting on the
side of Cyril's bed, his hands on his knees, looking like a statue of a
king.

'Come on,' said Cyril impatiently. 'He won't begin till we're all here.
And shut the door, can't you?'

When the door was shut the Egyptian said--

'My interests and yours are one.'

'Very interesting,' said Cyril, 'and it'll be a jolly sight more
interesting if you keep following us about in a decent country with no
more clothes on than THAT!'

'Peace,' said the Priest. 'What is this country? and what is this time?'

'The country's England,' said Anthea, 'and the time's about 6,000 years
later than YOUR time.'

'The Amulet, then,' said the Priest, deeply thoughtful, 'gives the power
to move to and fro in time as well as in space?'

'That's about it,' said Cyril gruffly. 'Look here, it'll be tea-time
directly. What are we to do with you?'

'You have one-half of the Amulet, I the other,' said Rekh-mara. 'All
that is now needed is the pin to join them.'

'Don't you think it,' said Robert. 'The half you've got is the same half
as the one we've got.'

'But the same thing cannot be in the same place and the same time, and
yet be not one, but twain,' said the Priest. 'See, here is my half.' He
laid it on the Marcella counterpane. 'Where is yours?'

Jane watching the eyes of the others, unfastened the string of the
Amulet and laid it on the bed, but too far off for the Priest to seize
it, even if he had been so dishonourable. Cyril and Robert stood beside
