cross the hills and take shelter in the great forest beyond. A few of the
older men who were unfit to take part in a long day's fighting were to aid
the women in their work.

The arms of all the men were carefully inspected, and the weapons remaining
in the armoury served out to those worst provided. At one o'clock the force
marched off, Wulf riding at the head of the hundred housecarls, while the
tenants, a hundred and fifty strong, followed in good order. Each man
carried six days' provisions. They camped that night in a forest twenty
miles from Steyning, marched thirty miles the next day, and early the
following morning joined the great array that was gathering on the hills
south of London. To his great pleasure Wulf found that Beorn had arrived
the day before with his levy. They had not met since they had returned from
the North with Harold.

"So you have been up there again, Wulf, and fought at Fulford and Stamford
Bridge. It was very unlucky I was not in London when the army marched
north; but I received no summons, and heard nothing of it until the king
was well on his march. None of the thanes along the south coast were
summoned."

"So I heard, Beorn. I fancy the king thought that in case of a landing by
the Normans the men near the coast would all be wanted to help take the
women and cattle to places of security."

"No doubt that was the reason," Beorn said. "At any rate, I am sorry I
missed the fight at Stamford Bridge. The other seems to have been a bad
affair."

"Very bad; we suffered terribly. So much so, indeed, that the earls will
have a good excuse for not getting their levies together in time for the
battle with the Normans."

"They are false loons," Beorn said; "and brothers-in-law as they are of
his, it would have been well had the king after Stamford Bridge had their
heads smitten off for their traitorous surrender to the Norsemen."

"I have no doubt they will hold aloof now, Beorn, until they see how
matters go in the South, and if we are worsted they will hasten to make
their peace with William, and to swear to be his liegemen, just as they
swore to be liegemen to Harold Hardrada. But they will find out their
mistake in the end. William has promised to divide England among his needy
adventurers if he wins, and Edwin and Morcar will very speedily find that
they will not, in that case, be allowed to keep half the country as their
share."

It was a great host that was gathered ready for the march south. Gurth had
brought down the fighting men of East Anglia; the thanes of the West were
there with their tenants; the Bishop of Winchester, Harold's uncle, not
only brought the tenants of the church lands, but he himself with twelve of
his monks had put on armour under their monkish robes. The Abbot of
Peterborough headed a contingent from the Fen Country; the men of London
under the sheriff of the Mid Saxons were there, and prepared to die in
defence of the royal standard, which it was the special privilege of London
to guard. In the Abbey of Westminster, where Harold had received his
crown, and in every church of London, mass was celebrated day and night,
and was attended by crowds of troops and citizens.

Harold himself snatched a day from the cares of preparation to visit
Waltham, the abbey that he had founded, and in which he had taken so lively
an interest, and there earnestly prayed for victory, with the vow that did
he conquer in the strife he would regard himself as God's ransomed servant,
and would throughout his life specially devote himself to His service. A
day or two after Wulf's arrival in London a messenger came from William of
Normandy calling upon Harold to come down from his throne, and to become,
as he had sworn to be, the duke's man. Harold in reply sent back a full
answer to William's claims. He admitted that Edward had promised the crown
to William, but he said that according to the law of England a man might at
any time revoke his will, and this Edward had done, and had named him as
his successor. As to the oath he himself had sworn, he maintained that it
was an extorted oath, and therefore of no binding force. Finally, he
offered rich gifts to William if he would depart quietly, but added that if
he was bent on war he would meet him in battle on the coming Saturday.

It is probable that William's insolent message was meant to have the effect
of inducing Harold to march against him. The Norman position was a very
strong one, and had been carefully fortified, and he hoped that Harold
would attempt to storm it. Gurth urged his brother to remain in London,
while he himself went with the army to battle. A large number of the levies
had as yet not come in, and with these, should the first battle be
unsuccessful, another army could be gathered to continue the struggle.
Moreover, whether the oath Harold had sworn was binding or not, he had
sworn, and it were better that another who was perfectly free in his
conscience should lead the English to battle.

Then, too, Gurth urged, if he himself was slain, it would matter
comparatively little, while Harold's death would jeopardize the whole
kingdom. He prayed him therefore to stay in London, and to gather another
and greater force, and to lay waste the whole land between London and the
coast, so that the Normans, whether successful or not in their first
battle, would be starved into a departure from the land. The counsel of
Gurth was approved of by the thanes, but Harold rejected it. He declared
that he would never let his brothers and friends go forth to danger on his
behalf while he himself drew back from facing it, neither could he bring
himself to harm the lands or the goods of any Englishman.

For six days Harold remained in London waiting, but in vain, for the forces
from the North to join him, and on the Thursday morning set out with his
army in order to meet the invaders on the day he had named. Accounts differ
very widely as to the strength of that army. Norman writers, in order to
glorify their own victory, speak of it as one of prodigious numbers.
English writers, on the other hand, endeavour to explain the defeat by
minimizing the number of those who followed Harold's standard. Doubtless
the English king, knowing the proved valour of his housecarls, and fresh
from the crushing defeat inflicted on the Norsemen, considered the numbers
to be sufficient. His military genius was unquestionable, and next only to
William the Norman he was regarded as the greatest general in Europe. As
there was no occasion for haste so long as the Normans remained at Hastings
he would not have moved forward with a force he deemed insufficient, when
he knew that in another week its numbers would have been doubled.

On the day that the king made his last visit to Waltham, Wulf rode over to
Croydon in compliance with an entreaty he received from Edith.

"When does the army march?" she asked anxiously as she entered.

"The day after to-morrow, lady."

"And my lord goes with it?"

"He does. I myself think that Gurth's counsel was good, and that it were
best for England that he remained at Westminster; and yet I can understand
well that he himself would feel it a shame did he remain behind."

"I feel sore misgivings," Edith said, bursting into tears. "When he
marched north against the King of Norway and Tostig I felt no doubt he
would return victorious; but night after night I have had evil dreams, and
though I pray continually my spirit has no relief. I have never feared for
him before. I have always felt sure that whoever died Harold would be
spared for the sake of England, but I have no such feeling now. It seems to
me that I sacrificed him and myself in vain when I bade him leave me and
marry the sister of the Northern earls. No good has come of it. They are
behaving now as traitors, and he has lost his life's happiness. And yet I
did it for the best."

"It was a noble sacrifice, lady, and come what may you have no cause to
regret it."

"The queen is not with him," Edith said bitterly.

"No, she is at Oxford. You must not think, lady, that the king has been
unhappy since he came to the throne. He has been so incessantly occupied
with work that he has had no time for domestic happiness, even if it had
been within his reach. His thoughts are ever on England, and he has no
thought of self. Labouring ever for the good of his subjects, he has his
happiness alike in their love, and in the knowledge that he is doing all
that man can for their welfare. If he dies, he will die the death not only
of a soldier but of the noblest king that ever sat on the English throne,
and at all times he will be enshrined in the hearts of the English people,
whether Normans or Englishmen reign over the land."

"That is true, and I must take comfort from it, Wulf; but it was not for
this that I sent for you, but to ask you where the battle is likely to be
fought."

"Near Hastings, assuredly," Wulf replied.

"I shall travel south to-morrow. I have had a message from the king praying
me to see him, but that would be too much for me. He is another woman's
husband and I dare not meet him, it were sin for me to do so; but I would
fain be nearer to the scene of battle, so that in a few hours I might
journey there, in order that, if my lord dies, I might see him once again.
I know the superior of a convent at Lewes, and there I will betake myself.
Thence, as I believe, it is some sixteen miles to Hastings, and so far as I
have heard the Norman plunderers have not gone so far west. Should aught
happen to him, will you send a speedy messenger to me?"

"Should I live through the fight I will do so, lady, but even should I not
return the news will travel swiftly; but God forfend that so great a loss
should fall upon England."

"Amen," Edith murmured, "and yet I fear. Thanks, Wulf, for coming,
perchance we may not meet again. I am thinking of entering a convent,
probably that at Lewes. The struggle and pain here is well-nigh too great
for me, but in the walls of a cloister I may find peace. If my fears are
fulfilled I shall assuredly do this, and when I return to the convent I
shall leave it no more. My life is over. I have a happy past to look back
upon, in that am blest, and shall be happier than those who have no such
consolation. Moreover, I can still be proud of Harold, and may love him as
I might love the memory of a husband who is lost. God bless you, Wulf, and
protect you through the coming battle!"

Wulf rode sadly back to the camp. Although he had denied it to Edith, he
could not but admit to himself that the sacrifice that she and Harold had
made had, so far, been unavailing. It had failed to draw the Northern earls
closer to the king. The marriage had been productive of no happiness to
Harold, and the only reward he had gained had been in the sympathy of the
people, who knew well enough that he had sacrificed his love for the good
of his country.

The army marched rapidly. Beorn and Wulf rode together, and talked over the
chances of the coming battle.

"I cannot blame Harold for not remaining behind," Wulf said, "though it
were certainly more politic for him to have stayed in London. As he could
not do so, I think it would have been well had he bidden Gurth remain
behind to gather another army with which to meet the Normans should we be
defeated; or if he could not spare Gurth he might have left Leofric behind.
It is assuredly a mistake for the three brothers all to come, for should
all fall England would no longer have a head."

"Surely no such misfortune as that will befall us, Wulf."

"I know not. They will fight side by side, and should one fall all may
perish together. One at least ought to remain behind. It matters not how
many of us are killed, so that one of Godwin's sons is left to rally the
kingdom. You may be sure that if we are conquered the victors will be in
but poor condition to meet another foe; but if there is no one to gather an
army and unite all England against the Normans they will eat us up
piecemeal."

"We must not think of so terrible a thing, Wulf. It is not like you to look
at the dark side. Why, when we were in Wales, and in as bad a plight as
could well be, you always made light of danger, and managed affairs as if
we were certain to succeed. Why should we be defeated? Why should the king
be killed? He went through the terrible fight at Stamford Bridge without a
scratch. We have seen the Normans at work, and know that they are not such
terrible fellows; and as for their duke, I would assuredly rather meet him
in battle, doughty as he may be, than have faced Harold Hardrada with his
two-handed sword."

"I have every hope of winning the day, Beorn, but still I do regret much
that Gurth and Leofric are both here. Do you remember that in Wales we
agreed that it was always well to have a way of retreat in case of defeat?
Well, I feel that defeat this time will mean not only the defeat of an army
but the ruin of England."

On Friday afternoon the army reached rising ground near the village of
Senlac, which Harold had beforehand fixed upon as the place where he would
give battle to the invaders. Kent and Sussex he knew well. They had been
the home of his family, and he owned vast estates there. Doubtless in the
long weeks of waiting for the coming of the Norman fleet he had fixed upon
this spot as one well suited for a battle. It was necessary that the
English should fight on the defensive. The Normans were strong in cavalry,
while the English were unaccustomed to fight on horseback, and would have
been at a grievous disadvantage had they attacked the enemy.

The hill offered many advantages to a force standing on the defensive. The
great eastern road passed close to its foot, and its possession barred the
passage of the invaders in that direction. The ground between it and the
sea was marshy and broken, and its occupation by an English force left the
Normans no choice but to come out and attack them.

The sides were steep and the ground rose rapidly in the rear, so that the
Norman cavalry could not attack from behind. It was, indeed, a sort of
peninsula running southward from the main range of hills.

The moment the troops reached the ground the royal standard was planted,
and the men set to work to fell trees and to form a triple palisade along
the accessible sides of the hills. The force at Harold's command must have
been far nearer to the estimate given of its strength by the English
chroniclers than by the Normans, for the space occupied was insufficient
for the standing room of such an army as that enumerated by the latter
writers.

Harold relied almost entirely upon the housecarls. The levies might be
brave, but they were undisciplined, and might easily be thrown into
disorder; they would, too, be impatient under the trial of a long day's
battle. It is even said that he sent away some of the ill-armed levies, who
came flocking in from the country round, eager to revenge the injuries
received at the hands of the Normans. It was upon the shield-wall, the
favourite formation of the English, that he relied to win the battle. It
was their national mode of fighting. It was that in which Alfred had led
the Saxons to victory over the Danes. It was that in which they clashed
against the shield-wall of Norway and shattered it, and he might well hope
that the barons of Normandy and the adventurers from all parts of Europe
who fought under William's banner might well try in vain to break it.

In the evening a messenger arrived from William, again bidding Harold
resign the kingdom or meet the duke in single combat, the crown of England
to be the prize of the victor. Harold refused the challenge. He had proved
his personal courage too often for it to be supposed that he declined from
any feeling of cowardice, but he knew well that the issue could not be thus
decided. Were he to fall, the people would still refuse to accept William
as their king; were William to fall, the host that had gathered for the
plunder of England would still give battle. Nothing was therefore to be
gained by the proposed combat.




CHAPTER XXI.


HASTINGS.

The fiction of the Norman historians, that while the Normans passed the
night preceding the battle in prayer, the English spent it in feasting, is
even more palpably absurd than the many other falsehoods invented for the
purpose of damaging the character of Harold. The English army had marched
nearly seventy miles in the course of two days, and had in addition
laboured incessantly for many hours in erecting the palisades and in
digging ditches. We may be sure that after two such days the great mass of
the army lay down dog-tired directly their work was done, and slept till
morning. Harold and his thanes had shared in their labours, and knowing the
terrible work that awaited them in the morning, would most surely be
disposed to get as long a sleep as possible to prepare for it.

But what is most opposed to the Norman story is the fact that Harold was a
sincerely and deeply religious man, far more so than his rival. The life of
the one man was in accordance with his professions--he was gentle and
merciful, ever ready to forgive his enemies, averse to bloodshed, and so
true a friend of the church that the whole of the prelates and clergy set
the interdict of the pope at naught for his sake. The only exception in his
clemency to the conquered was in the case of the Welsh, and in this
instance the stern measures he adopted were in the end the most merciful.
No oaths could bind these marauders, and the stern punishment he inflicted
was the means of procuring for the West of England a respite from their
incursions that lasted for three generations.

William of Normandy, on the contrary, was absolutely merciless in warfare.
He was not cruel for the sake of cruelty, but where he deemed that the
policy demanded it, he was ruthless, and spared neither age nor sex. He was
lavish to the church, but it was rather because he needed and obtained its
aid than from any feeling of real piety.

In point of ability, both civil and military, the Duke of Normandy and
Harold of England were perhaps about equal; in point of nobility of
character there was no comparison between them. We may be sure that the
night before the battle Harold prayed as earnestly as he had prayed at
Waltham for the aid of Heaven.

Wulf and Beorn lay down among the thanes, after Harold, sitting with them
round a fire, had explained his plans for the battle. So calmly and
confidently did he speak, and so strong was their position, that even those
who had, like Wulf, doubted the wisdom of an advance until the whole force
of England had assembled, now felt something like an assurance of victory,
and all lay down to sleep with the belief that the victory at Stamford
Bridge would be repeated.

On waking, Wulf visited his men. They were already astir, and he was
astounded at seeing among them the towering figure of Osgod.

"Why, what means this, Osgod?" he exclaimed. "Did I not order you to rest
quietly at York?"

"That did you, my lord," Osgod said, "and no man obeys your orders more
readily than I, and anything that you bid me do I am willing to do if
possible; but in this it was not possible, for I could not remain at York,
either in rest or quiet. I should have had fever in my blood, and would by
this time have been lying as deep in the earth as Harold of Norway himself.
Therefore, in order to get the rest and quiet you had ordered, it was
necessary for me to come south. As you had left me well supplied with
money, I was able to do so in comfort, and though I could well enough walk
I have had myself carried in a litter by easy stages. I reached London on
Wednesday night, having been a fortnight on the way, and I arrived here an
hour since. Each day I walked a little, so as to keep my health and
exercise my limbs, and so well have I succeeded that my wound has well-nigh
healed; and although I doubt whether I shall be able to use a heavy axe, I
trust I shall be able to strike hard enough with the right hand to split a
few Norman helms."

"But the exertion may set your wounds bleeding afresh, Osgod," Wulf said,
unable to repress a smile at Osgod's argument.

"Methinks there is no fear of that. The most nights I have slept at
monasteries, and have inquired from the monks, whom I told that I must
needs stand by your side to-day, whether I should be fit. They said at
first that there would be some risk in the matter, but that if I continued
to take rest and quiet as I was doing, and the wound continued to heal
favourably, it was possible, if I abstained from actual fighting, I might
do so; but of late they have spoken more confidently. I told the monk who
seared my arm to do it heartily, for a little pain more or less was of
small account, so that he made a good job of it. And so, what with the rest
and quiet and my mind being at ease, it went on so well that a monk who
examined it at Westminster on Wednesday evening told me that save for the
healing of the skin the wound was pretty nigh cured, and that he thought
there was no chance whatever of its breaking out afresh. He bandaged it
tightly to prevent any rush of blood into the veins, and though when I
drove an axe just now into that stump yonder, I felt that I had not got
back my strength fully, I expect when I warm to the work I shall strike as
strongly as most."

"Well, at any rate you must take care of yourself, Osgod. You can aid me
in keeping our men steady, but I charge you not to fight yourself unless
you see the line waver. Then you can, of course, throw yourself into the
fray."

"I will keep myself back for that, master; but I am sure we shall all have
to do our best before sunset, and as all will be risking their lives there
is no reason why I should not do so as well as the rest."

The troops made a hearty breakfast from the food they carried, and quenched
their thirst at the little stream that ran down by the side of the slope,
then they were told off to the ground they were to occupy.

At nine in the morning the vanguard of the Norman army appeared over the
brow of a rise, and the English at once took up their positions. In the
centre were the housecarls of the royal house and those of the thanes,
together with the men of Kent, whose right it was ever to be in the front
of a battle, and the London citizens under their sheriff. All these were
armed and attired like the housecarls. In the centre of this array flew the
royal standard, and around it were the three royal brothers, Aelfwig their
uncle, with his monk's cowl over his helmet, and their nephew, Hakon, the
son of Sweyn. The housecarls were in a triple line. To the left and right
of them were the levies, as brave as their more heavily armed comrades, but
altogether without discipline, and armed in the most primitive manner. A
few only carried swords or axes, the majority had spears or javelins. Many
had only forks or sharp stakes, while some carried stone hammers and axes,
such as were used by their primitive ancestors.

As the Norman army wound down from the opposite hill and formed up in the
order of battle, Harold rode along in front of his line exhorting all to
stand firm.

"They were there," he said, "to defend their country, and to defend their
country they had but to hold the hill. Were they steadfast and firm they
could assuredly resist the attack of this host who came to capture and
plunder England."

The order in which the Normans prepared for battle was similar to that of
the English. Both commanders had been well informed by spies of the
strength and position of their opponents, and the duke placed his tried
Norman troops in the centre to match themselves against the English
housecarls. His Breton contingent was on his left, while on the right were
the French, the Flemings, and the other foreign adventurers who had come to
fight under his banner. In the front line were the archers and slingers,
who were to open the battle and shake the line of the defenders. Behind
these came the infantry, who were to hew down the palisades and clear a way
for the cavalry charge full into the centre of the English host.

A Norman trumpet gave the signal for the commencement of the battle, and
the archers along the whole line poured a storm of arrows into the English.
It was unanswered, for there were few bowmen among the defenders of the
hill, and the distance was too great for the javelin-men to hurl their
missiles. After the archers had shot several volleys of arrows they fell
back, and the infantry advanced against the hill; but before they did so
Taillifer, a Norman minstrel, dashed forward on horseback, and spurring up
the ascent, tossing his sword in the air and catching it as it fell, rode
up to the English line. One man he pierced with a lance, another he cut
