

[Illustration:]


       *       *       *       *       *




_81_


elf
en cir' cled
jerk
hur' ri cane
rein'deer
min' i a ture
tar' nished



A VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS.


       'Twas the  night  before  Christmas,  when  all through the house
       Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse:
       The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,
       In the hope that St. Nicholas soon would be there.
       The children were nestled all snug in their beds,
       While visions of sugar-plums danced in their heads;
       And Mamma in her kerchief, and I in my cap,
       Had just settled our brains for a long winter's nap,
       When out on the lawn there rose such a clatter,
       I sprang from my bed to see what was the matter.
       Away to the window I flew like a flash,
       Tore open the shutters, and threw up the sash.
       The moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow
       Gave the luster of midday to objects below;
       When, what  to  my wondering eyes should appear
       But a miniature sleigh, and eight tiny reindeer,
       With a little old driver, so lively and quick,
       I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick!
       More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,
       And he whistled, and shouted  and called them by name:
       "Now, Dasher! now, Dancer! now, Prancer! now, Vixen!
       On, Comet! on, Cupid! on, Donder and Blitzen!
       To the top of the porch, to the top of the wall,
       Now, dash away! dash away! dash away, all!"
       As dry leaves, that before the wild hurricane fly
       When they meet with an obstacle, mount to the sky,
       So, up to the house-top the coursers they flew,
       With the sleigh full of toys, and St. Nicholas, too;
       And then, in a twinkling, I heard on the roof
       The prancing and pawing of each little hoof.
       As I drew in my head, and was turning around,
       Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound.
       He was dressed all in fur from his head to his foot,
       And his clothes were all tarnished with ashes and soot;
       A bundle of toys he had flung on his back,
       And he looked like a peddler just opening his pack;
       His eyes, how they twinkled! his dimples, how merry!
       His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry;
       His droll little mouth was drawn up like a bow,
       And the beard on his chin was as white as the snow;
       The stump of a pipe he held tight in his teeth,
       And the smoke it  encircled his head like a wreath;
       He had a broad face, and a little round belly,
       That shook, when he laughed, like a bowlful of jelly.
       He was chubby and plump,--a right jolly old elf--
       And I laughed when I saw him, in spite of myself.
       A wink of his eye and a twist of his head
       Soon gave me to know I had nothing to dread.
       He spoke not a word, but went straight to his work,
       And filled all the stockings; then turned with a jerk,
       And, laying his finger aside of his nose,
       And giving a nod, up the chimney he rose.
       He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle,
       And away they all flew like the down of a thistle;
       But I heard him exclaim, ere he drove out of sight,
       "Merry Christmas to all, and to all a good-night!"


_Clement C. Moore._


       *       *       *       *       *




_82_


a chieved'
es poused'
thral' dom
al li' ance
ter rif' ic
Del' a ware
Com' mo dore
re cip' i ents
New' found land
can non ad' ing
par tic' i pa ted
char ac ter is' tic



COMMODORE JOHN BARRY.


The story of the American Navy is a story of glorious deeds. From the
early days of Barry and Jones, when it swept the decks of King George's
proud ships with merciless fire, down to the glories achieved by
Admirals Dewey and Schley in our war with Spain, the story of our Navy
is the pride and glory of our Republic. The glowing track of its
victories extends around the world.

Of the many distinguished men whose names and whose deeds adorn the
pages of our country's history, there is none more deserving of our
gratitude and admiration than Commodore John Barry. His name and fame
will live in the naval annals of our country as long as the history of
America lasts.

Commodore Barry, the founder of the American Navy, was born in County
Wexford, Ireland, in the year 1745. At the age of fourteen he left home
for a life on

       "The sea, the sea, the open sea,
       The blue, the fresh, the ever free."


On board trading vessels he made several voyages to America. He spent
his leisure hours in reading and study, and in this way soon acquired a
general and practical education. By fidelity to duty, he advanced so
rapidly in his profession that at the age of twenty-five we find him in
command of the _Black Prince,_ one of the finest merchant vessels then
running between Philadelphia and London.

When the Revolution broke out between the Colonies and England, our
gallant Commodore gave up the command of his ship, and without delay or
hesitation espoused the cause of his adopted country. Congress purchased
a few vessels, had them fitted out for war, and placed the little fleet
under the command of Captain Barry. His flagship was the _Lexington_,
named after the first battle of the Revolution; and Congress having at
this time adopted a national flag, the Star-spangled Banner, the
_Lexington_ was the first to hoist this ensign of freedom.

From the time of the fitting out of the _Lexington_ down to the time of
the declaration of peace, which assured the liberation of the Colonies
from the thraldom of Great Britain, Commodore Barry was constantly
engaged on shore and afloat. Though he actually participated in upwards
of twenty sea fights, always against a force superior to his own, he
never once struck his flag to the enemy. The field of his operations
ranged all the way from the capes of the Delaware to the West Indies,
and as far east as the coast of Maine and Newfoundland. His victories
were hailed with joy throughout the country, and Barry and his men were
publicly thanked by General Washington.

During the darkest days of the War, while Washington was spending the
winter of 1777 in camp at Valley Forge, with our brave soldiers
perishing for want of provisions, blankets, clothing and tents, an
incident occurred which shows how supremely loyal and devoted Commodore
Barry was to the American cause. The British troops were occupying
Philadelphia. Lord Howe, their commander, offered our great sea fighter
a bribe of fifty thousand guineas and the command of a ship of war, if
he would abandon the American cause and enter the service of England.
Barry's indignant reply should be written in letters of gold: "I have
engaged in the service of my adopted country, and neither the value nor
the command of the whole British fleet can seduce me from it."

General Washington had the utmost confidence in the pluck and daring and
loyalty of Barry. He selected him as the best and safest man to be
trusted with the important mission of carrying our commissioners to
France to secure that alliance and assistance which we then so sorely
needed.

On his homeward trip, it is related that being hailed by a British
man-of-war with the usual questions as to the name of his ship, captain,
and destination, he gave the following bold and characteristic reply:
"This is the United States ship _Alliance_: Jack Barry, half Irishman
and half Yankee, commander: who are you?" In the engagement that
followed, Barry and his band of heroes performed such deeds of valor
that after a few hours of terrific cannonading, the English ship was
forced to strike its colors and surrender to the "half Irishman and half
Yankee."

This illustrious man, who was the first that bore the title of Commodore
in the service of our Republic, continued at the head of our infant Navy
till his death, which took place in Philadelphia, on the 13th of
September, 1803. During life he was generous and charitable, and at his
death made the children of the Catholic Orphan Asylum of Philadelphia
the chief recipients of his wealth. His remains repose in the little
graveyard attached to St. Mary's Catholic church.

Through the generous patriotism of the "Friendly Sons of St. Patrick," a
society of which General Washington himself was a member, a magnificent
monument was erected to the memory of Commodore Barry, in Independence
Square, Philadelphia, under the shadow of Independence Hall, the cradle
of American liberty. Miss Elise Hazel Hepburn, a great-great-grandniece
of the Commodore, had a prominent part at the ceremonies of the
unveiling, which took place on Saint Patrick's Day, 1907.


       *       *       *       *       *


       There are gallant hearts whose glory
         Columbia loves to name,
       Whose deeds shall live in story
         And everlasting fame.
       But never yet one braver
         Our starry banner bore
       Than saucy old Jack Barry,
         The Irish Commodore.



What is meant by the Congress of the U.S.? What two bodies compose it?
What is the number of senators, and how are they chosen?

Which was the most notable sea fight of Commodore John Paul Jones?

Where did Admiral Dewey specially distinguish himself? And Admiral
Schley?

What countries does the island of Great Britain comprise?

What does "never struck his flag" mean?

Name the capes of the Delaware. Locate Newfoundland.

Recite the two famous replies of Commodore Barry given in the selection.


[Illustration: COMMODORE JOHN BARRY]


       *       *       *       *       *




_83_


sau' cy
ig nored'
rev' eled
plain' tive
dis traught'
wea' ri some
rol' lick ing
mis' chie vous
frec'kle-faced



THE BOY OF THE HOUSE.


       He was the boy of the house, you know,
         A jolly and rollicking lad;
       He was never tired, and never sick,
         And nothing could make him sad.

       Did some one urge that he make less noise,
         He would say, with a saucy grin,
       "Why, one boy alone doesn't make much stir--
         I'm sorry I am not a twin!"

       "There are two of twins--oh, it must be fun
         To go double at everything:
       To hollo by twos, and to run by twos,
         To whistle by twos, and to sing!"

       His laugh was something to make you glad,
         So brimful was it of joy;
       A conscience he had, perhaps, in his breast,
         But it never troubled the boy.

       You met him out in the garden path,
         With the terrier at his heels;
       You knew by the shout he hailed you with
         How happy a youngster feels.

       The maiden auntie was half distraught
         At his tricks as the days went by;
       "The most mischievous child in the world!"
         She said, with a shrug and a sigh.

       His father owned that her words were true,
         And his mother declared each day
       Was putting wrinkles into her face,
         And was turning her brown hair gray.

       But it never troubled the boy of the house;
         He reveled in clatter and din,
       And had only one regret in the world--
         That he hadn't been born a twin.


       *       *       *       *       *


       There's nobody making a noise to-day,
         There's nobody stamping the floor,
       There's an awful silence, upstairs and down,
         There's crape on the wide hall door.

       The terrier's whining out in the sun--
         "Where's my comrade?" he seems to say;
       Turn your plaintive eyes away, little dog.
         There's no frolic for you to-day.

       The freckle-faced girl from the house next door
         Is sobbing her young heart out;
       Don't cry, little girl, you'll soon forget
         To miss the laugh and the shout.

       How strangely quiet the little form,
         With the hands on the bosom crossed!
       Not a fold, not a flower, out of place,
         Not a short curl rumpled and tossed!

       So solemn and still the big house seems--
         No laughter, no racket, no din,
       No starting shriek, no voice piping out,
         "I'm sorry I am not a twin!"

       There a man and a woman, pale with grief,
         As the wearisome moments creep;
       Oh! the loneliness touches everything--
         The boy of the house is asleep.


_Jean Blewett._
