
"Th' Magic listened when tha' sung th' Doxology.  It would ha' listened
to anything tha'd sung.  It was th' joy that mattered.  Eh! lad,
lad--what's names to th' Joy Maker," and she gave his shoulders a quick
soft pat again.

She had packed a basket which held a regular feast this morning, and
when the hungry hour came and Dickon brought it out from its hiding
place, she sat down with them under their tree and watched them devour
their food, laughing and quite gloating over their appetites.  She was
full of fun and made them laugh at all sorts of odd things.  She told
them stories in broad Yorkshire and taught them new words.  She laughed
as if she could not help it when they told her of the increasing
difficulty there was in pretending that Colin was still a fretful
invalid.

"You see we can't help laughing nearly all the time when we are
together," explained Colin.  "And it doesn't sound ill at all.  We try
to choke it back but it will burst out and that sounds worse than ever."

"There's one thing that comes into my mind so often," said Mary, "and I
can scarcely ever hold in when I think of it suddenly.  I keep thinking
suppose Colin's face should get to look like a full moon.  It isn't
like one yet but he gets a tiny bit fatter every day--and suppose some
morning it should look like one--what should we do!"

"Bless us all, I can see tha' has a good bit o' play actin' to do,"
said Susan Sowerby.  "But tha' won't have to keep it up much longer.
Mester Craven'll come home."

"Do you think he will?" asked Colin.  "Why?"

Susan Sowerby chuckled softly.

"I suppose it 'ud nigh break thy heart if he found out before tha' told
him in tha' own way," she said.  "Tha's laid awake nights plannin' it."

"I couldn't bear any one else to tell him," said Colin.  "I think about
different ways every day, I think now I just want to run into his
room." "That'd be a fine start for him," said Susan Sowerby.  "I'd like
to see his face, lad.  I would that! He mun come back--that he mun."

One of the things they talked of was the visit they were to make to her
cottage.  They planned it all.  They were to drive over the moor and
lunch out of doors among the heather.  They would see all the twelve
children and Dickon's garden and would not come back until they were
tired.

Susan Sowerby got up at last to return to the house and Mrs. Medlock.
It was time for Colin to be wheeled back also.  But before he got into
his chair he stood quite close to Susan and fixed his eyes on her with
a kind of bewildered adoration and he suddenly caught hold of the fold
of her blue cloak and held it fast.

"You are just what I--what I wanted," he said.  "I wish you were my
mother--as well as Dickon's!"

All at once Susan Sowerby bent down and drew him with her warm arms
close against the bosom under the blue cloak--as if he had been
Dickon's brother.  The quick mist swept over her eyes.

"Eh! dear lad!" she said.  "Thy own mother's in this 'ere very garden,
I do believe.  She couldna' keep out of it.  Thy father mun come back
to thee--he mun!"




CHAPTER XXVII

IN THE GARDEN


In each century since the beginning of the world wonderful things have
been discovered.  In the last century more amazing things were found
out than in any century before.  In this new century hundreds of things
still more astounding will be brought to light.  At first people refuse
to believe that a strange new thing can be done, then they begin to
hope it can be done, then they see it can be done--then it is done and
all the world wonders why it was not done centuries ago.  One of the
new things people began to find out in the last century was that
thoughts--just mere thoughts--are as powerful as electric batteries--as
good for one as sunlight is, or as bad for one as poison.  To let a sad
thought or a bad one get into your mind is as dangerous as letting a
scarlet fever germ get into your body.  If you let it stay there after
it has got in you may never get over it as long as you live.

So long as Mistress Mary's mind was full of disagreeable thoughts about
her dislikes and sour opinions of people and her determination not to
be pleased by or interested in anything, she was a yellow-faced,
sickly, bored and wretched child.  Circumstances, however, were very
kind to her, though she was not at all aware of it.  They began to push
her about for her own good.  When her mind gradually filled itself with
robins, and moorland cottages crowded with children, with queer crabbed
old gardeners and common little Yorkshire housemaids, with springtime
and with secret gardens coming alive day by day, and also with a moor
boy and his "creatures," there was no room left for the disagreeable
thoughts which affected her liver and her digestion and made her yellow
and tired.

So long as Colin shut himself up in his room and thought only of his
fears and weakness and his detestation of people who looked at him and
reflected hourly on humps and early death, he was a hysterical
half-crazy little hypochondriac who knew nothing of the sunshine and
the spring and also did not know that he could get well and could stand
upon his feet if he tried to do it.  When new beautiful thoughts began
to push out the old hideous ones, life began to come back to him, his
blood ran healthily through his veins and strength poured into him like
a flood.  His scientific experiment was quite practical and simple and
there was nothing weird about it at all.  Much more surprising things
can happen to any one who, when a disagreeable or discouraged thought
comes into his mind, just has the sense to remember in time and push it
out by putting in an agreeable determinedly courageous one.  Two things
cannot be in one place.

         "Where, you tend a rose, my lad,
         A thistle cannot grow."

While the secret garden was coming alive and two children were coming
alive with it, there was a man wandering about certain far-away
beautiful places in the Norwegian fiords and the valleys and mountains
of Switzerland and he was a man who for ten years had kept his mind
filled with dark and heart-broken thinking.  He had not been
courageous; he had never tried to put any other thoughts in the place
of the dark ones.  He had wandered by blue lakes and thought them; he
had lain on mountain-sides with sheets of deep blue gentians blooming
all about him and flower breaths filling all the air and he had thought
them.  A terrible sorrow had fallen upon him when he had been happy and
he had let his soul fill itself with blackness and had refused
obstinately to allow any rift of light to pierce through.  He had
forgotten and deserted his home and his duties.  When he traveled
about, darkness so brooded over him that the sight of him was a wrong
done to other people because it was as if he poisoned the air about him
with gloom.  Most strangers thought he must be either half mad or a man
with some hidden crime on his soul.  He, was a tall man with a drawn
face and crooked shoulders and the name he always entered on hotel
registers was, "Archibald Craven, Misselthwaite Manor, Yorkshire,
England."

He had traveled far and wide since the day he saw Mistress Mary in his
study and told her she might have her "bit of earth." He had been in
the most beautiful places in Europe, though he had remained nowhere
more than a few days.  He had chosen the quietest and remotest spots.
He had been on the tops of mountains whose heads were in the clouds and
had looked down on other mountains when the sun rose and touched them
with such light as made it seem as if the world were just being born.

But the light had never seemed to touch himself until one day when he
realized that for the first time in ten years a strange thing had
happened.  He was in a wonderful valley in the Austrian Tyrol and he
had been walking alone through such beauty as might have lifted, any
man's soul out of shadow.  He had walked a long way and it had not
lifted his.  But at last he had felt tired and had thrown himself down
to rest on a carpet of moss by a stream.  It was a clear little stream
which ran quite merrily along on its narrow way through the luscious
damp greenness.  Sometimes it made a sound rather like very low
laughter as it bubbled over and round stones.  He saw birds come and
dip their heads to drink in it and then flick their wings and fly away.
It seemed like a thing alive and yet its tiny voice made the stillness
seem deeper.  The valley was very, very still.

As he sat gazing into the clear running of the water, Archibald Craven
gradually felt his mind and body both grow quiet, as quiet as the
valley itself.  He wondered if he were going to sleep, but he was not.
He sat and gazed at the sunlit water and his eyes began to see things
growing at its edge.  There was one lovely mass of blue forget-me-nots
growing so close to the stream that its leaves were wet and at these he
found himself looking as he remembered he had looked at such things
years ago.  He was actually thinking tenderly how lovely it was and
what wonders of blue its hundreds of little blossoms were.  He did not
know that just that simple thought was slowly filling his mind--filling
and filling it until other things were softly pushed aside.  It was as
if a sweet clear spring had begun to rise in a stagnant pool and had
risen and risen until at last it swept the dark water away.  But of
course he did not think of this himself.  He only knew that the valley
seemed to grow quieter and quieter as he sat and stared at the bright
delicate blueness.  He did not know how long he sat there or what was
happening to him, but at last he moved as if he were awakening and he
got up slowly and stood on the moss carpet, drawing a long, deep, soft
breath and wondering at himself.  Something seemed to have been unbound
and released in him, very quietly.

"What is it?" he said, almost in a whisper, and he passed his hand over
his forehead.  "I almost feel as if--I were alive!"

I do not know enough about the wonderfulness of undiscovered things to
be able to explain how this had happened to him.  Neither does any one
else yet.  He did not understand at all himself--but he remembered this
strange hour months afterward when he was at Misselthwaite again and he
found out quite by accident that on this very day Colin had cried out
as he went into the secret garden:

"I am going to live forever and ever and ever!"

The singular calmness remained with him the rest of the evening and he
slept a new reposeful sleep; but it was not with him very long.  He did
not know that it could be kept.  By the next night he had opened the
doors wide to his dark thoughts and they had come trooping and rushing
back.  He left the valley and went on his wandering way again.  But,
strange as it seemed to him, there were minutes--sometimes
half-hours--when, without his knowing why, the black burden seemed to
lift itself again and he knew he was a living man and not a dead one.
Slowly--slowly--for no reason that he knew of--he was "coming alive"
with the garden.

As the golden summer changed into the deep golden autumn he went to the
Lake of Como.  There he found the loveliness of a dream.  He spent his
days upon the crystal blueness of the lake or he walked back into the
soft thick verdure of the hills and tramped until he was tired so that
he might sleep.  But by this time he had begun to sleep better, he
knew, and his dreams had ceased to be a terror to him.

"Perhaps," he thought, "my body is growing stronger."

It was growing stronger but--because of the rare peaceful hours when
his thoughts were changed--his soul was slowly growing stronger, too.
He began to think of Misselthwaite and wonder if he should not go home.
Now and then he wondered vaguely about his boy and asked himself what
he should feel when he went and stood by the carved four-posted bed
again and looked down at the sharply chiseled ivory-white face while it
slept and, the black lashes rimmed so startlingly the close-shut eyes.
He shrank from it.

One marvel of a day he had walked so far that when he returned the moon
was high and full and all the world was purple shadow and silver.  The
stillness of lake and shore and wood was so wonderful that he did not
go into the villa he lived in.  He walked down to a little bowered
terrace at the water's edge and sat upon a seat and breathed in all the
heavenly scents of the night.  He felt the strange calmness stealing
over him and it grew deeper and deeper until he fell asleep.

He did not know when he fell asleep and when he began to dream; his
dream was so real that he did not feel as if he were dreaming.  He
remembered afterward how intensely wide awake and alert he had thought
he was.  He thought that as he sat and breathed in the scent of the
late roses and listened to the lapping of the water at his feet he
heard a voice calling.  It was sweet and clear and happy and far away.
It seemed very far, but he heard it as distinctly as if it had been at
his very side.

"Archie! Archie! Archie!" it said, and then again, sweeter and clearer
than before, "Archie! Archie!"

He thought he sprang to his feet not even startled.  It was such a real
voice and it seemed so natural that he should hear it.

"Lilias! Lilias!" he answered.  "Lilias! where are you?"

"In the garden," it came back like a sound from a golden flute.  "In
the garden!"

And then the dream ended.  But he did not awaken.  He slept soundly and
sweetly all through the lovely night.  When he did awake at last it was
brilliant morning and a servant was standing staring at him.  He was an
Italian servant and was accustomed, as all the servants of the villa
were, to accepting without question any strange thing his foreign
master might do.  No one ever knew when he would go out or come in or
where he would choose to sleep or if he would roam about the garden or
lie in the boat on the lake all night.  The man held a salver with some
letters on it and he waited quietly until Mr. Craven took them.  When
he had gone away Mr. Craven sat a few moments holding them in his hand
and looking at the lake.  His strange calm was still upon him and
something more--a lightness as if the cruel thing which had been done
had not happened as he thought--as if something had changed.  He was
remembering the dream--the real--real dream.

"In the garden!" he said, wondering at himself.  "In the garden! But
the door is locked and the key is buried deep."

When he glanced at the letters a few minutes later he saw that the one
lying at the top of the rest was an English letter and came from
Yorkshire.  It was directed in a plain woman's hand but it was not a
hand he knew.  He opened it, scarcely thinking of the writer, but the
first words attracted his attention at once.


"Dear Sir:

I am Susan Sowerby that made bold to speak to you once on the moor.  It
was about Miss Mary I spoke.  I will make bold to speak again.  Please,
sir, I would come home if I was you.  I think you would be glad to come
and--if you will excuse me, sir--I think your lady would ask you to
come if she was here.

                      Your obedient servant,
                      Susan Sowerby."


Mr. Craven read the letter twice before he put it back in its envelope.
He kept thinking about the dream.

"I will go back to Misselthwaite," he said.  "Yes, I'll go at once."

And he went through the garden to the villa and ordered Pitcher to
prepare for his return to England.


In a few days he was in Yorkshire again, and on his long railroad
journey he found himself thinking of his boy as he had never thought in
all the ten years past.  During those years he had only wished to
forget him.  Now, though he did not intend to think about him, memories
of him constantly drifted into his mind.  He remembered the black days
when he had raved like a madman because the child was alive and the
mother was dead.  He had refused to see it, and when he had gone to
look at it at last it had been, such a weak wretched thing that
everyone had been sure it would die in a few days.  But to the surprise
of those who took care of it the days passed and it lived and then
everyone believed it would be a deformed and crippled creature.

He had not meant to be a bad father, but he had not felt like a father
at all.  He had supplied doctors and nurses and luxuries, but he had
shrunk from the mere thought of the boy and had buried himself in his
own misery.  The first time after a year's absence he returned to
Misselthwaite and the small miserable looking thing languidly and
indifferently lifted to his face the great gray eyes with black lashes
round them, so like and yet so horribly unlike the happy eyes he had
adored, he could not bear the sight of them and turned away pale as
death.  After that he scarcely ever saw him except when he was asleep,
and all he knew of him was that he was a confirmed invalid, with a
vicious, hysterical, half-insane temper.  He could only be kept from
furies dangerous to himself by being given his own way in every detail.

All this was not an uplifting thing to recall, but as the train whirled
him through mountain passes and golden plains the man who was "coming
alive" began to think in a new way and he thought long and steadily and
deeply.

