might have been heard at the chapel.

"Eh! what was it? I didn't see," inquired the master. "They only got one
run, I thought?"

"No, but such a ball, three-quarters length, and coming straight for his
leg bail. Nothing but that turn of the wrist could have saved him, and
he drew it away to leg for a safe one.--Bravo, Johnson!"

"How well they are bowling, though," said Arthur; "they don't mean to be
beat, I can see."

"There now," struck in the master; "you see that's just what I have been
preaching this half-hour. The delicate play is the true thing. I don't
understand cricket, so I don't enjoy those fine draws which you tell me
are the best play, though when you or Raggles hit a ball hard away for
six I am as delighted as any one. Don't you see the analogy?"

"Yes, sir," answered Tom, looking up roguishly, "I see; only the
question remains whether I should have got most good by understanding
Greek particles or cricket thoroughly. I'm such a thick, I never should
have had time for both."

"I see you are an incorrigible," said the master, with a chuckle; "but
I refute you by an example. Arthur there has taken in Greek and cricket
too."

"Yes, but no thanks to him; Greek came natural to him. Why, when he
first came I remember he used to read Herodotus for pleasure as I did
Don Quixote, and couldn't have made a false concord if he'd tried ever
so hard; and then I looked after his cricket."

"Out! Bailey has given him out. Do you see, Tom?" cries Arthur. "How
foolish of them to run so hard."

"Well, it can't be helped; he has played very well. Whose turn is it to
go in?"

"I don't know; they've got your list in the tent."

"Let's go and see," said Tom, rising; but at this moment Jack Raggles
and two or three more came running to the island moat.

"O Brown, mayn't I go in next?" shouts the Swiper.

"Whose name is next on the list?" says the captain.

"Winter's, and then Arthur's," answers the boy who carries it; "but
there are only twenty-six runs to get, and no time to lose. I heard
Mr. Aislabie say that the stumps must be drawn at a quarter past eight
exactly."

"Oh, do let the Swiper go in," chorus the boys; so Tom yields against
his better judgment.

"I dare say now I've lost the match by this nonsense," he says, as he
sits down again; "they'll be sure to get Jack's wicket in three or four
minutes; however, you'll have the chance, sir, of seeing a hard hit or
two," adds he, smiling, and turning to the master.

"Come, none of your irony, Brown," answers the master. "I'm beginning to
understand the game scientifically. What a noble game it is, too!"

"Isn't it? But it's more than a game. It's an institution," said Tom.

"Yes," said Arthur--"the birthright of British boys old and young, as
habeas corpus and trial by jury are of British men."

"The discipline and reliance on one another which it teaches is
so valuable, I think," went on the master, "it ought to be such an
unselfish game. It merges the individual in the eleven; he doesn't play
that he may win, but that his side may."

"That's very true," said Tom, "and that's why football and cricket,
now one comes to think of it, are such much better games than fives or
hare-and-hounds, or any others where the object is to come in first or
to win for oneself, and not that one's side may win."

"And then the captain of the eleven!" said the master; "what a post is
his in our School-world! almost as hard as the Doctor's--requiring skill
and gentleness and firmness, and I know not what other rare qualities."

"Which don't he may wish he may get!" said Tom, laughing; "at any rate
he hasn't got them yet, or he wouldn't have been such a flat to-night as
to let Jack Raggles go in out of his turn."

"Ah, the Doctor never would have done that," said Arthur demurely. "Tom,
you've a great deal to learn yet in the art of ruling."

"Well, I wish you'd tell the Doctor so then, and get him to let me stop
till I'm twenty. I don't want to leave, I'm sure."

"What a sight it is," broke in the master, "the Doctor as a ruler!
Perhaps ours is the only little corner of the British Empire which
is thoroughly, wisely, and strongly ruled just now. I'm more and more
thankful every day of my life that I came here to be under him."

"So am I, I'm sure," said Tom, "and more and more sorry that I've got to
leave."

"Every place and thing one sees here reminds one of some wise act of
his," went on the master. "This island now--you remember the time,
Brown, when it was laid out in small gardens, and cultivated by
frost-bitten fags in February and March?"

"Of course I do," said Tom; "didn't I hate spending two hours in the
afternoon grubbing in the tough dirt with the stump of a fives bat? But
turf-cart was good fun enough."

"I dare say it was, but it was always leading to fights with the
townspeople; and then the stealing flowers out of all the gardens in
Rugby for the Easter show was abominable."

"Well, so it was," said Tom, looking down, "but we fags couldn't help
ourselves. But what has that to do with the Doctor's ruling?"

"A great deal, I think," said the master; "what brought island-fagging
to an end?"

"Why, the Easter speeches were put off till midsummer," said Tom, "and
the sixth had the gymnastic poles put up here."

"Well, and who changed the time of the speeches, and put the idea of
gymnastic poles into the heads of their worships the sixth form?" said
the master.

"The Doctor, I suppose," said Tom. "I never thought of that."

"Of course you didn't," said the master, "or else, fag as you were,
you would have shouted with the whole school against putting down old
customs. And that's the way that all the Doctor's reforms have been
carried out when he has been left to himself--quietly and naturally,
putting a good thing in the place of a bad, and letting the bad die out;
no wavering, and no hurry--the best thing that could be done for the
time being, and patience for the rest."

"Just Tom's own way," chimed in Arthur, nudging Tom with his
elbow--"driving a nail where it will go;" to which allusion Tom answered
by a sly kick.

"Exactly so," said the master, innocent of the allusion and by-play.

Meantime Jack Raggles, with his sleeves tucked up above his great brown
elbows, scorning pads and gloves, has presented himself at the wicket;
and having run one for a forward drive of Johnson's, is about to receive
his first ball. There are only twenty-four runs to make, and four
wickets to go down--a winning match if they play decently steady. The
ball is a very swift one, and rises fast, catching Jack on the outside
of the thigh, and bounding away as if from india-rubber, while they
run two for a leg-bye amidst great applause and shouts from Jack's many
admirers. The next ball is a beautifully-pitched ball for the outer
stump, which the reckless and unfeeling Jack catches hold of, and hits
right round to leg for five, while the applause becomes deafening. Only
seventeen runs to get with four wickets! The game is all but ours!

It is over now, and Jack walks swaggering about his wicket, with his bat
over his shoulder, while Mr. Aislabie holds a short parley with his
men. Then the cover-point hitter, that cunning man, goes on to bowl slow
twisters. Jack waves his hand triumphantly towards the tent, as much as
to say, "See if I don't finish it all off now in three hits."

Alas, my son Jack, the enemy is too old for thee. The first ball of the
over Jack steps out and meets, swiping with all his force. If he had
only allowed for the twist! But he hasn't, and so the ball goes spinning
up straight in the air, as if it would never come down again. Away runs
Jack, shouting and trusting to the chapter of accidents; but the bowler
runs steadily under it, judging every spin, and calling out, "I have
it," catches it, and playfully pitches it on to the back of the stalwart
Jack, who is departing with a rueful countenance.

"I knew how it would be," says Tom, rising. "Come along; the game's
getting very serious."

So they leave the island and go to the tent; and after deep
consultation, Arthur is sent in, and goes off to the wicket with a last
exhortation from Tom to play steady and keep his bat straight. To the
suggestions that Winter is the best bat left, Tom only replies, "Arthur
is the steadiest, and Johnson will make the runs if the wicket is only
kept up."

"I am surprised to see Arthur in the eleven," said the master, as they
stood together in front of the dense crowd, which was now closing in
round the ground.

"Well, I'm not quite sure that he ought to be in for his play," said
Tom, "but I couldn't help putting him in. It will do him so much good,
and you can't think what I owe him."

The master smiled. The clock strikes eight, and the whole field becomes
fevered with excitement. Arthur, after two narrow escapes, scores one,
and Johnson gets the ball. The bowling and fielding are superb, and
Johnson's batting worthy the occasion. He makes here a two, and there a
one, managing to keep the ball to himself, and Arthur backs up and runs
perfectly. Only eleven runs to make now, and the crowd scarcely breathe.
At last Arthur gets the ball again, and actually drives it forward
for two, and feels prouder than when he got the three best prizes, at
hearing Tom's shout of joy, "Well played, well played, young un!"

But the next ball is too much for the young hand, and his bails fly
different ways. Nine runs to make, and two wickets to go down: it is too
much for human nerves.

Before Winter can get in, the omnibus which is to take the Lord's men
to the train pulls up at the side of the close, and Mr. Aislabie and Tom
consult, and give out that the stumps will be drawn after the next over.
And so ends the great match. Winter and Johnson carry out their bats,
and, it being a one day's match, the Lord's men are declared the
winners, they having scored the most in the first innings.

But such a defeat is a victory: so think Tom and all the School eleven,
as they accompany their conquerors to the omnibus, and send them off
with three ringing cheers, after Mr. Aislabie has shaken hands all
round, saying to Tom, "I must compliment you, sir, on your eleven, and I
hope we shall have you for a member if you come up to town."

As Tom and the rest of the eleven were turning back into the close, and
everybody was beginning to cry out for another country-dance, encouraged
by the success of the night before, the young master, who was just
leaving the close, stopped him, and asked him to come up to tea at
half-past eight, adding, "I won't keep you more than half an hour, and
ask Arthur to come up too."

"I'll come up with you directly, if you'll let me," said Tom, "for I
feel rather melancholy, and not quite up to the country-dance and supper
with the rest."

"Do, by all means," said the master; "I'll wait here for you."

So Tom went off to get his boots and things from the tent, to tell
Arthur of the invitation, and to speak to his second in command about
stopping the dancing and shutting up the close as soon as it grew dusk.
Arthur promised to follow as soon as he had had a dance. So Tom handed
his things over to the man in charge of the tent, and walked quietly
away to the gate where the master was waiting, and the two took their
way together up the Hillmorton road.

Of course they found the master's house locked up, and all the servants
away in the close--about this time, no doubt, footing it away on the
grass, with extreme delight to themselves, and in utter oblivion of the
unfortunate bachelor their master, whose one enjoyment in the shape
of meals was his "dish of tea" (as our grandmothers called it) in the
evening; and the phrase was apt in his case, for he always poured his
out into the saucer before drinking. Great was the good man's horror at
finding himself shut out of his own house. Had he been alone he
would have treated it as a matter of course, and would have strolled
contentedly up and down his gravel walk until some one came home; but he
was hurt at the stain on his character of host, especially as the guest
was a pupil. However, the guest seemed to think it a great joke, and
presently, as they poked about round the house, mounted a wall, from
which he could reach a passage window. The window, as it turned out, was
not bolted, so in another minute Tom was in the house and down at the
front door, which he opened from inside. The master chuckled grimly at
this burglarious entry, and insisted on leaving the hall-door and two
of the front windows open, to frighten the truants on their return; and
then the two set about foraging for tea, in which operation the master
was much at fault, having the faintest possible idea of where to find
anything, and being, moreover, wondrously short-sighted; but Tom, by a
sort of instinct, knew the right cupboards in the kitchen and pantry,
and soon managed to place on the snuggery table better materials for a
meal than had appeared there probably during the reign of his tutor, who
was then and there initiated, amongst other things, into the excellence
of that mysterious condiment, a dripping-cake. The cake was newly baked,
and all rich and flaky; Tom had found it reposing in the cook's private
cupboard, awaiting her return; and as a warning to her they finished
it to the last crumb. The kettle sang away merrily on the hob of the
snuggery, for, notwithstanding the time of year, they lighted a fire,
throwing both the windows wide open at the same time; the heaps of books
and papers were pushed away to the other end of the table, and the great
solitary engraving of King's College Chapel over the mantelpiece looked
less stiff than usual, as they settled themselves down in the twilight
to the serious drinking of tea.

After some talk on the match, and other indifferent subjects, the
conversation came naturally back to Tom's approaching departure, over
which he began again to make his moan.

"Well, we shall all miss you quite as much as you will miss us," said
the master. "You are the Nestor of the School now, are you not?"

"Yes, ever since East left," answered Tom. "By-the-bye, have you heard
from him?"

"Yes, I had a letter in February, just before he started for India to
join his regiment."

"He will make a capital officer."

"Ay, won't he!" said Tom, brightening. "No fellow could handle boys
better, and I suppose soldiers are very like boys. And he'll never tell
them to go where he won't go himself. No mistake about that. A braver
fellow never walked."

"His year in the sixth will have taught him a good deal that will be
useful to him now."

"So it will,"' said Tom, staring into the fire. "Poor dear Harry," he
went on--"how well I remember the day we were put out of the twenty! How
he rose to the situation, and burnt his cigar-cases, and gave away his
pistols, and pondered on the constitutional authority of the sixth, and
his new duties to the Doctor, and the fifth form, and the fags! Ay, and
no fellow ever acted up to them better, though he was always a people's
man--for the fags, and against constituted authorities. He couldn't
help that, you know. I'm sure the Doctor must have liked him?" said Tom,
looking up inquiringly.

"The Doctor sees the good in every one, and appreciates it," said the
master dogmatically; "but I hope East will get a good colonel. He won't
do if he can't respect those above him. How long it took him, even here,
to learn the lesson of obeying!"

"Well, I wish I were alongside of him," said Tom. "If I can't be at
Rugby, I want to be at work in the world, and not dawdling away three
years at Oxford."

"What do you mean by 'at work in the world'?" said the master, pausing
with his lips close to his saucerful of tea, and peering at Tom over it.

"Well, I mean real work--one's profession--whatever one will have really
to do and make one's living by. I want to be doing some real good,
feeling that I am not only at play in the world," answered Tom, rather
puzzled to find out himself what he really did mean.

"You are mixing up two very different things in your head, I think,
Brown," said the master, putting down the empty saucer, "and you ought
to get clear about them. You talk of 'working to get your living,' and
'doing some real good in the world,' in the same breath. Now, you may be
getting a very good living in a profession, and yet doing no good at all
in the world, but quite the contrary, at the same time. Keep the latter
before you as your one object, and you will be right, whether you make
a living or not; but if you dwell on the other, you'll very likely drop
into mere money-making, and let the world take care of itself for good
or evil. Don't be in a hurry about finding your work in the world for
yourself--you are not old enough to judge for yourself yet; but just
look about you in the place you find yourself in, and try to make things
a little better and honester there. You'll find plenty to keep your hand
in at Oxford, or wherever else you go. And don't be led away to think
this part of the world important and that unimportant. Every corner of
the world is important. No man knows whether this part or that is most
so, but every man may do some honest work in his own corner." And then
the good man went on to talk wisely to Tom of the sort of work which
he might take up as an undergraduate, and warned him of the prevalent
university sins, and explained to him the many and great differences
between university and school life, till the twilight changed into
darkness, and they heard the truant servants stealing in by the back
entrance.

"I wonder where Arthur can be," said Tom at last, looking at his watch;
"why, it's nearly half-past nine already."

"Oh, he is comfortably at supper with the eleven, forgetful of his
oldest friends," said the master. "Nothing has given me greater
pleasure," he went on, "than your friendship for him; it has been the
making of you both."

"Of me, at any rate," answered Tom; "I should never have been here now
but for him. It was the luckiest chance in the world that sent him to
Rugby and made him my chum."
