darkness. Only the area in which the battle was fought showed any light,
but here the flashes of the firing were continuous and intense. The crash
of the rifles never ceased. Now and then it rose to greater volume and
then fell again, but rising or falling it always went on, while over it
boomed the big guns answering one another in defiant notes of thunder.

The schooner was the most formidable obstacle to the passage. It lay full
length across the narrow bayou and, even if the boats of the supply fleet
should reach it, there was little room to pass on either side. From its
decks the nine pounders were fired fast and often with precision, and the
majority of the Spaniard's desperate band found shelter there also, firing
with rifles, muskets, and pistols. Others sent bullets, also, from the
comparative security of port holes. The possession of the schooner gave
them a great advantage and they did not neglect it. Now and then they sent
up fierce yells, the war-cries of the West Indian pirates, and their
Indian allies answered them with their own long-drawn, high pitched whoop,
so full of ferocity and menace. Both looked forward to nothing less than
complete triumph.

The space between the combatants was lighted up by the incessant flash of
the firing. Little jets of water where a missent bullet struck were
continually spouting up, and then would come a bigger one when a cannon
ball plunged into the depths of the bayou.

Paul suddenly heard a heavy impact, a crash, as of ripping wood, and a
cry. A canoe near them had been struck by a cannon ball, and practically
broken in half. It sank in an instant, and one of the men in it, wounded
in the arm, and crippled, was sinking a second time, when Paul sprang
into the water and helped him into their own boat. But not all the wounded
were so fortunate. Some sank, to stay, and the dark night battle, far more
deadly than that of the night before, reeled to and fro.

The combat at first had been more of a spectacle than anything else to
Paul. The extraordinary play of light and darkness, the innumerable
shadows and flashes on the surface of the bayou, the black tracery of the
forest on either bank, the red beads of flame from the rifle fire
appearing and re-appearing, made of it all a vast panorama for him. There
were the sounds, too, the piratical shout, hoarse and menacing, the Indian
whoop, shriller and with more of the wild beast's whine in it, the fierce,
sharp note of the rifle fire, steady, insistent, and full of threat, and
over it the heavy thudding of the great guns.

It was Paul's eye and ear at first that received the deep impression, but
now the aspect of a panorama passed away and his soul was stirred with a
fierce desire to get on, to cut through the hostile line, to crush down
the opposition, and to reach the full freedom of the wide river. He began
to hate those men who opposed them, the fire of passion that battle breeds
was surely mounting to his head. Unconsciously, Paul, the scholar and
coming statesman, the grave quiet youth, began to shout and to hurl
invectives at those who presumed to hold them back. The barrel of his
rifle grew hot in his hand with constant loading and firing, but he did
not notice it. He still, at imminent risk to himself, sent his bullets
toward the dark line of Indian canoes and the flashing hulk of the ship
behind them.

The supply fleet was beginning to suffer severely. A number of boats and
canoes had been sunk and nearly a score of men had been killed. Many more
were wounded and, despite all this loss, they had made no progress. The
fire from the bank, moreover, was beginning to sting them and to stop it
Adam Colfax landed more men. The increased force of the Americans on the
shore served the purpose but they were still unable to force the mouth of
the bayou. The schooner seemed to be fixed there and she never ceased to
send a storm of bullets and cannon balls at them.

Adam Colfax had a slight wound in the arm, but his slow cold blood was now
at the boiling point.

"We've got to force that schooner!" he cried. "We've got to take her, if
it has to be done with boarders! We can never get by unless we do it!"

But the loss of life even if the attempt were a success, would be
terrible. That was apparent to everybody and Henry made a suggestion.

"Let's concentrate our whole fire upon the ship," he said. "Mass the
cannon and the rest of us will back them up with our rifles. Maybe we can
silence her, and if we do then's the time to take her by storm."

The supply fleet drew back and its fire died. It seemed, in truth, as if
it were beaten and that, hemmed in by fire, as it were in the narrow
bayou, it must surrender. A tremendous shout of triumph burst forth from
the men on the schooner, and the Indians took it up in a vast and shriller
but more terrible chorus.

Then came one of those sudden and ominous silences that sometimes occur in
a battle. The fire of the Americans ceasing, that of their enemies ceased
for the moment also. But the pause was more deadly and menacing in its
stillness than all the thunder and shouting of the combat had been. It
seemed unnatural to hear again the sighing of the wind through the forest
and the quiet lap of water against the shore. The bank of smoke, no longer
increased from below, lifted, thinned, broke up into patches, and began to
float away. The moon's rays shot through the mists and vapors once more,
and lighted up the watery battlefield of the night, the schooner, the
desperate men on it, the swarms of canoes, the coppery, high-cheeked faces
of the Indians, the supply fleet packed now in a rather close mass, the
tanned faces of the men on board it, animated by the high spirit of daring
and enterprise, the wounded lying silent in the boats, and the wreckage
floating on the bayou.

But the stillness endured for only a few moments. It was broken by the
American fleet, which seemed to draw itself together into closer and more
compact form. An order in a low tone, but sharp and precise, was carried
from boat to boat, and it seemed to strengthen the men anew, heart and
body. They straightened up, signs of exhaustion passed from their faces,
and every one made ready all the arms that he had.

Paul, like the others, had felt the sudden silence, but perhaps most
acutely of all. His whole imaginative temperament was on fire. He knew--he
would have known, even had he not heard--that the sudden cessation of the
firing was merely preliminary, a fresh drawing of the breath as it were
for another and supreme effort. He clasped his hands to his temples, where
the pulses were beating rapidly and heavily, and his face burned as if in
a fever. But it was a fever of the mind not of the body.

"It's a big battle, Paul," said Shif'less Sol, who had come with Tom Ross
into their boat, "but it's wuth it. The arms and other things that we
carry in these boats may be wuth millions an' millions to the people who
come after us."

"Do you think we'll ever break through, Sol?" asked Paul.

"Shorely," replied the shiftless one. "Henry's got the plan, and we're
goin' to cut through like a wedge druv through a log. Something's got to
give. Up, Paul, with your gun! Here she goes ag'in!"

The battle suddenly burst forth afresh and with greater violence. All the
American twelve pounders were now in a row at the head of the fleet, and
one after another, from right to left and then from left to right and over
and over again, they began to fire with tremendous rapidity and accuracy
at the schooner. All the best gunners were around the twelve pounders. If
one fell, another took his place. Many of them were stripped to the waist,
and their own fire lighted up their tan faces and their brown sinewy arms
as they handled rammer and cannon shot.

The fire of the cannon was supported by that of scores and scores of
rifles, and the enemy replied with furious energy. But the supply fleet
was animated now by a single purpose. The shiftless one's simile of a
wedge driven into a log was true. No attention was paid to anybody in the
hostile boats and canoes. They could fire unheeded. Every American cannon
and rifle sent its load straight at the schooner. All the upper works of
the vessel were shot away. The men of Alvarez could not live upon its
decks; they were even slain at the port holes by the terrific rifle fire;
cannon shot, grape shot, and rifle bullets searched every nook and corner
of the vessel, and her desperate crew, one by one, began to leap into the
water and make for the shores.

A shout of exultation rose from the supply fleet, which was now slowly
moving forward. Flames suddenly burst from the schooner and ran up the
stumps of her masts and spars, reaching out long arms and laying hold at
new points. The cannon shots had also reached the inside of the ship as
fire began to spout from the port holes, and there was a steady stream of
men leaping from the schooner into the water of the bayou and making for
the land.

The American shout of exultation was repeated, and the forest gave back
the echo. The Indians answered it with a fierce yell of defiance, and the
forest gave back that, too.

But Adam Colfax had been watching shrewdly.

In his daring life he had been in more than one naval battle, and when he
saw the schooner wrapped and re-wrapped in great coils and ribbons of
flame he knew what was due. Suddenly he shouted in a voice that could be
heard above the roar of the battle:

"Back! Back, all! Back for your lives!"

It reached the ears of everybody in the American fleet, and whether he
understood its words or not every man understood its tone. There was an
involuntary movement common to all. The fleet stopped its slow advance,
seemed to sway in another direction, and then to sit still on the water.
But all were looking at the schooner with an intense, fascinated, yet
horrified gaze.

Nobody was left on the deck of the vessel but the dead. The huge,
intertwining coil of fiery ribbons seemed suddenly to unite in one great
glowing mass, out of which flames shot high, sputtering and crackling.
Then came an awful moment of silence, the vessel trembled, leaped from the
water, turned into a volcano of fire and with a tremendous crash blew up.

The report was so great that it came rolling back in echo after echo, but
for a few moments there was no other sound save the echo. Then followed a
rain of burning wood, many pieces falling in the supply fleet, burning and
scorching, while others fell hissing in the forest on either shore.
Darkness, too, came over land and water. All the firing had ceased as if
by preconcerted signal, though the combatants on either side were awed by
the fate of the vessel. The smoke bank came back, too, thicker and heavier
than before, and the air was filled with the strong, pungent odor of
burnt gunpowder.

But the schooner that had blocked the mouth of the bayou was gone forever
and the way lay open before them. Adam Colfax recovered from the shock of
the explosion.

"On, men! On!" he roared, and the whole fleet, animated by a single
impulse, sprang forward toward the mouth of the bayou, the cannon blazing
anew the path, the gunners loading and firing, as fast as they could. But
the simile of the shiftless one had come true. The wedge, driven by
tremendous strokes, had cleft the log.

The Indian fleet, many of the boats containing white men, too, closed in
and sought to bar the way, but they were daunted somewhat by their great
disaster, and in an instant the American fleet was upon them cutting a
path through to the free river. Boat often smashed into boat, and the
weaker, or the one with less impulse, went down. Now and then white and
red reached over and grasped each other in deadly struggle, but, whatever
happened, the supply fleet moved steadily on.

It was to Paul a confused combat, a wild and terrible struggle, the climax
of the night-battle. White and red faces mingled before him in a blur, the
water seemed to flow in narrow, black streams between the boats and the
pall of smoke was ever growing thicker. It hung over them, black and
charged now with gases. Paul coughed violently, but he was not conscious
of it. He fired his rifle until it was too hot to hold. Then he laid it
down, and seizing an oar pulled with the energy of fever.

When the boats containing the cannon were through and into the river, they
faced about and began firing over the heads of the others into the huddled
mass of the enemy behind. But it was only for a minute or two. Then the
last of the supply fleet; that is, the last afloat, came through, and the
gap that they had made was closed up at once by the enemy, who still hung
on their rear and who were yet shouting and firing.

The Americans gave a great cheer, deep and full throated, but they did not
pause in their great effort. Boats swung off toward either bank of the
bayou's mouth. The skirmishers in the bushes who had done such useful work
must be taken on board. Theirs was now the most dangerous position of all,
pursued as they certainly would be by the horde of Indians and outlaws,
bent upon revenge.

The boat containing the five was among those that touched the northern
side of the bayou's mouth, and everyone of them, rifle in hand, instantly
sprang ashore.




CHAPTER XXI

THE DEFENSE OF THE FIVE


Henry Ware was the first on land, Shif'less Sol came just behind him, and
then the other three. The boat from which they had leaped, and which now
contained but two oarsmen, swung back a little into the stream, and in a
moment the darkness, closing down, shut it from view. They stood in a
patch of undergrowth and the battle still flamed around them on the bayou,
on the river, and in the woods. It was now fiercest in the forest, which
crackled with the rifle shots and the sound of singing bullets.
Innumerable jets of flame sparkled here and there, and then went out, to
be succeeded instantly by others.

Many of the Indian canoes had been sunk by the explosion or the sweep of
the supply fleet, but it was easy for their occupants, if not seriously
wounded, to escape to the land, and they greatly increased the savage
swarm in the woods, chiefly on the north bank of the bayou. Henry and his
friends could hear their warning cries to one another, even their tread,
and they realized that their own skirmishers in the woods would be pressed
hard. Only a determined effort could hold back the horde long enough for
the men to reach the fleet.

While they stood there, seeking the best thing to do, two skirmishers
dashed up, breathless, both slightly wounded, and exclaiming that they
were pursued by a formidable force.

"Jump into the water!" cried Henry. "The boats are only a few yards away!
We'll hold back the savages!"

There were two plunks, as the skirmishers sprang into the Mississippi,
sinking a moment from sight, and then, as they reappeared, swimming
swiftly for the boats. Behind them came their pursuers in a swarm, but
they were driven back by the rifle fire of the little party from Kentucky.
Another skirmisher burst through the bushes, and, helped in the same way,
sprang into the Mississippi, swimming for the boats. Then came a fourth
and a fifth and everyone escaped as the others had done.

"It's well we came," said Henry. "This is not the least of our task. Lie
down, boys."

They stretched themselves on the damp earth, the great, yellow river close
behind them, and the forest in front swarming with the savage force. They
had expected other men who had landed to come to their aid, but the
parties had become separated in the darkness and confusion of the battle,
and they were left alone. Nevertheless a dauntless heart beat in every
breast, and they expected to hold that neck of land, which seemed to be a
channel for the pursued, until the last fugitive was safe.

Lying upon their faces, half supported by their elbows, they could load
and fire whenever they saw a hostile figure in front of them. Again and
again the pursuit of a skirmisher was driven back by these deadly
riflemen. Now and then a cannon shot fired from their own fleet whistled
over their heads and struck in the forest among their foes, but they paid
no attention to it. They were intent upon their own work and every faculty
was concentrated for the task.

They had the bayou on one side and a little bay of the river on the other,
and they could not be surrounded by land. The foe was always straight
before them, in a way, eye to eye, and there they sent bullets that rarely
missed.

A fever was in their blood, the long battle, its tremendous events, and
the new phase that it had now assumed, set every nerve to going. Certain
faculties useless for that crisis had become atrophied for the time. They
no longer heard the sounds of the cannon shots over their heads or the
shouts of the men on the boats, they saw and heard nothing but their own
battle and what lay directly in front of them.

The position was growing more dangerous. Their searching fire had drawn
upon them an enemy always increasing in numbers. The savages converged in
front of them in a semicircle, and their fire grew heavier and heavier.
Bullets whistled over them, struck the earth about them, or clipped their
clothing.

Another fugitive passed them and escaped, and then yet another. It was
evident that their task was not yet done, and they would not leave,
although the fire poured upon them, still increased in heat and the
bullets came in showers.

Presently the attack seemed to veer away from them somewhat, as if the
attention of the enemy were turned elsewhere, and Paul, who was at the end
of the line, crept forward a little in the thicket. The fever was still
burning in his veins and he was anxious to see what lay in front of him.
He did not hear the warning cries of his comrades, or, if hearing, he did
not heed them. He was still burning with the desire to see what lay there
in the depths of the forest. Paul, the scholar, the thinker, the future
statesman, had become transformed. In such a surcharged atmosphere he,
too, had turned into the primitive man, the fighter, the man who looks
upon every other man not proven a friend, as his natural enemy. The
bullets had ceased for the time being to whistle above his head and to
strike up the earth about him. He became conscious once more of the cannon
shots, shrieking over him, and the crash of the rifle fire came from right
and left.

A stick broke under Paul and he heard a shout in front of him. The shout
was so fierce, so fully charged with malice, that he sprang to his feet as
if he had been propelled by an electric shock. He stood face to face with
Don Francisco Alvarez, the plotter, the rebel, and leader of the attacking
army, a wild and terrible figure, clothes torn, bleeding from wounds, but
animated now by a savage joy. His pistol was leveled at the surprised
youth, and the next moment the deadly bullet would have been sped, but a
tall black-robed figure rose up from the bushes and threw Alvarez back.

"Francisco Alvarez, thou hast done crime enough already!" exclaimed the
priest.

Alvarez regained his balance, cast one look of hate at the man who had
intervened, and cried:

"Ha! it is you, priest, who have come in my way once more! Then go the way
of martyrdom!"

Turning his pistol he fired the bullet full into the black-robed chest,
and Father Montigny fell dying.

