dashed in between. Sparks danced before Ned's eyes. Throat and mouth,
lips and his whole face burned with smoke and fever, but all the heat
seemed to drive him into fiercer action. He struck at horse and horseman
so savagely that the two went down together, and the lance broke in his
hands. Then with a cry of triumph that his parched throat could scarcely
utter, he leaped into the timber.

Having reached the shelter of the trees, Ned ran on for a long time, and
finally came into the belt of forest along the San Antonio River.
Twenty-six others escaped in the same way on that day, which witnessed
the most dreadful deed ever done on the soil of North America, but
nearly four hundred were murdered in obedience to the letter sent by
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. Fannin and Ward, themselves, were shot
through the head, and their bodies were thrown into the common heap of
the slain.

Ned did not see any of the other fugitives among the trees. He may have
passed them, but his brain was still on fire, and he beheld nothing but
that terrible scene behind him, the falling recruits, the fire and the
smoke and the charging horsemen. He could scarcely believe that it was
real. The supreme power would not permit such things. Already the Alamo
had lighted a fire in his soul, and Goliad now turned it into a roaring
flame. He hated Urrea, who had rejoiced in it, and he hated Santa Anna
who, he dimly felt, had been responsible for this massacre. Every
element in his being was turned for the time into passion and hatred. As
he wandered on, he murmured unintelligible but angry words through his
burning lips.

He knew nothing about the passage of time, but after many hours he
realized that it was night, and that he had come to the banks of a
river. It was the San Antonio, and he swam it, wishing to put the stream
between himself and the Mexicans. Then he sat down in the thick timber,
and the collapse from such intense emotions and such great exertions
came quickly. He seemed to go to pieces all in a breath. His head fell
forward and he became unconscious.




CHAPTER XIX

THE RACE FOR THE BOAT


Five men, or rather four men and a boy, rode down the banks of the San
Antonio, always taking care to keep well in the shelter of the timber.
All the men were remarkable in figure, and at least three of them were
of a fame that had spread to every corner of Texas.

The one who rode slightly in advance was of gigantic build, enormously
thick through the shoulders and chest. He was dressed in brightly dyed
deerskin, and there were many fanciful touches about his border costume.
The others also wore deerskin, but theirs was of soberer hue. The man
was Martin Palmer, far better known as the Panther, or, as he loved to
call himself, the Ring Tailed Panther. His comrades were "Deaf" Smith,
Henry Karnes, Obed White and Will Allen.

They were not a very cheerful five. Riding as free lances, because there
was now practically no organized authority among the Texans, they had
been scouting the day before toward Goliad. They had learned that Fannin
and his men had been taken, and they had sought also to discover what
the Mexican generals meant to do with the troops. But the Mexican
patrols had been so numerous and strong that they could not get close
enough to Goliad. Early in the morning while in the timber by the river
they had heard the sound of heavy firing near Goliad, which continued
for some time, but they had not been able to fathom its meaning. They
concluded finally that a portion of Fannin's men must have been still
holding out in some old building of Goliad, and that this was the last
stand.

They made another effort to get closer to the town, but they were soon
compelled to turn back, and, again they sought the thickest timber along
the river. Now they were riding back, in the hope of finding some Texan
detachment with which they could cooeperate.

"If we keep huntin' we ought to find somebody who can tell us
somethin'," said the Panther.

"It's a long lane that has no news at the end," said Obed White, with an
attempt at buoyancy.

"That's so," said "Deaf" Smith. "We're bound to hit a trail somehow an'
somewhere. We heard that Fannin's men had surrendered an' then we heard
that firin'. But I guess that they wouldn't give up, without makin' good
terms for themselves, else they would have held out as the boys did in
the Alamo."

"Ah, the Alamo!" said Obed White. His face clouded at the words. He was
thinking then of the gallant youth who had escaped with him from the
dungeon under the sea in the castle of San Juan de Ulua, and who had
been his comrade in the long and perilous flight through Mexico into
Texas. The heart of the Maine man, alone in the world, had turned
strongly to Ned Fulton, and mourning him as one dead he also mourned him
as a son. But as he rarely talked of the things that affected him most,
he seldom mentioned Ned. The Panther was less restrained.

"We've got a big score to settle for the Alamo," he said. "Some good
friends of mine went down forever in that old mission an' there was that
boy, Ned Fulton. I s'pose it ain't so bad to be cut off when you're old,
an' you've had most of your life, but it does look bad for a strong,
fine boy just turnin' into a man to come straight up ag'inst the dead
wall."

Will Allen said nothing, but unbidden water forced itself to his eyes.
He and Ned had become the strongest of friends and comrades.

"After all that's been done to our people," said the Panther, "I feel
like rippin' an' r'arin' an' chawin' the rest of my life."

"We'll have the chance to do all of it we want, judgin' from the way
things are goin'," said "Deaf" Smith.

Then they relapsed into silence, and rode on through the timber, going
slowly as they were compelled to pick their way in the underbrush. It
was now nearly noon, and a brilliant sun shone overhead, but the foliage
of young spring was heavy on trees and bushes, and it gave them at the
same time shade and shelter.

As they rode they watched everywhere for a trail. If either Texans or
Mexicans had passed they wanted to know why, and when. They came at last
to hoofprints in the soft bank of the river, indicating that
horses--undoubtedly with men on their backs--had crossed here. The
skilled trailers calculated the number at more than fifteen, perhaps
more than twenty, and they followed their path across the timber and out
upon the prairie.

When the hoofprints were more clearly discernible in the grass they saw
that they had been made by unshod feet, and they were mystified, but
they followed cautiously or, for two or three miles, when "Deaf" Smith
saw something gleaming by the track. He alighted and picked up a painted
feather.

"It's simple now," he said. "We've been followin' the trail of Indians.
They wouldn't be in this part of the country, 'less they were helpin'
the Mexicans, an' I guess they were at Goliad, leavin' after the
business there was finished."

"You're right, Deaf," said Karnes. "That 'counts for the unshod hoofs.
It ain't worth while for us to follow them any longer, so I guess we'd
better turn back to the timber."

Safety obviously demanded this course, and soon they were again in the
forest, riding near the San Antonio and down its stream. They struck the
trail of a bear, then they roused up a deer in the thickets, but big
game had no attraction for them now, and they went on, leaving bear and
deer in peace. Then the sharp eyes of the Panther saw the print of a
human foot on the river bank. He soon saw three or four more such traces
leading into the forest, where the trail was lost.

The five gathered around the imprints in the earth, and debated their
meaning. It was evident even to Will Allen that some one without a horse
had swum the river at that point and had climbed up the bank. They could
see the traces lower down, where he had emerged from the water.

"I figger it this way," said the Panther. "People don't go travelin'
through this country except on horses, an' this fellow, whoever he is,
didn't have any horse, as we all can see as plain as day."

"An' in such times as these," said "Deaf" Smith, "fellers don't go
swimmin' rivers just for fun. The one that made these tracks was in a
hurry. Ain't that so, Hank?"

"'Course he was," replied Karnes. "He was gettin' away from somewhere
an' from somebody. That's why he swam the river; he wanted the San
Antonio to separate him from them somebodies."

"And putting two and two and then two more together," said Obed White,
"we draw the conclusion that it is a fugitive, probably one of our own
Texans, who has escaped in some manner from his prison at Goliad."

"It's what we all think," said the Panther, "an' now we'll beat up these
thickets till we find him. He's sure to keep movin' away from Goliad,
an' he's got sense to stay in the cover of the timber."

The forest here ran back from the river three or four hundred yards, and
the five, separating and moving up the stream, searched thoroughly. The
hunt presently brought the Panther and Obed White together again, and
they expressed their disappointment at finding nothing. Then they heard
a cry from Will Allen, who came galloping through the thickets, his face
white and his eyes starting.

"I've found Ned Fulton!" he cried. "He's lying here dead in the bushes!"

The Panther and Obed stared in amazement.

"Will," exclaimed the Panther, "have you gone plum' crazy? Ned was
killed at the Alamo!"

"I tell you he is here!" cried the boy, who was shaking with excitement.
"I have just seen him! He was lying on his back in the bushes, and he
did not move!"

"Lead on! Let's see what you have seen!" said Obed, who began to share
in the boy's excitement.

The Panther whistled, and Smith and Karnes joined them. Then, led by
Will Allen, they rode swiftly through the bushes, coming, forty or fifty
yards away, into a tiny grassy glade. It was either Ned Fulton or his
ghost, and the Panther, remembering the Alamo, took it for the latter.
He uttered a cry of astonishment and reined in his horse. But Obed White
leaped to the ground, and ran to the prostrate figure.

"A miracle!" he exclaimed. "It's Ned Fulton! And he's alive!"

The others also sprang from their horses, and crowded around their
youthful comrade, whom they had considered among the fallen of the
Alamo. Ned was unconscious, his face was hot with fever, and his
breathing was hard and irregular.

"How he escaped from the Alamo and how he came here we don't know," said
Obed White solemnly, "but there are lots of strange things in heaven and
earth, as old Shakespeare said, and this is one of the strangest of them
all."

"However, it's happened we're glad to get him back," said the Panther.
"And now we must go to work. You can tell by lookin' at him that he's
been through all kinds of trouble, an' a powerful lot of it."

These skilled borderers knew that Ned was suffering from exhaustion.
They forced open his mouth, poured a drink down his throat from a flask
that Karnes carried, and rubbed his hands vigorously. Ned, after a
while, opened his eyes and looked at them dimly. He knew in a vague way
that these were familiar faces, but he remembered nothing, and he felt
no surprise.

"Ned! Ned! Don't; you know us?" said Will Allen. "We're your friends,
and we found you lying here in the bush!"

The clouds slowly cleared away from Ned's mind and it all came back, the
terrible and treacherous slaughter of his unarmed comrades, his own
flight through the timber his swimming of the river, and then the blank.
But these were his best friends. It was no fantasy. How and when they
had come he did not know, but here they were in the flesh, the Panther,
Obed White, Will Allen, "Deaf" Smith and Henry Karnes.

"Boys," he asked weakly, "how did you find me?"

"Now don't you try to talk yet a while, Ned," said Obed White, veiling
his feeling under a whimsical tone. "When people come back from the
dead they don't always stay, and we want to keep you, as you're an
enrolled member of this party. The news of your trip into the beyond and
back again will keep, until we fix up something for you that will make
you feel a lot stronger."

These frontiersmen never rode without an outfit, and Smith produced a
small skillet from his kit. The Panther lighted a fire, Karnes chipped
off some dried beef, and in a few minutes they had a fine soup, which
Ned ate with relish. He sat with his back against a tree and his
strength returned rapidly.

"I guess you can talk now, Ned," said Obed White. "You can tell us how
you got away from the Alamo, and where you've been all the time."

Young Fulton's face clouded and Obed White saw his hands tremble.

"It isn't the Alamo," he said. "They died fighting there. It was
Goliad."

"Goliad?" exclaimed "Deaf" Smith. "What do you mean?"

"I mean the slaughter, the massacre. All our men were led out. They were
told that they were to go on parole. Then the whole Mexican army opened
fire upon us at a range of only a few yards and the cavalry trod us
down. We had no arms. We could not fight back. It was awful. I did not
dream that such things could be. None of you will ever see what I've
seen, and none of you will ever go through what I've gone through."

"Ned, you've had fever. It's a dream," said Obed White, incredulous.

"It is no dream. I broke through somehow, and got to the timber. Maybe a
few others escaped in the same way, but all the rest were murdered in
cold blood. I know that Santa Anna ordered it."

They knew perfectly well that Ned was telling the full truth, and the
faces of all of them darkened. The same thought was in the heart of
every one, vengeance for the deed, but however intense was the thought
it did not approach the feeling of Ned, who had seen it all, and who had
been through it all.

"I guess that was the firing we heard," said Smith, "when we thought it
was the boys making a last stand at Goliad. I tell you, comrades, this
means the freedom of Texas. No matter how the quarrel came about no
people can stand such things."

"It's so," said the others together.

They did not declaim. They were of a tribe that was not given much to
words, but they felt sure that their own resolve to fight until no
Mexicans were left in Texas would now be shared by every Texan.

After Ned rested a while longer and ate more of the good soup, he told
the full story of the great and tragic scenes through which he had
passed since he became separated from them. Seasoned as they were, these
men hung with breathless interest on every detail. He told them
everything that had passed in the Alamo during the long days of the
siege. He told of Crockett and Bowie and Travis and of the final
assault.

The Panther drew a deep breath, when he finished that part of the story.

"They were certainly great men in the Alamo, them fellers," he said,
"and when my time comes to die I believe I'd rather die that way than
any other."

Ned did not linger long over the tale of Goliad. He could not yet bear
the detailed repetition.

"I think we'd better make for the coast," said "Deaf" Smith, when he
had finished. "Our forces in the field are about wiped out, an' we've
got to raise a new army of some kind. We can look for our government,
too. It's wanderin' aroun', tryin' to keep out of the hands of Santa
Anna. We haven't any horse for you now, Ned, but you can ride behind
Will Allen. Maybe we can get you a mount before long."

They remained in the timber the rest of the day, in order that Ned might
recover sufficiently for the journey. About the middle of the afternoon
they saw a dozen Mexican cavalrymen on the plain, and they hoped that
they would invade the timber. They were keyed to such a pitch of anger
and hate that they would have welcomed a fight, and they were more than
confident of victory, but the Mexicans disappeared beyond the swells,
and every one of the men was disappointed.

At night they began their march toward the north, and continued almost
until morning. Ned, riding behind Will Allen, scarcely spoke. Obed
White, then and afterward, observed a great change in him. He seemed to
have matured suddenly far beyond his years, and Obed always felt that he
had some unchanging purpose that had little to do with gentleness or
mercy.

They slept in the timber until about 10 o'clock, and then resumed their
ride northward, still holding to the opinion that the peripatetic Texan
government would be found at Harrisburg, or somewhere in its vicinity.
In the afternoon they encountered a Mexican force of eight mounted men,
and attacked with such vigor that Ned and Will, riding double, were
never able to get into the fight. Two of the Mexicans fell, and the rest
got away. The Texans were unharmed.

The Panther, after a chase, captured one of the horses, and brought him
back for Ned. They also secured the arms of the fallen Mexicans, one of
these weapons being an American rifle, which Ned was quite sure had
belonged to a slaughtered recruit at Goliad. They also found a letter in
one of the Mexican haversacks. It was from General Urrea to General
Santa Anna, and the Panther and his comrades inferred from the direction
in which its bearer had been riding that the dictator himself had left
San Antonio, and was marching eastward with the main Mexican army.

"I have to inform you," ran a part of the letter, "that your orders in
regard to the rebels at Goliad were carried out, in my absence, by the
brave and most excellent Colonel Portilla. They were all executed,
except a few who escaped under cover of the smoke to the timber, but our
cavalrymen are sure to find in time every one of these, and inflict upon
them the justice that you have ordered.

"I shall march north, expecting to meet your excellency, and I trust
that I shall have further good news to report to you. There are now no
rebel forces worthy of the name. We shall sweep the country clean. I
shall send detachments to take any Americans who may land at the ports,
and, cooeperating with you, I feel assured, also, that we shall capture
every member of the rebel government. In another month there will not be
a single Texan in arms against us."

Ned read the letter aloud, translating into English as he went, and when
he finished the Panther burst into a scornful laugh.

"So, the rebels are all killed, or about to be killed!" he said. "An'
there won't be one Texan in arms a month from now! I'm willin' to give
my word that here are six of us who will be in arms then, roarin' an'
rippin' an' t'arin'! They'll sweep the country clean, will they? They'll
need a bigger broom for that job than any that was ever made in
Mexico!"

The others made comment in like fashion, but young Fulton was silent.
His resolution was immutable, and it required no words to assert it.

"I guess we'd better take this letter with us an' give it to Sam
Houston," said "Deaf" Smith. "Houston has been criticized a lot for not
gatherin' his forces together an' attackin' the Mexicans, but he ain't
had any forces to gather, an' talk has never been much good against
cannon balls an' bullets. Still, he's the only man we've got to fall
back on."

"You keep the letter, 'Deaf'," said the Panther, "an' now that we've got
a horse for Ned I guess we can go a little faster. How you feelin' now,
Ned?"

"Fine," replied Ned. "Don't you bother about me any more. I started on
the upgrade the moment you fellows found me."

"A good horse and a good rifle ought to be enough to bring back the
strength to any Texan," said Obed White.

They resumed their journey at a faster pace, but before nightfall they
met another Texan who informed them that large forces of Mexicans were
now between them and Harrisburg. Hence they concluded that it was wiser
to turn toward the coast, and make a great circuit around the forces of
Santa Anna.

But they told the Texan scout of what had been done at Goliad, and bade
him wave the torch of fire wherever he went. He rode away with a face
aghast at the news, and they knew that he would soon spread it through
the north. As for themselves they rode rapidly toward the east.

