

There was much in this letter to pain Primrose, and a year before she
might have torn it up and determined in no way to be guided by it; but
a year had brought her some very strange and some very sad
experiences. She was troubled and shocked to think that Jasmine should
have taken poor Poppy's hard earnings. She was deeply distressed at
owing herself so much to Miss Egerton, and now also so large a debt to
Arthur Noel. She had worked hard, and had done wonderfully well
considering, but nevertheless at the present moment, owing to adverse
circumstances, she was plunged in debt in many directions, and saw
little hope of repaying what she owed. Life seemed very difficult to
Primrose just then, and hot tears rose to her eyes.

Should she go still farther in debt, and give up the great struggle to
be independent? Oh, no, she could not--she could not. Her pride rose
up in rebellion; her passionate longing to be free and her own
mistress, to be beholden to no one for the necessaries of life, was
too strong to be easily crushed. Better the dullest life, better be a
"continual reader" all her days than take the money of strangers. This
was her feeling, and it grew so strong moment by moment, that she
might have sat down to answer Miss Egerton's letter there and then but
for a rather innocent little remark made by Daisy.

"Dear Primrose, I forgot it in all the other great trouble, but I do
want to send fifteen shillings as soon as possible to dear good Poppy.
She lent me fifteen shillings to buy a single third to come to
Rosebury, and I forgot all about it. Please, Primrose, try and spare
me fifteen shillings to send to Poppy."

"So you too are in debt, Daisy," said Primrose. "Oh, dear, what shall
I do? Daisy, dear, forgive me, I ought not to mind anything now you
are growing better, but my heart is heavy, and I feel almost crushed.
Yes, Daisy, dear Poppy must have her money. I won't write to Miss
Egerton until to-morrow."

Here Primrose wiped some tears from her sweet brown eyes, but she took
good care not to allow Daisy to see that she was crying.




CHAPTER LII.

"I LOVE MRS. ELLSWORTHY."


The next afternoon, to the surprise of both Primrose and Daisy, Noel
arrived. Daisy greeted her Prince with rapture, but refused to hear
any particulars of Dove's trial.

"I want to forget him," she said. "You say he is in the dungeon now. I
don't want to think of it. If I think of it long I shall begin to be
so sorry for him."

"We will talk of something better and pleasanter," said Noel. "How
soon are you coming back to your Palace Beautiful, little Princess?"

Daisy looked anxiously across the room at Primrose. Primrose was
bending over some needlework, and a ray of sunlight was shining on her
fair head. She did not raise her eyes or respond in any way to the
little sister's glance.

"We did think of coming back to Miss Egerton's in the autumn," said
Daisy, "but last night Primrose--May I tell, Primrose?"

Primrose put down her work suddenly and came up to where Noel and
Daisy were sitting.

"It is just this," she said; "Daisy did not know she had such a proud
and obstinate sister. We had made our plans for the autumn--at least
we simply intended to struggle on, and hope and watch for brighter
days--but yesterday I had a letter from Miss Egerton, and some of its
contents troubled me a good deal. Daisy saw that I was unhappy, and I
told her what Miss Egerton wanted. I thought the dear little one would
object, but she only said, 'Oh, let us be brave, Primrose; our Palace
Beautiful will be all the brighter if we really earn it.' Then she
added, 'I am beginning to wish to earn a little money myself, for I
want to give a very kind person back what he gave me.'"

Noel gave Daisy's thin little hand a squeeze. Primrose looked at the
two, and stopped speaking. After a moment's pause she said suddenly--

"I don't like the plan; I never can like it. Mrs. Ellsworthy is all
that is kind, but she is no relation of ours. She lived in the same
place with us for years, and she never even called on our mother. Oh,
I don't blame her; she naturally thought that people who lived in an
humble little cottage at Rosebury were not ladies, but you see we are
ladies, and we cannot help feeling sore. I may agree to the plan--I
may be forced to agree to it for Jasmine's and Daisy's sakes--but I
can never, never like it."

Here Primrose went out of the room.

"She was crying for a long time last night," whispered Daisy; "it
hurts her dreadfully to take Mrs. Ellsworthy's money. I don't suppose
I mind it so much, because I was coming to Mrs. Ellsworthy to ask her
for some money. I did not find her, and I was miserable until you
found me and helped me, Prince. Then I love Mrs. Ellsworthy, and so
does Jasmine."

"That is it, Eyebright," answered Noel; "we do not mind receiving
kindnesses and favors from those we love. Yes, I am very sorry for
Primrose; I wish matters could be differently arranged for her."

While Noel was speaking Hannah came into the room with a cup of
beef-tea for the little invalid.

"You have done her a sight of good already, sir," she said, peering
with her short-sighted eyes into the young man's face. "I don't know
what we'd have done for her if you hadn't come that day, and talked to
her, and got her to tell you what that most villainous person in
London was after."

"Oh, don't, Hannah," said Daisy, "he's in a dungeon now--poor, poor
Mr. Dove; I must not think about him if I mean to get well."

Here Daisy shivered, and added under her breath, with her little pale
face working--

"I did promise it very faithfully that I would never tell about the
sweetmeats."

"He was a bad man, Daisy, and he richly deserves his punishment," said
Noel, in an almost stern voice, for he wished to check any unhealthy
sentimentality on the part of the delicate child. "You must think of
what you and your sisters have suffered, and be glad he has been
prevented doing any more mischief."

"Drink up your beef-tea, missy," said Hannah. "Please, Mr. Noel, sir,
will you hold the cup for little miss? Oh, my heart alive, what--what
is that?"

"I don't see anything," said Noel, "what has frightened you, Hannah?"

But Hannah had grown white, and looked very queer, and a moment after
she hurried out of the room.

"I never knew your servant was nervous," said Noel to Daisy.

"Nervous?" she repeated, laughing merrily. "Is it Hannah? why she
always says she hasn't a nerve in her whole body. She's sometimes
almost cross with me for being nervous, Mr. Prince."

Noel stayed some little time longer with the sisters, and then
returned to Rosebury in time to catch the evening train to London.
When he got there he went straight to Mrs. Ellsworthy's house. That
little lady was anxiously expecting him, and plied him with many
questions on the spot.

"How is she taking it, Arthur?" she asked. "I have been forming and
maturing my plans, and I now think a resident governess at Shortlands
would be the nicest arrangement for the girls. They cannot be parted,
that is very evident, and as Primrose must be more than eighteen she
would not care to go to school. Yes, a resident governess seems the
plan of plans. I would take them up to London early in the spring, and
give them the advantage of the very best masters."

"Primrose seems very unhappy about it," replied Noel. "She may in the
end consent to some scheme for perfecting her education, but I'm quite
sure she will not go, nor allow her sisters to go to Shortlands to
live a life of simple luxury. I am sorry for you, Mrs. Ellsworthy, but
I know Primrose will never consent to that."

"I don't think you are sorry for me, Arthur," answered the pretty
little lady. "In your heart of hearts you quite agree with that
naughty, bad Primrose. You had rather the girls lived in their attic,
and encountered another dreadful Mr. Dove, and fell into the hands of
another designing publisher, than have them safe and happy at
Shortlands. Oh, it is a plot between you all to deprive me of my great
pleasure. Oh, why will girls, and young men, too, be so perverse?"

Noel smiled.

"I am sorry for both you and Primrose," he said. "I am convinced she
will never agree to your present scheme, although she may allow you to
help her to perfect her education."




CHAPTER LIII.

TELEGRAPH WIRES.


Daisy was quite right when she said that Hannah was not subject to
nervous attacks. Hannah scorned nerves, and did not believe in them.
When she was told that the human body was as full of nerves as an
electric battery was full of electricity, that nerves, in short, were
like numberless telegraphic-wires, prevailing the whole human frame,
she stared at the speakers, and pronounced them slightly daft.

Yet Hannah went out of her own little sitting-room on that summer
afternoon with, as she expressed it, trembling sensations running down
her back, and causing her fingers to shake when she handled her cups
and saucers.

"Dear, dear," she said to herself, "one would think I had some of
those awful telegrams in me which Miss Primrose said was the nervous
system. Why, I'm all upset from top to toe. I never had a good view of
him before, for I didn't pay no heed to nobody when my dear little
Miss Daisy was so ill; but I do say that the cut of the hand and the
turn of the head is as like--as like as two peas. Now I do wonder--no,
no, it can't be. Well, anyhow, my name ain't Hannah Martin if I don't
find out where he comes from, and who he really is. Well, well,
well--why this trembling won't leave me, and I don't dare go back into
the room. I suppose I have got a few telegraphs, and I mustn't never
laugh at poor little Miss Daisy again when she says she's nervous."

Hannah sat and rested for about half an hour--then she drank off a
glass of cold water--then she washed her face and hands--then she said
aloud that the telegrams should not get the better of her, and then
she prepared as nice a little dinner as she could for Noel and the two
sisters.

That evening, after Daisy was in bed, she came into the room where
Primrose was quietly reading.

"You haven't never come across no one the least like that brother of
yours in the London streets, Miss Primrose?" she asked. "London's a
big place, and strange things happen there--yes, very, very strange
things."

"Oh, Hannah, how you startle me!" said Primrose. "I come across my
poor little brother Arthur? How could I? Why, he must be dead for many
and many a year."

"Not a bit of him," said Hannah; "I don't believe he's dead. He was a
fine, hearty, strong child, and nothing ever seemed to ail him. Oh, it
rises up before me now what a beautiful picture he made when he stood
in his little red velvet dress by your mamma's knee, and she so proud
of him! There's no mistake, but he was the very light of her eyes. She
took him up to London, and a nursemaid--not me, you may be quite
sure--took him out. She went into a big shop, and the child was by her
side. She kept him standing by her as she ordered some things across
the counter, and, I suppose, she turned her head for a minute, for
when she looked round again he was gone. From that day to this he was
never heard of, though everything you can think of was done. Oh, my
poor, poor mistress, what she did suffer!"

"Hannah, how excited you look!" said Primrose. "Why, you are all
trembling. It is a terrible story, but as I say to Daisy about Mr.
Dove, don't let us think of it."

"Right you are, honey," said Hannah; "what can't be cured, you know.
If you don't mind, Miss Primrose, I'll just sit down for a minute. I'm
not to say quite myself. Oh, it ain't nothing, dearie; just a bit of
the trembles, and to prove to old Hannah that she is getting on in
years. I nursed you all, darling--him, my beautiful boy, and you
three. Miss Primrose, dear, how old would you say that Mr. Noel was.
I didn't have a fair look at him until to-day, and he seems quite a
young sort of man."

"Miss Egerton says that he is twenty-six, Hannah."

"Twenty-six," answered Hannah; "don't interrupt me for a minute, dear.
I'm comparing dates--twenty-six--twenty-six. Law, goodness gracious
me! You haven't never noticed, Miss Primrose, that he have a kind of a
mole--long-shaped, and rather big, a little way up his left arm? Have
you, now, dearies?"

"No, really, Hannah, I've never seen Mr. Noel's arm without his
coat-sleeve. How very queerly you are speaking, Hannah."

"Not at all, dearie; it's only because I've got the trembles on me.
Well, love, and so you don't want to be under no compliments to that
Mrs. Ellsworthy, who never took no notice of your poor dear ma?"

Primrose sighed.

"I feel sore about it, Hannah," she said. "But I must try not to be
too proud. I will ask God to help me to do what is really right in the
matter."

"That's it, honey, and maybe you won't have to do it after all. I
wonder, now, dear, if Mr. Noel is well off."

"Really, Hannah, I think you have got Mr. Noel on the brain! Yes, I
have heard Miss Egerton say that he is a rich man. He was the adopted
son of a very wealthy person, who left him all his property."

"Adopted, was he?" said Hannah. "On my word, these tremblings are
terrible! Miss Primrose, dear, I have come in to say that I may be
going a little journey in the morning. I'll be off by the first dawn,
so as to be back by night, and the shop needn't be opened at all
to-morrow. There's a nice cold roast fowl for you and Miss Daisy, and
a dish of strawberries which I gathered with my own hands not an hour
back, so you'll have no trouble with your dinner. You see that Miss
Daisy eats plenty of cream with her strawberries, dear, for cream's
fattening; and now good-night."




CHAPTER LIV.

A DISCOVERY.


Hannah Martin had never been much of a traveller. It was years since
she set her foot inside a railway carriage. She often boasted of her
abnormal lack of nerves, but she was also heard to say that accidents
by rail were fearful and common, and likely to happen at any moment.
She sighed for the old coaching days, and hated the thought of all
locomotives propelled by steam. Nevertheless, early in the morning of
the day following her interview with Primrose, Hannah, in her usual
neat print dress, was seen to enter the little railway station at
Rosebury, was observed to purchase for herself a third-class return
ticket, and after carefully selecting her carriage, to depart for
London.

In the afternoon of that same day Hannah reached her destination, and
securing the first porter whose attention she could arrest, she placed
a bit of paper in his hand, and asked him to direct her to the address
written upon it. The man screwed up his eyes, stared at the paper,
and suggested that Hannah should place herself in a hansom, and direct
the driver to take her to Park Lane. Hannah had not an idea what a
hansom meant; she had never visited London since her early days. She
stared with horror at the proposed vehicle, and finally selecting the
creakiest and most uninviting of the four-wheelers, drove off to her
destination.

Mrs. Ellsworthy was enjoying some very fragrant tea in her little
boudoir when a servant announced that a person of the name of Martin
had come up from the country in a four-wheeler, and would be glad to
see her as soon as possible.

"What kind of person, Henry?" asked the little lady. "I am very tired
just now, and I must go out to dinner in less than two hours. A person
from the country in a four-wheeler? What can she want with me?"

"She seems a respectable sort of body, ma'am," answered the footman,
"but nervous and shaky, and mortal afraid to step out of the cab; the
cabby and me we had both to lend her a hand in alighting, ma'am. She's
sitting now in a chair in the hall, and I can see she's upset with her
journey, but _respectable_; there's no word for the neatness of her
person, ma'am."

"She is probably poor, and wants me to help her," replied Mrs.
Ellsworthy. "I hate seeing beggars, for I find it absolutely
impossible to say _no_ to them. Show her up, Henry, and give her a
hint that I'm going out to dinner, and can only spare her a very few
moments."

Hannah could not certainly be accused when she entered Mrs.
Ellsworthy's room, of any want of nerves. Her hands were shaking, her
lips were tremulous, and her face, as she entered the room, became
perfectly white.

"You'll excuse me, ma'am," she said. "I'm most sorry to trouble you,
but I'm that anxious, I scarce know what I'm doing. I undertook a
railway journey--which I don't think right--and I came here through
most crowded streets in a dreadful vehicle, for I just wanted to ask
you a single question, ma'am."

"Sit down, my poor woman," said Mrs. Ellsworthy, who, the moment she
looked at Hannah, began to have a dim sort of idea that she had seen
her before, and also became full of pity for her. "Sit down. How you
tremble! I am sorry to see you are so nervous."

"Nervous, ma'am!" echoed Hannah. "That I should hear that said of me!
No, ma'am, it ain't nervous I am, but I'm rather worried with the
tremblings during the last few hours. I've come to ask you a plain
question, ma'am, plain and direct. It's about the young man Mr. Noel.
Have he, ma'am, or have he not, a mole on his left arm? I'd like yes
or no, ma'am."

"A mole on his left arm!" echoed Mrs. Ellsworthy. "My good woman, what
a very extraordinary question; you really quite startle me. Has Arthur
Noel a mole on his left arm? Yes, of course he has; I used to notice
it when he was a child. I suppose people don't outgrow moles, so he
probably has it still. Why, Mrs. Martin--I am told your name is
Martin--how very white you are. Would you--would you like a glass of
wine?"

"Thank you, ma'am--no wine, thank you, ma'am. I'm a bit upset. Yes,
I'm a bit upset, for I believe Mr. Arthur Noel is my long-lost baby."
