Western people seem to have for me. They seem to have read everything I
have written--and appear to appreciate the best. Think of a rough fellow
in a bearskin coat and blue shirt repeating to me _Concepcion de
Arguello_! Their strange good taste and refinement under that rough
exterior--even their tact--are wonderful to me. They are "Kentucks" and
"Dick Bullens" with twice the refinement and tenderness of their
California brethren....

I've seen but one [woman] that interested me--an old negro wench. She
was talking and laughing outside my door the other evening, but her
laugh was so sweet and unctuous and musical--so full of breadth and
goodness that I went outside and talked to her while she was scrubbing
the stones. She laughed as a canary bird sings--because she couldn't
help it. It did me a world of good, for it was before the lecture, at
twilight, when I am very blue and low-toned. She had been a slave.

I expected to have heard from you here. I've nothing from you or Eliza
since last Friday, when I got yours of the 12th. I shall direct this to
Eliza's care, as I do not even know where you are.

    Your affectionate
    FRANK.




LAFCADIO HEARN TO BASIL HALL CHAMBERLAIN


    [KUMAMOTO, JAPAN]
    January 17, 1893.

    DEAR CHAMBERLAIN,--

I'm writing just because I feel lonesome; isn't that selfish? However,
if I can amuse you at all, you will forgive me. You have been away a
whole year,--so perhaps you would like to hear some impressions of mine
during that time. Here goes.

The illusions are forever over; but the memory of many pleasant things
remains. I know much more about the Japanese than I did a year ago; and
still I am far from understanding them well. Even my own little wife is
somewhat mysterious still to me, though always in a lovable way. Of
course a man and woman know each other's hearts; but outside of personal
knowledge, there are race tendencies difficult to understand. Let me
tell one. In Oki we fell in love with a little Samurai boy, who was
having a hard time of it, and we took him with us. He is now like an
adopted son,--goes to school and all that. Well, I wished at first to
pet him a little, but I found that was not in accordance with custom,
and that even the boy did not understand it. At home, I therefore
scarcely spoke to him at all; he remained under the control of the women
of the house. They treated him kindly,--though I thought coldly. The
relationship I could not quite understand. He was never praised and
rarely scolded. A perfect code of etiquette was established between him
and all the other persons in the house, according to degree and rank. He
seemed extremely cold-mannered, and perhaps not even grateful, that was,
so far as I could see. Nothing seemed to move his young
placidity,--whether happy or unhappy his mien was exactly that of a
stone Jizo. One day he let fall a little cup and broke it. According to
custom, no one noticed the mistake, for fear of giving him pain.
Suddenly I saw tears streaming down his face. The muscles of the face
remained quite smilingly placid as usual, but even the will could not
control tears. They came freely. Then everybody laughed, and said kind
things to him, till he began to laugh too. Yet that delicate
sensitiveness no one like me could have guessed the existence of.

But what followed surprised me more. As I said, he had been (in my idea)
distantly treated. One day he did not return from school for three hours
after the usual time. Then to my great surprise, the women began to
cry,--to cry passionately. I had never been able to imagine alarm for
the boy could have affected them so. And the servants ran over town in
real, not pretended, anxiety to find him. He had been taken to a
teacher's house for something relating to school matters. As soon as his
voice was heard at the door, everything was quiet, cold, and amiably
polite again. And I marvelled exceedingly.

Sensitiveness exists in the Japanese to an extent never supposed by the
foreigners who treat them harshly at the open ports.... The Japanese
master is never brutal or cruel. How Japanese can serve a certain class
of foreigners at all, I can't understand....

This Orient knows not our deeper pains, nor can it even rise to our
larger joys; but it has its pains. Its life is not so sunny as might be
fancied from its happy aspect. Under the smile of its toiling millions
there is suffering bravely hidden and unselfishly borne; and a lower
intellectual range is counterbalanced by a childish sensitiveness to
make the suffering balance evenly in the eternal order of things.

Therefore I love the people very much, more and more, the more I know
them....

And with this, I say good-night.

    Ever most truly,
    LAFCADIO HEARN.




CHARLES ELIOT NORTON TO WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS


    SHADY HILL, 2 May, 1902.

"The Kentons" have been a great comfort to me. I have been in my
chamber, with a slight attack of illness, for two or three weeks, and I
received them one morning. I could not have had kinder or more
entertaining visitors, and I was sorry when, after two or three days, I
had to say Good-bye to them. They are very "natural" people, "just
Western." I am grateful to you for making me acquainted with them.

"Just Western" is the acme of praise. I think I once told you what
pleasure it gave me as a compliment. Several years ago at the end of one
of our Christmas Eve receptions, a young fellow from the West, taking my
hand and bidding me Good-night, said with great cordiality, "Mr. Norton,
I've had a delightful time; it's been _just Western_"!

"The Kentons" is really, my dear Howells, an admirable study of life,
and as it was read to me my chief pleasure in listening was in your
sympathetic, creative imagination, your insight, your humour, and all
your other gifts, which make your stories, I believe, the most faithful
representations of actual life that were ever written. Other stories
seem unreal after them, and so when we had finished "The Kentons,"
nothing would do for entertainment but another of your books: so now we
are almost at the end of "Silas Lapham," which I find as good as I found
it fifteen or sixteen years ago. As Gray's idea of pleasure was to lie
on a sofa and have an endless succession of stories by Crebillon,--mine
is to have no end of Howells!...


NOTES

Letter from William Vaughn Moody:--

=darkened counsel=:--See Job, 38:2. Moody seems to be referring here to
the uncertainty of his plans for the future.


Letter from Bret Harte:--

=Franky=:--Francis King Harte, Bret Harte's second son, who was eight
years old at this time.

=Concepcion de Arguello=:--One of Bret Harte's longer poems.

=Kentuck=:--A rough but kindly character in Harte's _The Luck of Roaring
Camp_.

=Dick Bullen=:--The chief character in _How Santa Claus Came to
Simpson's Bar_.

=Frank=:--Bret Harte's name was Francis Brett Hart(e), and his family
usually called him Frank.


Letter from Lafcadio Hearn:.--

=Chamberlain=:--Professor Chamberlain had lived for some years in Japan,
when Hearn, in 1890, wrote to him, asking assistance in securing a
position as teacher in the Japanese Government Schools. The friendship
between the two men continued until Hearn's death.

=Samurai=:--Pronounced _sae' m[)oo] r[=i]_; a member of the lesser
nobility of Japan.

=Jizo=:--A Japanese god, said to be the playmate of the ghosts of
children. Stone images of Jizo are common in Japan. (See page 19 of _The
Japanese Letters of Lafcadio Hearn_.)


EXERCISES IN LETTER WRITING

You are planning a camping trip with several of your friends; write to a
friend who lives in another town, asking him or her to join the camping
party.

Write to a friend asking him, or her, to come to your house for dinner
and to go with you afterward to see the moving pictures.

Write a letter to accompany a borrowed book, which you are returning.
Speak of the contents of the book, and the parts that you have
particularly enjoyed. Express your thanks for the use of the volume.

Write a letter to an intimate friend, telling of the occurrences of the
last week. Do not hesitate to recount trifling events; but make your
letter as varied and lively and interesting as possible.

Write to a friend about the new house or apartment that your family has
lately moved into.

Write to a friend or a relative who is visiting in a large city, asking
him or her to purchase some especial article that you cannot get in your
home town. Explain exactly what you want and tell how much you are
willing to pay. Speak of enclosing the money, and do not fail to express
the gratitude that you will feel if your friend will make the purchase
for you.

You have been invited to spend the week-end in a town not far from your
home. Write explaining why you cannot accept the invitation. Make your
letter personal and pleasant.

Write to some member of your family explaining how you have altered your
room to make it more to your taste than it has been. If you have not
really changed the room, imagine that you have done so, and that it is
now exactly as you want it to be.

You have heard of a family that is in great need. Write to one of your
friends, telling the circumstances and asking her to help you in
providing food and clothing for the children in the family.

You have just heard some startling news about an old friend whom you
have not seen for some time. Write to another friend who you know will
be interested, and relate the news that you have heard.

Write to one of your teachers explaining why you are late in handing in
a piece of work.

Your uncle has made you a present of a sum of money. Thank him for the
money and tell him what you think you will do with it.

A schoolmate is kept at home by illness. Write, offering your sympathy
and services, and telling the school news.

You have had an argument with a friend on a subject of interest to you
both. Since seeing this friend, you have run across an article in a
magazine, which supports your view of the question. Write to your friend
and tell him about the substance of the article.

Your mother has hurt her hand and cannot write; she has asked you to
write to a friend of hers about some business connected with the Woman's
Club.

You have arrived at home after a week's visit with a friend. Write your
friend's mother, expressing the pleasure that the visit has given you.
Speak particularly of the incidents of the visit, and show a lively
appreciation of the kindness of your friends.

A friend whom you have invited to visit you has written saying that she
(or he) is unable to accept your invitation. Write expressing your
regret. You might speak of the plans you had made in anticipation of the
visit; you might also make a more or less definite suggestion regarding
a later date for the arrival of your friend.

You are trying to secure a position. Write to some one for whom you have
worked, or some one who knows you well, asking for a recommendation that
you can use in applying for a position.

Write to your brother (or some other near relative), telling about a
trip that you have recently taken.

Write to one of your friends who is away at school, telling of the
athletic situation in the high school you are attending. Assume that
your friend is acquainted with many of the students in the high school.

You are sending some kodak films to be developed by a professional
photographer. Explain to him what you are sending and what you want
done. Speak of the price that he asks for his work, and the money that
you are enclosing.

Write a letter applying for a position. If possible, tell how you have
heard of the vacancy. State your qualifications, especially the
education and training that you have had; if you have had any
experience, tell definitely what it has been. Mention the
recommendations that you are enclosing, or give references to several
persons who will write concerning your character and ability. Do not
urge your qualifications, or make any promises, but tell about yourself
as simply and impersonally as possible. Close your letter without any
elaborate expressions of "hoping" or "trusting" or "thanking." "Very
truly yours," or "Very respectfully yours," will be sufficient.

You have secured the position for which you applied. Write expressing
your pleasure in obtaining the situation. Ask for information as to the
date on which you are to begin work.

Write to a friend or a relative, telling about your new position: how
you secured it; what your work will be; what you hope will come of it.

Write a brief respectful letter asking for money that is owed you.

Write to a friend considerably older than yourself, asking for advice as
to the appropriate college or training school for you to enter when you
have finished the high school course.


BOOKS FOR READING AND STUDY

Letters and Letter-writing                Charity Dye
Success in Letter-writing                 Sherwin Cody
How to do Business by Letter                 "     "
Charm and Courtesy in Letter-writing      Frances B. Callaway
Studies for Letters                          "    "      "
The Gentlest Art                          E.V. Lucas
The Second Post                           " "    "
The Friendly Craft                        F.D. Hanscom
Life and Letters of Miss Alcott           E.D. Cheney (Ed.)
Vailima Letters                           R.L. Stevenson
Letters of William Vaughn Moody           Daniel Mason (Ed.)
Letters from Colonial Children            Eva March Tappan
Woman as Letter-writers                   A.M. Ingpen.
The Etiquette of Correspondence           Helen E. Gavit


EXERCISES IN DRAMATIC COMPOSITION

I. Write a conversation suggested by one of the following situations.
Wherever it seems desirable to do so, give, in parentheses, directions
for the action, and indicate the gestures and the facial expressions of
the speakers.

     1. Tom has had trouble at school; he is questioned at home
     about the matter.

     2. Two girls discuss a party that has taken place the night
     before.

     3. A child and his mother are talking about Christmas.

     4. Clayton Wells is running for the presidency of the Senior
     class in the high school; he talks with some of his
     schoolmates, and is talked about.

     5. There has been a fire at the factory; some of the men talk
     about its origin.

     6. A girl borrows her sister's pearl pin and loses it.

     7. Unexpected guests have arrived; while they are removing
     their wraps in the hall, a conversation takes place in the
     kitchen.

     8. Anna wishes to go on a boating expedition, but her father
     and mother object.

     9. The crops in a certain district have failed; two young
     farmers talk over the situation.

     10. Two girls are getting dinner; their mother is away, and
     they are obliged to plan and do everything themselves.

     11. A boy has won a prize, and two or three other boys are
     talking with him.

     12. The prize-winning student has gone, and the other boys are
     talking about him.

     13. The furnace fire has gone out; various members of the
     family express their annoyance, and the person who is to blame
     defends himself.

     14. Grandfather has lost his spectacles.

     15. Laura has seen a beautiful hat in a shop window, and talks
     with her mother about it.

     16. Two men talk of the coming election of city officers.

     17. A boy has been removed from the football team on account of
     his low standings; members of the team discuss the situation.

     18. Sylvia asks her younger brother to go on an errand for her;
     he does not wish to go; the conversation becomes spirited.

     19. Grandmother entertains another old lady at afternoon tea.

     20. A working man is accused of stealing a dollar bill from the
     cook in the house where he is temporarily employed.

     21. Mary Sturgis talks with her mother about going away to
     college.

     22. A young man talks with his sister about woman's suffrage;
     they become somewhat excited.

     23. A middle-aged couple talk about adopting a child.

     24. There is a strike at the mills; some of the employees
     discuss it; the employers discuss it among themselves.

     25. An aunt in the city has written asking Louise to visit her;
     Louise talks with several members of her family about going.

     26. Two boys talk about the ways in which they earn money, and
     what they do with it.

     27. Albert Gleason has had a run-away; his neighbors talk about
     it.

     28. Two brothers quarrel over a horse.

