
The officer started, at hearing his name called out by the prisoner, but
he did not recognize him.

"I am Walter Davenant. You remember, sir, the wreck off Bray?"

"Good heavens!" Colonel L'Estrange exclaimed, pressing forward.

"It is the lad who saved my life, General Hamilton!

"Gentlemen, this young officer saved my life at the risk of his own. I
cannot and will not stand by and see him murdered."

The Hessian colonel signed to four of his men, who seized Walter and
dragged him towards the tree. Colonel L'Estrange drew his sword.

"My men," he shouted, to some English soldiers who were mingled with the
crowd of onlookers, which had rapidly increased during the dispute,
"stand by me, and don't let this brave young officer be murdered."

A score of soldiers pushed through the crowd, and ranged themselves by
Colonel L'Estrange. He dashed forward, sword in hand, and in a moment
Walter was torn from the grasp of the soldiers, and placed in the centre
of his rescuers, who were now joined by General Hamilton and the other
officers.

Several men had run off at full speed, to the British camp, to bring up
aid. The Hessian colonel called upon his men to seize the prisoner, and
cut down all who interfered to prevent the general's orders being carried
out. These hesitated before the resolute aspect of the English, but the
crowd of foreign soldiers ranged themselves with them, and the attack was
about to commence, when a number of English soldiers were seen running,
musket in hand, from their camp.

The Hessian colonel saw that to attempt to carry out his orders, now,
would bring on something like a pitched battle, and he therefore waved
his men back, saying to General Hamilton:

"I have nothing to do now, sir, but to report to General Ginckle that I
have been prevented, by force, from carrying his orders into effect."

"That you will, of course, do," General Hamilton said coldly. "I shall be
perfectly prepared to answer for my conduct."

There was no goodwill between the English and foreign sections of
Ginckle's army, and General Hamilton had some trouble in preventing the
soldiers from attacking the Hessians, and in inducing them to retire to
their camp. As soon as he arrived there, he ordered the drums to be
beaten, and the whole division to get under arms. He then despatched an
officer to General Ginckle, narrating the circumstances, and saying that
the honour of the whole army was concerned in preventing an officer,
fairly taken prisoner in war, and not while acting as a spy, from being
injured; and that, indeed, policy as well as honour forbade such a course
being taken, as there were several officers of rank in the hands of the
Irish, who would naturally retaliate on them the execution of prisoners
of war. He made a formal complaint against Colonel Hanau, for refusing to
delay the execution until he could lay the matter before the general. As
for his own conduct in the matter, he said he was perfectly prepared to
defend it before any military court, but that court must be held in
England, where he purposed to return at once, with the division his
majesty had intrusted to his command.

The Dutch general had, long before he received the letter, been informed
of what had taken place, and had also learned that the English division
had struck their tents, and were drawn up under arms. To allow them to
depart would be to entail certain ruin upon the campaign, and he felt
that it was more than probable that the course Hamilton and his officers
had taken would be upheld by a military court in England, and that public
opinion would condemn the execution of an officer, taken in fair fight.
He therefore wrote a letter to General Hamilton, saying that he regretted
to find that he had been acting under a misapprehension, for he had
understood that the person claiming to be an Irish officer was in fact a
spy, and that he had severely reprimanded Colonel Hanau for his refusal
to delay the execution until the fact had been explained to him. Far from
feeling in any way aggrieved that General Hamilton had interfered to
prevent such a mistake from taking place, he felt much obliged to him for
what he had done, as the execution of an Irish officer taken in war
would, in every way, have been a most unfortunate circumstance.

General Hamilton showed the letter to the colonels of the various
regiments in the division, and these agreed that, as General Ginckle was
evidently desirous that the matter should go no further, it would be as
well to order the tents to be again pitched, and for the troops to resume
their ordinary duties.

"My dear Walter," Colonel L'Estrange said, "I am happy, indeed, that we
came up when we did. What should I have felt, if I had afterwards learned
that you, who had saved my life, had been murdered here, for your
execution would have been neither more nor less than murder, as was that
of the twelve poor fellows who were taken at Kilcowan--a brutal murder!
They were perfectly justified in defending their property, and the idea
of quartering them, as well as hanging them, just as if they were
traitors of the worst dye, is nothing short of monstrous.

"I only came out here with my regiment a month since, but I am heartily
sick with what I see going on. It was terrible to see the ruined villages
on the road from Dublin. I have seen fighting on the Continent, but
nothing to equal the wholesale brutality with which the war is conducted
here. How God can continue to give success, to an army which behaves as
this one has done, is altogether beyond me. Of one thing I am resolved,
whether we take Limerick or not--and I own I see but small chance of
it--I shall exchange, if possible, into a regiment serving in Flanders.
If not, I shall resign my commission.

"And now, how is your father? I rode out from Dublin to see your mother,
and was very glad to find her, and old Mrs. Davenant, well. I was glad,
too, to find that, owing to the influence of Mr. Conyers, they had not
been troubled; and I was fortunately able, myself, to bring some
influence to bear upon the council, who seem to be bent upon squeezing
the last drop of blood from the Irish veins.

"But the men are falling in, and I must put myself at the head of the
regiment. I will hand you over to the care of an officer, and, if we
march out, you will, of course, go with us."

When the men were again dismissed, Colonel L'Estrange rejoined Walter.

"Ginckle has thought better of it," he said. "I fancied he would not
venture to push matters further, for the loss of the one division he can
really rely upon would be fatal to all his hope of success to the
campaign. Ginckle is a passionate man, but he is not a fool, and he must
have seen that, if the matter had been laid before the king, his conduct
would not have been approved. I don't say that ours is right, in a
military sense, but I am sure that public opinion would have approved of
it. The tales that have been circulated, of the doings of the army over
here since the commencement of the war, have already roused a very strong
feeling of irritation throughout the country."

Colonel L'Estrange now took Walter to General Hamilton's tent, and, after
formally introducing him, he told the story of the wreck, and of his
rescue by Walter from certain death.

"What do you mean to do with him, L'Estrange?" General Hamilton asked.

"My intention is, unless you see any objection to it, to pass him through
the lines this evening. I will provide him with a good horse, and see him
well away. After what has happened Ginckle will, I should say, feel
obliged for our thus rendering him a service by getting rid of his
prisoner. There are not likely to be any questions asked or remarks made
afterwards. I am not without influence at court, and there is a very
strong section, who are bitterly opposed to Dutchmen being placed in
every post in the king's gift, and there would be no difficulty in
getting up such a hostile feeling against Ginckle, in relation to this
affair, that it would cost him his command."

"Yes," the general agreed. "Marlborough would be only too glad to take
the matter up, and as Ginckle must be pretty well aware that his want of
success here must have already made his position precarious, I do not
think he will trouble himself to ask any questions about the prisoner;
and, certainly, William will not thank him for being the means, by his
unjust and arbitrary conduct, of causing a split between the English and
his foreign troops. I should like to put all their heads into one noose,
and I should feel no compunction in setting them swinging, for a greater
set of rascals were never collected under the sun. I must say that the
contrast between our army and the Irish is very great, and that, although
many bloody deeds are performed by the rapparees, there has never been a
single complaint brought against the Irish troops.

"Anyhow, Mr. Davenant, I think you cannot do better than fall in with
Colonel L'Estrange's plan. There will be no difficulty in getting out,
and, indeed, I will send a troop of cavalry to see you well beyond our
lines."

Walter spent the rest of the day with Colonel L'Estrange, and told him
all that had taken place since they had last met.

"It is difficult to believe that it is but three years ago," he said,
when he had finished.

"No, we judge the flight of time by the incidents we crowd into it. The
most uneventful days pass the most unheeded. Now to me, it seems but
yesterday that I stood on the deck of the ship, and knew that she was
sure to go to pieces, and that the chance of anyone reaching that rocky
coast alive were small, indeed; when I saw what seemed little more than a
black speck approaching, and you and your fisher boy made your way over
the wave.

"By the way, how is he? Doing well, I hope?"

"He might have done well, if he liked. The present that you left in my
father's hands, to buy him a boat when he was old enough to start as a
fisherman on his own account, would have made a man of him, but it is
hidden somewhere in the thatch of his father's cottage. When my father
first went to the war, he handed it over to Larry, as he could not say
what might happen before his return. Larry was at first delighted with
the thought that some day he should have a boat of his own, and a boat,
too, larger than any on the shore; but when I accompanied my father,
Larry insisted on going with me.

"'It will be time enough to buy a boat, when the war is over,' he said.

"And as I was very glad to have him with me, and my father did not
object, Larry had his way, and he has been with me ever since. He is
enrolled in the troop now, and, when he thinks there is any chance of
fighting, he takes his place in the ranks, but at other times he acts as
my servant."

"Tell him I have not forgotten him," Colonel L'Estrange said. "While you
have been doing so much, I have had a quiet time of it. I could have got
a regiment at once, had I cared for it, but I disliked the thought of
fighting over here. It was too much like civil war. Six months ago, when
things were going badly with us on the Continent, I asked to be employed,
and was given a regiment they were just raising. I had got them into fair
order, and was expecting to be ordered to embark for the Low Country at
any moment, when the news came of Ginckle's heavy losses at Athlone and
Aughrim, and the orders came for us to proceed to Bristol, and take ship
there for Ireland. I half thought of throwing up my commission, for the
news of the scandalous conduct of the foreign soldiers had stirred every
English heart with disgust and indignation, but I thought that the
struggle was nearly over. William was anxious for peace at any price, and
would grant almost any terms to secure it; and, on the other hand, we
knew that Louis was, at last, going to make a great effort. So that it
was certain that either the Irish would make peace on fair terms before
winter, or the French would land, and there would be an end of any
prospect of conquering Ireland, until matters were settled on the
Continent, and William could devote his whole strength to this business."

"And which alternative do you think the most likely?" Walter asked.

"The latter," Colonel L'Estrange said, gravely. "Frankly, Walter, the
situation looks bad. There is, so far as I can see, no chance whatever of
our taking Limerick, and in a fortnight ten thousand French troops will
be landed.

"Of course it is probable that, at the last moment, the Irish may
conclude that they prefer to be under England rather than France, for
that is what it comes to. I hope they will have the sense to choose
England, and if what we hear be true, they can judge from the insolent
arrogance of the French officers, when they are but a fraction of your
force, what they would be when they regarded themselves as your masters.

"William is ready to grant religious equality, and the security of
persons and estates. I think the Irish will be very unwise to refuse. At
the same time, they have suffered such villainous treatment, at the hands
of William's soldiers, that I cannot blame them if they decide to throw
in their lot with France."

"I think," Walter said, "that, if they were but sure that all the
promises would be kept, the greater part would be in favour of making
peace at once. Nine out of ten of us are of English descent, and have
only been driven to take up arms by the cruel oppression which we have
suffered. Why, at present five-sixths of the soil of Ireland is in the
hands of Protestants, our religion is persecuted, and for years we have
been trampled on, and regarded as fair objects of robbery."

"All that you say is true, Walter, and no one can regret it more than I
do. Still, I do think that you would be worse off under France than under
England. Louis would drain the island of its men to fill his army. He
uses you only as a cat's paw in his struggle against England and Holland,
and would not hesitate to turn you over to England again, did it at any
time suit him to make peace on such terms; or to offer Ireland as an
exchange for some piece of territory he coveted, beyond his frontier."

"I know my father is very much of your opinion," Walter said, "and that
he has no confidence whatever in the King of France, and considers that
French interference is responsible for the want of success which has
attended us. At any rate, there is scarcely one of us who does not hate
the French, and certainly, if we had to choose between the two countries,
we should choose England."

When it became dark, a troop of cavalry mounted, and with Colonel
L'Estrange and Walter in their midst, rode out of camp. They went for
several miles, and then Colonel L'Estrange said:

"We are now well outside the limit where you will be likely to meet any
of our scouting parties. Two miles further along this road, you will come
to the village of Mulroon. It has, like all the others, suffered heavily,
but there are two or three houses still standing, and when I rode
through, it a few days since, I saw an old man standing at the door of
one of them, so you will be likely to get information as to the best road
to the town, and perhaps a guide."

"Thank you very heartily, Colonel L'Estrange. I know the village, for I
rode through it only the day before I was captured, and if I can get no
guide, I can make my own way round as soon as it is daylight."

"You had better go on tonight, if you can, Walter. Some party of rascally
plunderers might arrive here, or Ginckle may, for aught I know, have sent
out parties of dragoons. At any rate, I would not stop here, but make
your way on among the hills, even if you can only get a mile away, and
have to sleep by the side of your horse. No one can say he is safe under
a roof within twenty miles of Ginckle's army."

There was a hearty leave taking between Colonel L'Estrange and Walter,
and the latter then rode straight forward, while the troop faced about,
and made their way back to camp.

On arriving at the village, Walter, as soon as he succeeded in convincing
the inhabitants of a cottage, in which he saw a light, that he was an
Irish officer, found no difficulty in obtaining a guide, a boy of
fourteen volunteering at once to conduct him to the ford, ten miles above
Limerick. It was nearly twenty miles, by the byroads by which they
travelled, and the morning was just breaking as they arrived there.

Colonel L'Estrange had insisted on providing Walter with funds, and he
was therefore able to reward his guide, who went his way, rejoicing,
while Walter crossed the river and rode for the cavalry camp, where he
was received with delight by his father and friends, who had believed him
to have been killed in the skirmish, for such was the report of the
troopers who had managed to make their escape.

"I must not let you go on any more detached commands, Walter," his father
said. "I do not say that you have been imprudent, or to blame; but this
is the second time that you have been surprised by the enemy, and, as it
is out of the question to expect that you can always have the good luck
to get out of their hands when you are captured, as you have on the last
two occasions, I shall keep you by me in future; for seriously, my boy,
your absence has caused me terrible anxiety."

When Walter's account of the barbarous sentence passed upon the peasants,
whose only crime was that they had defended their property against
marauders acting in defiance of the general's order, was known in camp,
the most intense indignation prevailed, and this was heightened by the
fact that a cavalry officer, taken in open fight, should have been
sentenced to a similar fate. So great, indeed, was the fury of both
officers and men, that had they been in any condition to take the field,
nothing could have restrained them from mounting and riding, at once, to
strike a blow in revenge for the murder and mutilation of the peasants.



Chapter 16: Peace.


Ginckle's expedition across the Shannon, and his surprise of the Irish
cavalry camp, successful as it had been, altered the position in no way.
Several days passed, and then, after a council of war, it was determined
to recross the bridge of boats, which remained undisturbed, to the Clare
side, and try to force a way across Thomond Bridge. On the 22nd of
September, all the cavalry of the army, ten regiments of infantry, and
fourteen pieces of cannon made the passage without molestation, and
marched towards the bridge, which was defended upon the Clare side by two
strong towers. As the British advanced guard of infantry approached the
bridge, it was charged by a body of Irish horse, broken, and driven back.

A strong body of cavalry rode up to support the infantry; the Irish horse
