"I have everything ready, sir. I will clear away this table, so as
to have all in order."

When this was done, the highwayman was lifted up and placed in a
chair, and the gag removed from his mouth.

"You don't remember us, I suppose, my man?" Charlie began. "The
last time I saw you was when I brought my stick down on your head,
when you were listening outside a window at Lynnwood."

An exclamation of surprise broke from the prisoner.

"Yes, I am Charlie Carstairs, and this gentleman is Harry Jervoise.
By the way, I have made a mistake. I have seen you twice since
then. The first time was in a wayside tavern, some twelve miles
beyond Barnet, nine days ago. The second time was at another tavern
in Barnet. You will remember that a mischievous boy threw a stone,
and broke one of the lattice panes of the window, where you were
sitting talking over this little affair of the North coach."

A deep execration broke from the lips of the highwayman.

"Now you see how we know all about it," Charlie went on. "Now, it
entirely depends on yourself whether, in the course of another
hour, we shall hand you over to a magistrate, as the leader of the
gang who robbed the North coach, and took part in the robbery near
Dorking--we have found some of the watches and other plunder in
your bedroom--or whether you escape trial for these offences. You
may be wanted for other, similar affairs."

"Yes, sir," Tony put in. "Now I see him, he answers exactly to the
description of a man the officers have been in search of, for a
long time. He goes by the name of Dick Cureton, and has been
engaged in at least a dozen highway robberies, to my knowledge."

"You see," Charlie went on, "there is no doubt whatever what will
happen, if we hand you over to the officers. You will be hung at
Tyburn, to a moral certainty. There is no getting out of that.

"Now, on the other hand, you have the alternative of making a clean
breast of your dealings with John Dormay, of how he put you at
Lynnwood to act as a spy, how you hid those two letters he gave you
in my father's cabinet, and how he taught you the lying story you
afterwards told before the magistrates at Lancaster. After having
this story written down, you will sign it in the presence of this
officer and his wife, and you will also repeat that story before
any tribunal before which you may be brought.

"I don't know whether this is a hanging matter, but, at any rate, I
can promise that you shall not be hung for it. The Duke of
Marlborough has taken the matter in hand, and will, I have no
doubt, be able to obtain for you some lesser punishment, if you
make a clean breast of it. I don't say that you will be let free.
You are too dangerous a man for that. But, at any rate, your
punishment will not be a heavy one--perhaps nothing worse than
agreeing to serve in the army. You understand that, in that case,
nothing whatever will be said as to your being Dick Cureton, or of
your connection with these last coach robberies. You will appear
before the court simply as Robert Nicholson, who, having met
Captain Jervoise and myself, felt constrained to confess the
grievous wrong he did to our fathers, and other gentlemen, at the
bidding of, and for money received from, John Dormay."

"I do not need any time to make up my mind," the highwayman said.
"I am certainly not going to be hung for the advantage of John
Dormay, who has paid me poorly enough, considering that it was
through me that he came into a fine estate. I take it that you give
me your word of honour, that if I make a clean breast of it, and
stick to my story afterwards, this other business shall not be
brought up against me."

"Yes, we both promise that on our word of honour."

"Very well then; here goes."

The story he told was in precise accordance with the suspicions
that his hearers had entertained. He had been tramping through the
country, sometimes pilfering, sometimes taking money as a footpad.
He had, one day, met John Dormay and demanded his money. He was
armed only with a heavy cudgel, and thought Dormay was defenceless.

The latter, however, produced a pistol from his pocket, and
compelled him to drop his stick; and then, taking him by the
collar, made him walk to his house. He had asked him questions as
to his previous life, and had then given him the choice of going to
jail, or of acting under his instructions, in which case he would
be well rewarded. Naturally, he had chosen the second alternative.
And, having him completely under his thumb, John Dormay had made
him sign a paper, acknowledging his attempt at highway robbery upon
him.

The rest of the story was already known to his hearers. He had,
several times, overheard the conversations in the dining room, but
had gathered nothing beyond talk of what would be done, if the
Pretender came over. John Dormay had taught him the story of the
assassination plot, and had given him the letters to hide. He now
swore that the whole story was false, and had been told entirely at
the dictation of John Dormay, and from fear of the consequence to
himself, if he refused to obey his orders.

When he had finished, Tony's wife was called in, and she made her
mark, and her husband signed his name, as witnesses to the
signature of Robert Nicholson.

"Now, I hope I may have something to eat," the man said,
recklessly. "I am ready to tell my story to whomsoever you like,
but am not ready to be starved."

"Give him food, Tony," Charlie said, "and keep a sharp lookout
after him. We will go across, and show this paper to the duke."

"I will bring the matter, at once, before the council," the general
said, when Charlie gave him the document, and briefly stated its
contents. "There is a meeting at three o'clock today. I shall see
the queen previously, and will get her to interest herself in the
matter, and to urge that justice shall be done without any delay. I
will arrange that the man shall be brought before the council, at
the earliest date possible. If you will come here this evening, I
may be able to tell you more. Come at eight. I shall be in then to
dress, as I take supper at the palace, at nine."

"I have ventured to promise the man that he shall not be hung, my
lord."

"You were safe in doing so. The rogue deserves the pillory or
branding, but, as he was almost forced into it, and was the mere
instrument in the hands of another, it is not a case for hanging
him. He might be shipped off to the plantations as a rogue and a
vagabond.

"What are you smiling at?"

"I was thinking, sir, that, as you said there were a good many of
that class in the army, the man might have the option of enlisting
given him."

"And so of getting shot in the Netherlands, instead of getting hung
at Tyburn, eh? Well, I will see what I can do."

At eight o'clock, they again presented themselves. The duke looked
at them critically.

"You will do," he said. "Put your cloaks on again, and come with
me. Where do you suppose that you are going?"

"Before the council, sir," Harry suggested.

"Bless me, you don't suppose that your business is so pressing,
that ministers have been summoned in haste to sit upon it. No, you
are going to sup with the queen. I told her your story this
afternoon. She was much interested in it, and when I informed her
that, young as you both were, you had fought behind Charles of
Sweden, in all his desperate battles, and that he had not only
promoted you to the rank of captain, but that he had, under his own
hand, given you a document expressing his satisfaction at your
conduct and bravery, she said that I must bring you to supper at
the palace. I told her that, being soldiers, you had brought with
you no clothes fit for appearance at court; but, as at little
gatherings there is no ceremony, she insisted that I should bring
you as you are.

"My wife Sarah went on half an hour ago, in her chair. There will
probably be two others, possibly Godolphin and Harley, but more
likely some courtier and his wife.

"You do not feel nervous, I hope? After being accustomed to chat
with Charles of Sweden, to say nothing of the Czar of Russia,
Carstairs, you need not feel afraid of Queen Anne, who is good
nature itself."

Nevertheless, both the young men felt nervous. After being
conducted up some private stairs, the duke led them into an
oak-panelled room, of comparatively small size, lighted by numerous
tapers, which displayed the rich hangings and furniture. A lady was
sitting by the fire. A tall, handsome woman, with a somewhat
imperious face, stood on the rug before her, talking to her, while
a pleasant-looking man, who by his appearance and manner might have
been taken for a country squire, was sitting opposite, playing with
the ears of a spaniel lying on his knee.

The tall lady moved aside, as they entered, and Charlie noticed a
little glance of affectionate welcome pass between her and the
duke--for the pair were devotedly attached to each other--then he
bowed to the seated lady.

"Madam," he said, "allow me to present to you the two young
officers, of whose bravery Charles of Sweden has written so
strongly, and whose parents have, with other gentlemen, been driven
from the land by villainy."

The young men bowed deeply. Anne held out her hand, and each in
turn, bending on one knee, raised it to his lips.

"There," she said, "let that be the beginning and end of ceremony.
This is not a court gathering, but a family meeting. I want to hear
your stories, and I want you, for the time, to forget that I am
Anne of England. I know that your fathers have always been faithful
to our house, and I hope that their sons will, ere long, do as good
service for me as they have done for a foreign prince.

"You have not seen these gentlemen yet, Sarah?"

"No, my husband has kept them to himself."

"I have had but little time to give them, Sarah, and wanted it all,
to question them on the Swedish modes of warfare."

"And you thought I should be an interruption?

"I am glad to meet you both, nevertheless. Since my husband likes
you, I am sure to do so;" and she smiled pleasantly, as she gave a
hand to each.

They were then introduced to the Prince Consort, George of Denmark.

At this moment, supper was announced. The queen and the duchess
went in together, followed by the four gentlemen.

"Lord Godolphin and Mr. Harley were to have been of the party
tonight," the queen said, as she took her seat at table, "but I put
them off till tomorrow, as I wanted to hear these gentlemen's
story."

During the meal, the conversation was gay. As soon as the last dish
was removed, the party returned to the other room. Then the queen
called upon the young men to tell their story.

Charlie began, and related up to the time when he had aided in the
rescue of his father from the hands of his escort. Harry told the
story of their military experiences, and then Charlie related his
narrow escape at Warsaw, his adventure with the brigands, and the
fight with the wolves.

"That is the most exciting of all," the queen said.

"I think that even you, general, would rather have gone through the
battle of Narva, than have spent that night among the wolves."

"That would I, indeed, madam, and I doubt if I should have got as
well through it as Captain Carstairs did. I am sure, madam, you
will agree with me, that these young gentlemen ought to be fighting
under our flag, rather than that of Sweden. There is no blame to
them, for they were most unjustly driven from the country; but I
hope that, by Monday at this time, I shall have the pleasure of
presenting a document for your majesty's signature, stating that,
in the opinion of the council, a very grave miscarriage of justice
has taken place; and that the gentlemen, whose estates were four
years ago confiscated, are proved to be innocent of the crime of
which they were accused, and are true and faithful subjects of your
majesty; and that the proceedings against them are hereby quashed,
and their estates restored to them.

"I had the honour of relating to you, this afternoon, the manner in
which these gentlemen have succeeded in bringing the truth to
light."

Shortly afterwards, the party broke up, the queen speaking most
graciously to each of the young men.

On Monday morning, they received a summons to appear before the
council, at two o'clock in the afternoon, and to produce one Robert
Nicholson, whose evidence was required in a matter of moment. They
hired a carriage, and took the highwayman with them to Saint
James's, and were conducted to the council chamber; where they
found Lord Godolphin, the Marquis of Normanby, Mr. Harley, and the
Duke of Marlborough, together with two judges, before whom the
depositions, in the case of Sir Marmaduke Carstairs and his
friends, had been laid.

Lord Normanby, as privy seal, took the chair, and briefly said
that, having heard there had been a grievous miscarriage of
justice, he had summoned them to hear important evidence which was
produced by Captains Carstairs and Jervoise, officers in the
service of the king of Sweden.

"What have you to say, Captain Carstairs?"

"I have, sir, only to testify that this man, who stands beside me,
is Robert Nicholson, who was in my father's employment for two
years, and was, I believe, the principal witness against him.
Captain Jervoise can also testify to his identity. I now produce
the confession, voluntarily made by this man, and signed in the
presence of witnesses."

He handed in the confession, which was read aloud by a clerk
standing at the lower end of the table. A murmur of indignation
arose from the council, as he concluded.

"You have acted the part of a base villain," Lord Normanby said to
Nicholson. "Hanging would be too good for such a caitiff. What
induced you to make this confession?"

"I have long repented my conduct," the man said. "I was forced into
acting as I did, by John Dormay, who might have had me hung for
highway robbery. I would long ago have told the truth, had I known
where to find the gentlemen I have injured; and, meeting them by
chance the other day, I resolved upon making a clean breast of it,
and to take what punishment your lordships may think proper;
hoping, however, for your clemency, on account of the fact that I
was driven to act in the way I did."

One of the judges, who had the former depositions before him, asked
him several questions as to the manner in which he had put the
papers into Sir Marmaduke's cabinet.

He replied that he found the key in a vase on the mantel, and after
trying several locks with it, found that it fitted the cabinet.

"His statement agrees, my lords," the judge said, "with that made
by Sir Marmaduke Carstairs in his examinations. He then said that
he could not account for the papers being in his cabinet, for it
was never unlocked, and that he kept the key in a vase on the
mantel, where none would be likely to look for it."

In a short time, all present were requested to withdraw, but in
less than five minutes they were again called in.

"Gentlemen," Lord Normanby said to the young officers, "I have
pleasure in informing you, that the council are of opinion that the
innocence of your fathers and friends, of the foul offence of which
they were charged, is clearly proven; and that they have decided
that the sentence passed against them, in their absence, shall be
quashed. They will also recommend, to her majesty, that the
sentence of confiscation against them all shall be reversed.

"As to you, sir, seeing that you have, however tardily, endeavoured
to undo the evil you have caused, we are disposed to deal
leniently, and, at the request of the Duke of Marlborough, we have
agreed, if you are ready to leave the country and enlist at once,
as a soldier in the army of Flanders, and there to expiate your
fault by fighting in the service of your country, we will not
recommend that any proceedings shall be taken against you. But if,
at any time, you return hither, save as a soldier with a report of
good conduct, this affair will be revived, and you will receive the
full punishment you deserve.

"For the present you will be lodged in prison, as you will be
needed to give evidence, when the matter of John Dormay comes up
for hearing."

Nicholson was at once removed in custody. The two young officers
retired, an usher bringing them a whispered message, from
Marlborough, that they had better not wait to see him, as the
council might sit for some time longer; but that, if they would
call at his house at five o'clock, after his official reception, he
would see them.

"This is more than we could have hoped for," Harry said, as they
left Saint James's. "A fortnight ago, although I had no intention
of giving up the search, I began to think that our chances of ever
setting eyes on that rascal were of the slightest; and now
everything has come right. The man has been found. He has been made
to confess the whole matter. The case has been heard by the
council. Our fathers are free to return to England, and their
estates are restored to them; at least, the council recommends the
queen, and we know the queen is ready to sign. So that it is as
good as done."

"It seems too good to be true."

"It does, indeed, Charlie. They will be delighted across the water.
I don't think my father counted, at all, upon our finding
Nicholson, or of our getting him to confess; but I think he had
hoped that the duke would interest himself to get an order, that no
further proceedings should be taken in the matter of the alleged
plot. That would have permitted them to return to England. He spoke
to me, several times, of his knowledge of the duke when he was a
young man; but Churchill, he said, was a time server, and has
certainly changed his politics several times; and, if a man is
fickle in politics, he may be so in his friendships. It was a great
many years since they had met, and Marlborough might not have been
inclined to acknowledge one charged with so serious a crime.

"But, as he said to me before I started, matters have changed since
the death of William. Marlborough stands far higher, with Anne,
than he did with William. His leanings have certainly been, all
along, Jacobite, and, now that he and the Tories are in power, and
the Whigs are out of favour, Marlborough could, if he chose, do
very much for us. It is no longer a crime to be a Jacobite, and
indeed, they say that the Tories are intending to upset the act of
succession, and bring in a fresh one, making James Stuart the
successor to Anne.

"Still, even if we had succeeded so far, by Marlborough's
influence, that our fathers could have returned to England without
fear of being tried for their lives, I do not think that either of
them would have come, so long as the charge of having been
concerned in an assassination plot was hanging over them.

"Now that they are cleared, and can come back with honour, it will
be different, altogether. It will be glorious news for them. Of
course, we shall start as soon as we get the official communication
that the estates are restored. We shall only have to go back to
them, for, as you know, yours is the only estate that has been
granted to anyone else. The others were put up for sale, but no one
would bid for them, as the title deeds would have been worth
nothing if King James came over. So they have only been let to
farmers, and we can walk straight in again, without dispossessing
anyone."

"I don't know what to do about John Dormay," Charlie said. "There
is no doubt that, from what the judge said, they will prosecute
him."

"So they ought to," Harry broke in. "He has striven, by false
swearing, to bring innocent men to the scaffold. Why, it is worse
than murder."

"I quite agree with you, Harry, and, if I were in your place, I
would say just as strongly as you do that he ought to be hung. But
you see, I am differently situated. The man is a kinsman of ours by
marriage. My cousin Celia has been always most kind to me, and is
my nearest relative after my father. She has been like an aunt,
and, indeed, did all she could to supply the place of a mother to
me; and I am sure my little sweetheart Ciceley has been like a
sister. This must have been a most terrible trial to them. It was a
bad day for cousin Celia when she married that scoundrel, and I am
sure that he has made her life a most unhappy one. Still, for their
sake, I would not see his villainy punished as it deserves, nor
indeed for our own, since the man is, to a certain extent, our
kinsman.

"Besides, Harry, as you must remember well enough, Ciceley and I,
in boy and girl fashion, used to say we should be some day husband
and wife, and I have never since seen anyone whom I would so soon
marry as my bonny little cousin; and if Ciceley is of the same
mind, maybe some day or other she may come to Lynnwood as its
mistress; but that could hardly be, if her father were hung for
attempting to swear away the life of mine."

