captain was glad that Ned had postponed the landing until midday;
as it gave the tired men time to rest, and prepare themselves for
fresh labors.

As soon as the shore could be seen, it was evident that the
destruction and carrying off of the canoes had created an immense
impression. The cliff was lined with natives, whose gesticulations,
as they saw their canoes fastened to the stern of the ship, were
wild and vehement.

A little before noon the boats were hauled up alongside, the
soldiers took their places in them with loaded arquebuses, and as
many sailors as could be spared also entered, to assist in their
advance. The ship carried several pieces of artillery, and these
were loaded, so as to open fire before the landing was effected, in
order to clear the shore of the enemy. This was soon accomplished,
and the natives who had assembled on the beach were seen, streaming
up the road through the cliff.

This was the most dangerous part that the advancing party would
have to traverse, as they would be exposed to a heavy fire, from
those standing above them, on both flanks. They would have
suffered, indeed, very severely, had not the captain turned his
guns upon the masses gathered on the high ground and, by one or two
lucky shots plumped into the middle of them, created such an effect
that the fire of arrows kept up upon the troops, as they advanced,
was wild and confused.

Several of the sailors were severely wounded, but the soldiers,
well sheltered by their mail, pressed on and gained the level
ground; their blood being fired, as they went, by the spectacle of
the dead bodies of their first officer and supercargo, who had
landed the night before.

Here the natives were assembled in great force and, as they were
now out of sight of those on board ship, the guns could no longer
render assistance to the little party. These showed a good front as
the masses of the enemy approached them, and charged boldly at
them.

The natives, however, maddened by the loss of their canoes, and
feeling that their only hope was in annihilating their enemies,
came on with such force, wielding heavy clubs, that the array of
the Portuguese was broken, and in a short time each was fighting
desperately for himself. Several had been stricken down and,
although large numbers of the natives had been killed, it was plain
that the victory would in a few minutes be decided; when suddenly a
great shout was heard, and a volley of musketry was poured into the
rear of the natives.

The hard-pressed whites gave a cheer, for they knew that assistance
had arrived from the castle. The natives, whose attention had been
directed to the attack in front, were taken completely by surprise;
and as both the parties of whites simultaneously charged, large
numbers were unable to escape and were cut down, while the rest
fled precipitately from the spot.

Very hearty were the congratulations of the Portuguese, as the
forces came together. Gerald had safely reached the castle, after
some narrow escapes. He, having fallen among some sleeping natives,
had been attacked and forced to trust to his speed.

After a short consultation it was decided to press the enemy, and
to leave them no time to recover from the demoralization caused by
the loss of their boats, and the junction of the two parties of
white men. The forces were, therefore, divided into two equal
parts, and these started in different directions. Clump after clump
of trees was searched, and the enemy driven from them. At first
some resistance was made; but gradually the natives became
completely panic stricken, and fled without striking a blow.

Until nightfall the two parties continued to hunt, and shoot down,
a large number of the natives. Then they returned to the castle.
They now had a consultation as to the terms which they should grant
the natives; for they had no doubt that victory had declared
itself, finally, in their favor Some were for continuing the strife
until the enemy were exterminated; but the governor of the island
was opposed to this.

"In the first place," he said, "mixed up with the Ternate people
are all the natives of this island, and to exterminate them would
be to leave us without labor, and to ruin the island. In the next
place, the havoc which has been already wrought in our plantations
is such that it will take years to repair; and the longer this
fighting goes on, the more complete will be the destruction. I
think, then, that we should grant them the easiest terms possible.
They will be only too glad to escape, and to get back to their own
land, and will be long before they invade us again."

"I think," the officer who had arrived with the reinforcements of
soldiers said, "it would be well, senor, if you were to consult
with the priest who is on board. He is a man who has the ear of the
council at Goa. He was but recently arrived, and knows but little
of the natives; but he is full of zeal, and it would be well, I
think, were we to make an arrangement of which he would perfectly
approve; so that his report, when he reached Goa, should be
altogether favorable"

The governor agreed to this proposal, and decided to send a party
down to the shore, in the morning, to bring the priest up to the
castle.

Early in the morning, a large crowd of natives were seen at a short
distance. In their hands they held boughs of trees, and waved them
to express their desire to enter into negotiations. The governor,
however, fired two or three shots over their heads, as a signal to
them to keep farther away, as their advances would not be received.
Then, while a party went down to the shore to fetch the priest, he
again sallied out and drove the natives before him.

When the holy father arrived another council was held, and he was
informed that the people were ready to treat, and asked what, in
his opinion, should be the terms imposed upon them. He heard the
arguments of the governor, in favor of allowing them to return to
their island, but he said:

"In my opinion it is essential, above all things, that they should
be forced to accept Christianity."

At this the Englishmen, and indeed the two Portuguese officers,
could with difficulty repress a smile; but the governor at once saw
that a wholesale conversion of this sort would do him much good
with the authorities at Goa, and he therefore willingly fell into
the priest's views.

The next morning the natives again appeared with their green
boughs; and the governor, with the officer, the priest, and a body
of ten soldiers, went out to meet them. The King of Ternate
advanced, and bowed himself submissively to the ground, and
expressed his submission; and craved for pardon, and for permission
to return with his people to Ternate, promising solemnly that never
again would they meddle with the Portuguese settlement.

The governor, who spoke the language fluently, having been there
for some years, uttered an harangue reproaching him with his folly,
and wickedness, in wantonly declaring war against the Portuguese.
He pointed to the destroyed plantations, and asked if any
punishment could be too great for the ruin caused.

The king and his councilors offered to pay large tributes,
annually, of spice and other products, until the ruined plantations
were again in bearing.

"This will not repay us for the losses we have suffered, and for
the evil spirit which you have introduced into this island.

"We have, however," the governor said, "only your interests at
heart; and therefore we have decided to pardon you, and to allow
you to return to your island, upon the condition that you and all
your people embrace Christianity, and pay such a tribute as we may
impose."

The king had no understanding of the meaning of what was proposed
to him, and the governor said that he and his people were, in the
morning, to assemble before the castle, and that the holy father,
who had been sent on purpose to turn them from the wickedness of
their ways, would then explain the doctrines of Christianity to
them; that if they accepted and believed what he said, pardon would
be theirs; if not, they would be hunted down until all were
destroyed.

Next morning the assembly took place in front of the castle gate.
The King of Ternate, surrounded by all his principal councilors and
warriors, took his place, while the fighting men stood around him.
The priest mounted on the platform of the wall, the governor
standing beside him to interpret.

The Englishmen, much amused at the ceremony, stood at a short
distance off. They did not wish to be recognized by any of the
people of Ternate, as it was possible that some English vessels
might again come into these seas, and they did not desire that the
pleasant remembrance of the visit of the Golden Hind should be
obliterated, by the sight of some of its crew in alliance with the
Portuguese.

The priest began an elaborate explanation of the Christian
religion, which he continued for the space of two hours; to the
surprise and astonishment of the natives, who could not, of course,
comprehend a single word that he said. Then he paused, and turning
to the governor said:

"Will you translate this, for the benefit of these benighted
heathens?"

"I fear," said the governor, "that it will be impossible for me to
do full justice to your eloquent words; and, indeed, that these
poor wretches would scarcely take in so much learning and wisdom
all at once; but in a few words I will give them the sense of what
you have been telling them."

Then, lifting up his voice, he addressed the king.

"There is only one God. These idols of yours are helpless, and
useless. We have brought ashore those from your war canoes, which
my men will now proceed to burn, and you will see that your gods
will be unable to help themselves. Indeed, they are not gods, and
have no power. God is good, and hates wickedness. All men are
wicked. Therefore He would hate all men; but He has sent His Son
down, and for His sake pardons all who believe in Him.

"Now, if you believe in Him, as I tell you, you will be pardoned
both by us and by God. If you do not believe, we shall kill you
all, and you will be punished eternally. Now you have the choice
what to do."

The matter, thus pithily put, did not require much consideration.
After a short consultation between the chiefs, the king demanded
what ceremonies would have to be gone through, to become
Christians; and was informed, by the governor, that the only
ceremony would be that he would have to declare himself a
Christian; that the priest would make upon him the sign of a cross
with his finger, and would sprinkle him with water; and that, when
this was done, he would be a Christian.

Much relieved to find that the entry into this new religion was so
easy, the king and his people at once agreed to accept Christianity.
The governor informed them that the priest thought that they were
hardly yet prepared, but that on the morrow the ceremony should take
place, after a further explanation.

The next day a great altar was erected outside the walls of the
castle, gay with banners and wax lights. Before this the King of
Ternate and his people assembled, the gunners on the walls
standing, with lighted matches, by their cannon in case of trouble.
The priest then made another long oration, which was again briefly
and emphatically translated by the governor. The king and all his
people then knelt and, according to the instruction of the priest,
made the sign of the cross. The priest then went along between the
lines of the people, sprinkling them with holy water, and this
being done the ceremony was declared complete, and the King of
Ternate and his people were received into the bosom of the Church.
Then, escorted by the soldier, they were taken down to the
seashore.

The two white men were permitted to depart with them. The governor
had, at first, insisted that these should be put to death. They
pleaded, however, that they had acted under force; and, Ned
interceding for them, their lives were granted on the condition
that they should, on reaching Ternate, at once embark for some
other island, and never return to Ternate.

The canoes were brought alongside and, there being now no fear of
any attempt at resistance, as the entire body of invaders had given
up their arms, they were allowed to enter the canoes, and to paddle
away to their own island; with numbers greatly diminished from
those which had landed, to the attack of Tidore, a week before.

The governor and the priest were, alike, delighted at the
termination of the war; the former because he was really anxious
for the good of the colony which had been entrusted to him, and
believed that it would now progress peaceably, and without
disturbance. He believed, too, that his successful resistance, to
so large a body of enemies, would insure him the approval of the
viceroy at Goa; and that the report of the priest would also obtain
for him the valuable protection and patronage of the ecclesiastics,
whose power in the eastern seas was even greater than it was at
home.

Tidore was the furthest of the Portuguese settlements, and the
ship, having now made her round, was to return direct to Goa. The
priest hesitated whether to remain, or to return in her. He had
made it one of the conditions of peace with Ternate that a
missionary should be received there, a place of worship erected,
and that he should be allowed to open schools, and to teach the
tenets of his religion to all; and he hesitated whether he would,
himself, at once take up that post, or whether he would report the
matter at Goa, where perhaps it might be decided to send a priest
who had acquired something of the language of the Southern Seas. He
finally decided upon the latter course.

The governor furnished the lads with letters, recommending them
most warmly to the viceroy, and stating the great services which
they had rendered to him in the defense of the island; saying,
indeed, that had it not been for their prudence, and valor, it was
probable that the natives would have succeeded in destroying the
small body of Portuguese, and in massacring the reinforcements
landed from the vessel. The priest also, while viewing the young
men with the natural horror of a Portuguese ecclesiastic for
heretics, was yet impressed with the services that they had
rendered; and considered their own shortcomings to be, in a great
measure, atoned for by the wholesale conversion which had, to some
extent, been effected by their means.

Bidding a hearty adieu to the governor, they took their places on
board ship and sailed for Goa. It was a six weeks' voyage, but the
vessel was well furnished with provisions and, after their
hardships, the boys greatly enjoyed the rest and tranquility on
board. In due time they found themselves lying off the mouth of the
river up which, at a short distance from its mouth, the capital of
Portuguese India was situated.




Chapter 22: Home.



The captain, who was accompanied by the priest, rowed up the river
to report the arrival of the ship and the events of his voyage to
the authorities, and to place in their hands the letter of the
governor of Tidore. Twenty-four hours later the captain returned,
with orders for the ship to sail up the river; and that, on their
arrival, the young Englishmen were to be landed and conducted to
the presence of the viceroy himself.

The young adventurers, much as they had traveled, were greatly
struck with the appearance of Goa. It was, indeed, a city of
palaces, most solidly built of stone, and possessing an amount of
magnificence and luxury which surpassed anything they had ever
seen. In the streets a few Portuguese, magnificently dressed and
escorted by guards, moved among a throng of gaily attired natives;
whose slight figures, upright carriage, and intelligent faces
struck the boys as most pleasing, after their experience of the
islanders of the South Seas. The immense variety of turbans and
headgear greatly astonished them, as well as the magnificence of
the dresses of some of these, who appeared to be men of importance
and who were attended by a retinue of armed followers.

The young men were escorted by two officers of the viceroy, who had
come on board ship as soon as she dropped anchor, to conduct them
to his presence. At the sight of these officials the natives
hastily cleared the way, and made every demonstration of respect,
as the party passed through them.

The vice-regal palace was a magnificent building, surpassing any
edifice the boys had ever seen, and they were still more struck by
the luxury of the interior. They were led through several
vestibules, until at last they arrived in a large chamber. At a
table here the viceroy was seated, while around him were a large
number of the councilors and leading men of the place. The viceroy
rose as the young men advanced, and bowed profoundly.

"You are, I hear, Englishmen; and I am told, but I can scarcely
believe it, that you belong to the ship of the Captain Drake whose
exploits in the West Indies, against the Spaniards, have made him
so famous. But how, belonging to him, you came to be cast on an
island in the South Seas is more than we are able to understand."

No news of the expedition had reached the Portuguese, and the
surprise of the viceroy was only natural.

"The Golden Hind, sir, the vessel in which we were gentlemen
adventurers, rounded Cape Horn, sailed up the American coast, and
then, keeping west, crossed through the islands; and has, we trust,
long since rounded the Cape of Good Hope and arrived in England,
having circumnavigated the globe."

An expression of surprise broke from the assembled Portuguese. But
a frown passed over the face of the viceroy.

"What was the object of your captain, in visiting these seas?" he
asked "They are the property of Portugal, and without the
permission of his majesty, no ship of any other nation may pass
through our waters."

"I can assure you," Ned said, "that there was no object, either of
conquest or of trade, on the part of our admiral in visiting these
seas. When he rounded the Cape his object was to discover, if
possible, a passage round the northern coast of America back to
England. But when we went north we found the cold was great, and
that the land stretched away so that it would join with Asia to the
north. Being convinced, then, that no passage could be obtained in
that way, he sailed for England round the Cape of Good Hope,
fearing the dangers of a passage round the Horn, by which he lost
on our passage out two of his ships, and was well-nigh wrecked
himself. He only abode in the islands of the South Seas for a few
days, to get provisions and water, and then sailed straight for
home."

Assured by this explanation, the viceroy now begged the boys to sit
down, and he and his council listened with admiration and
astonishment to the records of the expedition, and especially to
the passage across America of two of the young men before him. The
depredations which had been committed upon the Spaniards excited no
indignation among the Portuguese; for these nations were rivals,
and although they did not put their contentions to the test of the
sword, each was glad enough to hear of any misfortune befalling the
other.

The viceroy now assured the young men that he was proud to welcome
the members of so gallant a crew as that of the great English
navigator.

"England and Portugal," he said, "did not clash, and were always
natural allies."

He trusted they would always remain so, and in the meantime he
should be glad to treat the boys with all honor, and to forward
them home by the first ship which might be sailing.

Apartments were now assigned to them in the palace, and here they
were delighted to find a stock of clothes suited for them.

For the next fortnight they passed a pleasant time at Goa. They
were the objects of much attention on the part of the Portuguese,
and all vied in the attempt to make their stay pleasant to them.
They found that the town of Goa occupied but a small space, and
that it was strongly fortified, and the Portuguese made no attempt
to conceal their very high estimate of the fighting power of the
natives. One young officer, who was specially told off to accompany
the lads, and who spoke Spanish fluently, was particularly frank in
