interrupted duties in France, now become more important than ever.  He
was a man of the world and a soldier, a diplomat.  The hard experiences
of the past few months were for him episodes, exciting truly, but only
part of a lifetime spent in large adventure, soon forgotten in some
other strenuous part demanded by some other strenuous exigency.  But
she,--no, she was not a man at all, but a woman,--unused to such scenes
and happenings as fate had lately made her a participant in.  Her
father might have his country,--he had not lost his love, his heart was
not buried out in the depths of the cruel sea.  What had become of that
Roman patriotism upon which she prided herself in times past?  Her
country!  What had changed her so?  There were many answers.

There was Blodgett's grave at the foot of the hill.  She had played in
childhood with that faithful old soldier.  Many a tale had he told her
of her gallant father when, as a young man, he gayly rode away to the
wars, leaving her lady mother in tears behind.  She could sympathize
with waiting women now, and understand.  Those were such deeds of
daring that the rude recital of the old man once stirred her very heart
with joy and terror; now she was sick at the thought of them.  And
Blodgett was gone; he had died defending them, where he had been
stationed.  That was an answer.

There, too, far away in another State, lay the lover of her girlhood's
happy day,--the bright-eyed, eager, gallant, joyous lad.  What good
comrades they had been!  How they had laughed, and played, and ridden,
and rowed, and hunted, and danced, and flirted, through the morning of
life,--how pleasant had been that life indeed!  He was quiet now; she
could no longer join in his ringing laugh, the sound of his voice was
stilled, they might never play together again,--was there any play at
all in life?  That was another answer.

There was the white-haired mother, the stately little royalist, Madam
Talbot, who slept in peace on the hill at Fairview Hall, her ambitions,
her hopes, and her loyalty buried with her, leaving the place
untenanted save by wistful memories; she too had gone.

Answers?--they crowded thick upon her!  There were the officers of the
Yarmouth, Captain Vincent, Beauchamp, Hollins, and the little boy, the
Honorable Giles, and all the other officers and men with whom she had
come in contact on that frightful cruise.  There were the heroic men
who had stayed by their ship, who had seen the favored few go away in
the only boat that was left seaworthy, without a murmur at being left
behind, who had faced death unheeding, unrepining, sinking down in the
dark water with a cheer upon their lips.  There was the old sailor,
too, with his unquenchable patriotism, her friend because the friend of
her lover; and Philip, her brother; and there was Seymour himself.  Ah,
what were all the rest to him!  Gone, and how she loved him!

She leaned her head upon her hand and thought of him.  Here in this
boat-house he had first spoken to her of his love.  Here she had first
felt his lips touch her cheek.  There, rocked gently by the light
breeze, upon the water at her feet was the familiar little
pleasure-boat; she had not allowed any one to row her about in it since
her return, in spite of much entreaty.  It was this very cloak she wore
that day, nearly the very hour.  The place was redolent with sweet
memories of happy days, though to think on them now broke her heart.
It all came back to her as it had come again and again.  She briefly
reviewed that acquaintance, short though it was, which had changed the
whole course of her life.  She saw him again, as he struck prompt to
defend her honor in the hall, resenting a ruffian's soiling hand
stretched out to her; she saw him lying wounded and senseless there at
her feet.  She saw him stretched prone on that shattered deck, on that
ruined ship, pale, blood-stained, senseless again, again unheeding her
bitter cry.  She would have called once more upon him, save that she
knew humanity has no voice which reaches out into the darkness by which
it may call back those who are once gone to live beyond.  She did not
weep,--that were a small thing, a trifle; she sat and brooded.  What
had she lost in the service of her country?  What sacrifices had been
exacted from her by that insatiable country!  Alas, alas, she thought,
men may have a country, a woman has only a heart.

Four short months had changed it all.  How young she had been!  Would
she ever be young again?  How full of the joy of life!  Its currents
swept by her unheeded now.  Why had not God been merciful to her, that
she could have died there upon the sea, she thought.  Ah, poor humanity
never learns His mercy; perhaps it is because we have no measure by
which to fathom its mighty depths.  She saw herself old and lonely,
forgotten but not forgetting.  But even then lacked she not
opportunity; woman-like, in spite of her constancy, she took a
melancholy pleasure in the thought that there was one still who
hungered for the shattered remnants of her broken heart, who lived for
the sound of her voice and the glance other eyes and the light of her
face.  One there was, handsome, brave, distinguished, gentle, of
ancient name, assured station, ample fortune, who longed to lay all he
was or had at her feet.

But what were these things?  Nothing to her, nothing.  There was but
one, as she had said on the ship to Desborough: "I love a sailor; you
are not he."  And yet her soul was filled with pity for the gallant
gentleman, and she thought of him tenderly with deep affection.

Presently she heard quick footsteps on the floor of the boat-house, and
turning her head she saw him.  He held a letter, an official packet,
with the seal broken, open in his hand.

"Oh, Miss Wilton, you here?" he said.  "I have looked everywhere for
you.  Do you not think the evening air grows chill?  Is it not too cold
for you out here in the boat-house?  Allow me;" and then, with that
gentle solicitude which women prize, he lifted the neglected cloak and
tenderly wrapped it about her shoulders.

"Thank you," she said gratefully, faintly smiling up at him, "but I
hardly need it.  I do not feel at all cold.  The air is so pleasant and
the sun is not yet set, you see.  Did you wish to see me about anything
special, Lord Desborough?"

"No--yes--that is--  Oh, Mistress Katharine, the one special want of my
life is to see you always and everywhere.  You know that,--nay, never
lift your hand,--I remember.  I will try not to trespass upon your
orders again.  I came to tell you that--I am going away."

"Going away," she repeated sadly.  "Has your exchange been made?"

"Yes; a courier came to the Hall a short time since, and here it is.
My orders, you see; I must leave at once."

"I am sorry, indeed sorry that you must go."

He started suddenly as if to speak, a little flash of hope flickering
in his despondent face; but she continued quickly,--

"It has been very pleasant for us to have you here, except that you
have been a prisoner; but now you will be free, and for that, of
course, I rejoice.  But I have so few friends left," she went on
mournfully, "I am loath to see one depart, even though he be an enemy."

"Oh, do not call me an enemy, I entreat you, Katharine.  Oh, let me
speak just once again," he interrupted with his usual impetuosity; "and
talk not to me of freedom!  While the earth holds you I am not free:
ay, even should Heaven claim you, I still am bound.  All the days of my
captivity here I have been a most willing and happy prisoner,--your
prisoner.  I have looked forward with dread and anguish to the day when
I might be exchanged and have to go away.  Here would I have been
content to pass my life, by your side.  Oh, once again let me plead!
My duty, my honor, call me now to the service of my king.  I no longer
have excuse for delay, but you have almost made me forget there was a
king.  Now that I must go, why should I go alone?" he went on eagerly.
"I know, I know you love the--the other,--but he is gone.  You do not
hate me, you even like me; you regret my going; perhaps as days go by,
you will regret it more.  We are at least friends; let me take care of
you in future.  Oh, it kills me to see you so white, and indifferent to
life and all that it has or should have for you.  You are only a girl
yet,--I cannot bear to see all the color gone out of your sweet face,
the light out of your eyes; the sight of that thin hand breaks my
heart.  Won't you live for me to love,--live, and let me love you?
Your father goes to-morrow, so he says, and you will be left alone
here; why should it be?  Go with me.  Give me a right to do what my
heart aches to do for you,--to coax the roses back into your cheek, to
woo the laugh to your lips, to win happiness back to your heart; to
devote my life to you, darling.  Have pity on me, have pity on my
love,--have pity!"

His voice dropped into a passionate whisper; as he pleaded with her, he
sank down upon one knee by her side, beseeching by word and gesture and
look that she should show him that pity he could see in her eyes, that
he knew was in her heart, and to which he made his last appeal; and
then, lifting the hem of her dress to his lips with an unconscious
movement of passionate reverence, he waited.

She looked at him in silence a moment.  So young, so handsome, so
appealing, her heart filled with sorrow and sympathy for him.  There
was hope in his eyes which she had not seen for many days; how could
she drive it away and crush his heart!  It might be cruel, but she had
no answer, no other answer, no new word, to tell him.  Her eyes filled
with tears; she could not trust herself to speak, she only shook her
head.

"Ah," he said, rising to his feet and throwing up his hands with a
gesture of despair, "I knew it.  Well, the dream is over at last.  This
is the end.  I sought life, and found death; that, at least, if it
shall come I shall welcome.  Would God I had gone down with the ship!
You have no pity; you let a dead image--an idea--stand between you and
a living love.  Will you never forget?"

"Never," she said softly.  "Love knows no death.  He is alive--here.
But do not grieve so for me; I am not worth it.  You will go away and
forget, and--"

"No; you have said it, 'Love knows no death.'  I, too, cannot forget.
As long as I live I shall love--and remember.  How if I waited and
waited?  Katharine, I would wait forever for you," he said, suddenly
catching at the trifle.

"No, it would be no use.  My friend, we both must suffer; it cannot be
otherwise.  I esteem you, respect you, admire you.  You have protected
me, honored me; my gratitude--"  She went on brokenly, "You might ask
anything of me but my heart, and that is given away."

"Let me take you without it, then.  I want but you."

"No, Lord Desborough, it cannot be.  Do not ask me again.  No, I cannot
say I wish it otherwise."

His flickering hope died away in silence.  "Katharine, will you promise
me, if there ever comes a time--"

"I promise," she said; "but the time will never come."

He looked at her as dying men look to the light, there was a long
silence, and then he said,--

"I must go now, Katharine.  I suppose I must bid you good-by now?"

"Yes, I think it would be best."

"I shall pass this way again on my journey to Alexandria in half an
hour; may I not speak once more to you then?"

"No," she said finally, after a long pause.  "I think it best that we
should end it now.  It can do no good at all.  Good-by, and may God
bless you."

He bent and kissed her hand, and then stopped a moment and looked at
her, saying never a word.

"Good-by, again," she said.

On the instant he turned and left her.




CHAPTER XLI

_Into the Haven, at last_

Two weary horsemen on tired horses were slowly riding up the river road
just where it entered the Wilton plantation.  One was young, a mere boy
in years; but a certain habit of command, with the responsibility
accompanying, had given him a more manly appearance than his age
warranted.  The other, to a casual glance, seemed much older than his
companion, though closer inspection would show that he was still a
young man, and that those marks upon his face which the careless
passer-by would consider the attributes of age had been traced by the
fingers of grief and trouble.  The bronzed and weather-beaten faces of
both riders bespoke an open-air life, and suggested those who go down
upon the great deep in ships, a suggestion further borne out by the
faded, worn naval uniforms they wore.  In spite of the joy of
springtime which was all about them, both were silent and both were
sad; but the sadness of the boy, as was natural, was less deep, less
intense, than that of the man.  He was too young to realize the
greatness of the loss he had sustained in the death of his father and
sister; and were it not for the constant reminder afforded him by the
presence of his gloomy companion, he would probably, with the careless
elasticity of youth, have been more successful in throwing off his own
sorrow.  The man had not lost a father or a sister, but some one dearer
still.  He looked thin and ill, and under the permanent bronze of his
countenance the ravages wrought by fever, wounds, and long illness were
plainly perceptible; there were gray hairs in his thick neatly tied
locks, too, that had no rightful place there in one of his age.  The
younger and stronger assisted and watched over his older companion with
the tenderest care and attention.

They rode slowly up the pleasant road under the great trees, from time
to time engaging in a desultory conversation.  Philip endeavored to
cheer his companion by talking lightly of boyhood days, as each turn of
the road brought familiar places in the old estate in view.  Here he
and Katharine and Hilary had been wont to play; there was a favorite
spot, a pleasant haunt here, this had been the scene of some amusing
adventure.  These well-meant reminiscences nearly drove Seymour mad,
but he would not stop them.  Finally, they came to the place where the
road divided, one branch pursuing its course along the river-bank past
the boat-house toward the Talbot place, the other turning inland from
the river and winding about till it surmounted the high bluff and
reached the door of the Hall.  There Philip drew rein.

"This is the way to the Hall, you know, Captain Seymour," he said,
pointing to the right.  Seymour hesitated a moment, and said finally,--

"Yes, I know; the boat-house lies over there, does it not, beyond the
turn?  I think I will let you go up to the house alone, Philip, and I
will go down to the boat-house myself.  I will ride back presently."

"Well, then, I will go with you," said Philip.  "I really think you are
too weak, you know, especially after our long ride to-day, to go alone."

"No, Philip," said Seymour, gently, "I wish to be alone for a few
moments."

The boy hesitated.

"Oh, very well," he said, beginning to understand, "I will sit down
here on this tree by the road and wait for you.  I 'll tie my horse,
and you can leave yours here also, if you wish.  There is nothing at
the Hall, God knows, to make me hurry up there now, since father and
Katharine are gone," he continued with a sigh.  "Go on, sir, I'll wait.
You won't mind my waiting?"

"No, certainly not, if you wish it I shall be back in a few minutes
anyway.  I just want to see the--the--ah--boathouse, you know."

"Yes, certainly, I understand, of course," replied Philip, bluntly, but
carefully looking away, and then dismounting from his tired horse and
assisting Seymour to do the same from his.

"Poor old fellow!" he murmured, as he saw the man walk haltingly and
painfully up the road and disappear around the little bend.

Left to himself Seymour stumbled alone along the familiar road over
which a few short months before he had often travelled light-heartedly
by the side of Katharine.  As he pressed on, he noticed a man leave the
boat-house and climb slowly up the hill.  Desirous of escaping the
notice of the stranger, who, he supposed, might be the factor or agent
of the plantation, he waited in the shadow of the trees until the man
disappeared over the brow of the hill, and then he staggered on.  A
short time after, he stood on the landward end of the little pier, and
then his heart stood still for a second, and then leaped madly in his
breast, as he seemed to hear a subtle voice, like an echo of the past,
which whispered his name, "Seymour!  Seymour!"  Stepping toward the
middle of the pier so that he could see the interior of the boat-house
through the inner door, his eyes fell upon the figure of a woman
standing in the other doorway looking out over the water, stretching
out her hands.  The sun had set by this time, and the gray dusk of the
evening was stealing over the river.  He could not see distinctly, but
there was light enough to show him a familiar scarlet cloak at her
feet, and although her back was turned to him, he recognized the
graceful outlines of her slender figure.  It was Katharine, or a dream!
But could the dead return again?   Had the sea given up her dead indeed?

He could not believe the evidence of his bewildered senses.  It might
be an hallucination, the baseless fabric of a vision, some image
conjured from the deep recesses of his loving heart by his enfeebled
disordered imagination, and yet he surely had heard a living voice,
"Seymour--John--Oh, my love!"  Stifling the beating of his heart,
holding his breath even, stepping softly, lest he should affright the
airy vision, he staggered to the door and stood gazing; then he
whispered one word,--

"Katharine!"

It was only a whisper she heard, but it reached the very centre of her
being.

"Katharine," he said softly again, with so much passionate entreaty in
his wistful voice, that under its compelling influence she slowly
turned and looked toward the other door from whence the sound had come.
Then as she saw him, lifting one hand to her head while the other
unconsciously sought her heart, she shrank back against the wall, and
