you been doing now?"

Hallett gave a brief account of their adventure.

"You will probably be annoyed at us for acting as your messengers
but, as we have induced the two leaders of the large war camp to
come in, I trust that we shall be forgiven. We have promised them
permission for their force to return, unmolested, to their
villages; and I may say, from the formidable stockades they have
made there, this result could not have been achieved, otherwise,
without very heavy loss.

"I wish to say that the idea was entirely Bullen's. It seemed to be
the only chance of getting through; for we were both utterly
exhausted, when we reached the village."

"I think you have done extremely well, Hallett. I was about to send
a force to capture that camp; and I am glad, indeed, of being
relieved of the necessity of doing so. It means, perhaps, the
saving of a couple of hundred lives. Besides, we should probably
not have caught quarter of them; and the rest would have taken to
the bush, and continued to give us trouble.

"Tell me exactly what the terms are, upon which they are willing to
surrender."

"Simply the lives and freedom of the chiefs; and permission to
their men to retire, unmolested, to their villages."

"Those are exactly the terms I have offered to some of their
chiefs, who had sent in to ask for terms. Now, I will speak to them
myself."

He accordingly walked forward, with Hallett, to where the chiefs
were standing.

"I am glad, indeed, chiefs," he said, "that you have decided to
take no further part in the war. You will stay here with us, until
I hear that your camp is broken up; and you will then be at liberty
to return to your own grounds. I thank you for receiving my
messengers so kindly; as a reward for which I shall, when you
leave, present you each with five hundred dollars. Henceforth, I
trust that you will always remain on good terms with us, do all you
can to aid us by sending in carriers, and will accept our rule
frankly and truly.

"Now, I will ask you to come into the fort; where you will be
treated as guests, until I hear of the dispersal of your camps."

The chiefs were much gratified by their reception; and sent off the
escort, at once, to order the camp to be abandoned and burnt, and
the stockades to be pulled down. Then they followed Colonel
Willcocks into the fort, where a room was assigned to them, and
everything done for their comfort.

As soon as the governor had retired with them, the other officers
flocked down round Hallett and Lisle, to learn their adventures.
Both were warmly congratulated upon their safe return; and Lisle
came in for a large share of their congratulations when, in spite
of his protestations, Hallett insisted on giving him the largest
share of credit for the manner in which he had suggested the
scheme, and had unquestionably been the means of saving their
lives.

"Hallett had everything to do with it, except that," he said; "and
that was only an accidental idea. We mutually helped each other,
during those long days of tramping; and it was most fortunate for
me that he was with me for, had I been alone, I don't think I
should have had the strength of mind or body to hold on, when the
prospect seemed altogether hopeless."

As they went down to the lines of their company, they were
surrounded by the delighted blacks; who continued to cheer so
heartily that it was some time before they could get an opportunity
to tell what had taken place. Cheers again broke out, when the
stories were finished. The men insisted on shaking their hands, and
then started a war dance to show their satisfaction.

Then both retired to a shelter erected for them and, lying down,
slept for some hours. When they awoke they ate a hearty meal; after
which they agreed that, in a day or two, they would be fit for duty
again.

"I shall mention your conduct in my despatches," the colonel said,
next day. "You have not only saved your own lives; but have
rendered very important service, in inducing those two chiefs and
their followers to submit. From the information that we have been
able to get, their camp was very strongly fortified, and could only
have been taken after hard fighting; and even then, as has happened
on all previous occasions, the main body would have escaped,
rallied again a short distance away, and given us all the trouble
of dispersing them, once more. As it is, I have no doubt that the
influence of their chiefs will keep them quiet and, indeed,
scattered as they will be among their villages, it will be
difficult to persuade them to take up arms again.

"On second thoughts, I allowed them to leave this morning, with a
column that was starting to collect the arms of the garrison. They
seemed quite in earnest; and will, I have no doubt, succeed in
inducing their men to part with their arms, without a squabble."

The detachment, indeed, returned in the evening. The success of
their mission had been complete; and the natives had handed over
their arms, and started off with their chiefs into the forests,
after burning the camp and razing the stockades. They all seemed
highly pleased that they should not be called upon for more
fighting, and had individually taken an oath that they would never
again fight the white men.

Several other flags of truce came in, and many chiefs surrendered.
The Queen Mother, the most important of the leaders, tendered her
submission. Colonel Willcocks gave her four days in which to prove
the truth of her submission by coming in, in person. Shortly,
however, before the truce expired, she sent in an impudent message
that she would fight till the end.

Some of the chiefs who had been foremost in their opposition, and
who had personally taken part in the torture and death of those who
fell into their hands, were tried by court martial; and either shot
or hanged, it being necessary to prove to the natives that even
their greatest chiefs were not spared, and that certain punishment
would be dealt out to those who had taken part in the murder of
soldiers, or carriers, who had fallen into their hands.

The greatest tragedy of this campaign became known, on the 8th of
September, through a letter from a native clerk who was with the
Akim levies, which were commanded by Captains Willcox and Benson.
These levies had worked up on our right flank, as we advanced from
the south, in the same way as the Denkeras had done on the west.
They were as cowardly, and as terrified of the Ashantis, as all the
other neighbouring races. In fact, the only work they were fit for
was living in deserted villages, or cutting crops and eating up the
produce.

Three thousand of these levies were ordered to cooperate with
Colonel Brake's column. They were met by the Ashantis, and bolted
as soon as the latter opened fire; and Captain Benson, deserted by
his cowardly followers, fell. In a letter he had sent home, a few
days before his death, he expressed in the strongest terms his
opinion of the men under his command, saying:

"If it comes to a real show, after all, Heaven help us!
Three-quarters of my protective army are arrant cowards, all
undisciplined, and quite impossible to hold."

The native levies cannot be compared with the disciplined troops.
They were simply a motley mob, armed with stray guns, arms, and
powder, and their pay is what they can loot; whereas the African
private's drill and duties are identical with those of the British
private. His orders are given to him in English, and his knowledge
of our language is probably superior to that of most Indian or
Egyptian soldiers; while the British soldiers in West Africa are
rarely able to understand the language of their men.

A column had started, at once, to Captain Willcox's assistance.
They returned, however, in ten days, having been unable to come up
to him, as he had retired fifty miles farther to the east. They had
no fighting, the enemy having gone north; but they ascertained that
all the country immediately to the south was free from rebels and
desirous of peace. The spot where Captain Benson's action had been
fought was strewn with dead bodies, baggage, and rifles; evidence
of the disordered flight. It seemed that the levies bolted, as soon
as they were fired on. Then, with a few trained volunteers, the
white men hastily entrenched themselves; and held out till late in
the afternoon when, their ammunition having run short, they were
compelled to retire, which they did fighting. It was during the
retreat that Captain Benson was shot.

Another column came in on the following day, after five days'
reconnaissance. It had gone by the same road by which the governor
had broken out, on the 23rd of June. The road was entirely
deserted, the villages destroyed, and the crops burnt. They made no
attempt to search the bush but, on the path, they found
ninety-eight headless skeletons; a painful testimony of the number
of soldiers and carriers who had died of privation, and hardship,
during the retreat.

Information now came in that, to the north, the most reckless of
the Ashantis had again concentrated, and were determined to make
another stand. On the 16th there was a big review of the seventeen
hundred troops and the nine guns of the garrison. The heavy guns
were exercised on a stockade, similar to those of the enemy.
Hitherto they had not been altogether successful; as it was found
that, owing to the large bursting charge, the range had to be
estimated at double its real distance. Six shots smashed a
barricade which was six feet high by six feet thick.

Friendly chiefs, who were invited to witness the experiment, were
profoundly impressed; and there can be no doubt that the feat was
reported to the enemy in the field, for they raised no stockade in
the future, and reverted to their old plan of bush fighting.

The heavy and continuous rains were now rapidly bringing on
sickness, and the officers were attacked in forms that were quite
novel to them.

"I don't know what is the matter with me," Lisle said, one morning,
"but I am swollen all round the neck. I once had mumps, when I was
a little boy and, if it were not so ridiculous, I should declare
that I had got them again."

Hallett burst into a fit of laughter.

"I expect you are going to have all your old illnesses
again--scarlet fever, measles, whooping cough, and the rest. We
must see that the hut is fitted up for you, with something as much
like a bed as possible, and a fire for making a posset, or whatever
they give you."

"It is all very well for you to laugh, Hallett, but look at my
neck."

"Well, it is swollen," Hallett agreed; "and I expect that you have
caught a cold, when we were wandering about in the bush. Seriously,
I should advise you to put a piece of warm flannel round your neck,
or else go across and consult the doctor."

"I think I will do so, Hallett. It hurts a good deal, I can tell
you and, as you see, I can hardly drink my tea."

After breakfast was over, he went to the tent of the principal
doctor.

"I have come, sir," he said, "to ask you about my neck."

"You don't say so, Bullen! Why, yours is the third case I have seen
this morning! Let me look at it.

"Yes, the symptoms are just the same as in the others. If this were
England, I should say that an epidemic of mumps has broken out; but
of course it cannot be that.

"Well, I have sent the other two into hospital, and you had better
go there, too. Is it painful?"

"It is rather painful, and I can hardly swallow at all."

"Well, when I come across to the hospital, I will put you in with
the others. I certainly cannot make out what it is, nor why it came
on so suddenly. The only thing I can put it down to is the constant
rains that we have been having, though I really don't see why wet
weather should have that effect. I should advise you to keep on hot
poultices."

In the evening another patient came in, and Lisle burst out
laughing, when he saw that it was Hallett.

"Oh, you have come to the nursery, have you? I hope you have made
up your mind to go through scarlet fever, or measles, Hallett?"

"Don't chaff. It is no laughing matter."

"No? I thought you took it quite in that light, this morning. Well,
you see we have all got poultices on; and the orderly will make one
for you, at once. My face is bigger than it was this morning, and
what it is going to come to, I cannot imagine. Although the doctor
said, frankly, that he did not understand it; he seemed to think
that there was nothing very serious about it."

The next day the swelling had abated and, two days later, both of
them were discharged from the hospital; to their great delight, for
they heard that a column was just going to start, and that their
companies were included in it.

On the following day the column started. It was nearly a thousand
strong, with guns, and rations for twenty-eight days. This force
was to penetrate into the northwestern country. The enemy here had
sent an impudent message that they would not surrender; and that,
if they were attacked, they intended to revert to their former
tactics, and direct all their efforts to shooting down the officers
and, when these were disposed of, they would have little difficulty
in dealing with the native troops.

On the second day, when twenty-five miles from Coomassie, the enemy
were met with in force; and it was found that the message they had
sent was true, for there was no stockade, and the enemy resorted
entirely to sniping. They were commanded by Kofia, one of the most
turbulent and determined of their chiefs. The attack did not come
as a surprise for, the day before, a number of Ashantis had been
found in a village which was rushed. The active allies now searched
the woods thoroughly, and succeeded in ascertaining the spot where
the enemy had their war camp. They had been careful that the
Ashantis had no notion of our approach, and a number of them were
shot down by the Maxims and rifles.

The enemy, who held a strong position on the hilltop, rushed down
and attacked our front and flank. Their number was estimated at
four thousand. Three companies on each side entered the bush, and
soon succeeded in pressing the enemy into a path; where they were
fiercely charged by the West African Field Force, under Major
Melliss. That officer was wounded; and Captain Stevenson, who was
close to him, was shot in the chest.

For a moment the soldiers wavered but, almost immediately, dashed
on again to avenge the loss of their officers. The charge was very
effective. Those of the enemy who gradually assembled were
bayoneted, and the rest fled.

Captain Stevenson's death was greatly regretted. He and Captain
Wright, of another company, had asked for leave to accompany the
force. As the one had no better claim than the other, Colonel
Willcocks suggested that they should toss for it. They did so, and
Captain Stevenson won; but what he deemed his good fortune cost him
his life.

After the fight was over, there was a short pause to reorganize the
force; and an advance was made to a village, three miles ahead, the
intention being to attack the next morning. That evening, however,
a flag came in, with an offer to surrender. Word was sent back that
the offer would be accepted, if made unconditionally; and at seven
o'clock in the evening a chief, a large number of men, four hundred
guns, and some sheep arrived. They said that Kofia was holding a
village, farther on; and would again give fight there. The force
returned with them to Coomassie.

The next day, some scouts brought in the news that the enemy had
again concentrated, and their numbers had been raised to four
thousand by their junction with another fighting tribe. Kofia was
in command, and a big war camp had been established some twelve
miles away on the Berekum road. Berekum itself, which was a hundred
and forty miles to the north, was reported to be invested, and had
asked for help but, as so large an Ashanti force was near at hand,
no men could be spared for the purpose.

A column twelve hundred strong, with five guns, and every available
man in the garrison who could carry a gun, moved out early on the
29th, to give battle. It was followed by a supply column, and the
bulk of the carriers.

Nine miles were accomplished without any opposition. Then a small
Adansi outpost retired on their approach. The commandant decided to
halt, for the night, at a deserted village. It was a miserable
place. The huts had all been burnt by the rebels; so that the
troops had to sleep in the open, in a steady downpour of rain. The
Europeans tried to get rest in some hastily-constructed shelters,
but a perfect tornado of wind was blowing, and swept the ground on
which they were built.

Next day the troops marched, in their drenched clothes, through a
heavy rain. Between seven and eight, however, this ceased and,
almost at the same moment, a tremendous fire burst out upon them.
The advance guard and support at once became engaged, but the enemy
clung with such determination to their position, and contested
every foot of the ground so stoutly, that two companies of
reinforcements had to be called up.

Two companies were sent out into the bush, and eventually succeeded
in getting partly behind the enemy, and forcing them to retreat.
More troops were sent out on the left; and a company was instructed
to move through the bush, on an extended line. In this way the
enemy were driven out of the jungle, and forced to retire slowly up
the hill.

Then the main column started, led by Major Melliss and headed by
the Sikhs. The enemy, however, did not fly; and Major Melliss
dashed into the thick of them, with the few men he could collect.
An Ashanti fired at him, at close quarters; but a native soldier
ran the man through. As they struggled on the ground, another
Ashanti fired at Major Melliss, hitting him in the foot. He was
practically unarmed, as he could use neither his sword nor his
revolver; and would have been killed, had not another officer come
up and shot the wounded Ashanti.

As the head of the column reached the spot, a heavy fire was
directed upon the enemy, who were soon in headlong flight. The
village in the rear of the position was taken, at the point of the
bayonet. One hundred and fifty of their dead were found, lying on
the battlefield; and it was learned, from prisoners, that over five
hundred had been wounded.

The defeat was a crushing one. Several of their most determined
chiefs were found among the dead. So hopelessly demoralized were
the enemy that they never rallied again.

The victory had been achieved with very small loss, owing to the
excellence of Colonel Willcocks' force. The casualties consisted
only of two officers severely, and two slightly wounded; and
twenty-six rank and file killed and wounded.

When the wounded had been dressed, and the scattered units
collected, an advance was made to the next village; where the
wearied troops slept, as it was still doubtful whether the rebels
might not rally. Major Cobbe was sent on, next morning, with eight
hundred men. He was to go as far as he could, but to return the
next evening.

The march was a very trying one, the weather terrible. After going
four miles they reached the bank of an unfordable river, some forty
yards wide. The Pioneers, although they had no technical equipment,
succeeded in making a rough bridge by the afternoon; and Major
Cobbe decided to push on to Kofia. At ten o'clock they reached this
place and, to the general relief, it was found to be deserted. The
troops, therefore, marched in and turned into the huts, amid a
howling tornado.

The return journey, next day, was even worse. The tracks, in many
parts, were now covered with between two and three feet of water.
The bridge, though submerged, had fortunately not been carried
away; and the troops were able to cross, and march into camp the
same evening, having carried out their orders without encountering
the smallest opposition.



Chapter 20: At Home.


It was now found necessary to give the worn-out troops a long rest.
They had been on constant service, for months; the stream of
invalids that had been sent down to the coast daily increased, and
the sick list had already reached an appalling length. The want of
fresh rations was very much felt, and any large combination of
troops not only caused great discomfort, but engendered various
diseases, smallpox among them. In addition to this, as the black
soldiers always go barefooted, their feet had got into a deplorable
state.

The halt, however, had a good effect; and there was general
satisfaction that it was unlikely that they would be called upon to
make further efforts, as no news came of fresh gatherings of the
enemy.

Colonel Willcocks now saw that the time was come to issue a
proclamation promising, henceforward, to spare the lives of all
rebels that surrendered. This was done, with the result that large
numbers of the enemy came in. Almost all of them declared that they
would have surrendered, long ago, had they not feared to do so.

On October 6th, the Commandant and British Resident held a state
levee. It was attended by all the friendly and submitted kings.
These vied with each other in their pomp; they were dressed in
gorgeous robes and carried their state umbrellas, while their
attendants danced round them, beating drums and blowing horns.
After the palaver was over, target practice took place, with the
guns. Canvas dummies were riddled with bullets by the Maxims; and
stockades, specially constructed for the purpose, were demolished
by the big guns. The natives retired, greatly impressed.

Two days later, Colonel Willcocks got up a rifle meeting for a cup;
and he himself took his place among the competitors.

Five days later, news came that a fresh force of the enemy had
gathered. Two columns were sent out--one of seven hundred and the
other of five hundred men--but, though they traversed a wide
stretch of country, they had no fighting. They received, however,
the submission of a number of chiefs and villages.

The new commander of the Ashanti force was captured, tried, and
hanged. The queen also was caught and, on the 24th of April, a
telegram was sent home with the words:

"The campaign is at an end."

There can be no doubt that this expedition will lead to great
