river.  Over the river from where we lived was "Slab Town," dilapidated
little settlement of no social or moral consideration.  The old
captain, the pilot of the wheezy ferry-boat _Edgar_, was our sworn
friend, and allowed us to ride free as often as we could get away.
Charles intended crossing the river to get pawpaws.  A pawpaw is an
easily mashed fruit, three or four inches long, with a tough skin
inclosing a very liquid pulp full of seeds, and about as solid as a
cream puff, when it is dead ripe.  It grows on a low, stunted bush-like
tree.

We were mighty fond of pawpaws, but little fellows as we were didn't
dare to cross the river and venture into "Slab Town" or its vicinity,
for such an excursion within its territory usually provoked a fight
with the young ruffians of that hamlet, who hated the village boys as
aristocrats.

"You'd better not go over there, Charles," we advised him timorously.
"Those Slab Town boys will take your pawpaws away from you."

I can see now the chesty movement with which Charles stuck out his
breast, threw back his shoulders, curved inward and swung his arms, and
went away basket in hand, remarking in a lordly manner; "Aw, who's
goin' to take _my_ pawpaws?"

{328} It was evening when the rash youth returned.  He came slinking up
the back alley in a vain endeavor to elude observation, but we had a
number of his and our friends on the watch for him--to see that he
returned safely, of course--and we gave him a royal greeting.  We had
been true prophets, though without honor in Charles's sight.  The Slab
Town boys had taken his pawpaws in a spirit of aggressive
appropriation, which was bad enough, but with rare and unusual
generosity they had afterward returned them to Charles.  They had not
put them back in his basket, however, but had heaped them
indiscriminately upon his person.  It appears that he must have run for
miles pursued by a howling mob of all the ruffians over there, engaged
in the happy pastime of throwing soft, mushy pawpaws at him.  Charles
could hardly see; in fact he could hardly walk.  He was plastered with
pawpaws from his head to his feet.

Thereafter when we wanted to provoke a fight, all that was necessary
when the unappreciated portion of his name was flung at him and was not
sufficient to awaken his ire, was to throw out our chests, hold back
our shoulders, curve our arms and say in a throaty voice, "Who's going
to take _my_ pawpaws?"

I feel tempted to use the old phrase in certain modern circumstances
to-day when it seems to fit some bold and reckless endeavor.  I have
never forgotten Charles's "who's-goin'-to-take-_my_-pawpaws" air!

We were sometimes able to get a little money together by doing odd
jobs--not for our parents, however, but for the neighbors.  We had
plenty of odd jobs to do at home, but such work was a matter of
obligation and not remunerative, nor was it interesting.  With this
money Henry and I each bought a game-chicken, {329} which we kept
cooped up separately in the back lot behind the stable.  Neither father
nor mother knew anything about it, of course.

We would let these two game-cocks out half a dozen times a day.  They
would rush at each other fiercely, but before the battle was fairly on,
we would summarily part them, and put them back in their coops, which
were placed opposite each other, when they would indulge in
chicken-swearing and personalities as much as they desired.  Their
appetites for fighting were whetted indeed.  In fact, there was so much
animosity engendered between these two birds that they would rush
together like two express trains trying to pass each other on the same
track whenever they were turned loose.  There was no time sparring for
time or position.  It was fight from the moment they saw each other,
although we never let them strike more than one blow or two.  A
half-minute round was enough for us.  I think it really scared us.

Charles, in spirit of revenge, let them out one day during our absence.
When we got back from school we had only one chicken between us.  It
was a wonderful chicken, for it had beaten the other, although the
conquered bird had fought until it had been killed.  We burned him on a
funeral pyre as a dead gladiator, with much ceremony and boyish
speaking.  We wanted to sacrifice to his _manes_ a hen as his wife, but
finally concluded to abandon that part of the ceremony; mother kept
count of the hens, you see.

Of course, Julius Caesar (as we named him) had the run of the yard
thereafter, there being no one to oppose him.  He led a very peaceful
life until our next door neighbor bought a large Shanghai rooster.  I
forgot now what particular breed our rooster was, {330} but he was
small, not much larger than a bantam.  The Shanghai rooster, which was
a huge monster, had the most provoking crow, large, loud and
aggressive.  An alley intervened between the yard where he held forth
and our yard.  One day we came home from school and looked for our
chicken.  He was gone!

We hunted everywhere for him, but could not find him.  We missed the
crowing of the Shanghai rooster, which had been frequent and
exasperating, I have no doubt.  The yard was very silent.  We pursued
our investigations with zeal and finally reached the alley.  It had
been raining heavily for almost a week, and the alley was a mass of
black, sticky mud.  Gazing anxiously over the fence, we heard a feeble
chirp from a large gob of mud in the alley.  It was our rooster!

The Shanghai had rashly ventured into supposed neutral ground in that
alley and had crowed once too often.  The little game cock had squeezed
through the fence and come over to investigate the situation.  They had
fought there in the mud.  The mud was too deep for the Shanghai to run
and the bantam killed him.  During the battle the victor had become so
covered with mud that he could neither move nor crow nor see.  He was
in a worse state than Charles with the pawpaws, and indifferent to
honors.

We took him and washed him.  He seemed none the worse for his
adventure, but that battle must have been a royal one.  It was the
second one we had not seen!  We felt like the Roman public deprived of
its "_Circenses_."  We really never did see that chicken fight, for he
got the pip or something, a few days after, perhaps from the microbes
in the alley, and in spite of our careful nursing, or possibly because
of it, he died.  He died just in time, too, for after we had put {331}
him away with more ceremony than we had used before, father who had got
some inkling of the affair, suddenly broke out at supper: "Boys, are
you keeping game-cocks in the back lot?  Fighting-chickens, eh?"

"No, sir," we both answered meekly, with a clear conscience and a
steady eye.

We had lots of pets in those days; some time they may serve for another
story.




THE END






  {335}

  INDEX


  A

  Abancay, battle of, 102.
  Acla, Spanish settlement, 45-49
  Aguilar, Geronimo de, 122
  Alcantara, Martin de, 54, 106, 107
  Alderete, the King's Treasurer, 205-212
  _Alfred_, the, Jones's first ship, 283
  Almagrists, the, 106, 111
  Almagro, Diego de, 57-67; 88-93; 101-104; 107
    Diego, the son, 104, 108, 109
  Alvarado, Pedro de, called Tonatiuh, 102, 109, 174, 184, 186,
    187, 194
  Amazon River, 105
  America, Central, 3
    South, 3, 4, 18, 27
  Anahuac, Empire of, 125
  Andalusia, New, 7
  Antigua del Darien, Maria de la, 20, 23-27; 33-41
  Arbolancha, 42
  Arguello, the notary, 48, 49
  Arrows, poisoned, used by Indians, 10, 11, 13, 14
  Astor, John Jacob, 261-272
    Fur Trading Company, 262
  Astoria, 262-276
  Atahualpa, 71-92; 108
  Avila, Pedro Arias de, called Pedrarias, 32-35; 42-50; 56
  Ayxacatl, 169,176
  Aztec Empire, 115, 116, 125, 132
    Holy of Holies, 134
    wealth, 135
    last of the Kings, 219
  Aztecs, the, 69, 116, 125-130; 133, 176, 182-187; 194-198; 215-219


  B

  Badajoz, 53
  Bahamas, the, 4
  Balboa, Vasco Nunez de, accompanies Encisco to San Sebastian, 19
    placed in charge at Antigua, 20
    seeks to serve Nicuesa, 25
    further adventures, 31-50
    referred to, 107
  Barron, James, 251, 252
  Bastidas, an explorer, 5
  "Battery of the Fearless," referred to, 74 (footnote)
  Bay, Chesapeake, 4
  Bentham, Jeremy, 248
  Biddle, Major Thomas, 255
  Biru, land of, early name of Peru, 56
    chieftain named, 56
  _Bonhomme Richard_, the, 285, 286
  Bowie, James, 252-254
    knives, 253
  Brackett, Charles, 305
  Broderick, Senator, 256-258
  Buccaneers, the, 3
  Burr, Aaron, 248
  C

  Cabot, John, 4
  Cabral, Portuguese explorer, 5
  Caceres, 53
  Cacique, Indian, Caonabo, 6
    Cemaco, 20
    Careta, of Cueva, 36
    Comagre, 37, 56
    of Tenepal, 115
    Monteczuma, so called in Cortes's letter, 156
    Quahpopoca, 172
    of Tlacuba, 216
  Cannibalism universal among Aztecs, 126
  Capac, Manco, 68, 85, 92, 93, 95, 111, 112
    Huayna, 71, 108
  Cape, de la Vela, 7
    Gracias a Dios, 7
  Careta, Cacique of Cueva, 36
  Caribbean Sea, 3, 13
  Carrero, Alonzo de Puerto, 123
  Cartagena, 10, 18
  Carvajal, 109-111
  Castile, Golden, 8
    King of, 40
    Joanna of, 41
  Castro, Vaca de, 109
  Caverns, Infernal, of Pitt River, 311
  Caxamarca, massacre of, 73-85
  Cempoalla, town of, 135
    Cacique of, 135
    people of, 135, 166
  Central America, 3
  Chalcuchimo, 72, 85, 92
  Chapus, field of, 109
  Charles V., of Spain, 82, 88, 92, 95,
    109, 137, 147, 217, 218, 220
  Chase, Owen, mate of the _Essex_, 231
  Chaves, Francisco de, 106
  Chesapeake, Bay, 4
    American ship, 251
  Chili, Almagro goes to, 93
    Valdivia partially conquers, 109
    Men of, 102-107
    coast of, 231, 237
  Cholula, 140, 145, 146
  Cholulans, the, 145, 146, 194
  Cilley, Jonathan, 255, 256
  Cipango, referred to, 37
  Claverhouse, compared with Cortes, 120
  Coatzacualco, Province of, 115
  Colmenares, Rodrigo de, 23
  Columbus, Christopher, 4, 5, 6, 23, 37, 117, 132
    Diego, 9, 35
  Comagre, Indian chief, 37, 56
  Conception, a whaling ground, 231
  Cordova, Gonsalvo de, 117
  Cortes, Hernando (or Fernando),
    mentioned, 9, 75, 107; lands
    at Vera Cruz, 116; story of his
    birth and early life, 117; voyage
    to Santo Domingo and
    Cuba, 118; described by Helps
    and Diaz, 118-120; expedition to Mexico, 120-125;
    march to Tenochtitlan, 130;
    personal character of, 133;
    describes Tlascala, 138-140;
    massacres  Cholulans, 145, 146;
    describes Mexico, 147-162; meets Montezuma, 162-167;
    seizes the Emperor, 171-173; Mexico rebels against,
    175; attacks Mexico, 192-218;
    the end of, 218-223; descriptions of, 223-228
  Cosa, Juan de la, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12
  Costa Rica, 21
  Coya, the Inca's legal wife, 72
  Crook, George, 301-311
  Crozier, William, captain of the brig _Indian_, 240
  Cuba, 3, 16, 55, 120
  Cueyabos, 16
  Cuitlahua, 136, 176, 191
  Cuzco, 75, 85, 87, 92, 93, 102-111


  D

  Darien, Isthmus of, 5, 26, 32, 37, 55, 109
    Maria de la Antigua del, 20, 23-27; 33-41
    Quevedo, Bishop of, 33, 44
  _Dauphin_,  Nantucket Whaler, 242
  Davila, another name for Pedrarias, 32 (footnote)
  De Candia, 66, 73, 79, 104, 109
  Decatur, Stephen, 251, 252
  De Soto, Hernando, 33, 67, 68; 77-89; 107
  Despotism, communistic, form of
    government on South American coast, 68
  Diaz, Bernal, 119, 124, 134, 135,
    167, 179 (footnote), 223, 224, 225
    Porfirio, 224
  Dickinson, Charles, 248-250
  Dios, Nombre de, 23, 36
  Disappointment, Cape, 269, 270
  _Duras, Duc de_, an East Indiaman, 285


  E

  El Dorado, 9, 57, 59, 93
  El Galan, nickname of Pedrarias, 33
  El Justador, nickname of Pedrarias, 33
  Encisco, 8; 17-20; 31, 32, 42, 66
  English, their first appearance on
    the South American coast, 5
  Espinosa, 33, 48, 60
  Esquivel, Juan de, 9
  _Essex_, the whaleship, 231-242
  Estremadura, birthplace of the Pizarros, 53
    birthplace of Cortes, 117


  F

  Felippo, the interpreter, 82, 89, 90
  Ferdinand, King, of Spain, 5, 7, 41
  Fiske, John, 4, 43, 63 (footnote), 122, 125, 168, 226
  Florida, 4
  Fonseca, Bishop, 7, 33
  Fox, Ebenezer, 268, 269
  "Furor Domini," name given to Pedrarias, 43


  G

  Gallo, Island of, 62
  Garavito, Andres, 47
  Gasca, 110-112
  Golden Castile, 8
  Gonzales, Francisca, 54
  Gorgona, Island of, 63
  Graves, William J., 255, 256
  Grijilva, Juan de, 120
  Guatemoc (or Guatemotzin), 137, 177, 191, 193, 194, 216, 225
  Guatemotzin, popular name for Guatemoc, 191, 216
