rise, his legs and arms were pinioned to the ground by four powerful
Indians.  For an instant Maximus was paralysed.  Then the terrible
reality of his position, the scream of Aneetka, and the sight of the
thong with which his captors were about to bind him, caused his spirit
to rebound with a degree of violence that lent him for the moment the
strength of a giant.  With a shout, in which even a tone of contempt
seemed to mingle the Esquimau hurled his captors right and left, and
sprang to his feet.  The Indians fled; but one, who was a moment later
in rising than the others, received a blow that felled him instantly.
Maximus glanced quickly round in search of his wife, and observed her
being hurried away by two Indians.  As the arrow leaps from the bow the
Esquimau sprang forward in pursuit.  The Indians saw him coming.  In
bitter anger they prepared to let her go and fly, for having dropped
their guns in the scuffle they were unable to fire upon their
approaching foe.  But there were other Indians in the bush whose weapons
were levelled at the breast of Maximus, and the next moment would have
been his last, but for a stone thrown from the cliffs above, which
struck him on the forehead and stretched him bleeding and insensible
upon the ground.

When Maximus recovered from the effects of the blow, he found himself
lying on the cold earth in total darkness, and firmly bound hand and
foot.  It is impossible to describe the agony of that bold spirit as he
lay writhing on the ground, in the vain effort to burst the cords that
bound him.  He thought of Aneetka and his own utter helplessness, while
she was, no doubt, in urgent need of his strong arm to deliver her.  The
thought maddened him, and again he strove in vain to burst his fetters,
and yelled aloud in despair.  The echoing rocks gave back his cry, and
then all was silence.  The dreadful thought now flashed across him that
the Indians had buried him alive in some dark cavern, and brave though
he was, he trembled in every limb with agony.

Thus Maximus lay until the grey dawn shone in upon him, and showed that
he was in a cave.  Scarcely had he noted this fact when the figure of a
man darkened the cave's mouth and approached him.  As the Indian bent
over his helpless foe he revealed the savage features of Meestagoosh.
For an instant he cast a look of mingled hatred and triumph on his
enemy; then drawing a scalping-knife from his girdle, he stooped and cut
the thong that bound his feet, at the same time signing to him to rise,
for he knew that Maximus did not understand Indian.  The Esquimau
obeyed, and was led by the Indian through the woods towards the cliff
where the struggle of the previous night had taken place.  Here they
came suddenly into view of the Indian camp.

There were no tents: several green blankets that lay on the moss under
the trees indicated where the party had lain during the night; and at a
considerable distance apart from these sat Old Moggy, with her face
buried in her skinny hands.  Beside her stood Aneetka, with a calm but
slightly anxious expression on her pale countenance.  Chimo was held in
a leash by an Indian.  From the fact of the Indians being without tents
or women, and having their faces daubed with red paint, besides being
armed with knives, guns, and tomahawks, Maximus concluded that they
composed a war party.

On seeing her husband, Aneetka uttered a suppressed cry and bounded
towards him; but ere she had proceeded two paces an Indian laid his hand
on her arm, and led her back to where the old woman sat.  Meestagoosh
led Maximus to the same spot, and having confronted him with his wife,
he said to the latter,--"Now, she-bear of the north, translate between
us.  If I think you tell lies, the dogs shall have your bones to pick."

Aneetka replied meekly, "You cannot hurt one hair of our heads unless
the Great Spirit permit you."

"We shall see," retorted the Indian with a scornful laugh.  "Tell the
polar bear," continued Meestagoosh, in a contemptuous tone, "that I did
not expect to catch him so soon.  I have been fortunate.  It was kind of
him to come in my way, and to bring his she-bear with him.  Tell him
that I and my braves are going to pay a visit to his nation, to take a
few scalps.  I let him know this piece of good news because he will
never know it from his friends, as he shall be food for dog very soon."

On this being translated, the face of Maximus assumed an expression of
deep gravity mingled with sadness.  His mind flew to the far north, and
he thought of the midnight assault and the death-cry of women and
children.  The nature of the Esquimau was too noble and generous to be
easily ruffled by the contemptuous tone of such a man as Meestagoosh;
but his heart sank within him when he thought of the power as well as
the will that the Indian had to put his threat into execution.

"Tell him," said Maximus quietly, "that I have no wish to talk with him,
but remind him that Indians are not gods; they are men."

"Yes, he says truly," retorted Meestagoosh, "the Indians are men, but
Esquimaux are dogs."

While this conversation was going on, and the Indians were intent upon
the scene, Old Moggy, who was not deemed worthy of being noticed,
contrived unobserved to possess herself of a knife, and springing
suddenly towards Maximus with an agility of which she seemed utterly
incapable, she endeavoured to cut the thongs that bound his arms.  Her
hand was caught, however, by Meestagoosh, in time to frustrate her
intention.  Without deigning a word of remark, the Indian struck her a
heavy blow on the cheek with the back of his open hand, which nearly
stunned her.  Staggering backward, she fell upon the ground with a low
wail.

The bosom of Maximus felt as if it would burst with rage.  Before any
one could prevent him, he raised his foot and struck Meestagoosh so
violently on the chest that he fell as if he had been shot.  In a moment
he recovered, drew his knife, and springing like an infuriated tiger at
his enemy, drove it with deadly force at his throat.  Fortunately the
arms of Maximus were tied in front of him, so that by raising them he
was enabled to guard his chest and receive the stab on his wrist.  The
knife passed quite through the fleshy part of his left arm, but in doing
so it severed one of the cords that bound him.  Thought is not quicker
than the mighty wrench with which the Esquimau burst the remaining cord
and dashed his opponent to the ground.  Before the astonished Indians
could level their guns, Maximus had seized Aneetka in his arms and was
bounding madly towards the cliff, which was not more than fifty yards
distant.  Every gun poured forth its deadly contents before he gained
it; but his very nearness to the Indians seemed to contribute to his
safety, and the suddenness of his flight rendered their hasty aim
uncertain.  In another moment he was round the point and behind the
sheltering cliff, while the Indians uttered a terrific yell and darted
forward in pursuit.  Just about thirty paces beyond the point of the
cliff that hid him for a few moments from view was the cave in which
Maximus had spent the night.  Quick as thought he sprang up the steep
short ascent that led to its narrow entrance and darted in.

Scarcely had he placed Aneetka behind a projection that formed an ample
shelter at the mouth of the cave, when Chimo, who had broken from his
captors, also darted in and crouched at his master's feet.  Meanwhile
the Indians came sweeping round the point, and seeing by the entrance of
the dog where the fugitives had taken shelter, they bounded up the
ascent.  The first who reached the cave's mouth rashly passed the
entrance.  Ere he could fire his piece he received a blow from the fist
of the Esquimau that fractured his skull, hurled him down the steep
ascent, and dashed him against his comrades in the rear.  This sudden
repulse effectually checked the Indians, who are notoriously bad at
storming.  Indeed they would never have ventured to enter the cave in
this manner had they not known that Maximus was totally unarmed.

Withdrawing to a distance of about forty yards, the Indians now formed
in a line, and loading their guns, fired volley after volley into the
cave's mouth.  But Maximus and his wife crouched with the dog behind the
ledge of rock at the entrance, and remained there in perfect safety.  In
a few minutes the Indians ceased firing, and one of their number
cautiously approached the cave, supposing, no doubt, that the fusillade
must have wounded if it had not killed those within; but the instant he
passed the entrance, knife in hand, he was caught in the powerful arms
of Maximus and hurled down the slope.

A yell of indignation from the Indians followed this feat, and another
volley was fired into the cave, but without effect; and the savages,
seeing that it was impossible in this way to dislodge their foe,
assembled in a group to consult.

Meanwhile Old Moggy had made good use of the opportunity thus afforded
her to effect her escape.  She darted into the bushes and made for the
rocky ground in the rear of the camp.  In doing so she happened to pass
the tree against which leaned the two guns belonging to her friends.
They had escaped notice during the _melee_ of the previous day, and,
with the shot-belts and powder-horns, remained where they had been
placed when she and her companions landed.  The old woman eagerly seized
these, and clambered with them over the rocks at a rate that would have
done credit to more youthful limbs.  On reaching a ridge of rock that
overlooked the cave where Maximus was sheltered, Old Moggy became aware
of how matters stood.  She could also see, from her elevated position,
that a track, or the bed of a dried-up watercourse, led through the
bushes towards the cave.  Without a moment's delay she descended it;
but, on drawing near to the cave, she found that there was a barren spot
of about thirty yards in extent between the place of refuge and the edge
of the bushes.  This open space was completely exposed to the view of
the natives, who at that time were firing across it into the cavern;
for, after their consultation, they had changed their position and
renewed the fusillade.  Moggy was now in despair.  She knew that it
would be impossible to pass the open ground without being shot, and she
also felt certain that, when the Indians found their present attempts
were fruitless, they would resort to others, in prosecuting which they
would in all probability discover her.  While she meditated thus, she
looked earnestly towards the cave, and observed the astonished gaze of
Maximus fixed upon her; for, from his position behind the ledge of rock,
he could see the old woman without exposing himself to the Indians.
While they gazed at each other a thought occurred to Old Moggy.  She
made a series of complicated signs, which, after frequent repetition,
were understood by Maximus to mean that he was to expose himself to the
view of the Indians.  Instantly comprehending her meaning, the Esquimau
stepped boldly from his place of concealment and shook his fist
contemptuously in the face of his enemies.  A shower of bullets and a
yell of rage followed the act.  This was just what Old Moggy had
expected and desired.  Not a gun remained undischarged, and before they
could reload, she passed quickly over the open ground and bounded into
the cave, where she turned and shook aloft the two guns with a hoarse
laugh of triumph ere she sought the shelter of the ledge of rock.

The Indians were so filled with fury at being thus outwitted by an old
woman, that they forgot for a moment their usual caution, and rushed in
a body up the slope; but ere they had accomplished half the distance two
of their number fell, to rise no more.  This was sufficient to check
their career.  Howling with baffled rage, and without waiting to pick up
their fallen comrades, they darted right and left to seek the shelter of
the bushes, for they could no longer remain in the open ground, now that
their enemies were armed.

For nearly an hour after this all was silence.  Maximus and his
companions could only form conjectures as to the movements of the
Indians, for none of them were to be seen.  However, as they had no
resource but to remain in their retreat until night-fall, they
endeavoured to make the place as comfortable as possible, and busied
themselves in cleaning their arms.

It happened that from the cave's mouth they could see their canoe, which
still lay on the beach where they had originally left it; and, while
they were looking at it, they perceived one of the Indians stealing down
towards it.  Fortunately Maximus had a gun in his hand ready loaded, and
the instant the Indian appeared he fired and shot him.  No second Indian
dared to venture towards the little craft, although it lay only a few
yards distant from the edge of the forest; for they knew that the
watchful eye of the Esquimau was upon them, and that instant death would
be the fate of him who should make the attempt.  The little canoe now
became an object of intense interest to both parties.  The Indians knew
that if their foe should succeed in reaching it he could easily escape.
This, of course, he could not hope to do as long as daylight lasted; nor
even when night should arrive, unless it were a very dark one.  But, on
the other hand, they knew that they did not dare to venture near it so
long as there was sufficient light to enable Maximus to take aim at them
with his deadly gun.  Both parties, therefore, remained silent and
apparently inactive during the remainder of the day.

But the busy brains both of Indians and Esquimaux were, during this
weary interval, employed in planning how to circumvent each other.  As
the shades of night deepened, each became more watchful.  Once only did
Maximus move from his post, in order to go to the farther end of the
cave, where the large powder-horn had been placed for safety.  As he did
so, Chimo, who was tied to a rock, tried to follow him, and on finding
that he was restrained, uttered a loud, mournful howl.  This cry sent a
thrill to the heart of Maximus, for it immediately occurred to him that
any attempt to leave the cave stealthily would instantly be intimated to
the watchful foe by the dog, and to take Chimo with them was impossible.

"The dog must die," said Old Moggy, who divined at once what was passing
in the man's mind.

Maximus shook his head sadly.

"I cannot kill Chimo," he said to Aneetka; "he is Edith's dog."

Aneetka made no reply, for she felt the power of her husband's objection
to injure the dog of his little favourite; yet she could not but
perceive that the cry--which was invariably repeated when any of the
party moved away from the animal--would betray them in the moment of
danger.  Nothing further was said for some time, but Old Moggy, who had
no tender reminiscences or feelings in regard to the dog, proceeded
quietly and significantly to construct a running-noose on the stout
thong of leather that encircled her waist and served as a sash.

While she was thus engaged the sun's last rays faded away and the night
began to deepen around them.  To the satisfaction of both parties the
sky was draped with heavy clouds, which gave promise of a night of
intense darkness.  This was absolutely essential not only to the Indians
but to Maximus, who had at length formed a plan by which he hoped to
turn the dreaded cry of the dog to good account, although he had little
hope of saving it from the Indians, should he succeed in escaping with
the women.  As the night grew darker he began to put this plan in
execution.

Taking his station at the entrance of the cave, he took a long and
steady aim at the bow of the canoe, which could now be only seen dimly.
Having adjusted the gun to his satisfaction he marked its position
exactly on the rock, so that, when the canoe should be entirely hid from
sight, he could make certain of hitting any object directly in front of
it.  Then he ordered Moggy and his wife to keep moving about the cave,
so that the howling of Chimo should be kept up continually, and thus not
appear unusual when they should really forsake the cave and attempt
their escape.  In order to show that he was still on the alert, he
shortly after aimed at the canoe, which was now quite invisible, and
fired.  The effect was more startling than had been expected.  A
death-cry rent the air and mingled with the reverberations of the shot,
proving that it had taken deadly effect on one of the Indians, who,
under cover of the darkness, had ventured to approach the coveted canoe.
A volley was instantly fired in the direction of the cave from various
parts of the bushes, but without effect.

Maximus now kept up a continued fire, sometimes discharging a succession
of rapid shots, at other times firing at irregular intervals of from
three to ten minutes.  This he did purposely, with a view to his future
plans.  In the meantime the dog was made to keep up a continuous
howling.

"Now, Aneetka," said Maximus, as the ring of his last shot died away,
"go, and may the Great Spirit guide thee!"

Without a word of reply, the two women glided noiselessly like shadows
into the thick darkness.  About two minutes after they had disappeared,
Maximus again fired several shots, taking care, however, to point
considerably to the right of the canoe.  Then he ceased for three
minutes, and again fired several shots irregularly.  At the last shot he
passed from the cave so silently and quickly that even Chimo was
deceived, and snuffed the air for a moment ere it renewed its sad
wailing.  In less than two minutes the Esquimau had glided, with the
noiseless tread of a panther, to the spot where the canoe lay.  Here he
found his wife and the old woman crouching beside it.  The water's edge
was about ten yards distant.  A few seconds would suffice to lift the
light bark in his powerful arms and launch it.  Aneetka and the old
woman, who had already received minute instructions what to do, had
glided quietly into the sea the instant Maximus touched them; for, as we
have said, it was intensely dark and they could not see a yard before
them.  The women now stood up to the knees in water, with their paddles
in their hands ready to embark.

Stooping down, the Esquimau seized the canoe; but, just as he was about
to lift it, he observed a tall dark object close to his side.

"Wah!" whispered the Indian, "you are before me.  Quick! the Esquimau
dog will fire again."

The words of the Indian were cut short by the iron gripe of Maximus on
his throat, and the next instant he was felled by a blow that would have
stunned an ox.  So decided and quick was the action that it was not
accompanied by more noise than might have been caused by the Indian
endeavouring to lift the canoe, so that his comrades were not alarmed.
Next moment the canoe was in the water.  But the long silence, which had
now been unbroken for eight or ten minutes, except by the howling of
Chimo in the cave, began to arouse the suspicion of the red men; and no
sooner was this the case than they glided from the bushes in all
directions with noiseless tread.  In a second or two the body of their
fallen comrade was discovered, and a yell of fury rent the air (for
concealment was now unnecessary), while they dashed into the water in
pursuit.  The darkness favoured the fugitives for a few seconds, and
enabled the women to embark; but just as Maximus was about to step into
his place, Meestagoosh seized him by the throat!

Maximus was possessed of that ready presence of mind and prompt energy
of character which are so necessary to a warrior, especially to him who
wars with the prowling and stealthy savage.  Almost in the same instant
he gave the canoe a shove that sent it bounding out to sea, and raised
his hand to catch the invisible arm which he knew must be descending
with the deadly knife towards his heart.  He succeeded so far that,
although he did not arrest it, he turned the blow aside, receiving only
a slight wound on the shoulder.  Ere it could be repeated, he dealt his
adversary a blow on the forehead, and hurled him back insensible into
the water.

The Esquimau immediately glided out into deep water; and now, for the
first time in his life, he felt keenly the disadvantage of not being
able to swim.  This is an art which the inhabitants of the icy seas have
never acquired, owing probably to the shortness of the season of open
water, and the intense cold of the ice-laden seas, even in summer.  The
Indians, on the contrary, who live beside the warm lakes and rivers of
the interior, are many of them pretty expert swimmers.  Thus it happened
that Maximus was obliged to stand up to his neck in the water, not
daring to move or utter a sound, while his friends and foes alike sought
in vain for him in the darkness.

While he stood thus, uncertain how to act, he heard the water rippling
near to him, and distinguished the hard breathing of a swimmer.  Soon he
observed a dark head making straight towards him.  A sarcastic smile
played for a moment on the face of the gigantic Esquimau, as he thought
of the ease with which he should crush his approaching foe; and his hand
was already raised to strike when it was arrested by a low whine, and
the next moment Chimo was endeavouring to clamber upon his shoulder!

It instantly occurred to Maximus that he might turn the dog's swimming
powers to good account.  Seizing Chimo by the flanks with both hands, he
turned its head out to sea, and keeping it in that position, was dragged
into deep water.  When he had been thus conveyed what appeared to be
about fifty yards, he uttered a low cry.  He was heard by the Indians as
well as by those in the canoe; but the latter happened to be nearer to
the spot, and a few strokes of the paddles sent them alongside of their
comrade, who quickly caught the stern of the bark.  The women plied
their paddles, the Esquimau gave a shout of triumph, and half immersed
in the water, was dragged away from shore.  A yell of anger, and, soon
after, a desultory discharge of firearms, told that the Indians had
given up the chase.

But it was now a question how Maximus was to be got into the canoe.  The
frail bark was so crank that a much lighter weight than that of the
burly Esquimau would have upset it easily; and as the stern was sharp,
there was no possibility of climbing over it.  This was a matter of
considerable anxiety, for the water was excessively cold, being laden
with ice out at sea.  While in this dilemma, the canoe grated on a rock,
and it was discovered that in the dark they had well-nigh run against a
low cape that jutted far out from the land at this part of the coast.
Here Maximus and the dog landed, and while the one shook its wet sides,
the other wrung the moisture from his garments; after which necessary
operation he leaped, with his canine friend, into the canoe, and they
pushed well out to sea.

When daylight returned, they were far beyond the reach of their Indian
enemies.



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

HAPPY MEETINGS AND JOYOUS FEASTINGS--LOVE, MARRIAGE, DESERTION,
DESOLATION, AND CONCLUSION.

After the escape narrated in the last chapter, the stout Esquimau and
his companions travelled in safety; for they had passed the country of
the Indians, and were now near the lands of their own people.

