talked it over with your wife at least as many times--if not more."

"Your claim to rank among the prophets is indisputable, Macnab--at least
as regards the past.  What have you got to say about the future?"

"The future is as clear to me, my boy, as yonder sun, which gleams in
the pools that stud the ice on Lake Wichikagan."

"I am afraid, brother-in-law," returned Lumley, with a pitiful smile,
"that your intellects are sinking to a par with those of the geese which
fly over the pools referred to."

"Listen!" resumed the Highlander, with a serious air that was unusual in
him.  "I read the future thus.  You have already, as I am aware, sent in
your resignation.  Well, you will not only quit the service of the HBC,
but you will go and join your friend Maxby in Colorado; you will become
a farmer; and, worst of all, you will take my dear sister with you."

"In some respects," said Lumley, also becoming serious, "you are right.
I have made up my mind that, God willing, I shall quit the service--not
that I find fault with it, very much the reverse; but it is too much of
a life of exile and solitude to my dear Jessie.  I will also go to
Colorado and join Maxby, but I won't take your sister from you.  I will
take you with me, brother-in-law, if you will consent to go, and we
shall all live together.  What say you?"

Macnab shook his head, sadly.

"You forget my boy, that your case is very different from mine.  You
have only just reached the end of your second term of service, and are
still a youth.  Whereas, I am a commissioned officer of the Fur Trade,
with a fairish income, besides being an elderly man, and not very keen
to throw all up and begin life over again."

There was much in what Macnab said, yet not so much but that Lumley set
himself, with all his powers of suasion and suavity, to induce his
brother-in-law to change his mind.  But Lumley had yet to learn that no
power of Saxon logic, or personal influence, can move the will of a man
from beyond the Grampian range who has once made up his mind.

When all was said, Macnab still shook his head, and smiled regretfully.

"It's of no use wasting your breath, my boy,--but tell me, is Jessie
anxious for this change?"

"She is anxious.  She naturally pines for female society--though she did
not say so until I urged her solemnly to tell me all her mind.  And she
is right.  It is not good for woman, any more than for man, to be alone,
and when I am away on these long expeditions--taking the furs to the
depot, searching out the Indians, hunting, etcetera,--she is left
unavoidably alone.  I have felt this very strongly, and that was why, as
you know, I had made up my mind during the winter, and written to the
governor and council that, as my time had expired, I meant to retire
this spring."

"Yes, boy, I know," returned Macnab.  "I foresaw all this even long
before you began to move in the matter, and I also took steps with a
view to contingencies.  You know that I am entitled to a year's furlough
this spring.  Well, I wrote during the winter to say that I intended to
avail myself of it.  Now, then, this is what I intend to do.  When you
retire, and go off to the States, I will go with you on leave of
absence.  We won't lose time by the way, for you may depend on it that
Maxby will not delay his wedding longer than he can help.  Fortunately,
his old father won't be able to wind up his affairs in England, and set
off to Colorado quite as quickly as the son expects, so that will help
to delay matters; and thus, though we can hardly expect to be in time
for the wedding, we will at least be time enough to claim a revival and
extension of the festivities.  Then, you know, Big Otter--"

"Aye, what of him?" asked Lumley, seeing that Macnab paused.

"Well, I think we may prevail on him to go with us, as our guide, till
we reach the civilised world, after which, we can take him in charge--
turn the tables as it were--and guide him to Sunny Creek."

"Yes--or send him on in advance of us, through the wood in a straight
line, like the swallow, to announce our approach."

At this point, Jessie, who had been busy with the household bread, came
to the door with a face radiant from the combined effect of hard work
and happiness.

"What is the subject of all this earnest conversation, Jack?" she asked,
pulling down the sleeves that had been tucked up above her elbows.

"Ask your brother, Jess," said Lumley, rising.  "I shall have time
before supper to pay a visit to Big Otter on a matter of some
importance."

He passed into the house to take up his gun and powder-horn, while
Jessie sat down on the rustic chair, and her brother returned to the
subject that had been interrupted.

Now there occurred that afternoon an event which might have put a final
and fatal termination to the plans which had just been so eagerly
discussed.

I have said that spring was so far advanced at that time, that pools of
water were formed on the ice of Lake Wichikagan.  The heat which caused
these had also the effect of softening the snow in the woods, so as to
render walking in snow-shoes very laborious.  As walking without them,
however, was impossible, Lumley had no other course left than to put
them on and plod away heavily through the deep and pasty snow.

Big Otter at that time occupied the important position of hunter to the
establishment.  He supplied it with fresh meat and dwelt in a small
wigwam, about six miles distant from the fort, on the borders of a
little lake--little at least for that region, but measuring somewhat
over three miles in diameter.  He also, for his own advantage and
recreation, carried on the business of a trapper, and had that winter
supplied many a silver fox and marten to the fur-stores at Wichikagan.

When Lumley set out to visit the chief he knew that there was a
possibility of his being out after deer, but in that case he meant to
await his arrival, at least until nightfall, and then he could leave a
hieroglyphic message, which the Indian would understand, requiring his
immediate presence at the fort.  In any case Lumley thought nothing of a
twelve-mile walk, even though the snow _was_ soft and deep.

Nothing worthy of notice occurred until he reached the lake
above-mentioned, on the borders of which he halted.  Looking across the
bay, on the other side of which the hunter's wigwam stood, he could
discern among the pines and willows, the orange-coloured birch-bark of
which it was made, but no wreath of blue smoke told of the presence of
the hunter.

"H'm! not at home!" muttered Lumley, who then proceeded to debate with
himself the propriety of venturing to cross the bay on the ice.

Now, it must be told that ice on the North American lakes becomes
exceedingly dangerous at a certain period of spring, for, retaining much
of its winter solidity of appearance, and, indeed, much of its winter
thickness, it tempts men to venture on it when, in reality, it has
become honeycombed and "rotten."  Ice of this kind--no matter how thick
it be,--is prone to give way without any of those friendly cracks and
rends and other warnings peculiar to the new ice of autumn, and, instead
of giving way in angular cakes, it suddenly slides down, letting a man
through to the water, by opening a hole not much larger than himself.
Of course Lumley was well aware of this danger--hence the debate with
himself, or rather with his judgment.

"It looks solid enough," said Lumley.

"Looks are deceptive," said his judgment.

"Then, it's rather early yet for the ice to have become quite rotten,"
said Lumley.

"So everyone goes on saying, every spring, till some unfortunate loses
his life, and teaches others wisdom," said judgment; "besides, you're a
heavy man."

"And it is a tremendous long way round by the shore--nearly four times
the distance," murmured Lumley.

"What of that in comparison with the risk you run," remarked judgment,
growing impatient.

"I'll venture it!" said the man, sternly.

"You're a fool!" cried the other, getting angry.

It is surprising with what equanimity a man will stand insulting
language from himself!  With something like a contemptuous smile on his
lips, Lumley took off his snow-shoes and set off to cross the bay.

As he had anticipated, he found it as firm as a rock.  The surface,
indeed, had a dark wet look about it, and there were various pools here
and there which he carefully avoided; but there was no other indication
of danger until he had got three-quarters of the way across.  Then,
without an instant's warning, the mass of ice on which he stood dropped
below him like a trap-door and left him struggling in a compound of ice
and water!

The first shock of the cold water on his robust frame was to give it a
feeling of unusual strength.  With a sharp shout, caused by the cold
rather than alarm, he laid both hands on the edge of the ice, and,
springing like an acrobat out of the water to his waist, fell with his
chest on the still sound ice; but it was not long sound.  His convulsive
grip and heavy weight broke it off, and down he sank again, over head
and ears.

It is not easy to convince a very powerful man that he may become
helpless.  Lumley rose, and, with another Herculean grip, laid hold of
the edge of the ice.  His mind had not yet fully admitted that he was in
absolute danger.  He had only been recklessly vigorous at the first
attempt to get out--that was all--now, he would exercise caution.

With the coolness that was natural to him--increased, perhaps, by the
coolness of the water--he again laid his hands on the edge of the ice,
but he did not try to scramble upon it.  He had been a practised gymnast
at school.  Many a time had he got into a boat from deep water while
bathing, and he knew that in such an effort one is hampered by the
tendency one's legs have to get under the boat and prevent action--even
as, at that moment, his legs were attempting to go under the ice.
Adopting, therefore, his old plan and keeping his hands on the edge of
the ice, he first of all paddled backwards with his legs until he got
himself into a quite perpendicular position, so that when he should make
the spring there would be no fear of retarding his action by scraping
against the ice with his chest.  While in this position he let himself
sink to the very lips--nay, even lower--and then, acting with arms and
legs at the same moment, he shot himself full half his length out of the
water.

The whole process was well calculated, for, by sinking so deeply before
the spring, he thus made use of the buoyancy of water, and rendered less
pressure with his hands on the ice needful.  But, although he thus
avoided breaking the ice at first he could not by any device lessen the
weight of his fall upon it.  Again the treacherous mass gave way, and
once more he sank into the cold lake.

Cold, far more than exertion, tells on a man in such circumstances.  A
feeling of exhaustion, such as poor Lumley had never felt before, came
over him.

"God help me!" he gasped, with the fervour that comes over men when in
the hour of their extremity.

Death seemed at last evidently to confront him, and with the energy of a
brave man he grappled and fought him.  Again and again he tried the
faithless ice, each time trying to recall some device in athletics which
might help him, but always with the same result.  Then, still clinging
to life convulsively, he prayed fervently and tried to meet his fate
like a man.  This effort is probably more easy on the battle-field, with
the vital powers unexhausted, and the passions strong.  It was not so
easy in the lone wilderness, with no comrade's voice to cheer, with the
cold gradually benumbing all the vital powers, and with life slipping
slowly away like an unbelievable dream!

The desire to live came over him so strongly at times, that again and
yet again, he struggled back from the gates of the dark valley by the
mere power of his will and renewed his fruitless efforts; and when at
last despair took possession of him, from the depths of his capacious
chest he gave vent to that:--

  "Bubbling cry
  Of some strong swimmer in his agony!"

Sleeping soundly in his wigwam, Big Otter heard the cry.

Our Indian was not the man to start up and stare, and wonder, and wait
for a repetition of any cry.  Like the deer which he had so often
roused, he leaped up, bounded through the doorway of his tent, and
grasped gun and snow-shoes.  One glance sufficed to show him the not far
distant hole in the ice.  Dropping the gun he thrust his feet into the
snowshoes, and went off over the ice at racing speed.  The snow-shoes
did not impede him much, and they rendered the run over the ice less
dangerous.  Probably Lumley would not have broken through if he had used
his snow-shoes, because of the larger surface of ice which they would
have covered.

To come within a few yards of the hole, slide to the edge of it on his
chest, with both snow-shoes spread out under that, by way of diffusing
his weight over as much surface as possible, was the work of only a few
minutes.  But by that time the perishing man was almost incapable of
helping himself.  The great difficulty that the rescuer experienced was
to rouse Lumley once more to action, for the torpor that precedes death
had already set in, and to get on his knees on the edge of the ice, so
as to have power to raise his friend, would only have resulted in the
loss of his own life as well.  To make sure that he should not let go
his hold and slip, Big Otter tied the end of his long worsted belt round
his friend's right wrist.

"Now," he said, earnestly, "try once more."

"Too late--too late!  God bless you, Big--" He stopped, and his eyes
closed!

"No!" cried the Indian, vehemently, giving the perishing man's head a
violent shake--then, putting his mouth close to his ear, added in a deep
tone--"Not too late for the Master of Life to save.  Think!  The
dark-haired pale-face waits for you."

This was a judicious touch.  The energy which could not be aroused by
any consideration of self was electrified by the thought of the waiting
wife.  Lumley made one more desperate effort and once again cried to God
for help.  Both acts contributed to the desired end, and were themselves
an answer to the prayer of faith.  Mysterious connection!  Hope revived,
and the vital fluid received a fresh impulse.  In the strength of it
Lumley raised himself so far out of the water that the Indian was able
to drag half his body on the ice, but the legs still hung down.
Creeping back a few feet, the Indian, still lying flat on his face, cut
a hole in the ice with his hatchet into which he stuck his toe, and
seized hold of the end of his worsted belt.

"That's right," said his friend, faintly--"wait."

Big Otter knew that full consciousness had returned.  He waited while
Lumley, gently paddling with his legs, got them into a horizontal
position.

"Now!" cried Lumley.

The Indian pulled--softly at first, then vigorously, and Lumley slid
fairly on the ice.  The rest, though still dangerous, was easy.  In a
few minutes more the red-man had the pale-face stripped beside a rousing
fire in the wigwam--and thus he brought him back to life from the very
gates of death.

"You have saved me, my good friend," said Lumley, when he began to
recover.

"The Great Master of Life saved you," returned the Indian.  "He made use
of me--for which I thank him."

It was not until late on the following day that Lumley felt strong
enough to return to the fort, and relate what had occurred.  Then the
plans for the future were laid before Big Otter, and, to the
satisfaction of all parties, he agreed at once to fall in with them.

"But," said he, "Big Otter will not stay.  He loves the great wilderness
too well to be content to live among the wooden wigwams of the
pale-faces."

"Well, we won't bother ourselves on that point just now," said Macnab,
"and so, as that's comfortably settled, I'll pack up and away back to my
mountain fort to get ready for a trip, with you and Lumley and Jessie,
to Colorado."



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

THE LAST.

Once more I change the scene, from the wild regions of the north to the
little less wild lands of Colorado.

On a certain bright forenoon in Autumn I stood in the doorway of Sunny
Creek Cottage watching a clumsy vehicle as it laboured slowly up the
hill.  I was alone that day, old Mrs Liston, Eve, and "Aunt Temple"
having gone off in the waggon for a long drive to visit a relative with
hunting proclivities, who had built himself a log-hut in a ravine of the
neighbouring mountains, that he might be in closer proximity to the
bears and deer.

With some curiosity I approached the lumbering machine to assist the
occupant, who seemed unable, or too impatient, to open the door.  It was
a stiff door, and swung open with a jerk which caused the occupant's hat
to fall off, and reveal a bald head.

"Father!"  I gasped.

"Punch, my boy!"

The dear old man tripped in his haste to get down, plunged into my
bosom, threw his arms round my neck to save himself, and almost bore me
to the ground.  Neither of us being demonstrative in our affections,
this unpremeditated, not to say unintentional, embrace I felt to be
quite touching.  My father obviously resolved to make the most of his
opportunities, for he gave me a thoroughly exhaustive hug before
releasing me.

"I--I--didn't m-mean," said my father, blazing with excitement, and
gasping with a mingled tendency to laugh and weep, "didn't mean to come
it quite so strong, P-Punch, my boy, b-but you'll make allowance for a
momentary weakness.  I'm getting an old man, Punch.  What makes you grin
so, you backwoods koonisquat?"

The last sentence, with its opprobrious epithet (coined on the spot),
was addressed with sudden asperity to the driver of the clumsy vehicle,
who was seated on his box, with mouth expanded from ear to ear.

