side of the carriage fell out, and he slid down on the rails just as the
other carriages and vans piled up on the place he had left, killing or
wounding all his fellow-travellers.  Beneath the rubbish next the
tender, a mother and child were buried and several others.  All were
dead save the mother and child when the men began to dig them out and
before they succeeded in their labours the mother had died also, but the
child survived.  In another carriage, or rather under it, a lad was seen
lying with a woman's head crushed down on his breast and an infant
beside her.  They had to saw the carriage asunder before these could be
extricated.  The woman died almost immediately on being released, but
the lad and infant were uninjured.  Elsewhere a young girl, who had
attracted attention by the sweet expression of her face, had been
strangled, and her face rendered perfectly black.  In another case the
surface-men attempted to extricate a woman, by sawing the broken
carriage, under which she lay, but the more they sawed the more did the
splinters appear to cling round her, and when at last they got her out
she was dead, while another passenger in the same carnage escaped
without a scratch.

We would not prolong a painful description which may, perhaps, be
thought too long already--yet within certain limits it is right that men
should know what their fellows suffer.  After all the passengers had
been removed to the special train--the dead into vans and horse-boxes
and the living into carriages--the surface-men set to work to clear the
line.

Poor Mrs Tipps was among the rescued, and, along with the others, was
sent on to the Clatterby station by the special train.

While the people were being placed in this train, John Marrot observed
Edwin Gurwood in the crowd.  He chanced to be at Clatterby when the
telegram of the accident arrived, and ran down in the special train to
render assistance.

"I'm glad to see you, sir," he said in a low, earnest voice.  "My mate,
Bill Garvie, must be badly hurt, for he's nowhere to be found.  He must
be under the wreck somewheres.  I wouldn't leave the spot till I found
him in or'nary circumstances; but my Mary--"

He stopped abruptly.

"I hope Mrs Marrot is not hurt?" said Edwin anxiously.

John could not reply at first.  He shook his head and pointed to a
carriage near at hand.

"She's there, sir, with Gertie."

"Gertie!" exclaimed Edwin.

"Ay, poor thing, Gertie is all right, thank the good Lord for that;
but--"

Again he stopped, then with an effort continued--

"I couldn't quit _them_, you know, till I've got 'em safe home.  But my
mind will be easy, Mr Gurwood, if you'll look after Bill.  We was both
throw'd a good way from the ingine, but I couldn't rightly say where.
You'll not refuse--"

"My dear Marrot," said Edwin, interrupting him, and grasping his hand,
"you may rely on me.  I shall not leave the ground until he is found and
cared for."

"Thank 'ee, sir, thank 'ee," said John, in something of his wonted
hearty tone, as he returned Edwin's squeeze of the hand, and hastened to
the train, which was just ready to start.

Edwin went at once to the spot where the surface-men were toiling at the
wreck in the fitful light of the fires, which flared wildly in the storm
and, as they had by that time gathered intense heat, bid defiance to the
rain.  There were several passengers, who had just been extricated,
lying on the ground, some motionless, as if dead, others talking
incoherently.  These he looked at in passing, but Garvie was not among
them.  Leaving them under the care of the surgeons, who did all that was
possible in the circumstances for their relief, he ran and joined the
surface-men in removing the broken timbers of a carriage, from beneath
which groans were heard.  With some difficulty a woman was extricated
and laid tenderly on the bank.  Just then Edwin observed a guard, with
whom he was acquainted, and asked him if the fireman had yet been found.

"Not yet sir, I believe," said the man.  "They say that he and the
driver were flung to one side of the line."

Edwin went towards the engine, and, judging the probable direction and
distance to which a man might be thrown in such an accident, went to a
certain spot and sought carefully around it in all directions.  For some
time he sought in vain, and was on the point of giving up in despair,
when he observed a cap lying on the ground.  Going up to it, he saw the
form of a man half-concealed by a mass of rubbish.  He stooped, and,
raising the head a little, tried to make out the features, but the light
of the fires did not penetrate to the spot.  He laid him gently down
again, and was about to hasten away for assistance when the man groaned
and said faintly, "Is that you, Jack?"

"No, my poor fellow," said Edwin, stooping down.  "Are you badly hurt?
I am just going to fetch help to--"

"Mr Gurwood," said the man, interrupting, "you don't seem to know me!
I'm Garvie, the fireman.  Where am I?  Surely there is something wrong
with my left arm.  Oh!  I remember now.  Is Jack safe?  And the Missis
and Gertie?  Are they--"

"Don't exert yourself," interrupted Edwin, as Will attempted to rise.
"You must keep quiet until I fetch a doctor.  Perhaps you're not much
hurt, but it is well to be careful.  Will you promise me to be still?"

"All right sir," said Will, promptly.

Edwin hastened for assistance, and in a short time the fireman was
carried to a place of comparative shelter and his wounds examined.

Almost immediately after the examination Edwin knelt at his side, and
signed to those around him to retire.

"Garvie," he said, in a low kind voice, "I'm sorry to tell you that the
doctors say you must lose your left arm."

Will looked intently in Edwin's face.

"Is there _no_ chance of savin' it?" he asked earnestly; "it might never
be much to speak of, sir, but I'd rather run some risk than lose it."

Edwin shook his head.  "No," he said sadly, "they tell me amputation
must be immediate, else your life may be sacrificed.  I said I would
like to break it to you, but it is necessary, my poor fellow, that you
should make up your mind at once."

"God's will be done," said Will in a low voice; "I'm ready, sir."

The circumstances did not admit of delay.  In a few minutes the
fireman's left arm was amputated above the elbow, the stump dressed, and
himself laid in as sheltered a position as possible to await the return
of the train that was to convey the dead and wounded, more recently
extricated, to Clatterby.

When that train arrived at the station it was touching to witness the
pale anxious faces that crowded the platform as the doors were opened
and the dead and sufferers carried out; and to hear the cries of agony
when the dead were recognised, and the cries of grief, strangely, almost
unnaturally, mingled with joy, when some who were supposed to have been
killed were carried out alive.  Some were seen almost fondling the dead
with a mixture of tender love and abject despair.  Others bent over them
with a strange stare of apparent insensibility, or looked round on the
pitying bystanders inquiringly, as if they would say, "Surely, surely,
this _cannot_ be true."  The sensibilities of some were stunned, so that
they moved calmly about and gave directions in a quiet solemn voice, as
if the great agony of grief were long past, though it was painfully
evident that it had not yet begun, because the truth had not yet been
realised.

Among those who were calm and collected, though heart-stricken and
deadly pale, was Loo Marrot.  She had been sent to the station by her
father to await the arrival of the train, with orders to bring Will
Garvie home.  When Will was carried out and laid on the platform alive,
an irresistible gush of feeling overpowered her.  She did not give way
to noisy demonstration, as too many did, but knelt hastily down, raised
his head on her knee, and kissed his face passionately.

"Bless you, my darling," said Will, in a low thrilling voice, in which
intense feeling struggled with the desire to make light of his
misfortune; "God has sent a cordial that the doctors haven't got to
give."

"O William!" exclaimed Loo, removing the hair from his forehead--but Loo
could say no more.

"Tell me, darling," said Garvie, in an anxious tone, "is father safe,
and mother, and Gertie?"

"Father is safe, thank God," replied Loo, with a choking voice, "and
Gertie also, but mother--"

"She is not dead?" exclaimed the fireman.

"No, not dead, but very _very_ much hurt.  The doctors fear she may not
survive it, Will."

No more was said, for at that moment four porters came up with a
stretcher and placed Garvie gently upon it.  Loo covered him with her
shawl, a piece of tarpaulin was thrown over all, and thus he was slowly
borne away to John Marrot's home.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

RESULTS OF THE ACCIDENT.

Years passed away--as years inevitably must--and many important changes
took place in the circumstances and the management of the Grand National
Trunk Railway, but the results of that terrible accident did not quickly
pass away.  As we have said, it cost Will Garvie an arm, and nearly cost
Mrs Marrot her life.  We have much pleasure, however, in recording,
that it did not make the full charge in this matter.  A small, a very
small modicum of life was left in that estimable woman, and on the
strength of that, with her wonted vigour of character and invincibility
of purpose, she set to work to draw out, as it were, a new lease of
life.  She succeeded to admiration, so much so, in fact, that but for
one or two scars on her countenance, no one could have known that she
had come by an accident at all.  Bob Marrot was wont to say of her, in
after years, that, "if it had bin his mother who had lost an arm instead
of Will Garvie, he was convinced that her firmness, amountin' a'most to
obstinacy, of purpose, would have enabled her to grow on a noo arm as
good as the old 'un, if not better."  We need scarcely add that Bob was
an irreverent scamp!

Poor Will Garvie! his was a sad loss, yet, strange to say, he rejoiced
over it.  "W'y, you see," he used to say to Bob Marrot--Bob and he being
great and confidential friends--"you see, Bob, if it hadn't bin for that
accident, I never would have bin laid up and brought so low--so very
nigh to the grave--and I would never have know'd what it was to be
nursed by your sister too; and so my eyes might have never bin opened to
half her goodness an' tenderness, d'ye see?  No, Bob, I don't grudge
havin' had my eyes opened by the loss of an arm; it was done cheap at
the price.  Of course I know Loo pretty well by this time, for a few
years of married life is apt to clear a good deal of dust out of one's
eyes, but I do assure you, Bob, that I never _could_ have know'd her
properly but for that accident, which was the luckiest thing that ever
happened to me; an' then, don't 'ee see, I'm just as able to work these
there points with one arm as with two."

To which Bob would reply,--"You're a queer fish, Bill; howsever, every
man's got a right to his own opinions."

Will Garvie was a pointsman now.  On recovering from his prolonged
illness, during which he had been supported out of the Provident Fund of
the railway--to which he and all the other men on the line contributed--
he was put to light work at first at the station of Clatterby.  By
degrees his strength returned, and he displayed so much intelligence,
and such calmness of nerve and coolness of courage, that he was made a
pointsman at the station, and had a sentry-box sort of erection, with
windows all round it, apportioned to his daily use.  There he was
continually employed in shifting the points for the shunting of trains,
none of which dared to move, despite their mighty power and impatience,
until Will Garvie gave them leave.

To John Marrot, the accident although not severe at first, had proved
more damaging in the long-run.  No bones had been broken, or limbs lost,
but John had received a shake so bad that he did not resume his duties
with the same vigour as heretofore.  He continued to stick to his post,
however, for several years, and, before giving it up, had the pleasure
of training his son Bob in the situation which Garvie had been obliged
to resign.  Bob's heart you see, had been all along set on driving the
_Lightning_; he therefore gladly left the "Works" when old enough,--and
when the opportunity offered,--to fill the preliminary post of fireman.

During this period Edwin Gurwood rose to a responsible and sufficiently
lucrative situation in the Clearing-House.  At the same time he employed
much of his leisure in cultivating the art of painting, of which he was
passionately fond.  At first he painted for pleasure, but he soon found,
on exhibiting one or two of his works, that picture-dealers were willing
to purchase from him.  He therefore began to paint for profit, and
succeeded so well that he began to save and lay by money, with a view to
that wife with the nut-brown hair and the large lustrous eyes, who
haunted his dreams by night and became his guiding-star by day.

Seeing him thus wholly immersed in the acquisition of money, and not
knowing his motive, his faithful little friend Joe Tipps one day amazed,
and half-offended him, by reminding him that he had a soul to be cared
for as well as a body.  The arrow was tenderly shot, and with a
trembling hand, but Joe prayed that it might be sent home, and it was.
From that date Edwin could not rest.  He reviewed his life.  He
reflected that everything he possessed, or hoped for, came to him, or
was to come, from God; yet as far as he could make out he saw no
evidence of the existence of religion in himself save in the one fact
that he went regularly to church on Sundays.  He resolved to turn over a
new leaf.  Tried--and failed.  He was perplexed, for he had tried
honestly.

"Tipps," he said, one day, "you are the only man I ever could make a
confidant of.  To say truth I'm not given to being very communicative as
to personal matters at any time, but I _must_ tell you that the remark
you made about my soul the other day has stuck to me, and I have tried
to lead a Christian life, but without much success."

"Perhaps," said Tipps, timidly, "it is because you have not yet become a
Christian."

"My _dear_ fellow!" exclaimed Edwin, "is not leading a Christian life
becoming a Christian?"

"Don't you think," said Tipps, in an apologetic tone, "that leading a
Christian life is rather the result of having become a Christian?  It
seems to me that you have been taking the plan of putting yourself and
your doings first, and our Saviour last."

We need not prolong a conversation referring to the "old, old story,"
which ran very much in the usual groove.  Suffice it to say that Edwin
at last carefully consulted the Bible as to the plan of redemption; and,
in believing, found that rest of spirit which he had failed to work out.
Thenceforward he had a higher motive for labouring at his daily toil,
yet the old motive did not lose but rather gained in power by the
change--whereby he realised the truth that, "godliness is profitable for
the life that now is as well as that which is to come."

At last the painting became so successful that Edwin resolved to trust
to it alone--said good-bye to the Clearing-House with regret--for he
left many a pleasant companion and several intimate friends behind him--
and went to Clatterby, in the suburbs of which he took and furnished a
small villa.

Then it was that he came to the conclusion that the time had arrived to
make a pointed appeal to the nut-brown hair and lustrous eyes.  He went
off and called at Captain Lee's house accordingly.  The captain was
out--Miss Lee was at home.  Edwin entered the house, but he left all his
native courage and self-possession on the doorstep outside!

Being ushered into the drawing-room he found Emma reading.  From that
moment--to his own surprise, and according to his own statement--he
became an ass!  The metamorphosis was complete.  Ovid, had he been
alive, would have rejoiced in it!  He blushed more than a poor boy
caught in his first grievous offence.  The very straightforwardness of
his character helped to make him worse.  He felt, in all its importance,
the momentous character of the step he was about to take, and he felt in
all its strength the love with which his heart was full, and the
inestimable value of the prize at which he aimed.  No wonder that he was
overwhelmed.

The reader will observe that we have not attempted to dilate in this
book on the value of that prize.  Emma, like many other good people, is
only incidental to our subject.  We have been obliged to leave her to
the reader's imagination.  After all, what better could we have done?
Imagination is more powerful in this matter than description.  Neither
one nor other could, we felt, approach the reality, therefore
imagination was best.

"Emma!" he said, sitting down on the sofa beside her, and seizing her
hand in both of his.

