From the elevated spot where they lay they could see the hermit
advancing rapidly towards them in a crouching attitude, closely followed
by the maidens, while at the same time there advanced from the stede a
large band of men under a chief, who was evidently commissioned to
execute some order of the King.  Erling and his friends could clearly
see these two parties unwittingly approaching each other, at right
angles, each making for a point where the two paths crossed, and where
they were certain to meet.  They could see their friends quietly but
swiftly gliding towards the very fate they sought to avoid, and
experienced all the agony of being unable to give a shout of warning, or
to prevent the foe from capturing them; for, even if there had been time
to rush upon them before the meeting, which there was not, Erling by so
doing would have been obliged to place the whole of Harald's host
between him and the boat at Crow Cliff.  This consideration, however,
would not have deterred him, but another idea had flashed upon his mind.
What that was shall be seen presently.

Before the two parties met, the ears of the hermit, albeit somewhat
dulled by age, became aware of the tramp of armed men, and at once he
drew the girls hastily aside into the bushes; but the bushes at that
part happened to be not very thick, and part of Ada's dress, which was a
gay one with a good deal of scarlet about it, caught the attention of a
sharp-eyed warrior.  The man uttered a shout and sprang towards them;
several others joined in the pursuit, a loud scream from one of the
girls was heard, and next moment the fugitives were captured!

"Up and at them!" cried Glumm, endeavouring to rise, but he found
himself pinned to the earth by Erling's powerful arms.

"Stay, Glumm, be quiet, I beseech thee," entreated Erling, as his
comrade struggled violently but fruitlessly to escape from his powerful
embrace.--"Do listen, Ulf; ye will spoil all by inconsiderate haste.  I
have a plan: listen--these men are not devils, but Norsemen, and will
not hurt the girls; they will take them before the King.  Hear me, and
they shall yet be rescued!"

While the power of Erling's muscles restrained Glumm, the deep-toned
impassioned earnestness of his voice held back Ulf, who had leaped up
and drawn his sword; but it was with evident reluctance that he paused
and listened.

"Now hear me," cried Erling; "I and Glumm will go down and mingle with
Harald's men.  Our faces are doubtless not known to any of them;
besides, we are so bespattered with the blood and dust of battle that
even friends might fail to recognise us.  We will go boldly about among
the men, and keep near to the girls until a fitting opportunity offers,
when we will seize them and bear them off.  This will not be so
difficult as ye may think."

"Difficult!" cried Glumm, grinding his teeth; "I think nothing difficult
except sitting still!"

"Because," continued Erling, "the King's men will be taken by surprise,
and we shall be through the most of them before they are aware that
there is need to draw their blades.  But (and on this everything will
depend) thou must be ready, Ulf, with all the men, to rush, in the
twinkling of an eye, to our aid, the moment my shout is heard, for, if
this be not done, we cannot fail to be overpowered by numbers.  If thou
dost but keep them well in play while we make for the boat, and then
follow and leap into the river, we shall all escape."

"Come along, then," cried Glumm, in desperate impatience.

"Does the plan like thee, Ulf?" asked Erling.

"Not much," he replied, shaking his head, "but it is the only chance
left, so get thee gone.  I will not fail thee in the moment of need--
away!  See, the girls are already being led before the King."

Erling and Glumm instantly pulled their helmets well down on their
brows, wrapped their mantles round them so as to conceal their figures
as much as possible, then entered the wood and disappeared.

Meanwhile, on the open space in front of Haldor's ruined dwelling, King
Harald Haarfager stood surrounded by his court men.  He was still
bespattered with the blood and dust of battle, and furiously angry at
the escape of Haldor and the burning of the stede.  His gilt helmet
restrained the exuberance of his shaggy locks, and he stood on the top
of a slight elevation or mound, from the base of which his men extended
in a dense ring in front of him, eager to ascertain who it was that had
been so unexpectedly captured.  Erling and Glumm mingled with the crowd
unnoticed, for so many of the men assembled there had been collected
from various districts, that, to each, strange faces were the rule
instead of the exception.

When the girls were led into the ring there was a murmur of admiration,
and many complimentary remarks were made about them.  The old hermit was
dragged in after them, and excited a little attention for a few moments.
He had experienced rough handling from his captors.  His grey hair was
dishevelled and his face bloodstained, for, although he had offered no
resistance, some of the men who seized him were so much out of humour in
consequence of the burning of the stede and the escape of its inmates,
that they were glad to vent their anger on anyone.

"Good-looking girls, both of them," remarked the King to Jarl Rongvold,
as they were being led forward.--"Who are ye?" he added, addressing
them.

Ada looked round on the circle of men with a frightened glance, and cast
down her eyes, but did not reply, while Hilda raised her eyes timidly to
the King's face, but lacked courage to speak.

"Come," said the King sternly, "let us have no false modesty.  Ye are
before Norway's King, therefore speak, and to the point.  Who art thou?"

He addressed himself to Hilda, who replied--

"I am Hilda, daughter of Ulf of Romsdal."

"And thou?" he added, turning to her companion.

"My name is Ada.  My father is Hakon of Drontheim."

"Ha!" exclaimed the King, with a bitter smile.  "Is it so?  Thy father
has met his desert, then, for he now lies at the bottom of the fiord."

Ada turned deadly pale, but made no reply.

"Know ye where Haldor the Fierce is, and his insolent son Erling?" asked
the King.

Hilda flushed at this, and answered with some spirit that she did not
know, and that if she did she would not tell.

"Of course not," said the King; "I might have guessed as much, and do
but waste my time with ye.--Stand aside--bring forward yonder fellow."

The hermit was immediately led forward.

"Who art thou?" asked the King.

"An old wanderer on the face of the earth," replied Christian.

"That is easily seen," answered the King; "but not too old, it would
seem, to do a little mischief when the chance falls in thy way."

"Methinks, sire," whispered Jarl Rongvold, "that this fellow is one of
those strange madmen who have taken up with that new religion, which I
do not profess to understand."

"Sayest thou so?" exclaimed Harald, "then will I test him.--Ho! fetch me
a piece of horse flesh."

A piece of horse flesh was brought without delay, for some that had been
sacrificed in the Drontheim temple had been packed up and carried off
among other provisions when the expedition set forth.

"Here, old man, eat thou a portion of that," said Harald, holding the
flesh towards him.

"I may not eat what has been sacrificed to idols," said the hermit.

"Ho! ho! then thou art not a worshipper of Odin?  Say, dog, what art
thou?"

"I am a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ.  He is my Saviour.  To Him I
live, and for Him I can die."

"Can He save you from _me_?" demanded Harald.

"He can," answered the hermit earnestly, "and will save you too, King
Harald, from your sins, and all who now hear me, if they will but turn
to Him."

"Now will I test him," said the King.  "Stand forth, Hake of Hadeland,
and hew me the old man's head from his body."

"Spare him!  O spare him!" cried Hilda, throwing herself suddenly
between Hake and his victim, who stood with the resigned air of a man
who had made up his mind to die.  "He has twice saved _my_ life, and has
never done you evil in thought or deed."

"Stand aside, my pretty maid.  Nay, then, if thou wilt not, I must grant
thy request; but it is upon one condition: that this Saviour shall
either come himself or send a champion to deliver the old man.--Come,"
he added, turning fiercely to the hermit, "pray that thy God shall send
thee a champion now, for if He does not, as I live thou shalt die."

"I may not pray at thy bidding," said the hermit calmly; "besides, it
needs not that I should, because I have already prayed--before dawn this
morning--that He would grant me His blessing in the form that seemed
best to Himself."

"And hast thou got it?"

"I have--in that I possess a quiet spirit, and do not fear to die, now
that His time has come."

"'Tis something this, I admit," returned the King; "yet methinks 'tis
but a poor blessing, after all, with death as the end of it."

"Death is not the end of it," said the hermit, with a kindling eye, "for
after death is everlasting joy and glory with the Lord.  Besides, King
Harald, which were better, think you: to die with a willing spirit and
bright hope, or to live full of restless ambition, disappointment, and
rage, even although victorious and King of Norway?"

The King's countenance grew livid with anger as he turned to the berserk
and said, in a voice of suppressed passion--"Go forward, Hake, and slay
him!"

"Now--the time has come," whispered Erling to Glumm.

"Get as near to Ada as thou canst; for the rest, may Christian's God be
with us!"

As he spoke he sprang into the circle, sword in hand, and stood suddenly
between the astonished Hake and the hermit.

There was a loud murmur of amazement at this unexpected apparition, and
not a few of the spectators were awestricken, supposing that this was
actually a champion sent from the spirit world.

"Harald," cried Erling, for the berserk had shrunk back dismayed, "I do
now accept the challenge, and come here to champion the old man."

At the sound of his voice the King's face lighted up with intelligence.

"Ha!" he exclaimed suddenly; "has the old man's God sent Erling the
Bold?"

"Truly I think he has," replied Erling; "at all events it was not for
this purpose that I came hither to-day.  But now that I have come, and
of mine own free will put myself in thy power, I claim the right to do
battle for my old friend with thy stoutest man--so set him forth, King
Harald."

"What sayest thou, Hake?" said the King, turning to his berserk with a
smile; "art willing to join issue with the Bold one?--bold enough,
truly, and insolent as well."

Hake, who had recovered his self-possession the instant he recognised
Erling's voice, and who was by no means wanting in courage, suddenly
uttered one of his terrible roars, and rushed upon Erling like a
thunderbolt.

Our hero was too well accustomed to the ways of his class to be caught
off his guard.  Although Hake rained blows upon him so fast that it was
almost impossible for the spectators to follow the motions of his
flashing sword, Erling received them all on his shield, or parried them
with his short sword--which, as being more manageable in a _melee_, he
had selected for his present enterprise.  The instant, however, that the
berserk's furious onset began to slacken, Erling fetched him such a
tremendous cut on the sword that the weapon was broken close off at the
hilt.  Disdaining to slay an unarmed foe, he leaped upon the berserk,
and struck him a blow with the hilt of his sword, which drove the casque
down upon his head and stretched him flat upon the sward.

Without waiting an instant Erling flung down his shield and walked to
the place where Hilda stood, took her by the hand, and whispered,
"Courage! come with me and thou shalt be saved."  At the same moment
Glumm stepped to Ada's side, and took her right hand in his left.  No
sword was drawn, for Glumm had not drawn his, and no one present had the
faintest idea of what the young men intended to attempt.  Indeed, they
were all so amazed at the sudden termination of the fight, that the men
of the inner part of the ring actually stood aside to let them pass,
before the King had time to shout:--

"Seize them!"

In other circumstances, at Harald's word a thousand swords would have
been drawn, and the doom of Erling and his friends at once been sealed;
but the natural ferocity of the tyrant's followers had been spellbound,
and for the time paralysed by the calm bearing of old Christian and the
prowess of his champion, whose opportune appearance had all the effect
of a supernatural interposition, as it might well be deemed: and it will
be readily believed that our hero and Glumm did not fail to use the
advantage thus offered.  Leading those whom they had come to rescue, and
closely followed by the hermit, they passed completely through the
circle of men.  But at the repetition, in a voice of thunder, of the
royal mandate, some hundreds of the King's men surrounded them, and,
notwithstanding their wondrous strength and skill, they were being
gradually overpowered by numbers, when suddenly a tremendous shout was
heard, and next moment Ulf with his fifty men in battle array rushed out
of the forest.

King Harald endeavoured hastily to draw up his men in something like
order.  Hearing the cry in rear, the men in front of Erling and Glumm
fell aside, so that they quickly cut down those who still stood in their
way, and ran towards their friends, who opened their ranks to let them
pass--then reclosed, and fell upon the King's men with incredible fury.
Although outnumbered by at least twenty to one, the disparity did not at
first tell against them, owing to the confusion in the enemy's ranks,
and the confined space of ground on which they fought.  They were thus
enabled to act with great vigour, and, being animated by the spirit of
desperate men, they actually for some time kept driving back the King's
forces.

But the continual assault of fresh foes began to tell, and several of
Ulf's men had already fallen, when Erling's voice was heard ringing high
above the din of battle.  Instantly every man turned on his heel and
fled towards the river madly pursued by the whole of the King's host.

By this time Erling and Glumm had got the girls into the boat, and
steered them safely down the rapid into the little bay, where they
waited for their companions as patiently as they could.

Meanwhile Ulf's men reached the foot of the Crow Cliff and one by one
sprang into the boiling rapid.  Ulf was among the first there, but he
stayed to see them all pass.  Before the last could do so their enemies
were upon them, but Ulf kept them at bay for a few moments; and when the
last of his men took the water he retreated fighting, and leaped
backwards into the flood.  One or two of the King's men followed, but
they failed to catch him, were carried down stream, and, being ignorant
of the dangers of the place, were swept over the foss and killed.  Most
of the host, however, turned suddenly, and set off at full speed to
cross the ridge and pursue their enemies, by the path to which we have
already referred.  Before they had crossed it, Erling and his men were
far on their way down the valley; and when the pursuers reached the
coast there was no sign of the fugitives anywhere.

On reaching the cave Erling found that his father had got everything in
readiness to start; so, assembling the people together without delay, he
divided them into two bands, one of which he sent into the Swan, the
other into Glumm's vessel, the Crane.

Haldor also went in the Swan, along with Ulf of Romsdal, Thorer the
Thick, Kettle Flatnose, Alric, and the hermit, besides Dames Herfrida
and Astrid, and the widow Gunhild, Ingeborg, and all Haldor's younger
children.  With Glumm there were also several women besides Ada.  Ivor
the Old and Finn the One-eyed also went with him; but most of the old
and crippled hangers-on of both families, as well as Glumm's mother,
were taken by Erling into the Swan, as the accommodation there was
better than on board the Crane.

"Now, Glumm," said Erling, when all were on board, "we must say farewell
to Norway.  Keep close in my wake.  If they give chase we will do our
best to escape, but if that may not be, we will fight and fall
together."  The friends shook hands; then, each getting into his ship,
the stern ropes were cast off, the oars were dipped, and they shot out
upon the blue fiord, which the sinking sun had left in a solemn subdued
light, although his beams still glowed brightly on the snow-clad
mountain peaks.

They had proceeded some distance down the fiord before their pursuers
observed them.  Then a mighty shout told that they were discovered; and
the grinding of the heavy ships' keels was distinctly heard upon the
shore, as they were pushed off into deep water.  Immediately after, the
splash of hundreds of oars warned them to make haste.

"Pull, my lads,--pull with heart," cried Erling; "and let these slaves
see how freemen can make their ocean steeds leap across the sea!  Pull!
I see a breeze just off the mouth of the fiord.  If we reach that, we
may laugh at the tyrant King."

"What may yonder line on the water be?" said Haldor, with an anxious
look, as he pointed towards the mouth of the fiord.

Erling caught his breath, and the blood rushed to his temples as he
gazed for a moment in silence.

"'Tis a boom," cried Kettle, who had recovered by this time, and who now
leaped towards the fore deck with terrible energy.

"All is lost!" exclaimed Ulf, in a tone of bitterness which words cannot
express.

"Are ye sure it is a boom?" cried Erling quickly.  Everyone looked with
intense earnestness at the black line that stretched completely across
the mouth of the fiord, and each gave it as his opinion that it was a
boom.  There could not indeed be any doubt on the point.  King Harald's
berserk, although somewhat tardy, had fulfilled his orders but too well;
and now a succession of huge logs, or tree trunks, joined together by
thick iron chains, completely barred their progress seaward.
