sou'-wester, the oiled coat, the telescope, the framed sheet of the
flags of all nations, and the small portrait of the sea-captain in his
"go-to-meetin'" clothes; also the big Bible and a very small box, which
latter contained Mrs Roby's limited wardrobe.  He tied all up in a
tight bundle.  A coil of rope hung on a peg on the wall.  The bundle was
fastened to the end of it and lowered to the ground, amid a fire of
remarks from the crowd, which were rather caustic and humorous than
complimentary.

"Gillie," shouted the Captain, "cast off the rope, lad, and look well
after the property."

"Ay, ay, Cappen," replied the youth, taking up a thick cart-pin, or
something of the sort, that lay near, and mounting guard.

There was another laugh, from crowd and firemen, at the nautical brevity
and promptitude of Gillie.

At every large fire in London there may be seen a few firemen standing
about in what an ignorant spectator might imagine to be easy
indifference and idleness, but these men are not idlers.  They are
resting.  The men who first arrive at a fire go into action with the
utmost vigour, and toil until their powers are nearly--sometimes quite--
exhausted.  As time passes fresh men are continually arriving from the
more distant stations.  These go into action as they come up, thus
relieving the others, who stand aloof for a time looking on, or doing
easy work, and recruiting their energies.  It was these men who watched
the Captain's proceedings with much amusement while their comrades were
doing battle with the foe.

Presently the Captain reappeared at the window and lowered a huge
sea-chest.  A third time he appeared with the model of a full-rigged
ship in his hand.  This time he let the end of the rope down, and then
getting over the window, slid easily to the ground.

"You're uncommon careful o' your property," exclaimed one of the
onlookers, with a broad grin.

"'Taint all _my_ property, lad," replied the Captain, with a
good-humoured nod, "most of it is a poor old 'ooman's belongings."

So saying, he got a man to carry his sea-chest, himself shouldered the
bundle, Gillie was intrusted with the full-rigged model, and thus laden
they left the scene followed by another laugh and a hearty cheer.

But our bluff seaman was not content with rescuing Mrs Roby and her
property.  He afterwards proceeded to lend his effective aid to all who
desired his assistance, and did not cease his exertions until evening,
by which time the fire was happily subdued.

"She must not be moved to-night Captain," said Dr Lawrence, for whom
Gillie had been sent; "the place where she lies is doubtless far from
comfortable, but I have got her to sleep, and it would be a pity to
awake her.  To-morrow we shall get her into more comfortable quarters."

"Could she bear movin' to-morrow, a mile or so?" asked the Captain.

"Certainly, but there is no occasion to go so far.  Lodgings are to be
had--"

"All right, Doctor; I've got a lodging ready for her, and will ask you
to come an' have pot-luck with us before long.  Gillie, my lad, you go
hail a cab, and then come back to lend a hand wi' the cargo."

In a few minutes the pair were whirling towards the west end of London,
and were finally landed with their "cargo" on the banks of the Thames
above the bridges, near the new building which Captain Wopper had named,
after its prototype, "the cabin."

To fit this up after the fashion of the old place was a comparatively
short and easy work for two such handy labourers.  Before they left that
night it was so like its predecessor in all respects, except dirt, that
both declared it to be the "identical same craft, in shape and rig, even
to the little bed and curtains."  Next afternoon Mrs Roby was brought
to it by Captain Wopper, in a specially easy carriage hired for the
purpose.

The poor old woman had received more of a shock than she was willing to
admit, and did exactly as she was bid, with many a sigh, however, at the
thought of having been burnt out of the old home.  She was carried up
the stair in a chair by two porters, and permitted the Captain to draw a
thick veil over her head to conceal, as he said, her blushes from the
men.  He also took particular care to draw the curtains of the bed close
round her after she had been laid in it and then retired to allow her to
be disrobed by Netta, who had been obtained from Mrs Stoutley on loan
expressly for the occasion.

Much of this care to prevent her seeing the place that day, however, was
unnecessary.  The poor old creature was too much wearied by the short
journey to look at anything.  After partaking of a little tea and toast
she fell into a quiet sleep, which was not broken till late on the
following morning.

Her first thought on waking was the fire.  Her second, the Captain.  He
was in the room, she knew, because he was whistling in his usual low
tone while moving about the fireplace preparing breakfast.  She glanced
at the curtains; her own curtains certainly,--and the bed too!  Much
surprised, she quietly put out her thin hand and drew the curtain
slightly aside.  The Captain in his shirt sleeves, as usual, preparing
buttered toast, the fireplace, the old kettle with the defiant spout
singing away as defiantly as ever, the various photographs, pot-lids,
and other ornaments above the fireplace, the two little windows
commanding an extensive prospect of the sky from the spot where she lay,
the full-rigged ship, the Chinese lantern hanging from the beam--
everything just as it should be!

"Well, well," thought Mrs Roby, with a sigh of relief; "the fire must
have been a dream after all! but what a vivid one!"

She coughed.  The Captain was at her side instantly.

"Slept well, old girl?"

"Very well, thank you.  I've had such a queer dream, d'you know?"

"Have you?  Take your breakfast, mother, before tellin' it.  It's all
ready--there, fire away."

"It _was_ such a vivid one," she resumed, when half through her third
cup, "all about a fire, and you were in it too."

Here she proceeded to relate her dream with the most circumstantial
care.  The Captain listened with patient attention till she had
finished, and then said--

"It was no dream, mother.  It's said that the great fire of London was a
real blessin' to the city.  The last fire in London will, I hope, be a
blessin' to you an' me.  It was real enough and terrible too, but
through God's mercy you have been saved from it.  I managed to save your
little odds and ends too.  This is the noo `cabin,' mother, that you
wouldn't consent to come to.  Something like the old one, ain't it?"

Mrs Roby spoke never a word, but looked round the room in bewilderment.
Taking the Captain's hand she kissed it, and gazed at him and the room
until she fell asleep.  Awaking again in half an hour, she finished her
breakfast, asked for the old Bible, and, declaring herself content, fell
straightway into her old ways and habits.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

AN UNEXPECTED GEM FOUND.

Although Lewis Stoutley found it extremely difficult to pursue his
studies with the profusely illustrated edition of medical works at his
command, he nevertheless persevered with a degree of calm, steady
resolution which might be almost styled heroic.  To tear out the
illustrations was impossible, for Nita's portrait was stamped on every
page, compelling him to read the letterpress through it.  Success,
however, attended his labours, for he not only carried out the regular
course, but he attached himself to the poor district of the "moraine"
which had been appropriated as their own by his mother and Emma, who
ministered to the bodies of the sick while they sought to bring their
souls to the Good Physician.  This professional work he did as a sort of
amateur, being only a student under the guidance of his friend Lawrence,
whose extending practice included that district.  It happened also to be
the district in which Mrs Roby's new "cabin" was situated.

These labourers, in what Dr Tough had styled the London gold fields,
not only did good to the people, and to themselves in the prosecution of
them, but resulted occasionally in their picking up a nugget, or a
diamond, which was quite a prize.  One such was found by Lewis about
this time, which, although sadly dim and soiled when first discovered,
proved to be such a precious and sparkling gem that he resolved to wear
it himself.  He and Emma one day paid a visit to the cabin, where they
found old Mrs Roby alone, and had a long chat with her, chiefly about
the peculiarities of the Captain and his boy.

"By the way," said Mrs Roby to Lewis, when they rose to go, "a poor
woman was here just before you came, askin' if I knew where she could
find a doctor, for her father, she said, was very ill.  The two have
come to live in a room near the foot of this stair, it seems, and they
appear to be very poor.  I could not give her Dr Lawrence's new
address, for I don't know it, so I advised her to apply to the nearest
chemist.  Perhaps, Mr Lewis, you'll go yourself and see the poor man?"

"Willingly, and I shall myself call for Lawrence on my way home and send
him, if necessary.  Come, Emma.  Perhaps this may be a case for the
exercise of your philanthropy."

They soon found the place, and knocked at a low door, which was slowly
opened by a middle-aged woman, meanly clad and apparently very poor.

"Ah, sir, you're too late, he's dead," said the woman, in reply to
Lewis's inquiry.

"O how sad!" broke from Emma's sympathetic spirit, "I am _so_ sorry we
are too late.  Did you find a doctor?"

"No, ma'am, I didn't, but the chemist gave me the address of one, so I
ran back to tell the poor young thing that I'd go fetch one as quick as
I could, and I found him just dying in her arms."

"In whose arms? are not you the daughter--" said Emma.

"Me, miss! oh dear, no.  I'm only a neighbour."

"Has she any friends?" asked Lewis.

"None as I knows of.  They are strangers here--only just came to the
room.  There it is," she added, stepping back and pointing to an inner
door.

Lewis advanced and knocked, but received no answer.  He knocked again.
Still no answer.  He therefore ventured to lift the latch and enter.

It was a miserable, ill-lighted room, of small size and destitute of all
furniture save a truckle bed, a heap of clean straw in a corner, on
which lay a black shawl, a deal chair, and a small table.  Abject
poverty was stamped on the whole place.  On the bed lay the dead man,
covered with a sheet.  Beside it kneeled, or rather lay, the figure of a
woman.  Her dress was a soiled and rusty black.  Her hair, fallen from
its fastenings, hung dishevelled on her shoulders.  Her arms clasped the
dead form.

"My poor woman," whispered Emma, as she knelt beside her, and put a hand
timidly on her shoulder.

But the woman made no answer.

"She has fainted, I think," exclaimed Emma, rising quickly and trying to
raise the woman's head.  Suddenly Lewis uttered a great cry, lifted the
woman in his arms, and gazed wildly into her face.

"Nita!" he cried, passionately clasping her to his heart and covering
the poor faded face with kisses; but Nita heard not.  It seemed as if
the silver chord had already snapped.  Becoming suddenly aware of the
impropriety as well as selfishness of his behaviour, Lewis hastily bore
the inanimate form to the heap of straw, pillowed the small head on the
old shawl, and began to chafe the hands while Emma aided him to restore
consciousness.  They were soon successful.  Nita heaved a sigh.

"Now, Emma," said Lewis, rising, "this is _your_ place just now, I will
go and fetch something to revive her."

He stopped for one moment at the bed in passing, and lifted the sheet.
There was no mistaking the handsome face of the Count even in death.  It
was terribly thin, but the lines of sorrow and anxiety were gone at last
from the marble brow, and a look of rest pervaded the whole countenance.

On returning, Lewis found that Nita had thrown her arms round Emma's
neck and was sobbing violently.  She looked up as he entered, and held
out her hand.  "God has sent you," she said, looking at Emma, "to save
my heart from breaking."

Lewis again knelt beside her and put her hand to his lips, but he had no
power to utter a word.  Presently, as the poor girl's eye fell on the
bed, there was a fresh outburst of grief.  "Oh, how he loved me!--and
how nobly he fought!--and how gloriously he conquered!--God be praised
for that!"

She spoke, or rather sobbed, in broken sentences.  To distract her mind,
if possible, even for a little, from her bereavement, Emma ventured to
ask her how she came there, when her father became so ill, and similar
questions.  Little by little, in brief sentences, and with many choking
words and tears, the sad story came out.

Ever since the night when her father met with Lewis at Saxon, he had
firmly resisted the temptation to gamble.  God had opened his ear to
listen to, and his heart to receive, the Saviour.  Arriving in London
with the money so generously lent to them by Lewis, they took a small
lodging and sought for work.  God was faithful to His promises, she
said; he had sent a measure of prosperity.  Her father taught music, she
obtained needlework.  All was going well when her father became suddenly
ill.  Slowly but steadily he sank.  The teaching had to be given up, the
hours of labour with the needle increased.  This, coupled with constant
nursing, began to sap her own strength, but she had been enabled to hold
out until her father became so ill that she dared not leave him even for
a few minutes to visit the shops where she had obtained sewing-work.
Then, all source of livelihood being dried up, she had been compelled to
sell one by one the few articles of clothing and furniture which they
had begun to accumulate about them.

"Thus," she said, in conclusion, "we were nearly reduced to a state of
destitution, but, before absolute want had been felt by us, God
mercifully took my darling father home--and--and--I shall soon join
him."

"Say not so, darling," said Emma, twining her arms round the poor
stricken girl.  "It may be that He has much work for you to do for Jesus
_here_ before He takes you home.  Meanwhile, He has sent us to claim you
as our very dear friend--as our sister.  You must come and stay with
mamma and me.  We, too, have tasted something of that cup of adversity,
which you have drained to the very dregs, my poor Nita, but we are
comparatively well off now.  Mamma will be so glad to have you.  Say you
will come.  Won't you, dearest?"

Nita replied by lifting her eyes with a bewildered look to the bed, and
again burst into a passion of uncontrollable sorrow.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE DENOUEMENT.

Being naturally a straightforward man, and not gifted with much power in
the way of plotting and scheming, Captain Wopper began in time to
discover that he had plunged his mental faculties into a disagreeable
state of confusion.

"Gillie, my lad," he said, looking earnestly at his satellite while they
walked one afternoon along the Bayswater road in the direction of
Kensington, "it's a bad business altogether."

Gillie, not having the smallest idea what the Captain referred to,
admitted that it was "wery bad indeed," but suggested that "it might be
wuss."

"It's such a perplexin' state o' things," pursued the Captain, "to be
always bouncin' up an' down wi' hopes, an' fears, an' disappointments,
like a mad barometer, not knowin' rightly what's what or who's who."

"Uncommon perplexin'," assented Gillie.  "If I was you, Cappen, I'd
heave the barometer overboard along wi' the main-deck, nail yer colours
to the mast, cram the rudder into the lee-scuppers, kick up your
flyin'-jib-boom into the new moon, an' go down stern foremost like a
man!"

"Ha!" said the Captain, with a twinkle in the corner of his
"weather-eye," "not a bad notion."

"Now, my lad, I'm goin' out to my villa at Kensington to dine.  There's
to be company, too, an' you're to be waiter--"

"Stooard, you mean?"

"Well, yes--stooard.  Now, stooard, you'll keep a good look-out, an'
clap as tight a stopper on yer tongue as may be.  I've got a little plot
in hand, d'ee see, an' I want you to help me with it.  Keep your eye in
a quiet way on Dr Lawrence and Miss Gray.  I've taken a fancy that
perhaps they may be in love with each other.  You just let me have your
opinion on that pint after dinner, but have a care that you don't show
what you're up to, and, whatever you do, don't be cheeky."

"All right," said the stooard, thrusting both hands into his
trouser-pockets; "I'll do my best."

While these two were slowly wending their way through Kensington
Gardens, Emma Gray arrived at the Captain's villa--California Cottage,
he called it--and rang the bell.  The gate was opened by Netta White,
who, although not much bigger than when first introduced to the reader,
was incomparably more beautiful and smart.  Mrs Stoutley had reason to
be proud of her.

"I did not know that _you_ were to be here, Netta?" said Emma, in
surprise, as she entered.

"It was a very sudden call, Miss," said Netta, with a smile.  "Captain
Wopper wrote a note to me, begging me to ask Mrs Stoutley to be so good
as lend me to him for a day to help at his house-warming.  Here is the
letter, Miss."

Emma laughed as she glanced carelessly at the epistle, but became
suddenly grave, turned white, then red, and, snatching the letter from
the girl's hand, gazed at it intently.

"La!  Miss, is anything wrong?"
