
"All right, father."

"Got your hand on the check-string?  Mind, it will pull hard.  Now--let
go!"

The natives obeyed.  Benjy at the same instant hauled sharply on the
check-string, intending to tilt the kite well forward, and start in a
slow, stately manner, but there was a hitch of some sort somewhere, for
the string would not act.  The kite acted, however, with its full force.
Up went the fore part of the sledge as it flew off like an arrow from a
bow, causing Butterface to throw a back somersault, and leaving him
behind.

Benjy held on to the head of the sledge, and made violent efforts to
free the check-string.  Fortunately, the surface of the snow was smooth.

"After him, lads," roared the Captain, setting a brave example, and for
some time heading the natives in the chase; but a few moments sufficed
to prove the hopelessness of the race.

Tug as Benjy would at the regulator, it refused to act.  Fortunately,
being made of silk, it did not break.  By this time the kite had
attained its maximum speed, equal, as the Captain said, to a twenty-knot
breeze.  At first the surface of the snow was so smooth and hard, that
Benjy, being busy with the obdurate regulator, did not appreciate the
speed.

When he gave up his attempts with a sigh of despair, he had leisure to
look around him.  The sledge was gliding on with railway speed.  One or
two solitary hummocks that looked like white sentinels on the level
plain, went past him with an awful rush, and several undulations caused
by snow-drift were crossed in a light leap which he barely felt.  Benjy
was fully aware of his danger.  To meet with a hummock no bigger than a
wheelbarrow, would, in the circumstances, have entailed destruction; he
therefore seized a pole which formed part of the sledge-gear, and tried
steering.  It could be done, but with great difficulty, as he had to sit
in the front of the sledge to keep it down.

Recklessly jovial though he was, the boy could not contemplate his
probable fate without misgiving.  Nothing was visible in all the white
illimitable plain save a hummock here and there, with a distant berg on
the horizon.  He could not expect the level character of the ice to
extend far.  Whither was he going?  South he knew; but in that
direction, his father had often told him, lay the open sea.  The moon
seemed to smile on him; the aurora appeared to dance with unwonted
vigour, as if in glee; the very stars winked at him!

"What if a chasm or a big hummock should turn up?" thought Benjy.

The thought seemed to produce the dreaded object, for next moment a
large hummock appeared right ahead.  Far away though it was, the awful
pace brought it quickly near.  The poor boy struggled--he absolutely
agonised--with the pole.  His efforts were successful.  The hummock went
past like a meteor, but it was a horribly close shave, and Benjy felt
his very marrow shrink, while he drew himself up into the smallest
possible compass to let it go by.

A bump soon after told that the ice was getting more rugged.  Then he
saw a ridge before him.  Was it large or small?  Distance, the uncertain
light, and imagination, magnified it to a high wall; high as the wall of
China.  In wild alarm our hero tugged at the regulator, but tugged in
vain.  The wall of China was upon him--under him.  There was a crash.
The sledge was in the air.  Moments appeared minutes!  Had the vehicle
been suddenly furnished with wings?  No!  Another crash, which nearly
shut up his spine like a telescope, told him that there were no wings.
His teeth came together with a snap.  Happily his tongue was not between
them!  Happily, too, the sledge did not overturn, but continued its
furious flight.

"Oh, you villain!" exclaimed Benjy, shaking his fist at the airy monster
which was thus dragging him to destruction.

If Benjy had been asked to state the truth just then, he would have
found it hard to say whether consternation or delight were uppermost.
It _was_ such a glorious rush!  But then, how was it to end?  Well, he
did not dare to think of that.  Indeed he had not time to think, for
troubles came crowding on him.  A violent "swish!" and a sudden deluge
told him that what he had taken for glassy ice was open water.  It was
only a shallow pool, however.  Next moment he was across it, and bumping
violently over a surface of broken ice.

The water suggested the fear that he must be nearing the open sea, and
he became supernaturally grave.  Fortunately, the last crash had been
passed without dislocating the parts of either sledge or rider.  A long
stretch of smooth ice followed, over which he glided with
ever-increasing speed.

Thus he continued to rush over the frozen sea during a considerable part
of that night.

Poor Benjy! he became half-mad with excitement at last.  The exaltation
of his little spirit at the risky neck-or-nothing dash, coupled with
horror at the certainty of a terrible climax, was almost too much for
him.  He gave vent to his feelings in a wild cheer or yell, and, just
then, beheld an iceberg of unusual size, looming up on the horizon
before him.  Knowing by experience that he would soon be up to it, he
used his pole with all his might, hoping to steer clear of it.  As he
drew nearer, he saw a dark line on either side of the berg.  A feeling
of deadly alarm filled him.  It was the open sea! and he had to choose
between being plunged into it or dashed against the berg.  It occurred
to him then, for the first time, that a third resource was open--he
might cut the rope, and let the kite go free!  Amazed at his stupidity
in not thinking of this before, he took out his clasp-knife, but before
applying it, made a last effort to move the regulator.  Strange to say,
the silken cord yielded to the first pull, as if nothing had been wrong
with it at all!  The head of the runaway kite was thrown forward, and it
came wavering down in eccentric gyrations, while the sledge gradually
lost way, and came to a standstill not fifty yards from the berg.

Up to this point what may be termed the northern island-ice continued
unbroken, but beyond the berg it was broken up into floes, and, not six
hundred yards out, it tailed away to the southward in what whalers term
stream-ice.  The berg itself was obviously aground.

The first object that met Benjy's eyes, after coming to a halt, was an
enormous polar bear.  This was no strange sight to the boy by that time,
but it was awkward in the circumstances, for he had neither gun nor
spear.  Even if he had possessed the latter he was too young and light
to cope successfully with the shaggy white king of Arctic beasts.

From the attitude of the animal it appeared to be watching something.
In truth, it was so intently engaged with a sleeping seal that it had
not observed the approach of the sledge.  Profiting by this, Benjy
quietly moved away round a colossal buttress of the berg, and took
refuge in an ice-cave.  But such refuge, he knew, could avail him
nothing if the bear should scent him out and search for him.  Looking
hastily round and up into the dark blue cavern, he espied a projecting
ledge of ice about thirteen feet above the level of the floor.  On this
he resolved to perch himself.

His first care was to examine the contents of the sledge.  We have said
it had been lightly laden at starting, which was the reason of the
tremendous pace at which it travelled.  Although there was neither spear
nor gun, the anxious boy was somewhat comforted to find an axe strapped
in its accustomed place; also a blanket, sleeping-bag, and musk-ox skin,
besides a mass of frozen blubber, but there was nothing else of an
eatable nature.  There was, however, a box containing the captain's
sextant, the electrical machine, and a packet of dynamite cartridges.

Regarding these latter objects with a sigh of disappointment, Benjy
seized the axe and hastened towards the ledge of ice, muttering to
himself in a confidential tone--

"You see, old boy, if that bear takes a fancy to call on you, it will be
as well to be able to say, `Not at home,' for he could make short work
of you, much though you think of yourself.  Yes, this ledge is high
enough to bid you defiance, mister bear, and it's long and broad enough
to hold me and my belongings.  The knobs by which to climb to it, too,
are easy--too easy--but I'll soon rectify that.  Now, then, look alive,
Benjy, boy, for if that bear don't catch that seal he'll be sure to look
you up."

Ceasing to speak, he actively conveyed the contents of the sledge to his
shelf of refuge.  Then he cut away the knobs by which he climbed to it,
until there was barely sufficient for his own tiny toes to rest on.
That done, he went to the mouth of the cavern to look about him.

What he saw there may be guessed from the fact that he returned next
moment, running at full speed, stumbling over ice lumps, bumping his
shins and knees, dropping his axe, and lacerating his knuckles.  He had
met the bear!  Need we add that he gained his perch with the agility of
a tree-squirrel!

The bear, surprised, no doubt, but obviously sulky from the loss of the
seal, entered the cave sedately with an inquiring look.  It saw Benjy at
once, and made prodigious efforts to get at him.  As the monster rose on
its hind legs and reached its paws towards his shelf, the poor boy's
spirit seemed to melt, indeed his whole interior felt as if reduced to a
warm fluid, while a prickly heat broke out at his extremities,
perspiration beaded his brow, and his heart appeared to have settled
permanently in his throat.

These distressing symptoms did not, however, last long, for he quickly
perceived that the bear's utmost stretch did not reach nearer than three
or four feet of him.  Some of the alarm returned, however, when the
creature attempted to climb up by his own ladder.  Seven or eight times
it made the attempt, while the boy watched in breathless anxiety, but
each time it slipped when half-way up, and fell with a soft heavy thud
on the ice below, which caused it to gasp and cough.  Then it sat down
on its haunches and gazed at its little foe malignantly.

"Bah! you brute!" exclaimed Benjy, whose courage was returning, "I'm not
a bit afraid of you!"  He leant against the wall of his refuge,
notwithstanding this boast, and licked the ice to moisten his parched
lips.

After a rest the bear made another trial, and twice it succeeded in
planting the claws of one huge paw on the edge of the shelf, but Benjy
placed his heel against the claws, thrust them off, and sent the bear
down each time howling with disappointment.

Sailing softly among the constellations in the aurora-lighted sky, the
moon sent a bright ray into the cavern, which gleamed on the monster's
wicked eyes and glistening teeth; but Benjy had begun to feel
comparatively safe by that time, and was becoming "himself again."

"Don't you wish you may get me?" he asked in a desperately facetious
spirit.

The bear made no reply, but turned to examine the contents of the
ice-cave.  First he went to the hatchet and smelt it.  In doing so he
cut his nose.  With a growl he gave the weapon an angry pat, and in so
doing cut his toes.  We fear that Benjy rejoiced at the sight of blood,
for he chuckled and made the sarcastic remark, "That comes of losing
your temper, old fellow!"

That bear either understood English, or the very sound of the human
voice caused it irritation, for it turned and rushed at the ice-ledge
with such fury that Benjy's heart again leaped into his throat.  He had,
however, recovered sufficiently to enable him to act with promptitude
and discretion.  Sitting down with his right foot ready, and his hands
resting firmly on the ice behind him, he prepared to receive the charge
in the only available manner.  So fierce was the onset that the monster
ran up the ice-cliff like a cat, and succeeded in fixing the terrible
claws of both feet on the edge of the shelf, but the boy delivered his
right heel with such force that the left paw slipped off.  The left heel
followed like lightning, and the right paw also slipped, letting the
bear again fall heavily on the ice below.

This was more than even a bear could bear.  He rushed savagely about the
cavern, growling hideously, dashing the sledge about as if it had been a
mere toy, and doing all the mischief he could, yet always avoiding the
axe with particular care--thus showing that polar bears, not less than
men, are quite awake to personal danger, even when supposed to be blind
with rage!  At last he lay down to recover himself, and lick his bloody
nose and paw.

While Benjy sat contemplating this creature, and wondering what was to
be the end of it all, a bright idea occurred to him.  He rose quickly,
took the electrical machine out of its box, and happily found it to be
in good working order--thanks to Alf, who had special charge of the
scientific instruments, and prided himself on the care with which he
attended to them.  The bear watched him narrowly with its wicked little
eyes, though it did not see fit to cease its paw-licking.

Having arranged the machine, Benjy took the two handles in his left
hand, pressed his knee on the board of the instrument to hold it steady,
and with his right hand caused it to revolve.  Then he held down the
handles as if inviting the bear to come and take them.

The challenge was accepted at once.  Bruin cantered up, rose on his hind
legs, and stretched his neck to its utmost, but could not reach the
handles, though the boy stretched downward as far as possible to
accommodate him.  The dirty-white monster whined and snickered with
intense feeling at thus finding itself so near, and yet so far, from the
attainment of its object.

Sympathising with its desires, Benjy changed his posture, and managed
just to touch the nose of his enemy.  The bear shrank back with a sort
of gasp, appalled--at least shocked--by the result!  After a little, not
feeling much the worse for it, the brute returned as if to invite
another electric shock--perhaps with some sinister design in view.  But
another and a brighter idea had entered Benjy's brain.  Instead of
giving the bear a shock, he tore off a small bit of seal-blubber from
the mass at his side, which he dropped into its mouth.  It swallowed
that morsel with satisfaction, and waited for more.  Benjy gave it more.
Still it wanted more.

"You shall have it, my boy," said Benjy, whose eyes assumed that
peculiar glare of glee which always presaged some desperate intention.

He opened another small box, and found what he wanted.  It was a small
object scarcely a couple of inches in length.  He fastened the wires of
the electric machine quickly to it, and then imbedded it in a small
piece of blubber which he lowered, as before, to the bear.

"You'll probably break the wires or smash the machine, but I'll risk
that," muttered Benjy through his set teeth.  "I only hope you won't
chew it, because dynamite mayn't be palatable.  There--down with it!"

The bear happily bolted the morsel.  The wires seemed to perplex him a
little, but before he had time to examine the mystery, the boy gave the
instrument a furious turn.

Instantly there was a stupendous crash like a very thunderbolt.  The
bear burst like an overcharged cannon!  Benjy and the berg collided, and
at that moment everything seemed to the former to vanish away in smoke,
leaving not even a wrack behind!



CHAPTER THIRTY.

LEO IN DANGER NEXT!  A NOVEL MODE OF RESCUE.

When the catastrophe described in the last chapter occurred, Captain
Vane and his friends, following hard on the heels of the runaway,
chanced to be within two miles of the berg in the bosom of which Benjy
had found refuge.

"There he is!" shouted the Captain joyfully, as the flash of the
explosion reached his eyes and the roar of the report his ears.
"Blessed evidence!  He's up to mischief of some sort still, and that's
proof positive that he's alive."

"But he may have perished in this piece of mischief," said Alf,
anxiously glancing up at the kite, which was dragging the heavily-laden
sledge rather slowly over the rough ice.

"I hope not, Alf.  Shake the regulator, Butterface, and see that it's
clear."

"All right, Massa.  Steam's on de berry strongest what's possible."

"Heave some o' the cargo overboard, Alf.  We must make haste.  Not the
meat, lad, not the meat; everything else before that.  So.  Mind your
helm, Chingatok; she'll steer wildish when lightened."

Captain Vane was right.  When Alf had tumbled some of the heavier
portions of lading off the sledge, it burst away like a wild-horse let
go free, rendering it difficult at first for Chingatok to steady it.  In
a few minutes, however, he had it again under control, and they soon
reached the berg.

"The dynamite must have gone off by accident," said the Captain to Alf,
as they stumbled over masses of ice which the explosion had brought down
from the roof of the cavern.  "It's lucky it didn't happen in summer,
else the berg might have been blown to atoms.  Hallo! what's this?  Bits
of a polar bear, I do believe--and--what! not Benjy!"

It was indeed Benjy, flat on his back like a spread-eagle, and covered
with blood and brains; but his appearance was the worst of his case,
though it took a considerable time to convince his horrified friends of
that fact.

"I tell you I'm all right, father," said the poor boy, on recovering
from the state of insensibility into which his fall had thrown him.

"But you're covered from head to foot with blood," exclaimed the anxious
father, examining him all over, "though I can't find a cut of any sort
about you--only one or two bruises."

"You'll find a bump on the top of my head, father, the size of a
cocoa-nut.  That's what knocked the senses out o' me, but the blood and
brains belong to the bear.  I lay no claim to them."

"Where _is_ the bear?" asked Alf, looking round.

"Where is he?" echoed Benjy, bursting into a wild laugh.

"Oh!  Massa Benjy, don't laugh," said Butterface solemnly; "you hab no
notion wot a awful look you got when you laugh wid sitch a bloody face."

This made Benjy laugh more than ever.  His mirth became catching, and
the negro's solemn visage relaxed into an irrepressible grin.

"Oh, you japan-jawed porpoise!" cried Benjy, "you should have seen that
bear go off--with such a crack too!  I only wish I'd been able to hold
up for two seconds longer to see it properly, but my shelf went down,
and I had to go along with it.  Blown to bits!  No--he was blown to a
thousand atoms!  Count 'em if you can."

Again Benjy burst into uproarious laughter.

There was indeed some ground for the boy's way of putting the case.  The
colossal creature had been so terribly shattered by the dynamite
cartridge, that there was scarcely a piece of him larger than a man's
hand left to tell the tale.

"Well, well," said the Captain, assisting his son to rise, "I'm thankful
it's no worse."

"Worse, father! why, it _couldn't_ be worse, unless, indeed, his spirit
were brought alive again and allowed to contemplate the humbling
condition of his body."

"I don't refer to the bear, Benjy, but to yourself, lad.  You might have
been killed, you know, and I'm very thankful you were not--though you
half-deserve to be.  But come, we must encamp here for the night and
return home to-morrow, for the wind has been shifting a little, and will
be favourable, I think, in the morning."

The wind was indeed favourable next morning, we may say almost too
favourable, for it blew a stiff breeze from the south, which steadily
increased to a gale during the day.  Afterwards the sky became overcast
and the darkness intense, rendering it necessary to attend to the kite's
