life"--though in South Africa, where so many people live exclusively
upon the flesh of animals, bread is hardly entitled to that appellation.

Bread they were likely to have, and soon.  When trekking from the old
kraal, they had brought with them a small bag of maize.  It was the last
of their previous year's stock; and there was not in all over a bushel
of it.  But that was enough for seed, and would produce many bushels if
properly planted, and carefully tended.

This had been done shortly after their arrival at their present home.  A
fertile spot of ground had been selected, only a few hundred yards from
the nwana-tree.  It had been turned up with the spade, for want of a
plough, and the seeds planted at proper distances.

Many an hour had been given to the weeding and hoeing of it, and around
every plant a little hill of soft mould had been raised, to nourish the
roots, and protect them from the heat of the sun.  The plants were even
watered now and then.

Partly on account of this attention, and partly from the richness of the
virgin soil, a splendid growth was the result; and the stalks stood full
twelve feet high, with ears nearly a foot long.  They had almost
ripened; and the field-cornet intended in about a week or ten days to
gather in the crop.

Both he and all his people were anticipating pleasant feasts of
maize-bread, and "hominy," with "mash and milk" and various other
dishes, that with Totty's skill could be manufactured out of the Indian
corn.

About this time an incident occurred that nearly deprived them, not only
of their whole plot of maize-plants, but also of their valuable
housekeeper, Totty.  It was as follows.

Totty was on the platform in the great nwana-tree, which commanded a
view of the corn-patch, and also of the plain beyond, as far as the
bottom of the cliffs.  She was busied about "house" affairs, when her
attention was called off, by some singular noises that came from that
direction.  She parted the branches and looked through.  A singular
scene was before her eyes--a spectacle of no common kind.

A body of odd-looking animals, to the number of two hundred or more, was
coming from the direction of the cliffs.  They were creatures of
ungainly forms--in make and size not unlike large ill-shaped dogs--and
of a greenish brown colour.  Their faces and ears only were black, and
these were naked, while their bodies were covered with harsh coarse
hair.  They had long tails, which some of them carried high in the air,
and flourished about in a very eccentric manner.

Totty was by no means alarmed.  She knew what sort of animals they were.
She knew they were _baboons_.  They were of the species known as the
"pig-faced" baboon or "chacma" (_Cynocephalus porcarius_), which is
found in nearly every part of South Africa where there are high cliffs
with caves and crevices--the favourite dwelling-places of the baboon.

Of all the monkey tribe the baboons, or dog-headed monkeys
(_cynocephali_), are the most disgusting in form and features.  Who does
not feel disgust when regarding the hideous mandrill--the drill--the
hamadryas--or even the chacma?  And all these are baboons.

The baboons are peculiar to Africa, and there are six well-known species
of them:--the common baboon of North Africa, the "papion" of the south
and western coast, the "hamadryas" or "tartarin" of Abyssinia, the
"mandrill" and "drill" of Guinea, and the "chacma" of the Cape colony.

The habits of these animals are as disgusting as their appearance.  They
may be tamed, and made "pets" of; but dangerous pets they are, as they
will, upon the slightest provocation, bite the hand that feeds them.

Their great strength of body and jaw, and their long canine teeth, give
them a dangerous power which they often make use of.  No dog is a match
for one, and the hyena and leopard often come off second-best in an
encounter with a baboon.

They are not carnivorous, however, and only tear their enemy to pieces
without eating it.  Their food consists of fruits and bulbous roots,
which they well understand to dig out of the ground with the sharp nails
of their hands.

Although they will not attack man if left alone, they become dangerous
assailants when hunted and brought to bay.

Many odd stories are told of the chacma baboon among the settlers of
Southern Africa, such as their robbing the traveller of his food, and
then going off to some distance, and mocking him, while they devour it.
The natives also say that they sometimes use a stick in walking,
"crowing" for roots, and in self-defence.  Also, when a young one has
succeeded in finding a choice root, and is observed by an older and
stronger one, that the latter takes it away: but, should the young one
have already swallowed it, then the bully picks him up, turns him head
downward, and shakes him until he is forced to "disgorge!"  Many such
tales are current in the country of the boors, and they are not all
without foundation, for these animals most certainly possess the power
of _reflection_ in a high degree.

Totty from her perch saw enough to convince her of this, had she been
herself inclined to philosophise.  But she was not.  She was only a
little curious about the manoeuvres of the animals, and she called Truey
and little Jan up into the tree, in order that they might share the
spectacle with her.  All the others were off hunting.

Jan was delighted, and ran up the ladder at once.  So did Truey, and all
three stood watching the odd movements of the four-handed creatures.

They perceived that the troop was actually marching in order; not _in
line_, but with some understood arrangement.  There were scouts upon the
wings, and leaders in front.  These were baboons of greater age and size
than the others.  There were calls and signals, and the change of accent
and tone would have convinced any one that a regular conversation was
going on.  The females and younger ones marched in the middle for better
security.  The mothers carried their infants upon their backs, or over
their shoulders.  Now a mother would stop to suckle her little
offspring--dressing its hair at the same time--and then gallop forward
to make up for the loss.  Now one would be seen beating her child, that
had in some way given offence.  Now two young females would quarrel,
from jealousy or some other cause, and then a terrible chattering would
ensue, to be silenced by the loud threatening bark of one of the chiefs!

Thus proceeded they across the plain, chattering, and screaming, and
barking, as only monkeys can.

What were they after?

That question was answered very soon.  Truey, and Jan, and Totty, saw,
to their dismay, that the baboons were not out upon an idle errand.
They were after the maize-plants!

In a few minutes most of the troop had entered the corn-field, and were
hidden from view by the tall stems and broad leaves of the plants.  A
few only could be seen,--large old fellows, that stationed themselves
outside as sentinels, and were keeping up a constant interchange of
signals.  The main body was already stripping the plants of their
precious fruit.

But a singular appearance presented itself beyond the corn-field, where
a line of baboons, stationed at equal distance from one another,
extended away to the very bottom of the cliff.  These had been left by a
regular manoeuvre,--a deployment--as the troop traversed the plain in
coming to the field.  For what purpose?

That was soon apparent.  In less than two minutes after the crowd
disappeared under the shelter of the maize-plants, the long heads in
their husks were seen showering out towards the line, as if flung by the
hand of man!  Those placed at the near end of the line immediately took
them up, pitched them to the next, and these to the next, and so on,
until, in a very short while from the time a head was plucked from the
stalk, it was delivered to the storehouse of the baboons far off among
the cliffs!

Had this work gone on much longer the field-cornet would have had but a
poor gathering in harvest-time.  The baboons thought the corn ripe
enough, and would soon have made a crop of it, but at this moment their
operations were interrupted.

Totty knew but little of the danger she underwent, when she ran forth
with nothing but that long broom-handle to drive off a troop of chacmas.
She only thought of the loss her kind master was sustaining; and down
the ladder she hurried, and ran straight out to the corn-field.

Several sentinels met her by its edge, grinned, chattered, screamed,
barked, and showed their long canine teeth; but they only received a
blow over their ugly snouts from the broom-handle.  Their cries summoned
the others; and in a few moments the poor Hottentot was standing in the
midst of an angry circle of chacmas, that were only prevented from
springing in upon her by the expert manner in which she continued to ply
the broomstick.

But this slight weapon would not have served much longer, and Totty's
fate--that of being torn to pieces--would soon have been sealed, had not
four horsemen, or rather "quagga-men," at that moment galloped up to her
rescue.

These were the hunters returning from the chase; and a volley from their
guns at once scattered the ugly chacmas, and sent them howling back to
their caves.

After that the field-cornet looked well to his maize, until it was ready
for gathering; when it was all brought home, and deposited in safety out
of the reach of either birds, reptiles, quadrupeds or _quadrumuna_.



CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

THE WILD HOUNDS AND THE HARTEBEEST.

Since the taming of the quaggas the hunting had been attended with
tolerable success.  Not a week passed without adding a pair of tusks--
sometimes two or three pairs--to the collection, which now began to
assume the form of a little pyramid of ivory standing near the bottom of
the nwana.

Von Bloom, however, was not quite satisfied with his progress.  He
thought they might do far better if they only had a few dogs.

Though the quaggas were of great service to them, and with these they
were often able to overtake the elephant, yet they as often lost their
great game, and it is more easy to do so than most persons imagine.

But with dogs to join in the hunt, the result would be quite different.
It is true these animals cannot pull down an elephant, nor do him the
slightest injury; but they can follow him whithersoever he may go, and
by their barking bring him to a stand.

Another valuable service which the dogs perform, is in drawing the
attention of the elephant away from the hunters.  The huge quadruped
when enraged is, as we have already seen, exceedingly dangerous.  On
such occasions he will charge upon the noisy dogs, mistaking them for
his real assailants.  This, of course, gives the hunter a good
opportunity of delivering his fire, and avoiding the deadly encounter of
the elephant.

Now in several elephant-hunts which they had lately made, our hunters
had run some very narrow risks.  Their quaggas were neither so
manageable nor so quick in their movements as horses would have been,
and this rendered the hazard still greater.  Some of them might one day
fall a victim.  So feared Von Bloom; and he would gladly have given for
a number of dogs an elephant's tusk a-piece--even though they were the
most worthless of curs.  Indeed, their quality is but of slight
importance.  Any dogs that can trace the elephant and pester him with
their barring would do.

Von Bloom even thought of taming some hyenas, and training _them_ to the
hunt.  This idea was by no means quixotic.  The hyena is often used for
such a purpose, and performs even better than many kinds of dogs.

One day Von Bloom was pondering over this subject.  He was seated on a
little platform that had been constructed very high up--near the top of
the nwana-tree--from which a view could be had of the whole country
around.  It was a favourite resort of the field-cornet--his
smoking-room, in fact--where he went every evening to enjoy a quiet pull
out of his great meerschaum.  His face was turned upon the plain that
stretched from the border of the _bosch_ as far as the eye could reach.

While quietly puffing away, his attention was attracted by some animals
standing at a distance off upon the plain.  The brilliant colour of
their bodies had caught his eye.

They were of a lively sienna colour over the back and sides, and white
underneath, with a list of black upon the outside of the legs, and some
black stripes upon the face, as regularly defined as if laid on by the
brush of a painter.  They had horns of very irregular shape, roughly
knotted--each curved into something of the shape of a reaping-hook, and
rising directly from the top of one of the straightest and longest heads
ever carried by an animal.  These animals were far from being gracefully
formed.  They had drooping hind-quarters like the giraffe, though in a
much less degree, shoulders greatly elevated, and long narrow heads.
For the rest their forms were bony and angular.  Each stood five feet
high, from the fore-hoof to the shoulder, and full nine feet in length.

They were antelopes of course--that species known among Cape colonists
as the "hartebeest" (_Acronotus caama_).  There were in all about fifty
of them in the herd.

When first observed by Von Bloom, they were quietly browsing upon the
plain.  The next moment, however, they were seen to run to and fro, as
if suddenly alarmed by the approach of an enemy.

And an enemy there certainly was; for in a moment more the herd had
taken to flight; and Von Bloom now saw that they were followed by a
_pack of hounds_!  I say a "pack of hounds," for the creatures in the
distance exactly resembled hounds more than anything in the world.  Nay,
more than resembled, for it actually _was_ a pack of hounds--of _wild
hounds_!

Of course Von Bloom knew what they were.  He knew they were the
"wilde-honden," very absurdly named by sapient naturalists "_Hyena
venatica_," or "hunting hyena," and by others, with equal absurdity, the
"hunting dog."  I pronounce these names "absurd," first because the
animal in question bears no more resemblance to a hyena than it does to
a hedgehog; and, secondly, because "hunting dog" is a very ridiculous
appellation, since any dog may merit a similar title.

Now I would ask, why could these naturalists not let the nomenclature of
the boors alone?  If a better name than "wilde-honden" (wild hounds) can
be given to these animals, I should like to hear it.  Why, it is the
very perfection of a name, and exactly expresses the character of the
animal to which they apply it--that character, which coming under their
everyday observation, suggested the name.

It is quite a libel to call this beautiful creature a hyena.  He has
neither the ugly form, the harsh pelage, the dull colour, nor the filthy
habits of one.  Call him a "wolf," or "wild dog," if you please, but he
is at the same time the handsomest wolf or wild dog in creation.  But we
shall name him, as the boors have done, a "wild hound."  That is his
true title, let naturalists class him as they may.

His size, shape, his smooth clean coat, as well as his colour,
approximate him more to the hound than to any other animal.  In the
last--which is a ground of "tan" blotched and mottled with large spots
of black and grey--he bears a striking resemblance to the common hound;
and the superior size of his ears would seem to assimilate him still
more to this animal.  The ears however, as in all the wild species of
_Canis_, are of course not hanging, but erect.

His habits, however, crown the resemblance.  In his natural state the
wild hound never prowls alone; but boldly runs down his game, following
it in large organised packs, just as hounds do; and in his hunting he
exhibits as much skill as if he had Tom Moody riding at his heels, to
guide with whip and horn.

It was the field-cornet's good fortune to witness an exhibition of this
skill.

The hounds had come unexpectedly upon the hartebeest herd; and almost at
the first dash, one of the antelopes became separated from the rest, and
ran in an opposite direction.  This was just what the cunning dogs
wanted; and the whole pack, instead of following the herd, turned after
the single one, and ran "tail on end."

Now this hartebeest, although an ill-shaped antelope, is one of the very
swiftest of the tribe; and the wild hound does not capture it without a
severe chase.  In fact, he could not capture it at all, if speed were
the only point between the two animals.  But it is not.  The hartebeest
has a weakness in its character, opposite to which the wild hound
possesses a cunning.

The former when chased, although it runs in a straight line, does not
keep long in a direct course.  Now and then it diverges to one side or
the other, led perhaps by the form of the ground, or some other
circumstance.  In this habit lies its weakness.  The wild hound is well
aware of it, and takes advantage of it by a manoeuvre, which certainly
savours strongly of reflection on his part.

Our field-cornet had a proof of this as he watched the chase.  His
elevated position gave him a view of the whole ground, and he could note
every movement both of pursuer and pursued.

On breaking off, the hartebeest ran in a right line, and the hounds
followed straight after.  They had not gone far, however, when Von Bloom
perceived that one hound was forging ahead of the rest, and running much
