Star of this pretty play!"

And with a hoarse laugh at his horrid jest, the ruffian retires within
his tent.



CHAPTER SEVENTY THREE.

THE HAND OF GOD.

The sun is descending towards the crest of the Cordillera, his rays
becoming encrimsoned as twilight approaches.  They fall like streams of
blood between the bluffs enclosing the valley of the Arroyo de Alamo,
their tint in unison with a tragedy there about to be enacted--in itself
strangely out of correspondence with the soft, tranquil scene.

The stage is the encampment of Uraga and his detachment of lancers, now
set for the terrible spectacle soon to take place.

The two tents are still standing as pitched, several paces apart.  At
the entrance of the square one, with its flap drawn close and tied, a
soldier keeps sentry; that of conical shape being unguarded.

Rearward, by the wood edge, are three horses and a mule, all four under
saddle, with bridles on; these attached to the branches of a tree.
There is no providence in this, but rather neglect.  Since the purpose
for which they were caparisoned has proved abortive, they remain so only
from having been forgotten.

The other troop-horses have been stripped, and, scattered over the mead,
are browsing at the length of their lariats.

It is in the positions and attitudes of the men that a spectator might
read preparation; and of a kind from which he could not fail to deduce
the sequence of a sanguinary drama.  Not one accompanied by much noise,
but rather solemn and silent; only a few words firmly spoken, to be
followed by a volley; in short, a military execution, or, as it might be
more properly designated, a military murder.

The victims devoted are seen near the edge of the open ground--its lower
edge regarding the direction of the stream.  They are in erect attitude,
each with his back to the trunk of a tree, to which with raw-hide ropes
they are securely lashed.  No need telling who they are.  The reader
knows them to be the prisoners lately lying prostrate near the same
place.

In their front, and scarce ten paces distant, the lancers are drawn up
in line and single file.  There are ten of them, the tenth a little
retired to the right, showing chevrons on his sleeve.  He is the
sergeant in immediate command of the firing party.  Farther rearward,
and close by the conical tent, and two in the uniform of officers, Uraga
and his adjutant.  The former is himself about to pronounce the word of
command, the relentless expression upon his face, blent with a grim
smile that overspreads it, leading to believe that the act of diabolical
cruelty gives him gratification.  Above, upon the cliff's brow, the
black vultures also show signs of satisfaction.  With necks craned and
awry, the better to look below, they see preparations which instinct or
experience has taught them to understand.  Blood is about to be spilled;
there will be flesh to afford them a feast.

There is now perfect silence, after a scene which preceded; once more
Uraga having made overtures to Miranda, with promise of life under the
same scandalous conditions; as before, to receive the response, firmly
spoken,--

"No--never!"

The patriot soldier prefers death to dishonour.

His choice taken, he quails not.  Tied to the trunk of the tree, he
stands facing his executioners without show of fear.  If his cheeks be
blanched, and his bosom throbbing with tumultuous emotion, 'tis not at
sight of the firing party, or the guns held loaded in their hands.  Far
other are his fears, none of them for himself, but all for his dear
sister--Adela.  No need to dwell upon or describe them.  They may be
imagined.

And Don Prospero, brave and defiant too.  He stands backed by the tree,
his eyes showing calm courage, his long silvered beard touching his
breast, not drooping or despairingly, but like one resigned to his fate,
and still firm in the faith that has led to it--a second Wickliffe at
the stake.

The moment has arrived when the stillness becomes profound, like the
calm which precedes the first burst of a thunderstorm.  The vultures
above, the horses and men below, are all alike silent.

The birds, gazing intently, have ceased their harsh croaking; the
quadrupeds, as if startled by the very silence, forsaking the sweet
grass, have tossed their heads aloft, and so hold them.  While the men,
hitherto speaking in whispers, no more converse, but stand mute and
motionless.  They are going to deal death to two of their
fellow-creatures; and there is not one among them who does not know it
is a death undeserved--that he is about to commit murder!

For all this, not one has a thought of staying his hand.  Along the
whole line there is no heart amenable to mercy, no breast throbbing with
humanity.  All have been in a like position before--drawn up to fire
upon prisoners, their countrymen.  The patriots of their country, too;
for the followers of Gil Uraga are all of them picked adherents of the
_parti preter_.

"_Sergente_!" asks Uraga, on coming forth from his tent, "is everything
ready?"

"All ready," is the prompt reply.

"Attention!" commands the Colonel, stepping a pace or two forward, and
speaking in a low tone, though loud enough to be heard by the lancers.

"Make ready!"

The carbines are raised to the ready.

"Take aim!"

The guns are brought to the level, their bronzed barrels glistening
under the rays of the setting sun, with muzzles pointed at the
prisoners.  They who grasp them but wait for the word "Fire!"

It is forming itself on Gil Uraga's lips.  But before he can speak there
comes a volley, filling the valley with sound, and the space around the
prisoners with smoke.  The reports of more than forty pieces speak
almost simultaneously, none of them with the dull detonation of cavalry
carbines, but the sharper ring of the rifle!

While the last crack is still reverberating from the rocks, Uraga sees
his line of lancers prostrate along the sward; their guns, escaped from
their grasp, scattered beside them, still undischarged!



CHAPTER SEVENTY FOUR.

"SAUVE QUI PEUT."

At sight of his soldiers cut down like ripe corn before the reaper,
Uraga stands in stupefied amaze; his adjutant the same.  Both are alike
under the spell of a superstitious terror.  For the blow, so sudden and
sweeping, seems given by God's own hand.  They might fancy it a _coup
d'eclair_.  But the jets of fire shooting forth from the forest edge,
through a cloud of sulphurous smoke, are not flashes of lightning; nor
the rattle that accompanies them the rolling of thunder, but the reports
of firearms discharged in rapid succession.  While in shouts following
the shots there is no accent of Heaven; on the contrary, the cries are
human, in the voices of men intoned to a terrible vengeance.

Though every one of the firing party has fallen, sergeant as well as
rank and file, the two officers are still untouched.  So far they have
been saved by the interposition of the formed line.  But straggling
shots succeed, and bullets are whizzing past their ears.

These, quickening their instincts, rouse them from their stupefaction;
and both, turning from the direction of the danger, looked to the other
side for safety.

At first wildly and uncertain, for they are still under a weird
impression, with senses half bewildered.

Neither has a knowledge of the enemy that has made such havoc among
their men; only an instinct or intuition that the blow has been struck
by those terrible _Tejanos_, for the shots heard were the cracks of
rifles, and the shouts, still continued, are not Indian yells nor
Mexican vivas, but the rough hurrahs of the Anglo-Saxon.

While standing in hesitancy, they hear a voice raised above the rest--
one which both recognise.  Well do they remember it, pealing among the
waggons on that day of real ruthless carnage.

Glancing back over their shoulders, they see him who sends it forth--the
giant guide of the caravan.  He has just broken from the timber's edge,
and in vigorous bounds is advancing towards them.  Another is by his
side, also recognised.  With trembling frame, and heart chilled by fear,
Uraga identifies his adversary in the duel at Chihuahua.

Neither he nor his subordinate remains a moment longer on the ground.
No thought now of carrying off their female captives, no time to think
of them.  Enough, and they will be fortunate, if they can themselves
escape.

Better for both to perish there by the sides of their slain comrades.
But they know not this, and only yield to the common instinct of
cowardice, forcing them to flee.

Fortune seems to favour them.  For animals fully caparisoned stand
behind the conical tent.  They are these that were in readiness for a
flight of far different kind, since unthought of--altogether forgotten.

Good luck their being saddled and bridled now.  So think Uraga and
Roblez as they rush towards them.  So thinks Galvez, who is also making
to mount one.  The sentry has forsaken his post, leaving the marquee
unguarded.  When a lover no longer cares for his sweetheart, why should
he for a captive.

And in the _sauve-qui-peut_ scramble there is rarely a regard for rank,
the colonel counting for no more than the corporal.  Obedient to this
levelling instinct, Galvez, who has arrived first on the ground, selects
the best steed of the three--this being the horse of Hamersley.

Grasping the bridle, and jerking it from the branch, he springs upon the
animal's back and starts to ride off.  Almost as soon the two officers
get astride, Roblez on his own charger, the mustang mare being left to
Uraga.  From her mistress he must part thus unceremoniously, covered
with ignominious shame!

The thought is torture, and for a time stays him.

A dire, damnable purpose flashes across his brain, and for an instant
holds possession of his heart.  It is to dismount, make for the marquee,
enter it, and kill Adela Miranda--thrust her through with his sword.

Fortunately for her, the coward's heart fails him.

He will not have time to do the murder and remount his horse.  The
Rangers are already in the open ground and rushing towards him, Wilder
and Hamersley at their head.  In a minute more they will be around him.

He hesitates no longer, but, smothering his chagrin and swallowing his
unappeased vengeance, puts whip and spur to the mustang mare, going off
as fast as she can carry him.



CHAPTER SEVENTY FIVE.

DIVIDED BY DUTY.

But for a half-score men lying dead along the earth, their warm blood
welling from wounds where bullets have passed through their bodies, the
gory drops here and there like dew bedecking the blades of grass, or in
fuller stream settling down into the sand--but for this, the too real
evidence of death, one who entered the camp of Uraga as the Mexican
Colonel is riding out of it might fancy himself spectator of a pantomime
during the scene of transformation.  In the stage spectacle, not quicker
or more contrasting could be the change.

The gaily-apparelled lancers, with their plumes, pennons, and tassels,
representing the sprites and sylphides of the pantomime, are succeeded
by men who look real life.  Big bearded men, habited in homespun; some
wearing buckskin, others blanket coats; all carrying guns, bowie-knives,
and pistols; the first smoking at the muzzles, as freshly fired, the
last held in hand, ready to be discharged as soon as somebody worth
shooting at shows himself.

Entering the open ground ahead of the others, Hamersley and Wilder
glance around in search of this somebody, both thinking of the same.
They see stretched along the sward ten soldiers dead as herrings on a
string, but among them no one wearing the uniform of an officer--
certainly not him they are after.

Their first glance is unrewarded, but their second gives all they seek.
Behind a tent, and partially screened by the trees, three men are in the
act of mounting three horses.  One is already in the saddle and moving
away, the other two have just set foot in the stirrup.  The roan mounted
is unknown to the pursuers; but his animal is recognised by them.  It is
Hamersley's own horse!  Of the other two but one is identified, and him
only by Hamersley.  He sees Gil Uraga.

A cry from the Kentuckian expresses disappointment.  For on the instant
after sighting the Mexican officers the latter have leaped into their
saddles and gone off at a full gallop.  A rifle shet might yet reach
them; but the guns of both Kentuckian and Texan are empty.  Their
revolvers are loaded to no purpose.  The retreating horsemen are beyond
pistol range!

Sure of this, they do not think of firing.  And afoot, as all the
Rangers are--having left the horses behind to steal forward--they feel
helpless to pursue for the present.  While hesitating, a circumstance
occurs giving Hamersley a hope.  The man who has mounted his horse finds
a difficulty in managing him.  As a Mexican he sits the saddle to
perfection, but cannot make the animal go the way he wants.

From behind the horse has heard neighing, which he knows to come from
the steeds of his own race, and, knowing this, has resolved to rub noses
with them.

In vain Galvez kicks against his ribs, beats him about the head, and
makes frantic efforts to urge him on.  He but rears in the opposite
direction, backing so far as to bring his rider within reach of the
revolver held in the hands of Hamersley.  Its crack rings clear--not
needing to be repeated or the cylinder turned.  At the first explosion
the soldier is seen to spring from the saddle, dropping dead without
kick or cry, while the steed, disembarrassed, sheers round and comes
trotting towards the place whence the shot proceeded.

In a moment more its real master has hold of the bridle-rein, his shout
of joy answered by a whimper of recognition.

Seeing how matters stand, the Rangers hasten back to get possession of
their horses; others make for those of the fallen lancers, that now in
affright are rearing and straining at the end of their trail-ropes in a
vain endeavour to break loose.

For neither can Hamersley wait.  It will take time, which his
impatience--his burning thirst for vengeance--cannot brook.  He is
thinking of his slain comrades, whose bones lie unburied on the sands of
the Canadian; also of the outrage so near being perpetrated, so
opportunely interrupted.

But one thought stays him--Adela.  Where is she?  Is she safe?  He turns
towards the marquee late guarded by Galvez.  A very different individual
is now seen at its entrance.  Walt Wilder, with bowie-knife bared, its
blade cutting the cords that kept the tent closed.  In an instant they
are severed, the flap flies open, and two female forms rush forth.  In
another instant one of them is lying along Hamersley's breast, the other
in the embrace of Wilder.  Kisses and words are exchanged.  Only a few
of the latter, till Hamersley, withdrawing himself from the arms that
softly entwine him, tells of his intention to part.

"For what purpose?" is the interrogatory, asked in tremulous accents,
and with eyes that speak painful surprise.

"To redress my wrongs and yours, Adela," is the response firmly spoken.

"_Santissima_!" she exclaims, seeing her lover prepare to spring into
the saddle.  "Francisco!  Stay with me.  Do not again seek danger.  The
wretch is not worthy of your vengeance."

"'Tis not vengeance, but justice.  'Tis my duty to chastise this crime--
the greatest on earth.  Something whispers me 'tis a destiny, and I
shall succeed.  Dearest Adela, do not stay me.  There is no danger.  I
shall be back soon, bringing Uraga's sword, perhaps himself, along with
me."

"Thar's odds again ye, Frank," interposes Wilder.  "Two to one.  If I
foller afoot I mayn't be up in time.  An' the boys that's gone arter
thar critters, they'll be too late."

"Never mind the odds!  I'll make it up with the five shots still in my
revolver.  See, dearest, your brother is coming this way.  Go meet and
tell him I shall soon return with a prisoner to be exchanged for him.
Another kiss!  _Adios! hasta luego_!"

Tearing himself from arms so reluctant to release him, he bounds upon
the back of his horse and spurs off, soon disappearing among the trees.

Scarce is he out of sight when another quadruped is seen galloping
after--not a horse, but a hybrid.

Walt Wilder has espied the saddled mule hitched up behind the tent--that
intended for Conchita.  It is now ridden by the ex-Ranger, who, prodding
it with the point of his bowie, puts it to its best speed.

And soon after go other horsemen--the Texans who have recovered their
steeds, with some who have caught those of the troopers, rapidly bridled
and mounted them bare-back.

They who stay behind become spectators of a scene strange and tender.
Two male prisoners unexpectedly rescued--snatched, as it were, from the
jaws of death--two female captives alike saved from dishonour.  A
brother embracing his sister, whose noble affection but the moment
before prompted her to share with him the first sooner than submit to
the last.



CHAPTER SEVENTY SIX.

THE CHASE.

Hamersley has his horse fairly astretch ere the fugitives, though out of
sight, are many hundred yards ahead; for the scenes and speeches
recorded occupied but a few seconds of time.

He is confident of being able to overtake them.  He knows his Kentucky
charger is more than a match for any Mexican horse, and will soon bring
him up with Uraga and the other officer.  If they should separate he
will follow the former.

As he rides on he sees they cannot go far apart.  There is a sheer
precipice on each side--the bluffs that bound the creek bottom.  These
will keep the pursued men together, and he will have both to deal with.

The ground is such that they cannot possibly escape him except by
superior speed.  He can see the cliffs on each side to their bases.
There is not enough underwood for a horseman to hide in.

He hastens on, therefore, supposing them still before him.

In ten minutes more he is sure of it--they are in sight!

The timber through which the chase has hitherto led abruptly terminates,
a long grassy mead of over a mile in length lying beyond; and beyond it
the trees again obstruct the vista up the valley.  The retreating
horsemen have entered upon this open tract, but not got far over it,
when Hamersley spurs his horse out of the timber tract, and pursuer and
pursued are in sight of other.

It is now a tail-on-end chase, all three horses going at the greatest
speed to which their riders can press them.  It is evident that the
large American horse is rapidly gaining upon the Mexican mustangs, and,
if no accident occur, will soon be alongside them.

Hamersley perceives this, and, casting a glance ahead, calculates the
distance to where the timber again commences.  To overtake them before
they can reach it is the thought uppermost in his mind.  Once among the
tree-trunks they can go as fast as he, for there the superior fleetness
of his horse will not avail.  Besides, there may be a thick underwood,
giving them a chance of concealment.

He must come up with them before they can reach the cover, and to this
end he once more urges his animal both with spur and speech.

At this moment Roblez looking back, perceives there is but one man in
chase of them.  A long stretch of open plain in his rear, and no other
pursuer upon it.  Brigand though he be, the adjutant possesses real
courage.  And there are two of them, in full health and strength, both
armed with sabres, himself carrying a pair of dragoon pistols in his
holsters.  Those belonging to Uraga are nearer to the hand of
Hamersley--having been left upon the saddle which the colonel, in his
hasty retreat, had been hindered from occupying.

"_Carajo_!" exclaims Roblez, "there's but one of them after us.  The
others haven't had time to get mounted, and won't be up for a while.
It's some rash fool who's got your horse under him.  Let's turn upon
him, colonel."

The coward thus appealed to cannot refuse compliance.  In an instant the
two wheel round, and, with blades bared, await the approach of the
pursuer.

In a dozen more strides of his horse Hamersley is on the ground.  Uraga
now recognises his antagonist in the Chihuahua duel--the man he hates
above all others on earth.

This, hatred, intense as it is, does not supply him with courage.  In
the eye of the pursuer coming on, when close up, Uraga reads a terrible
expression--that of the avenger!

Something whispers him his hour has come, and with shrinking heart and
palsied arm he awaits the encounter.

As said, the two Mexican officers carry swords, cavalry sabres.  Against
these the Kentuckian has no weapon for parrying or defence.  He is but
ill-armed for the unequal strife, having only a Colt's revolver with one
chamber empty, and, as a _dernier ressort_, the single-barrelled pistols
in the holsters.

Quickly perceiving his disadvantage, he checks up before coming too
close, and with his revolver takes aim, and fires at the nearest of his
antagonists, who is Roblez.

The shot tells, tumbling the lancer lieutenant out of his saddle, and
making more equal the chances of the strife.

But there is no more fighting, nor the show of it, for Uraga, on seeing
his comrade fall, and once more catching sight of that avenging glance
that glares at him as if from the eyes of Nemesis, wrenches the mustang
round, and rides off in wild retreat; his sword, held loosely, likely to
drop from his grasp.

Soon it does drop, for Hamersley, following in close pursuit, delivers a
second shot from the revolver.  The bullet hits the extended sword arm;
the naked blade whirls out, and falls with a ring upon the meadow turf.

Uraga rides on without looking back.  He has not even courage to turn
his face towards his antagonist.  He thinks only of reaching the timber,
in a despairing hope he may there find shelter and safety.

It is not his destiny to reach it; the pursuer is too close upon his
heels.  The head of Hamersley's horse is swept by the mustang's tail,
its long, white hair spread comet-like behind.

Once more the revolver is raised, its muzzle pointed at the retreating
coward.  The pressing of its trigger would send a bullet into his back.
It is not pressed.

As if from mercy or mere caprice Hamersley suddenly transfers the pistol
to his left hand.  Then, forcing his horse to a long leap forward, he
