as he spoke I fancied myself back in the Randlebury schoolroom, and my
memory saw a bright-eyed boy I had known once whom I could almost have
believed to be the speaker of these few words.  Strange what fancies
take possession of one!  Patrick, as he _had_ a watch, and had by this
time learned the mysterious art of telling the time, was not the man to
answer such a question as this at random.

"Hould my gun, cap'n," he said, "till I sthrike a light."

Fancy a sentinel asking an officer to hold his gun!  I knew enough of
military discipline to make me tremble at the thought of what would
become of my unceremonious master.

But the officer, instead of flying into a rage, took the rifle and
laughed.  That laugh reminded me more than ever of Randlebury.

"You're a pretty fellow," he said.  "Is that the manners they teach you
at home."

"I axe yer pardon, colonel, but--"

Here the officer laughed again--and oh! how my heart beat as I heard
him.  "If I stay here much longer I shall get promoted to general, I
suppose," said he.  "Look sharp and tell me the time."

Patrick, without another word, produced a light.  The officer's face was
half turned as he did so, and I could not catch his features, but as he
turned impatiently towards the sentinel the light fell full upon it, and
with a bound of astonishment I recognised in the swarthy, soldierly
officer before me, no other than my oldest and dearest master, Charlie
Newcome, of Randlebury.

The strange presentiment, then, was true--I had found him after so long
a time!  But what if he should not see me?  What torment to be so near
and yet so far!  And how was it likely he would take notice of a common
private's watch, and if he did, how was it likely at this distance of
time he would remember poor me?  Jim, I know, had told him of the
strange way in which I had come into his hands, and would certainly have
also told him about losing me.  He must, therefore, long ago have given
up all thoughts about me, or if he ever remembered me it would be as one
dead.

My master took me out and held me up to the light.

"It'll be about five minutes past ten, your honour, by my watch."

"Thank you.  Good--hullo?"

He had seen me!  His eyes were suddenly riveted upon me, and he seemed
glued to the spot where he stood.

"Did your honour plaze to spake?" asked Paddy, proceeding to put me back
into his pocket.

"My old watch!" cried Charlie, springing forward, and catching hold of
my master's hand.  "Give it to me!"

Paddy's surprise was unbounded.  At first he deemed the man mad, then
drunk, then gradually it dawned upon him this was not an officer at all,
but a highwayman in disguise, seeking to take advantage of his solitude
to rob him.

In an instant he sprang back, and, seizing his rifle, levelled the
bayonet to within an inch of Charlie's heart.

"Now, ye thievin' blackguard," said he, "move an inch and I'll stick ye
like a pig.  Arrah! but ye came to the wrong boy when ye thought to play
your tricks on me!  Stan' still now, or as sure as you're alive you're a
dead man;" and he gave Charlie a suggestive touch with the point of his
weapon, which showed plainly he had every intention of being as good as
his word.

Here was a predicament! and I could do nothing to help.

Charlie, fairly penned in a corner, was at a loss what to say or do.  He
began in an angry strain,--

"Don't be a fool, sir; do you--"

"Howld yer tongue!" roared Paddy, giving another poke with his bayonet.

Then Charlie attempted to laugh, which enraged the sentry all the more.

"Is it mock me, ye would, as well as rob me, ye foul-mouthed spalpeen,
you?" he cried.

"I don't want to rob you," put in Charlie.

"Faith and I'll see ye don't," retorted the Irishman.

"Listen to me an instant," besought Charlie.

"The sorra a word.  Ye shall say it all before the gineral the morrow,
for there I'll take ye."

For some moments Charlie stood in this awkward fix, not daring to stir,
or even to speak, and with every prospect of spending the night with a
bayonet point within an inch of his body.

Suddenly, however, a brilliant idea occurred to him.  If I really was
his old watch, as he fancied, this man had possibly found me where
Halliday had lost me.

It was a bare chance every way, but he determined to try it.

"So you are from Seatown!" he suddenly exclaimed.

The rifle literally dropped from the astonished sentry's hand.

"Who told ye that?" he almost shrieked.

"Never mind," said Charlie, following up the advantage, and softly
stepping out of his corner.  "It's two years since you left, isn't it?"

Patrick was "dumfoundered."  This man must be in league, surely, with
the powers of darkness!

"_Now_ do you know why I want that watch?" said Charlie sternly, at the
same time quietly picking up the dropped rifle.  The tables were fairly
turned now.  The wretched Patrick, whose conscience had more than once
smitten him about the way in which he had become possessed of me, looked
the picture of terror--not at the bayonet, but at the man who held it.

He drew me from his pocket with trembling hands, and holding me out at
arm's length, cried,--

"Arrah, arrah! take him, gineral, take him.  How was I to know you was
the gentleman dropped him there?  Who'd have--"

By this time Charlie had seized me and taken me to the light.  In an
instant he stripped me of my coat, and there, with bounding heart, read
his own initials, scratched years ago with his own boyish hand, in the
dormitory of Randlebury.

"It _is_ it!" he shouted; "my old watch!  Who would have thought it
possible!"

Then turning to the trembling Paddy, he said, in a voice almost unsteady
in its eagerness,--

"My man, what will you sell me this watch for?"

Paddy looked more astonished than ever.

"Sure it's your honour's own."

"It was once, but it's yours now.  But I'll give you a ten-pound note
for him and a gold watch besides if you'll let me have him back."

Imagine Paddy's astonishment.

"Sure Duck Downie says it's not worth thirty shillings--"

"Who cares for Duck Downie?" shouted Charlie, pulling out his purse.
"Here's the money, and if you come to Lieutenant Newcome's tent when you
are off duty you shall have the watch."

And so saying, and not waiting for another word, he darted off, with me
still in his hands, leaving Paddy fairly stupefied with amazement, and
with only presence of mind enough left to pick up his rifle and make a
royal salute to the retreating form of my first and last and dearest
master.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

HOW I SAVED MY MASTER'S LIFE, AND RETIRED FROM ACTIVE SERVICE.

I may with truth say, I reached that night the happiest moment in my
life.

Indeed, as the young officer walked on, with me held tight in his hand,
it would be hard to say which of us two was the happier.

Charlie's soldier life had not turned out as happily as, long ago, he
had pictured it to himself.  Away from home, and with comparatively few
friends, he had felt himself losing somewhat of his freshness and boyish
enthusiasm, and settling down rather to habits of a humdrum commonplace
official.  Books he had very few, and congenial society still less.
Quartered as he had been during the first two years in dull country
stations, he had grown weary of the routine of everyday life, and longed
for the sight of fresh faces, fresh scenes, fresh occupation.

After a while this desire was gratified in his removal to Calcutta.  But
if he had suffered from dulness and weariness before, he was now in
danger of going to another extreme.  In his first joy at getting back
into lively society he rushed with ardour into all the attractions and
gaieties of the capital.  Not that Charlie was a fellow ever to make the
same mistakes as Tom Drift.  He never associated with companions he knew
to be bad, or allowed himself to be led into scenes which were in the
slightest degree discreditable.  But he did enter rather too readily
into the frivolities of his new quarters, at the expense of his peace of
mind.  His popularity was his greatest snare.  Everywhere he went he
became a favourite.  People were eager to get him to join their parties,
and he was often enough too good-natured to refuse.  And thus Charlie
wasted much of his time, and in the end found himself far more
dissatisfied with himself than in the quiet monotony of his up-country
duties.

Do not let me do him injustice, reader, in my account of him during
those few weeks at Calcutta.

He was gay but not fast, frivolous though not dissipated.  His errors
were errors of unprofitableness, but never of viciousness.  Even in his
most frivolous moments he had never been anything but a gentleman and a
good fellow.  Still, it had been unsatisfactory, and he knew it to be so
in his inmost soul.

In the midst of this life came the mutiny, and, like hundreds of others,
Charlie leapt at the call of duty, and flung to the winds all those
attractions which had held him captive during the weeks of his idleness.
Like hundreds of others his blood boiled at the tragedies of that awful
time, and now, of all the rescuing host, there was not one who loved his
own life less, or his country's glory more, than Charlie Newcome.

And thus it was with him when I found him.

But to-night, whatever may have been the memories, and hopes, and
regrets which secretly animated his breast in finding himself again
possessed of his boyish treasure and the companion of so many of his
happiest days, Charlie Newcome had no leisure to sit down and spend his
time in passive contemplation.  He had a report to make to his colonel,
and an important despatch to carry to the commander-in-chief.  Then
there was the ammunition to be served out among his men, and he had to
superintend the process.  And there were the plans for next day's
assault to be talked over with his brother officers, and the various
detachments for that duty to be selected.  So that Charlie was a busy
man that night.  But with what a light heart he laboured!  Among his
occupations he did not forget the gold watch, but had the satisfaction
of making Paddy the happiest man (but one) in the camp.

Thus, first with one thing, then another, the night wore on; and, when
towards morning he lay down on his camp bed for a hurried rest, he fell
asleep like a child, whistling one of the old Randlebury songs, and with
me, as of old, under his pillow.

At the first note of the bugle he sprang from his couch, and putting me
in my old abode, next his heart, sallied out to see the preparations for
the advance.  It was generally known we were to make a dash for the
approaches to Lucknow this day; and at the prospect of the attack the
troops hailed the signal to get under arms with enthusiasm.  It was
plain to see, by the alacrity with which the men worked, that my master
was a prime favourite in his own company; indeed, such was their
promptitude that we stood ready and waiting long before the order to
march arrived.

During this interval, if Charlie was seized with a desire to know the
time once, he was seized twenty times; and each time a mere glance was
not enough to satisfy him.  How natural it all seemed, and how like old
times!

Then came the longed-for signal, and with a cheer the men set their
faces towards Lucknow.

Now, the reader must not expect I am going to describe military
operations for his edification.  I know nothing about columns and
countermarches, and echelons and skirmishing; how could a watch, hid
under a scarlet jacket, be expected to do so?

True, I had eyes that could penetrate any number of scarlet jackets, but
what good was that when I knew about as much of the art of war as I did
of candle-making!

But there are some things in the events of that memorable day which I
shall remember as long as I live.

After about an hour's march we were suddenly halted, and almost at the
same moment there came the sullen boom of a gun ahead.  I could feel
Charlie's heart leap at the sound.  It was the enemy at last; and now
the fate of Lucknow was to be decided.

A horseman dashed up to the head of our column and called out to our
colonel, in a voice loud enough for us all to hear, "Bring up your
battalion."  Next moment we were advancing in double quick time through
a lane of troops to the front.  There two other regiments stood waiting,
and almost the instant we arrived the whole body moved forward at a run.

It was an exciting moment.  The enemy's guns sounded louder and more
frequent ahead, and dropping shot at either side announced that our
danger was not all in front.  The pace was kept up for a hundred yards
or so, until we reached a cluster of trees, in whose shelter the column
was halted to get breath.  The fire in front still kept up, and through
the smoke I thought I could discern the dim outline of a low building,
not five hundred yards distant.  At this moment Charlie and the other
officers were summoned to the front for orders.  They were brief and to
the point.

"Straight for the fort, there!" said the commanding officer, "the
shortest way you can take your men!"

It was an order that meant certain death to scores of those brave
fellows; yet when they had heard it they cheered as schoolboys cheer for
a holiday.

Again we stood waiting.  The officers with their swords drawn stepped in
front.  The men quickly loaded and fixed bayonets, and then came the
shout,--

"Forward!"

As we cleared the trees we burst full in the face of the enemy's fire.
For a moment the balls whizzed harmlessly over our heads, then there was
a crash on the ground before us, and, as we rushed on, the men parted on
either side to avoid stepping over a dying man.  It was awful; and every
step we took grew more and more fatal.  Under that withering fire men
went down by the dozen; yet still the column rushed on.  The front rank
broke into gaps, which the rear rank men dashed forward to fill, till
they themselves fell.  And still on we rushed.  Officers, too,
everywhere to the front, dropped one by one; but still we never checked
our pace.  The sullen walls of the fort stood clear before us and poured
upon us an unceasing shower of bullet and ball.  In a minute our
foremost men would be at the walls.

"Forward now! follow me!"  I heard Charlie cry; and looking round
noticed for the first time that the captain of his company was missing.
The men cheered by way of answer, and their run broke into a rush as
they followed him under the guns.  Others were at the fort before us,
and the storm had already begun.  Heedless of wounds, heedless of peril,
the men swept towards the breach, and called on those behind to come on.
Charlie was one of the earliest of our battalion there, and already his
feet were in the place, and he was waving to his men to come up when--
