upon the ground, which was partly open, partly clothed with trees and
shrubs.  Here the natives, who numbered several hundreds, spread
themselves out in a long semicircular line, in order to drive the game
into the trap.

As we followed them, or rather formed part of the line, I overheard the
following conversation between Peterkin and Makarooroo, who chanced to
be together.

"Now, Mak," said the former, examining the caps of his rifle, "explain
to me what sort of trap this is that we're coming to, and what sort of
brutes we may expect to find in it."

"De trap, massa," replied our faithful follower, drawing the back of his
hand across his mouth--"de trap am be call _hopo_--"

"Called what-o?" inquired Peterkin.

"_Hopo_."

"Oh! go on."

"An' hims be made ob great number oh sticks tumble down--an' hole at de
end ob dat; an' de beasties dat goes in be zebros, elosphants, eelands,
buff'los, gaffs, nocrices, noos, an' great more noders ob which me
forgit de names."

"Oh! you forgit de names, do you?"

"Yis, massa."

"Ah! it wouldn't be a great loss, Mak, if you were to forget the names
of those you remember."

The conversation was interrupted at this point by the appearance of a
buffalo, which showed that we were drawing near to the scene of action.
But as Makarooroo's description is not remarkable for lucidity, I may
explain here that the hopo, or trap, consists of two parts; one part may
be termed the conducting hedges, the other the pit at their termination,
and into which the game is driven.  The conducting hedges are formed in
the shape of the letter V.  At the narrow extremity there is a narrow
lane, at the end of which is the terminating pit.  This pit is about
eight feet deep and fifteen feet broad, and its edges are made to
overlap in such a way that once the animals are in it, they have no
chance whatever of getting out again.  The surface of the pit is
concealed by a thin crust of green rushes, and the hedges are sometimes
a mile long, and nearly the same width apart at the outer extremities.

We were still a considerable distance from the outer ends of the hedges,
when the natives spread out as above described, and I am convinced that
our line extended over at least four miles of ground.  The circle, of
course, narrowed as they advanced, shouting wildly, in order to drive
the game into the enclosure.

That the country was teeming with game soon became apparent, for ever
and anon as we advanced a herd of gnus or buffaloes or hartbeests would
dart affrighted from their cover, and sweep over the open ground into
another place of shelter, out of which they were again driven as the
line advanced.  In the course of half an hour we drove out hartbeests,
zebras, gnus, buffaloes, giraffes, rhinoceroses, and many other kinds of
smaller game, either singly or in herds.

"Now, lads," said Jack, approaching Peterkin and me as we walked
together, "it is quite evident that if we wish to see this sport in
perfection we must get outside the hedge, and run along towards the pit;
for there, in the natural course of things, we may expect the grand
climax.  What say you?  Shall we go?"

"Agreed," said I.

"Ditto," cried Peterkin.

So without more words we turned aside, followed by Makarooroo, leaped
the hedge, and running down along it soon reached the edge of the pit.

Here we found a number of the natives assembled with spears, looking
eagerly through the interstices of the hedges in expectation of the
advancing herds.  We took up our stand on a convenient spot, and
prepared to wait patiently.  But our patience was not severely tried.
We had not been more than five minutes stationed when the noise of the
closing line was heard, and a herd of buffaloes dashed wildly out from a
small piece of jungle in which they had sought shelter, and galloped
over the plain towards us.  Suddenly they halted, and stood for a moment
snuffing the air, as if uncertain what to do; while we could see, even
at that distance, that every muscle of their bodies trembled with
mingled rage and terror.  Before they could decide, a herd of gnus burst
from the same place; and presently a dozen zebras galloped out, tossing
up their heels and heads in magnificent indignation.  These last
scattered, and approached the hedges; which caused several natives to
dart into the enclosure, who from beneath the shelter of oval shields as
large as themselves, threw their spears with unerring certainty into the
sides of the terrified creatures.

At this moment there was a general rush from the scattered groups of
trees and clumps of jungle, for the animals were now maddened with
terror, not only at the shouts of their human persecutors, but at their
own wild cries and the increasing thunder of their tread.

The shouting and tumult now became excessive.  It was almost
bewildering.  I looked round upon the faces of the negroes nearest to
me.  They seemed to be almost insane with suppressed excitement, and
their dark faces worked in a manner that was quite awful to witness.

Presently there was a general and indiscriminate rush of all kinds of
wild animals towards the narrow end of the hopo.  The natives pressed in
upon them with wild cries.  Spears flew in all directions.  Ere long the
plain was covered with wounded animals struggling and bellowing in their
death-agonies.  As the rushing multitude drew nearer to the fatal pit,
they became crowded together, and now the men near us began to play
their part.

"Look out, Jack!"  I cried, as a buffalo bull with glaring eyes and
foaming jaws made a desperate effort to leap over the barrier in our
very faces.

Jack raised his rifle and fired; at the same instant a spear was sent
into the buffalo's breast, and it fell back to form a stumbling-block in
the way of the rushing mass.

The report of the rifle caused the whole herd to swerve from our side so
violently that they bore down the other side, until I began to fear the
hedge would give way altogether; but they were met by the spears and the
furious yells of the natives there, and again swept on towards the
narrow lane.

And now the head of the bellowing mass came to the edge of the pit.
Those in front seemed to suspect danger, for they halted suddenly; but
the rush of those behind forced them on.  In another moment the thin
covering gave way, and a literal cataract of huge living creatures went
surging down into the abyss.

The scene that followed was terrible to witness; and I could not regard
it with other than feelings of intense horror, despite my knowledge of
the fact that a large tribe of natives depended on the game then slain
for their necessary food.  The maddened animals attempted to leap out of
the pit, but the overlapping edges already referred to effectually
prevented this until the falling torrent filled it up; then some of them
succeeded in leaping out from off the backs of their smothered comrades.
These, however, were quickly met and speared by the natives, while ever
and anon the great mass was upheaved by the frantic struggles of some
gigantic creature that was being smothered at the bottom.

While this scene of wholesale destruction was going on, Makarooroo came
up to me and begged me, with mysterious looks, to follow him out of the
crowd.

I obeyed, and when we had got away from the immediate neighbourhood of
the turmoil, I said,--"Well, Mak, what's wrong?"

"De chief, massa, hims tell me few moments ago dat canoe wid Mbango and
oomans hab pass dis way to-morrow."

"To-morrow!"  I exclaimed.

"No, me forgit; hab pass yistumday."

"Indeed!"

"Yis, an' de chief hims say hims want us to stop wid him and go hunt for
week or two.  P'raps he no let us go 'way."

"That's just possible, Mak.  Have you told Jack?"

"No, massa."

"Then go bring him and Peterkin hither at once."

In a few minutes my companions were with me, and we held a brief earnest
consultation as to what we should do.

"I think we should tell the chief we are anxious to be off at once, and
leave him on good terms," said I.

Peterkin objected to this.  "No," said he; "we cannot easily explain why
we are anxious to be off so hastily.  I counsel flight.  They won't find
out that we are gone until it is too late to follow."

Jack agreed with this view, so of course I gave in, though I could not
in my heart approve of such a method of sneaking away.  But our guide
seemed also to be exceedingly anxious to be off, so we decided; and
slipping quietly away under the shelter of the hedge, while the natives
were still busy with their bloody work, we soon gained the forest.  Here
we had no difficulty in retracing our steps to the village, where,
having picked up our little companion, Njamie's son, who had been left
to play with the little boys of the place, we embarked, swept down the
stream, and were soon far beyond the chance of pursuit.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A LONG CHASE, AND A HAPPY TERMINATION THEREOF.

Knowing that unless we advanced with more than ordinary speed we could
not hope to overtake our friends for several days--a stern chase being
proverbially a long one--we travelled a great part of the night as well
as all day; and on our third day after quitting the scene of the curious
hunt described in the last chapter, we descried the fugitives descending
the river about a quarter of a mile ahead of us.

Unhappily we made a stupid mistake at this time.  Instead of waiting
until we were near enough to be recognised, we shouted to our friends
the moment we saw their canoe.  I cannot say that we knew them to be our
friends, but we had every reason to suppose so.  The result of our shout
was that they supposed us to be enemies, and paddled away as if for
their lives.  It was in vain that we tried to show by signs that we were
not enemies.

"Yell!" cried Peterkin, turning to Makarooroo, who sat close behind him.

Our guide opened his huge mouth, and gave utterance to a yell that might
well have struck terror into the heart of Mars himself.

"Stop! stay!" cried Peterkin hastily.  "I didn't mean a war-yell; I
meant a yell of--of _peace_."

"Me no hab a yell ob peace," said Makarooroo, with a look of perplexity.

"I should not suppose you had," observed Jack, with a quiet laugh, as he
dipped his paddle more energetically than ever into the stream.--"The
fact is, Peterkin, that we shall have to go in for a long chase.  There
is no doubt about it.  I see that there are at least four men in their
canoe, and if one of them is Mbango, as we have reason to believe, a
stout and expert arm guides them.  But ho! give way! `never venture,
never win.'"

With that we all plied our paddles with our utmost might.  The chase
soon became very exciting.  Ere long it became evident that the crews of
the two canoes were pretty equally matched, for we did not, apparently,
diminish the distance between us by a single inch during the next
half-hour.

"What if it turns out not to be Mbango and his party after all?"
suggested Peterkin, who wielded his light paddle with admirable effect.

Jack, who sat in the bow, replied that in that case we should have to
make the best apology and explanation we could to the niggers, and
console ourselves with the consciousness of having done our best.

For some time the rapid dip of our paddles and the rush of our canoe
through the water were the only sounds that were heard.  Then Peterkin
spoke again.  He could never keep silence for any great length of time.

"I say, Jack, we'll never do it.  If we had only another man, or even a
boy."  (Peterkin glanced at Njamie's little son, who lay sound asleep at
the bottom of the boat.) "No, he won't do; we might as well ask a
mosquito to help us."

"I say, lads, isn't one of the crew of that canoe a woman?" said Jack,
looking over his shoulder, but not ceasing for an instant to ply his
paddle.

"Can't tell," answered Peterkin.--"What say you, Mak?"

"Ye-is, massa," replied the guide, with some hesitation.  "Me tink dat
am be one ooman's arm what wag de paddil.  Oh! yis, me sartin sure now,
dat am a ooman."

"That being the case," observed Jack, in a tone of satisfaction, "the
chase won't last much longer, for a woman's muscles can't hold out long
at such a pace.  Ho! give way once more."

In less than five minutes the truth of Jack's remark became apparent,
for we began rapidly to overhaul the fugitives.  This result acted with
a double effect: while it inspirited us to additional exertion, it
depressed those whom we were pursuing, and so rendered them less capable
than before of contending with us.  There was evidently a good deal of
excitement and gesticulation among them.  Suddenly the man in the stern
laid down his paddle, and stooping down seized a gun, with which,
turning round, he took deliberate aim at us.

"That's rather awkward," observed Jack, in a cool, quiet way, as if the
awkwardness of the case had no reference whatever to him personally.

We did not, however, check our advance.  The man fired, and the ball
came skipping over the water and passed us at a distance of about two
yards.

"Hum!  I expected as much," observed Jack.  "When a bad shot points a
bad gun at you, your best plan is to stand still and take your chance.
In such a case the chance is not a bad one.  Hollo! the rascal seems
about to try it again.  I say, boys, we must stop this."

We had now gained so much on the fugitives that we had reason to hope
that we might by signs enable them to understand that we were not
enemies.  We had to make the attempt rather abruptly, for as Jack
uttered his last remark, the man in the stern of the canoe we were
chasing, having reloaded his gun, turned round to aim at us again.  At
the same time the rest of the crew suddenly ceased to paddle, in order
to enable their comrade to take a steady aim.  It was evident that they
rested all their hopes upon that shot disabling one of our number, and
so enabling them to escape.  Seeing this, Makarooroo in desperation
seized his rifle and levelled it.

"No, no," said Peterkin, hastily holding up his hand.  "Give me your
rifle, Mak; and yours, Ralph.  Now then, stop paddling for a moment;
I'll try an experiment."

So saying, he sprang to his feet, and grasping a rifle in each hand,
held them high above his head, intending thus to show that we were
well-armed, but that we did not intend to use our weapons.

The device was happily successful: the man in the other canoe lowered
the gun with which he was in the act of taking aim at us.

"Now, boys, paddle slowly towards the bank," cried Peterkin, laying down
the rifles quickly and standing erect again with his empty hands
extended in the air, to confirm the fugitives in regard to our good
intentions.  They understood the sign, and also turned toward the bank,
where in a few minutes both parties landed, at the distance of about two
hundred yards from each other.

"Mak, you had better advance alone," said Jack.  "If it is Mbango and
his friends, they will know you at once.  Don't carry your rifle; you
won't need it."

"Nay, Jack," I interposed; "you do not act with your usual caution.
Should it chance not to be Mbango, it were well that Mak should have his
rifle and a companion to support him."

"O most sapient Ralph," said Peterkin, "don't you know that Jack and I
have nothing to do but sit down on this bank, each with a double-barrel
in his hand, and if anything like foul play should be attempted, four of
the enemy should infallibly bite the dust at the same time?  But you'd
better go with Mak, since you're so careful of him.  We will engage to
defend you both.--Hollo, Puggy! take the line of our canoe here and
fasten it to yonder bush."

The latter part of this remark was addressed to Njamie's little boy,
whose name we had never learned, and who had been called Puggy by
Peterkin--not, let me remark, in anything approaching to a contemptuous
spirit.  He evidently meant it as a title of endearment.  We had tacitly
accepted it, and so had the lad, who for some time past had answered to
the name of Puggy, in utter ignorance, of course, as to its
signification.

Mak and I now advanced unarmed towards the negroes, and in a few seconds
we mutually recognised each other.  I was overjoyed to observe the
well-known face of Okandaga, who no sooner recognised her lover than she
uttered a joyful shout and ran towards him.  I at the same time advanced
to Mbango, and grasping his hand shook it warmly; but that good-hearted
chief was not satisfied with such a tame expression of good will.
Seizing me by the shoulders, he put forward his great flat nose and
rubbed mine heartily therewith.  My first impulse was to draw back, but
fortunately my better judgment came to my aid in time, and prevented me
from running the risk of hurting the feelings of our black friend.  And
I had at that time lived long enough to know that there is nothing that
