
"Then there is no trouble in that," the Roman said, with a smile;
"throw him to the fishes, and buy another. They are cheap enough,
for we have flooded the world with slaves and, as we know to our
cost, they are scarce saleable. We have brought two or three
thousand with us, and can get no bid for them."

"Yes, but this matter can't be settled so," Tibellus said; "but
first, I want to ask you a question or two. You heard, of course,
of John of Gamala, in your wars in Judea?"

There was a chorus of assent.

"That did we, indeed, to our cost," the general said; "save the two
leaders in Jerusalem, he was the most dangerous; and was by far the
most troublesome of our foes. Many a score of sleepless nights has
that fellow caused us; from the time he well-nigh burnt all our
camp before Gamala, he was a thorn in our side. One never knew
where he was, or when to expect him. One day we heard of him
attacking a garrison at the other end of the country, and the next
night he would fall upon our camp. We never marched through a
ravine, without expecting to see him and his men appearing on the
hills, and sending the rocks thundering down among us; and the
worst of it was, do what we would, we could never get to close
quarters with him. His men could march three miles to our one; and
as for our Arabs, if we sent them in pursuit, they would soon come
flying back to us, leaving a goodly portion of their numbers dead
behind them. He was the most formidable enemy we had, outside
Jerusalem; and had all the Jews fought as he did, instead of
shutting themselves up in their walled towns, we might have been
years before we subdued that pestilent country."

"Did you ever see this John of Gamala? Do you know what he was
like, personally? Was he another giant, like this Simon who was
executed at the triumph, the other day?"

"None of us ever saw him--that is, to know which was he, though
doubtless we may have seen him, in the fights--but all the country
people we questioned, and such wounded men as fell into our
hands--for we never once captured one of his band, unharmed--all
asserted that he was little more than a lad. He was strong, and
skilful in arms, but in years a youth. They all believed that he
was a sort of prophet, one who had a mission from their God.

"But why are you asking?"

"I will tell you, presently," Tibellus said; "but first answer me
another question. Was it not your legion that was at Carmelia, with
Titus, when Vespasian lay at Hebron?"

There was a general assent.

"Did you ever hear of a wounded Jew being brought in, and tended
there by order of Titus?"

"We did," the general said; "and here is Plancus, who was in
command of that part of the horse of the legion which formed the
bodyguard of Titus, and who brought him into the camp. He will tell
you about it."

"Titus had received a message from Vespasian that he wished to see
him," the officer signified by the general said, "and rode off at
once, telling us to follow him. We armed and mounted, as soon as we
could; but Titus was well mounted, and had a considerable start. We
came up to him in a valley. He was standing by the side of his dead
horse. He was slightly wounded, and his dirtied armour showed that
he had had a sharp fight. Close by lay a Jew, who seemed to be
dead. Titus ordered him to be carried back to the camp, and cared
for by his own leech. That is all I know about it."

"I can tell you more," the general said, "for Titus himself told me
that he had had a desperate fight with the Jew; that he had wounded
him severely, and was on the point of finishing him, when the Jew
sprang at him suddenly and the sudden shock threw him to the
ground; and that, strange as it might seem, although knowing who he
was, the Jew spared his life. It was a strange story, and anyone
besides Titus would have kept it to himself; and run his sword
through the body of the Jew, to make sure of his silence; but Titus
has notions of his own, and he is as generous as he is brave. By
what he said, I gathered that the Jew abstained from striking,
believing--as was truly the case--that Titus was more merciful than
Vespasian, and that he would spare Jerusalem and their Temple, if
he could.

"And now, why all these questions?"

"One more on my part first: what became of the Jew, and what was he
like?"

"That is two questions," the general replied; "however, I will
answer them. Titus let him go free, when he was recovered from his
wounds. He was a young man, of some twenty years old."

"And do you know his name?"

"I know his name was John, for so he told Titus; but as every other
Jew one comes across is John, that does not tell much."

"I can tell you his other name," Tibellus said. "It was John of
Gamala."

An exclamation of astonishment broke from the officers.

"So that was John of Gamala, himself!" the general said. "None of
us ever dreamt of it; and yet it might well have been for, now I
think of it, the young fellow I saw lying wounded in the tent next
to that of Titus answered, exactly, to the description we have
heard of him; and the fact that he overcame Titus, in itself, shows
that he had unusual strength and bravery.

"But how do you know about this?"

"Simply because John of Gamala is, at present, working as a slave
in my garden."

"You do not say so!" the general exclaimed. "We have often wondered
what became of him. We learned, from the deserters, that he had
entered into Jerusalem, and was fighting there against us. They all
agreed that the men he had brought with him took no part in the
atrocities of the soldiers of Simon, and John of Gischala; but that
they kept together, and lived quietly, and harmed no man. It was
they, we heard, who did the chief part in the three days' fighting
at the breach of the lower town; but we never heard what became of
him, and supposed that he must have fallen in the fighting round
the Temple.

"And so, he is your slave, Tibellus! How did you know it was he,
and what are you going to do? The war is over, now, and there has
been bloodshed enough and, after all, he was a gallant enemy, who
fought us fairly and well."

"He told me, himself, who he was," Tibellus said; "but I believed that
he was lying to me. I had heard often of John of Gamala, and deemed
that he was a brave and skilful warrior; and it seemed impossible that
young man could be he. As to what I am going to do with him, I have
nothing to do but what he has himself demanded--namely, to be sent to
Titus. He produced the signet ring of Caesar; said that it was given
to him by the general, himself; and that he told him that, if he
presented it to a Roman at any time, he would lead him to his presence.
I believed that he had stolen the ring, or had got it from somebody
that had stolen it; and he then told me of the story, very much as you
have told it--save that he said that, when he was well-nigh conquered by
Titus, and sprang upon him, Caesar's foot slipped, and he fell--hinting
that his success was the result of accident, rather than his own effort.
He spoke by no means boastingly of it, but as if it was the most natural
thing in the world."

"There he showed discretion, and wisdom," the general said; "but
truly this is a marvellous story. If he had not appealed to Caesar,
I should have said, 'Give him his freedom.' You can buy a new slave
for a few sesterces. This young fellow is too good to be a slave
and, now that Judea is finally crushed, he could never become
dangerous; but as he has demanded to be sent to Caesar, you must,
of course, send him there. Besides, with the ideas that Titus has,
he may be really glad to see the youth again.

"But we shall like to see him, also. We all honour a brave
adversary, and I should like to see him who so long set us at
defiance."

"I will bring him down, tomorrow, at this hour," Tibellus said; and
then, taking leave of the officers, he mounted and rode back.

On reaching home, he at once sent for John.

"I doubted your story, when you told it to me," he said, "and
deemed it impossible; but I have been down to the officers of the
legion which arrived, last week, from Judea. It chances to be the
very one which was at Carmelia, when Vespasian lay at Hebron; and I
find that your story is fully confirmed--although, indeed, they did
not know that the wounded man Titus sent in was John of Gamala--but
as they admit that he answered, exactly, to the description which
they have heard of that leader, they doubt not that it was he.

"However, be assured that your request is granted, and that you
shall be sent to Rome by the next ship that goes thither."



Chapter 19: At Rome.


Tibellus at once ordered John to be released from all further work,
the badge of slavery to be removed, and that he should be supplied
with handsome garments, removed into the house, and assigned an
apartment with the freedmen. The bearer of the signet of Titus--now
that it was ascertained that the signet had been really given to
him by Caesar--was an important person, and was to be received with
consideration, if not honour. When these changes had been made,
John was again brought before Tibellus.

"Is there anything else that I can do for your comfort, as one who
has been honoured by Titus, himself, our future emperor? You have
but to express your wishes, and I shall be glad to carry them out."

"I would ask, then," John said, "that my friend and companion may
be set free, and allowed to accompany me to Rome. He is my adopted
brother. He has fought and slept by my side, for the last four
years; and your bounty to me gives me no pleasure, so long as he is
labouring as a slave."

Tibellus at once sent for Philo, and ordered the collar to be filed
from the neck of Jonas, and for him to be treated in the same
manner as John.

The next day Tibellus invited John to accompany him to the barracks
and, as he would take no excuses, he was obliged to do so.

Tibellus presented him to the general and his officers, who
received him very cordially; and were much struck with his quiet
demeanour, and the nobility of his bearing. John had, for four
years, been accustomed to command; and the belief, entertained by
his followers, in his special mission had had its effect upon his
manner. Although simple and unassuming in mind; and always ready,
on his return to the farm, to become again the simple worker upon
his father's farm; he had yet, insensibly, acquired the bearing of
one born to position and authority.

He was much above the ordinary height; and although his figure was
slight, it showed signs, which could well be appreciated by the
Romans, of great activity and unusual strength. His face was
handsome, his forehead lofty, his eyes large and soft; and in the
extreme firmness of his mouth and his square chin and jaw were
there, alone, signs of the determination and steadfastness which
had made him so formidable a foe to the Romans.

"So you are John of Gamala!" the general said. "We have, doubtless,
nearly crossed swords, more than once. You have caused us many a
sleepless night, and it seemed to us that you and your bands were
ubiquitous. I am glad to meet you, as are we all. A Roman cherishes
no malice against an honourable foe, and such we always found you;
and I trust you have no malice for the past."

"None," John said. "I regard you as the instruments of God for the
punishment of my people. We brought our misfortunes upon ourselves,
by the rebellion--which would have seemed madness had it not,
doubtless, been the will of God that we should so provoke you, and
perish. All I ask, now, is to return to my father's farm; and to
resume my life there. If I could do that, without going to Rome, I
would gladly do so."

"That can hardly be," Tibellus said. "The rule is that when one
appeals to Caesar, to Caesar he must go. The case is at once taken
out of our hands. Besides, I should have to report the fact to
Rome, and Titus may wish to see you, and might be ill pleased at
hearing that you had returned to Galilee without going to see him.
Besides, it may be some time before all animosity between the two
peoples dies out there; and you might obtain from him an imperial
order, which would prove a protection to yourself, and family,
against any who might desire to molest you. If for this reason,
alone, it would be well worth your while for you to proceed to
Rome."

Three days later, Tibellus told John that a ship would sail, next
morning; and that a centurion, in charge of some invalided
soldiers, would go in her.

"I have arranged for you to go in his charge, and have instructed
him to accompany you to the palace of Titus, and facilitate your
having an interview with him. I have given him a letter to present
to Titus, with greetings, saying why I have sent you to him.

"Here is a purse of money, to pay for what you may require on the
voyage; and to keep you, if need be, at Rome until you can see
Titus, who may possibly be absent.

"You owe me no thanks," he said, as John was about to speak. "Titus
would be justly offended, were the bearer of his signet ring sent
to him without due care and honour."

That evening Tibellus gave a banquet, at which the general and
several officers were present. The total number present was nine,
including John and the host--this being the favourite number for
what they regarded as small, private entertainments. At large
banquets, hundreds of persons were frequently entertained. After
the meal John, at the request of Tibellus, related to the officers
the manner of his escapes from Jotapata and Jerusalem, and several
of the incidents of the struggle in which he had taken part.

The next morning, he and Jonas took their places on board the ship,
and sailed for Rome. It was now far in November, and the passage
was a boisterous one; and the size of the waves astonished John,
accustomed, as he was, only to the short choppy seas of the Lake of
Galilee. Jonas made up his mind that they were lost and, indeed,
for some days the vessel was in imminent danger. Instead of passing
through the straits between Sicily and the mainland of Italy, they
were blown far to the west; and finally took shelter in the harbour
of Caralis, in Sardinia. Here they remained for a week, to refit
and repair damages, and then sailed across to Portus Augusti, and
then up the Tiber.

The centurion had done his best to make the voyage a pleasant one,
to John and his companion. Having been informed that the former was
the bearer of a signet ring of Titus, and would have an audience
with him, he was anxious to create as good an impression as
possible; but it was not until Caralis was reached that John
recovered sufficiently from seasickness to take much interest in
what was passing round him. The travellers were greatly struck with
the quantity of shipping entering and leaving the mouth of the
Tiber; the sea being dotted with the sails of the vessels bearing
corn from Sardinia, Sicily, and Africa; and products of all kinds,
from every port in the world.

The sight of Rome impressed him less than he had expected. Of its
vastness he could form no opinion; but in strength, and beauty, it
appeared to him inferior to Jerusalem. When he landed, he saw how
many were the stately palaces and temples; but of the former none
were more magnificent than that of Herod. Nor was there one of the
temples to be compared, for a moment, with that which had so lately
stood, the wonder and admiration of the world, upon Mount Moriah.

The centurion procured a commodious lodging for him and, finding
that Titus was still in Rome, accompanied him the next day to the
palace. Upon saying that he was the bearer of a letter to Titus,
the centurion was shown into the inner apartments; John being left
in the great antechamber, which was crowded with officers waiting
to see Titus, when he came out--to receive orders, pay their
respects, or present petitions to him.

The centurion soon returned, and told John to follow him.

"Titus was very pleased," he whispered, "when he read the letter I
brought him; and begged me bring you, at once, to his presence."

Titus was alone in a small chamber, whose simplicity contrasted
strangely with the magnificence of those through which he had
passed. He rose from a table at which he had been writing.

"Ah, my good friend," he said, "I am truly glad to see you! I made
sure that you were dead. You were not among those who came out, and
gave themselves up, or among those who were captured when the city
was taken; for I had careful inquiry made, thinking it possible
that you might have lost my ring, and been unable to obtain access
to me; then, at last, I made sure that you had fallen. I am truly
glad to see that it is not so."

"I was marvellously preserved, then, as at Jotapata," John said;
"and escaped, after the Temple had fallen, by a secret passage
leading out beyond the wall of circumvallation. As I made my way
home, I fell into the hands of some slave dealers, who seized me
and my companion--who is my adopted brother--and carried us away to
Alexandria, where I was sold. As you had not yet returned to Rome,
I thought it better not to produce your signet, which I had
fortunately managed to conceal.

"When I heard that you had reached Rome, and had received your
triumph, I produced the ring to my master Tibellus; and prayed him
to send me and my companion here to you, in order that I might ask
for liberty, and leave to return to my home. He treated me with the
greatest kindness and, but that I had appealed to you, would of
himself have set us free. It is for this, alone, that I have come
here; to ask you to confirm the freedom he has given me, and to
permit me to return to Galilee. Further, if you will give me your
order that I and mine may live peacefully, without molestation from
any, it would add to your favours."

"I will do these, certainly," Titus said, "and far more, if you
will let me. I shall never forget that you saved my life; and
believe me, I did my best to save the Temple, which was what I
promised you. I did not say that I would save it, merely that I
would do my best; but your obstinate countrymen insisted in
bringing destruction upon it."

"I know that you did all that was possible," John said, "and that
the blame lies with them, and not with you, in any way. However, it
was the will of God that it should be destroyed; and they were the
instruments of his will, while they thought they were trying to
preserve it."

"But now," Titus said, "you must let me do more for you. Have you
ambition? I will push you forward to high position, and dignity. Do
you care for wealth? I have the treasures of Rome in my gift. Would
you serve in the army? Many of the Alexandrian Jews had high rank
in the army of Anthony. Two of Cleopatra's best generals were your
countrymen. I know your bravery, and your military talents, and
will gladly push you forward."

"I thank you, Caesar, for your offers," John said, "which far
exceed my deserts; but I would rather pass my life as a tiller of
the soil, in Galilee. The very name of a Jew, at present, is
hateful in the ear of a Roman. All men who succeed by the favour of
a great prince are hated. I should be still more so, as a Jew. I
should be hated by my own countrymen, as well as yours, for they
would regard me as a traitor. There would be no happiness in such a
life. A thousand times better a home by the Lake of Galilee, with a
wife and children."

"If such be your determination, I will say nought against it,"
Titus said; "but remember, if at any time you tire of such a life,
come to me and I will give you a post of high honour and dignity.
There are glorious opportunities for talent and uprightness in our
distant dependencies--east and west--where there will be no
prejudices against the name of a Jew.

"However, for the present let that be. Tomorrow I will have
prepared for you an imperial order--to all Roman officers, civil
and military, of Galilee and Judea--to treat you as the friend of
Titus; also the appointment as procurator of the district lying
north of the river Hieromax, up to the boundary of Chorazin, for a
distance of ten miles back from the lake. You will not refuse that
office, for it will enable you to protect your country people from
oppression, and to bring prosperity upon the whole district.

"Lastly, you will receive with the documents a sum of money. I know
that you will not use it on yourself, but it will be long before
the land recovers from its wounds. There will be terrible misery
and distress; and I should like to think that in the district, at
least, of my friend, there are peace and contentment. Less than
this Caesar cannot give to the man who spared his life."

John thanked Titus, most heartily, for his favours; which would, he
saw, ensure his family and neighbours from the oppression and
tyranny to which a conquered people are exposed, at the hands of a
rough soldiery. Titus ordered an apartment to be prepared for him,
in the palace; and begged him to take up his abode there, until a
vessel should be sailing for Casarea. Slaves were told off to
attend upon him, and to escort him in the city; and everything was
done to show the esteem and friendship in which Titus held him.
Titus had several interviews with him; and learned now, for the
first time, that he was the John of Gamala who had so long and
stoutly opposed the Romans.

"If I had known that," Titus said, with a smile, "when you were in
my hands, I do not think I should have let you go free; though your
captivity would have been an honourable one. When you said that you
would not promise to desist from opposing our arms, I thought that
one man, more or less, in the ranks of the enemy would make little
difference; but had I known that it was the redoubtable John of
Gamala who was in my hands, I should hardly have thought myself
justified in letting you go free."

John, at the request of Titus, gave him a sketch of the incidents
of his life, and of the campaign.

"So you have already a lady love," Titus said, when he had
finished. "What shall I send her?

"Better nothing, at present," he said, after a moment's thought and
a smile, "beyond yourself. That will be the best and most
acceptable gift I could send her. Time, and your good report, may
soften the feelings with which doubtless she, like all the rest of
your countrywomen, must regard me; though the gods know I would
gladly have spared Galilee, and Judea, from the ruin which has
fallen upon them."

