sent him to me."

"I will be one," said the man with the pipe.

"Very well, Fred."

"And I will go with Fred," said a long limbed fellow who had been a
Kansas cowboy.

"I accept you, Otto. Go armed, and don't lose sight of him."

"Shall you send the money?"

"Not I. I will send a letter that will encourage them to hope for it. I
want to gain time."

"Any instructions, Jefferson?"

"Only this, if you see these men, capture or kill them."

"All right."



CHAPTER XXXV.


A BLOODY CONFLICT.


This was the letter that was handed to Caesar:


I have received your note. I must have time to think, and time perhaps
to get hold of the gold. Don't harm a hair of the boy's head. If so, I
will hunt you to death.

JEFFERSON PETTIGREW.


P.S.--Meet me tomorrow morning at the rocky gorge at the foot of Black
Mountain. Ten o'clock.


Caesar took the letter, and bent his steps in the direction of the place
where he had tethered his horse. He did not observe that he was
followed by two men, who carefully kept him in sight, without attracting
attention to themselves.

When Caesar reached the place where he had tethered the horse, he was
grievously disappointed at not finding him. One of the miners in
roaming about had come upon the animal, and knowing him to be Jefferson
Pettigrew's property, untied him and rode him back to Oreville.

The dwarf threw up his hands in dismay.

"The horse is gone!" he said in his deep bass voice, "and now I must
walk back, ten long miles, and get a flogging at the end for losing
time. It's hard luck," he groaned.

The loss was fortunate for Fred and Otto who would otherwise have found
it hard to keep up with the dwarf.

Caesar breathed a deep sigh, and then started on his wearisome journey.
Had the ground been even it would have troubled him less, but there was
a steep upward grade, and his short legs were soon weary. Not so with
his pursuers, both of whom were long limbed and athletic.

We will go back now to the cave and the captors of Rodney. They waited
long and impatiently for the return of their messenger. Having no
knowledge of the loss of the horse, they could not understand what
detained Caesar.

"Do you think the rascal has played us false?" said Roderick.

"He would be afraid to."

"This man Pettigrew might try to bribe him. It would be cheaper than to
pay five thousand dollars."

"He wouldn't dare. He knows what would happen to him," said John grimly.

"Then why should he be so long?"

"That I can't tell."

"Suppose we go out to meet him. I begin to feel anxious lest we have
trusted him too far."

"I am with you!"

The two outlaws took the path which led to Oreville, and walked two
miles before they discovered Caesar coming towards them at a slow and
melancholy gait.

"There he is, and on foot! What does it mean?"

"He will tell us."

"Here now, you black imp! where is the horse?" demanded Roderick.

"I done lost him, massa."

"Lost him? You'll get a flogging for this, unless you bring good news.
Did you see Jefferson Pettigrew?"

"Yes, massa."

"Did he give you any money?"

"No; he gave me this letter."

Roderick snatched it from his hand, and showed it to John.

"It seems satisfactory," he said. "Now how did you lose the horse?"

Caesar told him.

"You didn't fasten him tight."

"Beg your pardon, massa, but I took good care of that."

"Well, he's gone; was probably stolen. That is unfortunate; however you
may not have been to blame."

Luckily for Caesar the letter which he brought was considered
satisfactory, and this palliated his fault in losing the horse.

The country was so uneven that the two outlaws did not observe that they
were followed, until they came to the entrance of the cave. Then, before
opening the door, John looked round and caught sight of Fred and Otto
eying them from a little distance.

He instantly took alarm.

"Look," he said, "we are followed. Look behind you!"

His brother turned and came to the same conclusion.

"Caesar," said Roderick, "did you ever see those men before?"

"No, massa."

"They must have followed you from Oreville. Hello, you two!" he added
striding towards the miners. "What do you want here?"

Fred and Otto had accomplished their object in ascertaining the place
where Rodney was confined, and no longer cared for concealment.

"None of your business!" retorted Fred independently. "The place is as
free to us as to you."

"Are you spies?"

"I don't intend to answer any of your questions."

"Clear out of here!" commanded Roderick in a tone of authority.

"Suppose we don't?"

Roderick was a man of quick temper, and had never been in the habit of
curbing it. He was provoked by the independent tone of the speaker, and
without pausing to think of the imprudence of his actions, he raised his
rifle and pointing at Fred shot him in the left arm.

The two miners were both armed, and were not slow in accepting the
challenge. Simultaneously they raised their rifles and fired at the two
men. The result was that both fell seriously wounded and Caesar set up a
howl of dismay, not so much for his masters as from alarm for himself.

Fred and Otto came forward, and stood looking down upon the outlaws, who
were in the agonies of death.

"It was our lives or theirs," said Fred coolly, for he had been long
enough in Montana to become used to scenes of bloodshed.

"Yes," answered Otto. "I think these two men are the notorious Dixon
brothers who are credited with a large number of murders. The country
will be well rid of them."

Roderick turned his glazing eyes upon the tall miner. "I wish I had
killed you," he muttered.

"No doubt you do. It wouldn't have been your first murder."

"Don't kill me, massa!" pleaded Caesar in tones of piteous entreaty.

"I don't know," answered Fred. "That depends on yourself. If you obey us
strictly we will spare you."

"Try me, massa!"

"You black hound!" said Roderick hoarsely. "If I were not disabled I'd
kill you myself."

Here was a new danger for poor Caesar, for he knew Roderick's fierce
temper.

"Don't let him kill me!" he exclaimed, affrighted.

"He shall do you no harm. Will you obey me?"

"Tell me what you want, massa."

"Is the boy these men captured inside?"

"Yes, massa."

"Open the cave, then. We want him."

"Don't do it," said Roderick, but Caesar saw at a glance that his old
master, of whom he stood in wholesome fear, was unable to harm him, and
he proceeded to unlock the door.

"Go and call the boy!" said Fred.

Caesar disappeared within the cavern, and soon emerged with Rodney
following him.

"Are you unhurt?" asked Fred anxiously.

"Yes, and overjoyed to see you. How came you here?"

"We followed the nigger from Oreville."

What happened afterwards Rodney did not need to inquire, for the two
outstretched figures, stiffening in death, revealed it to him.

"They are the Dixon brothers, are they not?" asked Fred, turning to
Caesar.

"Yes, massa."

"Then we are entitled to a thousand dollars each for their capture. I
have never before shed blood, but I don't regret ending the career of
these scoundrels."

Half an hour later the two outlaws were dead and Rodney and his friends
were on their way back to Oreville.



CHAPTER XXXVI.


THE RODNEY MINE.


Rodney was received by Jefferson Pettigrew with open arms.

"Welcome home, boy!" he said. "I was very much worried about you."

"I was rather uneasy about myself," returned Rodney.

"Well, it's all over, and all's well that ends well. You are free and
there has been no money paid out. Fred and Otto have done a good thing
in ridding the world of the notorious Dixon brothers. They will be
well paid, for I understand there is a standing reward of one thousand
dollars for each of them dead or alive. I don't know but you ought
to have a share of this, for it was through you that the outlaws were
trapped."

"No, Mr. Pettigrew, they are welcome to the reward. If I am not mistaken
I shall make a good deal more out of it than they."

"What do you mean?"

Upon this Rodney told the story of what he had seen in the cavern.

"When I said I, I meant we, Mr. Pettigrew. I think if the gold there is
as plentiful as I think it is we shall do well to commence working it."

"It is yours, Rodney, by right of first discovery."

"I prefer that you should share it with me."

"We will go over tomorrow and make an examination. Was there any one
else who seemed to have a claim to the cave except the Dixons?"

"No. The negro, Caesar, will still be there, perhaps."

"We can easily get rid of him."

The next day the two friends went over to the cavern. Caesar was still
there, but he had an unsettled, restless look, and seemed undecided what
to do.

"What are you going to do, Caesar?" asked Pettigrew. "Are you going to
stay here?"

"I don't know, massa. I don't want to lib here. I'm afraid I'll see the
ghostes of my old massas. But I haven't got no money."

"If you had money where would you go?"

"I'd go to Chicago. I used to be a whitewasher, and I reckon I'd get
work at my old trade."

"That's where you are sensible, Caesar. This is no place for you. Now
I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll give you a hundred dollars, and you can
go where you like. But I shall want you to go away at once."

"I'll go right off, massa," said Caesar, overjoyed. "I don't want to
come here no more."

"Have you got anything belonging to you in the cave?"

"No, massa, only a little kit of clothes."

"Take them and go."

In fifteen minutes Caesar had bidden farewell to his home, and Rodney
and Jefferson were left in sole possession of the cavern.

"Now, Mr. Pettigrew, come and let me show you what I saw. I hope I have
made no mistake."

Rodney led the way to the narrow passage already described. By the light
of a lantern Mr. Pettigrew examined the walls. For five minutes not a
word was said.

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Rodney anxiously.

"Only this: that you have hit upon the richest gold deposits in Montana.
Here is a mining prospect that will make us both rich."
