"What has happened to the old Snow Queen, Marilla?"

"Oh, I knew you'd feel bad over that," said Marilla. "I felt bad myself.
That tree was there ever since I was a young girl. It blew down in the
big gale we had in March. It was rotten at the core."

"I'll miss it so," grieved Anne. "The porch gable doesn't seem the same
room without it. I'll never look from its window again without a sense
of loss. And oh, I never came home to Green Gables before that Diana
wasn't here to welcome me."

"Diana has something else to think of just now," said Mrs. Lynde
significantly.

"Well, tell me all the Avonlea news," said Anne, sitting down on the
porch steps, where the evening sunshine fell over her hair in a fine
golden rain.

"There isn't much news except what we've wrote you," said Mrs. Lynde. "I
suppose you haven't heard that Simon Fletcher broke his leg last week.
It's a great thing for his family. They're getting a hundred things done
that they've always wanted to do but couldn't as long as he was about,
the old crank."

"He came of an aggravating family," remarked Marilla.

"Aggravating? Well, rather! His mother used to get up in prayer-meeting
and tell all her children's shortcomings and ask prayers for them.
'Course it made them mad, and worse than ever."

"You haven't told Anne the news about Jane," suggested Marilla.

"Oh, Jane," sniffed Mrs. Lynde. "Well," she conceded grudgingly, "Jane
Andrews is home from the West--came last week--and she's going to be
married to a Winnipeg millionaire. You may be sure Mrs. Harmon lost no
time in telling it far and wide."

"Dear old Jane--I'm so glad," said Anne heartily. "She deserves the good
things of life."

"Oh, I ain't saying anything against Jane. She's a nice enough girl. But
she isn't in the millionaire class, and you'll find there's not much to
recommend that man but his money, that's what. Mrs. Harmon says he's an
Englishman who has made money in mines but _I_ believe he'll turn out to
be a Yankee. He certainly must have money, for he has just showered Jane
with jewelry. Her engagement ring is a diamond cluster so big that it
looks like a plaster on Jane's fat paw."

Mrs. Lynde could not keep some bitterness out of her tone. Here was
Jane Andrews, that plain little plodder, engaged to a millionaire, while
Anne, it seemed, was not yet bespoken by any one, rich or poor. And Mrs.
Harmon Andrews did brag insufferably.

"What has Gilbert Blythe been doing to at college?" asked Marilla. "I
saw him when he came home last week, and he is so pale and thin I hardly
knew him."

"He studied very hard last winter," said Anne. "You know he took High
Honors in Classics and the Cooper Prize. It hasn't been taken for five
years! So I think he's rather run down. We're all a little tired."

"Anyhow, you're a B.A. and Jane Andrews isn't and never will be," said
Mrs. Lynde, with gloomy satisfaction.

A few evenings later Anne went down to see Jane, but the latter was
away in Charlottetown--"getting sewing done," Mrs. Harmon informed Anne
proudly. "Of course an Avonlea dressmaker wouldn't do for Jane under the
circumstances."

"I've heard something very nice about Jane," said Anne.

"Yes, Jane has done pretty well, even if she isn't a B.A.," said Mrs.
Harmon, with a slight toss of her head. "Mr. Inglis is worth millions,
and they're going to Europe on their wedding tour. When they come back
they'll live in a perfect mansion of marble in Winnipeg. Jane has only
one trouble--she can cook so well and her husband won't let her cook. He
is so rich he hires his cooking done. They're going to keep a cook and
two other maids and a coachman and a man-of-all-work. But what about
YOU, Anne? I don't hear anything of your being married, after all your
college-going."

"Oh," laughed Anne, "I am going to be an old maid. I really can't find
any one to suit me." It was rather wicked of her. She deliberately meant
to remind Mrs. Andrews that if she became an old maid it was not because
she had not had at least one chance of marriage. But Mrs. Harmon took
swift revenge.

"Well, the over-particular girls generally get left, I notice. And
what's this I hear about Gilbert Blythe being engaged to a Miss Stuart?
Charlie Sloane tells me she is perfectly beautiful. Is it true?"

"I don't know if it is true that he is engaged to Miss Stuart," replied
Anne, with Spartan composure, "but it is certainly true that she is very
lovely."

"I once thought you and Gilbert would have made a match of it," said
Mrs. Harmon. "If you don't take care, Anne, all of your beaux will slip
through your fingers."

Anne decided not to continue her duel with Mrs. Harmon. You could not
fence with an antagonist who met rapier thrust with blow of battle axe.

"Since Jane is away," she said, rising haughtily, "I don't think I can
stay longer this morning. I'll come down when she comes home."

"Do," said Mrs. Harmon effusively. "Jane isn't a bit proud. She just
means to associate with her old friends the same as ever. She'll be real
glad to see you."

Jane's millionaire arrived the last of May and carried her off in a
blaze of splendor. Mrs. Lynde was spitefully gratified to find that
Mr. Inglis was every day of forty, and short and thin and grayish. Mrs.
Lynde did not spare him in her enumeration of his shortcomings, you may
be sure.

"It will take all his gold to gild a pill like him, that's what," said
Mrs. Rachel solemnly.

"He looks kind and good-hearted," said Anne loyally, "and I'm sure he
thinks the world of Jane."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Rachel.

Phil Gordon was married the next week and Anne went over to Bolingbroke
to be her bridesmaid. Phil made a dainty fairy of a bride, and the Rev.
Jo was so radiant in his happiness that nobody thought him plain.

"We're going for a lovers' saunter through the land of Evangeline," said
Phil, "and then we'll settle down on Patterson Street. Mother thinks
it is terrible--she thinks Jo might at least take a church in a decent
place. But the wilderness of the Patterson slums will blossom like the
rose for me if Jo is there. Oh, Anne, I'm so happy my heart aches with
it."

Anne was always glad in the happiness of her friends; but it is
sometimes a little lonely to be surrounded everywhere by a happiness
that is not your own. And it was just the same when she went back to
Avonlea. This time it was Diana who was bathed in the wonderful glory
that comes to a woman when her first-born is laid beside her. Anne
looked at the white young mother with a certain awe that had never
entered into her feelings for Diana before. Could this pale woman with
the rapture in her eyes be the little black-curled, rosy-cheeked Diana
she had played with in vanished schooldays? It gave her a queer desolate
feeling that she herself somehow belonged only in those past years and
had no business in the present at all.

"Isn't he perfectly beautiful?" said Diana proudly.

The little fat fellow was absurdly like Fred--just as round, just as
red. Anne really could not say conscientiously that she thought him
beautiful, but she vowed sincerely that he was sweet and kissable and
altogether delightful.

"Before he came I wanted a girl, so that I could call her ANNE," said
Diana. "But now that little Fred is here I wouldn't exchange him for a
million girls. He just COULDN'T have been anything but his own precious
self."

"'Every little baby is the sweetest and the best,'" quoted Mrs. Allan
gaily. "If little Anne HAD come you'd have felt just the same about
her."

Mrs. Allan was visiting in Avonlea, for the first time since leaving it.
She was as gay and sweet and sympathetic as ever. Her old girl friends
had welcomed her back rapturously. The reigning minister's wife was an
estimable lady, but she was not exactly a kindred spirit.

"I can hardly wait till he gets old enough to talk," sighed Diana. "I
just long to hear him say 'mother.' And oh, I'm determined that his
first memory of me shall be a nice one. The first memory I have of
my mother is of her slapping me for something I had done. I am sure I
deserved it, and mother was always a good mother and I love her dearly.
But I do wish my first memory of her was nicer."

"I have just one memory of my mother and it is the sweetest of all
my memories," said Mrs. Allan. "I was five years old, and I had been
allowed to go to school one day with my two older sisters. When school
came out my sisters went home in different groups, each supposing I was
with the other. Instead I had run off with a little girl I had played
with at recess. We went to her home, which was near the school, and
began making mud pies. We were having a glorious time when my older
sister arrived, breathless and angry.

"'You naughty girl" she cried, snatching my reluctant hand and dragging
me along with her. 'Come home this minute. Oh, you're going to catch it!
Mother is awful cross. She is going to give you a good whipping.'

"I had never been whipped. Dread and terror filled my poor little heart.
I have never been so miserable in my life as I was on that walk home. I
had not meant to be naughty. Phemy Cameron had asked me to go home with
her and I had not known it was wrong to go. And now I was to be whipped
for it. When we got home my sister dragged me into the kitchen where
mother was sitting by the fire in the twilight. My poor wee legs were
trembling so that I could hardly stand. And mother--mother just took me
up in her arms, without one word of rebuke or harshness, kissed me
and held me close to her heart. 'I was so frightened you were lost,
darling,' she said tenderly. I could see the love shining in her eyes as
she looked down on me. She never scolded or reproached me for what I had
done--only told me I must never go away again without asking permission.
She died very soon afterwards. That is the only memory I have of her.
Isn't it a beautiful one?"

Anne felt lonelier than ever as she walked home, going by way of the
Birch Path and Willowmere. She had not walked that way for many moons.
It was a darkly-purple bloomy night. The air was heavy with blossom
fragrance--almost too heavy. The cloyed senses recoiled from it as
from an overfull cup. The birches of the path had grown from the fairy
saplings of old to big trees. Everything had changed. Anne felt that she
would be glad when the summer was over and she was away at work again.
Perhaps life would not seem so empty then.

     "'I've tried the world--it wears no more
     The coloring of romance it wore,'"

sighed Anne--and was straightway much comforted by the romance in the
idea of the world being denuded of romance!




Chapter XL

A Book of Revelation


The Irvings came back to Echo Lodge for the summer, and Anne spent
a happy three weeks there in July. Miss Lavendar had not changed;
Charlotta the Fourth was a very grown-up young lady now, but still
adored Anne sincerely.

"When all's said and done, Miss Shirley, ma'am, I haven't seen any one
in Boston that's equal to you," she said frankly.

Paul was almost grown up, too. He was sixteen, his chestnut curls had
given place to close-cropped brown locks, and he was more interested
in football than fairies. But the bond between him and his old teacher
still held. Kindred spirits alone do not change with changing years.

It was a wet, bleak, cruel evening in July when Anne came back to Green
Gables. One of the fierce summer storms which sometimes sweep over the
gulf was ravaging the sea. As Anne came in the first raindrops dashed
against the panes.

"Was that Paul who brought you home?" asked Marilla. "Why didn't you
make him stay all night. It's going to be a wild evening."

"He'll reach Echo Lodge before the rain gets very heavy, I think.
Anyway, he wanted to go back tonight. Well, I've had a splendid visit,
but I'm glad to see you dear folks again. 'East, west, hame's best.'
Davy, have you been growing again lately?"

"I've growed a whole inch since you left," said Davy proudly. "I'm as
tall as Milty Boulter now. Ain't I glad. He'll have to stop crowing
about being bigger. Say, Anne, did you know that Gilbert Blythe is
dying?" Anne stood quite silent and motionless, looking at Davy. Her
face had gone so white that Marilla thought she was going to faint.

"Davy, hold your tongue," said Mrs. Rachel angrily. "Anne, don't
look like that--DON'T LOOK LIKE THAT! We didn't mean to tell you so
suddenly."

"Is--it--true?" asked Anne in a voice that was not hers.

"Gilbert is very ill," said Mrs. Lynde gravely. "He took down with
typhoid fever just after you left for Echo Lodge. Did you never hear of
it?"

"No," said that unknown voice.

"It was a very bad case from the start. The doctor said he'd been
terribly run down. They've a trained nurse and everything's been done.
DON'T look like that, Anne. While there's life there's hope."

"Mr. Harrison was here this evening and he said they had no hope of
him," reiterated Davy.

Marilla, looking old and worn and tired, got up and marched Davy grimly
out of the kitchen.

"Oh, DON'T look so, dear," said Mrs. Rachel, putting her kind old arms
about the pallid girl. "I haven't given up hope, indeed I haven't. He's
got the Blythe constitution in his favor, that's what."

Anne gently put Mrs. Lynde's arms away from her, walked blindly across
the kitchen, through the hall, up the stairs to her old room. At its
window she knelt down, staring out unseeingly. It was very dark. The
rain was beating down over the shivering fields. The Haunted Woods was
full of the groans of mighty trees wrung in the tempest, and the air
throbbed with the thunderous crash of billows on the distant shore. And
Gilbert was dying!

There is a book of Revelation in every one's life, as there is in the
Bible. Anne read hers that bitter night, as she kept her agonized vigil
through the hours of storm and darkness. She loved Gilbert--had always
loved him! She knew that now. She knew that she could no more cast him
out of her life without agony than she could have cut off her right hand
and cast it from her. And the knowledge had come too late--too late even
for the bitter solace of being with him at the last. If she had not been
so blind--so foolish--she would have had the right to go to him now. But
he would never know that she loved him--he would go away from this
life thinking that she did not care. Oh, the black years of emptiness
stretching before her! She could not live through them--she could not!
She cowered down by her window and wished, for the first time in her
gay young life, that she could die, too. If Gilbert went away from her,
without one word or sign or message, she could not live. Nothing was of
any value without him. She belonged to him and he to her. In her hour
of supreme agony she had no doubt of that. He did not love Christine
Stuart--never had loved Christine Stuart. Oh, what a fool she had been
not to realize what the bond was that had held her to Gilbert--to think
that the flattered fancy she had felt for Roy Gardner had been love. And
now she must pay for her folly as for a crime.
