ships moored in the river.

The lines of men passing buckets had long since broken up, it being
too evident that their efforts were not of the slightest avail. The
wind had, in the last two hours, rapidly increased in strength, and
was carrying the burning embers far and wide.

Cyril and his companions had, after satisfying their first curiosity,
set to work to assist the fugitives, by aiding them to carry down
their goods to the waterside. Cyril was now between eighteen and
nineteen, and had grown into a powerful, young fellow, having, since
he recovered from the Plague, grown fast and widened out greatly. He
was able to shoulder heavy trunks, and to carry them down without
difficulty.

By six o'clock, however, all were exhausted by their labours, and
Captain Dave's proposal, that they should go back and get breakfast
and have a wash, was at once agreed to.

At this time the greater part of Fish Street was in flames, the
Church of St. Magnus had fallen, and the flames had spread to many of
the streets and alleys running west. The houses on the Bridge were
blazing.

"Well, father, what is the news?" Nellie exclaimed, as they entered.
"What have you been doing? You are all blackened, like the men who
carry out the coals from the ships. I never saw such figures."

"We have been helping people to carry their goods down to the water,
Nellie. The news is bad. The fire is a terrible one."

"That we can see, father. Mother and I were at the window for hours
after you left, and the whole sky seemed ablaze. Do you think that
there is any danger of its coming here?"

"The wind is taking the flames the other way, Nellie, but in spite of
that I think that there is danger. The heat is so great that the
houses catch on this side, and we saw, as we came back, that it had
travelled eastwards. Truly, I believe that if the wind keeps on as it
is at present, the whole City will be destroyed. However, we will
have a wash first and then some breakfast, of which we are sorely in
need. Then we can talk over what had best be done."

Little was said during breakfast. The apprentices had already been
out, and so excited were they at the scenes they had witnessed that
they had difficulty in preserving their usual quiet and submissive
demeanour. Captain Dave was wearied with his unwonted exertions. Mrs.
Dowsett and Nellie both looked pale and anxious, and Cyril and John
Wilkes were oppressed by the terrible scene of destruction and the
widespread misery they had witnessed.

When breakfast was over, Captain Dave ordered the apprentices on no
account to leave the premises. They were to put up the shutters at
once, and then to await orders.

"What do you think we had better do, Cyril?" he said, when the boys
had left the room.

"I should say that you had certainly better go on board a ship,
Captain Dave. There is time to move now quietly, and to get many
things taken on board, but if there were a swift change of wind the
flames would come down so suddenly that you would have no time to
save anything. Do you know of a captain who would receive you?"

"Certainly; I know of half a dozen."

"Then the first thing is to secure a boat before they are all taken
up."

"I will go down to the stairs at once."

"Then I should say, John, you had better go off with Captain Dave,
and, as soon as he has arranged with one of the captains, come back
to shore. Let the waterman lie off in the stream, for if the flames
come this way there will be a rush for boats, and people will not
stop to ask to whom they belong. It will be better still to take one
of the apprentices with you, leave him at the stairs till you return,
and then tie up to a ship till we hail him."

"That will be the best plan," Captain Dave said. "Now, wife, you and
Nellie and the maid had best set to work at once packing up all your
best clothes and such other things as you may think most valuable. We
shall have time, I hope, to make many trips."

"While you are away, I will go along the street and see whether the
fire is making any way in this direction," Cyril said. "Of course if
it's coming slowly you will have time to take away a great many
things. And we may even hope that it may not come here at all."

Taking one of the apprentices, Captain Dave and John at once started
for the waterside, while Cyril made his way westward.

Already, people were bringing down their goods from most of the
houses. Some acted as if they believed that if they took the goods
out of the houses they would be safe, and great piles of articles of
all kinds almost blocked the road. Weeping women and frightened
children sat on these piles as if to guard them. Some stood at their
doors wringing their hands helplessly; others were already starting
eastward laden with bundles and boxes, occasionally looking round as
if to bid farewell to their homes. Many of the men seemed even more
confused and frightened than the women, running hither and thither
without purpose, shouting, gesticulating, and seeming almost
distraught with fear and grief.

Cyril had not gone far when he saw that the houses on both sides of
the street, at the further end, were already in flames. He was
obliged to advance with great caution, for many people were
recklessly throwing goods of all kinds from the windows, regardless
of whom they might fall upon, and without thought of how they were to
be carried away. He went on until close to the fire, and stood for a
time watching. The noise was bewildering. Mingled with the roar of
the flames, the crackling of woodwork, and the heavy crashes that
told of the fall of roofs or walls, was the clang of the alarm-bells,
shouts, cries, and screams. The fire spread steadily, but with none
of the rapidity with which he had seen it fly along from house to
house on the other side of the conflagration. The houses, however,
were largely composed of wood. The balconies generally caught first,
and the fire crept along under the roofs, and sometimes a shower of
tiles, and a burst of flames, showed that it had advanced there,
while the lower portion of the house was still intact.

"Is it coming, Cyril?" Mrs. Dowsett asked, when he returned.

"It is coming steadily," he said, "and can be stopped by nothing
short of a miracle. Can I help you in any way?"

"No," she said; "we have packed as many things as can possibly be
carried. It is well that your things are all at your lodging, Cyril,
and beyond the risk of this danger."

"It would have mattered little about them," he said. "I could have
replaced them easily enough. That is but a question of money. And
now, in the first place, I will get the trunks and bundles you have
packed downstairs. That will save time."

Assisted by the apprentice and Nellie, Cyril got all the things
downstairs.

"How long have we, do you think?" Nellie asked.

"I should say that in three hours the fire will be here," he said.
"It may be checked a little at the cross lanes; but I fear that three
hours is all we can hope for."

Just as they had finished taking down the trunks, Captain Dave and
John Wilkes arrived.

"I have arranged the affair," the former said. "My old friend, Dick
Watson, will take us in his ship; she lies but a hundred yards from
the stairs. Now, get on your mantle and hood, Nellie, and bring your
mother and maid down."

The three women were soon at the foot of the stairs, and Mrs.
Dowsett's face showed signs of tears; but, though pale, she was quiet
and calm, and the servant, a stout wench, had gained confidence from
her mistress's example. As soon as they were ready, the three men
each shouldered a trunk. The servant and the apprentice carried one
between them. Mrs. Dowsett and her daughter took as many bundles as
they could carry. It was but five minutes' walk down to the stairs.
The boat was lying twenty yards out in the stream, fastened up to a
lighter, with the apprentice and waterman on board. It came at once
alongside, and in five minutes they reached the _Good Venture_. As
soon as the women had ascended the accommodation ladder, some sailors
ran down and helped to carry up the trunks.

"Empty them all out in the cabin," Captain Dave said to his wife; "we
will take them back with us."

As soon as he had seen the ladies into the cabin, Captain Watson
called his son Frank, who was his chief mate, and half a dozen of his
men. These carried the boxes, as fast as they were emptied, down into
the boat.

"We will all go ashore together," he said to Captain Dave. "I was a
fool not to think of it before. We will soon make light work of it."

As soon as they reached the house, some of the sailors were sent off
with the remaining trunks and bundles, while the others carried
upstairs those they had brought, and quickly emptied into them the
remaining contents of the drawers and linen press. So quickly and
steadily did the work go on, that no less than six trips were made to
the _Good Venture_ in the next three hours, and at the end of that
time almost everything portable had been carried away, including
several pieces of valuable furniture, and a large number of objects
brought home by Captain Dave from his various voyages. The last
journey, indeed, was devoted to saving some of the most valuable
contents of the store. Captain Dave, delighted at having saved so
much, would not have thought of taking more, but Captain Watson would
not hear of this.

"There is time for one more trip, old friend," he said, "and there
are many things in your store that are worth more than their weight
in silver. I will take my other two hands this time, and, with the
eight men and our five selves, we shall be able to bring a good
load."

The trunks were therefore this time packed with ship's instruments,
and brass fittings of all kinds, to the full weight that could be
carried. All hands then set to work, and, in a very short time, a
great proportion of the portable goods were carried from the
store-house into an arched cellar beneath it. By the time that they
were ready to start there were but six houses between them and the
fire.

"I wish we had another three hours before us," Captain Watson said.
"It goes to one's heart to leave all this new rope and sail cloth,
good blocks, and other things, to be burnt."

"There have been better things than that burnt to-day, Watson. Few
men have saved as much as I have, thanks to your assistance and that
of these stout sailors of yours. Why, the contents of these twelve
boxes are worth as much as the whole of the goods remaining."

The sailors' loads were so heavy that they had to help each other to
get them upon their shoulders, and the other five were scarcely less
weighted; and, short as was the distance, all had to rest several
times on the way to the stairs, setting their burdens upon
window-sills, or upon boxes scattered in the streets. One of the
ship's boats had, after the first trip, taken the place of the light
wherry, but even this was weighted down to the gunwale when the men
and the goods were all on board. After the first two trips, the
contents of the boxes had been emptied on deck, and by the time the
last arrived the three women had packed away in the empty cabins all
the clothing, linen, and other articles, that had been taken below.
Captain Watson ordered a stiff glass of grog to be given to each of
the sailors, and then went down with the others into the main cabin,
where the steward had already laid the table for a meal, and poured
out five tumblers of wine.

"I have not had so tough a job since I was before the mast," he said.
"What say you, Captain Dave?"

"It has been a hard morning's work, indeed, Watson, and, in truth, I
feel fairly spent. But though weary in body I am cheerful in heart.
It seemed to me at breakfast-time that we should save little beyond
what we stood in, and now I have rescued well-nigh everything
valuable that I have. I should have grieved greatly had I lost all
those mementos that it took me nigh thirty years to gather, and those
pieces of furniture that belonged to my father I would not have lost
for any money. Truly, it has been a noble salvage."

Mrs. Dowsett and Nellie now joined them. They had quite recovered
their spirits, and were delighted at the unexpected rescue of so many
things precious to them, and Captain Watson was overwhelmed by their
thanks for what he had done.

After the meal was over they sat quietly talking for a time, and then
Cyril proposed that they should row up the river and see what
progress the fire was making above the Bridge. Mrs. Dowsett, however,
was too much fatigued by her sleepless night and the troubles and
emotions of the morning to care about going. Captain Dave said that
he was too stiff to do anything but sit quiet and smoke a pipe, and
that he would superintend the getting of their things on deck a
little ship-shape. Nellie embraced the offer eagerly, and young
Watson, who was a well-built and handsome fellow, with a pleasant
face and manner, said that he would go, and would take a couple of
hands to row. The tide had just turned to run up when they set out.
Cyril asked the first mate to steer, and he sat on one side of him
and Nellie on the other.

"You will have to mind your oars, lads," Frank Watson said. "The
river is crowded with boats."

They crossed over to the Southwark side, as it would have been
dangerous to pass under the arches above which the houses were
burning. The flames, however, had not spread right across the bridge,
for the houses were built only over the piers, and the openings at
the arches had checked the flames, and at these points numbers of men
were drawing water in buckets and throwing it over the fronts of the
houses, or passing them, by ropes, to other men on the roofs, which
were kept deluged with water. Hundreds of willing hands were engaged
in the work, for the sight of the tremendous fire on the opposite
bank filled people with terror lest the flames should cross the
bridge and spread to the south side of the river. The warehouses and
wharves on the bank were black with spectators, who looked with
astonishment and awe at the terrible scene of destruction.

It was not until they passed under the bridge that the full extent of
the conflagration was visible. The fire had made its way some
distance along Thames Street, and had spread far up into the City.
Gracechurch Street and Lombard Street were in flames, and indeed the
fire seemed to have extended a long distance further; but the smoke
was so dense, that it was difficult to make out the precise point
that it had reached. The river was a wonderful sight. It was crowded
with boats and lighters, all piled up with goods, while along the
quays from Dowgate to the Temple, crowds of people were engaged in
placing what goods they had saved on board lighters and other craft.
Many of those in the boats seemed altogether helpless and undecided
as to what had best be done, and drifted along with the tide, but the
best part were making either for the marshes at Lambeth or the fields
at Millbank, there to land their goods, the owners of the boats
refusing to keep them long on board, as they desired to return by the
next tide to fetch away other cargoes, being able to obtain any price
they chose to demand for their services.

Among the boats were floating goods and wreckage of all kinds,
charred timber that had fallen from the houses on the bridge, and
from the warehouses by the quays, bales of goods, articles of
furniture, bedding, and other matters. At times, a sudden change of
wind drove a dense smoke across the water, flakes of burning embers
and papers causing great confusion among the boats, and threatening
to set the piles of goods on fire.

At Frank Watson's suggestion, they landed at the Temple, after having
been some two hours on the river. Going up into Fleet Street, they
found a stream of carts and other vehicles proceeding westward, all
piled with furniture and goods, mostly of a valuable kind. The
pavements were well-nigh blocked with people, all journeying in the
same direction, laden with their belongings. With difficulty they
made their way East as far as St. Paul's. The farther end of
Cheapside was already in flames, and they learnt that the fire had
extended as far as Moorfields. It was said that efforts had been made
to pull down houses and so check its progress, but that there was no
order or method, and that no benefit was gained by the work.

After looking on at the scene for some time, they returned to Fleet
Street. Frank Watson went down with Nellie to the boat, while Cyril
went to his lodgings in the Savoy. Here he found his servant
anxiously awaiting him.

"I did not bring the horses this morning, sir," he said. "I heard
that there was a great fire, and went on foot as far as I could get,
but, finding that I could not pass, I thought it best to come back
here and await your return."

"Quite right, Reuben; you could not have got the horses to me unless
you had ridden round the walls and come in at Aldgate, and they would
have been useless had you brought them. The house at which I stayed
last night is already burnt to the ground. You had better stay here
for the present, I think. There is no fear of the fire extending
beyond the City. Should you find that it does so, pack my clothes in
the valises, take the horses down to Sevenoaks, and remain at the
Earl's until you hear from me."

Having arranged this, Cyril went down to the Savoy stairs, where he
found the boat waiting for him, and then they rowed back to London
Bridge, where, the force of the tide being now abated, they were able
to row through and get to the _Good Venture_.

They had but little sleep that night. Gradually the fire worked its
way eastward until it was abreast of them. The roaring and crackling
of the flames was prodigious. Here and there the glare was
diversified by columns of a deeper red glow, showing where
warehouses, filled with pitch, tar, and oil, were in flames. The
heavy crashes of falling buildings were almost incessant.
Occasionally they saw a church tower or steeple, that had stood for a
time black against the glowing sky, become suddenly wreathed in
flames, and, after burning for a time, fall with a crash that could
be plainly heard above the general roar.

"Surely such a fire was never seen before!" Captain Dave said.

"Not since Rome was burnt, I should think," Cyril replied.

"How long was that ago, Cyril? I don't remember hearing about it."

"'Tis fifteen hundred years or so since then, Captain Dave; but the
greater part of the city was destroyed, and Rome was then many times
bigger than London. It burnt for three days."

"Well, this is bad enough," Captain Watson said. "Even here the heat
is well-nigh too great to face. Frank, you had better call the crew
up and get all the sails off the yards. Were a burning flake to fall
on them we might find it difficult to extinguish them. When they have
done that, let the men get all the buckets filled with water and
ranged on the deck; and it will be as well to get a couple of hands
in the boat and let them chuck water against this side. We shall have
all the paint blistered off before morning."

So the night passed. Occasionally they went below for a short time,
but they found it impossible to sleep, and were soon up again, and
felt it a relief when the morning began to break.




CHAPTER XXII

AFTER THE FIRE


Daylight brought little alleviation to the horrors of the scene. The
flames were less vivid, but a dense pall of smoke overhung the sky.
As soon as they had breakfasted, Captain Watson, his son, Captain
Dowsett, Nellie, and Cyril took their places in the boat, and were
rowed up the river. An exclamation burst from them all as they saw
how fast the flames had travelled since the previous evening.

"St. Paul's is on fire!" Cyril exclaimed. "See! there are flames
bursting through its roof. I think, Captain Watson, if you will put
me ashore at the Temple, I will make my way to Whitehall, and report
myself there. I may be of use."

"I will do that," Captain Watson said. "Then I will row back to the
ship again. We must leave a couple of hands on board, in case some of
these burning flakes should set anything alight. We will land with
the rest, and do what we can to help these poor women and children."

"I will stay on board and take command, if you like, Watson," Captain
Dave said. "You ought to have some one there, and I have not
recovered from yesterday's work, and should be of little use ashore."

"Very well, Dowsett. That will certainly be best; but I think it will
be prudent, before we leave, to run out a kedge with forty or fifty
fathoms of cable towards the middle of the stream, and then veer out
the cable on her anchor so as to let her ride thirty fathoms or so
farther out. We left six men sluicing her side and deck, but it
certainly would be prudent to get her out a bit farther. Even here,
the heat is as much as we can stand."

As soon as Cyril had landed, he hurried up into Fleet Street. He had
just reached Temple Bar when he saw a party of horsemen making their
way through the carts. A hearty cheer greeted them from the crowd,
who hoped that the presence of the King--for it was Charles who rode
in front--was a sign that vigorous steps were about to be taken to
check the progress of the flames. Beside the King rode the Duke of
Albemarle, and following were a number of other gentlemen and
officers. Cyril made his way through the crowd to the side of the
Duke's horse.

"Can I be of any possible use, my Lord Duke?" he asked, doffing his
hat.

"Ah, Sir Cyril, it is you, is it? I have not seen you since you
bearded De Ruyter in the _Fan Fan_. Yes, you can be of use. We have
five hundred sailors and dockyard men behind; they have just arrived
from Chatham, and a thousand more have landed below the Bridge to
fight the flames on that side. Keep by me now, and, when we decide
where to set to work, I will put you under the orders of Captain
Warncliffe, who has charge of them."

When they reached the bottom of Fleet Street, the fire was halfway
down Ludgate Hill, and it was decided to begin operations along the
bottom of the Fleet Valley. The dockyard men and sailors were brought
up, and following them were some carts laden with kegs of powder.

"Warncliffe," Lord Albemarle said, as the officer came up at the head
of them, "Sir Cyril Shenstone is anxious to help. You know him by
repute, and you can trust him in any dangerous business. You had
better tell off twenty men under him. You have only to tell him what
you want done, and you can rely upon its being done thoroughly."

The sailors were soon at work along the line of the Fleet Ditch. All
carried axes, and with these they chopped down the principal beams of
the small houses clustered by the Ditch, and so weakened them that a
small charge of powder easily brought them down. In many places they
met with fierce opposition from the owners, who, still clinging to
the faint hope that something might occur to stop the progress of the
fire before it reached their abodes, raised vain protestations
against the destruction of their houses. All day the men worked
unceasingly, but in vain. Driven by the fierce wind, the flames swept
down the opposite slope, leapt over the space strewn with rubbish and
beams, and began to climb Fleet Street and Holborn Hill and the dense
mass of houses between them.

The fight was renewed higher up. Beer and bread and cheese were
obtained from the taverns, and served out to the workmen, and these
kept at their task all night. Towards morning the wind had fallen
somewhat. The open spaces of the Temple favoured the defenders; the
houses to east of it were blown up, and, late in the afternoon, the
progress of the flames at this spot was checked. As soon as it was
felt that there was no longer any fear of its further advance here,
the exhausted men, who had, for twenty-four hours, laboured, half
suffocated by the blinding smoke and by the dust made by their own
work, threw themselves down on the grass of the Temple Gardens and
slept. At midnight they were roused by their officers, and proceeded
to assist their comrades, who had been battling with the flames on
the other side of Fleet Street. They found that these too had been
successful; the flames had swept up to Fetter Lane, but the houses on
the west side had been demolished, and although, at one or two
points, the fallen beams caught fire, they were speedily
extinguished. Halfway up Fetter Lane the houses stood on both sides
uninjured, for a large open space round St. Andrew's, Holborn, had
aided the defenders in their efforts to check the flames. North of
Holborn the fire had spread but little, and that only among the
poorer houses in Fleet Valley.

Ascending the hill, they found that, while the flames had overleapt
the City wall from Ludgate to Newgate in its progress west, the wall
had proved an effective barrier from the sharp corner behind
Christchurch up to Aldersgate and thence up to Cripplegate, which was
the farthest limit reached by the fire to the north. To the east, the
City had fared better. By the river, indeed, the destruction was
complete as far as the Tower. Mark Lane, however, stood, and north of
this the line of destruction swept westward to Leaden Hall, a massive
structure at the entrance to the street that took its name from it,
and proved a bulwark against the flames. From this point, the line of
devastated ground swept round by the eastern end of Throgmorton
Street to the northern end of Basinghall Street.

Cyril remained with the sailors for two days longer, during which
time they were kept at work beating out the embers of the fire. In
this they were aided by a heavy fall of rain, which put an end to all
fear of the flames springing up again.

