Dick, Warner and Pennington, before they lay down in their blankets,
listened to the faint reports of rifles. They could see little owing
to the deep woods in which they lay, but the sound of the shots came
clearly.

"A part of our army is to cross the fords of Stone River in the morning
by daylight or before," said Warner, "and we're to surprise the enemy
and rush him. I wonder if we'll do it."

"We will not," said Pennington with emphasis. "We may beat the enemy,
but we will not surprise him. We never do. Why should we surprise him?
He is here in his own country. If the whole Southern army were sound
asleep, a thousand of the natives would wake up their generals and tell
them that the Yankee army was advancing."

"Their sentinels are watching, anyhow," said Dick, "but I imagine that
we'd gain something if the first rush was ours and not theirs."

"We'll hope for the best," said Warner, "I wonder whose time this will
be to get wounded. It was mine at Antietam, yours, Dick, at Perryville,
and only you are left Pennington, so it's bound to be you."

"No, it won't be me," said Pennington stoutly. "I've been wounded in two
or three battles already, not bad wounds, just scratches and bruises,
but as there were so many of 'em you can lump 'em together, and make one
big wound. That lets me out."

The Winchester regiment lay in the very thickest of the forest and in
order not to indicate to the enemy their precise position no fires were
lighted. The earth was still soaked deep with the heavy rains and their
feet sank at every step. But they did not make many steps. They had
learned enough to lie quiet, seek what rest and sleep they could find,
and await the dawn.




CHAPTER XV. STONE RIVER


Dick awoke at sunrise of the last day of the year, and Warner and
Pennington were up a moment later. There was no fog. The sun hung a low,
red ball in the steel blue sky of winter. No fires had been lighted,
cold food being served.

He heard far off to right a steady tattoo like the rapid beat of many
small drums. A quiver ran through the lads who were now gathering in the
wood and at its edge. But Dick knew that the fire was distant. The other
wing had opened the battle, and it might be a long time before their own
division was drawn into the conflict.

He stood there as the sound grew louder, a continuous crash of rifles,
accompanied by the heavy boom of cannon, and far off he saw a great
cloud of smoke gathering over the forest. But no shouting reached his
ears, nor could he see the men in combat. Colonel Winchester, who was
standing beside him, shrugged his shoulders.

"They're engaged heavily, or they will be very soon," he said.

"And it looks as if we'd have to wait," said Dick.

"Things point that way. The general thinks so, too. It seems that Bragg
has moved his forces in the night, and that the portion of the enemy in
front of us is some distance off."

Dick soon confided this news to Warner and Pennington, who looked
discontented.

"If we've got to fight, I'd rather do it now and get it over," said
Pennington. "If I'm going to be killed the difference between morning
and afternoon won't matter, but if I'm not going to be killed it'll be
worth a lot to get this weight off my mind."

"And if we're far away from the enemy it's easy enough for us to go up
close to him," said Warner. "I take it that we're not here to keep out
of his way, and, if our brethren are pounding now, oughtn't we to go in
and help them pound? Remember how we divided our strength at Antietam."

Dick shrugged his shoulders. His feelings were too bitter for him to
make a reply save to say: "I don't know anything about it."

Meanwhile the distant combat roared and deepened. It was obvious that
a great battle was going on, but the division lay quiet obeying its
orders. The sun rose higher in the cold, steely blue heavens and then
Dick, who was watching a forest opposite them, uttered a loud cry. He
had seen many bayonets flashing among the leafless trees.

The cry was taken up by others who saw also, and suddenly a long
Southern line, less than half a mile away, emerged into the open and
advanced upon them in silence, but with resolution, a bristling and
terrific front of steel. After all their watching and waiting the
Northern division had been surprised. Many of the officers and soldiers,
too, were in tents that had been set against the cold and damp. The
horses that drew the artillery were being taken to water.

It was an awful moment and Dick's heart missed more than one beat, but
in that crisis the American, often impatient of discipline, showed his
power of initiative and his resolute courage. While that bristling
front of steel came on the soldiers formed themselves into line without
waiting for the commands of the officers. The artillerymen rushed to
their guns.

"Kneel, men! Kneel!" shouted Colonel Winchester to his own regiment. He
and all his officers were on foot, their horses having been left in the
rear the night before.

His men threw themselves down at his command, and, all along the
Northern line formed so hastily, the rifles began to crackle, sending
forth a sheet of fire and bullets.

The Northern cannon, handled as always with skill and courage, were
at work now, too, and their shells and shot lashed the Southern ranks
through and through. But Dick saw no pause in the advance of the men in
gray. They did not even falter. Without a particle of shelter they came
on through the rain of death, their ranks closing up over the slain,
their front line always presenting that bristling line of steel.

It seemed to Dick now that the points of the bayonets shone almost in
his face, gleaming through the smoke that hung between them and the foe,
a gap that continually grew narrower as the Southern line never ceased
to come.

"Stand firm, lads; steady for God's sake, steady!" shouted Colonel
Winchester, and then Dick heard no single voice, because the roar of the
battle broke over them like the sudden rush of a storm. He was conscious
only that the tips of the bayonets had reached them, and behind them he
saw the eyes in the brown faces gleaming.

Then he did not even see the brown faces, because there was such a storm
of fire and smoke pouring forth bullets like hail, and the tumult
of shouts and of the crash of cannon and rifles was so awful that it
blended into one general sound like the roaring of the infernal regions.

Dick felt himself borne back. It seemed to him that their line had
cracked like a bow bent too much. It was not anything that he saw but a
sense of the general result, and he was right. The Northern line which
had not found time to form properly, was hurled back. Neither cannon nor
rifles could stop the three Southern brigades which were charging them.

The South struck like a tornado, and despite a resistance made with all
the fury and rage of despair, the Northern division was driven from its
position, and its line broken in many places. A Northern general was
taken prisoner. The guns which could not be carried, because the horses
were gone, were taken by the triumphant Southerners, and over all the
roar and tumult of the frightful battle Dick heard that piercing and
triumphant rebel yell, poured forth by thousands of throats and swelling
over everything, in a fierce, dominant note.

Dick bumped against Warner as they were borne back in the smoke. He saw
the Vermonter's blackened lips move, and his own moved in the same way,
but neither heard what the other said. Nevertheless Dick read the words
in his comrade's eyes, and they said:

"Surprised again, Dick! Good God, surprised!"

Yet the young troops fought with a courage worthy of the toughest
veterans. They gave ground, because the rush against them was
overpowering, but they maintained a terrible fire which strewed the
earth in front of them with dead and wounded.

"Behind those trees! Behind those trees!" suddenly called Colonel
Winchester as they continued their sullen and fighting retreat, and he
and the remnants of his regiment darted into a little wood just in time.
There was a sudden rush of hoofbeats on their flank, and a cloud of
Southern cavalry swept down, shearing away the entire side of the
Northern division as if it had been cleft with the slash of a mighty
sword. Besides the fallen a thousand prisoners and seven cannon fell
into the hands of the cavalrymen, who rushed on in search of fresh
triumphs.

Dick shuddered with horror, but he saw that all his own immediate
friends were safe in the wood. A swarm of fugitives poured in after
them, and then came colonels and generals making desperate efforts to
reform their line of battle. But the Southern brigades gave them no
chance. Their leaders continually urged on the pursuit. The broken
regiments fell back still loading and firing, and they would soon be on
the banks of the creek again.

After a time that seemed almost infinite, Dick heard the roar of shells
over their heads. In their retreat the regiments had come upon another
Northern division which opposed a strong resistance to the Southern
advance. Winchester's men welcomed their friends joyfully. But the fresh
troops could not stop the advance. The fire of the Southern cannon and
rifles was so deadly that nearly all the Northern artillerymen were
killed around their guns.

The North again gave ground, seeking point after point for fresh
resistance. They rallied strongly around a building used as a hospital,
and filled it with riflemen. But they were driven from that, too,
although they inflicted terrible losses on their enemy.

"We've got to stop this backward slide somewhere," gasped Pennington.

"Yes, but where?" cried Dick.

Whether Warner made any reply he did not know, because he lost him then
in the flame and the smoke. An instant or two later the charging swarms
of infantry and cavalry drove them into one of the woods of red cedars,
where they lay shattered and gasping. The smoke lifted a little, and
Dick saw the field which he already regarded as lost. Then there was a
renewed burst of firing and cheering, as a regiment of veteran regulars
galloped into the open space and drove off the Southern cavalry which
was just about to seize the ammunition wagons and more cannon.

Encouraged by the charge of the regulars, the men in the cedar wood
rose and began to reform for battle. Now chance, or rather watchfulness,
interposed to save Dick and his comrades from destruction. Rosecrans, at
another point, confident that McCook could hold out against all attacks,
listened with amazement to the roar of battle coming nearer and nearer.
His officers called his attention to the fact that save at the opening
there was no cannon fire. All that approaching crash was made by rifles.
They judged from it that their cannon had been taken, but they did not
know that the rush of the Southern troops had been so fast that their
own batteries were not able to keep up.

Rosecrans read the signs with them and his alarm was great and
justified. Then a dispatch came from McCook telling him that his right
wing was routed and he took an instant resolve.

Many regiments were marching to another point in the line, and the
commander at once changed their course. He meant to save his right wing,
but at the same moment a tremendous attack was begun upon the center of
his army. He struck his horse smartly and galloped straight toward the
rolling flame.

Dick and his friends, driven from the defense around the hospital, lost
touch with the rest of the troops. Colonel Winchester held together what
was left of his regiment, and presently they found themselves in the
woods with the troops of the young officer, Sheridan, who had saved the
battle of Perryville. Here they took their stand, and when Dick saw
the quick and warlike glance of Sheridan that embraced everything he
believed they were not going to retreat.

He heard cheers all around him, men shouting to one another to stand
firm. They refused to take alarm from the fugitives pouring back upon
them, and sent volley after volley into the advancing gray lines. The
artillery, too, handled with splendid skill and daring, poured a storm
along the whole gray front. The combat deepened to an almost incredible
degree. The cannon were compelled to cease firing because the men
were now face to face. Regiments lost half their numbers and more, but
Sheridan still held his ground and the South still attacked.

Dick began to shout with joy. He saw that the indomitable stand of
Sheridan was saving the whole Northern army from rout. The South must
continually turn aside troops to attack Sheridan, and they dared not
advance too far leaving him unbeaten in their rear. Rosecrans in the
center was urging his troops to a great resistance and the battle flamed
high there. It now thundered along the whole front. Nearly every man and
cannon were in action.

Dick was glad that chance had thrown his regiment with Sheridan, when he
saw the splendid resistance made by the young general. Sheridan massed
all his guns at the vital point and backed them up with riflemen.
Nothing broke through his line. Nothing was able to move him.

"He'll have to retreat later on," Colonel Winchester shouted in Dick's
ear, "because our lines are giving way elsewhere, but his courage and
that of his men has saved us from an awful defeat."

The battle in front of Sheridan increased in violence. The Confederates
were continually pouring fresh troops upon him, and it became apparent
that even he, with all his courage and quickness of eye at the vital
moment, could not withstand all day long the fierce attacks that were
being made upon him. The Southern fire from cannon and rifles grew more
terrible. Sheridan had three brigades and the commanders of all three of
them were killed. The Confederate attack had been repulsed three times,
but it was coming again, stronger and fiercer than ever.

Dick, aghast, gazed at Colonel Winchester and somehow through the
thunder of the battle he heard the colonel's reply:

"Yes, we'll have to give up this position, but we have saved so much
time that the army itself is saved. Rosecrans is forming a new line
behind us."

Rosecrans, no genius, but a brave and resolute fighter, had indeed
brought up fresh troops and made a new line. Sheridan, having that
greatest of all gifts of the general, the eye to see amid the terrible
tumult of battle the time to do a thing, and the courage to do it then,
sounded the trumpet. Nearly all his wagons had been captured by the
Southern cavalry, and his ammunition was beginning to fail. Around him
lay two thousand of his best men, dead or wounded. Rosecrans and the
fresh troops were appearing just in time.

Yet the retreat of Sheridan was made with the greatest difficulty. A
part of his troops were cut off and captured. Others drove back the
Confederate flankers with a bayonet charge, and then the remnant
retreated, the new lines opening to let them through. Dick, as he passed
through the gap, saw that he was among countrymen. That is, a Kentucky
regiment, fighting for the Union was standing as a shield to let his
comrades and himself through, and the people of the state were related
so closely that in the flare of the battle he saw among these new men at
least a half dozen faces that he knew.

It was this Kentucky regiment, led by its colonel, Shepherd, that
now formed itself in the very apex of the battle. The remains of the
Winchester regiment, forming behind it, saw a terrible sight. Some of
the regiments crushed earlier in the action had entirely disbanded. The
woods and the bushes were filled with fugitives, soldiers seeking the
rear. Vast clouds of smoke drifted everywhere, the air was filled with
the odors of exploded gunpowder, cannon were piled in inextricable heaps
in the road, and horses, killed by shells or bullets, lay on the guns or
between the wheels.

Dick had never beheld a more terrible sight. Their army was defeated
so far, the dead and the wounded were heaped everywhere, terrified
fugitives were pouring to the rear, and the enemy, wild with triumph,
and shouting his terrible battle yell, was coming on with an onset that
seemed invincible.

Colonel Winchester darted among the fugitives and with stinging words
and the flat of his sword beat many of them back into line. Dick,
Warner, Pennington and other young officers did likewise. More Kentucky
troops bringing artillery came up and joined those who were standing so
sternly. It became obvious to all that they must hold the ground here or
the battle indeed was lost once and for all.

Thomas, the silent and resolute Virginian, had arrived also, and had
joined Rosecrans. Dick observed them both. Rosecrans, tremendously
excited, and reckless of death from the flying shells and bullets,
galloped from point to point, urging on his soldiers, telling them to
die rather than yield. Thomas, cool, and showing no trace of excitement
also directed the troops. Both by their courage and resolution inspired
the men. The beaten became the unbeaten. Dick felt rather than saw the
stiffening of the lines, and the return of a great courage.

The new line of battle was formed directly under the fire of a
victorious and charging enemy. Three batteries were gathered on a height
overlooking a railroad cut, where they could sweep the front of the foe.

Just as they were in battle order Dick saw the faces of the Southerners
coming through the woods, led by Hardee in person. Then he saw, too,
the value of presence of mind and of a courage that would not yield.
The three batteries planted by the Kentuckian, Rousseau, on the railway
embankment suddenly opened a terrible enfilading fire upon the Southern
advance. The Kentucky regiment standing so firmly in the breach also
opened with every rifle firing directly into the ranks of their brother
Kentuckians, who were advancing in the vanguard of the South. Here again
people of the same state and even of the same county fought one another.

The Confederates pursuing a defeated and apparently disorganized enemy
were astounded by such a sudden and fierce fire. One of their generals
