for that way of writing very much. It would be an awful swot to keep it
up--looking out the words and all that.)

To speak in the language of everyday life, our holiday was jolly nearly
up. We had had a ripping time, but it was all but over. We really did
feel sorry--though, of course, it was rather decent to think of getting
back to Father and being able to tell the other chaps about our raft,
and the dam, and the Tower of Mystery, and things like that.

When but a brief time was left to us, Oswald and Dicky met by chance
in an apple-tree. (That sounds like 'consequences', but it is mere
truthfulness.) Dicky said--

'Only four more days.'

Oswald said, 'Yes.'

'There's one thing,' Dickie said, 'that beastly society. We don't want
that swarming all over everything when we get home. We ought to dissolve
it before we leave here.'

The following dialogue now took place:

Oswald--'Right you are. I always said it was piffling rot.'

Dicky--'So did I.'

Oswald--'Let's call a council. But don't forget we've jolly well got to
put our foot down.'

Dicky assented, and the dialogue concluded with apples.

The council, when called, was in but low spirits. This made Oswald's and
Dicky's task easier. When people are sunk in gloomy despair about one
thing, they will agree to almost anything about something else. (Remarks
like this are called philosophic generalizations, Albert's uncle says.)
Oswald began by saying--

'We've tried the society for being good in, and perhaps it's done us
good. But now the time has come for each of us to be good or bad on his
own, without hanging on to the others.'

'The race is run by one and one, But never by two and two,'

the Dentist said.

The others said nothing.

Oswald went on: 'I move that we chuck--I mean dissolve--the Wouldbegoods
Society; its appointed task is done. If it's not well done, that's ITS
fault and not ours.'

Dicky said, 'Hear! hear! I second this prop.'

The unexpected Dentist said, 'I third it. At first I thought it would
help, but afterwards I saw it only made you want to be naughty, just
because you were a Wouldbegood.'

Oswald owns he was surprised. We put it to the vote at once, so as not
to let Denny cool. H. O. and Noel and Alice voted with us, so Daisy and
Dora were what is called a hopeless minority. We tried to cheer their
hopelessness by letting them read the things out of the Golden Deed
book aloud. Noel hid his face in the straw so that we should not see the
faces he made while he made poetry instead of listening, and when the
Wouldbegoods was by vote dissolved for ever he sat up, straws in his
hair, and said--


               THE EPITAPH

     'The Wouldbegoods are dead and gone
     But not the golden deeds they have done
     These will remain upon Glory's page
     To be an example to every age,
     And by this we have got to know
     How to be good upon our ow--N.


N is for Noel, that makes the rhyme and the sense both right. O, W, N,
own; do you see?'

We saw it, and said so, and the gentle poet was satisfied. And the
council broke up. Oswald felt that a weight had been lifted from his
expanding chest, and it is curious that he never felt so inclined to be
good and a model youth as he did then. As he went down the ladder out of
the loft he said--

'There's one thing we ought to do, though, before we go home. We ought
to find Albert's uncle's long-lost grandmother for him.'

Alice's heart beat true and steadfast. She said, 'That's just exactly
what Noel and I were saying this morning. Look out, Oswald, you wretch,
you're kicking chaff into my eyes.' She was going down the ladder just
under me.

Oswald's younger sister's thoughtful remark ended in another council.
But not in the straw loft. We decided to have a quite new place, and
disregarded H. O.'s idea of the dairy and Noel's of the cellars. We had
the new council on the secret staircase, and there we settled exactly
what we ought to do. This is the same thing, if you really wish to be
good, as what you are going to do. It was a very interesting
council, and when it was over Oswald was so pleased to think that the
Wouldbegoods was unrecoverishly dead that he gave Denny and Noel, who
were sitting on the step below him, a good-humoured, playful, gentle,
loving, brotherly shove, and said, 'Get along down, it's tea-time!'

No reader who understands justice and the real rightness of things, and
who is to blame for what, will ever think it could have been Oswald's
fault that the two other boys got along down by rolling over and over
each other, and bursting the door at the bottom of the stairs open by
their revolving bodies. And I should like to know whose fault it was
that Mrs Pettigrew was just on the other side of that door at that very
minute? The door burst open, and the Impetuous bodies of Noel and Denny
rolled out of it into Mrs Pettigrew, and upset her and the tea-tray.
Both revolving boys were soaked with tea and milk, and there were one or
two cups and things smashed. Mrs Pettigrew was knocked over, but none of
her bones were broken. Noel and Denny were going to be sent to bed, but
Oswald said it was all his fault. He really did this to give the others
a chance of doing a refined golden deed by speaking the truth and saying
it was not his fault. But you cannot really count on anyone. They did
not say anything, but only rubbed the lumps on their late-revolving
heads. So it was bed for Oswald, and he felt the injustice hard.

But he sat up in bed and read The Last of the Mohicans, and then he
began to think. When Oswald really thinks he almost always thinks of
something. He thought of something now, and it was miles better than the
idea we had decided on in the secret staircase, of advertising in the
Kentish Mercury and saying if Albert's uncle's long-lost grandmother
would call at the Moat House she might hear of something much to her
advantage.

What Oswald thought of was that if we went to Hazelbridge and asked
Mr B. Munn, Grocer, that drove us home in the cart with the horse that
liked the wrong end of the whip best, he would know who the lady was
in the red hat and red wheels that paid him to drive us home that
Canterbury night. He must have been paid, of course, for even grocers
are not generous enough to drive perfect strangers, and five of
them too, about the country for nothing. Thus we may learn that even
unjustness and sending the wrong people to bed may bear useful fruit,
which ought to be a great comfort to everyone when they are unfairly
treated. Only it most likely won't be. For if Oswald's brothers and
sisters had nobly stood by him as he expected, he would not have had
the solitary reflections that led to the great scheme for finding the
grandmother.

Of course when the others came up to roost they all came and squatted
on Oswald's bed and said how sorry they were. He waived their apologies
with noble dignity, because there wasn't much time, and said he had an
idea that would knock the council's plan into a cocked hat. But he would
not tell them what it was. He made them wait till next morning. This was
not sulks, but kind feeling. He wanted them to have something else to
think of besides the way they hadn't stood by him in the bursting of the
secret staircase door and the tea-tray and the milk.

Next morning Oswald kindly explained, and asked who would volunteer for
a forced march to Hazelbridge. The word volunteer cost the young Oswald
a pang as soon as he had said it, but I hope he can bear pangs with any
man living. 'And mind,' he added, hiding the pang under a general-like
severeness, 'I won't have anyone in the expedition who has anything in
his shoes except his feet.'

This could not have been put more delicately and decently. But Oswald is
often misunderstood. Even Alice said it was unkind to throw the peas up
at Denny. When this little unpleasantness had passed away (it took some
time because Daisy cried, and Dora said, 'There now, Oswald!') there
were seven volunteers, which, with Oswald, made eight, and was, indeed,
all of us. There were no cockle-shells, or tape-sandals, or staves, or
scrips, or anything romantic and pious about the eight persons who set
out for Hazelbridge that morning, more earnestly wishful to be good and
deedful--at least Oswald, I know, was--than ever they had been in the
days of the beastly Wouldbegood Society. It was a fine day. Either it
was fine nearly all last summer, which is how Oswald remembers it, or
else nearly all the interesting things we did came on fine days.

With hearts light and gay, and no peas in anyone's shoes, the walk to
Hazelbridge was perseveringly conducted. We took our lunch with us, and
the dear dogs. Afterwards we wished for a time that we had left one of
them at home. But they did so want to come, all of them, and Hazelbridge
is not nearly as far as Canterbury, really, so even Martha was allowed
to put on her things--I mean her collar--and come with us. She walks
slowly, but we had the day before us so there was no extra hurry.

At Hazelbridge we went into B. Munn's grocer's shop and asked for
ginger-beer to drink. They gave it us, but they seemed surprised at
us wanting to drink it there, and the glass was warm--it had just been
washed. We only did it, really, so as to get into conversation with B.
Munn, grocer, and extract information without rousing suspicion. You
cannot be too careful. However, when we had said it was first-class
ginger-beer, and paid for it, we found it not so easy to extract
anything more from B. Munn, grocer; and there was an anxious silence
while he fiddled about behind the counter among the tinned meats and
sauce bottles, with a fringe of hobnailed boots hanging over his head.

H. O. spoke suddenly. He is like the sort of person who rushes in where
angels fear to tread, as Denny says (say what sort of person that is).
He said--

'I say, you remember driving us home that day. Who paid for the cart?'

Of course B. Munn, grocer, was not such a nincompoop (I like that word,
it means so many people I know) as to say right off. He said--

'I was paid all right, young gentleman. Don't you terrify yourself.'

People in Kent say terrify when they mean worry. So Dora shoved in a
gentle oar. She said--

'We want to know the kind lady's name and address, so that we can write
and thank her for being so jolly that day.'

B. Munn, grocer, muttered something about the lady's address being goods
he was often asked for. Alice said, 'But do tell us. We forgot to ask
her. She's a relation of a second-hand uncle of ours, and I do so want
to thank her properly. And if you've got any extra-strong peppermints at
a penny an ounce, we should like a quarter of a pound.'

This was a master-stroke. While he was weighing out the peppermints his
heart got soft, and just as he was twisting up the corner of the paper
bag, Dora said, 'What lovely fat peppermints! Do tell us.'

And B. Munn's heart was now quite melted, he said--

'It's Miss Ashleigh, and she lives at The Cedars--about a mile down the
Maidstone Road.'

We thanked him, and Alice paid for the peppermints. Oswald was a little
anxious when she ordered such a lot, but she and Noel had got the money
all right, and when we were outside on Hazelbridge Green (a good deal
of it is gravel, really), we stood and looked at each other. Then Dora
said--

'Let's go home and write a beautiful letter and all sign it.'

Oswald looked at the others. Writing is all very well, but it's such a
beastly long time to wait for anything to happen afterwards.

The intelligent Alice divined his thoughts, and the Dentist divined
hers--he is not clever enough yet to divine Oswald's--and the two said
together--

'Why not go and see her?'

'She did say she would like to see us again some day,' Dora replied. So
after we had argued a little about it we went.

And before we had gone a hundred yards down the dusty road Martha began
to make us wish with all our hearts we had not let her come. She began
to limp, just as a pilgrim, who I will not name, did when he had the
split peas in his silly palmering shoes.

So we called a halt and looked at her feet. One of them was quite
swollen and red. Bulldogs almost always have something the matter with
their feet, and it always comes on when least required. They are not the
right breed for emergencies.

There was nothing for it but to take it in turns to carry her. She
is very stout, and you have no idea how heavy she is. A half-hearted
unadventurous person name no names, but Oswald, Alice, Noel, H. O.,
(Dicky, Daisy, and Denny will understand me) said, why not go straight
home and come another day without Martha? But the rest agreed with
Oswald when he said it was only a mile, and perhaps we might get a
lift home with the poor invalid. Martha was very grateful to us for
our kindness. She put her fat white arms round the person's neck who
happened to be carrying her. She is very affectionate, but by holding
her very close to you you can keep her from kissing your face all
the time. As Alice said, 'Bulldogs do give you such large, wet, pink
kisses.'

A mile is a good way when you have to take your turn at carrying Martha.

At last we came to a hedge with a ditch in front of it, and chains
swinging from posts to keep people off the grass and out of the ditch,
and a gate with 'The Cedars' on it in gold letters. All very neat and
tidy, and showing plainly that more than one gardener was kept. There we
stopped. Alice put Martha down, grunting with exhaustedness, and said--

'Look here, Dora and Daisy, I don't believe a bit that it's his
grandmother. I'm sure Dora was right, and it's only his horrid
sweetheart. I feel it in my bones. Now, don't you really think we'd
better chuck it; we're sure to catch it for interfering. We always do.'

'The cross of true love never did come smooth,' said the Dentist. 'We
ought to help him to bear his cross.'

'But if we find her for him, and she's not his grandmother, he'll MARRY
her,' Dicky said in tones of gloominess and despair.

Oswald felt the same, but he said, 'Never mind. We should all hate it,
but perhaps Albert's uncle MIGHT like it. You can never tell. If you
want to do a really unselfish action and no kid, now's your time, my
late Wouldbegoods.'

No one had the face to say right out that they didn't want to be
unselfish.

But it was with sad hearts that the unselfish seekers opened the long
gate and went up the gravel drive between the rhododendrons and other
shrubberies towards the house.

I think I have explained to you before that the eldest son of anybody is
called the representative of the family if his father isn't there. This
was why Oswald now took the lead. When we got to the last turn of the
drive it was settled that the others were to noiselessly ambush in the
rhododendrons, and Oswald was to go on alone and ask at the house for
the grandmother from India--I mean Miss Ashleigh.

So he did, but when he got to the front of the house and saw how neat
the flower-beds were with red geraniums, and the windows all bright and
speckless with muslin blinds and brass rods, and a green parrot in
a cage in the porch, and the doorstep newly whited, lying clean and
untrodden in the sunshine, he stood still and thought of his boots and
how dusty the roads were, and wished he had not gone into the farmyard
after eggs before starting that morning. As he stood there in anxious
