is not one in a thousand boys of your age who would have settled down
to work and made their way without a friend to help them as you have
done; it shows that there is right good stuff in you. There, I am so
long getting under weigh that I shall never get into port if I don't
steer a straight course. Now, my ideas and my wife's come to this: if
you have got no friends you will have to take a lodging somewhere
among strangers, and then it would be one of two things--you would
either stop at home and mope by yourself, or you would go out, and
maybe get into bad company. If I had not come across you I should
have had to employ a clerk, and he would either have lived here with
us or I should have had to pay him enough to keep house for himself.
Now in fact you are a clerk; for though you are only here for six
hours a week--you do all the work there is to do, and no clerk could
do more. Well, we have got an attic upstairs which is not used, and
if you like to come here and live with us, my wife and I will make
you heartily welcome."

"Thank you, indeed," Cyril said warmly. "It is of all things what I
should like; but of course I should wish to pay you for my board. I
can afford to do so if you will employ me for the same hours as at
present."

"No, I would not have that, lad; but if you like we can reckon your
board against what I now pay you. We feed John Wilkes and the two
apprentices, and one mouth extra will make but little difference. I
don't want it to be a matter of obligation, so we will put your board
against the work you do for me. I shall consider that we are making a
good bargain."

"It is your pleasure to say so, sir, but I cannot tell you what a
load your kind offer takes off my mind. The future has seemed very
dark to me."

"Very well. That matter is settled, then. Come upstairs with me and I
will present you to my wife and daughter; they have heard me speak of
you so often that they will be glad to see you. In the first place,
though, I must ask you your name. Since you first signed articles and
entered the crew I have never thought of asking you."

"My name is Cyril, sir--Cyril Shenstone."

His employer nodded and at once led the way upstairs. A motherly
looking woman rose from the seat where she was sitting at work, as
they entered the living-room.

"This is my Prince of Scriveners, Mary, the lad I have often spoken
to you about. His name is Cyril; he has accepted the proposal we
talked over last night, and is going to become one of the crew on
board our ship."

"I am glad to see you," she said to Cyril, holding out her hand to
him. "I have not met you before, but I feel very grateful to you.
Till you came, my husband was bothered nearly out of his wits; he
used to sit here worrying over his books, and writing from the time
the shop closed till the hour for bed, and Nellie and I dared not to
say as much as a word. Now we see no more of his books, and he is
able to go out for a walk in the fields with us as he used to do
before."

"It is very kind of you to say so, Mistress," Cyril said earnestly;
"but it is I, on the contrary, who am deeply grateful to you for the
offer Captain Dave has been good enough to make me. You cannot tell
the pleasure it has given me, for you cannot understand how lonely
and friendless I have been feeling. Believe me, I will strive to give
you as little trouble as possible, and to conform myself in all ways
to your wishes."

At this moment Nellie Dowsett came into the room. She was a pretty
girl some eighteen years of age.

"This is Cyril, your father's assistant, Nellie," her mother said.

"You are welcome, Master Cyril. I have been wanting to see you.
Father has been praising you up to the skies so often that I have had
quite a curiosity to see what you could be like."

"Your father is altogether too good, Mistress Nellie, and makes far
more of my poor ability than it deserves."

"And is he going to live with us, mother?" Nellie asked.

"Yes, child; he has accepted your father's offer."

Nellie clapped her hands.

"That is good," she said. "I shall expect you to escort me out
sometimes, Cyril. Father always wants me to go down to the wharf to
look at the ships or to go into the fields; but I want to go
sometimes to see the fashions, and there is no one to take me, for
John Wilkes always goes off to smoke a pipe with some sailor or
other, and the apprentices are stupid and have nothing to say for
themselves; and besides, one can't walk alongside a boy in an
apprentice cap."

"I shall be very happy to, Mistress, when my work is done, though I
fear that I shall make but a poor escort, for indeed I have had no
practice whatever in the esquiring of dames."

"I am sure you will do very well," Nellie said, nodding approvingly.
"Is it true that you have been in France? Father said he was told
so."

"Yes; I have lived almost all my life in France."

"And do you speak French?"

"Yes; I speak it as well as English."

"It must have been very hard to learn?"

"Not at all. It came to me naturally, just as English did."

"You must not keep him any longer now, Nellie; he has other
appointments to keep, and when he has done that, to go and pack up
his things and see that they are brought here by a porter. He can
answer some more of your questions when he comes here this evening."

Cyril returned to Holborn with a lighter heart than he had felt for a
long time. His preparations for the move took him but a short time,
and two hours later he was installed in a little attic in the
ship-chandler's house. He spent half-an-hour in unpacking his things,
and then heard a stentorian shout from below,--

"Masthead, ahoy! Supper's waiting."

Supposing that this hail was intended for himself, he at once went
downstairs. The table was laid. Mistress Dowsett took her seat at the
head; her husband sat on one side of her, and Nellie on the other.
John Wilkes sat next to his master, and beyond him the elder of the
two apprentices. A seat was left between Nellie and the other
apprentice for Cyril.

"Now our crew is complete, John," Captain Dave said. "We have been
wanting a supercargo badly."

"Ay, ay, Captain Dave, there is no doubt we have been short-handed in
that respect; but things have been more ship-shape lately."

"That is so, John. I can make a shift to keep the vessel on her
course, but when it comes to writing up the log, and keeping the
reckoning, I make but a poor hand at it. It was getting to be as bad
as that voyage of the _Jane_ in the Levant, when the supercargo had
got himself stabbed at Lemnos."

"I mind it, Captain--I mind it well. And what a trouble there was
with the owners when we got back again!"

"Yes, yes," the Captain said; "it was worse work than having a brush
with a Barbary corsair. I shall never forget that day. When I went to
the office to report, the three owners were all in.

"'Well, Captain Dave, back from your voyage?' said the littlest of
the three. 'Made a good voyage, I hope?'

"First-rate, says I, except that the supercargo got killed at Lemnos
by one of them rascally Greeks.

"'Dear, dear,' said another of them--he was a prim, sanctimonious
sort--'Has our brother Jenkins left us?'

"I don't know about his leaving us, says I, but we left him sure
enough in a burying-place there.

"'And how did you manage without him?'

"I made as good a shift as I could, I said. I have sold all the
cargo, and I have brought back a freight of six tons of Turkey figs,
and four hundred boxes of currants. And these two bags hold the
difference.

"'Have you brought the books with you, Captain?'

"Never a book, said I. I have had to navigate the ship and to look
after the crew, and do the best I could at each port. The books are
on board, made out up to the day before the supercargo was killed,
three months ago; but I have never had time to make an entry since.

"They looked at each other like owls for a minute or two, and then
they all began to talk at once. How had I sold the goods? had I
charged the prices mentioned in the invoice? what percentage had I
put on for profit? and a lot of other things. I waited until they
were all out of breath, and then I said I had not bothered about
invoices. I knew pretty well the prices such things cost in England.
I clapped on so much more for the expenses of the voyage and a fair
profit. I could tell them what I had paid for the figs and the
currants, and for some bags of Smyrna sponges I had bought, but as to
the prices I had charged, it was too much to expect that I could
carry them in my head. All I knew was I had paid for the things I had
bought, I had paid all the port dues and other charges, I had
advanced the men one-fourth of their wages each month, and I had
brought them back the balance.

"Such a hubbub you never heard. One would have thought they would
have gone raving mad. The sanctimonious partner was the worst of the
lot. He threatened me with the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and went
on till I thought he would have had a fit.

"Look here, says I, at last, I'll tell you what I will do. You tell
me what the cargo cost you altogether, and put on so much for the
hire of the ship. I will pay you for them and settle up with the
crew, and take the cargo and sell it. That is a fair offer. And I
advise you to keep civil tongues in your heads, or I will knock them
off and take my chance before the Lord Mayor for assault and battery.

"With that I took off my coat and laid it on a bench. I reckon they
saw that I was in earnest, and they just sat as mum as mice. Then the
little man said, in a quieter sort of voice,--

"'You are too hasty, Captain Dowsett. We know you to be an honest man
and a good sailor, and had no suspicion that you would wrong us; but
no merchant in the City of London could hear that his business had
been conducted in such a way as you have carried it through without
for a time losing countenance. Let us talk the matter over reasonably
and quietly.'

"That is just what I am wanting, I said; and if there hasn't been
reason and quiet it is from no fault of mine.

"'Well, please to put your coat on again, Captain, and let us see how
matters stand!'

"Then they took their ink-horns and pens, and, on finding out what I
had paid for the figs and other matters, they reckoned them up; then
they put down what I said was due to the sailors and the mate and
myself; then they got out some books, and for an hour they were busy
reckoning up figures; then they opened the bags and counted up the
gold we had brought home. Well, when they had done, you would hardly
have known them for the same men. First of all, they went through all
their calculations again to be sure they had made no mistake about
them; then they laid down their pens, and the sanctimonious man
mopped the perspiration from his face, and the others smiled at each
other. Then the biggest of the three, who had scarcely spoken before,
said,--

"'Well, Captain Dowsett, I must own that my partners were a little
hasty. The result of our calculations is that the voyage has been a
satisfactory one, I may almost say very satisfactory, and that you
must have disposed of the goods to much advantage. It has been a new
and somewhat extraordinary way of doing business, but I am bound to
say that the result has exceeded our expectations, and we trust that
you will command the _Jane_ for many more voyages.'

"Not for me, says I. You can hand me over the wages due to me, and
you will find the _Jane_ moored in the stream just above the Tower.
You will find her in order and shipshape; but never again do I set my
foot on board her or on any other vessel belonging to men who have
doubted my honesty.

"Nor did I. I had a pretty good name among traders, and ten days
later I started for the Levant again in command of a far smarter
vessel than the _Jane_ had ever been."

"And we all went with you, Captain," John Wilkes said, "every man
jack of us. And on her very next voyage the _Jane_ was captured by
the Algerines, and I reckon there are some of the poor fellows
working as slaves there now; for though Blake did blow the place
pretty nigh out of water a few years afterwards, it is certain that
the Christian slaves handed over to him were not half those the Moors
had in their hands."

"It would seem, Captain Dowsett, from your story, that you can manage
very well without a supercargo?" Cyril said quietly.

"Ay, lad; but you see that was a ready-money business. I handed over
the goods and took the cash; there was no accounts to be kept. It was
all clear and above board. But it is a different thing in this ship
altogether, when, instead of paying down on the nail for what they
get, you have got to keep an account of everything and send in all
their items jotted down in order. Why, Nellie, your tongue seems
quieter than usual."

"You have not given me a chance, father. You have been talking ever
since we sat down to table."

Supper was now over. The two apprentices at once retired. Cyril would
have done the same, but Mistress Dowsett said,--

"Sit you still, Cyril. The Captain says that you are to be considered
as one of the officers of the ship, and we shall be always glad to
have you here, though of course you can always go up to your own
room, or go out, when you feel inclined."

"I have to go out three times a week to work," Cyril said; "but all
the other evenings I shall be glad indeed to sit here, Mistress
Dowsett. You cannot tell what a pleasure it is to me to be in an
English home like this."

It was not long before John Wilkes went out.

"He is off to smoke his pipe," the Captain said. "I never light mine
till he goes. I can't persuade him to take his with me; he insists it
would not be manners to smoke in the cabin."

"He is quite right, father," Nellie said. "It is bad enough having
you smoke here. When mother's friends or mine come in they are
well-nigh choked; they are not accustomed to it as we are, for a
respectable London citizen does not think of taking tobacco."

"I am a London citizen, Nellie, but I don't set up any special claim
to respectability. I am a sea-captain, though that rascally Greek
cannon-ball and other circumstances have made a trader of me, sorely
against my will; and if I could not have my pipe and my glass of grog
here I would go and sit with John Wilkes in the tavern at the corner
of the street, and I suppose that would not be even as respectable as
smoking here."

"Nellie doesn't mean, David, that she wants you to give up smoking;
only she thinks that John is quite right to go out to take his pipe.
And I must say I think so too. You know that when you have
sea-captains of your acquaintance here, you always send the maid off
to bed and smoke in the kitchen."

"Ay, ay, my dear, I don't want to turn your room into a fo'castle.
There is reason in all things. I suppose you don't smoke, Master
Cyril?"

"No, Captain Dave, I have never so much as thought of such a thing.
In France it is the fashion to take snuff, but the habit seemed to me
a useless one, and I don't think that I should ever have taken to
it."

"I wonder," Captain Dave said, after they had talked for some time,
"that after living in sight of the sea for so long your thoughts
never turned that way."

"I cannot say that I have never thought of it," Cyril said. "I have
thought that I should greatly like to take foreign voyages, but I
should not have cared to go as a ship's boy, and to live with men so
ignorant that they could not even write their own names. My thoughts
have turned rather to the Army; and when I get older I think of
entering some foreign service, either that of Sweden or of one of the
Protestant German princes. I could obtain introductions through which
I might enter as a cadet, or gentleman volunteer. I have learnt
German, and though I cannot speak it as I can French or English, I
know enough to make my way in it."

"Can you use your sword, Cyril?" Nellie Dowsett asked.

"I have had very good teaching," Cyril replied, "and hope to be able
to hold my own."

"Then you are not satisfied with this mode of life?" Mistress Dowsett
said.

"I am satisfied with it, Mistress, inasmuch as I can earn money
sufficient to keep me. But rather than settle down for life as a city
scrivener, I would go down to the river and ship on board the first
vessel that would take me, no matter where she sailed for."

"I think you are wrong," Mistress Dowsett said gravely. "My husband
tells me how clever you are at figures, and you might some day get a
good post in the house of one of our great merchants."

"Maybe it would be so," Cyril said; "but such a life would ill suit
me. I have truly a great desire to earn money: but it must be in some
way to suit my taste."

"And why do you want to earn a great deal of money, Cyril?" Nellie
laughed, while her mother shook her head disapprovingly.

"I wish to have enough to buy my father's estate back again," he
said, "and though I know well enough that it is not likely I shall
ever do it, I shall fight none the worse that I have such a hope in
my mind."

"Bravo, lad!" Captain Dave said. "I knew not that there was an estate
in the case, though I did hear that you were the son of a Royalist.
It is a worthy ambition, boy, though if it is a large one 'tis scarce
like that you will get enough to buy it back again."

"It is not a very large one," Cyril said. "'Tis down in Norfolk, but
it was a grand old house--at least, so I have heard my father say,
though I have but little remembrance of it, as I was but three years
old when I left it. My father, who was Sir Aubrey Shenstone, had
hoped to recover it; but he was one of the many who sold their
estates for far less than their value in order to raise money in the
King's service, and, as you are aware, none of those who did so have
been reinstated, but only those who, having had their land taken from
them by Parliament, recovered them because their owners had no
title-deeds to show, save the grant of Parliament that was of no
effect in the Courts. Thus the most loyal men--those who sold their
estates to aid the King--have lost all, while those that did not so
dispossess themselves in his service are now replaced on their land."

"It seems very unfair," Nellie said indignantly.

"It is unfair to them, assuredly, Mistress Nellie. And yet it would
be unfair to the men who bought, though often they gave but a tenth
of their value, to be turned out again unless they received their
money back. It is not easy to see where that money could come from,
for assuredly the King's privy purse would not suffice to pay all the
money, and equally certain is it that Parliament would not vote a
great sum for that purpose."

"It is a hard case, lad--a hard case," Captain Dave said, as he
puffed the smoke from his pipe. "Now I know how you stand, I blame,
you in no way that you long more for a life of adventure than to
settle down as a city scrivener. I don't think even my wife, much as
she thinks of the city, could say otherwise."

"It alters the case much," Mistress Dowsett said. "I did not know
that Cyril was the son of a Knight, though it was easy enough to see
that his manners accord not with his present position. Still there
are fortunes made in the city, and no honest work is dishonouring
even to a gentleman's son."

"Not at all, Mistress," Cyril said warmly. "'Tis assuredly not on
that account that I would fain seek more stirring employment; but it
was always my father's wish and intention that, should there be no
chance of his ever regaining the estate, I should enter foreign
service, and I have always looked forward to that career."

"Well, I will wager that you will do credit to it, lad," Captain Dave
said. "You have proved that you are ready to turn your hand to any
work that may come to you. You have shown a manly spirit, my boy, and
I honour you for it; and by St. Anthony I believe that some day,
unless a musket-ball or a pike-thrust brings you up with a round
turn, you will live to get your own back again."

Cyril remained talking for another two hours, and then betook himself
to bed. After he had gone, Mistress Dowsett said, after a pause,--

"Do you not think, David, that, seeing that Cyril is the son of a
Knight, it would be more becoming to give him the room downstairs
instead of the attic where he is now lodged?"

The old sailor laughed.

"That is woman-kind all over," he said. "It was good enough for him
before, and now forsooth, because the lad mentioned, and assuredly in
no boasting way, that his father had been a Knight, he is to be
treated differently. He would not thank you himself for making the
change, dame. In the first place, it would make him uncomfortable,
and he might make an excuse to leave us altogether; and in the
second, you may be sure that he has been used to no better quarters
than those he has got. The Royalists in France were put to sore
shifts to live, and I fancy that he has fared no better since he came
home. His father would never have consented to his going out to earn
money by keeping the accounts of little city traders like myself had
it not been that he was driven to it by want. No, no, wife; let the
boy go on as he is, and make no difference in any way. I liked him
before, and I like him all the better now, for putting his
gentlemanship in his pocket and setting manfully to work instead of
hanging on the skirts of some Royalist who has fared better than his
father did. He is grateful as it is--that is easy to see--for our
taking him in here. We did that partly because he proved a good
worker and has taken a lot of care off my shoulders, partly because
he was fatherless and alone. I would not have him think that we are
ready to do more because he is a Knight's son. Let the boy be, and
suffer him to steer his ship his own course. If, when the time comes,
we can further his objects in any way we will do it with right good
will. What do you think of him, Nellie?" he asked, changing the
subject.

"He is a proper young fellow, father, and I shall be well content to
go abroad escorted by him instead of having your apprentice, Robert
Ashford, in attendance on me. He has not a word to say for himself,
and truly I like him not in anyway."

"He is not a bad apprentice, Nellie, and John Wilkes has but seldom
cause to find fault with him, though I own that I have no great
liking myself for him; he never seems to look one well in the face,
which, I take it, is always a bad sign. I know no harm of him; but
when his apprenticeship is out, which it will be in another year, I
shall let him go his own way, for I should not care to have him on
the premises."

"Methinks you are very unjust, David. The lad is quiet and regular in
his ways; he goes twice every Sunday to the Church of St. Alphage,
and always tells me the texts of the sermons."

The Captain grunted.

"Maybe so, wife; but it is easy to get hold of the text of a sermon
without having heard it. I have my doubts whether he goes as
regularly to St. Alphage's as he says he does. Why could he not go
with us to St. Bennet's?"

"He says he likes the administrations of Mr. Catlin better, David.
And, in truth, our parson is not one of the stirring kind."

"So much the better," Captain Dave said bluntly. "I like not these
men that thump the pulpit and make as if they were about to jump out
head foremost. However, I don't suppose there is much harm in the
lad, and it may be that his failure to look one in the face is not so
much his fault as that of nature, which endowed him with a villainous
squint. Well, let us turn in; it is past nine o'clock, and high time
to be a-bed."

Cyril seemed to himself to have entered upon a new life when he
stepped across the threshold of David Dowsett's store. All his cares
and anxieties had dropped from him. For the past two years he had
lived the life of an automaton, starting early to his work, returning
in the middle of the day to his dinner,--to which as often as not he
sat down alone,--and spending his evenings in utter loneliness in the
