more obnoxious to the Luddites, Major Browne insisted on placing six
soldiers permanently at the mill and on four accompanying him as an
escort whenever he went backward or forward.

Ned was very averse to these measures, but the magistrates agreed with
Major Browne as to the danger of assassination to which Ned was exposed
from the anger of the croppers at his having twice thwarted their
attempts, and he the more readily agreed as the presence of this guard
soothed the fears which Charlie and Lucy felt for his safety whenever
he was absent from the town. What perhaps most influenced him was a
conversation which he had with Mrs. Porson.

"Your mother was speaking of you to me today, Ned," she said; "it is the
first time she has done so since I made her acquaintance. She began by
saying, 'Please, Mrs. Porson, tell me all about this attack on George
Cartwright's mill; Abijah and Lucy have been talking about it, but
Abijah always gets confused in her stories, and of course Lucy knows
only what she is told. I should like to know all about it.' Of course
I told her the whole story, and how much Mr. Cartwright says he is
indebted to you for the warning you brought him, and how every one is
speaking in praise of your conduct, and what a good effect it has had.

"I told her that of course the Luddites would be very much incensed
against you and that it was adding to the risks that you already ran.
She lay on the sofa quietly with her eyes shut all the time I was
speaking. I could see her color come and go, and some tears fell down
her cheeks; then she said in a tone which she tried to make hard and
careless, but which really trembled, 'The military ought to put a guard
over my son. Why does he go risking his life for other people? What
business is it of his whether Cartwright's mill is burned or not?' I
said that Mr. Cartwright had been very kind to you, and that I knew
that you were much attached to him. I also said that the military were
anxious that you should have an escort to and from the mill, but that
you objected. I said that I was afraid that your life had not much value
in your own eyes, for that it was by no means a happy one. 'It has
value in other people's eyes,' she said irritably, 'in Lucy's and in his
brother's. What would they do if he was to throw it away? Who would look
after the mill and business then? He has no right to run such risks,
Mrs. Porson, no right at all. Of course he is unhappy. People who let
their tempers master them and do things are sure to be unhappy, and make
other people unhappy, too; but that is no reason that he should cause
more unhappiness by risking his own life needlessly, so, Mrs. Porson,
please talk to your husband and tell him to make my son have an escort.
I know he always listens to Mr. Porson.'"

"Naturally my mother is anxious, for the sake of Charlie and Lucy, that
I should live to carry on the mill until Charlie is old enough to run it
himself," Ned said bitterly.

"I do not think that it is only that, Ned," Mrs. Porson said kindly.
"That was only the excuse that your mother made. I could see that she
was deeply moved. I believe, Ned, that at heart she still loves you
dearly. She has this unhappy fixed idea in her mind that you killed her
husband, and believing this she cannot bear to see you; but I am sure
she is most unhappy, most deeply to be pitied. I cannot imagine anything
more dreadful than the state of mind of a woman who believes that a son
of hers has murdered her husband. I think that if you quite realized
what her feelings must be you would feel a little less bitter than you
do.

"I know, Ned, how much you have to try you, but I am sure that I would
not exchange your position for that of your mother. Her pain must be far
greater than yours. You know that you are innocent, and hope that some
day you may be able to prove it. She thinks she knows that you are
guilty, and is in constant dread that something may occur that may prove
your guilt to the world."

"Perhaps you are right, Mrs. Porson," Ned said wearily; "at any rate I
will put up with the nuisance of this escort. I suppose it will not be
for very long, for I expect that we shall not hear very much more of
the Luddites. The failures upon Cartwright's mill and mine must have
disheartened them, and the big rewards that are offered to any one
who will come forward and betray the rest must make them horribly
uncomfortable, for no one can be sure that some one may not be tempted
to turn traitor."

"What is the matter with Bill?" Ned asked Luke Marner that afternoon. "I
see he is away."

"Yes, sir, he be a-sitting with John Stukeley, who they say is main bad.
It seems as how he has taken a fancy to t' lad, though why he should
oi dunno, for Bill had nowt to do wi' his lot. Perhaps he thinks now as
Bill were right and he were wrong; perhaps it only is as if Bill ha' got
a name in the village of being a soft hearted chap, allus ready to sit
up at noight wi' any one as is ill. Anyhow he sent last noight to ask
him to go and sit wi' him, and Bill sent me word this morning as how he
couldn't leave the man."

"Do you know what is the matter with him?"

"I dunno for certain, Maister Ned, but I has my suspicions."

"So have I, Luke. I believe he got a gunshot wound in that affair at the
mill."

Luke nodded significantly.

"Dr. Green ought to see him," Ned said. "A gunshot wound is not a thing
to be trifled with."

"The doctor ha' been up twice a day on the last three e days," Luke
replied. "Oi suppose they got frighted and were obliged to call him in."

"They had better have done so at first," Ned said; "they might have
been quite sure that he would say nothing about it to the magistrates
whatever was the matter with Stukeley. I thought that fellow would get
into mischief before he had done."

"It war a bad day for the village when he coomed," Luke said; "what
wi' his preachings and his talk, he ha' turned the place upside down. I
doan't say as Varley had ever a good name, or was a place where a quiet
chap would have chosen to live, For fighting and drink there weren't a
worse place in all Yorkshire, but there weren't no downright mischief
till he came. Oi wur afraid vor a bit when he came a-hanging aboot
Polly, as the gal might ha' took to him, for he can talk smooth and has
had edication, and Polly thinks a wonderful lot of that. Oi were main
glad when she sent him aboot his business."

"Well, there is one thing, Luke; if anything happens to him it will
put an end to this Luddite business at Varley. Such a lesson as that in
their midst would do more to convince them of the danger of their goings
on than any amount of argument and advice."

"It will that," Luke said. "Oi hear as they are all moighty down in the
mouth over that affair at Cartwright's. If they could not win there,
when they were thirty to one, what chance can they have o' stopping the
mills? Oi consider as how that has been the best noight's work as ha'
been done in Yorkshire for years and years. There ain't a-been anything
else talked of in Varley since. I ha' heard a score of guesses as to how
you found owt what was a-going on in toime to get to the mill--thank God
there ain't one as suspects as our Polly brought you the news. My own
boys doan't know, and ain't a-going to; not as they would say a word as
would harm Polly for worlds, but as they gets a bit bigger and takes to
drink, there's no saying what mightn't slip out when they are in liquor.
So you and oi and Bill be the only ones as ull ever know the ins and
outs o' that there business."




CHAPTER XX: CLEARED AT LAST.


The night was a wild one. The weather had changed suddenly, and the rain
beat fiercely in the faces of the hands as they made their way back from
the mill up to Varley. As the night came on the storm increased. The
wind as it swept across the moor swirled down into the hollow in which
Varley stood, as if it would scoop the houses out of their foundations,
and the drops of rain were driven against roof and wall with the force
of hailstones.

Bill Swinton was sitting up again with John Stukeley, and as he bent
over the sick man's bed and tenderly lifted his head while he held a
cup with some cooling drink to his lips, the contrast between his broad,
powerful figure, and his face, marked with the characteristics alike
of good temper, kindness, and a resolute will, and the thin, emaciated
invalid was very striking. Stukeley's face was without a vestige of
color; his eyes were hollow and surrounded by dark circles; his cheeks
were of an ashen gray pallor, which deepened almost to a lead color
round his lips.

"Thou ought'st not to talk so much, John," Bill was saying. "Thou
know'st the doctor said thou must not excite thyself."

"It makes no difference, Bill, no difference at all, talk or not talk.
What does it matter? I am dying, and he knows it, and I know it--so do
you. That bit of lead in my body has done its work. Strange, isn't it,
that you should be here nursing me when I have thought of shooting you
a score of times? A year ago it seemed absurd that Polly Powlett should
like a boy like you better than a man like me, and yet I was sure it was
because of you she would have nothing to say to me; but she was right,
you will make the best husband of the two. I suppose it's because of
that I sent for you. I was very fond of Polly, Bill, and when I felt
that I was going, and there wasn't any use my being jealous any longer,
I seemed to turn to you. I knew you would come, for you have been always
ready to do a kindness to a chap who was down. You are different to
the other lads here. I do believe you are fond of reading. Whenever you
think I am asleep you take up your book."

"Oi am trying to improve myself," Bill said quietly. "Maister Sankey
put me in the roight way. He gives me an hour, and sometimes two, every
evening. He has been wonderful kind to me, he has; there ain't nothing
oi wouldn't do for him."

The sick man moved uneasily.

"No more wouldn't Luke and Polly," Bill went on. "His father gived his
loife, you know, for little Jenny. No, there ain't nowt we wouldn't do
for him," he continued, glad to turn the subject from that of Stukeley's
affection for Polly. "He be one of the best of maisters. Oi would give
my life's blood if so be as oi could clear him of that business of
Mulready's."

For a minute or two not a word was said. The wind roared round the
building, and in the intervals of the gusts the high clock in the corner
of the room ticked steadily and solemnly as if distinctly intimating
that its movements were not to be hurried by the commotion without.

Stukeley had closed his eyes, and Bill began to hope that he was going
to doze off, when he asked suddenly; "Bill, do you know who sent that
letter that was read at the trial--I mean the one from the chap as
said he done it, and was ready to give himself up if the boy was found
guilty?"

Bill did not answer.

"You can tell me, if you know," Stukeley said impatiently. "You don't
suppose as I am going to tell now! Maybe I shan't see any one to tell
this side of the grave, for I doubt as I shall see the morning. Who
wrote it?"

"I wrote it," Bill said; "but it warn't me as was coming forward, it war
Luke's idee fust. He made up his moind as to own up as it was he as did
it and to be hung for it to save Maister Ned, acause the captain lost
his loife for little Jenny."

"But he didn't do it," Stukeley said sharply.

"No, he didn't do it," Bill replied.

There was a silence again for a long time; then Stukeley opened his eyes
suddenly.

"Bill, I should like to see Polly again. Dost think as she will come and
say goodby?"

"Oi am sure as she will," Bill said steadily. "Shall oi go and fetch
her?"

"It's a wild night to ask a gal to come out on such an errand," Stukeley
said doubtfully.

"Polly won't mind that," Bill replied confidently. "She will just wrap
her shawl round her head and come over. Oi will run across and fetch
her. Oi will not be gone three minutes."

In little more than that time Bill returned with Mary Powlett.

"I am awfully sorry to hear you are so bad, John," the girl said
frankly.

"I am dying, Polly; I know that, or I wouldn't have sent for ye. It was
a good day for you when you said no to what I asked you."

"Never mind that now, John; that's all past and gone."

"Ay, that's all past and gone. I only wanted to say as I wish you well,
Polly, and I hope you will be happy, and I am pretty nigh sure of
it. Bill here tells me that you set your heart on having young Sankey
cleared of that business as was against him. Is that so?"

"That is so, John; he has been very kind to us all, to feyther and all
of us. He is a good master to his men, and has kept many a mouth full
this winter as would have been short of food without him; but why do you
ask me?"

"Just a fancy of mine, gal, such a fancy as comes into the head of a man
at the last. When you get back send Luke here. It is late and maybe
he has gone to bed, but tell him I must speak to him. And now, goodby,
Polly. God bless you! I don't know as I hasn't been wrong about all this
business, but it didn't seem so to me afore. Just try and think that,
will you, when you hear about it. I thought as I was a-acting for the
good of the men."

"I will always remember that," Polly said gently.

Then she took the thin hand of the man in hers, glanced at Bill as if
she would ask his approval, and reading acquiescence in his eyes she
stooped over the bed and kissed Stukeley's forehead. Then without a word
she left the cottage and hurried away through the darkness.

A few minutes later Luke Marner came in, and to Bill's surprise Stukeley
asked him to leave the room. In five minutes Luke came out again.

"Go in to him, Bill," he said hoarsely. "Oi think he be a-sinking. For
God's sake keep him up. Give him that wine and broath stuff as thou
canst. Keep him going till oi coom back again; thou doan't know what
depends on it."

Hurrying back to his cottage Luke threw on a thick coat, and to the
astonishment of Polly announced that he was going down into Marsden.

"What! on such a night as this, feyther?"

"Ay, lass, and would if it were ten toimes wurse. Get ye into thy room,
and go down on thy knees, and pray God to keep John Stukeley alive and
clear headed till oi coomes back again."

It was many years since Luke Marner's legs had carried him so fast as
they now did into Marsden. The driving rain and hail which beat against
him seemed unheeded as he ran down the hill at the top of his speed.
He stopped at the doctor's and went in. Two or three minutes after the
arrival of this late visitor Dr. Green's housekeeper was astonished at
hearing the bell ring violently. On answering the bell she was ordered
to arouse John, who had already gone to bed, and to tell him to put the
horse into the gig instantly.

"Not on such a night as this, doctor! sureley you are not a-going out on
such a night as this!"

"Hold your tongue, woman, and do as you are told instantly," the doctor
said with far greater spirit than usual, for his housekeeper was, as a
general thing, mistress of the establishment.

With an air of greatly offended dignity she retired to carry out his
orders. Three minutes later the doctor ran out of his room as he heard
the man servant descending the stairs.

"John," he said, "I am going on at once to Mr. Thompson's; bring the gig
round there. I shan't want you to go further with me. Hurry up, man, and
don't lose a moment--it is a matter of life and death."

A quarter of an hour later Dr. Green, with Mr. Thompson by his side,
drove off through the tempest toward Varley.

The next morning, as Ned was at breakfast, the doctor was announced.

"What a pestilently early hour you breakfast at, Ned! I was not in bed
till three o'clock, and I scarcely seemed to have been asleep an hour
when I was obliged to get up to be in time to catch you before you were
off."

"That is hard on you indeed, doctor," Ned said, smiling; "but why this
haste? Have you got some patient for whom you want my help? You need not
have got up so early for that, you know. You could have ordered anything
you wanted for him in my name. You might have been sure I should have
honored the bill. But what made you so late last night? You were surely
never out in such a gale!"

"I was, Ned, and strange as it seems I never went in answer to a call
which gave me so much satisfaction. My dear lad, I hardly know how to
tell you. I have a piece of news for you; the greatest, the best news
that man could have to tell you."

Ned drew a long breath and the color left his cheeks.

"You don't mean, doctor, you can't mean"--and he paused.

"That you are cleared, my boy. Yes; that is my news. Thank God, Ned,
your innocence is proved."

Ned could not speak. For a minute he sat silent and motionless. Then he
bent forward and covered his face with his hands, and his lips moved as
he murmured a deep thanksgiving to God for this mercy, while Lucy and
Charlie, with cries of surprise and delight, leaped from the table,
and when Ned rose to his feet, threw their arms round his neck with
enthusiastic delight; while the doctor wrung his hand, and then, taking
out his pocket handkerchief, wiped his eyes, violently declaring, as he
did so, that he was an old fool.

"Tell me all about it, doctor. How has it happened? What has brought it
about?"

"Luke Marner came down to me at ten o'clock last night to tell me that
John Stukeley was dying, which I knew very well, for when I saw him in
the afternoon I saw he was sinking fast; but he told me, too, that the
man was anxious to sign a declaration before a magistrate to the effect
that it was he who killed your stepfather. I had my gig got out and
hurried away to Thompson's. The old fellow was rather crusty at being
