man within his wigwam. A party of Crow Indians discovered the camp of
the trappers and one tempestuous night made them a stealthy visit. They
departed during the darkness, and, when they went away, took with them
nine of the very best horses of the hunters--a loss too serious to be
borne without using every recourse to prevent it.



CHAPTER V.


 Kit Carson's Decision--A Hot Pursuit an and Unexpected Discovery--Weary
 Waiting--A Snow Balling Party--A Daring Attack--Brilliant Exploit.

Instinctively every one turned to Carson to learn what he had to advise
and yet each was certain what he would say.

"It'll never do, boys, to let them steal our horses in that style,"
he remarked in his quiet fashion, compressing his lips and shaking his
head, while his eyes flashed with a dangerous light.

All knew what his words and manner meant, and in a twinkling the
thirteen men were in their saddles, and, with their gallant leader at
their head, galloped forth off in pursuit.

It would be supposed where the ground was covered with snow to such a
depth, that it was the easiest matter imaginable to follow the trail,
and yet Kit and his companions found it one of the most difficult tasks
they had ever undertaken. Hundreds of bison had repeatedly crossed the
tracks since they were made and less experienced eyes than those of the
trappers would have given over the search in despair.

But no one thought of turning back, and the pursuit was pushed
unflaggingly for fully forty miles. Not the first glimpse had been
obtained of the Indians, and the horses that had been pushed so hard
finally gave out. They were in poor condition, and, when the company
came to a halt, showed such exhaustion that it was evident they could
not be forced much further. It was decided, therefore, to go into camp.
Accordingly, they turned the heads of their panting animals toward a
piece of woods a short distance away.

Before the shelter was reached, the trappers were astonished to observe
a column of smoke rising above the trees. They looked in each others'
faces with a smile of gratification: inasmuch as the trail led into the
grove and it was evident a camp fire was burning there, it followed
that they were close to the thieves whom they had followed such a long
distance.

The discovery infused new warmth into the blood of the hunters, who were
fairly atremble with eagerness to attack the unsuspecting Indians.

But all were too experienced in the ways of the wilderness to allow
their impatience to betray them into any indiscretion. They deemed
it necessary their assault should be a surprise and they, therefore,
withdrew to a secluded place in the woods and waited for night.

This was trying to a painful degree. The weather which had been bitterly
cold during the day, grew still colder, until the animals shivered as if
with the ague. They were carefully tied where the trees partly sheltered
them from the cutting wind and the hunters made sure their arms were
ready. Then, when the sun went down and darkness crept over the snowy
landscape, the men moved around so as to approach the camp from the
direction opposite to that from which the Indians would naturally look
for pursuit.

When close enough to catch sight of the flames among the trees, the
hunters sank on their knees and crept noiselessly forward until able to
gain a full view of the dusky thieves. They were surprised at what they
saw. The savages had thrown some logs and stones together so as to make
a couple of rude forts and had divided themselves into two parties. It
was characteristic of them that they were holding a dance and feast in
honor of the brilliant style in which they had outwitted the trappers
forty miles away.

The scene was quite interesting, especially when our friends plainly
saw their stolen animals tied near one of the forts. The sight of their
property was anything but soothing to the wrathful trappers, who were
resolved not to go back to their own camp without taking the horses
along.

But the Crows were strong in numbers, well armed and ready to fight on
the briefest notice. It would have been an act of the greatest rashness
to charge upon their camp, while they were excited to an unusual degree
by the rejoicing in which all took a hilarious part. The whites decided
to wait several hours longer until most of their enemies would be
unconscious in slumber.

All this time the weather was growing colder, and, toughened as the
trappers had become by years of exposure, they suffered greatly. They
dare not move about to keep up the circulation of their blood, for the
slightest noise was liable to attract the suspicion of some of the Crows
who might be prowling through the grove. More than once Carson feared
his limbs were freezing, but he held out like the genuine hero he was,
and his companions were all worthy of him.

At last the dance was over and the tired warriors wrapped their blankets
around their forms and stretched out to rest. Their manner showed they
had no thought that a foe was anywhere in the neighborhood. Although
such men sleep lightly, they do not remain long awake when courting
sleep, and in a brief while all were unconscious except the sentinels
on duty. Even they were so confident that nothing threatened, that they
became less vigilant than usual.

"Sh! now is the time," whispered the youthful leader. They had decided
long before upon their plan of action, so that no time was now lost in
consultation. Kit and five of his men began slowly creeping toward their
horses. This was anything but a pleasant occupation, for the snow, it
will be remembered, was deep on the ground; but such veterans cared
nothing for a trifle like that, and they speedily reached their animals.

Such an attempt is always a dangerous one, for the horse of the Indian
or white hunter often proves his most skilful sentinel. He is able to
detect the stealthy approach of a scout, long before the straining ear
of his master can catch the slightest sound. If the beasts should become
frightened by the shadowy figures crawling over the snow, they would be
likely to alarm the camp; but Carson and his companions managed it so
well that there was not a single neigh or stamp of a hoof.

Silently rising to their feet, they cut the halters which held the
horses fast, and then, withdrawing a slight distance, began throwing
snowballs at them. These feathery missiles fell among and struck against
them, until, to escape the mimic bombardment they moved out the wood
altogether, where they were taken charge by the others who were waiting.
All this was accomplished without attracting the attention of a single
Indian.

Having met with such success, common prudence and sense suggested that
the trappers should make all haste to their own comfortable quarters, so
many long miles away; but they had scarcely joined each other when they
fell into an earnest discussion as to what the next step should be.

Some were in favor of withdrawing with the least possible delay, but
Kit Carson and a couple of daring spirits were bent on going back and
punishing the thieves who had given them so much trouble. As they could
not be argued out of their purpose, the others, as a matter of course,
agreed to give them their aid.

Three of the trappers were sent to take the recaptured animals to where
the saddle horses were secured while the others advanced directly upon
the Indian camp. They moved cautiously as was their custom and were
almost upon the Crows, when one of their dogs gave notice of danger by a
vigorous barking. On the instant, the warriors leaped to their feet
and the fight opened. So many of the Indians were shot down and the
advantage was so strongly against them, that the survivors hastily
ran into the nearest fort, from which they returned the fire of their
assailants. The latter, however, had stationed themselves behind trees,
where they were safe against the whistling bullets, and in their attack
they threw away very few shots indeed.

It began growing light in the east, and, as soon as the Crows
discovered how few composed the besieging force, they in turn became
the assailants, and rushed out of their fort with their frightful war
whoops, but they were met by such a destructive fire that they scurried
back again.

The second attack of the savages was so furious that the trappers were
forced to fall back, but the reserve, as it may be called, speedily
joined them, and once more drove the Indians into their fort. Several
of the whites had been wounded though not dangerously, and both parties
having had enough of fighting, the battle ended.



CHAPTER VI.


 The British and American Trapper--Hunting on the Laramie--The
 Deserters--The Vain Pursuit--Arrival of Friends--The Return Journey--The
 Night Alarm--The Attack Upon the Camp--Pursuit and Recovery of Horses.

A half century ago the vast region beyond the Rocky Mountains was
comparatively unknown and unexplored. Its general features of course
were understood, but the interior was like the central portion of
Australia or Africa. Clarke and Lewis made their famous expedition to
Oregon during the early days of the century, and helped to turn general
attention in that direction. Its growth and development since then is
one of the wonders of the age.

But there was one class (if the word may be used), who never hesitated
to penetrate the wildest and most dangerous recesses of the far West
and Northwest: those were the hunters and trappers. As we have already
stated, the employees of the venerable and all embracing Hudson Bay
Company ranged over British America and through Oregon, to which vast
territory they possessed the clear legal right, besides which they and
the trappers of the American Fur Company frequently trespassed on each
others reserves, and not infrequently came in bloody collision with each
other.

Far to the northward, the Indian drove his birch canoe across the silent
Athabasca and Great Bear Lakes, on his way with his peltries to the
distant factory or post of the Company; along the frozen shores of the
lone Mackenzie (the only American river flowing into the Arctic Ocean),
the trapper glided on his snow shoes, or with his sturdy dogs and
sleigh, fought his way over the snowy wastes of Prince Rupert's Land;
the brigades in their boats rounded the curves of the Saskatchewan,
keeping time with their paddles to their own cheery songs; their camp
fires were kindled in the land of the Assiniboine and they set their
traps in the wildest recesses of the Rocky Mountains where the whirling
snow storms almost carried them off their feet; but north of the
dividing line, the hunters had little if anything to fear from the red
men. Though they encountered in the loneliest and most desolate distant
regions, they generally met and separated as friends. Among the perils
of the trapper's life in British America was not reckoned that from the
hostile natives.

It was far different within our own territory. Those who left our
frontier States and pushed westward, and those who penetrated northward
and eastward from the Mexican country, knew they were invading the
hunting grounds of the fiercest Indians on the American continent. We
have already told enough to show the intense hostility of the red men;
between them and the hunters and trappers raged a war that never ceased
or slackened, except when policy held it for a time in check.

The little group of horsemen, who rode out from Independence or
Westport, or who took steamer at St. Louis up the Missouri, often came
back with several of their number missing. Up among the mountains, they
had gone out to visit their traps and had never come back to camp. The
lurking Blackfoot, or Sioux, or Crow, had aimed all too well, and, as
he bounded whooping away, he swung aloft the scalp of his victim whose
trapping days were ended forever.

After recovering their horses from the band of Crows, Carson and his
companions returned to camp, where they remained until spring, when they
cached their furs and made their way to the Laramie River on another
hunting expedition. While thus employed, a couple of the men deserted
taking several of the best animals. Kit Carson and a single companion
were sent in pursuit, the rascals having a good day's start. A desperate
fight was sure to follow a meeting between the parties, for Carson would
never forgive such treachery, and the deserters were not the ones to
permit themselves to be despoiled of their booty without doing their
utmost to prevent it.

It was suspected that they were on their way to the place where the
beaver had been cached; and disregarding the trail, therefore Carson
made all haste thither. It need not be said that he lost no time on the
road, but when he reached their old camp, he found the deserters had
preceded him. They had stolen several thousand dollars worth of furs and
departed.

Carson was more anxious than ever to overtake the scoundrels. He and his
companion made diligent search, but failed utterly to find them. They
were never seen or heard of again, and Carson was convinced they had
fallen victims to the Indians who in turn made off with the stolen
peltries.

It will be borne in mind that Kit and his friend were several hundred
miles from the main body of hunters, and in one of the most dangerous
countries they had ever visited. So dangerous, indeed, did they consider
an attempt to return to them, that they decided not to make it, but to
stay in the old camp. Inasmuch as it would be impossible to keep their
presence from the knowledge of the Indians, they threw up some rude
fortifications and never relaxed their vigilance. When Carson wrapped
his blanket around him, and lay down to rest, he knew his companion was
on guard and would not slumber. It was the same with his friend, their
watchfulness undoubtedly preventing the attack which scarcely could have
failed to be effectual.

It was needful now and then that one of them should venture out to
procure game, but that was so plentiful that he was never compelled to
go far, and he used such extreme care that he was not even so much as
fired upon.

Thus the time passed, until at the end of several weeks, the hunters
were surprised and delighted by the arrival of more than a dozen men on
their way with a complete outfit to join the main body. Carson and his
friend were glad enough to go with them and the long journey was begun.
They had not gone far, when they exchanged shots with hostiles and there
were almost daily skirmishes with them. By sunset they had travelled a
long distance, and went into camp, feeling certain that though Indians
had not shown themselves, they were in the vicinity. To prevent a
stampede of their animals, the long ropes around their necks were
fastened to stakes driven deep into the earth. This arrangement allowed
them to graze over sufficient ground and opposed an almost insuperable
obstacle to the success of the dusky thieves prowling around.

It was yet early in the evening when one of the dogs belonging to the
camp began barking. A score of causes might have caused this but Carson
believed the incitement in that instance was the one most dreaded.
Several men were added to the guard and the rest lay down, too uneasy to
gain much slumber, however.

The trappers were right in their suspicion that savages were near but
they could not have failed to note what precautions had been taken by
the whites against surprise and they withdrew without molesting them.
The party were in a beaver country, and Carson and three of his men went
up the stream some distance to learn whether it was worth their while to
set the traps.

They had not been gone long when a party of Indians, who were probably
awaiting such an opportunity, charged upon the camp and drove off all
the loose horses. Four of the hunters instantly saddled the swiftest
of those remaining and started in hot pursuit. So hot indeed was the
pursuit that they speedily came up with the marauders and opened a
running fight. One of the hunters was badly wounded, while a warrior
was shot from his horse pitching headlong to the earth with a screech
of agony. The remaining ones were pressed so hard that they were glad
enough to abandon the property which came back to the rightful owners,
probably before an animal was able to comprehend what had taken place.

The promptness and daring of the hunters had prevented a serious loss,
and though one of their number was severely hurt, his wound was not
mortal. It may be said that he suffered much but fully recovered in
time. Men with such iron constitutions and rugged frames rallied from
injuries that would have swept off those accustomed to less stirring
lives.

Having righted matters, so far as possible, the trappers picketed their
horses and awaited the return of Carson and his companions. They were
much disturbed by fears for their safety, as in truth they had good
cause to be.



CHAPTER VII.


 An Unexpected Meeting--The Ambush--A Daring and Perilous Ride--Return to
 Camp--Disappointments--The Beaver.

Meanwhile the Indians made it exceedingly lively for Kit Carson and his
three companions.

The latter had heard so much of the abundance of beavers in a
certain section that they determined to visit it and make a thorough
exploration. To do this, it was necessary to ride over a lofty Rocky
Mountain peak or take many hours to pass around it. Very naturally they
concluded to "cut across lots," confident of their ability to take care
of themselves, no matter what danger threatened.

The ascent proved very exhausting to men and animals, for the trappers
did not compel the weary beasts to bear them up the steep slope where it
tired them to force their own way. They rested many times, but finally
accomplished the ascent and passed over into the valley beyond. There,
disappointment awaited them. The most careful search failed to show the
first sign of a beaver and they had their labor for their pains. The
