
The last day of the term arrived in due course, bringing with it that
jolly time when everybody is excited, happy, and good-tempered; when the
morning's work is a mere matter of form, and the boys slap their books
together at the sound of the bell, with the joyful conviction that the
whole length of the Christmas holidays lies between them and "next
lesson."

Directly after dinner every one commenced "packing up;" which term might
have been supposed to include every form of skylarking which the heart
of the small boy could devise, from racing round the quadrangle, arrayed
in one of Bibbs's night-shirts, to playing football in the gymnasium,
North _versus_ South, with the remains of an old mortar-board.

It was at this period of the day that the Triple Alliance proceeded to
carry out a project which had for some little time occupied the minds of
at least two of their number.  The idea was that the little fraternity
should celebrate their approaching separation, and the consequent
breaking up of their association, with a sort of funeral feast, the cost
of which Jack and Diggory insisted should be borne by the two surviving
members.  Only one outsider was invited to attend--namely, "Rats," whose
cheery presence it was thought would tend to enliven the proceedings,
and chase away the gloomy clouds of regret which would naturally hang
over the near prospect of parting.

The box-room (where such functions usually took place) being at this
time in a state of indescribable uproar, it was decided that the banquet
should be served in one of the remote classrooms.

"None of the fellows'll come near it," said Jack Vance; "and if old
Watford should be knocking round and catch us there, he won't do
anything to-day; we shall have to clear out, that's all."

Accordingly, about a quarter to four, the three friends, with their
solitary guest, assembled at the trysting-place.  Jack Vance carried two
big paper bags, Diggory a biscuit-box and a small tin kettle, while the
other two were provided with four clean jam-pots, it having been
announced that there was "going to be some cocoa."

For the preparation of this luxury Diggory mounted a form and lit one of
the gas-jets, over which he and Jack Vance took it in turns to hold the
kettle until the water boiled.  Sugar, cocoa, and condensed milk were
produced from the biscuit-tin, and the jam-pots having been filled with
the steaming beverage, the company seated themselves round the stove, in
which there still smouldered some remains of the morning's fire, and
prepared to enjoy themselves.

From the first, however, the proceeding's fell as flat as ditch-water.
Even the gallant efforts of "Rats" to enliven the party were of no
avail; and for some time everybody munched away in silence, Jack Vance
occasionally pausing to remark, "Here, pass over that nose-bag, and help
yourselves."

The classroom itself, which belonged to the Third Form, was suggestive
of that glad season known as "breaking-up." The ink-pots had all been
collected, and stood together in a tray on the master's table; fragments
of examination papers filled the paper-basket, and were littered here
and there about the floor, while some promising Latin scholar had
scrawled across the blackboard the well-known words, _Dulce Domum_.
These inspiriting signs of a "good time coming" were, however, lost on
the Triple Alliance.  Their present surroundings served only to remind
them of the old days of "The Happy Family," when they had first come to
Ronleigh, never expecting but to have completed the period of their
school lives in one another's company.

"Well," said Jack Vance, suddenly broaching the subject which was
uppermost in each of their minds, "we've had jolly times together.--
D'you remember when we made the Alliance, the day you first came
to The Birches, Diggory?"

"Yes," answered Diggory; "it was just after we'd been frightened by the
ghost.  D'you remember the 'Main-top' and the 'House of Lords' and the
Philistines?  I wonder what's become of them all?"

One reminiscence suggested another, and after exhausting their
recollections of The Birches, they recalled their varied experiences at
Ronleigh.  Only one adventure was by mutual consent not alluded
to: their clandestine visit to The Hermitage, coupled with Noaks's
threat, hung like the sword suspended by a single hair above the head of
Damocles at the feast.

At length, when the paper bags had been wellnigh emptied, Jack Vance
intimated his intention of making a speech--which announcement was
received with considerable applause.

"Don't finish up your cocoa," he began, "because, before we dissolve the
Alliance, I'm going to propose a toast.  We've been friends a long time,
and both here and at The Birches, as Diggory says, the Triple Alliance
has done wonders and covered itself with glory."  (Cheers.)  "We said
when we started that we'd always stand by each other whatever happened;
and so we have, and so we would again if we were going to be together
any longer."  ("Hear, hear!") "I wish 'Rats' could have joined us, but
then I suppose it wouldn't have been the Triple Alliance.  However, now
it's finished with; but before we break it up, I'm going to call upon
you to drink the health of Mr. Mugford.  May he have long life and
happiness, and a jolly fine house, with a model railway, and a lake for
boating in the grounds, and ask us all to come and stay with him
whenever we feel inclined."

This sentiment was received with shouts of applause, and in honouring it
the jam-pots were drained to their muddy dregs.

No one expected that Mugford would reply, for he was decidedly a man of
few words; but on this occasion he rose above his usual self, and
sitting with his hands in his trouser pockets, his feet on the fender of
the stove, and his chin sunk forward on his breast, delivered himself as
follows.  The room was already growing dark with the early winter
twilight, which perhaps rendered it more easy for him to undertake the
task of responding to the toast.

"You've always been very kind to me," he began, speaking rather quickly.

"No, we haven't," interrupted Jack Vance.

"Yes, you have.  Just shut up;  I'm going to say what I like.  You made
friends with me because I happened to be in the same room at The
Birches; but you always stuck to me, and helped me along a lot when we
came here first.  I know I'm stupid, and sometimes I feel I'm a coward;
but I enjoyed being with you, and shall always remember the times we've
had together--yes, I swear I shall--always.  And now I've got a drop of
cocoa left, so I'm going to propose a toast.  You must take 'Rats' in my
place.  I hope you'll have heaps of larks; and you must write me a
letter sometimes and tell me what you're doing.  Here goes--The new
_Triple Alliance!_"

It was customary to laugh at whatever Mugford said, but on this occasion
not even a smile greeted the conclusion of his remarks.

Only Diggory spoke.  "No, we shan't have another Triple Alliance; now
it's going to end."

He turned, and taking something out of the biscuit-tin, said solemnly,
"I, Diggory Trevanock, do hereby declare that the association known as
the Triple Alliance is now dissolved; in token of which I break this bit
of a flat ruler, used by us as a sugar-spoon, into three parts, one of
which I present to each of the members as a keepsake, to remind them of
all our great deeds and many adventures."

Each boy pocketed his fragment of wood in silence.  Jack Vance tried to
crack a joke, but it was a miserable failure.

"There was something I wanted to say," began "Rats" thoughtfully.
"I shall remember it in a minute.  Oh, _bother!_"

"What's up?"

"Why, I know what it was; Mugford's talking about writing to him
reminded me of it.  I'm awfully sorry, but there were some letters came
for you chaps this morning.  I took them off the table, meaning to give
them to you; but I quite forgot, and left them in my desk."

"Well, you're a nice one!" cried Diggory.  "Suppose you go and fetch 'em
now!"

"Rats" scrambled to his feet and hurried out of the room.

Jack Vance pulled out his watch, and held it down so that the glimmer of
the red light from between the bars of the stove fell upon its face.

"My word," he exclaimed, "it's time we thought about packing!"

"Wait a jiff for those letters," answered Diggory.

A moment later "Rats" came scampering down the passage.  "Here they
are," he cried; "I'm very sorry I forgot 'em.  A letter for Mugford, and
a paper for Vance."

Diggory relighted the gas-jet which he had turned out after boiling the
kettle, and proceeded, with the assistance of "Rats," to gather up the
remains of the feast.  They had hardly, however, got further than
emptying the tin kettle down the ventilator before their attention was
attracted by a joyful exclamation from Jack Vance.

"What d'you think's happened?" he cried, brandishing the open newspaper.
"Why, they've caught the thieves who stole old Fossberry's coins!"

"Not really!"

"They have, though.  It was the old woman who looks after the house, and
her husband; they're to be tried at the next assizes.  They did it right
enough; some of the coins were found in their possession, and--Hullo!
what's the matter with you?"

The latter remark was addressed to Mugford, who suddenly jumped on a
form, began to dance, fell off into the coal-box, scrambled to his feet,
and capered wildly round the room.

"He's gone mad!" cried Diggory; "catch him, and sit on his head!"

"No, I haven't!" exclaimed Mugford, coming to a standstill; "but what do
you think's happened?  Guess!"

"Not that you're going to stay on here!"

"Yes!  My uncle says he'll pay for me, and I'm to come back again after
Christmas!"

"Well, I'm sure!" gasped Jack Vance; "and we've just dissolved the
Alliance!  We must make it again."

"No, you shan't!" shouted "Rats;"  "Diggory said you wouldn't.
I'm coming in, as Mugford suggested, so it'll have to be a quadruple one
next time."

"Well, so it shall be," cried Jack Vance, embracing Mugford with the
hugging power of a juvenile bear: "next term we'll start afresh."

Diggory and "Rats" promptly fell into each other's arms, and all four,
coming into violent collision, tumbled down amidst the _debris_ of the
overturned coal-box; and after rolling over one another like a lot of
young dogs, scrambled to their feet, turned out the gas, and rushed away
to complete their packing.

So, as the door slams behind them, they vanish from our sight; for
though the renewal of their friendship tempts us to follow them further
in their school life, we are reminded that our story has been told.
Here ended the existence of the Triple Alliance, and here, therefore,
should the history of its trials and triumphs be likewise brought to a
conclusion.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRIPLE ALLIANCE***


******* This file should be named 10027.txt or 10027.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/2/10027


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
