The dawn came clear and brilliant, and the army advanced, to the music
of a fine band. The light cavalry led the way, then came a detachment
of sailors who had been loaned by Admiral Keppel, followed by the
English regulars in red and the Virginians in blue. Behind them came
the cannon, the packhorses, and all the elements that make up the
train of an army.

It was a gay and inspiriting sight, especially so to youth, and
Robert's heart thrilled as he looked. The hour of triumph had come at
last. Away with the forebodings of Willet! Here was the might of
England and the colonies, and, brave and cunning as St. Luc and
Beaujeu and the other Frenchmen might be their bravery and cunning
would avail them nothing.

They marched on all the morning, a long and brilliant line of red and
blue and brown, and nothing happened. The forest on either side of
them was still silent and tenantless, and they expected in a few more
hours to see the fort they had come so far to take. The heavens
themselves were propitious. Only little white clouds were to be seen
in the sky of dazzling blue, and the green forest, stirred by a gentle
wind, waved its boughs at them in friendly fashion.

About noon they approached the river, and Gage leading a strong
advance guard across it, found no enemy on the other side, puzzling
and also pleasing news. The foe, whom they had expected to find in
this formidable position, seemed to have melted away. No trace of him
could be found in the forest, and to many it appeared that the road to
Fort Duquesne lay open.

"They've concluded our force is too great and have abandoned the
fort," said Robert. "I can't make anything else of it, Dave."

"It does look like it," said the hunter doubtfully. "I certainly
thought they would meet us here. The ford is the place of places for a
defensive battle."

Gage made his report to Braddock, confirming the general in his belief
that the French and Indians would not dare to meet him, and that the
dangers of the wilderness had been overrated. The order to resume the
march was given and the trumpets in the advance sang merrily, the
silent woods giving back their echoes in faint musical notes. The
afternoon that had now come was as brilliant as the morning. A great
sun blazed down from a sky of cloudless blue, deepening and
intensifying the green of the forest, the red uniforms of the British
and the blue uniforms of the Virginians. Robert again admired the
sight. The army marched as if on parade, and it presented a splendid
spectacle.

The head of the column entered the shallows, and soon the long line
was passing the river. Robert had a lingering belief that the bullets
would rain upon them in the water, but nothing stirred in the forest
beyond. The head of the column emerged upon the opposite bank, and
then its long red and blue length trailed slowly after. Robert and his
comrades crossed in a wagon. They had wanted to go into the woods,
seeking for the enemy, but the orders of Braddock, who wished to keep
all his force together, held them.

The entire army was now across, and, within the shade of the forest,
the general ordered a short period for rest and food, before they
completed the few miles that yet separated them from Fort
Duquesne. The troops were in great spirits. They might have been held
at the dangerous ford, they thought, but now that it had been passed
without resistance the woods could offer nothing able to stop them.

"What has become of your warlike Frenchmen, Mr. Willet?" asked
Grosvenor. "So far as this campaign is concerned they seem to excel as
runners rather than warriors."

"I confess that I'm surprised, Mr. Grosvenor," replied the
hunter. "Beaujeu, St. Luc and Dumas are not the men to make a carpet
of roses for us to march on. There is something here that does not
meet the eye. What say you, Tayoga?"

"I like it not," replied the Onondaga. "In war I fear the forest when
it is silent."

Near them a small circle of land had been cleared and in it stood a
house, lone and deserted. It had been built by a trader named Fraser
and in it Washington, who had visited it once before on a former
mission, and one or two others sat, during the period of rest and
refreshment. The young Virginian, despite his great frame and gigantic
strength, was so much wasted by fever that, when he came forth to
remount, he was barely able to keep his place in his saddle.

Now the merry trumpets sang again and the red and blue column, lifting
itself up, resumed its march along the trail through the forest toward
Duquesne. The river was on one side and a line of high hills on the
other, but the forest everywhere was dense and in its heaviest
foliage. Braddock, despite the safe passage of the ford, was not
reckless. A troop of guides and Virginia light horsemen led the way. A
hundred yards behind them came the vanguard, then Gage with a picked
body of British troops, after them the axmen, who had done such great
work, behind them the main body of the artillery, the wagons and the
packhorses, while a strong force of regulars and Virginians closed up
the rear. Scouts and skirmishers ranged the flanks, though they were
ordered to go not more than a few hundred yards away.

Robert, Tayoga and Willet were with the guides at the very apex of the
column, and they continually searched the forests and the thickets
with keen eyes for a possible enemy. But all was quiet there. The
game, frightened by the advancing army, had gone away. Not a leaf, not
a bough stirred. The blazing sun, now near the zenith, poured down
fiery rays and it was hot in the shade of the great trees that grew so
closely together.

Robert and the other scouts and guides in the apex marched on
soundless feet, but he heard close behind him the tread of the
Virginia light horsemen, behind them the steady march of the regulars
under Gage, and behind them the deep hum and murmur of the army, the
creaking of wheels and the clank of the great guns. Despite the
following sounds he was conscious all the time of the deep, intense
silence in the forest on either side of him. The birds, like the game,
had gone away, and there was no flash of blue or of flame among the
green leaves.

"There's a dip just ahead," said Willet, pointing to a wide ravine
filled with bushes that ran directly across the trail.

They continued their steady advance, and Robert's heart fluttered, but
when they came to the ravine they found it empty of everything save
the bushes, and the scouts and guides, plunging into it, crossed to
the other side. The light horsemen of Virginia followed, after them
Gage's regulars and then the main army drew on its red and blue
length, expecting to cross in the same way.

Robert, Tayoga and Willet, leading, entered the deep forest
again. Some chance had put young Lennox slightly in advance of his
comrades, but suddenly he stopped. A short distance ahead a figure
bounded across the trail and disappeared in the thicket. It was only a
flitting glimpse, but he recognized St. Luc, the athletic figure, the
fair hair and the strong face.

"St. Luc!" he exclaimed. "Did you see, Dave?  Did you see?"

"Aye, I saw," said the hunter, "and the enemy is here!"

He whirled about, threw up his arms and shouted to the column to
stop. At the same moment, a terrible cry, the long fierce war whoop of
the savages, burst from the forest, filled the air and came back in
ferocious echoes. Then a deadly fire of rifles and muskets was poured
from both right and left upon the marching column. Men and horses went
down, and cries of pain and surprise blended with the war whoop of the
savages which swelled and fell again.

Robert and his comrades had thrown themselves flat upon the ground at
the first fire, and escaped the bullets. Now they rose to their
knees, and began to send their own bullets at the flitting forms among
the trees and bushes. Robert caught glimpses of the savages, naked to
the waist, coated thickly with war paint, their fierce eyes gleaming,
and now and then he saw a man in French uniform passing among them and
encouraging them. He saw one gigantic figure which he knew to be that
of Tandakora, and he raised his reloaded rifle to fire at him, but the
Ojibway was gone.

Surprised in the ominous forest, the British and the Virginians
nevertheless showed a courage worthy of all praise. Gage formed his
regulars on the trail, and they sent volley after volley into the
dense shades on either side, the big muskets thundering together like
cannon. Leaves and twigs and little boughs fell in showers before
their bullets, but whether they struck any of the foe they did not
know. The smoke soon rose in clouds and added to the dimness and
obscurity of the forest.

"A great noise," shouted Tayoga in Robert's ear, "but it does not hurt
the enemy, who sees his target and sends his bullets against it!"

The soldiers were dropping fast and the bullets of the French and the
savages were coming from their coverts in a deadly rain. Robert,
Willet and Tayoga, with the wisdom of the wilderness, remained
crouched at the edge of the trail, but in shelter, and did not fire
until they saw an enemy upon whom to draw the trigger. Then a deeper
roar was added to the thundering of the big muskets, as Braddock
brought up the cannon, and they began to sweep the forest. The English
troops, eager to get at the foe, crowded forward, shouting "God save
the King!" and the cheers of the Virginians joined with them.

"We'll win! We'll win!" cried Robert. "They can't stop such brave men
as ours!"

But the fire of the French and the savages was increasing in volume
and accuracy. The bullets and cannon balls of the English and
Americans fired almost at random were passing over their heads, but
the great column of scarlet and blue on the trail formed a target
which the leaden missiles could not miss. Continually shouting the war
whoop, exultant now with the joy of expected triumph, the savages
hovered on either flank of Braddock's army like a swarm of bees, but
with a sting far more deadly. The brave and wily Beaujeu had been
killed in the first minute of the battle, but St. Luc, Dumas and
Ligneris, equally brave and wily, directed the onset, and the huge
Tandakora raged before his warriors.

The head of the British column was destroyed, and the three crept back
toward Gage's regulars, but the fire of the enemy was now spreading
along both flanks of the column to its full length. Robert remembered
the warning words of St. Luc. Every twig and leaf in the forest was
spouting death. Gage's regulars, raked by a terrible fire, and in
danger of complete destruction, were compelled to retreat upon the
main body, and, to their infinite mortification, abandon two cannon,
which the savages seized with fierce shouts of joy and dragged into
the woods.

"It goes ill," said Willet, as the terrible forest, raining death from
every side, seemed to close in on them like the shadow of
doom. Braddock, hearing the tremendous fire ahead, rushed forward his
own immediate troops as fast as possible, and meeting Gage's
retreating men, the two bodies became a great mass of scarlet in the
forest, upon which French and Indian bullets, that could not miss,
beat like a storm of hail. The shouts and cheers of the regulars
ceased. In an appalling situation, the like of which they had never
known before, hemmed in on every side by an unseen death, they fell
into confusion, but they did not lose courage. The savage ring now
enclosed the whole army, and to stand and to retreat alike meant
death.

The British charged with the bayonet into the thickets. The Indians
melted away before them, and, when the exhausted regulars came back
into the trail, the Indians rushed after them, still pouring in a
murderous fire, and making the forest ring with the ferocious war
whoop. The Virginians, knowing the warfare of the wilderness, began to
take to the shelter of the trees, from which they could fire at the
enemy. The brave though mistaken Braddock fiercely ordered them out
again. A score lying behind a fallen trunk and, matching the savages
at their own game, were mistaken by the regulars for the foe, and were
fired upon with deadly effect. Other regulars who tried to imitate the
hostile tactics were set upon by Braddock himself who beat them with
the flat of his sword and drove them back into the open trail, where
the rain of bullets fell directly upon them.

Robert looked upon the scene and he found it awful to the last
degree. The bodies of the dead in red or blue lay everywhere.
Officers, English and Virginian, ran here and there begging
and praying their troops to stand and form in order. "Fire
upon the enemy!"  they shouted. "Show us somebody to fire at and we'll
fire," the men shouted back. The confusion was deepening, and the
signs of a panic were appearing. In the forest the circle of Indians,
mad with battle and the greatest taking of scalps they had ever known,
pressed closer and closer, and sent sheets of bullets into the huddled
mass. Many of them leaped in and scalped the fallen before the eyes of
the horrified soldiers. The yelling never ceased, and it was so
terrific that the few British officers who survived declared that they
would never forget it to their dying day.

Among the officers the mortality was now frightful. The brave Sir
Peter Halket was shot dead, and his young son, the lieutenant, rushing
to raise up his body, was killed and fell by his side. The youthful
Shirley, Braddock's secretary, received a bullet in his brain and died
instantly. Out of eighty-six officers sixty-three were down.
Washington alone seemed to bear a charmed life. Two horses were
killed under him and four bullets pierced his clothing. Braddock
galloped back and forth, cursing and shouting to his men, and showing
undaunted courage. Robert believed that he never really understood
what was happening, that the deadly nature of the surprise and its
appalling completeness left him dazed.

How long Robert stood at the edge of the circle of death and fired
into the bushes he never knew, but it seemed to him that almost an
eternity had passed, when Tayoga seized him by the arm and shouted in
his ear.

"It is finished! Our army has perished! Come, Lennox!"

He wiped the smoke from his eyes, and saw that the mass in red and
blue was much smaller. Braddock was still on his horse, and, at the
insistence of his officers, he was at last giving the command to
retreat. Just as the trumpet sounded that note of defeat he was shot
through the body and fell to the ground where, in his rage and
despair, he begged the men to leave him to die alone. But two of the
Virginia officers lifted him up and bore him toward the rear. Then the
army that had fought so long against an invisible foe broke into a
panic, that is what was left of it, as two thirds of its numbers had
already been killed or wounded. Shouting with horror and ignoring
their officers, they rushed for the river.

Everything was lost, cannon and baggage were abandoned, and often
rifles and muskets were thrown away. Into the water they rushed, and
the Indians, who had followed howling like wolves, stopped, though
they fired at the fleeing men in the stream.

As the retreat began, Robert, Tayoga and Willet, whom some miracle
seemed to preserve from harm, joined the Virginians who covered the
rear, and, as fast as they could reload their rifles, they fired at
the demon horde that pressed closer and closer, and that never ceased
to cut down the fleeing army. It was much like a ghastly dream to
Robert. Nothing was real, except his overwhelming sense of horror. Men
fell around him, and he wondered why he did not fall too, but he was
untouched, and Willet and Tayoga also were unwounded. He saw near him
young Stuart who had lost his horse long since, but who had snatched a
rifle from a fallen soldier, and who was fighting gallantly on foot.

"Who would have thought it?" exclaimed the Virginian. "An army such
as ours, to be beaten, nay, to be destroyed, by a swarm of savages!"

"But don't forget the Frenchmen!" shouted Robert in reply. "They're
directing!"

"Which is no consolation to us," cried Stuart. He said something else,
but it was lost in the tremendous firing and yelling of the Indians,
who were now only a score of yards away from the devoted rear guard
that was doing its best to protect the flying and confused mass of
soldiers.

Robert discharged his bullet at a brown face and then, as he walked
backward, he tripped and fell over a root. He sprang up at once, but
in an instant a gigantic figure bounded out of the fire and smoke, and
Tandakora, uttering a fierce shout of triumph, circled his tomahawk
swiftly above his head, preparatory to the mortal blow. But Tayoga,
quick as lightning, hurled his pistol with all his might. It struck
the huge Ojibway on the head with such force that the tomahawk fell
from his hand, and he staggered back into the smoke.

"Tayoga, again I thank you!" cried Robert.

"You will do the same for me," said the Onondaga, and then they too
were lost in the smoke, as with the rear guard of Virginians they
followed the retreating army.

Robert and his comrades, swept on in the press, crossed the river with
the others and gained the farther shore unhurt. Willet looked back at
the woods, which still flamed with the hostile rifles, and shuddered.

"It's worse than anything of which I ever dreamed," he said. "Now the
tomahawk and the scalping knife will sweep the border from Canada to
Carolina."

The panic was stopped at last and the broken remnants of the army,
covered by the Virginians who understood the forest, began their
retreat. Braddock died the next day, his last words being, "We shall
know better how to deal with them another time."  Washington, Orme,
Morris and the others carried the news of the great defeat to Virginia
and Pennsylvania, whence it was sent to England, to be received there
at first with incredulity, men saying that such a thing was
impossible. But England too was soon to be in mourning, because so
many of her bravest had fallen at the hands of an invisible foe in the
far American wilderness.

Robert, Willet and Tayoga followed the retreating army only a short
distance beyond the Monongahela. They saw that Grosvenor, Stuart and
Cabell had escaped with slight wounds, and, slipping quietly into the
forest, they circled about Fort Duquesne, seeing the lights where the
Indians were burning their wretched prisoners alive, and then plunging
again into the woods.

Late at night they lay down in a dense covert, and exhausted,
slept. They rose at dawn, and tried to shake off the horror.

"Be of good courage, Robert," said Willet. "It's a terrible blow, but
England and the colonies have not yet gathered their full strength."

"That is so," said Tayoga. "Our sachems tell us that he who wins the
first victory does not always win the last."

A bird on a bough over their heads began to sing a song of greeting to
the new day, and Robert hoped and believed.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Shadow of the North, by Joseph A. Altsheler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHADOW OF THE NORTH ***

***** This file should be named 11881.txt or 11881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/8/8/11881/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Ari J Joki and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
