


CHAPTER XXXVI.

SAD FOREBODINGS.


The day which had been so eagerly awaited by Squire Carter dawned at
last. The mortgage on Sterling Grant's farm was due, and he intended to
foreclose. There was a gentleman from the city who had taken a fancy to
the farm and had offered him eight thousand dollars for it. The squire
hoped to obtain it by foreclosure at less than five thousand. This would
be taking advantage of the farmer; but, as the squire said to himself,
complacently, "Business is business!" These words are used as an excuse
for a great many mean acts.

At supper time, the evening before, Sterling Grant looked sad and
troubled.

"Wife," he said, "I am afraid we shall have to bid good-by to the old
farm to-morrow."

"Do you really think the squire will foreclose, Sterling?"

"I know he will. I called on him to-day, and begged and pleaded with him
to extend the mortgage another year, but it was all in vain."

"I don't see how people can be so hard-hearted," said Mrs. Grant,
indignantly.

"It's the squire's nature. He says that business is business."

"I thought perhaps Andy might do something. He has five hundred dollars,
and maybe a little more."

"It would do no good, wife. I hinted that I might be able to pay a part
of the mortgage, but the squire wouldn't hear of it. He said the whole
or none."

"I am sure Andy would help us if he could."

"I know that, but the mortgage is for three thousand dollars. It is
quite beyond his ability to lift."

"I am afraid you are right, Sterling," said his wife, with a sigh. "I
thought perhaps Andy would be here by this time."

"It would do no good to come unless he brought the money with him."

"He may come yet by the seven o'clock train."

"We had better not count on that, or we shall only be the more
disappointed."

"What shall you do, Sterling, if the squire takes the farm?"

"There will be some money left, but I am afraid not much."

"Isn't the place worth six thousand dollars?"

"Yes but it won't fetch that at a forced sale. The squire told me this
afternoon that it wasn't worth more than fifteen hundred dollars over
and above the face of the mortgage."

"It would be wicked to sell for that."

"We must be content with what we can get."

After supper the farmer took his hat, and walked slowly and soberly
about the farm. He felt that it was his farewell. Till now it had been
his. To-morrow it would pass from his possession.

"It is hard," he sighed, "but it can't be helped. At any rate, we won't
starve."

There was a small house, with half an acre of land attached on the
outskirts of the village, which he could get at a moderate rental. He
had inquired about it, and had made up his mind to secure it.

"But it is humble," objected his wife.

"We must not be proud, wife," he said. We can make it look homelike with
our furniture in it."

"But what will you do for an income, Sterling?"

"I can work out by the day. Perhaps the man who buys our farm--I hear
the squire has got a purchaser for it--will employ me."

"To work out by the day at your age, Sterling!" said his wife,
indignantly.

"It will be hard, but if it is necessary I can do it."

"But I want to help, Sterling. I can get sewing to do."

"No, no; I won't consent to that."

"Then I won't consent to your working by the day."

"Well, we won't discuss it to-night. We will let the future take care of
itself."

Just then the noise of wheels was heard, and a buggy stopped at the
door.

"I do believe it's Andy!" exclaimed Mrs. Grant, joyfully.

It was Andy. A minute later, he was in the house.

"I am late," he said. "I lost the regular train, and had to get off at
Stacy, six miles away; but I got a man from the stable to bring me
over."

"I am glad to see you, Andy," said his mother.

"And so am I," added Sterling Grant, "though it is a sad time."

"Why a sad time, father?"

"The squire will foreclose to-morrow."

"No, he won't foreclose, father. I will stop it."

"But how can you prevent it, my son?"

"By paying the three thousand dollars, father."

"Have you got the money?" asked his father, incredulously.

"Yes."

"But how--?"

"Don't ask me any questions, father. Be satisfied with the knowledge
that I have got it."

"Heaven be praised!" said the farmer, fervently.

"I don't think Squire Carter will say that."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

CONCLUSION.


A little before twelve o'clock on the following day, Squire Carter rang
the bell at the farmhouse door. He was dressed with scrupulous neatness,
and there was a smile of triumphant anticipation on his face.

Andy answered the bell.

"Walk in, squire," he said.

"Ha! So you are home, Andy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Ahem! Your father has been unfortunate."

"Then you intend to foreclose?"

"Yes; I need the money and must have it."

"Isn't that rather hard on an old neighbor?"

"You are a boy, Andy, and don't understand. Business is business."

"Well, come in."

Mr. and Mrs. Grant were sitting by the fireplace. They looked calm, not
sorrowful, as the squire anticipated.

"Ahem! My friends, I am sorry for you!" said the squire, in a
perfunctory way. "Life is full of disappointments, as we read in the
Scriptures."

"What do you propose to do with the farm, squire?" asked the farmer,
calmly.

"I may sell it, if I can find a purchaser. I haven't thought much about
it."

"That is right, squire. It isn't well to count your chickens before they
are hatched."

It was Andy who spoke.

"Andrew, you are very flippant," said the squire, displeased. "I
apprehend that there is very little doubt as to my having the farm to
sell."

"What do you suppose is going to become of my father?"

"That is not for me to say. If I run the farm I may hire him to work on
it."

"He has made up his mind to work on it."

"With or without my permission?" said the squire, with a sneer.

"Exactly so."

"I don't understand you," said the squire, with dignified displeasure.

"I presume not, but you will understand better when I say that he stands
prepared to pay off the mortgage, and the farm will remain his."

"Impossible!" ejaculated the squire, turning pale.

"Quite possible, sir. Have you the mortgage with you?"

"Yes."

"Here is a release which you will please sign. Father, you had better
pay the squire at once."

Mr. Grant took out a big wallet, and counted out thirty
one-hundred-dollar bills.

"I believe that is correct, squire," he said.

"No, it isn't. You haven't paid the interest," snarled the squire.

"Here is another hundred dollars--that will cover it."

Ten minutes later Squire Carter left the farmhouse with a heavy frown
upon his face. He was bitterly disappointed, and the money did not
console him.

This was not the last of his disappointments. His brother's widow in New
York sued him for an accounting of his father's estate, and he was
obliged, not long afterward, to pay her five thousand dollars. This put
the widow and her son in a comfortable position, but seriously
embarrassed the squire, who had lost money by ill-advised speculation.

Two years later he had to sell his fine place and take a much humbler
one half a mile from the village. Conrad was obliged to seek a place,
and is bitterly humiliated because he receives but four dollars a week,
while the boy he used to look down upon is prosperous and successful.

Andy has sold out his property in Tacoma to such advantage that he
counts himself worth twenty thousand dollars. He continues to live in
handsome style with his friend, Walter Gale, and is to be taken into
partnership in the real estate office by Mr. Crawford when he attains
the age of twenty-one.

Of the less important characters in our story it may be said that Byron
Warden has had a story published in the nickel library, and is very
proud of this measure of success. He continues to write poems for the
_Century_ and other prominent magazines. They always come back to him
"respectfully declined," but he cherishes the hope that some day he will
receive a more favorable answer.

Valentine Burns holds a place in Mr. Crawford's office and is giving
excellent satisfaction. Simon Rich, formerly head clerk for Mr. Flint,
has proved a defaulter, and is a fugitive in Canada. Sam Perkins still
dazzles the world with his showy neckties, but thus far has only risen
to ten dollars a week.

Mr. Grant and his wife are happy in Andy's success, and there is no
danger of the farm passing from their possession. Quite unexpectedly the
farmer has received a check from Nathan Lawrence, the defaulting cashier
of the Benton bank, for a thousand dollars, with assurance that in time
the entire three thousand dollars will be paid up.

"After all father," writes Andy, "it was lucky for me that I had to
leave school. It was the beginning of my present prosperity."



THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Andy Grant's Pluck, by Horatio Alger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDY GRANT'S PLUCK ***

***** This file should be named 14831.txt or 14831.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/8/3/14831/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Amy Cunningham and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
