"Julie," whispered John, "will your mother consent?"

"Yes, when I tell her to do so."

"And Philip?"

"Yes, without telling."

The automobile, still unguided, ran on straight and true as if it were
alive, and knew that it carried the precious freight of two young and
faithful hearts, and that nothing else in all the world was so tender
and true as young love.

Far in the night, when the road had climbed up the hills, John saw a
light flashing and winking in the valley, and from a more distant point
another light winked and flashed in reply. He read the fiery signals and
he knew that the alarm was abroad. The hussars had come to Obenstein,
only to find that the birds had flown, and doubtless, too, to find among
the bushes the dead body of Weber, Prince Karl's most trusted and
unscrupulous agent. Julie had gone to sleep at last and Antoine and
Suzanne slumbered on.

He alone watched and worked, and for a few moments he felt a chill of
dread. The hussars would spread the alarm and the whole country would
now be seeking them. He saw a road turning from the main one, and
leading deeper into the mountains. Instinctively he followed it, like an
animal seeking hiding in the wilderness, and now the machine rose fast
on the slopes, dense forest lining the way on either side. Far below in
the valley the lights and the wireless signals talked incessantly to one
another and the hounds were hot on the chase.

It was about halfway between midnight and morning when John stopped the
machine among dense pines on the very crest of a mountain, where the
road, without any reason, seemed to end. Antoine awoke with a start and,
springing out, began to curse himself under his breath for having gone
to sleep.

"Take no blame, Antoine," said John. "You could have done nothing then,
and it was much better for you to have slept. You now have back all your
strength and we may need it."

Julie awoke with a start and after a moment or two of bewilderment
understood. Then she gave John that old brilliant, flashing look,
softened now by the memory of a kiss when no hand was at the wheel.

"Julie," said John, trusting as ever in her courage, "we seem to have
come to the end of things. Our enemies are in the valley following us,
and it's not hard to trace the path of our automobile. I don't know how
many will come, but Antoine and I can make a stand with the rifles."

"All hope is not yet lost!" said Suzanne, in a voice as deep as that of
a man. "Remember that when the earth cannot hide us the air may open to
receive us. Remember, too, Mademoiselle Julie, that your brother seeks
you, and when the time comes we are to look aloft."

Driven again by that extraordinary impulse, John and Julie gazed up. But
they saw only the dancing stars in the blue velvet of the sky.

"He may come! He may come in time!" said Suzanne, speaking like an
inspired prophet of old, and her manner carried conviction. John,
clinging to the last desperate hope, recalled how Lannes and he had
summoned Castelneau and Mery from the sky to save them, and though it
was a wild hope he resolved to send up the same signal.

It was a quick task to gather dry wood and build a little heap, Julie
and Suzanne helping with energy and enthusiasm. There were plenty of
matches in the car, and presently John lighted the heap, which crackled
and sent up leaping tongues of flame.

"It may serve also as a signal to those who follow us," he said, "but
we must take the chance. Cavalry can't reach us except by the road that
we came and with our rifles we can hold it a long time."

The mention of the word "rifle," put a thought in the head of Antoine
Picard, in whose veins the blood of Vikings flowed, and who that night
was a veritable Viking of the land. Leaving John and the two women to
feed the signal fire, he secured one of the powerful breech-loading
rifles from the automobile, and quietly stole down the path.

Antoine, although he held a modern weapon in his hand, had shed
centuries of civilization. As still as death as he trod lightly in the
dark road, he was, nevertheless, consumed with the wild Berserk rage
against those who followed him. He knew that hussars would soon appear
on the slope, but he intended that a lion should be in their path and he
stroked lovingly the barrel of the powerful breech-loader. Behind him
the flames were shooting higher and higher, pouring red streaks against
the velvet blue of the sky. But all of Picard's attention was
concentrated now on what lay before him.

He heard soon the distant beat of hoofs and he drew a little to the side
of the road, down which he could see a long distance, as it stretched
straight before him, narrow and steep. He made out clearly a half dozen
figures, hussars struggling forward on tired horses, and he chuckled a
little to himself. It was a splendid weapon that he held in his hand,
and he was a great marksman. Armed as he was, he felt that he had
little to fear on that lone mountain road from six or seven horsemen.

He pushed the rifle forward a little and waited in the shadow of the
pines. The hoofbeats rang louder, and the shadows became the distinct
figures of horses and men. Picard uttered a deep "Ah!" because he
recognized the one who led them, a powerful, erect man, the Prussian
Rudolf von Boehlen, now in the very center of the moonlight.

When they were yet two hundred yards away, Picard stepped into the
middle of the road and called to them in a loud voice to halt. He saw
von Boehlen throw up his head, say something to his troop, and then try
to urge his horse to a faster gait.

Picard sighed. He knew that von Boehlen was a brave man and he respected
brave men. A disagreeable task lay before him, one that must be done,
but he would give him another chance. He called again and louder than
before for them to halt, but von Boehlen came on steadily. Then Picard
promptly raised his rifle and shot him through the heart.

When von Boehlen fell dead in the road his hussars halted and while they
were hesitating Picard shot the horses of two under them, while a third
received a bullet in the shoulder. Then all of them fled on horse or on
foot into the valley while Picard went calmly back to the fire which was
now sending its signal across the whole heavens. He told John in a
whisper of what had befallen, and soon he returned to his place in the
road to watch.

John and Julie by and by left Suzanne to feed the fire and they stood
hand in hand gazing now at the heavens and now at the dark pine forests.
The velvet blue of the sky faded into the dark hour and then the dawn
came, edged with silver, turning to pink and then to gold, like a robe
of many colors, drawn slowly out of the infinite. Suzanne suddenly
uttered a great cry.

"Look up! Look up, my children!" she cried.

Coming out of the west which was yet in dusk was a black dot and then
three others--behind it in Indian file.

"We're saved," cried Suzanne. "It's Monsieur Philip and his friends'"

"How do you know? You can't see yet," said John, almost afraid to hope.

"I don't need to see it! I feel it, and I know!" replied Suzanne. "Look,
how they come!"

John trembled and the hand of Julie in his own trembled too, but it was
not fear, it was the feeling that a miracle, a miracle to save them, was
coming to pass.

The four black dots moved on out of the west and John knew that they
were aeroplanes coming swiftly and directly toward their mountain. The
dawn reaching the zenith spread also to the west and the flying machines
were outlined clearly in the luminous golden haze. Then John, too,
uttered a great cry.

He knew the slender sinuous shape that led. As far as eye could reach he
would recognize the _Arrow_. The miracle was done. They had called to
Philip in their desperate need and he had come.

"Philip and the _Arrow_!" he exclaimed. "We're saved!"

"I knew that he would come!" Julie said, as she stared wide-eyed into
the blue and gold of the heavens.

Now the aeroplanes flew at almost incredible speed, the _Arrow_ always
at their head, poised for a few moments directly over their heads, and
then came down in a dazzling series of spirals, landing almost at their
feet.

"Philip, my brother!" exclaimed Julie, as the slender compact figure
that they knew so well stepped gracefully from the _Arrow_.

He took off his heavy glasses and gazed at them as they stood,
forgetting that they were still hand in hand. Then he smiled and lifting
his cap in his old dramatic way he said:

"It seems that for several reasons I didn't come too soon."

"No," replied John, calmly, and holding firmly the little hand in his,
"you have arrived just in time to give your consent to my marriage with
your sister."

"And what does Mademoiselle Julie Lannes say?"

The rising sun clothed Julie in a shower of gold. Never before had the
wonderful golden hair seemed more wonderful. Never before had she seemed
to the youthful eyes of her lover more nearly divine.

"Julie Lannes says," she replied bravely, "that if John Scott wishes her
to be his wife and her mother and brother consent she will gladly marry
him."

[Illustration: "Now the aeroplanes flew at almost incredible speed, the
_Arrow_ always at their head"]

"Then we must hurry away, or it will be a wedding; without either a
bride or a bridegroom. Are not those Austrian hussars at the bottom of
the slope, Picard?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Then it's up and away with us. Here are Caumartin, Mery and Castelneau,
old friends of yours, John, but it was Delaunois who brought me the last
news of you. Caumartin has the _Omnibus_, and in it the bridal pair must
travel. I can't take you with me in the _Arrow_ now, John, as it admits
of only a single passenger. But do you, Picard, take the rifles and come
with me. We'll cover the rear of our flight. Now, hasten! Hasten!"

John and Julie in an instant were side by side in the _Omnibus_, Picard,
forgetting all fear of aeroplanes, was with Philip, and the four
machines rose, circling above the mountain, Caumartin's big plane
leading. John and Julie sat very close together and her hand was again
in his.

"Fear not, dearest," he said. "When all seemed lost Philip came for us."

"But you came for me first and you risked your life many times. To give
myself to you seems but a small reward for all that you've done."

"It's a reward that kings and princes in their power cannot win."

Then they fell silent, their emotion too deep for speech. Philip had
spoken in jest, but it was almost like a wedding trip. The hussars below
had reached the abandoned automobile, and fired vain shots at the
disappearing aeroplanes, but John and Julie heeded them not. War and
brute passions were left behind, and they were sailing through the calm
blue ether.

Caumartin, the stalwart, was wholly absorbed in steering his great
machine and they sat behind him, very close together, still hand in
hand, watching the great panorama of the heavens, unrolled before them.
It was the most beautiful sky that they had ever seen, dyed that day
into intensely vivid colors by the master hand. Far away were great pink
terraces of color, changing to blue or gold or silver, while below them
revolved the earth, clad in deepest green, save where far peaks were
crested with snow.

Both John and Julie breathed an infinite peace. The war sank farther and
farther away, as they sailed on through peaceful heavens, surcharged
with infinite color. Both felt, with the certainty of truth, that their
troubles and dangers were over, and they now left the journey and its
needs to Philip and his able comrades.

"After we're married, Julie, you'll go to America with me for awhile,"
said John, "but we'll come back to France. We shall divide our time
between two homes, your country and mine, now the countries of both."

The hand within his own returned his pressure. Caumartin turned his
machine toward the north, avoiding neutral Switzerland, and sailing at
great speed they passed beyond the German lines and over the fair land
of France that all of them loved so well.

Caumartin kept his place in front. Suzanne was in the machine just
behind and Philip and Picard in the _Arrow_ always hovered in the rear.
That night they descended within the French lines, and John heard the
next day that Prince Karl of Auersperg had been killed in battle. It was
singular, perhaps, but John felt a touch of pity for him. He had wanted
something very greatly and, powerful prince though he was, his power had
not been great enough to win it for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were married in Notre Dame by the Archbishop of Paris. The
influence of John's uncle, the senator and great mining millionaire, was
sufficient to procure John's release from the army. In truth, General
Vaugirard, although he was fat and sixty, had a strong vein of
sentiment, and he was one of the most distinguished guests in Notre
Dame, where he puffed mightily and kept himself with great difficulty
from whistling his approval. He and Senator Pomeroy stood together and
he nodded emphatically when the senator told him, with a certain pride
in his whisper, that while John, his sole heir, was not a prince, he
could buy and sell many who were.

General Vaugirard was not the only distinguished officer at the
marriage. There was a lull in the operations and all of John's friends
came to Paris to see him wed the beautiful Julie Lannes. A little man,
with the brow of a Napoleon, the famous general, Bougainville, whose
rise had been so astonishing, stood beside General Vaugirard.

Daniel Colton, now a colonel, his arm in a sling, was not far away.
Carstairs was there, a bandage about his head, and Wharton was with him,
his shoulder yet sore from the path that a bullet had made through it.
It was decreed that while these friends of John's should receive many
wounds, all of them were to survive the great war.

They were to spend three days at the little house beyond the Seine
before sailing, and as the twilight came on they sat together and looked
out over the City of Light, melting into the dusk after a golden day.
The subdued hum of Paris came to them in a note of infinite sweetness
and peace.

John was stirred to the depths, but his emotion, like that of most deep
natures, was quiet. He felt Julie's hand tremble a little in his own, as
the voice of Paris grew fainter but sweeter. The twilight faded into the
night and the buildings grew misty.

"We have passed through many dangers, Julie," said John, "but for me at
least the reward is greater than them all. When did you begin to love
me?"

"You were my gallant knight from the first, but, if it had not been so,
how could I have kept from loving the fearless crusader who dared all
and who risked his life every day in the country of the enemy to save
me?"

"I'd have been a poor and worthless creature if I hadn't done so,
Julie."

"Few men have done so, though, even for love."

Stirred by an emotion deeper than ever, and wholly pure, he put his
arms around her, and their lips met in a long kiss of young love.

The first dusk thinned away, the sky turned to a vault of burnished
silver, and, the infinite stars coming out, danced their approval.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOSTS OF THE AIR***


******* This file should be named 15285.txt or 15285.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/5/2/8/15285



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
