whistling over the heads of the Texans. In an instant the garrison of
Cos was awake, and the alarm sounded from every point of San Antonio.
Lights flashed, arms rattled and men called to one another.

"Into this house" cried "Deaf" Smith. "We cannot charge up the narrow
street in face of the cannon!"

They were now within a hundred yards of the plaza, but they saw that the
guide was right. They dashed into the large, solid house that he had
indicated, and Ned did not notice until he was inside that it was the
very house of the Vice-Governor, Veramendi, into which he had come once
before. Just as the last of the Texans sprang through the doors another
cannon ball whistled down the street, this time low enough. Milam's
division, meanwhile, had rushed into the house of De La Garcia, near by.

As Ned and the others sprang to cover he trampled upon the flowers in a
patio, and he saw a little fountain playing. Then he knew. It was the
house of Veramendi, and he thought it a singular chance that had brought
him to the same place. But he had little time for reflection. The column
of Texans, a hundred and fifty in number, were taking possession of
every part of the building, the occupants of which had fled through the
rear doors.

"To the roof!" cried "Deaf" Smith. "We can best meet the attack from
there."

The doors and windows were already manned, but Smith and many of the
best men rushed to the flat roof, and looked over the low stone coping.
It was not yet day and they could not see well. Despite the lack of
light, the Mexicans opened a great fire of cannon and small arms. The
whole town resounded with the roar and the crash and also with the
shouting. But most of the cannon balls and bullets flew wide, and the
rest spent themselves in vain on the two houses.

The Texans, meanwhile, held their fire, and waited for day. Ned, Smith
and the others on the roof lay down behind the low coping. They had
achieved their long wish. They were in San Antonio, but what would
happen to them there?

Ned peeped over the coping. He saw many flashes down the street toward
the plaza and he heard the singing of bullets. His finger was on the
trigger and the temptation to reply was great, but like the others he
waited.

The faint light in the east deepened and the sun flashed out. The full
dawn was at hand and the two forces, Texans and Mexicans, faced each
other.




CHAPTER XXII

THE TAKING OF THE TOWN


The December sun, clear and cold, bathed the whole town in light.
Houses, whether of stone, adobe or wood, were tinted a while with gold,
but everywhere in the streets and over the roofs floated white puffs of
smoke from the firing, which had never ceased on the part of the
Mexicans. The crash of rifles and muskets was incessant, and every
minute or two came the heavy boom of the cannon with which Cos swept the
streets. The Texans themselves now pulled the trigger but little, calmly
waiting their opportunity.

Ned and his comrades still lay on the roof of the Veramendi house. The
boy's heart beat fast but the scene was wild and thrilling to the last
degree. He felt a great surge of pride that he should have a share in so
great an event. From the other side of the river came the rattle of
rifle fire, and he knew that it was the detachment from Burleson
attacking the Alamo. But presently the sounds there died.

"They are drawing off," said Obed, "and it is right. It is their duty to
help us here, but I don't see how they can ever get into San Antonio. I
wish the Mexicans didn't have those cannon which are so much heavier
than ours."

The Texans had brought with them a twelve pounder and a six pounder, but
the twelve pounder had already been dismounted by the overpowering
Mexican fire, and, without protection they were unable to use the six
pounder which they had drawn into the patio, where it stood silent.

Ned from his corner could see the mouths of the guns in the heavy
Mexican battery at the far end of the plaza, and he watched the flashes
of flame as they were fired one by one. In the intervals he saw a lithe,
strong figure appear on the breastwork, and he was quite sure that it
was Urrea.

An hour of daylight passed. From the house of De La Garcia the other
division of Texans began to fire, the sharp lashing of their rifles
sounding clearly amid the duller crash of musketry and cannon from the
Mexicans. The Texans in the lower part of the Veramendi house were also
at work with their rifles. Every man was a sharpshooter, and, whenever a
Mexican came from behind a barricade, he was picked off. But the
Mexicans had also taken possession of houses and they were firing with
muskets from windows and loopholes.

"We must shoot down the cannoneers," shouted the Ring Tailed Panther to
"Deaf" Smith.

Smith nodded. The men on the roof were fifteen in number and now they
devoted their whole attention to the battery. Despite the drifting smoke
they hit gunner after gunner. The fever in Ned's blood grew. Everything
was red before him. His temples throbbed like fire. The spirit of battle
had taken full hold of him, and he fired whenever he caught a glimpse of
a Mexican.

"Deaf" Smith was on Ned's right, and he picked off a gunner. But to do
so he had lifted his head and shoulders above the coping. A figure rose
up behind the Mexican barricade and fired in return. "Deaf" Smith
uttered a little cry, and clapped his hand to his shoulder.

"Never mind," he said in reply to anxious looks. "It's in the fleshy
part only, and I'm not badly hurt."

The bullet had gone nearly through the shoulder and was just under the
skin on the other side. The Ring Tailed Panther cut it out with his
bowie knife and bound up the wound tightly with strips from his hunting
shirt. But Ned, although it was only a fleeting glimpse, had recognized
the marksman. It was Urrea who had sent the bullet through "Deaf"
Smith's shoulder. He was proving himself a formidable foe.

But the men on the roof continued their deadly sharpshooting, and now,
the battery, probably at Urrea's suggestion, began to turn its attention
to them. Ned was seized suddenly by Obed and pulled flat. There was a
roaring and hissing sound over his head as a twelve pound cannon ball
passed, and Ned said to Obed: "I thank you." The cannon shot was
followed by a storm of bullets and then by more cannon shots. The
Mexican guns were served well that day. The coping was shot away and the
Texans were in imminent danger from the flying pieces. They were glad
when the last of it was gone.

But they did not yet dare to raise themselves high enough for a shot.
Balls, shell, and bullets swept the roof without ceasing. Ned lay on his
side, almost flat. He listened to the ugly hissing and screaming over
his head until it became unbearable. He turned over on his other side
and looked at Smith, their leader. Smith was pale and weak from his
wound, but he smiled wanly.

"You don't speak, but your face asks your question, Ned," he said. "I
hate to say it, but we can't hold this roof. I never knew the Mexicans
to shoot so well before, and their numbers and cannon give them a great
advantage. Below, lads, as soon as you can!"

They crept down the stairway, and found that the house itself was
suffering from the Mexican cannon. Holes had been smashed in the walls,
but here the Texans were always replying with their rifles. They also
heard the steady fire in the house of De La Garcia and they knew that
their comrades were standing fast. Ned, exhausted by the great tension,
sat down on a willow sofa. His hands were trembling and his face was wet
with perspiration. The Ring Tailed Panther sat down beside him.

"Good plan to rest a little, Ned," he said. "We've come right into a
hornets' nest an' the hornets are stingin' us hard. Listen to that, will
you!"

A cannon ball smashed through the wall, passed through the room in which
they were sitting, and dropped spent in another room beyond. Obed joined
them on the sofa.

"A cannon ball never strikes in the same place twice," misquoted Obed.
"So it's safer here than it is anywhere else in this Veramendi house.
I'd help with the rifles but there's no room for me at the windows and
loopholes just now."

"Our men are giving it back to them," said Ned. "Listen how the rifles
crackle!"

The battle was increasing in heat. The Mexicans, despite their
artillery, and their heavy barricades, were losing heavily at the hands
of the sharpshooters. The Texans, sheltered in the buildings, were
suffering little, but their position was growing more dangerous every
minute. They were inside the town, but the force of Burleson outside was
unable to come to their aid. Meanwhile, they must fight five to one, but
they addressed themselves with unflinching hearts to the task. Even in
the moment of imminent peril they did not think of retreat, but clung
to their original purpose of taking San Antonio.

Ned, tense and restless, was unable to remain more than a few minutes on
the sofa. He wandered into another room and saw a large table spread
with food. Bread and meat were in the dishes, and there were pots of
coffee. All was now cold. Evidently they had been making ready for early
breakfast in the Veramendi house when the Texans came. Ned called to his
friends.

"Why shouldn't we use it!" he said, "even if it is cold?"

"Why shouldn't we?" said Obed. "Even though we fight we must live."

They took the food and coffee, cold as it was, to the men, and they ate
and drank eagerly. Then they searched everywhere and found large
supplies of provisions in the house, so much, in fact, that the Ring
Tailed Panther growled very pleasantly between his teeth.

"There's enough here," he said, "to last two or three days, an' it's
well when you're in a fort, ready to stand a siege, to have something to
eat."

Some of the men now left the windows and loopholes to get a rest and Ned
found a place at one of them. Peeping out he saw the bare street, torn
by shot and shell. He saw the flash of the Texan rifles from the De La
Garcia house and he saw the blaze of the Mexican cannon in the plaza.
Mexican men, women and children on the flat roofs, out of range, were
eagerly watching the battle. Clouds of smoke drifted over the city.

While Ned was at the window, a second cannon ball smashed through the
wall of the Veramendi house, and caused the debris to fall in masses.
The Colonel grew uneasy. The cannon gave the Mexicans an immense
advantage, and they were now using it to the utmost. The house would be
battered down over the heads of the Texans, and they could not live in
the streets, which the Mexicans, from their dominating position, could
sweep with cannon and a thousand rifles and muskets. A third ball
crashed through the wall and demolished the willow sofa on which the
three had been sitting. Plaster rained down upon the Texans. They looked
at one another. They could not stay in the house nor could they go out.
A boy suddenly solved the difficulty.

"Let's dig a trench across the street to the De La Garcia house!" cried
Ned, "and join our comrades there!"

"That's the thing!" they shouted. They had not neglected to bring
intrenching tools with them, and they found spades and shovels about the
house. But in order to secure the greatest protection for their work
they decided to wait until night, confident that they could hold their
present position throughout the day.

It was many hours until the darkness, and the fire rose and fell at
intervals. More shattered plaster fell upon them, but they were still
holding the wreck of a house, when the welcome twilight deepened and
darkened into the night. Then they began work just inside the doorway,
cutting fast through plaster and adobe, and soon reaching the street.
They made the trench fairly wide, intending to get their six pounder
across also. Just behind those who worked with spade and shovel came the
riflemen.

A third of the way across, and the Mexicans discovered what was going
on. Once more a storm of cannon, rifle and musket balls swept the
street, but the Texans, bent down in their trench, toiled on, throwing
the dirt above their heads and out on either side. The riflemen behind
them, sheltered by the earth, replied to the Mexican fire, and, despite
the darkness, picked off many men.

Ned was just behind Obed, and the Ring Tailed Panther was following him.
All three were acting as riflemen. Obed was seeking a glimpse of Urrea,
but he did not get it. Ned was watching for a shot at the gunners.

Once the Mexicans under the cover of their artillery undertook to charge
down the street, but the sharpshooters in the trench quickly drove them
back.

Thus they burrowed like a great mole all the way across Soledad Street,
and joined their comrades in the strong house of De La Garcia. They also
succeeded in getting both of their cannon into the house, and, now
united, the Texans were encouraged greatly. Ned found all the rooms
filled with men. A party broke through the joint wall and entered the
next house, thus taking them nearer to the plaza and the Mexican
fortifications.

All through the night intermittent firing went on. The Mexicans
increased their fortifications, preparing for a desperate combat on the
morrow. They threw up new earthworks, and they loopholed many of the
houses that they held. Cos, his dark face darker with rage and fury,
went among them, urging them to renewed efforts, telling them that they
were bound to take prisoners all the Texans whom they did not slay in
battle, and that they should hang every prisoner. Great numbers of the
women and children had hidden in the Alamo on the other side of the
river. San Antonio itself was stripped for battle, and the hatred
between Texan and Mexican, so unlike in temperament, flamed into new
heat.

Ned was worn to the bone. His lips were burnt with his feverish breath.
The smoke stung his eyes and nostrils, and his limbs ached. He felt that
he must rest or die, and, seeing two men sound asleep on the floor of
one of the rooms, he flung himself down beside them. He slept in a few
minutes and Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther seeing him there did not
disturb him.

"If any boy has been through more than he has," said Obed, "I haven't
heard of him."

"An' I guess that he an' all of us have got a lot more comin'," said the
Ring Tailed Panther grimly. "Cos ain't goin' to give up here without the
terriblest struggle of his life. He can't afford to do it."

"Reckon you're right," said Obed.

Ned awoke the next morning with the taste of gunpowder in his mouth, but
the Texans, besides finding food in the houses, had brought some with
them, and he ate an ample breakfast. Then ensued a day that he found
long and monotonous. Neither side made any decided movement. There was
occasional firing, but they rested chiefly on their arms. In the course
of the second night the Mexicans opened another trench, from which they
began to fire at dawn, but the Texan rifles quickly put them to flight.

The Texans now began to grow restless. Cooped up in two houses they were
in the way of one another and they demanded freedom and action. Henry
Karnes suggested that they break into another house closer to the plaza.
Milam consented and Karnes, followed closely by Ned, Obed, the Ring
Tailed Panther and thirty others, dashed out, smashed in the door of the
house, and were inside before the astonished Mexicans could open an
accurate fire upon them. Here they at once secured themselves and their
bullets began to rake the plaza. The Mexicans were forced to throw up
more and higher intrenchments.

Again the combat became intermittent. There were bursts of rifle fire,
and occasional shots from the cannon, and, now and then, short periods
of almost complete silence. Night came on and Ned, watching from the
window, saw Colonel Milam, their leader, pass down the trench and enter
the courtyard of the Veramendi house. He stood there a moment, looking
at the Mexican position. A musket cracked and the Texan, throwing up his
arms, fell. He was dead by the time he touched the ground. The ball had
struck him in the center of the forehead.

Ned uttered a cry of grief, and it was taken up by all the Texans who
had seen their leader fall. A half dozen men rushed forward and dragged
away his body, but that night they buried it in the patio. His death
only incited them to new efforts. As soon as his burial was finished
they rushed another house in their slow advance, one belonging to
Antonio Navarro, a solid structure only one block from the great plaza.
They also stormed and carried a redoubt which the Mexicans had erected
in the street beside the house. It now being midnight they concluded to
rest until the morrow. Meanwhile, they had elected Johnson their leader.

Ned was in the new attack and with Obed and the Ring Tailed Panther he
was in the Navarro house. It was the fourth that he had occupied since
the attack on San Antonio. He felt less excitement than on the night
before. It seemed to him that he was becoming hardened to everything. He
looked at his comrades and laughed. They were no longer in the semblance
of white men. Their faces were so blackened with smoke, dirt and burned
gunpowder that they might have passed for negroes.

"You needn't laugh, Ned," said Obed. "You're just as black as we are.
This thing of changing your boarding house every night by violence and
the use of firearms doesn't lead to neatness. If fine feathers make
fine birds then we three are about the poorest flock that ever flew."

"But when we go for a house we always get it," said the Ring Tailed
Panther. "You notice that. This place belongs to Antonio Navarro. I've
met him in San Antonio, an' I don't like him, but I'm willin' to take
his roof an' bed."

Ned took the roof but not the bed. He could not sleep that night, and it
was found a little later that none would have a chance to sleep. The
Mexicans, advancing over the other houses, the walls of all of which
joined, cut loopholes in the roof of the Navarro house and opened fire
upon the Texans below. The Texans, with surer aim, cleared the Mexicans
away from the loopholes, then climbed to the roof and drove them off
entirely.

But no one dared to sleep after this attack, and Ned watched all through
the dark hours. Certainly they were having action enough now, and he was
wondering what the fourth day would bring forth. From an upper window he
watched the chilly sun creep over the horizon once more, and the dawn
brought with it the usual stray rifle and musket shots. Both Texan and
Mexican sharpshooters were watching at every loophole, and whenever they
saw a head they fired at it. But this was only the beginning, the
crackling prelude to the event that was to come.

"Come down, Ned," said Obed, "and get your breakfast. We've got coffee
and warm corn cakes and we'll need 'em, as we're already tired of this
boarding house and we intend to find another."

"Can't stay more than one night in a place while we're in San Antonio,"
said the Ring Tailed Panther, growling pleasantly. "A restless lot we
are an' it's time to move on again."

Ned ate and drank in silence. His nerves were quite steady, and he had
become so used to battle that he awaited whatever they were going to
attempt, almost without curiosity.

"Ain't you wantin' to know what we're goin' to do, Ned?" asked the Ring
Tailed Panther.

"I'm thinking that I'll find out pretty quick," replied Ned.

"Now this boy is shorely makin' a fine soldier," said the Panther to
Obed. "He don't ask nothin' about what he's goin' to do, but just eats
an' waits orders."

Ned smiled and ate another corn cake.

"Maybe," said Obed, "we'll meet our friend Urrea in the attack we're
going to make. If so, I'll take a shot at him, and I won't have any
remorse about it, either, if I hit him."

They did not wait long. A strong body of the Texans gathered on the
lower floor, many carrying, in addition to their weapons, heavy iron
crowbars. The doors were suddenly thrown open and they rushed out into
the cool morning air, making for a series of stone houses called the
Zambrano Row, the farthest of which opened upon the main plaza, where
the Mexicans were fortified so strongly. Scattering shots from muskets
and rifles greeted them, but as usual, when any sudden movement
occurred, the Mexicans fired wildly, and the Texans broke into the first
of the houses, before they could take good aim.

Ned was one of the last inside. He had lingered with the others to repel
any rush that the Mexicans might make. He was watching the Mexican
barricade, and he saw heads rise above it. One rose higher than the rest
and he recognized Urrea. The Mexican saw Ned also, and the eyes of the
two met. Urrea's were full of anger and malice, and raising his rifle
he fired straight at the boy. Ned felt the bullet graze his cheek, and
instantly he fired in reply. But Urrea had quickly dropped down behind
the barricade and the bullet missed. Then Ned rushed into the house.

The boy was blazing with indignation. He had spared Urrea's life, and
yet the Mexican had sought at the first opportunity to kill him. He
could not understand a soul of such caliber. But the incident passed
from his mind, for the time being, in the strenuous work that they began
now to do.

They broke through partition wall after wall with their powerful picks
