"No, indeed, Charlie. I know how fond you were of your cousin."

"Indeed, Harry, there was a talk between my father and cousin
Celia, a few months before the troubles came, of a formal betrothal
between us, and, had it not been for the coolness between our
fathers, it would have taken place."

"Yes, I remember now your telling me about it, Charlie.

"Well, what is to be done? for I agree with you that, if possible,
John Dormay must escape from the punishment he deserves. But how is
it to be done?"

"Well, Harry, a week or two will make no difference to our fathers.
They will have no expectation of hearing from us, for a long time
to come. I should say it were best that I should go down and warn
him, and I shall be glad if you will go with me."

"Of course I will go," Harry said. "Indeed, it were best that the warning
came from me. The man is a villain, and a reckless one; and in his
passion, when he hears that his rascality is known, the prize for which
he schemed snatched from him, and his very life in danger, might even
seek to vent his rage and spite upon you. Now it is clear, Charlie, that
you could not very well kill a man, and afterwards marry his daughter.
The thing would be scarce seemly.  But the fellow is no kinsman of mine.
He has grievously injured us, and I could kill him without the smallest
compunction, and thereby rid the world of a scoundrel, and you of a
prospective father-in-law of the most objectionable kind."

Charlie laughed.

"No, Harry; we will have no killing. We will go down and see him
together. We will let him know that the orders are probably already
on the road for his arrest, and that he had best lose not an hour,
but at once cross the water. I should not think that he would wish
to encumber himself with women, for I never thought he showed the
least affection to either his wife or daughter. At any rate, we
will see that he does not take them with him. I will tell him that,
if he goes, and goes alone, I will do my best to hush up the
matter; and that, so long as he remains abroad, the tale of his
villainy shall never be told; but that, if he returns, the
confession of Nicholson shall be published throughout the country,
even if no prosecution is brought against him."

When they called upon the duke, he shook them warmly by the hand.

"This parchment is the royal assent to the decision of the council,
that the estates of those inculpated in the alleged plot for the
assassination of the late king should be forthwith restored to
them, it having been clearly proved that they have been falsely
accused of the said crime, and that her majesty is satisfied that
these gentlemen are her true and loyal subjects.

"I think I may say," the duke continued with a smile, "that no
affair of state has ever been so promptly conducted and carried
through."

"We feel how deeply indebted we are, for our good fortune, to your
kindness, your grace," Charlie said. "We know that, but for you,
months might have elapsed, even years, before we could have
obtained such a result, even after we had the confession of
Nicholson in our hands."

"I am glad, in every way, to have been able to bring this about,"
the duke said. "In the first place, because I have been able to
right a villainous piece of injustice; in the second, because those
injured were loyal gentlemen, with no fault save their steadfast
adherence to the cause of the Stuarts; and lastly, because one of
these gentlemen was my own good friend, Mat Jervoise, of whose
company I have so many pleasant recollections.

"I hope that, as soon as you have informed your fathers that their
names are cleared, and their property restored, you will think of
what I said, and will decide to quit the service of Sweden, and
enter that of your queen.

"An officer fighting for a foreign monarch is, after all, but a
soldier of fortune, however valiantly he fights. He is fighting for
a cause that is not his own, and, though he may win rewards and
honours, he has not the satisfaction that all must feel who have
risked their lives, not for gold, but in the service of their
country. But I do not want any answer from you on that head now. It
is a matter for you to decide upon after due thought. I only say
that I shall go out, early in the spring, to take command of the
army; and that, if you present yourselves to me before I leave, I
shall be glad to appoint you on my personal staff, with the same
rank you now hold.

"You can now leave the country without any farther trouble. As to
the affair of the man Dormay, a messenger has been sent off, this
afternoon, with an order to the magistrates at Lancaster, to arrest
him on the charge of suborning false evidence, by which the lives
of some of her majesty's subjects were endangered; and of forging
letters whereby such evil designs might be furthered. I do not
suppose I shall see you again before you sail, for tomorrow we go
down to our country place, and may remain there some weeks. I may
say that it was the desire to get your affair finished, before we
left town, that conduced somewhat to the speed with which it has
been carried through."

After again thanking the duke most warmly for his kindness, and
saying that they would lay his offer before their fathers, and that
their own inclinations were altogether in favour of accepting it,
the young men took their leave.

"It is unfortunate about Dormay."

"Most unfortunate," Harry said.

"I think, if we start tomorrow morning, Harry, we shall be in time.
There is no reason why the messenger should travel at any
extraordinary speed, and, as he may be detained at Lancaster, and
some delay may arise before officers are sent up to Lynnwood to
make the arrest, we may be in time.

"We must take a note of the date. It is one we shall remember all
our lives. It is the 25th of November, and we will keep it up as a
day of festivity and rejoicing, as long as we live."

"That will we," Harry agreed. "It shall be the occasion of an
annual gathering of those who got into trouble from those suppers
at Sir Marmaduke's. I fancy the others are all in France, but their
friends will surely be able to let them know, as soon as they hear
the good news.

"I think we shall have a stormy ride tomorrow. The sky looks very
wild and threatening."

"It does, indeed; and the wind has got up very much, in the last
hour.''

"Yes, we are going to have a storm, beyond all doubt."

The wind got up hourly, and when, before going to bed, they went to
pass an hour at a tavern, they had difficulty in making their way
against it. Several times in the night they were awoke by the
gusts, which shook the whole house, and they heard the crashing of
falling chimney pots above the din of the gale.

They had arranged to start as soon as it was light, and had, the
evening before, been to a posting inn, and engaged a carriage with
four horses for the journey down to Lancashire.

"There is no starting today, gentlemen," the landlord said, as they
went down to breakfast by candlelight. "I have looked out, and the
street is strewn with chimney pots and tiles. Never do I remember
such a gale, and hour by hour it seems to get worse. Why, it is
dangerous to go across the street."

"Well, we must try," Charlie said, "whatever the weather. It is a
matter of almost life and death."

"Well, gentlemen, you must please yourselves, but I am mistaken if
any horse keeper will let his animals out, on such a day as this."

As soon as they had eaten their breakfasts, they wrapped themselves
up in their cloaks, pressed their hats over their heads, and
sallied out. It was not until they were in the streets that they
realized how great was the force of the gale. Not only were the
streets strewn with tiles and fragments of chimney pots, but there
was light enough for them to see that many of the upper windows of
the houses had been blown in by the force of the wind. Tiles flew
about like leaves in autumn, and occasionally gutters and sheets of
lead, stripped from the roofs, flew along with prodigious
swiftness.

"This is as bad as a pitched battle, Charlie. I would as lief be
struck by a cannonball as by one of those strips of lead."

"Well, we must risk it, Harry. We must make the attempt, anyhow."

It was with the greatest difficulty that they made their way along.
Although powerful young fellows, they were frequently obliged to
cling to the railings, to prevent themselves from being swept away
by the gusts, and they had more than one narrow escape from falling
chimneys. Although the distance they had to traverse was not more
than a quarter of a mile, it took them half an hour to accomplish
it.

The post master looked at them in surprise, as they entered his
office flushed and disordered.

"Why, gentlemen, you are not thinking of going on such a day as
this? It would be a sheer impossibility. Why, the carriage would be
blown over, and if it wasn't, no horses would face this wind."

"We would be willing to pay anything you may like to ask," Charlie
said.

"It ain't a question of money, sir. If you were to buy the four
horses and the carriage, you would be no nearer, for no post boy
would be mad enough to ride them; and, even supposing you got one
stage, which you never would do, you would have to buy horses
again, for no one would be fool enough to send his animals out. You
could not do it, sir. Why, I hear there are half a dozen houses,
within a dozen yards of this, that have been altogether unroofed,
and it is getting worse instead of better. If it goes on like this,
I doubt if there will be a steeple standing in London tomorrow.

"Listen to that!"

There was a tremendous crash, and, running out into the street,
they saw a mass of beams and tiles lying in the roadway--a house
two doors away had been completely unroofed. They felt that, in
such a storm, it was really impossible to proceed, and accordingly
returned to their lodgings, performing the distance in a fraction
of the time it had before taken them.

For some hours the gale continued to increase in fury. Not a soul
was to be seen in the streets. Occasional heavy crashes told of the
damage that was being wrought, and, at times, the house shook so
that it seemed as if it would fall.

Never was such a storm known in England. The damage done was
enormous. The shores were strewn with wrecks. Twelve ships of the
royal navy, with fifteen hundred men, were lost; and an enormous
number of merchant vessels. Many steeples, houses, and buildings of
all kinds were overthrown, and the damage, in London alone, was
estimated at a million pounds.

There were few who went to bed that night. Many thought that the
whole city would be destroyed. Towards morning, however, the fury
of the gale somewhat abated, and by nightfall the danger had
passed.

The next morning the two friends started, and posted down to
Lancashire. The journey was a long one. In many places the road was
completely blocked by fallen trees, and sometimes by the ruins of
houses and barns. In the former case, long detours had often to be
made through villainous roads, where the wheels sank almost to
their axles, and, in spite of the most liberal bribes to post boys
and post masters, the journey occupied four days longer than the
usual time.

At last, they reached the lodge gate of Lynnwood. A man came out
from the cottage. He was the same who had been there in Sir
Marmaduke's time.

Charlie jumped out of the post chaise.

"Why, Norman, don't you know me?"

The man looked hard at him.

"No, sir, I can't say as I do."

"What, not Charlie Carstairs?"

"Bless me, it is the young master!" the man said. "To think of my
not knowing you. But you have changed wonderful. Why, sir, I have
been thinking of you often and often, and most of all the last
three days, but I never thought of you like this."

"Why the last three days, Norman?"

"Haven't you heard the news, sir?"

"No, I have heard nothing. Captain Jervoise and I--my old friend,
you know, Norman--have posted all the way from London, and should
have been here six days ago, if it had not been for the storm."

"Well, sir, there is bad news; at least, I don't know whether you
will consider it bad. Most of the folk about here looks at it the
other way. But the man in there shot hisself, three days ago. A
magistrate, with some men from Lancaster, came over here. They say
it was to arrest him, but I don't know the rights of the case.
Anyhow, it is said they read some paper over to him, and then he
opened a drawer at the table where he was sitting, and pulled out a
pistol, and shot hisself before anyone could stop him.

"There have been bad goings here of late, Mr. Charles, very bad,
especially for the last year. He was not friends with his son, they
say, but the news of his death drove him to drink, worse than
before; and besides, there have been dicing, and all sorts of
goings on, and I doubt not but that the ladies have had a terrible
time of it. There were several men staying in the house, but they
all took themselves off, as soon as it was over, and there are only
the ladies there now. They will be glad enough to see you, I will
be bound."

Charlie was shocked; but at the same time, he could not but feel
that it was the best thing that could happen, and Harry freely
expressed himself to that effect.

"We won't take the carriage up to the house," Charlie said, after a
long pause. "Take the valises out, and bring them up to the house
presently, Norman."

He paid the postilion who had brought them from Lancaster, and
stood quiet until the carriage had driven off.

"I hope Sir Marmaduke is well, sir. We have missed him sorely
here."

"He was quite well when I saw him, ten weeks ago. I hope he will be
here before long. I am happy to say that his innocence of the
charge brought against him has been proved, and his estates, and
those of Mr. Jervoise and the other gentlemen, have been restored
by the queen."

"That is good news, indeed, sir," the man exclaimed. "The best I
have heard for many a long year. Everyone about here will go wild
with joy."

"Then don't mention it at present, Norman. Any rejoicings would be
unseemly, while John Dormay is lying dead there."

"Shall I go up with you, Charlie, or will you go alone?" Harry
asked. "Of course, there are some horses here, and you could lend
me one to drive over to our own place."

"You shall do that presently, Harry, and tell them the news. But
come in now. You know my cousin and Ciceley. It will be all the
better that you should go in with me."

His cousin received Charlie with a quiet pleasure. She was greatly
changed since he had seen her last, and her face showed that she
had suffered greatly. Ciceley had grown into a young woman, and met
him with delight. Both were pleased to see Harry.

"We were talking of you but now, Charlie," Mrs. Dormay said.
"Ciceley and I agreed that we would remove at once to our old
place, and that this should be kept up for you, should you at any
time be able to return. Now that Queen Anne is on the throne, and
the Tories are in power, we hoped that you, at least, would ere
long be permitted to return. How is your dear father?"

"He is well, cousin, and will, I trust, be here ere long. Our
innocence of the charge has been proved, the proceedings against us
quashed, and the Act of Confiscation against my father, Mr.
Jervoise, and the others reversed."

"Thank God for that," Mrs. Dormay said earnestly, and Ciceley gave
an exclamation of pleasure. "That accounts, then, for what has
happened here.

"I do not want to talk about it, Charlie. You may imagine how
Ciceley and I have suffered. But he was my husband, spare him for
my sake."

"I will never allude to the subject again, cousin," Charlie said.
"But I must tell you that Harry and I have posted down from London,
in hopes of being in time to warn him, and enable him to escape. I
need not say we did so because he was your husband, and Ciceley's
father."

Harry then turned the subject, by a remark as to the effects of the
storm. Then Ciceley asked questions as to their life abroad, and
there was so much to tell, and to listen to, that even Mrs.
Dormay's face brightened. Harry willingly allowed himself to be
persuaded to remain for the night, and to ride over to his place in
the morning.

The funeral took place two days later. Charlie went as sole
mourner.

"He was my kinsman," he said to Harry, "and, though I can pretend
no sorrow at his death, my attendance at the funeral will do
something towards stopping talk, and will make it easier for my
cousin."

The next day, Mrs. Dormay and Ciceley returned to Rockley, whose
tenant had fortunately left a few weeks before. Charlie and Harry
both went over with them, and stayed for three or four days, and
they were glad to see that Mrs. Dormay seemed to be shaking off the
weight of her trouble, and was looking more like her old self.

They then rode to Lancaster, and returned to London by coach. They
crossed to Gottenburg by the first vessel that was sailing, and Sir
Marmaduke was delighted to hear the success of their mission, and
that he was at liberty to return at once, as master of Lynnwood.

"Luck favoured you somewhat, Charlie, in throwing that vagabond in
your way, but for all else we have to thank you both, for the
manner in which you have carried the affair out, and captured your
fox. As for John Dormay, 'tis the best thing that could have
happened. I have often thought it over, while you have been away,
and have said to myself that the best settlement of the business
would be that you, Harry, when you obtained proofs, should go down,
confront him publicly, and charge him with his treachery, force him
to draw, and then run him through the body. Charlie would, of
course, have been the proper person, in my absence, so to settle
the matter, but he could not well have killed my cousin's husband,
and it would have added to the scandal.

"However, the way it has turned out is better altogether. It will
be only a nine days' wonder. The man has been cut by all the
gentry, and when it is known that he shot himself to escape arrest,
many will say that it was a fit ending, and will trouble themselves
no more concerning him.

"You are coming back with me, I hope, Charlie. I have seen but
little of you for the last four years, and if you are, as you say,
going with the Duke of Marlborough to the war in the spring, I
don't want to lose sight of you again till then. You can surely
resign your commission here without going back to the army,
especially as you have leave of absence until the end of March."

Charlie hesitated.

"I think so, too," Harry said. "I know that the colonel told the
king the whole story, when he asked for leave for me and obtained
that paper. He told my father that the king was greatly interested,
and said: 'I hope the young fellows will succeed, though I suppose,
if they do, I shall lose two promising young officers.' So he will
not be surprised when he hears that we have resigned.

"As for me, I shall, of course, go on at once. My father will, I am
sure, be delighted to return home. The hardships have told upon him
a good deal, and he has said several times, of late, how much he
wished he could see his way to retiring. I think, too, he will
gladly consent to my entering our own service, instead of that of
Sweden. He would not have done so, I am sure, had William been
still on the throne. Now it is altogether different."

"Well, Harry, if you do see the king, as it is possible you may do,
or if you do not, you might speak to the colonel, and ask him, in
my name, to express to Charles my regret at leaving his service, in
which I have been so well treated, and say how much I feel the
kindly interest that his majesty has been pleased to take in me. If
there had been any chance of the war coming to an end shortly, I
should have remained to see it out; but, now that the Polish
business may be considered finished, it will be continued with
Russia, and may go on for years, for the czar is just as obstinate
and determined as Charles himself."

Accordingly, the next morning, Charlie sent in the formal
resignation of his commission to the war minister at Stockholm, and
Harry left by ship for Revel. Sir Marmaduke placed his business
affairs in the hands of a Scotch merchant at Gottenburg, with
