only a young man!"

"Twenty-nine," said St. Luc. "Gabrielle was twelve years older than I
am. You are more a younger brother than a nephew to me, Robert."

"But I will never become a Marquis of France," said Robert. "I am
American, English to the core. I have fought against France, though I do
not hate her. I cannot go to France, nor even to England. I must stay in
the country in which I was born, and in which my father was born."

"Spoken well," said Willet. "It was what I wanted to hear you say. The
Chevalier will return to France. He will marry and have children of his
own. Haven't we heard him sing often about the girl he left on the
bridge of Avignon? The next Marquis of Clermont will be his son and not
his nephew."

Which came to pass, as Willet predicted.

Robert stayed long that night by the pallet of his uncle, to whom the
English gave the best of attention, respecting the worth of a wounded
prisoner so well known for his bravery, skill and lofty character. St.
Luc finally fell asleep, and, going outside, Robert found Tayoga
awaiting him. When he told him all the strange and wonderful story that
he had heard inside the tent, the Onondaga said:

"I suppose that Dagaeoga, being a great man, will go to Europe and
forget us here."

"Never!" exclaimed Robert. "My home is in America. All I know is
America, and I'd be out of place in any other country."

And then he added whimsically:

"I couldn't go so far away from the Hodenosaunee."

"Dagaeoga might go far and yet never come to a nation greater than the
great League," said Tayoga, with deep conviction.

"That's true, Tayoga. How stands the battle? I had almost forgotten it
in the amazing tide of my own fortunes."

"General Wolfe is dead, but his spirit lives after him. We are
victorious at all points. The French have fled into Quebec, and they yet
have an army much more numerous than ours, if they get it all together.
But Montcalm was wounded and they say he is dying. The soul has gone out
of them. I think Quebec will be yielded very soon."

And surrendered it was a few days later, but the victors soon found that
the city they had won with so much daring would have to be defended with
the utmost courage and pertinacity. St. Luc, fast recovering from his
wound, was sent a prisoner to New York, together with De Galissonniere,
who had been taken unhurt, but Robert did not get away as soon as he had
expected. Quebec was in peril again, but now from the French. De Levis,
who succeeded Montcalm as the military leader of New France, gathering
together at Montreal all the fragments of the French power in Canada,
swore to retake Quebec.

Robert, Tayoga and Willet, with the rangers, served in the garrison of
Quebec throughout the long and bitter winter that followed. In the
spring they moved out with the army to meet De Levis, who was advancing
from Montreal to keep his oath. Robert received a slight wound in the
battle of Ste. Foy that followed, in which the English and Americans
were defeated, and were compelled to retreat into Quebec.

This battle of Ste. Foy, in which Robert distinguished himself again
with the New England rangers, was long and fierce, one of the most
sanguinary ever fought on Canadian soil. De Levis, the French commander,
showed all the courage and skill of Montcalm, proving himself a worthy
successor to the leader who had fallen with Wolfe, and his men displayed
the usual French fire and courage.

Hazen, the chief of the rangers, was badly wounded in the height of the
action, but Robert and Willet succeeded in bringing him off the field,
while Tayoga protected their retreat. A bullet from the Onondaga's rifle
here slew Colonel de Courcelles, and Robert, on the whole, was glad that
the man's death had been a valiant one. He had learned not to cherish
rancor against any one, and the Onondaga and the hunter agreed with him.

"There is some good in everybody," said Willet. "We'll remember that and
forget the rest."

But Robert's friends in the Royal Americans had a hard time of it in the
battle of Ste. Foy, even harder than in Wolfe's battle on the Plains of
Abraham. They were conspicuous for their valor and suffered many
casualties. Colden, Cabell and Stuart were wounded, but took no
permanent hurt. Charteris also received a slight wound, but he recovered
entirely before his marriage in the summer with the lovely Louise de St.
Maur, the daughter of the Seigneur Raymond de St. Maur, in whose house
he had been a prisoner a long time in Quebec.

It was Robert's own personal contact and his great friendship for
Charteris, continuing throughout their long lives in New York, that
caused him to take such a strong and permanent interest in this
particular regiment which had been raised wholly in the colonies and
which fought so valiantly at Duquesne, Louisbourg, Ticonderoga, Quebec,
Ste. Foy, and in truth in nearly all the great North American battles of
the Seven Years' War.

It was at first the Sixty-Second Regular Regiment of the British Army,
"Royal American Provincials," but through the lapsing of two other
regiments it soon became the Sixtieth. Its valor and distinction were so
high when composed wholly of Americans, except the superior officers,
that nearly seventy years subsequent to the fall of Quebec the
Englishmen, who after the great quarrel had replaced the Americans in
it, asked that they be allowed to use as their motto the Latin phrase,
_Celer et audax_, "Swift and Bold," "Quick and Ready," which Wolfe
himself was said to have conferred upon it shortly before his fall upon
the Plains of Abraham. And in memory of the great deeds of their
American predecessors, the gallant Englishmen who succeeded them were
permitted by the British government to use that motto.

Despite their defeat at Ste. Foy, the English and Americans held the
capital against De Levis until another British fleet arrived and
compelled the retreat of the brave Frenchmen. More reenforcements came
from England, the powerful army of Amherst advanced from the south,
Montreal was taken, and it was soon all over with New France.

Canada passed to England, and after its fall English and American
troops, men of the same blood, language and institutions, did not stand
together again in a great battle for more than a century and a half, and
then, strangely enough, it was in defense of that France which under one
flag they had fought at Duquesne and Ticonderoga, at Quebec and Ste.
Foy.

Robert, Tayoga and Willet went back to the colonies by land, and after a
long journey stopped at Albany, where they received the warmest of
welcomes from Master Jacobus Huysman, Master Alexander McLean and
Caterina.

"I knew Robert that some time you would come into your own. I hold some
of the papers about you in my great chest here," said Jacobus Huysman.
"Now it iss for you to show that you understand how to use great fortune
well."

"And never forget your dates," said Master Alexander. "It is well to
know history. All the more so, because you have had a part in the making
of it."

Warm as was their welcome in Albany, it was no warmer than that given
them in New York by Benjamin Hardy and Jonathan Pillsbury. The very next
day they went to the house of Adrian Van Zoon for a reckoning, only to
find him dead in his bed. He had heard the night before of Robert's
arrival; in truth, it was his first intimation that young Lennox was
alive, and that all his wicked schemes against him had failed.

"It may have been a stroke of heart disease," said Benjamin Hardy, as
they turned away, "or----"

"He has gone and his crimes have gone with him," said Robert. "I don't
wish ever to know how he went."

A little later the Chevalier Raymond Louis de St. Luc, Marquis de
Clermont, the war now being over, sailed with his faithful Canadian
attendant, Dubois, from New York for France. The parting between him and
his nephew was not demonstrative, but it was marked by the deepest
affection on either side.

"France has been defeated, but she is the eternal nation," said St. Luc.
"She will be greater than ever. She will be more splendid than before."

The De Clermonts were a powerful stock, with their roots deep in the
soil. A son of St. Luc's became a famous general under Napoleon, a great
cavalry leader of singular courage and capacity, and a lineal descendant
of his, a general also, fought with the same courage and ability under
Joffre and Foch in the World War, being especially conspicuous for his
services at both the First and Second Marne. At the Second Marne he gave
a heartfelt greeting to two young American officers named Lennox,
calling them his cousins and brothers-in-arms, in blood as well as in
spirit. They were together in the immortal counter-stroke on the morning
of July 18, 1918, when Americans and French turned the tide of the World
War, and sealed anew an old friendship. They were also together
throughout those blazing one hundred and nineteen days when British,
French and Americans together, old enemies and old friends who had
mingled their blood on innumerable battle-fields, destroyed the greatest
menace of modern times and hurled the pretender to divine honors from
his throne.

Robert found his fortune to be one of the largest in the New World, but
he kept it in the hands of Benjamin Hardy and David Willet, who
increased it, and he became the lawyer, orator and statesman for which
his talents fitted him so eminently. A marked characteristic in the life
of Robert Lennox, noted by all who knew him, was his liberality of
opinion. He had his share in public life, but the bitterness of
politics, then so common in this country as well as others, seemed never
to touch him. He was always willing to give his opponent credit for
sincerity, and even to admit that his cause had justice. In his opinion
the other man's point of view could always be considered.

This broadness of mind often caused him to incur criticism, but it had
become so much his nature, and his courage was so great, that he would
not depart from it. He had been through the terrible war with the
French, and, even before he knew that he was half a Frenchman by blood,
he had gladly acknowledged the splendid qualities of the French, their
bravery and patience, and their logical minds. He always said during the
worst throes of their revolution that the French would emerge from it
greater than ever.

His position was similar in the Revolutionary War with the English.
While he cast in his lot with his own people, and suffered with them, he
invariably maintained that the English nation was sound at the core. He
had fought beside them in a great struggle and he knew how strong and
true they were, and when our own strife was over he was most eager for a
renewal of good relations with the English, always saying that the fact
that they had quarreled and parted did not keep them from being of the
same blood and family, and hence natural allies.

He consistently refused to hate an individual. He always insisted that
life was too busy to cherish a grudge or seek revenge. Bad acts
invariably punished themselves in the course of time. He was able to see
some good, a little at least, in everybody. Searching his mind in after
years, he could even find excuses for Adrian Van Zoon. He would say to
Willet that the man loved nothing but money, that perhaps he had been
born that way and could not help it, that he had made his attempts upon
him under the influence of what was the greatest of all temptations to
him, and that while he paid the slaver to carry him away he had not paid
him to kill him. As for Garay, he would say that he might have exceeded
orders. He would say the same about the shots the slaver had fired at
him at Albany.

This tolerance came partly from his own character, and partly from an
enormous experience of life in the raw in his young and formative years.
He knew how men were to a large extent the creatures of circumstances,
and on the individual in particular his judgments were always mild. He
had two favorite sayings:

"No man is as bad as he seems to his worst enemy."

"No man is as good as he seems to his best friend."

His own faults he knew perfectly well to be quickness of temper and a
proneness to hasty action. Throughout his life he fought against them
and he took as his models Willet and Tayoga, who always appeared to him
to have a more thorough command over their own minds and impulses than
any other men he ever knew.

Aside from his brilliancy and power in public life, Lennox had other
qualities that distinguished him as a man. He was noted for his
cosmopolitan views concerning human affairs. He had an uncommon
largeness and breadth of vision, all the more notable then, as America
was, in many respects, outside the greater world of Europe. People in
speaking of him, however, recalled the extraordinary variety and
intensity of his experiences. Much of his story was known and it was not
diminished in the telling. He was always at home in the woods. He had an
uncommon sympathy for hunters, borderers, pathfinders and all kinds of
wilderness rovers. He understood them and they instinctively understood
him, invariably finding in him a redoubtable champion. He was also
closely in touch with the Indian soul, and his friends used to say
laughingly that he had something of the Indian in his own nature. At all
events, the Great League of the Hodenosaunee found in him a defender and
he was more than once an honored guest in the Vale of Onondaga.

On the other hand, his interest in European affairs was always keen and
intelligent, especially in those of England and France, with whose sons
he had come into contact so much during the great war. He maintained a
lifelong correspondence with his friend, Alfred Grosvenor, who
ultimately became a nobleman and who sat for more than forty years in
the House of Lords. Lennox visited him several times in England, both
before and after the quarrel between the colonies and the mother
country, which, however, did not diminish their friendship a particle.
In truth, during those troubled times Grosvenor, who was noted for the
liberality of his sentiments and for an affection for Americans,
conceived during his service as a soldier on their continent in the
Seven Years' War, often defended them against the criticism of his
countrymen, while Lennox, on his side, very boldly told the people that
nothing could alter the fact that England was their mother country, and
that no one should even wish to alter it.

But his correspondence with his uncle, Raymond Louis de St. Luc, Marquis
de Clermont, not so many years older than himself, covered a period of
nearly sixty years filled with world-shaking events, and, though it has
been printed for private circulation only, it is a perfect mine of fact,
comment and illumination. St. Luc was one of the few French noblemen to
foresee the great Revolution in his country, and, while he mourned its
excesses, he knew that much of it was justified. His patriotism and
courage were so high and so obvious that neither Danton, Marat nor
Robespierre dared to attack him. As an old man he supported Napoleon
ardently until the empire and the ambitions of the emperor became too
swollen, and, while he mourned Waterloo, he told his son, General Robert
Lennox de St. Luc, who distinguished himself so greatly there and who
almost took the chateau of Hougoumont from the English, that it was for
the best, and that it was inevitable. It was the comment of St. Luc,
then eighty-five years old and full of experience and wisdom, that a
very great man may become too great.

Lennox was noted for his great geniality and his extraordinary capacity
for making friends. Yet there was a strain of remarkable gravity, even
austerity, in his character. There came times when he wished to be
alone, to hear no human voices about him. It was then perhaps that he
thought his best thoughts and took, too, his best resolutions. In the
great silences he seemed to see more clearly, and the path lay straight
before him. Many of his friends thought it an eccentricity, but he knew
it was an inheritance from his long stay alone upon the island, a period
in his life that had so much effect in molding his character.

It was this ripeness of mind, based upon fullness of information and
deep meditation, that made him such a great man in the true sense of the
word. As a speaker he was without a rival either in form or substance in
the New World. It was said everywhere in New York that the famous
Alexander Hamilton and the equally skillful Aaron Burr went to the
courtroom regularly to study his methods. Both admitted quite freely in
private that they copied his style, though neither was ever able to
acquire the wonderful golden voice, the genuine phenomenon that made
Lennox so notable.

On one of these occasions, after making a thrilling speech, when he
filled the souls of both Hamilton and Burr with despair, a great
Onondaga sachem, in the full costume of his nation, said to his friend
Willet, once a renowned hunter:

"I always knew Dagaeoga could use more words than any one else could
find in the biggest dictionary."




THE END




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


Page numbers in the table of contents and in the transcriber's notes
below refer to the original printed version.

Footnotes have been moved to the end of their respective chapters.

The following typographical errors in the original printed version have
been noted below and corrected only where indicated.


CHARACTERS IN THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES

The character Louis de Galissonniere appears here as "GALISONNIERE."
Although he appears only at one other point in this book, the correct
spelling comes from his more frequent appearances in another novel of
the series, _The Masters of The Peaks_.

The captain of the _Hawk_, Stuart Whyte, is listed here as "WHITE."

The lieutenant of the _Hawk_, John Lanham, is listed here as "LATHAM."


CHAPTER I

(Page 2) The character of Jacobus Huysman has a very noticeable dialect.
The spelling of "iss," "wass," and "hass," plus various other words in
his dialogue, is preserved as in the original text.

(Page 17) Alfred Grosvenor is referred as "Grovenor's."


CHAPTER III

(Page 53) "hiden" instead of "hidden." Corrected in this text.


CHAPTER IV

(Page 71) A missing closing quote at "... and so I decided against
him." Corrected in this text.


CHAPTER V

(Page 92) "probabilty" instead of "probability." Corrected in this text.

(Page 93) "She's going almost due south ..." opens with a single quote.
Corrected in this text.


CHAPTER VIII

(Page 144) "firce" instead of "fierce." Corrected in this text.


CHAPTER XI
