"_I_ am very sure that you're honest, my good creature! Now, do tell me
about this stone. How did you come by it?"

"It was the young lady, ma'am; the young lady from Australia."

"Daisy Rymple, do you mean?"

"Miss Flower she called herself, ma'am. She come to me in sore plight
late one evening, when we was all in bed, and 'Mrs. Ricketts,' said she,
dear lamb, 'will you help me to go away to Mrs. Cameron, to Bath? I want
the money to go third class to Bath. Can you let me have nine shillings
and fourpence halfpenny, Mrs. Ricketts? and I'll give you this for the
money!' and she flashed that bit of a glittering stone right up into my
eyes. My word, I thought as I was blinded by it. 'You'll get most like
two pounds for it, Mrs. Ricketts,' she said, 'for my father told me it
was worth a sight of money.' That's how I come by it, ma'am, and that's
the way I was treated about it to-day."

Mrs. Cameron slowly drew out her purse.

"I will give you two sovereigns for the stone!" she said. "There, take
them and go home, and say nothing about the money. It will be the worse
for you if you do; now go quickly home."

Mrs. Ricketts' broad face was one glow of delight. She dropped another
courtesy, and tried to articulate some words of thanks, but Mrs. Cameron
had already disappeared into the drawing-room, where she now sat,
holding the diamond in the palm of her open hand.

She knew enough about precious stones to guess at something of its
probable value. The idea of in this way possessing herself of Flower's
diamond never for a moment entered her head, but she was worldly-minded
enough to wish that it could be her own, and she could not help owning
to a feeling of satisfaction, even to a sense of compensation for the
loss of Scorpion, while she held the beautiful glittering thing in her
open palm.

Even Flower rose in her estimation when she found that she had possessed
a gem so brilliant. A girl who could have such a treasure and so lightly
part with it was undoubtedly a simpleton--but she was a simpleton who
ought to be guarded and prized--the sort of young innocent who should
be surrounded by protecting friends. Mrs. Cameron felt her interest in
Flower growing and growing. Suppose she offered to release the Doctor of
this wearisome burden. Suppose she undertook the care of Flower and her
diamond herself.

No sooner did this thought occur to Mrs. Cameron, than she resolved to
act upon it. Of course the Doctor would be delighted to part with
Flower. She would see him on the subject at once.

She went slowly upstairs and knocked with a calm, steady hand at the
door of the dressing-room which opened into Dr. Maybright's apartment.
No sound or reply of any kind came from within. She listened for a
moment, then knocked again, then tried to turn the handle of the door.
It resisted her pressure, being locked from within.

Mrs. Cameron raised her voice. She was not a person who liked to be
opposed, and that locked door, joined to that most exasperating silence,
became more than trying. Surely the Doctor was not deaf as well as
blind. Surely he must hear her loud demands, even though a dressing-room
stood between his room and the suppliant without.

And surely the Doctor would have heard, for a more polite man never
lived, were it not for that all mischievous and irrepressible Polly. But
she, being left in charge, had set her sharp brains to work, and had
devised a plan to outwit Mrs. Cameron. The dressing-room in question
contained a double baize door. This door was seldom or never used, but
it came in very conveniently now, for the furtherance of Polly's plan.
When it was shut, and thick curtains also drawn across, and when, in
addition, the door leading into Dr. Maybright's room was securely
fastened and curtained off, Polly felt sure that she and her father
might pass their morning in delicious quietude. Not hearing Mrs.
Cameron, she argued with herself that no one _could_ possibly blame her
for not letting her in. Therefore, in high good humor, this young lady
sat down to read, work, and chatter gayly. As the Doctor listened, he
said to himself that surely there never was in the world a sweeter or
more agreeable companion than his Polly.

With all her precautions, however, as the hours flew by, sundry muffled
and distant sounds did penetrate to the sick chamber.

"What a peculiar noise!" remarked the Doctor.

"Can it be mice?" queried Polly's _most_ innocent voice.

More time passed.

Suddenly the sharp and unmistakable sound of gravel being flung against
the window forced the young lady to go to ascertain what was the matter.

On looking out, she saw what caused her to utter an amazed exclamation.

Mrs. Cameron, very red in the face, and holding the lost Scorpion in one
encircling arm, while the other was thrown firmly round a most
sulky-looking David; Firefly, pale and with traces of tears on her face;
Flower, looking excited and eager--all stood under the window. This
group were loud in demanding instant admission to the Doctor's room.

"What is it, what is it?" questioned the patient from the bed.

"Oh, you are _not_ strong enough to see them, father."

"To see whom?"

"Aunt Maria--Scorpion--the children."

"Yes, I am quite strong enough. Let them come up at once."

"But father!"

"But Polly! You don't suppose seriously that your Aunt Maria can disturb
my equanimity?"

"Oh! She will worry you with so many tales."

"About my very naughty family?"

"Yes, yes; you had much better not see her."

"Because she wants me to get a chaperon for you?"

"Oh! yes--oh! don't see her."

"My dear, you can trust me; you happen to be _my_ children, not hers. I
would rather have the matter out. I knew there was something wrong from
the way little Fly kissed my hand this morning. Show the deputation
outside the window into the audience chamber at once, Polly."

So admonished, the curtains had to be drawn back, the baize door
reopened, and Polly--a most unwilling hostess--had to receive her
guests. But no words can describe the babel of sounds which there and
then filled the Doctor's room; no words can tell how patiently the blind
man listened.

Aunt Maria had a good tale to tell, and it lost nothing in the telling.
The story of Scorpion's disappearance; of the wickedness of David and
Fly; of the recovering of the little animal from the man who had bought
it, through Flower's instrumentality; all this she told, following up
with the full and particular history of the sale of a valuable diamond.
At last--at long last--the good lady stopped for want of breath.

There was a delicious pause, then the Doctor said, quietly:

"In short, Maria, you have never come across such absolutely wicked
children as the Maybrights and Dalrymples?"

"No, Andrew--never! never!"

"It is lucky they are not your children?"

"Thank Heaven!"

"Would it not be well to leave them to me? I am accustomed to them."

"Yes; I wash my hands of you all; or no--not quite of you all--I heap
coals of fire on your head, Andrew; I offer to relieve you of the charge
of Daisy Rymple."

"Of Flower?--but she is one of the worst of us."

Here Flower ran over, crouched down by the Doctor, and put one of her
hands into his.

"But I will be good with you," she said with a half-sob.

"Hear her," said the Doctor. "She says she will be good with me.
Perhaps, after all, Maria, I _can_ manage my own children better than
any one else can."

"Daisy is not your child--you had better give her to me."

"I can't part with Flower; she is an excellent reader. I am a blind man,
but she scarcely allows me to miss my eyes."

Flower gave a low ecstatic sob.

"And you will allow her to part with valuable gems like this?"

"Thanks to you, Maria, she has recovered her diamond."

"Andrew, I never met such an obstinate, such a misguided man! Are you
really going to bring up these unfortunate children without a chaperon?"

"I think you must allow us to be good _and_ naughty in our own way."

"Father is looking very tired, Aunt Maria," here whispered Polly.

"My dear, _I_ am never going to fatigue him more. Andrew, I wash my
hands of your affairs. Daisy, take your diamond. At least, my little
precious dog, I have recovered _you_. We return to Bath by the next
train."




CHAPTER XIX.

ONE YEAR AFTER.


"Helen, here's a letter."

"Yes. Who is it for?"

"I think it's for us all. See: 'the Misses Maybright and Miss
Dalrymple.'"

"Well, where's Flower? We can't open it till Flower comes down. It must
be--yes, it must be about father! You know it was yesterday his eyes
were to be operated on."

"As if I didn't know it, Nell! I never closed my eyes last night. I felt
nearly as bad as that awful day a year ago now. I wish I might tear open
this envelope. Where is Flower? Need we wait for her?"

"It would be unkind not to wait! No one feels about father as Flower
does."

"David, please call her this instant!"

David flew out of the room, and Polly began to finger the precious
letter.

"It's thick," she said; "but I don't think there's much writing inside.
Yes," she continued, "Flower is certainly very sensitive about father.
She's a dear girl. All the same, I'm sometimes jealous of her."

"Oh, dear Polly! why?"

"Father thinks so much of her. Yes, I know it's wrong, but I do feel a
little sore now and then. Not often though, and never when I look into
Flower's lovely eyes."

"She is very sweet with father," said Helen. "It seems to me that during
this past year she has given up her very life to him. And did you ever
hear any one read better?"

"No, that's one of the reasons why I'm devoured with jealousy. Don't
talk to me about it, it's an enemy I haven't yet learnt to overcome. Ah!
here she comes."

"_And_ Fly, _and_ the twins!" echoed Helen. "Here's a letter from
father, Flower. At least, we think so. It's directed to us and to you."

A tall, very fair girl, with soft, shining eyes, and a wonderful mane of
yellow hair came up and put her arm round Polly's neck. She did not
smile, her face was grave, her voice shook a little.

"Open the letter, Helen," she exclaimed impatiently.

"Don't tremble so, Flower," said Polly.

But she herself only remained quiet by a great effort, as Helen
unfastened the thick envelope, opened the sheet of paper, and held it up
for many eager pairs of eyes to read:

    "My Children:--I see again, thank God.
    "Your Father and loving Friend."

"There!" said Polly. "Oh, I can't talk about it. Flower, you are silly
to cry. Will no one dance a hornpipe with me? I'll choke if I don't
laugh. You're the one to dance, Fly. Why, you are crying, too.
Ridiculous! Where's the letter? Let's kiss it all round. That'll make us
better. His own blessed writing! Isn't he a darling? Was there ever such
a father?"

"Or such a friend?" exclaimed Flower. "I said long ago, and I say again
now, that he's the best man in the world, and I do really think that
some day he'll turn me into a good girl."

"Why, you're the nicest girl I know now," said Polly.

And then they kissed each other.

                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber's Notes
-------------------

1. Punctuation has been normalized to contemporary standards.

2. Frontispiece relocated to after title page.

3. Typographic errors corrected in original:
   p. 7 aways to always ("always did think")
   p. 8 breat-and-butter to bread-and-butter
   p. 102 nuseries to nurseries ("to the nurseries")
   p. 154 by to my ("jealous of my influence")
   p. 159 life to like ("looked like artificial flowers")






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Polly, by L. T. Meade

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLLY ***

***** This file should be named 18666.txt or 18666.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/6/6/18666/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
