stared at him in voiceless terror.  He dropped unsteadily to his knee,
as if to worship at a shrine.

"Oh, do not go away," he whispered.  "I know it is only a dream of
mine--so many times have I seen you, ever since the night the frigate
struck and I sent you to your death on that rocky pass, in that beating
sea.  Ay, in the long hours of the fever--but you did not shrink away
from me then, you listened to me say I love you, and you answered."  He
stretched out his hand toward her in tender appeal.  She bent forward
toward him.  He rose to his feet, half in terror.

"Kate," he said uncertainly, "is it indeed you?  Are you alive again?"

She was nearer now.  One glad cry broke from her lips; he was in her
arms again, and she was clasped to his heart!--a real woman and no
dream, no vision.  What the wind could only faintly shadow forth upon
her cheek, sprang into life under the touch of his fevered lips, and
color flooded them like a wave.  Laughing, crying, sobbing, she clung
to him, kissed him with little incoherent murmurs, gazed at him, wept
over him, kissed him again.  All the troubles of the intervening days
of sadness and privation faded away from her like a disused chrysalis,
and she sparkled with life and love like a butterfly new born.

He that was dead was alive again, he had come back, and he was here!
As for him, in fearful surprise, he held her to his breast once more,
still unbelieving.  She noticed then an empty sleeve, and raised it
tenderly to her lips.

"I lost it after an action with the British ship Yarmouth,--it was only
a flesh wound at first,--we were long in reaching Charleston; the arm
had to be amputated.  It was a fearful action."

"I know it," she interrupted; "I was there."

"You, Katharine!  Ah, that woman on the ship!  I was not deceived then,
and yet I could not believe it."

"Yes, 'twas I.  I gloried in your bravery, until I saw you lying, as I
thought, dead on the deck.  Oh, John, the horror of that moment!  Then
I called you, and you did not answer.  Then I wanted to die, too, but
now I am alive again, and so happy--but for this;" she lifted the empty
sleeve to her lips.  "How you must have suffered, my poor darling," she
went on, her eyes filling with tears, her heart yearning over him.
"And how ill you look, and I keep you standing here,--how thoughtless!
Come to the bench here and sit down.  Lean on me."

"Nay, but, Kate, you too have suffered.  See!"  He lifted her arm, the
loose sleeve fell back.  "Oh, how thin it is, and how smooth and round
and plump it was when I kissed it last," he said, as he raised it
tenderly again to his lips.

"It is nothing, John.  I shall be all right now that you are here.  You
poor shattered lover, how you must have suffered!" she went on, with a
sob in her voice.

"Oh, Katharine, this," looking down at his empty sleeve, "was nothing
to what I suffered before, when I thought I had killed you!"

"When you thought you had killed me!" she said in surprise.  They were
sitting close together now, and she had his hand in both her own.
"How--when, was that?"

And then he told her rapidly about the loss of the Radnor, and the idea
which her note had given that she was on board of it.

"And you led that ship down to destruction, believing I was on her!
How could you do it, John?" she said reproachfully.

"It was my duty, darling Kate," he said desperately.

"And did you love your duty more than me?"

"Love it?  I hated it!  But I had to do it, dearest," he went on
pleadingly.  "Honor--you told me so yourself, here, in this very spot;
I remember your words; do you not recall them?--'If I stood in the
pathway of liberty for a single instant I should despise the man who
would not sweep me aside without a moment's hesitation.'  Don't you
know you said that, Katharine?"

"Did I say it?  Ah, but that was before I loved you so, and you swept
me aside,--well, I love you still, and, John, I honor you for it too;
but I could not do it.  You see, I am only a woman."

"Kate, don't say 'only a woman' that way; what else would I have you,
pray?  But tell me of yourself."

Briefly she recited the events that had occurred to her, dwelling much
upon Desborough's courage and devotion to her in the first days of her
captivity, the death of Johnson, the burning of Norfolk, the death of
Bentley.  He interrupted her there, and would fain hear every detail of
the sad scene over again, thanking her and blessing her for what she
had done.

"It was nothing," she said simply; "I loved to do it; he was your
friend.  It seemed to bring me closer to you."  Then she told him of
the foundering of the ship, of the frightful voyage in the boat, and
rang the changes upon Desborough's name, his cheerfulness, his
unfailing zeal and energy, until Seymour's heart filled with jealous
pain.

"Kate," he said at last, "as I came up the road I saw a man leave the
boat-house and climb the hill; who was it?"

"It was Lord Desborough, John."

Seymour was human, and filled with human feeling.  He drew away from
her.

"What was he doing here?" he said coldly.  She smiled at him merrily.

"Bidding me good-by.  He was made prisoner, of course, by the first
soldier we came across after we landed, and has been spending the days
of his captivity with us.  He was exchanged to-day, and leaves
to-night."

"Katharine, he was in love with you!" he said, with what seemed to him
marvellous perspicacity.

"Yes, John," she answered, still smiling.

"Was he making love to you here?"

"Yes."

"And you?  You praise this man, you like him, you--"

"I think him the bravest man, the truest gentleman in the world--except
this one," she said, laying her hand upon his shoulder and her head
upon his breast.  "No, no; he pleaded in vain.  I only pitied him; I
loved you.  Do not be jealous, foolish boy.  No one should have me.  I
am yours alone."

"But if I had not come back, Kate,--how then?"

"It would have made no difference.  I told him so."

Neither of them in their mutual absorption had noticed that a horse had
stopped in the road opposite the boat-house, and a horseman had walked
to the door and had halted at the sight which met his eyes.  Desborough
recognized Seymour at once, and he had unwittingly heard the end of the
conversation.  He was the second.  The man was back again.  It was
true.  The gallant gentleman stood still a moment, making no sound,
then turned back and mounted his horse, and rode madly away with
despair in his heart.

"Oh, Katharine," Seymour said at last, "do you know that I am a poor
man now?  Lame!  See, I can no longer walk straight."  He stood up.
"Poor surgery after the battle did that."

"The more reason that in the future you should not go alone," she said
softly, standing by his side.

"And with but one arm," he continued.

"No, three," she said again, "for here are two."

"Besides, my trading ships have been captured by the enemy, my private
fortune has been spent for the cause.  I am a poor man in every sense."

"Nay, John, you are a rich man," she said gayly.

"Oh, yes, rich in your love, Katharine."

"Yes, that of course, if that be riches, and richer in honor too; but
that's not all."

"What else pray, dearest?"

"Did you know that Madam Talbot had died?" she answered, with apparent
irrelevance.

"No, but I am not surprised at it.  After her son's death I expected
it, poor lady.  He loved you too, Kate.  We fought about you once," he
said; and then he told her briefly of Talbot's end, his burial, the
interview he had with Talbot's mother, and the letter.

"I have seen that letter since I returned," she said.  "It is at
Fairview Hall now awaiting you, awaiting its master like the other
things there,--and here.  Shall we live there, think you, John?"

"Awaiting me!  Its master!  Live there!  What mean you, Kate?" he cried
in surprise.

"Yes, yes, it is all yours," she replied, laughing at his astonishment.
"A codicil to her will, written and signed the day before she died, the
day after you saw her, left it all to you.  It was to have been her
son's and then mine; and when she believed us dead, as she had no
relatives in this land she left it to you, 'As,' I quote her own words,
'a true and noble gentleman who honors any cause, however mistaken, to
which he may give his allegiance.'  I quote them, but they are my own
words as well.  You are a rich man, John, and the two estates will come
together as father and Madam Talbot had hoped, after all."

"I am glad, Kate, for your sake."

"It is nothing.  I should have taken you, if you had nothing at all."

A young man ran down the little pier and into the house at this moment.
"Kate," he cried, "where are you?  It is so dark here I can hardly
see--  Ah, there you are!" he ran forward and kissed her boisterously.
"You 'll have to forgive me, I could not wait any longer, Captain
Seymour.  Father rode down the hill after Lord Desborough galloped by
me, and met me there, waiting.  Oh, I was so glad to know you were
alive again!  We felt like a pair of murderers, did n't we, Captain
Seymour?  Father told me you were here, Kate, and then we waited until
now, to give you a little time, and then I could n't stand it any
longer, I had to see you.  Father's coming too, but I ran ahead."

"Why, Philip," cried Kate, as soon as he gave her an opportunity,
kissing him again and laughing light-heartedly as she has not done for
days, "how you have grown!  You are quite a man now."

"It is entirely due to Philip, Katharine, that I am here," said
Seymour.  "He commanded the little brig which ran down to the Yarmouth
at the risk of destruction, and picked me up.  Disobeyed orders too,
the young rogue.  He brought me into Charleston, nursed me like a
woman, and then brought me here.  I should have died without him."

"Oh, Philip," said the delighted girl, kissing the proud and happy
youngster with more warmth than he had ever known before, "promise me
always to disobey your orders.  How can I thank you!"

"Very bad advice that.  Promise nothing of the kind, Philip; but what
are you thanking him for, Kate?" said the cheery voice of the colonel
as he came in the door.

"Thanking him for Seymour, father."

"Ah, my boy," said the colonel, grasping his hand, "you don't know how
glad I am to see you.  It is like one returning from the dead.  But it
is late and cold and quite dark.  Supper is ready, let us go up to the
Hall.  I shall see the Naval Commissioners in a few days, Seymour, and
get you another and a better ship.  The country is full of your action;
they 've struck a medal for you and voted you prize money and thanks,
and all that.  I make no doubt I can get you the best ship there is on
the ways, or planned.  'T was a most heroic action--"

"Not now, father," said Katharine, jealously, throwing her arm about
her lover.  "He shall not, cannot, go now; he must have rest for a long
time, and he must have me!  We are to be married as soon as he is well,
and the country must wait.  Is it not so, John?"

"What's that?" said the colonel, pretending great surprise.

"Sir," answered Seymour, nervously, "I have something to say to
you,--something I must say.  Will you give me the privilege of a few
moments' conversation with you?"

"Seymour," said the colonel, smiling, "you asked me that once before,
did you not?"

"Yes, sir, I believe so."

"And I answered you--how?"

"Why, you said, if my memory serves me, that you--"

"Exactly, that I would see you after supper, and so I will.  Come,
children, let us go in; this time I warrant you there will be no
interruptions."

The father and son turned considerately and walked away, leaving the
two lovers to follow.

"You won't leave me, John, will you, now that you have just come back?"

"No, Kate, not now; I am good for nothing until I get strong."

"Good for me, though; but when you do get strong?"

"Then, if my country needs me, dearest, I shall have to go.  But I fear
there will be no more ships of ours to get to sea, the blockade is
getting more strict every day.  I can be a soldier, though.  No, Kate,
do not beg me.  My duty to my country constrains me."

"Don't talk about it now, then, John.  At least I shall have you for a
long time; it will be long before you are well again."

"Yes, I fear so," he said with a sigh.

"Why do you sigh, dearest?"

"Because I want to stay with you, and I ought to welcome any
opportunity to enter active service.  Think what old Bentley would say."

"Old Bentley did not love you," she replied quickly, with a jealous
pang.

"Ah, did he not!" said Seymour, softly.

There was a long pause.

"Well," said Katharine at last, "I suppose nothing will move you if
your duty calls you, but I warn you if you get killed again, I shall
die.  I could not stand it another time," she cried piteously.

"Well, dearest, I shall try to live for you.  Now we must go to the
Hall."

But, to anticipate, fate would be kinder toward Katharine in the future
than she had been in the past and it was many a day before her lover,
her husband rather, was able to get to sea; and, as if they had
suffered enough, he went through the rest of the war on land and sea
scatheless, and was one of those who stood beside the great commander
before the trenches of Yorktown, when the British soldiers laid down
their arms.  But this was all of the future, and now they turned
quietly and somewhat sadly to follow the others.

This time it was Katharine who helped Seymour up the hill.  Slowly,
hand in hand, they walked across the lawn, up the steps of the porch,
and toward the door of the Hall.  The night had fallen, and the house
was filled with a soft light from the wax candles.  They paused a
moment on the threshhold; Katharine resolutely mastered her fears and
resolved to be happy in the present, then, heedless of all who might
see, she kissed him.

"Home at last, John," she said, beaming upon him.  And there, with the
dark behind, and the light before, we may say good-by to them.











End of Project Gutenberg's For Love of Country, by Cyrus Townsend Brady

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR LOVE OF COUNTRY ***

***** This file should be named 20791.txt or 20791.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/9/20791/

Produced by Al Haines
