results. The natives of Ashanti and the surrounding tribes have
received a lesson that will not be forgotten for a great number of
years and, long before that time, it may be hoped that civilization
will have made such strides there that there will be no more chance
of trouble. They have been taught that they are absolutely unable
to stand against the white man; that neither distance, the
thickness of their forests, stockades, nor weather can check the
progress of British troops; and that resistance can only draw down
upon them terrible loss, and the destruction of their villages and
crops.

They had received no such lessons in the previous expeditions. That
of Governor Sir Charles M'Carthy had been entirely defeated, and
the governor himself killed. Another expedition, in 1867, met with
a total failure. Sir Garnet Wolseley, in 1873, marched to Coomassie
but, though he burnt the place, he had at once to fall back to the
coast. In 1895 Sir Francis Scott led an expedition which, for some
reason or other, met with no resistance.

Now Ashanti had been swept from end to end, and fire and sword had
destroyed the major part of the villages. Garrisons were to be
left, at Coomassie, strong enough to put down any local risings;
and the natives had been taught that, small as our army might be in
their country, it could at any time be largely augmented, at very
short notice. Most of all, they had learned that, even without the
assistance of white soldiers, the native troops--whom they had
hitherto despised--were their superiors in every respect.

The completion of the railway to Coomassie has enabled troops to be
sent up from the coast, in a few hours, to the heart of the
country; and the numerous companies formed to work the gold mines
will, in themselves, prove a great check to trouble as, no doubt,
the miners will, in future, be well armed.

Colonel Willcocks left the headquarters staff a few days after the
despatch of his telegram. He rode through a two-mile avenue of
troops and friendly natives and, on arriving at Cape Coast, had a
magnificent reception. Major C. Burroughs remained in command of
Coomassie, with a strong garrison.

A few days later, the rest of the force moved down to the coast.
Lisle and Hallett were carried down in hammocks, for both were
completely worn out by the hardships of the campaign and, as there
was no limit to the numbers of carriers that could be obtained,
they gladly acquiesced in the decision of the medical officer that
they ought to be carried. Both, indeed, had the seeds of fever in
their system and, when they arrived at Cape Coast, were laid up
with a sharp attack. As a result they were, like the great portion
of the officers who had gone through the campaign, invalided home.

A day after his arrival in London, Lisle was visited by his friend
Colonel Houghton, at whose house he had spent most of his leave
when he was last in England.

"I saw your name in the paper, yesterday, as among the returned
invalids; and thought that I should find you in the hotel where you
stayed before."

"I wrote yesterday afternoon to you, sir."

"Ah! Of course, I have not got that letter. And now, how are you?"

"I am a little shaky, sir, but the voyage has done wonders for me.
I have no doubt that I shall soon be myself, again."

"You have not seen the last gazette, I suppose?"

"No, sir."

"Well, there was a list of promotions, and I am happy to say that
you have got the D.S.O. for your services. I dare say you know that
you succeeded to your company, just six months ago?"

"No, I did not know that. I knew that I stood high among the
lieutenants, and expected to get it before long; but I am proud,
indeed, of the D.S.O."

"To have won the V.C. and the D.S.O. is to attain the two greatest
distinctions a soldier can wear.

"Now, you had better come down with me to my place in the country;
the air of London is not the best, for a man who has been suffering
from African fever."

"I certainly want bracing air, and I shall be only too glad to go
home with you; for I feel it is more my home than any other in
England."

As soon as Lisle began to recover a little, Colonel Houghton
introduced him to his neighbours, who made a good deal of the young
soldier. Five years had elapsed, since he had started with the
Pioneers for Chitral, and he was twenty-one.

Soon after he went to the colonel's, he was speaking to him of his
friend and constant companion in the late campaign; and the colonel
at once invited Hallett down. Hallett accepted the invitation, and
soon joined them. He had pretty well recovered, and the campaign
had knocked all his little laziness and selfishness out of him. He
also had received the D.S.O.

"I am sure, Colonel Houghton," he said one day, "that I owe a
tremendous lot to Lisle. He was always cheerful, and his unmerciful
chaffing kept me alive. I am quite sure I should never have got
through that time, when we were lost in the forest, if it hadn't
been for him. I was a confirmed grumbler, too; but he never let me
indulge my discontent. Altogether you have no idea, Colonel
Houghton, how much he did for me."

"Well, you know, Captain Hallett, how much he did for me."

"No, sir," Hallett said, in surprise; "he has often spoken to me of
you, and of your kindness to him; but he did not tell me about
anything he had done for you."

"Well, he saved my life at the risk of his own. If he has not told
you the story, I will."

And he related the manner in which Lisle had won his V.C.

"Why did you not tell me about it, Bullen? It was a splendid thing
to do. You did tell me, I remember, how you got the V.C. by helping
to get an officer out of the grasp of the Afridis, but you gave no
details."

"There was nothing to tell about it, Hallett. I only did what I am
sure you would have done, in my case."

"I am by no means sure of that," Hallett said. "I am always slow in
making up my mind about anything; and should never have thought of
putting a wounded officer on my horse, and sending him off, while I
remained to be cut to pieces. I hope I should have stood by him,
and been cut down with him; but I am certain that I should not have
thought of the other thing, with the Afridis rushing down upon me,
only thirty yards away.

"You ought to have let me know about it. You did bully me a great
deal, you know; and though it was all for my good, still I think I
should have put up with it better, if I had known that you had done
such a thing as that."

"I think you put up with it very well, Hallett. Chaffing you, and
getting you sometimes into a rage--which was pretended, rather than
real--did me a lot of good. I am sure I should have given in,
several times, had you not acted as a sort of tonic; and had I not
been sure that it did you as much good as it did me."

A month after Hallett's arrival, the colonel said, one morning:

"Good morning, Lisle! I am going out with the hounds, tomorrow.
They meet near here. As you are not great riders, I won't press you
to go with me but, at least, you will ride with me to the meet. It
is sure to be a good gathering, and you will probably meet some
nice girls; who will, no doubt, have much greater attractions, for
young fellows like you, than a gallop round the country."

"They have no particular attraction for me, sir," Lisle laughed.
"It will be time enough for that, in another eight or ten years. It
is more in Hallett's line."

"But we shall be chaffed, if we don't ride after the hounds,
Colonel," Hallett said.

"Not at all," the colonel replied, "you have a first-rate excuse.
You are only just recovering from fever. That would get you no end
of commiseration and pity."

"In that case," Lisle said, "I think I should prefer staying at
home. I don't feel that I need the least pity, and don't want to
get it on false pretences."

"It won't be false pretences," the colonel said. "I have taken care
that all the ladies I shall introduce you to should know what you
did for me, and how you did it."

"I am sorry to hear it, Colonel. It is really hateful, being
regarded as a man who has done something, especially at my age.
However, I shall leave Hallett to bear the brunt of it. I know that
he is on the lookout for a wife."

"I don't think you know anything of the sort, Lisle. It will be
time for that when I get my majority."

"Ah! That is all very well, Hallett; I know you took a good
half-hour dressing your hair, previous to that dinner party last
week."

"It has to be brushed. It was nearly all cut off, when we were in
Cape Coast, and one doesn't want to go out looking like a fretful
porcupine."

So, laughing and joking, they started the next morning. There was,
as the colonel had predicted, a large meet. Many ladies came on
horseback, and others in carriages. The two young officers were
soon engaged, chatting and laughing, with the latter.

"Do you mean to say that you are not going to ride, Captain
Bullen?" one of the ladies on horseback said.

"In the first place, Miss Merton, I am an infantry officer and,
except for a few weeks when I was on the staff of Colonel Lockhart,
I have never done any riding. In the second place, I am forbidden
to take horse exercise, at present. Moreover, although no doubt you
will despise me for the confession, I dislike altogether the idea
of a hundred men on horseback, and forty or fifty dogs, all chasing
one unfortunate animal."

"But the unfortunate animal is a poacher of the worst kind."

"Very well, then, I should shoot him, as a poacher. Why should a
hundred horsemen engage in hunting the poor brute down? Bad
horseman as I am, I should not mind taking part in a cavalry
charge; but hunting is not at all to my taste."

"You like shooting, Captain Bullen?"

"I like shooting, when there is something to be shot; in the first
place, a dangerous animal, and in the second, an animal that is
able to show fight. I have several times taken part in tiger hunts,
and felt myself justified in doing so, because the animals had made
themselves a scourge to unarmed villagers."

"I am afraid that you are a sort of Don Quixote," the girl laughed.

"Not quite that, Miss Merton; though I own I admire the good
knight, greatly. We are going to move off, now, to the covert that
has to be drawn; and I know I shall shock you, when I say that I
sincerely hope that nothing will be found there."

The whole party then moved off, and the hounds were put into a
covert. Five minutes later, a whimper was heard. It soon spread
into a chorus, and then a fox dashed out from the opposite side;
followed, in a couple of minutes, by the whole pack.

"Well, that is fun, is it not, Captain Bullen?" said a girl, to
whom he was talking, in one of the carriages.

"It is a pretty sight," he said, "and if the fox always got away, I
should like it. As it is, I say honestly that I don't."

The meet now broke up, and the carriages dispersed. Hallett and
Lisle accepted an invitation to lunch with the ladies to whom they
were talking. Two hours later, Lisle was on the point of leaving,
when a groom rode up at full speed.

"Is Captain Bullen here?" he asked.

With a presentiment of evil, Lisle went out.

"The colonel has had a bad accident, sir. He was brought in, half
an hour ago, by the servants. I understand that he asked for you;
and three of us at once rode off, in different directions, to find
you."

Lisle called Hallett and, in five minutes, they were mounted and
dashed off. As they entered the house, they were met by the
surgeon.

"Is he badly hurt'?" Lisle asked, anxiously.

"I fear that he is hurt to death, Captain Bullen. His horse slipped
as it was taking a fence, and fell on the top of him. He has
suffered severe internal injuries, and I greatly fear that there is
not the least hope for him."

"Is he conscious?" Lisle asked, with deep emotion.

"Yes, he is conscious, and I believe he understands that his case
is hopeless. He has asked for you, several times, since he was
brought in; so you had better go to him, at once."

With a sinking heart, Lisle went upstairs. The colonel was lying on
his bed.

"I am glad you have come in time, my dear boy," he said faintly, as
Lisle entered. "I am afraid that I am done for, and it is a
consolation for me to know that I have no near relatives who will
regret my loss. I have had a good time of it, altogether; and would
rather that, as I was not to die on the battlefield, death should
come as it has. It is far better than if it came gradually.

"Sit by me, lad, till the end comes. I am sure it will not be long.
I am suffering terribly, and the sooner it comes, the better."

The ashy gray of the colonel's face sufficed to tell Lisle that the
end was, indeed, near at hand. The colonel only spoke two or three
times and, at ten o'clock at night, passed away painlessly.

Upon Lisle devolved the sad work of arranging his funeral. He wrote
to the colonel's lawyer, asking him to come down. Hallett had left
the house at once, though Lisle earnestly begged him to stay till
the funeral was over. The lawyer arrived on the morning of the
funeral.

"I have taken upon myself, sir," Lisle said, "to make all the
arrangements for the funeral, seeing that there was no one else to
do it."

"You were the most proper person to do so," the lawyer said,
gravely, "as you will see when the will is read, on our return from
the grave."

When all was over, Lisle asked two or three of the colonel's most
intimate friends to be present at the reading of the will. It was a
very short one. The colonel made bequests to several military
charities; and then appointed his adopted son, Lisle Bullen,
Lieutenant in His Majesty's Rutlandshire regiment, the sole heir to
all his property.

This came almost as a surprise to Lisle. The colonel had indeed
told him that he had adopted him, and he was prepared to learn that
he had left him a legacy; but he had no idea that he would be left
sole heir.

"I congratulate you, sir," the lawyer said, when he folded up the
paper. "Colonel Houghton stated to me, fully, his reasons for
making such a disposition of his property and, as he had no near
relations, I was able to approve of it heartily. I may say that he
has left nearly sixteen thousand pounds. The other small legacies
will take about a thousand, and you will therefore have some
fifteen thousand pounds, which is all invested in first-rate
securities."

"I feel my good fortune, sir," Lisle said quietly, "but I would
that it had not come to me for many years, and not in such a
manner."

The meeting soon after broke up, and Lisle went up to town and
joined Hallett at the hotel they both used.

"Well, I congratulate you heartily," Hallett said, when he heard
the contents of the will. "It is a good windfall, but not a bit
more than you deserve."

"I would rather not have had it," Lisle said, sorrowfully. "I owe
much to the colonel, who has for the past three years given me an
allowance of two hundred pounds a year; and I would far rather have
gone on with that, than come into a fortune in this manner."

"I can understand that," Hallett said; "the colonel was a
first-rate old fellow, and his death will be an immense loss to
you. Still, but for you it would have come three years ago and,
after all, it is better to be killed hunting than to be shot to
pieces by savages.

"Well, it will bring you in six or seven hundred pounds a year, a
sum not to be despised. It will enable you to leave the army, if
you like; though I should advise you to stick to it. Here are you a
captain at twenty-one, a V. C. and D. S. O. man, with a big career
before you and, no doubt, you will get a brevet majority before
long."

"I have certainly not the least idea of leaving the army. I was
born in it, and hope to remain in it as long as I can do good
work."

"What are you going to do now?"

"I shall go down there again, in a fortnight or so."

"Would you be disposed to take me with you?"

"Certainly I shall, if you will go. I had not thought of asking
you, because everything must go on quietly there, for a time; but
really I should prize your company very much."

"Well, the fact is," Hallett said, rather shamefacedly, "I am
rather smitten with Miss Merton, and I have some hopes that she is
a little taken with me. I heard that she has money but, although
that is satisfactory, I would take her, if she would have me,
without a penny. You know I have three hundred pounds a year of my
own; which is quite enough, with my pay, to enable us to get on
comfortably. Still, I won't say that, if she has as much more, we
could not do things better."

Lisle laughed.

"I thought you were not a marrying man, Hallett! In fact, you have
more than once told me so."

"Well, I didn't think I was," Hallett admitted, "but you see,
circumstances alter cases."

"They do, Hallett, and your case seems to be a bad one. However,
old man, I wish you luck. She is an exceedingly nice girl and, if I
were ten years older, I might have been smitten myself; and then,
you know, your chance would have been nowhere."

"I quite feel that," Hallett said; "a V.C. is a thing no girl can
stand against.

"If you will take me, I will go down with you and stay a little
time, and then try my luck."

"That you certainly shall do. I can hardly do anything in the way
of festivities, at present; but there is no reason why you should
not enter into anything that is going on."

So they went down together. Ten days later, all the families round
came to pay visits of condolence; and to each Lisle said that,
although he himself could not think of going out, at present, his
friend Hallett, who had come to stay with him for a month, would be
glad to join in any quiet festivity. So Hallett was frequently
invited out, Lisle accompanying him only to the very quietest of
dinners.

One evening Hallett returned in the highest glee.

"Congratulate me, my dear fellow," he said. "Miss Merton has
accepted me and, after she had done so, I had the inevitable talk
with her father. He told me, frankly, that he had hoped that his
daughter would make a better match. I of course agreed with him,
heartily; but he went on to say that, after all, our happiness was
the first consideration, and that he felt sure that it would be
secured by her marriage with me. He said that he should allow her
four hundred pounds a year, during his and her mother's lifetime.
At their death there would be a small addition to her allowance,
but naturally the bulk of his property would go to her brother. Of
course, I expressed myself as infinitely grateful. I said that he
had not enquired about my income, but that I had three hundred
pounds a year, in addition to my pay; and should probably, some
day, come into more. He expressed himself as content and, as I had
expected, asked me whether I intended to leave the army. I said
that that was a matter for his daughter to decide; but that, for my
part, I should certainly prefer to remain in the service, for I
really did not see what I should do with myself, if I left it. I
said that I had been very fortunate in having, to some small
extent, distinguished myself; but that if, after some experience of
India, she did not care for the life, I would promise to retire."

"'I think you are right,' he said. 'It is a bad thing for a young
man of seven or eight and twenty to be without employment. Your
income would be insufficient to enable you to live, with comfort,
as a country gentleman; and you would naturally find time lie heavy
upon your hands, if you had nothing to do.'

"He was good enough to say that he thought his daughter's happiness
would be safe in my hands and, as she would be able to have every
luxury in India, he thought that the arrangement would be a very
satisfactory one. It is awfully good of him, of course, for she
could have made an infinitely better match."

"You have, of course, not settled anything about the date,
Hallett?"

"No; I expect we shall settle about that when I see her, tomorrow.
Of course, it must be pretty early, as we had letters, yesterday,
to go up to town to be examined by the board; and we have both
picked up so much that, I fancy, we shall be ordered back to our
regiments pretty sharply. You see, every man is wanted at present
and, as we both had a year's leave before we went out to West
Africa, it is not unnatural that they should send us off again, as
soon as they can. I dare say, however, they will give us a couple
of months; and I suppose we shall want a month for our honeymoon,
in which case we ought to be spliced in a month's time; if she can
