you brothers loved each other passing well; but I suppose that a man who
can be guilty of ingratitude is not to be much depended on in the matter
of affection."

Heika winced at these words--not that the charge of ingratitude affected
him, but he could not submit calmly to the unjust supposition that in
his contemplated flight he had been actuated by selfish indifference to
his brother.  At the same time he would not condescend to give any
explanation of his conduct.  Drawing himself up, he looked Leif full in
the face.

"Norseman," he said, "small is the gratitude I owe to thee.  'Tis true,
ye have treated me and my brother kindly since we came hither, and for
that I owe thee thanks, and would gladly have paid this debt before
leaving, had such been consistent with flight; but kindness, however
great, is not a worthy price for liberty, and when King Olaf Tryggvisson
sent me to thee, I made no promise to sell my liberty at such a price.
But in regard to Hake--"

"Ay, in regard to Hake, go on; why dost thou stop?" said Leif, in a
stern tone.  "There is some truth in what ye say about gratitude; but
what of Hake?"

The Scot still remained silent, with his lips compressed, and dropped
his eyes sternly on the ground.

"This seems to me a bad business," said Karlsefin, who had hitherto
listened with an expression of anxiety and disappointment gradually
deepening on his countenance.  "I had thought better of thee, Heika.
Surely Hake's longing to be free and in his own native land must be to
the full as strong as thine.  I am puzzled, moreover, for two were
better than one in the mad voyage ye thought to undertake."

Heika smiled at this.

"Truly," he said, "my brother loves his native land and freedom,
nevertheless he prefers bondage to freedom, and Greenland to his native
land.  And yet would he fain have sacrificed his preference, and
resigned his bondage out of love to me, if I would have allowed him."

"Resigned his bondage, Heika!" exclaimed Leif.  "Ye speak in riddles,
man; what mean you?"

Instead of replying the Scot looked at Leif with an intelligent smile,
and held up his forefinger as if to call attention.  At the same moment
the sound as if of some one running at full speed was heard faintly in
the distance.

Leif and Karlsefin looked at the Scot in surprise.

"It is my brother," he said, sadly.

In a few seconds the steps were close at hand.  Leif seized Karlsefin by
the arm, and dragged him swiftly under the deep shadow of the cliffs
just as Hake came through the narrow opening with such a rush that on
seeing Heika he could not avoid plunging violently into his extended
arms.

"Was this right in thee, brother?" he cried, laying his hand on Heika's
shoulder, on recovering himself; "was it wise to treat me thus like a
child?"

"It was kindly meant," said Heika, much perplexed as to how he should
act in existing circumstances.

"Kindly meant!" exclaimed Hake, vehemently.  "Ay, well do I know that,
yet it was not wisely kind to forsake me after promising to take me with
you, when ye knew that I did but leave Bertha for a time, and meant to
come back and win or demand her from--."

"Hush! brother, hush!" cried Heika, laying his hand on the other's
mouth.  "Whatever I thought or meant to do matters little now, for I
have found it impossible to undertake this voyage after all."

"Impossible!" echoed Hake; "why, what craven spirit has come over thee?
Is not the boat ready? am not _I_ ready, and is not the opportunity
favourable?"

"All is ready, no doubt," replied Heika, hesitating, "but--"

"But the truth is," cried Leif, as he and Karlsefin issued from their
place of concealment, laughing heartily, "the truth is, that the
opportunity is _not_ favourable, for I have some objection to either of
you leaving me at present--though the objection is not so strong but
that it might give way if ye desired it greatly.  Come hither, all of
you."

He went a few steps towards the boat, and pointing to it, said--"Tell
me, Hake, for thou art not a bad counsellor at need, dost think that
vessel there is a sufficiently large one to venture a voyage in it on
these northern seas at this time of year?"

"It is large enough for men who would be free," replied Hake moodily,
for his astonishment on first beholding his master had given place to
deep mortification, now that he perceived his brother's hopes and plans
were frustrated.

"Nay, as to being free," returned Leif, with a laugh, "thy brother
hinted not long ago something about thy preference for thraldom, in
regard to which I now perceive some glimmering of reason; but I ask thee
for a matter-of-fact opinion.  Dost think there would be much risk in
the voyage thy brother contemplated?"

"There would be some risk, doubtless, yet not so much but that we would
have run it for the sake of freedom."

"H'm!  In my opinion it would have been a mad venture," rejoined Leif.
"What say you, Karlsefin?"

"A useless venture, as well as mad," he replied; "for death, not
freedom, would have been the end of it."

"So I think," returned Leif, "and that is my only objection to your
undertaking it, Hake.  Nevertheless if you and Heika are still willing
to venture, ye may do so.  There lies the boat; a fair wind is blowing
outside; get on board, shove off, hoist the sail and away to bonny
Scotland if you will, for _I grant you freedom to go_!"

"It is ill to jest with thralls," said Heika, looking sternly at his
master.

"Nay, I do not jest--nor are ye thralls," replied Leif, assuming a look
and tone of unwonted seriousness.  "Give me your attention, friends; and
thou, Karlsefin, take note of what I say, for I care not to talk much on
this subject until my mind is more clear upon it.  My opinion is that
this new religion which we hear so much of just now, is _true_.  It is
of God--not of man, and I believe that Jesus Christ, my Lord, has come
in the flesh to save His people from their sins.  Many things have led
me to this opinion, in regard to which I will not speak.  I have thought
and heard much for some years past, and woefully have I been staggered,
as well as helped on, by the men who have been sent to Greenland with
the Good News.  Some have, by their conduct squaring with their
profession, led me to believe.  Others have, by their conduct belying
their profession, hindered me.  But the Lord Himself has led me into a
certain measure of light; and there is one law of His in particular,
which just now comes home to me with much power, namely
this--`Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so
unto them.'  This law, I am persuaded, is of God.  Long have I lived,
and never before have I seen it acted on till these Christians came
amongst us.  They do not, indeed, always practise as they teach; but
they are imperfect, therefore they cannot practise _fully_ as they
teach, because they teach _perfection_.  This law I shall henceforth
follow as I best can.  I follow it to-day.  If I were in thraldom to
_you_, Heika, just now, I would wish you to set me free, therefore I now
set you and your brother free.  The rule is very simple of application.
It only wants a willing spirit.  And let me add--ye have to thank the
Lord, not me, for your freedom."

The brothers stood speechless with surprise on hearing this, but
Karlsefin grasped Leif's hand and said very earnestly--"Ye have done
well, brother.  Long have I thought to urge thee to this, and frequently
have I asked of Him that it might be as it has turned out.  Now, my
prayer is answered.  But what say Heika and Hake to this?"

"Never mind what they say," returned Leif brusquely.  "Doubtless their
thoughts interfere with their speech at present.  And hark 'ee, all; as
I said before, I desire to have no further talk at present on this
point.  Ye are welcome to tell whom ye please what I have said, and what
I have done, and why I have done it--there let the matter rest.  So now,
Heika and Hake," he added, in a gay tone, "I mean what I say.  There
lies the boat, and ye are free to go if it please you.  Only, if ye will
accept my advice you will make up your minds to spend this winter in
Greenland as my guests, and in spring there will be better weather and a
more fitting craft to carry you over the sea to Scotland.  Meanwhile
Hake will have ample opportunity to woo, win, and wed--without
demanding--the fair Bertha!"

Need we say that the brothers gladly accepted this generous invitation,
and endeavoured, in spite of Leif's prohibition, to express their
gratitude in a few earnest though broken sentences.

Great was the surprise that night in Brattalid, when it was made known
that Leif Ericsson had given freedom to his thralls out of regard to the
Christian religion.  Leif afterwards told his friends that it was out of
regard to the Founder of that religion, but it was long before many of
the people could see a distinction in that.  Numerous were the
theological discussions, too, which this act of emancipation called
forth in every household, and great was the joy which it created in one
or two hearts.

To say nothing of the young Scots themselves, it caused the heart of
timid little Bertha to sing for joy, while Gudrid, Astrid, and Thora
rejoiced sympathetically, and looked forward with pleasant anticipation
to the approaching marriage.  Even Freydissa opened out in a new light
on the occasion, and congratulated her handmaiden heartily, telling her
with real sincerity that marriage was the only thing she was fit for!

But it was Olaf who displayed the greatest amount of feeling on the
occasion, and it was Snorro on whom he expended himself!

On the morning after the great event, he hoisted Snorro on his back with
his wonted care and tenderness, and hurried off with him to the solitude
of the sea-shore--for, alas! there were no umbrageous solitudes in
Greenland.  There, not far from the spot where Flatface and his friends
had once been made to wriggle their coat-tails with terror, he set
Snorro down, and, sitting on a rock beside him, said--

"Now, old man, it is going to have a talk with me."

"Iss," replied Snorro, very contentedly.

"Does it know what has happened to Hake and Heika?"

Snorro shook his head.

"Well, my father has set them both free."

"Bof f'ee?" repeated Snorro, with a puzzled look.

"Yes, both."

"W'at's _f'ee_?" asked Snorro.

Olaf was greatly perplexed, for he knew not how to convey an idea of the
meaning of that word to his little friend.  He made various attempts,
however, by means of simple illustrations and words, to explain it, but
without success--as was made plain by Snorro's usually intelligent
countenance remaining a perfect blank.

At last he seized the child by both wrists and held him fast for a few
seconds.

"Snorro," he said, "you are _not_ free while I hold you.  Now," he
added, releasing the wrists, "you _are_ free."

Snorro's countenance was no longer blank, but, on the contrary,
extremely perplexed.

"Leif," he said, "no' hold Heika an' Hake by e _hands_!"

"No," replied Olaf, "but he holds them by the spirit."

"W'at's spiwit?" asked Snorro.

Olaf was in despair!

"Well, well," he cried, after stroking his chin and pulling his nose,
and knuckling his forehead in the vain hope of hitting on some other
mode of explaining his meaning; "it don't matter, old man.  They are
free, and that has made them very happy; and oh!  I am very glad,
because I am so fond of Hake.  Don't you remember how he came to save us
from the Skraelingers, and nearly did it too?  And he is going to be
married to Bertha.  Isn't that nice?  It knows what married means, don't
it?"

"No," said Snorro.

"Well, no matter; it's what seems to make everybody very happy; and
Bertha is very happy, and so am I, for I'm fond of Bertha, as well as of
Hake; and so is Snorro, isn't he?"

"Iss," replied Snorro, with a very decided nod.

"Well, that's all very pleasant," continued Olaf, running on with the
subject until it led him into another subject, which led him into a
third and fourth, and so on, with the ever-varying moods of his gay and
fanciful mind, until he was led in spirit to Vinland, where he and
Snorro remained lost in the woods, perfectly contented and happy, for
the remainder of the day.

And now, patient reader, we must lead you in spirit away from the scenes
on which we have dwelt so long, across the wide ocean to Scotland.

There, on the heights of a lion-like hill, stand Heika and Hake.  A
precipitous crag rises behind them.  In front towers a rock, from which
Edwin's castle frowns down on the huts of an embryo city.  The
undulating woodland between resounds with the notes of the huntsman's
horn.  Away in the distance lie the clear waters of the fiord of Forth,
and the background of Scotia's highland hills mingling with the sky.

The brothers stand in rapt and silent admiration of the scene, as well
they may, for it is surpassingly beautiful.  But they do not stand
alone.  Bertha leans on Hake's arm, and a tall girl with dark hair leans
on Heika's.  Beside them stands a fine-looking though somewhat delicate
old man; whose benignant gaze seems to be more attracted by the young
people than the scenery.

Need we say that this is the Scottish Earl, the father of our
fleet-footed thralls, and that the dark-haired girl is Emma?  We will
not violate your sense of propriety, gentle reader, by talking of Mrs
Heika; nor will we venture to make reference to the little Heikas left
at home!

But these are not all the party.  Karlsefin, Biarne, and Thorward are
there--on a visit to the Earl--with Gudrid and Freydissa; and away on
the fiord they can see their two Norse galleys towering like quaint
giants at rest among the small craft that ply and skim about there.

Shall we listen to what our friends say?  We think not.  Too long
already have we caused them to break the silence which they have
maintained for the last eight hundred years.  Let us rather bid their
shades depart with a kind farewell.

But before the memory of them is quite gone, let us say a word or two in
conclusion.

Whether the Norsemen ever returned again to Vinland is a matter of
uncertainty, for the saga is silent on that point; and it is to be
feared that Snorro, the first American, did not return to take
possession of his native land, for when the great continent was
re-discovered about five hundred years later, only "red-skins" were
found there; and the Pilgrim Fathers make no mention of having met with
descendants of any colony of white men.

What ultimately became of Snorro and Olaf is, we regret to say, unknown.
This, however, is certain, that Karlsefin, according to his
oft-expressed intention, retired to Iceland, where he dwelt happily with
Gudrid, Leif, Biarne, and Thorward for many years.  It is therefore
probable that Snorro and Olaf took to a seafaring life, which was almost
the only life open to enterprising men in those days.  If they did, they
distinguished themselves--there can be no doubt whatever upon that
point.

As to the other personages who have figured in our tale, we can only
surmise--at least hope--that they lived long and happily, for the saga
relates nothing as to the end of their respective careers.  But of this
we are quite sure, that wherever they went, or however long they lived,
they never failed to retain a lively recollection of that romantic
period of their lives when they sojourned in the pleasant groves of
Vinland--that mighty continent which, all unsuspected by these men of
old, was destined, in the course of time, to play such a grand and
important part in the world's history.

Thus ends all that we have got to tell of the adventures of the Norsemen
in the West, and the Discovery of America before Columbus.

THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  An important Christian colony existed in Greenland for nearly 400
years--from some time in the tenth to near the end of the fourteenth
century,--a colony in which, in the fourteenth century, there were 190
townships and a town called Garda, in which were a cathedral, bishop's
seat, and twelve or thirteen churches, besides other Christian
establishments, with a regular succession of bishops for their
superintendence, of whom seventeen are named in the sagas.  This colony,
strange to say, was obliterated, no one knew how or when, and its very
existence was forgotten by the civilised world.  It was chronicled,
however, in the Icelandic sagas and brought to light by antiquaries of
the highest authority.  The statistical details given by the sagas have
been corroborated by the actual discovery in Greenland, in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, of vast ecclesiastical and other
buildings.  These are facts which do not admit of reasonable doubt--so
writes Samuel Laing in his translation of "The Heimskringla, or
Chronicle of the Kings of Norway," volume one, page 141.

