His first difficulty was removed almost at once, on his arrival, by his
finding a trader who had bought a great many more ponies than he knew
what to do with.  Fifty of them were promptly secured and turned over
to Many Bears.  Even while that was being cared for Murray sought and
obtained two or three important interviews.  One was with the United
States Army officer in command of the post, and from him he received
the promise of all the help he might need.

"Still," said the gallant major, "it will keep the Indians in better
humor if you pay as you agreed."

"I mean to exactly."

"It's a little the biggest romance I ever heard of.  I'll tell you
what: you'd better have the final transfer made in my presence."

"Thank you heartily.  That will be just the thing."

Another of Murray's calls was upon the "post barber," the next upon the
traders in boots, hats, clothing etc.; and when he finished the last
one, Steve Harrison, who had accompanied him, making some purchases on
his own account, exclaimed,

"Why, Murray, you don't look as if you were over forty.  The major
won't know you, nor the chief either."

"I was almost ashamed to have my hair dyed.  I did it partly for Rita's
sake.  So she can remember me better.  Partly, I must say, so my
English friends will know me."

Rita turned pale when she saw him, and did not say a word; but
Ni-ha-be's face put on an expression of great disgust both for him and
Steve.

"Ugh!  Pale-face!  Young brave better wear blanket and look like a man!"

"That's it, Ni-ha-be," said Murray.  "He looks like a white man now,
not like a red one."

Many Bears also took a look at Send Warning and Knotted Cord in their
new rig, and it was not half an hour before he was strutting around in
an old blue army uniform coat and a high-crowned hat.

The Apaches of his band declared the "talking leaves" to have told the
truth; for, although there was not much of a "big talk" or treaty,
there were a good many presents from their "Great Father at
Washington," and they were in excellent humor.

Many Bears knew that the price to be paid for Rita was fast being got
together, and he may have cared very little whether it should be called
a dowry or a ransom, for he had as yet no idea but what she and her new
father and Steve would go back with him to their lodge in his camp.

The romantic truth, however, had been told as a great secret to the
major's wife, and she told it to the other ladies at the fort, and they
all went wild together over a grand new wardrobe for Rita.  Never had
any daughter of the Apaches owned a tenth of the varied material the
enthusiastic ladies prepared in less than twenty-four hours after they
had their first glimpse of Rita.

"We must make quite an affair," said the major to Murray, "of your
making the payment.  Then they will not think of trying to back out."

"There would be danger to Rita, I fear, if I were to make the truth
known publicly too soon."

"Of course there would.  Are all your presents ready?"

"They will be to-morrow."

"Then bring them to the parade ground in the morning.  I will have
everything fixed for the occasion."

Major Norris was an experienced "Indian fighter," and just the man to
be in command of such a post, for the reason that he had learned how
much cheaper it was to have the red men as friends than as enemies.  He
sent word at once to Many Bears and a number of other "great chiefs"
that Send Warning was also a "great chief" and that proper honor must
be shown him by his pale-face friends on so great an occasion.  Nothing
could have better suited the pride of Many Bears, but both Dolores and
Ni-ha-be bitterly resented the proposal of the white ladles to prepare
Rita's toilet.  They would surely have kept her to themselves if it had
not been for the tact and good-sense of the major's wife, to whom
Murray explained the difficulty.

"Nonsense!  Tell them all the ladies of the great chief's family are
invited to come to my room in the morning.  Tell them it will be bad
manners if they do not come."

That was enough.  Ni-ha-be felt that the daughter of a great chief
ought not to be impolite, and she and Dolores came with Rita in the
morning.  The white ladies preserved their gravity, but they all said
afterward that it was great fun.

Somehow or other, Rita seemed to know the uses of her new wardrobe very
well, except that hooks-and-eyes were a sort of mystery, and she had no
skill in the handling of pins.  Dolores was made happy by the
presentation of a wonderful scarf of brilliant colors, and Ni-ha-be
consented to "try on" everything that was put before her.

That was as far as they could persuade her to go, however, for she took
off bonnet and dress, stockings and shoes, resuming her own pretty and
neatly fitting garments.  All she would keep on was a pair of bracelets
sent to her by Knotted Cord.  They were hardly ready when they heard
the band begin to play on the parade-ground, and word came from the
major to hurry.

It was quite a procession that marched out of the fort barracks with
Rita, and the Apache warriors and squaws who were looking on felt that
a high compliment was paid to their nation.  There were the troops
drawn up in splendid array, with flags, and cannon, and music, and the
"white chiefs" in their bright uniforms.

There were the great warriors of several "bands" of the Apaches in
their paint and feathers.  There were the beautiful white squaws in
their strange dresses.  Many Bears had been looking very intently at a
collection of things just in front of where Major Norris was standing,
with Murray and Steve Harrison.  Ponies, blankets, guns, all, and more
than all, that had been agreed upon.  No chief who was looking on could
say he had ever received more than that for one of his daughters, and
the heart of Many Bears swelled proudly within him.  There was a cloud
upon his haughty face, however, and another on that of Red Wolf, who
was standing at his side.

The clouds did not disperse when they searched the approaching party of
ladies with their eyes for Rita.  Rita!  Could that be the adopted
daughter of Many Bears walking there behind Mrs. Norris and Mother
Dolores?  The beautiful young lady whose face was so very pale, and who
was dressed so splendidly?  They had never before seen her look
anything like that.  The band played, the soldiers "presented arms,"
the officers touched their hats, and Murray stepped forward and held
out his right hand to Many Bears, pointing with his left to the ponies
and things.

"There they are.  Send Warning has kept his word.  Rita is mine."

"Ugh!  Good.  Presents all right.  Young squaw is the daughter of Send
Warning."

He shook hands heartily as he said it; but Many Bears had something
more on his mind, and was about to open his mouth, only waiting for the
music to stop.  He was farther prevented by a sign to his father and a
word in Apache from Red Wolf.

"Listen!" exclaimed Many Bears.  "Send Warning see ponies?  See all
presents?"

"Yes, I see them."

"All mine now.  Give all to Red Wolf.  Young brave want Rita.  Give all
ponies for her.  All presents.  All except gun.  Great chief keep them.
What does Send Warning say?"

"Not want pony.  Not want anything.  Want daughter.  Keep her."

"Red Wolf is young.  Come again by-and-by.  Bring more pony."

"Listen," said Murray, in his turn.  "I tell you a big truth.  Rita is
my own daughter.  When you burn ranch in Mexico, many summers ago, burn
mine, take horses, cattle, mules, take away little girl, all that was
mine.  Got little girl back now.  Apaches all good friends of mine."

"Send Warning not come back to lodge?"

"Not now.  Go to my own people for a while.  Show them my daughter.
Say found her again."

"Ugh!  Send Warning is a wise man.  Cunning chief.  Throw dust in the
eyes of the Apaches."

It was plain that the chief was troubled in his mind.  He hardly knew
whether to be angry or not, but there was no reasonable objection to
Murray's doing as he pleased with his own daughter, after she had cost
him so many ponies.

Murray spoke again.

"Send Warning say what great chief do.  Let Ni-ha-be come with Rita to
pale-face lodges.  Stay awhile.  Learn to hear talking leaves.  Then
come back to her friends.  What say?"

The chief pondered a moment, but Ni-ha-be had heard and understood, and
a scared look arose in her face.

"Rita!  Rita!  You are going away?  You will not be an Apache girl any
more?"

"Oh, Ni-ha-be, come with me!"

Their arms were around each other, and they were both weeping, but
Ni-ha-be's mind was made up instantly.

"No.  You are born white.  You will go with your father.  I am an
Apache, and I will go with my father."

Many Bears was listening.

"Send Warning hear what young squaw say?  All Apaches say good.  She
will stay with her own people."

Ni-ha-be consented, nevertheless, to remain with Rita at the post
head-quarters as long as her friends were camped close by.

Murray and Steve were anxious to begin their return to civilization,
but it would be several days before a "train" would go with an escort,
and they did not care to run any farther risks.

So the "farewell" was spread over sufficient time to make all sorts of
explanations and promises, and Rita's mind became so full of dreams of
her new life that she could easily give up the old one.

Ni-ha-be had never seen so much of the pale-faces before, and Rita
tried again and again to persuade her to change her mind, but, on the
very last morning of all, she resolutely responded,

"No, Rita, you are all pale-face.  All over.  Head and heart both
belong with white friends.  Feel happy.  Ni-ha-be only little Indian
girl here.  Out there, on plains, among mountains, Ni-ha-be is the
daughter of a great chief.  She is an Apache."

No doubt she was right, but she and Rita had a good long cry over it
then, and probably more than one afterward.  As for Dolores, she came
to the fort to say good-bye, but neither Many Bears nor Red Wolf came
with her.

"The heart of the great chief is sore," she said, "and he mourns for
his pale-face daughter.  Not want to speak."

Rita sent many kindly messages, even to Red Wolf, glad as she was that
he had failed to make a bargain for her.

Out from the gates of the fort that morning wheeled the cavalry escort
of the waiting "train" of supply wagons and traders' "outfits," and
behind the cavalry rode a little group of three.  The ladies of the
garrison, with the major and the rest, had said their last farewells at
the gates, and the homeward journey had begun.

"Steve," said Murray, "are you a Lipan or an Apache to-day?"

"Seems to me that is all ever so long ago.  I am white again."

"So am I.  At one time I had little hope that I ever should be.  I
never would if I had not found Rita.  Oh, my daughter!"

"Father!  Father, see--there she is!  Oh, Ni-ha-be!"

A swift and beautiful mustang was bounding toward them across the plain
from a sort of cloud of wild-looking figures at a little distance, and
on its back was a form they all knew well.  Nearer it came and nearer.

"She wants to say good-bye again."

Nearer still, so near that they could almost look into her dark,
streaming eyes, and Rita held out her arms beseechingly; but at that
moment the mustang was suddenly reined in and wheeled to the
right-about, while Ni-ha-be clasped both hands upon her face.

"Ni-ha-be!  Oh, Ni-ha-be!"

But she was gone like the wind, and did not come again.

"There, Rita," said her father.  "It is all for the best.  All your
Indian life is gone, like mine and Steve's.  We have something better
before us now."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALKING LEAVES***


******* This file should be named 21913.txt or 21913.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/9/1/21913



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
