
The balls, the _tertulias_, the _dias de campo_, were alike insipid and
tiresome.  _She_ was not there--and where?  I knew not.  I might never
see her again.  All I knew was that they had gone up the country--
perhaps to Cordova or Orizava.

Clayley shared my feelings.  The bright eyes in the balconies, the sweet
voices in the orange-shaded patios of Jalapa, had neither brightness nor
music for us.  We were both thoroughly miserable.

To add to this unhappy state of things, a bad feeling had sprung up
among the officers of our army--a jealousy between the old and the new.
Those of the old standing army, holding themselves as a species of
military aristocracy, looked upon their brethren of the new regiments as
"interlopers"; and this feeling pervaded all ranks, from the
commander-in-chief down to the lowest subaltern.

It did not, however, interest all individuals.  There were many
honourable men on both sides who took no part in a question so
ridiculous, but, on the contrary, endeavoured to frown it down.  It was
the child of idleness and a long spell of garrison duty.  On the eve of
a battle it always disappeared.  I have adverted to this, not that it
might interest the reader, but as explaining a result connected with
myself.

One of the most prominent actors in this quarrel, on the side of the
"old regulars", was a young officer named Ransom, a captain in an
infantry regiment.  He was a good fellow in other respects, and a brave
soldier, I believe; his chief weakness lay in a claim to be identified
with the "aristocracy."

It is strange that this miserable ambition is always strongest where it
should exist with the least propriety.  I have observed, in travelling
through life--and so has the reader, no doubt--that _parvenus_ are the
greatest sticklers for aristocratic privilege; and Captain Ransom was no
exception to this rule.  In tumbling over some old family papers, I had
found a receipt from the gallant captain's grandfather to my own
progenitor, acknowledging the payment of a bill for leather breeches.

It so happened that this very receipt was in my portmanteau at the time;
and, nettled at the "carryings-on" of the tailor's grandson, I drew it
forth and spread it out upon the mess-table.  My brethren of the mess
were highly tickled at the document, several of them copying it off for
future use.

A copy soon reached Ransom, who, in his hour of indignation, made use of
certain expressions that, in their turn, soon reached me.

The result was a challenge, borne by my friend Clayley, and the affair
was arranged for the following morning.

The place chosen for our morning's diversion was a sequestered spot upon
the banks of the river Zedena, and along the solitary road that leads
out towards the Cofre de Perote.

At sunrise we rode out in two carriages, six of us, including our
seconds and surgeons.  About a mile from town we halted, and leaving the
carriages upon the road, crossed over into a small glade in the midst of
the chaparral.

It was as pretty a spot for our purpose as the heart could wish for, and
had often, we were informed, been used for similar morning exercises--
that was, before chivalry had died out among the descendants of Cortez
and the conquerors.

The ground was soon lined off--ten paces--and we took our stands, back
to back.  We were to wheel at the word "Ready!" and fire at "One, two,
three!"

We were waiting for the word with that death-like silence which always
precedes a similar signal, when Little Jack, who had been left with the
carriages, rushed into a glade, calling with all his might:

"Captain!  Captain!"

Every face was turned upon him with scowling inquiry, when the boy,
gasping for breath, shouted out:

"The Mexicans are on the road!"

The words had scarcely passed his lips when the trampling of hoofs
sounded in our ears, and the next moment a band of horsemen came driving
pell-mell into the opening.  At a single glance we recognised the
guerilla!

Ransom, who was nearest, blazed away at the foremost of the band,
missing his aim.  With a spring the guerillero was over him, his sabre
raised for the blow.  I fired, and the Mexican leapt from his saddle
with a groan.

"Thank you, Haller," cried my antagonist, as we rushed side by side
towards the pistols.

There were four pairs in all, and the surgeons and seconds had already
armed themselves, and were pointing their weapons at the enemy.  We
seized the remaining two, cocking them as we turned.

At this moment my eye fell upon a black horse, and, looking, I
recognised the rider.  He saw and recognised me at the same moment, and,
driving the spurs into his horse's flanks, sprang forward with a yell.
With one bound he was over me, his white teeth gleaming like a tiger's.
His sabre flashed in my eyes--I fired--a heavy body dashed against me--I
was struck senseless to the earth!

I was only stunned, and in a few moments I came to my senses.  Shots and
shouts rang around me.  I heard the trampling of hoofs and the groans of
wounded men.

I looked up.  Horsemen in dark uniforms were galloping across the glade
and into the woods beyond.  I recognised the yellow facings of the
American dragoons.

I drew my hand over my face; it was wet with blood.  A heavy body lay
across mine, which Little Jack, with all his strength, was endeavouring
to drag off.  I crawled from under it, and, bending over, looked at the
features.  I knew them at a glance.  I muttered to my servant:

"Dubrosc!  He is dead!"

His body lay spread out in its picturesque attire.  A fair form it was.
A bullet--my own--had passed through his heart, killing him instantly.
I placed my hand upon his forehead.  It was cold already, and his
beautiful features were white and ashy.  His eyes glared with the
ghastly expression of death.

"Close them!"  I said to the boy, and turned away from the spot.

Wounded men lay around, dragoons and Mexicans, and some were already
dead.

A party of officers was at the moment returning from the pursuit, and I
recognised my late adversary, with our seconds and surgeons.  My friend
Clayley had been wounded in the _melee_, and I observed that he carried
his arm in a sling.  A dragoon officer galloped up.

It was Colonel Harding.

"These fellows, gentlemen," cried he, reining up his horse, "just came
in time to relieve me from a disagreeable duty.  I have orders from the
commander-in-chief to arrest Captains Haller and Ransom.

"Now, gentlemen," he continued with a smile, "I think you have had
fighting enough for one morning, and if you will promise me to be quiet
young men, and keep the peace, I shall, for once in my life, take the
liberty of disobeying a general's orders.  What say you, gentlemen?"

It needed not this appeal.  There had been no serious cause of quarrel
between my adversary and myself, and, moved by a similar impulse, we
both stepped forward and grasped one another by the hand.

"Forgive me, my dear Haller," said Ransom, "I retract all.  I assure you
my remarks were only made upon the spur of the moment, when I was angry
about those cursed leather breeches."

"And I regret to have given you cause," I replied.  "Come with me to my
quarters.  Let us have a glass of wine together, and we shall light our
cigars with the villainous document."

A burst of laughter followed, in which Ransom good-naturedly joined; and
we were soon on our way to town, seated in the same carriage, and the
best friends in creation!

Some of the soldiers who had "rifled" the body of Dubrosc found a paper
upon him which proved that the Frenchman was a spy in the service of
Santa Anna.  He had thrown himself into the company at New Orleans with
the intention of gaining information, and then deserting on his arrival
at Mexico.  This he succeeded in doing in the manner detailed.  Had he
been in command of the "Rifle Rangers", he would doubtless have found an
opportunity to deliver them over to the enemy at La Virgen or elsewhere.



CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE.

AN ADIOS.

Clayley had now recovered, and I once more enjoyed the society of my
light-hearted friend.  But neither that nor the smiles of the hospitable
Jalapenas could make me happy.  My thoughts dwelt upon Guadalupe, and
often was I harassed with the painful apprehension that I should never
see her again.  Better fortune, however, was in store for me.

One day Clayley and I were sitting over our wine, along with a gay party
of friends, in the Fonda de Diligencias, the principal hotel of Jalapa,
when Jack touched me on the shoulder, and whispered in my ear:

"Captain, there's a Mexican wants to see ye."

"Who is it?"  I demanded, somewhat annoyed at the interruption.

"It's the brother," replied Jack, still speaking in a whisper.

"The brother!  What brother?"

"Of the young ladies, Captain."

I started from my chair, overturning a decanter and several glasses.

"Hilloa! what's the matter?" shouted several voices in a breath.

"Gentlemen, will you excuse me?--one moment only--I--I--will--"

"Certainly! certainly!" cried my companions, all at once, wondering what
_was_ the matter.

The next moment I was in the _ante-sala_, embracing Narcisso.  "And so
you are all here!  When did you arrive?"

"Yesterday, Captain.  I came to town for you, but could not find you."

"And they are well?--all well?"

"Yes, Captain.  Papa expects you will come this evening, with the
lieutenant and the other officer."

"The other officer!  Who, Narcisso!"

"I think he was with you on your first visit to La Virgen--_un senor
gordo_."

"Oh! the major!  Yes, yes, we shall come; but where have you been since
we met, Narcissito?"

"To Orizava.  Papa has a tobacco-farm near Orizava; he always goes to it
when he comes up here.  But, Captain, we were so astonished to hear from
your people that you had been a prisoner, and travelling along with us!
We knew the guerillos had some American prisoners, but we never dreamt
of its being you.  _Carambo_! if I had known that!"

"But how came you, Narcisso, to be with the guerilla?"

"Oh! papa had many things to carry up the country; and he, with some
other families, paid Colonel Cenobio for an escort--the country is so
full of robbers."

"Ah! sure.  Tell me, Narcisso, how came I by this?"

I held out the dagger.

"I know not, Captain.  I am ashamed to tell you that I lost it the day
after you gave it to me!"

"Oh! never mind.  Take it again, and say to your papa, I shall bring
`_el senor gordo_' (the fat gentleman) along with me."

"You will know the way, Captain.  Yonder is our house."  And the lad
pointed to the white turrets of an aristocratic-looking mansion that
appeared over the tree-tops, about a mile distant from the town.

"I shall easily find it."

"Adieu, then, Captain; we shall be impatient till you arrive--_hasta la
tarde_!"  (till the evening).

So saying, the youth departed.

I communicated to Clayley the cause of my temporary withdrawal; and,
seizing the earliest opportunity, we left our companions over their
cups.

It was now near sundown, and we were about to jump into our saddles,
when I recollected my promise to bring the major.  Clayley proposed
leaving him behind and planning an apology; but a hint that he might be
useful in "keeping off" Don Cosme and the senora caused the lieutenant
suddenly to change his tactics, and we set out for Blossom's quarters.

We had no difficulty in persuading "_el senor gordo_" to accompany us,
as soon as he ascertained where we were going.  He had never ceased to
remember _that_ dinner.  Hercules was brought out and saddled, and we
all three galloped off for the mansion of our friends.

After passing under the shadows, of green trees, and through copses
filled with bright flowers, we arrived at the house, one of the fairest
mansions it had ever been our fortune to enter.  We were just in time to
enjoy the soft twilight of an eternal spring--of a landscape _siempre
verde_; and, what was more to the major's mind, in time for a supper
that rivalled the well-remembered dinner.

As I had anticipated, the major proved exceedingly useful during the
visit.  In his capacity of quarter-master he had already picked up a
little Spanish--enough to hold Don Cosme in check over the wine; while
Clayley and myself, with "Lupe" and "Luz", walked out into the verandah
to "take a peep at the moon".  Her light was alluring, and we could not
resist the temptation of a stroll through the gardens.

It was celestial night; and we dallied along _dos y dos_ (two and two),
under the pictured shadows of the orange-trees, and sat upon
curiously-formed benches, and gazed upon the moon, and listened to the
soft notes of the tropic night-birds.

The perils of the past were all forgotten, and the perils of the
future--we thought not of them.

It was late when we said "_buenas noches_" to our friends, and we parted
with a mutual "_hasta la manana_."  It is needless to say that we kept
our promise in the morning, and made another for the following morning,
and kept that too; and so on till the awful bugle summoned us once more
to the "route."

The detail of our actions during these days would have no interest for
the reader, though to us the most interesting part of our lives.  There
was a sameness--a monotony, it is true; but a monotony that both my
friend and myself could have endured for ever.

I do not even remember the details.  All I can remember is, that on the
eve of our march I found myself "cornering" Don Cosme, and telling him
plainly, to his teeth, that I meant to marry one of his daughters; and
that my friend--who had not yet learned the "lingo", and had duly
commissioned me as his "go-between"--would be most happy to take the
other off his hands.

I remember very well, too, Don Cosme's reply, which was given with a
half-smile, half-grin--somewhat cold, though not disagreeable in its
expression.  It was thus:

"Captain--_when the war is over_."

Don Cosme had no intention that his daughters should become widows
before they had fairly been wives.

And we bade adieu once more to the light of love, and walked in the
shadow of war; and we toiled up to the high tables of the Andes, and
crossed the burning plains of Perote; and we forded the cold streams of
Rio Frio, and climbed the snowy spurs of Popocatepec; and, after many a
toilsome march, our bayonets bristled along the borders of the Lake
Tezcoco.  Here we fought--a death-struggle, too--for we knew there was
no retreat.  But our struggle was crowned with victory, and the starry
flag waved over the ancient city of the Aztecs.

Neither my friend nor myself escaped unhurt.  We were shot "all over";
but, fortunately, no bones were broken, and neither of us was converted
into a cripple.

And then came the "piping times of peace", and Clayley and I spent our
days in riding out upon the Jalapa road, watching for that great old
family-carriage, which, it had been promised, should come.

And it came rumbling along at length, drawn by twelve mules, and
deposited its precious load in a palace in the Calle Capuchinas.

And shortly after, two officers in shining uniforms entered the portals
of that same palace, sent up their cards, and were admitted on the
instant.  Ah! these were rare times!  But rarer still--for it should
only occur once in a man's lifetime--was an hour spent in the little
chapel of San Bernardo.

There is a convent--Santa Catarina--the richest in Mexico; the richest,
perhaps, in the world.  There are nuns there--beautiful creatures--who
possess property (some of them being worth a million of dollars); and
yet these children of heaven never look upon the face of man!

About a week after my visit to San Bernardo, I was summoned to the
convent, and permitted--a rare privilege for one of my sex--to enter its
sacred precincts.  It was a painful scene.  Poor "Mary of Mercy"!  How
lovely she looked in her snow-white vestments!--lovelier in her sorrow
than I had ever seen her before.  May God pour out the balm of oblivion
into the heart of this erring but repentant angel!

I returned to New Orleans in the latter part of 1848.  I was walking one
morning along the Levee, with a fair companion on my arm, when a
well-known voice struck on my ear, exclaiming:

"I'll be dog-goned, Rowl, if it ain't the cap'n!"

I turned, and beheld Raoul and the hunter.  They had doffed the
regimentals, and were preparing to "start" on a trapping expedition to
the Rocky Mountains.

I need not describe our mutual pleasure at meeting, which was more than
shared by my wife, who had often made me detail to her the exploits of
my comrades.  I inquired for Chane.  The Irishman, at the breaking up of
the "war-troops", had entered one of the old regiments, and was at this
time, as Lincoln expressed it, "the first sargint of a kump'ny."

I could not permit my old ranging comrades to depart without a
_souvenir_.  My companion drew off a pair of rings, and presented one to
each on the spot.  The Frenchman, with the gallantry of a Frenchman,
drew his upon his finger; but Lincoln, after trying to do the same,
declared, with a comical grin, that he couldn't "git the eend of his
wipin' stick inter it."  He wrapped it up carefully, however, and
deposited it in his bullet-pouch.

My friends accompanied us to our hotel, where I found them more
appropriate presents than the rings.  To Raoul I gave my revolving
pistols, not expecting to have any further use for them myself; and to
the hunter, that which he valued more than any other earthly object, the
major's "Dutch gun".  Doubtless, ere this, the _zundnadel_ has slain
many a "grisly b'ar" among the wild ravines of the Rocky Mountains.

Courteous reader!  I was about to write the word "adieu", when "Little
Jack" handed me a letter, bearing the Vera Cruz post-mark.  It was
dated, "_La Virgen, November 1, 1849_."  It concluded as follows:

  "You were a fool for leaving Mexico, and you'll never be half as happy
