
"He didn't look like a Sir Anything!" exclaimed Gwen. "He was the
oddest, shabbiest, crankiest old fellow, and so inquisitive!"

"I hear he's very eccentric, and of course one sees now why he asked
so many questions. He'd actually never been at Skelwick before,
although he's the patron, and nobody here in the village knew him. He
told the bishop you'd suggested dividing the parish!"

"I!" shrieked Gwen, "I wouldn't have dared to suggest such a thing. I
only said it would be nice."

"Well, you put it into his head, anyway. He said the idea had never
occurred to him before, and he saw at once its extreme advisability.
He talked it over with the bishop, and they both agreed it ought to be
done. I suppose he came to church that evening to hear Dad preach, and
judge for himself what he was capable of."

"He evidently liked him. But who wouldn't?" returned Gwen. "Then Dad
has refused Rawtenbeck?"

"Yes; thank goodness we needn't go and live amongst chemical works and
factory chimneys! The Diocesan Society's going to build an extra
bedroom on to the Parsonage. Isn't that lovely?"

"It will be the Vicarage now, if you please!" declared Gwen, rubbing
her hands with satisfaction.

That her father's hard work should be recognized and rewarded at last
was indeed a triumph, and the thought that she had perhaps had an
unconscious share in bringing this about added a special element of
joy.

"It was like entertaining an angel unawares!" she chuckled. "Though
anybody less angelic-looking than poor old Sir Benjamin one couldn't
imagine! I'm glad I took that solitary walk on the wold, Bee!"

"So am I, as it happens, though it's the exception that proves my
rule."

The appointment to the new parish was indeed an important event for
Mr. Gascoyne in more ways than one. It not only gave him a better
position and larger opportunities of carrying on the work he had
begun, but it meant also pecuniary benefit. The living of Skelwick was
to be worth treble his curate's stipend, and though he was an
unworldly man, his children's future was a necessary consideration. He
would not be opulent, but he would now at any rate be free from money
troubles, and the family could carry out many precious schemes which
before had seemed mere dreams. The boys could be educated in course of
time at Stedburgh Grammar School, Lesbia could take music lessons, and
Gwen's visions of college might actually some day see fulfilment.
Winnie could give up the teaching she hated and become housekeeper at
home, that her elder sister might be free to take her training at a
great London hospital, for Beatrice's heart was still set on entering
the nursing profession.

"You'll see me a matron yet!" she announced. "I warn you that I'm
ambitious, and mean to get on!"

"I'll be a B.A. by then, and we'll shake hands over our mutual
success!" laughed Gwen.

"Don't forget you promised to be a lady doctor and study at college
with me!" put in Dick, who had become almost one of the family at the
Parsonage.

"You'll have to look out then, or I'll get ahead of you!"

"You won't do that, madam! I'm going back to school next term,
remember."

Dick was fortunately quite strong again. The specialist who had
examined him before declared he had outgrown his temporary delicacy,
and even gave him permission to play football when the season began,
as well as to recommence his work at Stedburgh.

"I shall be sorry to lose my pupil," said Mr. Gascoyne. "The children
will miss you here on Saturdays."

"I'll see them all every day in the bus," returned Dick cheerfully.

As the holidays wore on and it grew nearer and nearer to the time when
she might expect to hear the result of the Senior Oxford, Gwen waxed
impatient. The suspense was hard to bear, and seemed harder the longer
she waited.

"I want to be put out of my misery," she declared. "If I've failed I'd
like to know and have done with it."

"But you thought you'd done pretty well," said Winnie.

"How can I tell? Every day I think of something more that I left out
in my papers, and it makes me less and less hopeful. I've borrowed one
of Dad's big pocket handkerchiefs all ready to weep into! I warn you I
shall cry gallons if I've not passed."

Miss Roscoe had arranged that a telegram should be sent to each of the
candidates announcing the lists, and on the day when the news was
likely to arrive the Gascoyne family haunted the rampart on the wall,
watching eagerly for the advent of the telegraph boy. It was Basil who
spied him first, and Giles who got to the gate quickest to meet him,
and Beatrice who tore open the yellow envelope and read the message to
the excited audience.

"'First-class Honours, and Geographical Society's Silver Medal!'"

Gwen nearly dropped on the grass.

[Illustration: "IT WAS BASIL WHO SPIED HIM FIRST"]

"Let me look at it!" she quavered. "Are you sure you haven't made a
mistake, Bee?"

"Here it is in black and white. Look at it yourself, then, you
sceptic, and be convinced! I do congratulate you!"

"Hip, hip, hooray!" yelled the boys with such vigour that their shouts
aroused curiosity in the village, and several parishioners came to
enquire the cause of the rejoicings.

Gwen had known that the Royal Geographical Society offered two medals,
one of silver and one of bronze, to the two Senior candidates who gave
the best answers to the geography papers, but in her wildest visions
she had never contemplated winning one of them. To come out first in
all England in geography seemed an honour almost above the flights of
ambition.

"Miss Roscoe will be so rejoiced!" said Winnie. "She always thought
you'd do well, Gwen. Why, you'll be a credit to the school. She'll
boast about this silver medal for evermore. I expect it will go down
in the prospectuses! You'll get coached up for a scholarship next,
you'll see."

"I still can't quite, quite believe it--it's too absolutely,
perfectly, deliriously scrumpshus!" bleated Gwen hysterically.

"Dad's big pocket handkerchief won't be wanted after all to dry your
tears," laughed Lesbia. "Oh, there's Dad coming up the road now--go
and meet him, Gwen, and tell him your own self!"

The next prize-giving at Rodenhurst was a more than usually special
occasion, for not only had four girls matriculated, but five had
passed the Senior Oxford, two of them in the Honours Division. Gwen's
medal was acknowledged the triumph of the school, and both pupils and
mistresses spoke of her as likely to win more laurels in the future.

"She's one of the best workers we have," said Miss Roscoe to the
Mayor, who was acting chairman; "a very clever girl. I believe she has
a career before her."

As Gwen went up to receive her prizes and certificate the girls
clapped and clapped till, not content even with the noise they were
making, they broke into ringing cheers. Half-dizzy with emotion, Gwen
returned to her place--these were the very same schoolfellows who,
only one short year ago, had allowed her to walk down the hall without
a sign of recognition or appreciation. From being the outcast of her
Form she had risen to the height of popularity.

"I always said, childie, that if you only bided your time and worked
your very hardest, the girls would be proud of you in the end!"
declared Father when the celebrations were over and the Gascoynes had
returned to the Parsonage.

"Oh, it was ripping to hear them all clapping and cheering, Gwen! And
after last year, too--it's like a miracle!" exclaimed Lesbia
rapturously.

"Yes, that's just what it is--a miracle," said Gwen, thinking of the
motto that hung on her bedroom wall.

       *       *       *       *       *




BY ANGELA BRAZIL

     "Angela Brazil has proved her undoubted talent for writing a
     story of schoolgirls for other schoolgirls to
     read."--Bookman.

A Patriotic Schoolgirl.

     "A capital story for girls--breezy, healthy, and full of
     interest."--Ladies' Field.

For the School Colours.

     "Angela Brazil knows what schoolgirls like to read and she
     gives it to them."--Scottish Educational Journal.

The Madcap of the School.

     "A capital school story, full of incident and fun, and
     ending with a mystery."--Spectator.

The Luckiest Girl in the School.

     "A thoroughly good girls' school story."--Truth.

The Jolliest Term on Record.

     "A capital story for girls."--Record.

The Girls of St. Cyprian's: A Tale of School Life.

     "St. Cyprian's is a remarkably real school, and Mildred
     Lancaster is a delightful girl."--Saturday Review.

The Youngest Girl in the Fifth: A School Story.

     "A very brightly-written story of schoolgirl
     character."--Daily Mail.

The New Girl at St. Chad's: A Story of School Life.

     "The story is one to attract every lassie of good
     taste."--Globe.

For the Sake of the School.

     "Schoolgirls will do well to try to secure a copy of this
     delightful story, with which they will be
     charmed."--Schoolmaster.

The School by the Sea.

     "One always looks for works of merit from the pen of Miss
     Angela Brazil. This book is no exception."--School Guardian.

The Leader of the Lower School: A Tale of School Life.

     "Juniors will sympathize with the Lower School at
     Briarcroft, and rejoice when the newcomer wages her
     successful battle."--Times.

A Pair of Schoolgirls: A Story of School-days.

     "The story is so realistic that it should appeal to all
     girls."--Outlook.

A Fourth Form Friendship: A School Story.

     "No girl could fail to be interested in this
     book."--Educational News.

The Manor House School.

     "One of the best stories for girls we have seen for a long
     time."--Literary World.

The Nicest Girl in the School.

The Third Class at Miss Kaye's: A School Story.

The Fortunes of Philippa: A School Story.


LONDON: BLACKIE & SON, LTD., 50 OLD BAILEY, E.C.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Youngest Girl in the Fifth, by Angela Brazil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNGEST GIRL IN THE FIFTH ***

***** This file should be named 21687.txt or 21687.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/8/21687/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
