
I felt a dull crushing sensation.  My nerves collapsed; my senses left
me.  Speech, sight, hearing, all failed me in an instant; a strange
darkness came over me, and then I was conscious of nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When my senses slowly and wearily recovered I was still lying in my
master's pocket in the place where he had fallen at the storming of the
breach.  Firing was still going on all around, but the shouts of our men
rose now from inside the fort instead of outside.  And what shouting it
was!  The enemy's guns ceased as if by magic, and the distant sounds of
firing showed plainly enough that the main body, now that we had
silenced the fort, was resuming its march on Lucknow.

All this flashed through me as my senses gradually returned, and before
even I had time to contemplate my own condition.  What a wreck I was!  A
helpless cripple past all healing, of no use to any one, and utterly
incapable of resuming the ordinary duties of life.  But almost before I
could realise this, another care flashed through my mind and drove out
every other.

My master!  What of him?  There he lay, motionless and pale, with his
blue eyes closed, and a little stream of blood trickling down his chest.
Could he be dead?

Anxiously I listened if his heart still beat.  At first all seemed
silent as death.  Then there seemed a slight quiver, and as I listened
still, a faint throb.  He lived still!  How I longed for help to come!

And before long it came.  Two soldiers of Charlie's regiment came out of
the fort and walked straight towards us.

"It was close to the breach he dropped," said one.

"Come on, then," said the other, "and we may be in time."

They were not long in finding the object of their search, and leant
eagerly over him.

"He's dead, poor fellow!" said the first; "shot right through the
heart!"

"So he is," said the other.  "It must have--wait a bit!" cried he, in
sudden excitement.  "Feel here, Tom, quick! he's alive yet!  Oh, if we
could only get hold of a doctor!"

"Is there one about at all?"

"Not that I know of, unless the Major knows what to do."

Just then there came up a gaunt man, in an undress uniform, who, seeing
that they knelt over a wounded man, said,--

"Is he alive?"

"It's all he is, sir," replied one of the men; "and we're wondering how
to get a doctor to him."

"Let me see," said the stranger, approaching the body.

He knelt beside it and gently removed the coat from the wound.

"It looks as if he must be shot through the heart.  Stay a bit, though,
here's a watch!" and he pulled me softly out of the pocket.  As he did
so I looked up at him.  Surely I knew his face!  Surely somewhere I had
seen that troubled frightened face before!  Then I remembered Seatown
Gaol!  Could this be Tom Drift here in India, and kneeling beside his
old schoolfellow's body?

It was indeed Tom Drift!  But he neither recognised me nor the wounded
man before him; indeed he was too busy examining the latter's wound to
look very closely at his face.  As he removed the waistcoat he uttered
an exclamation of astonishment.

"A most wonderful thing," he said; "the bullet, which must have been a
spent one, has struck his watch and turned aside.  A most wonderful
escape!"

And then he produced a box of instruments, with one of which he probed
the wound, and after some trouble extracted the bullet.  Then, bandaging
up the place, he said,--

"He may do now, but he has lost a lot of blood.  Let him lie here a bit,
and presently, if he seems better, move him into the fort.  I will see
him again this evening."

And so saying, he passed on to the next prostrate figure.

Towards evening the two men tenderly lifted their officer in their arms
and carried him inside the fort, where a rude hospital had been fitted
up.  Here Charlie, who, after the extraction of the bullet and
staunching of blood, had shown symptoms of recovery, opened his eyes,
and found himself able to say a few words to those round him.  And when
they told him how I had probably saved his life his face lit up with a
most triumphant smile, and he asked that I might be put into his hand.

As he lay there, scarcely strong enough to speak, and fondling me in his
fingers, the doctor entered the hospital.

He came straight to Charlie's bed.  My master's eyes were closed when
Tom first reached his side; and I could see by the face of the latter
that he was still as far from recognising his old schoolfellow as ever.
But directly Tom softly lifted the clothes in order to examine his
wound, the patient woke and opened his eyes.  They rested for a moment
on the doctor's face, and then, with a sudden flush and start, he half
raised himself in his bed, and exclaimed,--

"Tom Drift, is it you?"

The doctor thus unexpectedly hearing his own name pronounced, turned
pale, and started back as if he had been shot.  The scared, terrified
look returned to his face, and for an instant he seemed as if he would
rush from the place.  But only for an instant.

As he looked again on the face of his patient a strange expression came
over his own.  Wonder, doubt, joy, succeeded each other in rapid
succession, and then all of a sudden it flashed upon him who this was.

"Charlie!" he exclaimed, trembling with astonishment; and next moment
the poor prodigal was on his knees beside his friend's bed, sobbing,
with his head buried in his hands.

Don't laugh at him, reader, for thus forgetting himself.  Tom Drift had
been through many trials you know nothing about, and out of those trials
he had come broken in spirit and as humble as a child.  _You_ might have
had more regard for appearances, perhaps, and controlled your emotion
genteelly; but, as I have said before, Tom Drift was not anything like
so strong-minded as you.  So he knelt there and sobbed; and Charlie, as
he lay, took his hand into his own, and held it.

Presently he said, softly, "Tom!"

Tom looked up and rose to his feet.

"What, old fellow?"

"Look here, Tom!" said Charlie, showing me.

At the sight of me, bruised and battered as I was, Tom's feelings
overcame him again.  He seized me eagerly, and looked long and tenderly
into my face; then his tears came again, and once more he sunk on his
knees at Charlie's side and buried his face in his hands.

The place was getting dark.  The noise of voices outside and the distant
roar of guns slowly died away; the guards for the night were called out,
and one by one soldier and invalid fell asleep after their hard day's
toil.  But Tom Drift never moved from Charlie's bedside, nor did
Charlie, by word or movement, disturb him.  In the silence of that night
I seemed to be back in the past--when, years ago, I first knew these
two.  The dreary hospital changed, in my imagination, into the old
Randlebury dormitory.

These beds all round were occupied not by wounded soldiers, but by
soundly-sleeping boys, worn out with sports or study.  And the two
between whom I lay were no longer suffering men, but the light-hearted
lads of long ago.  I could almost fancy myself ticking through the
silent watches; and when now and then the fingers that held me closed
over me, or fondled me tenderly, I could almost have believed I heard
the low sweet whistling of an innocent boy as he furtively turned in his
waking moments to his father's precious gift.

It all seemed so strangely natural that as I woke from my dream it
required an effort to remember where I really was.  All was silent
around me.  I peered first at my master, then at Tom Drift; they were
both asleep--sleeping, perhaps, as simply as ever they did in those
bygone days--Tom kneeling still by the bedside with his head upon his
arms, and Charlie turned towards him with one hand upon his friend's,
and I--I lay between them.

Thus the sultry Indian night passed, and then at the little window
opposite there came a faint gleam of light.

Charlie woke first, and, laying his hand gently on Tom's arm, said, "Tom
Drift, old fellow!"

With a start and a bound Tom was awake and on his feet, staring in a
bewildered way round him.

At last his eyes fell on Charlie, and he remembered where he was.  "I
was asleep and dreaming," he said.

"So was I," said Charlie--and _I_ could almost guess what their dreams
had been.

"Now, Tom," said Charlie, "you must look to my wound."

"My poor boy!" exclaimed Tom; "to think I have forgotten it all this
time!"

"It's not worth bothering about, after all," said my master, "But see,
Tom, the day is breaking."

"Ay!" said Tom, looking down with a new light in his weary eyes, "the
day _is_ breaking!"



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

WHICH BRINGS MY ADVENTURES TO A CLOSE.

Reader, be my companion in one scene more, and my story is done.

A month or two ago there was a grand merrymaking at the house of one
Charles Newcome, Esquire, late captain in her Majesty's army, to
celebrate the tenth birthday of his son, Master Thomas James Newcome.
The company was mostly juvenile, and included, of course, the gallant
captain's two little girls and his younger son, that most terrible of
all Turks, Charlie the younger.  Then there were all the little boys and
girls living in the square, and many others from a distance, and one or
two big boys and girls, and one or two young gentlemen who stroked their
chins as if something was to be felt there, and one or two young ladies
who would not take twice of sponge-cake, for fear of looking as if they
were hungry.  But besides these there were a few grown-up people
present, whom I must not forget to name.  Naturally the gallant captain
was one, and the gallant captain's lady was another; and then there were
the last-named lady's two brothers there, one a clergyman called the
Reverend James Halliday, and the other (and elder) Mr Joseph Halliday,
a civil engineer with a ferocious pair of whiskers.  And, to complete
the party, there was present a grave, anxious-looking gentleman by the
name of Mr Drift, a surgeon.

These all sat apart and looked on while the young folk enjoyed
themselves.  And how the young folk did enjoy themselves that night!
What shouting and laughter there was, what a jingling of the piano, what
hiding in corners, what romping on the stair case!  And the round games,
and the charades, and the family posts!  Oh dear me, I'm an old watch,
and I've gone through a good many noisy scenes, but I never remember
such a racket as this.

And how the young folk besieged the elder and compelled them to join in
the fun.  There was papa down on his hands and knees with half-a-dozen
youngsters on his back.  And there was Uncle Joseph performing tricks of
conjuring before a select audience; and Mr Drift telling stories to
another; and as for the reverend Uncle Jim, he was made blind man, and
had his long coat-tails pulled; and, strange to say, he never caught
anybody all the time.  And then the supper! who shall describe that? the
clattering of dishes, the rattle of knives and forks, the banging of
crackers, the peals of laughter, and the cross-fire of chaff.

Alas! all good things must come to an end, and so did this party.  One
by one the little guests said good-bye, and after they had gone the
little family of children and elders was left alone.  Though it was past
eleven, the little urchin Charlie insisted on clambering on to Mr
Drift's knee, to hear one last story, and the little girls besieged
their uncles, and put their arms round their necks, and besought their
intercession with mamma to gain them another half-hour's respite down
stairs.

"Charlie," said Tom Drift, "this little fellow is worrying me for a
story.  Suppose you tell one."

"Oh yes," shouted that small chorus.  "Oh yes! papa, please tell us a
story?"

"Hear, hear!" said Uncle Joe.

"Fire away," said Uncle Jim.

"Remember, it must be quite a short one, Charles," said mamma.

Charlie Newcome the elder looked puzzled for a minute, and fidgeted
uncomfortably in his seat.

Then he turned to his eldest boy, and said,--

"Tom, open that cabinet there and bring me the watch that is under the
glass-case."

"The old, ugly watch, papa?" asked the boy, running off on his errand.

"Yes, the old, ugly watch," said papa, with a queer sort of smile.

The boy brought me.  I was taken out of my case, and lay there in his
open hand.

"Once upon a time," began papa--and what a hush fell on that little
company!--"once upon a time there was a little boy,"--why was it
everyone but the children looked so grave? and why did Mr Drift push
his chair back into the shadow? why, even, did papa's voice tremble now
and then as he went on, and caught the eye first of one and then another
of his listeners?

That night he told my story--not as I have told it to you.  There was
not much about Mr Drift in the story he told, and a great deal less
about himself than there might have been.  But as he went on these
children crowded round me and looked with awe upon my battered body, and
read with reverence those quaintly-scratched initials, and as they
followed me in imagination from one master to another, and from one
peril to the next, ending up with the famous battle before Lucknow, they
forgot I was old and ugly, and I gradually appeared to their little eyes
one of the greatest treasures which their father's house contained.

"And here he lies in my hand, children," concluded papa; "and if you
love him as much as I do you must be very fond of him.  And now, good-
night, all of you."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of a Three-Guinea Watch, by
Talbot Baines Reed

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE-GUINEA WATCH ***

***** This file should be named 21035.txt or 21035.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/3/21035/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
