months old. Then he disappeared. He was stolen from the garden. A
clue was left, evidently that I might know from whom the blow came.
The gipsy had been convicted partly on the evidence of the
feathers; but principally from the fact that the boot, which he had
on, had half the iron on the heel broken off, and this tallied
exactly with some marks in my fowl house. An hour after the child
was gone we found, in the center of the drive, in the park, a boot,
conspicuously placed there to catch the eye; and this boot I
recognized, by the broken iron, as that which had transported the
gipsy.

"That the woman had stolen the child, I had not the least doubt;
but neither of her, nor it, could I ever gain the slightest clue. I
advertised in every paper in the kingdom, I offered a reward of
1000 pounds, and I believe the police searched every gipsy
encampment in England, but without success.

"My wife had never been strong and, from that day, she gradually
sank. As long as there was hope she kept up, for a time. I hoped
all would go well; but three months afterwards she faded rapidly
and, ere six months had passed from the loss of the child, I buried
her, and came straight out to India. I went home once, for two or
three months, upon business connected with my property there, some
seven years since. That was when we last met, you know, at the
club. With that exception, I have remained here ever since."

"The trouble will be, I fear," Colonel Shepherd said, "for you to
identify him. That vindictive gipsy woman, who stole your child, is
not likely to have left any marks on its clothing by which it might
be identified at any future time, and her revenge on you
frustrated."

"Thank God!" the colonel said, earnestly, "if it be my son, he
bears a mark by which I shall know him. That was one of his poor
mother's greatest comforts. The child was born with an ugly blood
mark on its neck. It used to bother my wife a good deal, and she
consulted several surgeons whether it could not be removed; but
they all said no, not without completely cutting out the flesh--and
this, of course, was not to be thought of. After the child was lost
I remember, as well as if it had been spoken today, my wife saying:

"'How strange are God's ways! I was foolish enough to fret over
that mark on the darling's neck; and now, the thought of it is my
greatest comfort and, if it shall be God's will that years shall
pass away, before we find him, there is a sign by which we shall
always know him. No other child can be palmed off upon us as our
own. When we find Tom we shall know him, however changed he may
be.'

"Listen, Shepherd! That is his step on the stairs. May God grant
that he prove to be my son!"

"Be calm, old friend," Colonel Shepherd said. "I will speak to
him."

The door opened, and Will entered.

"I am glad you have not gone, colonel--I was afraid you might have
left, for I have been longer than I expected. I just heard the news
that the 66th are in orders this evening to march, the day after
tomorrow, for Kurrachee; to sail for England, where we are to be
reorganized, again."

"Gale, I am going to ask you a rather curious thing. Will you do
it, without asking why?" Colonel Shepherd said, quietly.

"Certainly, colonel, if it is in my power," Will said, somewhat
surprised.

"Will you take off your patrol jacket, open your shirt, and turn it
well down at the neck?"

For a moment, Will looked astounded at this request. He saw, by the
tone in which it was made, that it was seriously uttered and,
without hesitation, he began to unhook his patrol jacket. As he did
so, his eye fell upon Colonel Ripon's face; and the intense
anxiety, and emotion, that it expressed caused him to pause, for a
moment.

Something extraordinary hung on what he had been asked to do. All
sorts of strange thoughts flashed through his brain. Hundreds of
times in his life he had said to himself that, if ever he
discovered his parents, it would be by means of this mark upon his
neck, which he was now asked to expose. The many remarks which had
been made, of his likeness to Colonel Ripon, flashed across his
mind; and it was with an emotion scarcely inferior to that of the
old officer that he opened his shirt, and turned down the collar.

The sight was conclusive. Colonel Ripon held out his arms, with a
cry of:

"My son, my son!"

Bewildered and delighted, Will felt himself pressed to the heart of
the man whom he liked, and esteemed, beyond all others.

With a word of the heartiest congratulation, Colonel Shepherd left
the father and son together; to exchange confidences, and tell to
each other their respective stories, and to realize the great
happiness which had befallen them both. Their delight was without a
single cloud--save that which passed for a moment through Colonel
Ripon's mind, as he thought how his wife would have rejoiced, had
she lived to see that day.

His joy was, in some respects, even greater than that of his son.
The latter had always pictured to himself that, if he ever
discovered his father, he should find him all that was good; but
the colonel had, for many years, not only given up all hope of ever
finding his son, but almost every desire to do so. He had thought
that, if still alive, he must be a gipsy vagabond--a poacher, a
liar, a thief--like those among whom he would have been brought up.
From such a discovery, no happiness could be looked for; only
annoyance, humiliation, and trouble. To find his son, then, all
that he could wish for--a gentleman, a most promising young
officer, the man, indeed, to whom he had been so specially
attracted--was a joy altogether unhoped and unlooked for.

Morning had broken before the newly united father and son had done
their long and happy talk, and they separated only to take a bath,
to prepare them for the day's work.

The astonishment of everyone was unbounded when Colonel Ripon
announced, on the following morning, that in Captain Gale of the
66th--who, it was known, had risen from the ranks--he had
discovered a son that had been stolen from him, as a child. No one
entertained a doubt, for an instant, that any mistake had arisen;
for the likeness between the two men, as they strode down the
street together, on their way to General Roberts' quarters, was so
marked that--now that men knew the relationship--none doubted for a
moment that they were, indeed, father and son.

The warmest congratulations poured in upon them, from all sides;
and from none more heartily than from the general, who was more
than ever pleased that he had been the means of Will's obtaining
his commission from the ranks.

The same day Colonel Ripon sent off, by a mounted messenger
carrying despatches, a telegram to be sent from the nearest station
of the flying line--which the engineers advancing with General
Phayre's force had already carried as far as the Kojak Pass--to the
government of India; asking leave to go home, at once, on the most
urgent and pressing family business.

Yossouf's grief, when he heard that his master was going to leave for
England, was very great. At first, he begged that he might accompany
him; but Tom pointed out that--much as he should like to have him with
him--his position in England would be an uncomfortable one. He would
meet with no one with whom he could converse; and would, after a time,
long for his own country again.  Yossouf yielded to his reasoning;
and the picture which Will drew of his own loneliness when in Cabul,
separated from all his own people, aided greatly in enforcing his
arguments on his mind. He said however that, at any rate, he would not
return to Afghanistan, at present.

"It will be long," he said, "before things settle down there; and
it will be useless for me to put my money into a herd which might
be driven off by plunderers, the next week.

"Besides, at present the feeling against the English will be
strong. So many have lost men of their family, in the fighting. If
I returned, I should be a marked man. It is known that I threw in
my lot with the English, and it will be cast in my teeth, even if
no worse came of it.

"No, I will enlist in the Guides. I shall be at home with them, for
most of them belong to the Afghan tribes. I am young yet, not fully
a man, and I have my life before me. Some day, perhaps, if things
are quiet and prosperous at home, I will go back and end my days
there."

So it was arranged. One of the officers of the Guides had
accompanied General Roberts, as interpreter; and Will handed over
Yossouf to him, telling him how well the lad had served him. The
officer promised to enroll him in the corps, as soon as he rejoined
it; and also that he would not fail to report his conduct to the
colonel, and to obtain his promotion to the rank of a native
officer, as soon as possible. From Will Yossouf would accept
nothing except his revolver, as a keepsake; but Colonel Ripon
insisted upon his taking, from him, a present which would make him
a rich man, when he chose to return to his native country.



Chapter 22: At Home At Last.


The next day Colonel Ripon started with the 66th and, at the end of
the first day's march, met a messenger who, among other despatches,
carried a telegram granting him, at once, the leave he asked
for--and which, indeed, had been due, had he asked for it many
years before. His intention was to accompany the 66th to Kurrachee,
and to sail with it to England. This intention was carried out, and
the remnant of the regiment safely reached England.

One of Colonel Ripon's first steps was to accompany Will--or, as he
ought now to be called, Tom--to the Horse Guards; and to procure an
insertion in the Gazette stating that Captain William Gale, of the
66th, would henceforth be known by his true and proper name of
Thomas Ripon.

The colonel purchased a fine estate in Somersetshire and, retiring
from the service, settled down there. There was a considerable
discussion, between father and son, as to whether the latter should
remain in the army. Colonel Ripon was unwilling that his son should
relinquish a profession of which he was fond; and in which, from
his early promotion, he had every chance of obtaining high rank and
honor--but Tom, who saw how great a pleasure his society was to his
father, and how lonely the latter's life would be without him, was
resolute in his determination to quit the service. He had already,
as he said, passed through a far greater share of adventure than
usually falls to one man's lot; and the colonel's property was so
large that there was not the slightest occasion for him to continue
in the service.

Not long after his return to England, Will paid a visit to Ely
workhouse. He was accompanied by the colonel, and the two men
walked together up to the gate of the workhouse. He rang at the
bell, and a woman opened the door. She curtsied, at seeing two
tall, soldier-like gentlemen before her.

"Your name is Mrs. Dickson, I think?" the younger said.

The woman gave a violent start, and gazed earnestly at him.

"It is Will Gale!" she exclaimed, drawing back a step. "They said
you were dead, years ago."

"No, I am very much alive, Mrs. Dickson; and glad, most glad, to
see an old friend again."

"Good Lord!" the woman exclaimed, "it is the boy himself, sure
enough;" and, for a moment, she seemed as if she would have rushed
into his arms; and then she drew back, abashed at his appearance.

Tom, however, held out his arms; and the woman fell sobbing into
them.

"Why, you did not think so badly of me," he said, "as to think that
I should forget the woman who was a mother to me.

"Father," he said,

"--For I have found my real father, Mrs. Dickson, as you always
said I should, some day--

"It is to this good woman that I owe what I am. But for her, I
might now be a laboring man; but it is to her kindness, to her good
advice, to her lessons, that I owe everything. It was she who
taught me that I should so behave that, if my parents ever found
me, they should have no cause to be ashamed of me. She was, indeed,
as a mother to me; and this lodge was my home, rather than the work
house, inside.

"Ah! And here is Sam!"

Sam Dickson, coming out at this moment, stood in open-mouthed
astonishment, at seeing his wife standing with her hand in that of
a gentleman.

"Oh, Sam! Who do you think this is?"

Sam made no reply, but stared at Tom, with all his eyes.

"If it warn't that he be drowned and dead, long ago," he said, at
last, "I should say it was Will Gale, growed up and got to be a
gentleman. I shouldn't ha' knowed him, at first; but when he
smiles, I don't think as how I can be far wrong."

"You are right, Sam. I am the boy you and your wife were so kind
to, from the time you picked him up, just where we are standing;
and whom you last handed over to go aboard a smack, at Yarmouth.
She was--as you have heard--run down in the North Sea; but I was
saved, in the ship which ran over her, and was taken on it to the
East. There--after being wrecked again, and going through lots of
adventures--I went to India; enlisted there, and fought through the
Afghan war.

"I am a captain, now; and my name is no longer Will Gale, but Tom
Ripon, for I have found my real father--this gentleman, Colonel
Ripon."

"Who feels," Colonel Ripon went on, "how much he and his son owe to
your kindness, and that of your good wife, here; and who, as you
will find, is not ungrateful. I have just bought an estate, down in
Somersetshire; and I mean to install you and your wife in a pretty
lodge, at the gates, with enough to live upon, comfortably, to the
end of your lives."

Mrs. Dickson cried with joy, as Colonel Ripon entered into details
of what he intended to do for them; and Sam--although, as was his
way, much less demonstrative in his gladness--was yet greatly
delighted. There was a good garden to the lodge. They were to have
the keep of a cow, and thirty shillings per week, as long as they
lived. Before the colonel left, Sam Dickson's resignation of his
post was handed in to the master.

The colonel told them that at the end of the month, when Sam's
notice would expire, they were to sell off what furniture they had,
as it would cost more, to convey it so long a distance, than it was
worth; and he would take care that they should find everything
comfortable and ready for occupation, at the lodge, upon their
arrival.

Tom called upon the master and matron and schoolmaster, and thanked
all for the kindness that they had shown him, when a boy; and
Colonel Ripon left a check with the master, to be expended in
tobacco, tea, and sugar for the aged inmates of the house.

No words can express the delight of Sam Dickson and his wife when,
a month later, they arrived at their new home. Tom had spared no
trouble in seeing that it was comfortably and cosily furnished. The
garden had been thoroughly dug up, and planted; and Mrs. Dickson
could scarcely believe that she was the mistress of so pleasant a
home. Tom was forgetful of none of his old friends; and he wrote to
an address which Hans--his companion among the Malays--had given
him when they separated, and forwarded to him a handsome watch, as
a souvenir of his comrade.

There is no more to be told. Captain Ripon--still a very young
man--is living with his father, the colonel. He is one of the most
popular men in his county; and there is some talk of his standing
for one of its boroughs, at the next election; and it is rumored
that he is likely, ere long, to bring home a lady who will be the
future mistress of Burnham Park.

He is quite content that he has left the army--though he fidgeted a
little, while the Egyptian war was going on, and could not help
feeling a little regret that he did not take part in the storming
of Tel-el-Kebir.


