
"You two had better go to your work for the present," said Mr Barnacle;
"but understand that you are neither of you at liberty to leave the
office.  Merrett, I will go down to the bank."

"Do," said Mr Merrett.

And so this first painful interview ended.  My feelings on finding
myself once more at my desk among my fellow-clerks may be more easily
imagined than described.

My indignation and sense of injury would scarcely allow me to think
calmly on my position.  That my employers should be ready, on the
testimony of such a fellow as Hawkesbury, to believe a charge like this
against me, was simply unbearable, and my own helplessness to prove my
innocence only added tenfold to my trouble.  Oh! if Jack were only here,
I might get some light.

I hurriedly dashed off a note to him, telling him all, and begging him
to come.  Yet what was the use of writing when I was not allowed to
leave the office to post the letter?

I only wished Mr Barnacle would come back from the bank, and that I
might know the worst.

As for Hawkesbury, he had shut himself up in his glass box, and was
invisible.

Presently, not a little to my comfort, Doubleday returned.  Fortunately,
Crow was in another part of the office at the time, so that before he
delivered his message I had time for a hurried consultation.

"Doubleday," said I, in a whisper, "I am accused of stealing a cheque;
can you help me out?"

"Guilty, or not guilty?" inquired Doubleday, taking a practical view of
the case at once.  This was pleasant, but it was no time to be
particular.

"It is a lie from beginning to end, invented by Hawkesbury to shield
himself from a similar charge."

"Oh, that's it?  He's been coming out in that line has he?"

I hurriedly narrated the morning's adventures, greatly to his
astonishment and wrath.  He took in the situation at once.

"Jolly awkward fix," said he.  "Seen the cheque?"

"No; Mr Barnacle is down at the bank now."

"Doubleday," said Crow, entering at this moment, "the governors want
you--sharp."

"They are going to send you for a policeman," I said.  "If anything
happens, Doubleday, will you please telegraph to Smith, at Mrs
Shield's, Packworth, and tell him to come to me, and also find out
Billy, the shoeblack, and say I want to see him."

Doubleday looked at me with something like amazement as I made this
request, which, however, he promised to fulfil, and then waited on Mr
Merrett in the partners' room.

However, he returned almost immediately, and said he was to wait until
Mr Barnacle came back.

It seemed ages before that event happened.  Meanwhile Doubleday advised
me not to be seen talking to him, or anybody, but to go to my desk and
keep my own counsel.  It was good advice, and I took it.  Mr Barnacle
returned presently, accompanied by a man who I fancied must be connected
with the bank.  The two partners and this stranger were closeted
together for some time in the inner-room, and then Doubleday was
summoned.

After what seemed a century he emerged and beckoned to me to go in.
"You're wanted," he said.

I could gather neither comfort nor hope from his face as he stood to let
me pass.

"Come when I ring," said Mr Merrett to him.

Once more I stood before my employers.  The stranger was still in the
room, and eyed me as I entered in a manner which made me feel as if,
whatever I was, I ought to be the guilty person.

"This matter, Batchelor," began Mr Merrett, solemnly, "is more serious
than we imagined.  Not only has a cheque been stolen, but it has been
tampered with.  Look here!"

So saying he held out the cheque.  It was dated the previous day, and
payable to bearer.  But the amount, instead of being eight pounds, was
eighty.  The alteration had been neatly made, and no one who did not
know the original amount drawn for would have suspected that L80 was not
the proper sum.

"This cheque," said Mr Merrett, "was presented at the bank this morning
at ten o'clock and cashed."

I made no reply, being determined to say as little as I could.

"You were here at this hour, I believe," continued Mr Merrett, "but you
had left the office between 9 and 9:45."

"No, sir.  I have not left the office since I arrived at half-past
eight."

Mr Merrett touched the bell.

"Send Hawkesbury here," he said to Doubleday.

Hawkesbury appeared, and at Mr Merrett's bidding, after being shown the
cheque, repeated once more his story in the hearing of the stranger.

It did not vary from the former version, and included the statement that
I had quitted the office at the time alleged.

"Did you leave the office at all?" inquired Mr Barnacle.

"No," said Hawkesbury.

"Not at all?"

"No, I said so," replied he.

"And no one came to see you here?"

"No."

"Your friend Masham did not?"

Hawkesbury, much offended to be thus catechised, made no reply.

Mr Barnacle coolly repeated the question.

"No--he did not!"

"What were you doing all the time?"

"I was working."

"Yes, what particular work were you engaged in?"

"I told you--I was balancing the petty-cash."

"Did you finish it?"

"Nearly."

Mr Barnacle touched the bell, and Doubleday appeared.

"Doubleday, go to Hawkesbury's desk and bring me the petty-cash book and
box."

Hawkesbury turned pale and broke out into a rage.

"What is this for, Mr Barnacle?  I am not going to stand it!  What
right have you to suspect me?"

"Give Doubleday the key," repeated Mr Barnacle.

"No," exclaimed Hawkesbury, in a white heat.  "I will not, I will fetch
the book myself.  He doesn't know where to find it.  He has no business
to go to my desk."

"Remain where you are, Hawkesbury," said Mr Barnacle.

"What right have you to search my desk?  I have private things in it.
Uncle Merrett, are you going to allow this?"

"Mr Barnacle has a perfect right to see the petty-cash account," said
Mr Merrett, looking, however, by no means pleased.

"Why don't you examine his desk?" said Hawkesbury, pointing to me; "he
is the one to suspect, not me.  Why don't you search his desk?"

"I have no objection to my desk being searched," said I, feeling a good
deal concerned, however, at the thought of the mess that receptacle was
in.

"It is only fair," said Mr Barnacle.  "This gentleman will search both,
I dare say.  Doubleday, show this gentleman both desks."

It was a long, uncomfortable interval which ensued, Hawkesbury breaking
out in periodical protests against his desk being examined, and I
wondering where and how to look for help.  The partners meanwhile stood
and talked together in a whisper at the window.

At length the gentleman, who, it had dawned on me, was not a bank
official, but a detective, returned with Doubleday, who carried in his
hands a few books and papers.

The petty-cash book and box were first delivered over, and without
examination consigned to the safe.

"These letters were in the same desk," said the detective, laying down
the papers on the table.  They appeared to be letters, and in the
address of the top one I instantly recognised the handwriting of the
letter sent to Mary Smith, which I still had in my pocket.

Hawkesbury made an angry grasp at the papers.  "They are private
letters," he exclaimed, "give them up!  What right have you to touch
them?"

"Hawkesbury," said Mr Barnacle, "in a case like this it is better for
you to submit quietly to what has been done.  Nothing in these papers
that does not concern the matter in hand is likely to tell against you.
Is that all, officer?"

"That's all in that desk," said the detective.  "In the other young
gentleman's desk the only thing besides business papers and litter was
this key."

A key?  What key could it be?  It was the first I had seen of it!

"Let me look at it," said Mr Merrett, suddenly, as the detective laid
it on the table.

It was handed to him, and his face changed as he took it.  He turned for
a moment to show it to Mr Barnacle and whisper something.  Then he
said, "This is my key of the safe, which I left last night in the pocket
of my office coat in this room!"



CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

HOW I ENDED THE DAY MORE COMFORTABLY THAN I HAD EXPECTED.

My misfortunes had now fairly reached a climax, and it seemed useless to
struggle against circumstances any more.

Of course, I could see, as soon as my stunned senses recovered
sufficiently to enable me to perceive anything, that the same false hand
which had pointed me out as a thief had also placed that key in my desk
as part of his wicked plot.  I remembered that when I was conveyed up to
the sample-room that morning my desk had been open.  Nothing, therefore,
could have been more simple than to secrete the key there during my
absence, and so lay up against me a silent accuser which it would be far
harder to gainsay than a talking one.

But what was the use of explaining all this when evidently fortune had
decreed that I should become a victim?  After all, was it not better to
give in at once, and let fate do its worst?

"This is my key of the safe," said Mr Merrett, and all eyes turned on
me.

Nothing I could say, it was clear, could do any good.  I therefore gaped
stupidly at the key and said nothing.

"How came it in your desk, Batchelor?" asked Mr Barnacle.

I didn't know, and therefore I couldn't say, and consequently said
nothing.

"Have you any explanation to offer?" repeated Mr Barnacle.

"No," I replied.

"Then, officer," said Mr Merrett, "we must give him in charge."

The bare idea of being walked off to a police-station was enough to
drive all my sullenness and reserve to the four winds.

Suddenly finding my tongue, I cried--

"Oh, please don't, please don't!  I can explain it all.  For mercy sake
don't be cruel--don't send me to prison!  I am innocent, Mr Merrett,
Mr Barnacle; I can explain it all.  Please don't have me locked up."

In my confusion and panic I turned round and addressed these last words
to Hawkesbury, who received them with a smile in which there was more of
triumph than pity.

"You false coward!"  I exclaimed, suddenly seeing who it was, "you did
this.  You put the key in my desk while I was locked up stairs."

"Really, Batchelor," replied he, in his sweetest tones, "I'm afraid you
hardly know what you're saying.  I don't understand you."

"You do," said I, "and you understand how helpless I am to defend
myself.  You and Masham did your work well this morning."

"At any rate," retorted he, firing up, "we gave you a lesson for your
impudence."

Mr Merrett had been speaking with the detective, and did not hear this
dialogue; but Mr Barnacle did, happily for me.

"Then," he said, turning short round to Hawkesbury, "Masham _was_ here
this morning?"

Hawkesbury, thus suddenly cornered, turned first red, then white, and
tried to mumble out some evasion.  But Mr Barnacle was not the man to
be put off in that way.

"Then he _was_ here this morning?" he demanded again.

Hawkesbury had no retreat, and he saw it.

"He just called in for a moment," he said, sullenly; "that's all."

"Oh," said Mr Barnacle, "you can go to your desk, Hawkesbury, for the
present."

Hawkesbury, looking anything but triumphant, obeyed, and Mr Barnacle,
who evidently suspected the real truth more than his partner did, turned
to me.

"Batchelor, do you still decline to offer any explanation of the
discovery of this key in your desk?"

"I can only say," I replied, "that it must have been put there, for I
never touched it."

"Who would put it there?"

"Hawkesbury, I suppose.  When he and his friend dragged me up stairs my
desk was left open."

"Can you describe this Masham?"

I could, and did.

"The description," said the detective, "tallies exactly with that given
at the bank of the person who presented the cheque."

"Do you know his writing?"

"I know what I believe to be his writing," said I.

"Is that it?" inquired Mr Barnacle, showing me an envelope addressed to
Hawkesbury.

"No, that is not the handwriting I believe to be his."

"Is that?" showing another.

"No."

"Is that?"  This time it was the envelope I had already recognised.

"Yes, that is it."

"How are you able to recognise it?"

"By this," said I, producing the letter to Mary Smith from my pocket.
The handwriting on the two envelopes was compared and found to be alike,
and further to correspond with a signature at the back of the cheque.
The clerk, it seemed, being a little doubtful of the person who
presented the cheque, had required him to write his name on the back;
and the fictitious signature "A.  Robinson" was accordingly given in
Masham's hand.

"That seems clear," said the detective.

"I see," said Mr Barnacle, looking again at the envelope I had given
him, "this letter is addressed to the place where Smith lives.  Is
Masham a friend of Smith or his family?"

"Would you mind reading the letter, sir?"  I said; "that will answer the
question better than I can."

Mr Barnacle did so, and Mr Merrett also.

In the midst of my trouble it was at least a satisfaction to see the
look of disgust which came into both their faces as they perused its
contents.

"A dastardly letter!" said Mr Merrett.  "How came Masham to know of
Smith's private affairs?"

"Hawkesbury overheard Smith and me talking of them on the first occasion
that we found him here, and must have told Masham, who had a grudge
against Smith."

"You heard, of course, that Hawkesbury included Smith as well as
yourself in his accusation?"

"Yes, I did.  And I wish he was here to confirm my denial of it.  What
happened was--"

"Yes," said Mr Barnacle, "you need not go into that again.  But answer
one more question, Batchelor.  Are you acquainted with Masham?"

"Slightly.  I once was introduced to him by Hawkesbury and spent a day
with him."

"Have you any reason to believe he is a swindler?"

"I know of nothing which would warrant me in saying so," replied I.

"Do you know whether Hawkesbury owes him money?"

"Yes--at least I have been told so."

"By whom?"

"By a boy--a shoeblack who--"

"A shoeblack!" exclaimed Mr Merrett.  "Is that your only authority?"

"I believe he is honest," I said; "he overheard a conversation between
Masham and a friend, in which Masham mentioned that Hawkesbury owed him
L15."

"Really," said Mr Merrett, "this is almost absurd to take such
testimony as that."

"It wouldn't be amiss to see the boy, though," said Mr Barnacle; "a
great deal depends on whether or no Hawkesbury owed money to Masham.
Where is this boy to be found?"

"Oh, I could fetch him at once.  I know where he works," I said.

"No," said Mr Barnacle, "you must stay here.  Doubleday can go."  And
he touched the bell.

"Doubleday," he said, when that youth entered, "we want you to bring
here a shoeblack."

"Yes, sir," said Doubleday, artlessly: "will any one do?"

"No, no," said Mr Barnacle, "the boy we wish to see is--where is he,
Batchelor?"

"He works at the top of Style Street," I said; "you will know the place
by the writing all over the flagstones on either side."

With this lucid direction Doubleday started, and I in the meanwhile was
left to go on with my usual work.  Most of the fellows were away at
dinner, and Hawkesbury as before was invisible, so I had the place
pretty much to myself, and was spared, for a time, at any rate, a good
deal of unwelcome questioning.

In due time there was a sound of scuffling and protest on the stairs
outside, and Doubleday reappeared dragging in Billy.  That youthful
hero, evidently doubting the import of this strange summons, was in a
highly indignant frame of mind at being thus hauled along by the
mischievous Doubleday, who, vouchsafing no explanation and heeding no
protest, had simply made a grab at his unlucky young victim, and then
led him away, box, brushes, and all, to Hawk Street.

"Do you hear? turn it up--do you hear?" he cried, as they entered.  "Oh,
go on, you let my arm be--let me go, do you hear?"

At this point he recognised me, who thought it well to interpose.

"Don't alarm yourself, Billy," said I, "no one's going to hurt you."

"This cove do--and he _are_!"

"Well, he didn't mean.  The gentlemen here want to ask you some
questions, that's all."

"I ain't a-goin' to be arsted no questions.  They ain't my governors, so
I let them know.  I ain't a-goin' to be arsted questions by any one 'sep
my governor."

"But what they want to ask you, Billy," said I, "has something to do
with Mr Smith's happiness and mine.  All you have to do is to tell the
truth."

This explanation mollified the ruffled Billy somewhat.

"Come, young cock-sparrow," said Doubleday, returning from announcing
the distinguished visitor, "you're wanted inside.  They want you, too,
Batch."

We entered.  Billy, as usual, was more at his ease than any one else.
"What cheer?  Well, what do you want to arst me?" he cried, jauntily.

The partners, thus encouraged, looked rather amused, and Mr Barnacle
said, "You're the little shoeblack, are you?"

"In corse I are!"

"And you know this gentleman?"

"Yaas; I knows the animal!"

"And you know Mr Smith?"

"What! my governor?  He ain't no concern of yourn," retorted the boy,
firing up a little at this liberty taken with his "governor's" name.

Mr Barnacle gazed curiously at the strange urchin through his
spectacles, and then resumed, in as coaxing a tone as he could assume,
"You know a person called Masham, do you?"

"Yaas; I knows 'im."

"What sort of person is he?"

"What sort?  Why, he are a beauty, so I tell you!"

"Yes; but I mean, what sort of looking man?  Is he tall or short?  Has
he dark hair or light?  Would you know him if you saw him?"

"Know him?  Oh no--no fear--I know the beauty!"

"Well, what sort of looking man is he?" asked Mr Barnacle.

"He's a ugly bloke with a mug like yourn, and a 'orseshoe pin in 'is
weskit."

"Yes?  And what colour is his hair?"

"Carrots!"

That was quite enough.  This unromantic portrait corresponded
sufficiently nearly with the description already given.

"Now," said Mr Barnacle, "will you tell us when you last blacked his
boots?"

"A Toosdy."

"Do you remember whether he was alone?"

"Ain't you arstin' me questions, though!" exclaimed Billy.  "Of course
he 'ad a bloke along of him, and, says he, `That there parson's son,'
says he, `is a cuttin' it fat?' says he.  `He do owe me a fifteen pun,'
says 'e, `and ef 'e don't hand it over sharp,' says he, `I'll wake 'im
up!'  And then--"

"Yes," said Mr Barnacle; "that's enough, my man, thank you."

When Billy had gone, Mr Merrett turned to me and said, "Go to your
work, Batchelor, and tell Doubleday to send Hawkesbury here."

I obeyed, feeling that, after all, as far as I was concerned, the storm
had blown over.

Doubleday went to Hawkesbury's glass box and opened the door.  "You're
wanted, Hawkes-- Hullo!"

This exclamation was caused by the discovery that Hawkesbury was not
there!

"Where's Hawkesbury?" he inquired of the office generally.

"He's not come back," said Crow.

"When did he go out?"

"Why, the usual time, to be sure."

Doubleday gave a low whistle, and exclaimed, "Bolted!"  And so it was.
That afternoon Hawkesbury did not appear again at Hawk Street, or the
next day, or the next week, or the next month.  And when inquiry was
made at the rectory, all that could be ascertained was that he had left
home, and that not even his father knew where he had gone.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

WHICH PARTS ME FROM THE READER, BUT NOT FROM MY FRIEND SMITH.

And now, reader, my story is all but done.  One short scene more, and
then my friend Smith and I must retire out of sight.

It was on a Christmas day, three years after the event last narrated,
that a little party assembled in a tiny house in Hackney to spend a very
quiet evening.

It was, I daresay, as modest a party in as modest a house as could have
been found that Christmas-time in all London.

The house had hardly yet lost the smell of paint and varnish which had
greeted its occupants when they first moved into it a week ago.  To-day,
however, that savour is seriously interfered with by another which
proceeds from the little kitchen behind, and which dispenses a
wonderfully homelike influence through the small establishment.  In
fact, the dinner now in course of preparation will be the first regular
meal which that household has celebrated, and the occasion being more or
