
"I have read of several very singular cases," said Sam, "in which cables
have been attacked and damaged by inhabitants of the sea.  The Cuba and
Florida cable was once damaged by the bite of some large fish, and a
similar accident happened to the China cable.  In the Malta-Alexandria
cable, a piece of the core from which the sheathing had been worn was
found to have been bitten by a shark, and pieces of the teeth were found
sticking in the gutta-percha."

"I thought it was to the Singapore cable that that happened," said
Robin.

"No, but something similar happened to it.  That cable was laid in
December.  In the following March a stoppage occurred.  The fault was
spotted at 200 miles from Singapore.  When hauled up, the cable was
found to have been pierced, and bits of crushed bone were sticking in
the hole.  The piece was cut out and sent to Mr Frank Buckland, who,
after long and careful examination, came to the conclusion that it had
been the work of a saw-fish."

"Dear me, Mr Shipton," said Mrs Langley, "you speak as if every part
of the world were connected by electric cables."

"And such is the case," said Sam; "we have now direct communication by
submarine cable and land telegraph with every part of Europe; with
Canada and the United States; down South America, nearly to Cape Horn;
with Africa from Algiers to the Cape of Good Hope; with India from
Afghanistan to Ceylon; with China from Pekin to Hong-Kong; and down
through the Malacca Archipelago, Australia, and Tasmania."

"I say, Sam, are you a member of the Royal Geographical Society, or a
walking atlas?" asked uncle Rik.

"In short," continued Sam, not heeding the interruption, "there isn't a
civilised quarter of the globe which is not tied to us by telegraph, and
from which we might not hear any morning of the events of the preceding
day."

"Always excepting Central Africa and the two poles," said the captain.

"I said civilised quarters," retorted Sam, "and, as far as I know, the
poles are inhabited only by bears."

"True, I forgot, the poles are barely civilised," said uncle Rik.

"Now, Master Sammy," growled a deep voice from the adjoining galley,
"you keep your hands out o' that copper."

"Fasser," shouted a silvery voice from the same region, "'Tumps is
naughty.  I wants to wass my hands in de soup, an' he won't let me."

"Quite right.  Keep him in order, Stumps," said the unfeeling Sam,
senior.

"Dere--pa says I's kite right, an' to keep you in order, 'Tumps," said
the silvery voice.  (Then, after a few minutes), "Grunkle Rik, is you
finish bekfist?"

"Ay, ay, Sunbeam, quite finished."

"Den come on deck an' p'ay vid me."

Uncle Rik rose with a laugh, and obediently went on deck to play.  But
the play did not last long, for that day ominous clouds rose in the
west, and, overspreading the sky, soon drenched the little yacht with
rain.  Towards evening the rain ceased, but the wind increased to a
gale, and the weather showed signs of becoming what is known among
seamen, we believe, as dirty.  Ere long the low mutterings of thunder
increased to mighty peals, and the occasional gleams of lightning to
frequent and vivid flashes, that lit up the scene with the brilliancy of
full moonlight.

"I wish we were nearer shore," said Letta, timidly, to Robin, as they
stood looking over the bulwarks; "what is the land we see far away on
our left?"

"The Island of Mull," returned Robin.

"Better if it was further away," growled Captain Rik, who overheard the
remark.  "We want plenty of sea-room on a night like this."

"We've got sea-room enough," observed "Captain" Slagg, with the
confidence of a man who knows well what he is about, as he stood by the
tiller, balancing himself with his legs well apart.

"You've got a lightning conductor on the mast, of course?" observed
Captain Rik to Sam.

"No," replied Sam.

"Sam!" exclaimed the captain in a tone of intense surprise, "you, of all
men, without such a safeguard."

"Well, uncle Rik," replied Sam with a laugh, "yachts are not always
fitted with conductors.  But I'm not so bad as you think me.  I had
ordered a special conductor with some trifling novelties of construction
for the yacht, but it was not ready when we started, so we had to sail
without it.  However, it is not once in a thousand times that a vessel
is struck by lightning."

While Sam was yet speaking, a flash of lightning almost blinded them,
and the little schooner received a shock which told of disaster.  Next
moment the roar of reverberating thunder drowned the crash of timber as
the topmast went overboard, carrying the bowsprit and its gear along
with it.

Fortunately no one was hurt, but the schooner became unmanageable, owing
to the mass of wreckage which hung to her.

Jim Slagg, seizing an axe, sprang to the side to cut this away, ably
seconded by all the men on board, but before it could be accomplished
the Gleam had drifted dangerously near to the rocks on the coast of
Mull.  To add to the confusion, the darkness became intense.

Captain Rik, forgetting or ignoring his years, had thrown off his coat
and was working like a hero with the rest.  The ladies, unable to remain
below, were clinging to the stern rails, Madge holding her little boy
tightly in her arms, and the spray dashing wildly over all.

Another moment and the Gleam struck on the rocks with tremendous
violence.  Only by the lightning could they see the wild rocky shore, on
which they had drifted.

Instinctively each member of the little crew drew towards those nearest
and dearest.

"Get out the boat!" shouted Captain Slagg; but the men could not obey,
for a heavy sea had anticipated them, and the little dinghy was already
careering shoreward, bottom up.

The next wave lifted the Gleam like a cork, and let her down on the
rocks like fifty-six tons of lead.  A flash of lightning revealed for a
moment a range of frowning cliffs, as if to add horror to a scene that
was already sufficiently appalling.  Then all was again dark as Erebus.

In a frenzy of resolution Captain Rik seized an axe with the view of
extemporising a raft, when the Gleam parted amidships, and we might
almost say went out, leaving her crew struggling in the waves.

Sam had seized his wife with his strong left arm--he happened to be
left-handed--and buffeted the waves with his right.  Madge held on to
Sammy with the power of maternal love.  Sam was aware of that, and felt
comparatively at ease in regard to his first-born.

Robin's arm had been round Letta's waist--unknown to himself or her!--
when the Gleam struck.  It did not relax when he felt that they were
afloat.  Frank Hedley gallantly offered to take charge of Mrs Langley.

Ebenezer Smith, being unable to swim, confessed the fact, with something
of a gasp, to Captain Rik, who considerately told him never to mind.

"I can swim for both," he said, tying a piece of rope-yarn tight round
his waist, for he had long before cast off coat, vest, and braces; "but
you ought to be ashamed of yourself, a man come to your time o' life,
an' not able to swim!"

"I never lived near the sea, and had no one to teach me," pleaded
Ebenezer in a tremblingly apologetic voice, for the roar of united wind,
waves, and thunder was really tremendous even to those who _could_ swim.

"What o' that?" returned Captain Rik, sternly.  "Was there no river or
pond nigh?  Even a horse-trough or a washing-tub would have sufficed to
make a man of you.  As for teaching--what teaching did you want?
Swimmin' ain't Latin or Greek.  It ain't even mathematics--only
aquatics.  All the brute beasts swim--even donkeys swim without
teaching.  Boh! bah!  There, lay hold o' me--so.  Now, mind, if you try
to take me round the neck with your two arms I'll plant my fist on the
bridge of your nose, an' let you go to Davy Jones's locker."

A flash of lightning revealed Captain Rik's face in such a way that
Ebenezer Smith resolved to obey him to the letter.

It was at this point of their conversation that the Gleam went down--or
out--and they sank with a gurgle, coming up next moment, however, with a
gasp.

Strange to say, after the first plunge and overthrow amid the boiling
waves, the swimmers found themselves in almost still water.

"You'd better let me take Sammy, ma'am," said Captain Slagg, swimming
quietly alongside of Madge, and speaking in the calm tone of a man
taking an evening stroll.

"Is that you, Slagg?" asked Sam, who was striking out vigorously.

"Yes, sir, it is," said Slagg.  "You've no need to exert yourself, sir,
so violently.  I know the spot well.  We've bin washed clean over the
reef by the wave that sank us, into a sort o' nat'ral harbour, an' we
ain't far from shore.  I can feel bottom now, sir, which, bein' a
six-footer, you'll touch easy."

"So I do!" exclaimed Sam, letting down his feet.  "Madge, darling, cheer
up, we've got soundings.  Give Sammy to Slagg.  There, we'll do famously
now."

Only those who have been for a few moments in deadly peril can
understand the feeling of intense relief that came to Sam Shipton's
heart when he felt his toes touch ground on that eventful night.  The
feeling was expressed in his tone of voice as he asked Slagg whether he
had seen any of the others.

"No, sir, I ain't seen 'em for want o' light, but I've heerd 'em.
Stumps is splutterin' behind us like a grampus.  If you'll hold on a bit
an' listen you'll hear him.  He's a bad swimmer, and it's all he can do
to save hisself.  If he only knowed he could reach bottom with his long
legs, he'd find it easier.  Not quite so tight, Sammy, my boy, and keep
off the wind-pipe--so; you're quite safe, my lad.  As for the rest of
'em, sir, they all swim like ducks except Mr Ebbysneezer Smith, but
he's took charge on by Captin Rik, so you may keep your mind easy.
There's a bit o' flat beach hereabouts, an' no sea inside the reef, so
we'll git ashore easy enough--let's be thankful."

Jim Slagg was right.  They got ashore without difficulty, and they
_were_ thankful--profoundly so--when they had time to think of the
danger they had escaped.

After a few minutes' rest and wringing of salt water from their
garments, they proceeded inland to search for shelter, and well was it
for the shipwrecked party that the captain of the lost yacht was
acquainted with the lie of the land, for it was a rugged shore, with
intermingled fields and morasses, and wooded rocky heights, among which
it would have been difficult, if not impossible, to thread one's way in
the dark without severe damage to the shins.  But Jim Slagg led them to
a cottage not far from the sea, where they received from the family
resident there at the time a warm and hearty Scottish welcome.

It is not uncommon, we suspect, for eccentric natures to undertake the
most important matters at the most unsuitable times and in the most
ridiculous manners.  At all events Robin Wright, while stumbling among
the rocks and rugged ground of that midnight march in Mull, dripping wet
and with the elements at war around him, conceived the idea of declaring
his unalterable, not to say unutterable, attachment to Letta Langley,
who leant heavily on the arm of her preserver.  But Robin was intensely
sensitive.  He shrank from the idea, (which he had only got the length
of conceiving), as if it had been a suggestion from beneath.  It would
be unfair, mean, contemptible, he thought, to take advantage of the
darkness and the elemental noise to press his suit at such a time.  No,
he would wait till the morrow.

He did wait for the morrow.  Then he waited for the morrow afterwards,
and as each morrow passed he felt that more morrows must come and go,
for it was quite obvious that Letta regarded him only as a brother.

At last, unable to bear it, our unhappy hero suddenly discovered that
one of the morrows was the last of his leave of absence, so he said
good-bye in despair, and parted from his companions, who could not
resist the genial hospitality of their new friends in the cottage on the
west of Mull.

Ten days later Sam got a letter from Robin, telling him that he had
received a cable-telegram from India, from their friend Redpath,
offering him a good situation there, and that, having reached the lowest
depths of despair, he had resolved to accept it, and was sorry he should
not have an opportunity of saying good-bye, as he was urged to start
without a day's delay.

Sam was staying with his friends at the Oban Hotel at the time, having
at last managed to tear himself away from the cottage in Mull.

He instantly ran out and telegraphed--

"Don't accept on any account."

Then he sought Mrs Langley, and opened Robin's case to her.  Mrs
Langley listened with a smile of intelligence, and soon after went to
her daughter's room, the window of which commanded a splendid view of
the western sea.

"Letta, dear, are you moralising or meditating?"

"Both, mamma."

"Well, I will try to help you," said Mrs Langley, seating herself by
the window.  "By the way, did you hear that Mr Wright has been offered
a lucrative appointment in the Telegraph Department of India, and is
going off at once;--has not time even to say good-bye to his old friend
Sam Shipton?"

Letta turned very pale, then extremely red, then covered her face with
both hands and burst into tears.

"So, Letta, you love him," said her mother, gently.  "Why did you not
let me know this sooner?"

"Oh, mamma!" said poor Letta, "why do you put it so--so--suddenly.  I
don't love him--that is--I don't _know_ that I love him.  I've never
thought about it seriously.  He has never opened his lips to me on the
subject--and--and--"

"Letta, dear," said her mother, tenderly, "would you wish to prevent his
going away if you could?  Open your heart to your mother, darling."

Letta laid her head on her mother's shoulder, but spoke not.

A few minutes later Mrs Langley went to Sam and said--

"Robin must not go to India."

Sam instantly went by the shortest conceivable route to London, where he
found Robin in his room feverishly packing his portmanteau, and said--

"Robin, you must not go to India."

From that text he preached an eloquent lay-sermon, which he wound up
with the words, "Now, my boy, you must just propose to her at once."

"But I can't, Sam.  I haven't got the pluck.  I'm such a miserable sort
of fellow--how could I expect _such_ a creature to throw herself away on
_me_?  Besides, it's all very well your saying you have good ground for
believing she cares for me; but how can you know?  Of course you have
not dared to speak to her?"

Robin looked actually fierce at the bare idea of such a thing.

"No, I have not dared," said Sam.

"Well, then.  It is merely your good-natured fancy.  No, my dear fellow,
it is my fate.  I must bow to it.  And I know that if I were to wait
till I see her again, all my courage would have oozed away--"

"But I don't intend that you shall wait, Robin," interrupted Sam.  "You
need not go on talking so selfishly about yourself.  You must consider
the girl.  I'm not going to stand by and see injustice done to _her_.
You have paid _marked_ attention to her, and are bound in honour to lay
yourself at her feet, even at the risk of a refusal."

"But how, Sam?  I tell you if I wait--"

"Then don't wait,--telegraph."

Robin gazed at his friend in stupefied amazement.  "What! make a
proposal of marriage by telegraph?"

"Even so, Robin.  You began life with electricity, so it is quite in
keeping that you should begin a new departure in life with it."

Sam rose, sought for paper, and with pencil wrote as follows:--"From Mr
R. Wright, London, to Miss Letta Langley, --- Hotel, Oban.--I can stand
it no longer.  May I come to see you?"

Presenting this to his friend, Sam said, "May I despatch it?"

Robin nodded, smiled, and looked foolish.

An hour later Mrs Langley, sitting beside her daughter, took up a pen,
and wrote as follows:--

"From Miss Letta Langley, Oban, to R. Wright, London.--Yes."

Presenting this to her daughter, she said.  "May I send it?"

Letta once more covered her face with her hands, and blushed.

Thus it came to pass that our hero's fate in life, as well as his
career, was decided by the electric telegraph.

