finally put me down and snuffed me out by assuring me that I had been
born at least a generation before my time.

Dan Horsey sat on the dresser of my kitchen, switching his boot with a
riding-whip, and looking at Susan with an extremely melancholy
expression of countenance.  Susan was cleaning a silver tea-pot--her
usual occupation when Dan was present.  Cook--now resigned to her fate--
was sighing and peeling potatoes in the scullery.

"Och! darlint, me heart's heavier than a cart o' coals," said Dan.
"Bucephalus is to be sowld next week, and I'm to quit in a month!"

Susan sighed.

"To be sure, I'd aisy git another place, but in the meantime that'll put
off our weddin', jewel, till I don' know when."

Susan sighed again, and Dan hit his boot somewhat smartly, as if he were
indignant with Fate.

"But it's wus," continued Dan, "for masther an' Miss Gordon than for us,
darlint--there, now, don't toss yer head, mavourneen, ye know we can git
spliced av we like whenever I git a noo sitiwation; but masther can't
well throw up the wan he's got, an' yit it won't kape him an' his wife.
Och! worse luck!  Av we could only diskiver a goold mine now, or
somethin' o' that sort."

"Well, I _am_ sorry for them," said Susan, with another sigh; "an' I'm
sure I hope that we'll get over our troubles, all of us, though I don't
see very well how."

"Arrah! now, don't look so blue, me angel," said Dan, rising and putting
his arm round Susan.  "Me heart is lighter since I comed here and saw
yer sweet face.  Sure there's midcine in the glance o' yer purty blue
eye.  Come now, cheer up, an' I'll ventur a prophecy."

"What may that be?" asked Susan with a smile.

"That you and I shall be spliced before two months is out.  See if we
won't."

Susan laughed; but Dan stoutly asserted that his prophecies always came
true, and then, saying that he was the bearer of a letter to Miss Peppy,
he bade Susan adieu, and took himself off.

I turn now to Miss Puff, who happened about this time to be on a visit
to us.  She was seated one forenoon alone in the dining-room of Bingley
Hall, when a loud ring came to the door-bell; a quick step was heard on
the stair, and next moment the dining-room door burst open, and my son
Gildart rushed into the room.

Gildart was wonderfully changed since the day he had sailed for China.
He had grown tall and stout.  Moreover he had whiskers--not very bushy,
perhaps, but, undeniable whiskers.

"Hallo!  Puff!" he exclaimed, rushing towards his old friend with the
intention of kissing her; but when Miss Puff rose to receive him, he
felt constrained to check himself.

"Why, how you are grown, and _so_ changed!" he said, shaking her hand
warmly.

Miss Puff was indeed changed, so much so that her old friends who had
not seen her for some time could scarcely have known her.  She was no
longer fat and inane.  Her figure had become slim and graceful; her face
had become expressive and remarkably pretty, and her manners were those
of a well-bred and self-possessed lady.  Gildart felt that he could no
more have taken the liberties he had ventured on in former years than he
could have flown.

He soon became very chatty, however, and speedily began to question her
in regard to his father and mother, (who, she told him, were not at
home), and old friends.

"And what of my friend Kenneth Stuart?" said he.

"He is well, poor fellow," replied Miss Puff; "but he is in unhappy
circumstances just now."

Here she related the circumstances of the bank failure, and the evil
consequences that followed, and were still pending over Kenneth and many
of their other friends in Wreckumoft.

"That's a sad business," said Gildart; "but I don't see how it can be
mended.  I fear me it is a case of `grin and bear it.'  And your aunt,
Miss Puff, what of the adorable Miss Flouncer?"

"She is now Lady Doles."

"You _don't_ say so!  Well, I had given Sir Richard credit for more
sense.  How long is it since they married?"

"About two years."

"Is Sir Richard dead?"

"No, why should you think so?"

"Because if it had been me, I should have succumbed in three months.
It's an awful thing to think of being married to a she-griffin."

"She is my aunt, Mr Bingley," said Miss Puff.

"Ah, to be sure, forgive me.  But now I must go and search for my
father.  Adieu.  Miss Puff--_au revoir_."

Gildart left the room with a strange sensation of emptiness in his
breast.

"Why, surely--it _cannot_ be that I--I--am in love with that girl, that
stupid, fat--but she's not stupid and not fat _now_.  She's graceful and
intelligent and pretty--absolutely beautiful; why, botheration, I _am_
in love or insane, perhaps both!"

Thus soliloquising my son entered my study.

The last conversation that I shall record, took place between Mr Stuart
senior and Colonel Crusty.  It occurred about two weeks after those
conversations that have just been narrated.  The colonel had been
suddenly summoned to see his brother-in-law, "on his death-bed,"--so the
epistle that summoned him had been worded by Miss Peppy.

That dinner at which these two friends had enjoyed themselves so much
happened to disagree with Mr George Stuart, insomuch that he was thrown
into a bilious fever--turned as yellow as a guinea and as thin as a
skeleton.  He grew worse and worse.  Wealth was at his command--so was
everything that wealth can purchase; but although wealth procured the
best of doctors in any number that the patient chose to order them, it
could not purchase health.  So Mr Stuart pined away.  The doctors shook
their heads and gave him up, recommending him to send for his clergyman.

Mr Stuart scorned the recommendation at first; but as he grew worse he
became filled with an undefinable dread, and at last did send for his
pastor.  As a big cowardly boy at school tyrannises over little boys and
scoffs at fear until a bigger than he comes and causes his cheek to
blanch, so Mr Stuart bullied and scorned the small troubles of life,
and scoffed at the anxieties of religious folk until death came and
shook his fist in his face; then he succumbed and trembled, and
confessed himself, (to himself), to be a coward.  One result of the
clergyman's visit was that Mr Stuart sent for Colonel Crusty.

"My dear Stuart," said the colonel, entering the sick man's room and
gently taking his wasted hand which lay outside the counterpane, "I am
distressed to find you so ill; bless me, how thin you are!  But don't
lose heart.  I am quite sure you have no reason to despond.  A man with
a constitution like yours can pull through a worse illness than this.
Come, cheer up and look at the bright side of things.  I have seen men
in hospital ten times worse than you are, and get better."

Mr Stuart shook, or rather rolled, his head slowly on the pillow, and
said in a weak voice--

"No, colonel, I am dying--at least the doctors say so, and I think they
are right."

"Nonsense, my dear fellow," returned the colonel kindly, "doctors are
often mistaken, and many a man recovers after they have given him up."

"Well, that may be or it may not be," said Mr Stuart with a sudden
access of energy, "nevertheless I believe that I am a dying man, and I
have sent for you on purpose to tell you that I am an ass--a consummate
ass."

"My dear Stuart," remonstrated the colonel, "really, you are taking a
very warped view of--"

"I--am--an--ass," repeated the sick man, interrupting his friend; "more
than that, _you_ are an ass too, colonel."

The colonel was a very pompous and stately man.  He had not been
honoured with his true title since he left school, and was therefore a
good deal taken aback by the plain-speaking of his friend.  He
attributed the words, however, to the weak condition of Mr Stuart's
mind, and attempted to quiet him, but he would not be quieted.

"No, no, colonel; it's of no use trying to shut our eyes to the fact.
You and I have set our hearts on the things of this world, and _I_ have
now come to see that the man who does that is a fool."

"My dear fellow," said the colonel soothingly, "it is bodily weakness
that induces you to think so.  Most people speak thus when they are
seriously ill; but they invariably change their opinion when they get
well again."

"You are wrong, colonel.  I am now convinced that they do _not_ change
their opinions.  They may change their _wills_, but their opinions
_must_ remain the same.  The conclusion which I have now come to has
been forced upon me by cool, logical reasoning; and, moreover, it has
more than once flashed upon me in the course of my life, but I shut my
eyes to it.  The approach of death has only opened them to see _very_
clearly what I was more than half aware of before.  Do not suppose that
I make this confession of my folly to you in order to propitiate the
Deity.  I do not for a moment expect that the God whom I have neglected
all my life can be humbugged in this way.  No, I have deliberately cast
Him off in time past, and I recognise it as my due that He should cast
_me_ off now.  It is too late to repent, so I suppose that there is no
hope for me."

Mr Stuart paused here a few minutes.  The shade of doubt expressed in
his last words was occasioned by the recollection of the clergyman's
assurance that it was _never_ too late to repent; that the finished work
of Jesus Christ, (which leaves nothing for a man to do but to "believe
and live"), would avail the sinner at the latest hour.

The colonel sat gazing at his friend in silence.  Presently the sick man
resumed as though he had not paused:--

"Therefore what I say to you now is not intended as a propitiatory
offering, but is the result of clear and calm conviction.  Now listen to
me, for I feel getting weak.  Let me entreat you to forgive your
daughter.  Will you take that entreaty into earnest consideration?  I do
not ask you to promise.  It is folly to make men promise what they don't
want to do.  The chances are that they'll break the promise.  I only ask
you to take this subject into your serious consideration.  It is the
request of a dying man.  Will you grant it?"

The colonel coughed, and looked troubled.

"Colonel," said Mr Stuart, "I have forgiven Kenneth--that is to say, we
are reconciled; for I can scarcely be said to forgive one who never
offended me.  The gladness that has ensued on that reconciliation is
worth more to me than all the gold I ever made."

"Stuart," said the colonel, somewhat suddenly, "I'll do what you ask."

"Thank you; you're a good fellow.  Squeeze my hand--there now, go away;
I'll sleep for a little.  Stay, perhaps, I may never waken; if so,
farewell.  You'll find a fire in the library if you choose to wait till
it's over.  God bless you."

The sick man turned on his side with a sigh, and fell into a sleep so
deep and quiet that the colonel left the room with some uncertainty as
to whether his friend were still in the land of the living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  If the reader would see a somewhat similar kitchen, let him
visit the Sailors' Home, Well Street, London Docks.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

CONCLUSION.

Gladness is a source of life.  It is probable that the joy which filled
Mr Stuart's heart, in consequence of being reconciled to Kenneth, and
having induced his brother-in-law to promise to consider the possibility
of forgiving Bella, was the cause of a favourable turn in his malady.
At all events he did recover, to the surprise of every one, and the
utter discomfiture of the doctors who had given him up!

The sentiments which Mr Stuart had expressed when, as was supposed, in
a dying state, did not forsake him when he was restored to health, for,
whereas in former days all his time, health, and wealth, were dedicated
to himself, now they were all devoted to God.  Mr Stuart's face, so to
speak, had been turned south before his illness; after his illness it
was turned north.  There was no other change than this.  He did not
change his nature, nor did he change his pursuits.  Even those of them
which were sinful were not changed--they were given up.  He did not
cease to be an irascible man, but he fought against his temper, (which
he had never done before), and so became less irascible.  He did not
give up his profession, but he gave up the evils which he had before
permitted to cling to it.  He did not cease to make money, but he ceased
to hoard it, and devoted the money made to higher ends than heretofore.
He did not think of the world and its affairs less, but he thought of
his Maker more, and in so doing became a better man of the world than
ever!  Gloom and asceticism began to forsake him, because the Bible told
him to "rejoice evermore."  Philanthropy began to grow, because the
Bible told him to "look not upon his own things, but upon the things of
others."  He had always been an energetic man, but he became more so
now, because the Bible told him that "whatever his hand found to do, he
ought to do it with his might."

In short, Mr Stuart became a converted man, and there was no mystery
whatever in his conversion.  Great though its effects were, it was
simply this,--that the Holy Spirit had enabled him to believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Many results followed from this change in the old man.  One of the first
was that Kenneth and Lizzie Gordon were married, Bucephalus was not
sold, and Dan Horsey was retained in the service of his young master.

Miss Peppy came out very strong on that occasion of Kenneth's marriage.
She laughed, and then she wept, and then, by way of variety, she did
both at once.  She kissed everybody that came within arm's-length of
her, partly because her heart was very full, partly because her tears
blinded her, so that she could not easily distinguish who was who.  She
made an effort once or twice to skip, and really, considering her age
and infirmities, the efforts were wonderfully successful.  She also sang
a little; attempted to whistle, but failed, and talked straight on for
several days without cessation, (except when asleep and at meals), the
most extraordinary amount of nonsense that ever came from the lips of
woman.

True to their resolve, Dan Horsey and Susan Barepoles were married at
the end of the same week.  And it is worthy of remark that mad Haco
danced at their wedding, and by so doing, shook to its foundation the
building in which it occurred.

Strange to say, my son, Lieutenant Bingley, arrived from China on the
morning of the wedding, so that he had the unexpected pleasure of
dancing at it too, and of chaffing Haco on being "done out of his
daughter!"

The "Boodwar" was the scene of the festivities at Dan's wedding.  It was
more; it was also the locality in which the honeymoon was spent.  Mrs
Gaff had insisted on taking a little jaunt to Ramsgate, with her
husband, son, and daughter, in order that she might give up her abode to
Dan and Susan, who were favourites with her.

Thus it came to pass that when the festivities of the wedding drew to a
close, the bride and bridegroom, instead of leaving their friends, were
left by their friends in possession of the "Boodwar."

It now remains for me, reader, to draw this veracious narrative to a
close.

My son Gildart married Miss Puff, and ultimately became a commander in
the navy.  My wife's strength of mind gave way before increasing years,
and she finally became as gentle as she was when I first paid my
addresses to her!

Emmie Graham became a permanent inmate of Kenneth's home.  The shock
that she had sustained when Gaff saved her life told upon her
constitution so severely that she fell into bad health, but there was a
sunny cheerfulness of disposition about her which induced those with
whom she came in contact to regard her as a sunbeam.  Lady Doles became
stronger-minded day by day, and finally reduced Sir Richard to the
condition of a mere human machine, with just enough spirit left to
enable him to live and do her bidding.

Colonel Crusty forgave Bella, and, as is not infrequently the case in
similar circumstances, he and his son-in-law the major, (for he rose to
that rank), became bosom friends.  When the latter retired on half-pay
they all took up their abode in Wreckumoft.

Kenneth retained his old post, for, although independent of its salary,
he would not eat the bread of idleness.  As Secretary to the Sailors'
Home he frequently met me while I was going about in my capacity of
honorary agent of the Shipwrecked Mariners' Society.

Billy Gaff went to sea, and ultimately became captain of an East
Indiaman, to his mother's unspeakable delight.

Gaff and his wife and Tottie remained in the "Boodwar" for many years.
They did not find their fortune too much for them, being guided in the
use thereof by the Bible.

In regard to the state of things that had come about, Miss Peppy used to
say confidentially, to Mrs Niven, that she never knew anything like it.
It beat all the novels she had ever read, not that she had read novels
much, although some of them were good as well as bad, but she felt that
too many of them were hurtful; of course, she meant if taken
