slowly put on his coat.

"I vote we souse that idiot, Tubbs, till he's black in the face," said
Crashford viciously.

"What's the use of that?" asked Bowler.  "The fact is, you fellows,"
said he, "we're regularly in for it now, and the sooner we make up our
minds what we shall do the better."

"Let's make a waft," said Braintree, mindful of his _Wobinson Cwusoe_.

"Where's your wood?" asked Wallas.

"Let's hoist a signal, anyhow," said Wester.

"No one to see it if you do," said Wallas.

"Let's have some grub," said Crashford.

This last suggestion met with general approval.  They had had no
breakfast to speak of, and after their voyage and excitement hunger was
beginning to assert itself.  The one brown-paper parcel rescued from the
"Eliza" was forthwith handed in and pronounced common property.  It
happened to be the parcel bearing Tubbs's name, and contained, besides a
seventh part of the provisions, Tubbs's voluntary contributions to the
general store--namely, the crib to Sallust, and the guide to the
environs of Tunbridge Wells.  These, it was proposed and seconded,
should be handed over to the owner as his share of the good things
contained in the parcel, but Bowler and Gayford interfered on his
behalf; and after having been reprimanded with a severity that took away
his appetite, he was allowed to partake of a portion of potted shrimp
and a potted peach, together with a small slice of cake.  Bowler groaned
to see what a hole even this frugal repast made in the provisions, and
consulted Gayford in an undertone on the possibility of slaying a
seagull and the merits of raw poultry generally.

Rather dolefully the provisions were packed up and deposited in a ledge
in the rocks, while the party proceeded to wander about the island in
search of board and lodging.  The charms of Long Stork Island had fallen
off greatly in the short interval, and the sea-fog, which was beginning
to wrap it round and hide the mainland from view, seemed like a wet
blanket both on the spirits and persons of the adventurers.

After much dreary search a hollow was found on the hill-side, which by
fastening together three or four ulsters might be roofed over
sufficiently well to keep out the rain or cold if required.  As to food,
the island provided absolutely nothing except the chance of raw poultry
already mentioned and a few shell-fish on the rocks.

The day wore on, and the fog turned to drizzle and the drizzle to rain.
They held out against it as long as they could, but had to take shelter
at last, and herd together in their extemporised cabin.

Here a painful discussion ensued, "I hope you're satisfied now!" growled
Wallas.  "This is mess enough to please even you, Bowler."

"What do you mean?" retorted Gayford; "a lot you've done for the public
good.  There are plenty of seagulls about without you to croak, too."

"I wish my umbwellah hadn't gone out to sea," observed Braintree,
shivering.

"By the way," said Crashford, "didn't I see it lying on the rocks.  I'll
just run and see," and off he started.

"When shall we ever get away?" asked Wester.  "We may get starved here."

"They're sure to see us or find us out in a day or two," said Bowler.

"A day or two!" exclaimed Wallas; "do you really mean we've got to stay
here without food or shelter a day or two?  I wish your New Swishford
was in the middle of the sea."

"So it is," dryly observed Bowler.

"Fine fools you've made of us with your humbug and child's play,"
growled the other.

"_You_ don't want much making," retorted Bowler; "and if you want to
talk any more, you can talk to some one else."

Wallas accepted the invitation, and growled all round till everybody was
sick of him.

After a long absence Crashford returned without the umbrella.

"I couldn't find it," said he, sitting down.  "It's gone."

"But you found the peaches, you blackguard!" said Bowler, springing up
and pointing to some juicy remains still clinging to the delinquent's
coat.  And in his righteous indignation he dealt the traitor a blow
which sent him out of the tent.

A fight ensued there and then between Bowler and Crashford, unhappily,
to the disadvantage of the former, who was no match for the practised
hand opposed to him.  The company interposed after a few rounds, and
none too soon for the damaged though still lion-hearted Bowler.

Crashford profited nothing by his victory, for it was decided
unanimously to exclude him from the tent till he chose to apologise for
his treachery; and meanwhile the remains of the slender provisions were
taken into safe custody out of his reach.

The day wore on, and the rain fell heavier and heavier upon the ulster-
roof over their heads.  The wind whistled drearily above them, and the
mainland was entirely lost to sight.  As far as they were concerned they
might be in the real New Swishford, a thousand miles from the nearest
land.

They huddled together silently, no one caring much to speak.  Only
Braintree broke the monotony by shivering audibly, and the footsteps of
Crashford, as he paced up and down outside to keep warm, added a dreary
variety to the silence.

The afternoon drew on, and at last Bowler said--

"Better let the beggar in."

"Hadn't we better all turn out and see what's to be done?" said Gayford.
"We shall only come to grief here.  The grub won't hold out for another
meal, and then it'll be something more than a joke."

"Come on, then, you fellows," said Bowler.  And the roof was hauled
down, and the party turned dismally out once more to seek their fortune.



Chapter IV.  Consolation.

Our heroes, who in all their anticipations had never calculated on
anything but fine weather and unlimited rations and congenial
occupation, began to entertain serious doubts as to the joys of founding
an empire, as they trailed dreadily along in the rain after Bowler and
Gayford.  The weaker of the party had no spirit to suggest anything
themselves, or to question what their leaders suggested; so they
followed doggedly where they were led, neither knowing nor caring
whither.

With Bowler and Gayford it was otherwise.  They felt rather ashamed of
themselves for having lost their heads earlier in the day and resolved
now to atone for it in the only way they could.  They put a brave face
on the situation, and tried to impart their courage to their followers.

"I tell you what," said Bowler cheerily, as the seven stood again on the
rocks at the water's edge; "it wants a good hour of dark, and the least
thing we can do is to spend the daylight in looking for some proper
place of shelter and something to eat, if we can find it.  Suppose I and
Tubbs and Braintree start to walk round this way, and you, Gayford, take
the rest round the other way.  If any of us find anything, we'll stop
till the other party come up.  I've got my whistle, so we'll be sure to
hear one another."

It could do no harm, and it might do good, so the party tacitly fell in
with the suggestion, and divided itself accordingly.  Even Crashford was
wise enough to feel he could gain nothing by sulking, and returned to
his allegiance without demur.

"Can't we have something to eat before we start?" said Wallas.

"My dear fellow," replied Gayford, "I wish we could, but then we shall
have nothing left for to-morrow."

Strange to say, Wallas disputed the matter no further, and turned with
his companions to start on their tour of discovery.

Bowler kept whistling cheerily, and Gayford shouted in reply till the
two parties were out of earshot.  Then each walked on in silence,
eagerly scanning sea and shore in search of hope.  For Bowler's party
there seemed very little prospect of anything turning up, for their way
lay across bare ledges of rock, with perhaps a pool to wade, or a little
cape to scramble across, but never a sign of food or shelter.  Braintree
did indeed announce that in one place he saw a "cwab" disappear into a
hole, but the chances of satisfaction from that source were too remote
to be pursued.

How they longed to be back under the roof of old Swishford, and to hear
the cheery bell summoning the boys to tea, and how gratefully now would
they have welcomed the wholesome plenty of that often abused meal!
Alas! there were no cups of tea, or eggs, or bread-and-butter going on
the Long Stork.

"Of course," said Bowler, "we could never be _quite_ stuck up for grub
as long as there's seaweed about, and if the rain goes on like this
there'll be plenty of water too."

"You're wight there," said Braintree; "but seaweed and wain-water is
warthah a spare diet."

"Anyhow," said Bowler, "we have got enough of the shrimps and peaches
left for a good breakfast to-morrow; that's one comfort."

And they trudged on in that glorious prospect.

For an hour they toiled along the rocky shore until the daylight almost
suddenly vanished, and the gloom of a damp November night fell upon
them.  What was the use of exploring further?  Even Bowler lost heart as
he stumbled about in the dusk, and heard Braintree shivering and
chattering with cold beside him, and Tubbs's scarcely suppressed whimper
of misery.

"Better get back to the rest as soon as we can," said he, taking out his
whistle and blowing it again.

They listened, but no answer came, only the shriek of the gulls and the
steady splash of the rain on the rocks.

"Never mind, we can't be long before we get round to them," said Bowler;
"perhaps they've found a place, you know."

For another half-hour they toiled on, Bowler blowing his whistle every
few minutes, but always without response.

"Where can they be?  We're almost round at the place we started from,
surely," said Bowler, "and--hullo, look out there!"

They had reached a sudden break in the coast about twenty yards across,
with rocks on each side which dropped almost precipitously into the
water, forming a serious bar to further progress.

They must either scramble down and wade or swim across, or else turn
inland and make a long detour round the head of the chasm.

Bowler made a careful inspection of the rocks, and then said--

"I think we could do it; what do you say?  If we went round we might
miss the others."

"All wight," said Braintree, blowing his hands; "I'm game, so's Tubbs."

Tubbs said nothing, but stood by miserably, ready to follow Bowler's
lead.

"I'll go down first," said the latter.  "Mind how you come, the rocks
are slippery."

He lowered himself cautiously down the steep rock, finding just enough
to cling on to with his hands, while he felt his way down with his feet.
He got to the bottom safely, and found firm footing in a ledge of rock
close to the water's edge.

"Now, then," shouted he, "down you come, Braintree."

Braintree obeyed, and managed with difficulty to reach the ledge.  Then
Tubbs attempted.  But he, poor fellow, clumsy at all times, and now
utterly unnerved by the miseries of the day, was not man enough for the
venture, and, after one feeble effort, begged to be allowed to stay
where he was.

"Nonsense!" cried Bowler; "come on, old man, we'll help you down all
right."

So Tubbs tried again.  Had not the situation been so perilous, the
appearance he presented as he clung wildly on to the rock with his
hands, and kicked still more wildly with his feet, would have been
ludicrous.  But it was no time for joking.  The two at the bottom
piloted his feet as well as they could, and encouraged him in his
downward career.  But before they could reach him he slipped, and with a
howl fell backward into the sea.

In a moment Bowler, dressed as he was, was in beside him, holding him up
and striking out to where Braintree, with outstretched hand, waited to
help them in.  But it was long before they could haul his half-senseless
form from the water; and by the time this was accomplished, Bowler
himself was so exhausted that he in turn needed all Braintree's aid to
land himself.  At last, however, all three were on the ledge.

But what were they to do next?  Tubbs lay still half-stupefied, utterly
unable to help himself.  The rock they had descended frowned above them,
defying any attempt to return the way they had _come_, and between the
ledge they stood on and the rock the other side twenty yards of uneasy
water intervened.

"Could we swim across with him?" said Bowler, after a little.

"I'll do my best," said Braintree.

"The thing is," said Bowler, "the tide was dead out an hour ago, so it
must be coming in now.  Oh, what a cad I was to lead you into this,
Braintree!"

"Shut up, old man, I say," said Braintree; and he began to take off his
coat and boots.

Bowler did the same.

"We shall have to leave them behind," said he.  "It can't be helped.
Are you ready?"

"Yes.  But I say, old man, if I get done up and have to let go, don't
wait for me.  I'm not much of a swimmer."

Bowler hesitated.

"If I could only be sure of getting _him_ over," said he, pointing to
Tubbs, "I might come back and--"

"Hullo!  I say, Bowler, look there!" exclaimed Braintree suddenly,
pointing out to sea.  "Wasn't that a light?  Blow your whistle, I say."

Bowler obeyed, eagerly gazing in the direction indicated by Braintree.
There was neither answer nor light.

"I'm certain I saw something!" exclaimed Braintree.  "Blow again, old
man."

And once more the whistle sent forth a shrill cry seaward, accompanied
by a loud shout from Braintree.

They waited in terrible suspense, but still no answer.

"You must be wrong," said Bowler.

"No, I'm not; blow once more."

And again Bowler obeyed.

This time, sure enough, he fancied he saw a glimmer on the water; but it
might be only the lights on the mainland appearing through the lifting
fog.

For ten minutes they kept up an incessant whistling and shouting, their
hopes growing less and less as the time passed.  At length, worn out and
desperate, they had given it up, and were turning once more to prepare
for their swim across.  But as they did so the light suddenly
reappeared, the time close to the shore.

Once more, with frantic energy, they raised their signal of distress,
and after a moment's terrible silence had the joy of hearing a faint
shout across the water.

"It's a boat!" cried Braintree.  "Whistle again to show them where we
are."

Again and again they whistled, and again and again the responsive shout,
growing ever nearer, came back.  Presently they could even distinguish
the sound of oars, and at length the dim outline of a boat loomed across
the entrance of the gulf.

"Where are you?" shouted a voice in the familiar tones of the Raveling
coastguard.

"Here.  We can see you.  We're on the ledge here, Thomson!"

In a few seconds the boat was alongside, and the three boys were safely
lifted into it.

"Where's the rest of you?" asked Thomson, as coolly as if this sort of
thing was an everyday occurrence with him.  "We want seven of you."

"I don't know where they are," said Bowler.  "They were coming round
this way to meet us.  You'd better row round somewhere where we can land
and look for them."

"Give your orders," said Thomson.  "You've had your day's fun, and
seemingly you're determined I should have my night's.  Row away, mate."
And he and his man turned the boat's head and pulled out of the gulf.

"I say, Thomson, have you got any gwub or anything?" said Braintree
faintly.

"Grub," said the jocular coastguard.  "What, harn't you found grub
enough on this here island?  Anyhow, if you do want something you'd
better open that there bag and see what you can find."

Bowler was too anxious to discover the missing ones to feel much
appetite for food, and kept blowing his whistle as the boat slowly
coasted the island.

At length, to his unbounded joy, an answering shout was heard, and the
shadowy forms of the four outcasts were seen standing on the pier from
which they had started two hours before.

Jubilant were the welcomes exchanged as the heroes of New Swishford once
more counted their full number, and ensconced themselves snugly in the
stern of Thomson's boat round his wonderful bag of food.

It did not take long to chronicle the doings of Gayford's party.  After
about half an hour's journey they had been pulled up by the same chasm
which had nearly proved too much for poor Tubbs.  Finding it impossible
to cross it, they had turned inland, and for a cheerful hour lost their
way completely in the fog.  At length, by means of walking in a straight
line, they had come again to the coast, and after much searching had
found the pier.  And having found it, they resolved to keep it until the
other party completed the circuit and found them where it left them.

"And however did you find us out, Thomson?" inquired Gayford, after the
repast had been done ample justice to.  "Did your boat come ashore?"

"No, she didn't, young gentleman; and I can tell you you'll get to know
how to spell her name tolerable well before you've heard the last of
her."

"Oh, of course we shall get into a frightful row," said Bowler; "but how
did you come to find us?"
