In addition to the two documents which he had promised him, Titus
thoughtfully gave him another, intended for the perusal of his own
countrymen only. It was in the form of a letter, saying to John
that he had appointed him procurator of the strip of territory
bordering the Lake of Galilee on the east, not from any submission
on his part, still less at his request; but solely as a proof of
his admiration for the stubborn and determined manner in which he
had fought throughout the war, the absence of any cruelty practised
upon Romans who fell into his hands, of his esteem for his
character, and as a remembrance of the occasion when they two had
fought, hand to hand, alone in the valley going down from Hebron.

The gold was sent directly on board a ship. It was in a box, which
required four strong men to lift. A centurion, with twenty men, was
put on board the ship; with orders to land with John at Casarea,
and to escort him to his own home, or as near as he might choose to
take them. Titus took a cordial leave of him, and expressed a hope
that John would, some day, change his mind and accept his offer of
a post; and that, at any rate, he hoped that he would, from time to
time, come to Rome to see him.

The voyage to Caesarea was performed without accident.

"I shall look back at our visit to Rome as a dream," Jonas said,
one evening, as they sat together on the deck of the ship. "To
think that I, the goatherd of Jotapata, should have been living in
the palace of Caesar, at Rome; with you, the friend of Titus,
himself! It seems marvellous; but I am weary of the crowded
streets, of the noise, and bustle, and wealth and colour. I long to
get rid of this dress, in which I feel as if I were acting a part
in a play.

"Do not you, John?"

"I do, indeed," John replied. "I should never accustom myself to
such a life as that. I am longing for a sight of the lake, and my
dear home; and of those I love, who must be mourning for me, as
dead."

At Caesarea, a vehicle was procured for the carriage of the chest,
and the party then journeyed until they were within sight of
Tarichea. John then dismissed his escort, with thanks for their
attention during the journey, and begged them to go on to the city
by themselves. When they were out of sight, he and Jonas took off
their Roman garments, and put on others they had purchased at
Caesarea, similar to those they were accustomed to wear at home.
Then they proceeded, with the cart and its driver, into Tarichea;
and hired a boat to take them up the lake. The boatmen were
astonished at the weight of John's chest, and thought that it must
contain lead, for making into missiles for slingers.

It was evening when the boat approached the well-known spot, and
John and his companion sprang out on the beach.

"What shall we do with the chest?" one of the boatmen asked.

"We will carry it to that clump of bushes, and pitch it in among
them, until we want it. None will run off with it, and they
certainly would not find it easy to break it open."

This reply confirmed the men in their idea that it could contain
nothing of value and, after helping John and Jonas to carry the
chest to the point indicated, they returned to their boat and rowed
away down the lake.

"Now, Jonas, we must be careful," John said, "how we approach the
house. It would give them a terrible shock, if I came upon them
suddenly. I think you had better go up alone, and see Isaac, and
bring him to me; then we can talk over the best way of breaking it
to the others."

It was nearly an hour before Jonas brought Isaac down to the spot
where John was standing, a hundred yards away from the house; for
he had to wait some time before he could find an opportunity of
speaking to him. Jonas had but just broken the news, that John was
at hand, when they reached the spot where he was standing.

"Is it indeed you, my dear young master?" the old man said, falling
on John's neck. "This is unlooked-for joy, indeed. The Lord be
praised for his mercies! What will your parents say, they who have
wept for you for months, as dead?"

"They are well, I hope, Isaac?"

"They are shaken, greatly shaken," old Isaac said. "The tempest has
passed over them; the destruction of Jerusalem, the woes of our
people, and your loss have smitten them to the ground but, now that
you have returned, it will give them new life."

"And Mary, she is well, I hope, too?" John asked.

"The maiden is not ill, though I cannot say that she is well,"
Isaac said. "Long after your father and mother, and all of us, had
given up hope, she refused to believe that you were dead; even when
the others put on mourning, she would not do so--but of late I know
that, though she has never said so, hope has died in her, too. Her
cheeks have grown pale, and her eyes heavy; but she still keeps up,
for the sake of your parents; and we often look, and wonder how she
can bear herself so bravely."

"And how are we to break it to the old people?" John asked.

Isaac shook his head. The matter was beyond him.

"I should think," Jonas suggested, "that Isaac should go back, and
break it to them, first, that I have returned; that I have been a
slave among the Romans, and have escaped from them. He might say
that he has questioned me, and that I said that you certainly did
not fall at the siege of Jerusalem; and that I believe that you,
like me, were sold as a slave by the Romans.

"Then you can take me in, and let them question me. I will stick to
that story, for a time, raising some hopes in their breasts; till
at last I can signify to Mary that you are alive, and leave it to
her to break it to the others."

"That will be the best way, by far," John said. "Yes, that will do
excellently well.

"Now, Isaac, do you go on, and do your part. Tell them gently that
Jonas has returned, that he has been a slave, and escaped from the
Romans; and that, as far as he knows, I am yet alive. Then, when
they are prepared, bring him in, and let him answer their
questions."

The evening meal had been ended before Isaac had left the room to
feed, with some warm milk, a kid whose dam had died. It was while
he was engaged upon this duty that Jonas had come upon him. When he
entered the room Simon was sitting, with the open Bible before him,
at the head of the table; waiting his return to commence the
evening prayers.

"What has detained you, Isaac?" he asked. "Surely it is not after
all these years you would forget our evening prayers?"

"I was detained," the old man said, unsteadily and, at the sound of
his voice, and the sight of his face, as it came within the circle
of the light from the lamp, Mary rose suddenly to her feet, and
stood looking at him.

"What is it?" she asked, in a low voice.

"Why," Simon asked calmly, "what has detained you, Isaac?"

"A strange thing has happened," the old man said. "One of our
wanderers has returned--not he whom we have hoped and prayed for
most--but Jonas. He has been a slave, but has escaped, and come
back to us."

"And what is his news?" Simon asked, rising to his feet; but even
more imperative was the unspoken question on Mary's white face, and
parted lips.

"He gives us hope," Isaac said to her. "So far as he knows, John
may yet be alive."

"I knew it, I knew it!" Mary said, in a voice scarcely above a
whisper.

"O Lord, I thank thee. Why have I doubted Thy mercy?"

And she stood, for a moment, with head thrown back and eyes
upraised; then she swayed suddenly, and would have fallen, had not
Isaac run forward and supported her until, at Martha's cry, two of
the maids hastened up and placed her on a seat.

Some water was held to her lips. She drank a little, and then said,
faintly, "Tell us more, Isaac."

"I have not much more to tell," he replied. "Jonas says that John
certainly did not fall in Jerusalem--as, indeed, we were told by
the young man of his band who returned--and that he believes that,
like himself, he was sold as a slave.

"But Jonas is outside. I thought it better to tell you, first. Now,
I will call him in to speak for himself."

When Jonas entered, Martha and Mary were clasped in each other's
arms. Miriam, with the tears streaming down her cheeks, was
repeating aloud one of the Psalms of thanksgiving; while Simon
stood with head bent low, and his hands grasping the table, upon
which the tears were raining down in heavy drops.

It was some little time before they could question Jonas further.
Martha and Mary had embraced him as if he had been the son of one,
the brother of the other. Simon solemnly blessed him, and welcomed
him as one from the dead. Then they gathered round to hear his
story.

"John and I both escaped all the dangers of the siege," he said.
"We were wounded several times, but never seriously. God seemed to
watch over us; and although at the last, of the six hundred men
with which we entered Jerusalem there were but twelve who remained
alive, we were among them."

"Yes, yes, we knew that," Martha said. "News was brought by a young
man of his band, who belonged to a village on the lake, that twelve
of you had escaped together on the day the Temple fell. The others
all returned to their homes, but no news ever came of you; and they
said that some party of Romans must have killed you--what else
could have befallen you? And now we are in February--nearly six
months have passed--and no word of you!"

"We were carried off as slaves," Jonas said, "and taken, like
Joseph, to be sold in Egypt."

"And have you seen him, since?" Simon asked.

"Yes, I saw him in Egypt."

"And he was well then?"

"Quite well," Jonas replied. "I was sent to Rome, and thence
managed to make my way back by ship."

"We must purchase him back," Simon said. "Surely that must be
possible! I have money, still. I will make the journey, myself, and
buy him."

And he rose to his feet, as if to start at once.

"Well, not now," he went on, in answer to the hand which Martha
laid on his shoulder, "but tomorrow."

While he was speaking, Mary had touched Jonas, gazing into his face
with the same eager question her eyes had asked Isaac. The thought
that Jonas was not alone had flashed across her. He nodded
slightly, and looked towards the door. In a moment she was gone.

"John!" she cried, as she ran out of the house; at first in a low
tone, but louder and louder as she ran on. "John! John! Where are
you?"

A figure stepped out from among the trees, and Mary fell into his
arms. A few minutes later, she re-entered the room.

"Father," she said, going up to Simon, while she took Martha's hand
in hers, "do you remember you told me, once, that when you were a
young man you went to hear the preaching of a teacher of the sect
of the Essenes, whom they afterwards slew. You thought he was a
good man, and a great teacher; and you said he told a parable, and
you remembered the very words. I think I remember them, now:

"'And his father saw him, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed
him, and said, "Let us be merry, for this my son was dead, and is
alive again; he was lost and is found."'

"And so, father, is it even unto us."

Illustration: The Return of John to his House on the Lake.

Martha gave a loud cry, and turned to the door and, in another
moment, was clasped in John's arms. Then his father fell on his
neck.

There was no happier household in the land than that which joined
in the Psalms of thanksgiving that night. The news spread quickly
to the fishermen's cottages, and the neighbours flocked in to
congratulate Simon and Martha on the return of their son; and it
was long since the strains of the songs of joy had floated out so
clear and strong over the water of Galilee for, for years, strains
of lamentation and humiliation, alone, had been on the lips of the
Jewish maidens.

After the service of song was over, Miriam and the maids loaded the
table, while Isaac fetched a skin of the oldest wine from the
cellar, and all who had assembled were invited to join the feast.

When the neighbours had retired, John asked his father and Isaac to
come down with him, and Jonas, to the side of the lake, to bring up
a chest that was lying there.

"It is rather too heavy for Jonas and me to carry, alone."

"It would have been better, my son, to have asked some of our
neighbours. They would gladly have assisted you, and Isaac and I
have not, between us, the strength of one man."

"I know it, father, but I do not wish that any, besides ourselves,
should know that the box is here. We will take a pole and a rope
with us, and can adjust the weight so that your portion shall not
be beyond your strength."

On arriving at the spot, Simon was surprised at seeing a small box,
which it would be thought a woman could have lifted, with ease.

"Is this the box of which you spoke, John? Surely you want no aid
to carry this up?"

"We do, indeed, father, as you will see."

With the assistance of Jonas, John put the rope round the box, and
slung it to the pole near one end. He and Jonas then took this end.
Simon and Isaac lifted that farthest from the box, so that but a
small share of the weight rested upon them. So the chest was
carried up to the house.

"What is this you have brought home?" Martha asked, as they laid
the box down in the principal room.

"It is gold, mother--gold to be used for the relief of the poor and
distressed, for those who have been made homeless and fatherless in
this war. It was a gift to me, as I will tell you, tomorrow; but I
need not say that I would not touch one penny of it, for it is
Roman gold. But it will place it in our power to do immense good,
among the poor. We had best bury it, just beneath the floor, so
that we can readily get at it when we have need."

"It is a great responsibility, my son," Simon said; "but truly,
there are thousands of homeless and starving families who sought
refuge among the hills, when their towns and villages were
destroyed by the Romans and, with this store of gold, which must be
of great value, truly great things can be done towards relieving
their necessities."

The next morning, John related to his family the various incidents
which had befallen him and Jonas since they had last parted; and
their surprise was unbounded, when he produced the three documents
with which he had been furnished by Titus. The letters, saying that
the favour of Caesar had been bestowed upon John as a token of
admiration, only, for the bravery with which he had fought, and
ordering that all Romans should treat him as one having the favour
and friendship of Titus, gave them unbounded satisfaction. That
appointing him procurator of the whole district bordering the lake
to the east surprised, and almost bewildered them.

"But what are you going to do, my son? Are you going to leave us,
and live in a palace, and appear as a Roman officer?"

"I am not thinking of doing that, father," John said, with a smile.
"For myself I would much rather that this dignity had not been
conferred on me by Titus; and I would gladly put this commission,
with its imperial seal, into the fire. But I feel that I cannot do
this, for it gives me great power of doing good to our neighbours.
I shall be able to protect them from all oppression by Roman
soldiers, or by tax gatherers. There is no occasion for me to live
in a palace, or to wear the garments of a Roman official. The
letter of Titus shows that it is to a Jew that he has given this
power, and as a Jew I shall use it.

"While journeying here from Rome, I have thought much over the
matter. At first, I thought of suppressing the order. Then, I felt
that a power of good had been given into my hands; and that I had
no right, from selfish reasons, to shrink from its execution.
Doubtless, at first I shall be misunderstood. They will say that I,
like Josephus, have turned traitor, and have gone over to the
Romans. Even were it so, I should have done no more than all the
people of Tiberias, Sepphoris, and other cities which submitted to
them.

"But I do not think this feeling will last long. All those who
fought with me outside Jerusalem, against the Romans, know that I
was faithful to the cause of my country. The few survivors of the
band I led into Jerusalem can testify that I fought until the
Temple fell, and that I escaped by my own devices, and not from any
agreement with the Romans.

"Moreover they will, in time, judge me by my acts. I shall rule, as
I said, as a Jew, and not as a Roman--rule as did the judges in the
old times, sitting under my own fig tree, here, and listening to
the complaints that may be brought to me--and I trust that wisdom
will be given to me, by the Lord, to judge wisely and justly among
them."

"You have decided well, my son," Simon said. "May God's blessing be
upon you!

"What think you, little Mary? How do you like the prospect of being
the wife of the ruler of this district?"

"I would rather that he had been the ruler only of this farm," Mary
said, "but I see that a great power of good has been given into his
hands, and it is not for me to complain."

"That reminds me," Simon said, "of what Martha and I were speaking
together, last night. You have both waited long. There is no
occasion for longer tarrying. The marriage feast will be prepared,
and we will summon our neighbours and friends to assemble here,
this day week.

"And now, John, what are you going to do?"

"I am going, father, at once to Hippos, the chief town in the
district. I shall see the authorities of the town, and the captain
of the Roman garrison, and lay before them the commission of
Caesar. I shall then issue a proclamation, announcing to all people
within the limits of the district that have been marked out that I
have authority, from Rome, to judge all matters that may come
before me, in the district; and that all who have causes of
complaint, or who have been wronged by any, will find me here,
ready to hear their cause, and to order justice to be rendered to
them. I shall also say that I shall shortly make a tour through the
district, to see for myself into the condition of things, and to
give aid to such as need it."

Great was the surprise of the Roman and Jewish authorities, in
Hippos, when John produced the imperial commission. There was,
however, no doubting or disputing it. The Roman officers at once
placed themselves under his orders, and issued proclamations of
their own, in addition to that of John, notifying the fact to all
the inhabitants of the district.

Among the Jewish authorities there was, at first, some feeling of
jealousy that this young man should be placed over them; but they
felt, nevertheless, the great benefits that would arise from the
protection which one of their own countrymen, high in the favour of
Titus, would be able to afford them. When showing his commission,
John had also produced the letter of Titus, giving his reasons for
the nomination; and indeed, the younger men in the district, many
of whom had followed John in his first campaigns--and who had
hitherto, in accordance with the oath of secrecy taken on
enrollment, concealed their knowledge that John of Gamala was the
son of Simon--now proclaimed the fact, and hailed his appointment
with joy.

On the appointed day, the marriage of John and Mary took place and,
as the news had spread through the country, a vast gathering
assembled, and it was made the occasion of a public demonstration.
The preparations which Martha and Mary had made for the feast,
ample as they had been, would have availed but little among such a
multitude; but Isaac and the menservants drove in and slaughtered
several cattle and, as those who came for the most part bore
presents of wine, oil, bread, goats, and other articles, and the
neighbours lent their assistance in preparing a feast at the great
fires which were lighted along the shore, while Simon contributed
all the contents of his wine store, the feast proved ample for all
assembled.

John and his wife moved among the throng, receiving congratulations
and good wishes; Mary blushing, and tearful with happiness and
pride in the honour paid to John; John himself radiant with
pleasure, and with satisfaction at the thought of the good which
the power, so strangely conferred upon him, would enable him to
effect for his neighbours.

After that, things went on in their ordinary routine at the farm;
save that John was frequently away visiting among the villages of
the district, which was some thirty miles long by ten wide. The
northern portion was thinly inhabited; but in the south the
villages were thick, and the people had suffered greatly from the
excursions of the Roman foragers, at the time of the siege of
Gamala. Many of the villages had been rebuilt, since that time; but
there was still great distress, heightened by the number of
fugitives from the other side of Jordan.

