lays hold of Uraga with his right.

Grasping the Mexican by the sword-belt and jerking him out of the
saddle, he dashes him down to the earth.  Then reining up, with the
revolver once more in his right hand, he cries out--

"Lie still, you ruffian!  Don't move an inch!  I have four shots to
spare, and if you attempt to stir, one of them will quiet you."

The admonition is not needed.  Uraga, stunned by the shock for a time,
makes no movement.  He is insensible.

Before he comes to himself the Rangers have ridden up, with Walt Wilder
at their head.  They proceed to make prisoners of the two men, neither
of whom has been killed in the encounter.

Better for both if they had.  For they are now in the hands of men who
will surely doom them to a death less easy thar that they had escaped.

Their fate is inevitable.



CHAPTER SEVENTY SEVEN.

THE CAMP TRANSFORMED.

Another sun rises over the Llano Estacado, his beams gilding with ruddy
glow the brown basaltic cliffs that enclose the valley of the Arroyo de
Alamo.

On projecting points of these, above the spot chosen by Uraga for his
camp, the black vultures are still perched.  Though 'tis not their usual
roosting-place, they have remained there all night, now and then giving
utterance to their hoarse, guttural croaks, when some howling, predatory
quadruped--coyote or puma--approaching too near, has startled them from
their dozing slumbers.  As the first rays of the sun rouse them to
activity, their movements tell why they have stayed.  No longer at rest,
or only at intervals, they flit from rock to rock, and across the valley
from cliff to cliff, at times swooping so low that their wings almost
touch the topmost twigs of the trees growing upon the banks of the
stream.  All the while with necks astretch, and eyes glaring in hungry
concupiscence.  For below they perceive the materials of a repast--a
grand, gluttonous feast--no longer in doubtful expectation, but now
surely provided for them.

Ten men lie prostrate upon the sward; not asleep, as the vultures well
know--nor yet reclining to rest themselves.  Their attitudes are
evidence against this.  They lie with bodies bent and limbs stiff, some
of them contorted to unnatural postures.  Besides, on the grass-blades
around are drops and gouts of blood, grown black during the night,
looking as if it had rained ink; while little pools of the same are here
and there seen, dull crimson and coagulated.

From these sanguinary symbols the vultures are well aware that the
recumbent forms are neither asleep nor reposing.  Every bird knows that
every man of them is dead; and, though still clad in the uniform of
soldiers, with all the gay insignia of lancers, they are but clay-cold
corpses.

It is the firing party, still lying as it fell; not a figure disturbed,
not a coat stripped off nor pocket rifled; no strap, plume, or pennon
displaced since the moment when all dropped dead almost simultaneously
at the detonation of the Rangers' rifles.

Except the tents, which are still set as before, this cluster of corpses
is the only thing seeming unchanged since yesterday's sun went down.
For it was after sunset when the pursuers returned, bringing their
prisoners along with them.  As on yesterday, two captives are seen under
the same tree, where late lay Don Valerian and the doctor.  But
different men, with quite another style of sentry standing over them.
The latter, a rough-garbed, big-bearded Texan, full six feet in height,
shouldering a gun whose butt, when rested on the ground, places the
muzzle within an inch of his chin.  No need to say who are the two he is
guarding.  At his feet Uraga lies, crestfallen, with a craven look upon
his face, like a fox in the trap; his splendid habiliments torn,
mud-bedaubed, bedraggled.  Besides him his adjutant, Roblez--his
confederate in many a crime--also showing signs of having received rough
treatment, but not without resenting it.  His aspect is that of a tiger
encaged, chafing at the torture, regardless of what may be the end.  On
the camp ground are seen some sixty horses with half-a-dozen mules.
About fifty of the former are under saddle and bridle, as if soon to be
mounted.  The others have lariats around their necks, intended to be
led.

A few men--those of inferior standing--look after the animals; while the
larger number is gathered into a group near the centre of the camp
ground.  Their air, attitudes, earnest speech, and excited
gesticulations tell they are taking counsel on some matter of serious
import.

Walt Wilder is among them, Hamersley being absent.  The latter is inside
the square tent, in pleasanter companionship.

He is seated upon a _catre_, Adela by his side, her hand clasping his.
This without any bashfulness or reserve at her brother being present.
Which he is, along with the dear old doctor, both now released from
their bonds.  It is a tableau of true love, wreathed with fraternal
affection.

With devotion also, of an humbler kind, Conchita is passing out and in,
rejoicing in a general way.  She pays no attention to a peon who lies
tied behind the tent--Jose; and gives only scorn to another seen fast
bound beside him--Manuel.

Notwithstanding her knowledge that this man is madly in love with her--
for she now also knows how much he has been a traitor--her thoughts, as
her eyes, are upon one more true--on her grand, gallant _Tejano_!  She
is proud to observe the distinguished part he plays among his
_compaisanos_.  For, in truth, Walt is doing this.  Standing a half head
taller than any of the Rangers around him, he is alike leader in their
deliberations, those the most serious in which men can be engaged.

No question of life and death.  It has been, but is no longer.  The
latter has been unanimously decreed, the verdict declared, the sentence
pronounced.  Their talk now only relates to the manner of execution.

The Ranger Captain, who presides, puts the interrogatory thus:

"Well, boys, what are we to do with them?  Shoot or hang?"

"Hang!" is the response from more than a majority of voices.

"Shootin' is too clean a death for scoundrels sech as them," is the
commentary of a voice recognisable as that of Nat Cully.

"They ought to be scalped, skinned, an' quartered," adds a man disposed
to severer punishment.

"Yes!" affirms another of the like inclining.  "A bit of torture
wouldn't be more than the rascals deserve."

"Come, comrades!" cries the Ranger Captain.  "Remember, we are Texans,
and not savages like those we're about to punish.  Sufficient to send
them out of the world without acting inhumanly.  You all declare for
hanging?"

"All!"

"Enough!  Where shall we string them up?"

"Yonner's a pick spot," responds Wilder, pointing out the two trees to
which Don Valerian and the doctor had been lately lashed.  "They kin
each hev a branch separate, so's not to crowd one the t'other in makin'
tracks to etarnity."

"Jest the place!" endorses Cully.  "Kedn't be a better gallis if the
sheriff o' Pike County, Massoury, had rigged it up hisself.  We'll gie
'em a tree apiece, as they war about to do wi' thar innocent prisoners.
Takin' their places'll be turn an' turn about.  That's fair, I reckin."

"Boys!" cries Walt, "look out a cupple o' layvettes, an' fetch 'em this
way."

Several start towards the horse-drove, and soon return with the
trail-ropes.  Then all proceed towards the two trees.  Each chances to
have a large limb extending horizontally outward from the trunk.  Over
each a tazo is flung, one end left loose, the other remaining in the
hand of him who pitched it.  Before flinging them the rope has been
passed through the iron ring with which all lariats are provided, thus
furnishing a ready-made running noose.

"Who's to haul up?" asks the Ranger Captain; adding, "Boys!  'Taint a
nice business, I know; but I suppose there's some of you willing to
undertake it."

Some of them!

Forty voices, nearly all present, are heard crying out with one accord--

"I'm willing!"

In fact, every man upon the ground seems eager to take part in a duty
which, under other circumstances, would be not only disagreeable, but
disgusting to them.  Rough, rude men as most of the Rangers are, little
prone to delicate sentimentalism, they are, nevertheless, true to the
ordinary instincts of humanity.  Accustomed to seeing blood spilled, and
not squeamish about spilling it if it be that of a red-skinned foe, it
is different when the complexion is white.

In the present case they have no scruples on the score of colour.  What
has been told them about their two prisoners--the atrocities these have
committed--puts all this aside.  The tale has made a profound impression
upon their minds; and, beyond any motive of mere revenge, they are
stirred by a sense of just retribution.  Every man of them feels as if
it were his sacred duty to deal out justice, and administer the
punishment of death to criminals so surely deserving it.



CHAPTER SEVENTY EIGHT.

A LIVING SCAFFOLD.

Captain Haynes, seeing there will be no difficulty in obtaining
executioners, deems everything settled, and is about ordering the
prisoners to be brought up.  Being a man of humane feelings, with
susceptibilities that make him somewhat averse to performing the part of
sheriff, it occurs to him that he can avoid the disagreeable duty by
appointing a deputy.

For this he selects Walt Wilder, who in turn chooses Nat Cully to assist
him.  The two assume superintendence of the ceremony, and the Ranger
Captain retires from the ground.

After communing for some seconds between themselves, and in _sotto
voce_, as if arranging the mode of execution, Walt faces round to the
assembled Texans, saying--

"Wal, boys, thar 'pears to be no stint o' hangmen among ye.  This chile
niver seed so many o' the Jack Ketch kind since he fust set foot on the
soil o' Texas.  Maybe it's the smell o' these Mexikins makes ye so
savagerous."

Walt's quaint speech elicits a general laugh, but suppressed.  The scene
is too solemn for an ebullition of boisterous mirth.  The ex-Ranger
continues--

"I see you'll want to have a pull at these ropes.  But I reckon we'll
have to disapp'int ye.  The things we're agoin' to swing up don't
desarve hoistin' to etarnity by free-born citizens o' the Lone Star
State.  'Twould be a burnin' shame for any Texan to do the hangin' o'
sech skunks as they."

"What do you mean, Walt?" one asks.  "Somebody must hoist them up!"

"'Taint at all necessary.  They kin be strung 'ithout e'er a hand
techin' trail-rope."

"How?" inquire several voices.

"Wal, thar's a way Nat Cully an' me hev been speaking o'.  I've heern o'
them Mexikins practisin' themselves on thar Injun prisoners for sport.
We'll gie' 'em a dose o' their own medicine.  Some o' you fellows go an'
fetch a kupple o' pack mules.  Ye may take the saddles off--they won't
be needed."

Half-a-dozen of the Rangers rush out, and return leading two mules,
having hastily stripped off their alparejas.

"Now!" cries Walt, "conduct hyar the kriminals!"

A party proceeds to the spot where the two prisoners lie; and taking
hold, raise them to an erect attitude.  Then, half carrying, half
dragging, bring them under the branches designed for their gallows-tree.

With their splendid uniforms torn, mud-bedaubed, and stained with spots
of blood, they present a sorry spectacle.  They resemble wounded wolves,
taken in a trap; nevertheless, bearing their misfortune in a far
different manner.  Roblez looks the large, grey wolf--savage, reckless,
unyielding; Uraga, the coyote--cowed, crestfallen, shivering; in fear of
what may follow.

For a time neither speaks a word nor makes an appeal for mercy.  They
seem to know it would be idle.  Regarding the faces around, they may
well think so.  There is not one but has "death" plainly stamped upon
it, as if the word itself were upon every lip.

There is an interval of profound silence, only broken by the croak of
the buzzards and the swish of their spread wings.  The bodies of the
dead lancers lie neglected; and, the Rangers now further off, the birds
go nearer them.  Wolves, too, begin to show themselves by the edge of
the underwood--from the stillness thinking the time arrived to commence
their ravenous repast.  It has but come to increase the quantity of food
soon to be spread before them.

"Take off thar leg fastenin's!" commands Wilder, pointing to the
prisoners.

In a trice the lashings are loosed from their ankles, and only the ropes
remain confining their wrists--these drawn behind their backs, and there
made fast.

"Mount 'em on the mules!"

As the other order, this is instantly executed; and the two prisoners
are set astride on the hybrids, each held by a man at its head.

"Now fix the snares roun' thar thrapples.  Make the other eends fast by
giein' them a wheen o' turn over them branches above.  See as ye draw
'em tight 'ithout streetchin'."

Walt's orders are carried out quickly, and to the letter, for the men
executing them now comprehend what is meant.  They also, too well, who
are seated upon the backs of the mules.  It is an old trick of their
own.  They know they are upon a scaffold--a living scaffold--with a
halter and running noose around their necks.

"Now, Nat!" says Walt, in undertone to Cully.  "I guess we may spring
the trap?  Git your knife riddy."

"It's hyar."

"You take the critter to the left.  I'll look arter that on the right."

The latter is bestridden by Uraga.  With Walt's ideas of duty are
mingled memories that prompt to revenge.  He remembers his comrades
slaughtered upon the sands of the Canadian, himself left buried alive.
With a feeling almost jubilant--natural, considering the circumstances,
scarce reprehensible--he takes his stand by the side of the mule which
carries Colonel Uraga.  At the same time Cully places himself beside
that bestridden by Roblez.

Both have their bowie-knives in hand, the blades bare.  One regarding
them, a stranger to their intent, might think they meant slaughtering
either the mules or the men on their backs.

They have no such thought, but a design altogether different, as
declared by Wilder's words--the last spoken by him before the act of
execution.

"When I gie the signal, Nat, prod yur critter sharp, an' sweep the
support from unner them.  They've been thegither in this world in the
doin' o' many a rascally deed.  Let's send 'em thegither inter the
next."

"All right, ole hoss!  I'll be riddy," is the laconic rejoinder of
Cully.

After it another interval of silence, resembling that which usually
precedes the falling of the gallows drop.  So profound, that the chirp
of a tree cricket, even the rustling of a leaf, would seem a loud noise.
So ominous, that the vultures perched upon the summit of the cliff
crane out their necks to inquire the cause.

The stillness is interrupted by a shout; not the signal promised by
Wilder, but a cry coming from the lips of Uraga.

In the last hour of anguish his craven heart has given way, and he makes
a piteous appeal for mercy.  Not to those near him, knowing it would
scarce be listened to; but to the man he has much wronged, calling out
his name, "Colonel Miranda."

On hearing it Don Valerian rushes forth from the tent, his sister by his
side, Hamersley with the doctor behind.  All stand in front regarding
the strange spectacle, of which they have been unconscious, seemingly
prepared for them.  There can be no mistaking its import.  The _mise en
scene_ explains it, showing the stage set for an execution.

If they have a thought of interfering it is too late.  While they stand
in suspense, a shout reaches them, followed by explanatory words.

They are in the voice of Walt Wilder, who has said--

"Death to the scoundrels!  Now, Nat, move your mule forrard!"

At the same instant he and Cully are seen leaning towards the two mules,
which bound simultaneously forward, as if stung by hornets or bitten by
gadflys.

But neither brings its rider along.  The latter--both of them--stay
behind; not naturally, as dismounted and thrown to the earth; but, like
the cradle of Mahomet, suspended between earth and heaven.



CHAPTER SEVENTY NINE.

AFTER THE EXECUTION.

It is mid-day over the Arroyo de Alamo.

The same sun whose early morning rays fell around the deliberating
lynchers, at a later hour lighting up a spectacle of execution, has
mounted to the meridian, and now glares down upon a spectacle still
sanguinary, though with tableaux changed.

The camp is deserted.  There are no tents, no Texans, no horses, nor yet
any mules.  All have disappeared from the place.

True, Uraga and his lancers are still there--in body, not in spirit.
Their souls have gone, no one may know whither.  Only their clay-cold
forms remain, us left by the Rangers--the common soldiers lying upon the
grass, the two officers swinging side by side, from the trees, with
broken necks, drooping heads, and limbs dangling down--all alike
corpses.

Not for long do they stay unchanged--untouched.

Scarce has the last hoof-stroke of the Texan horses died away down the
valley, when the buzzards forsake their perch upon the bluff, and swoop
down to the creek bottom.

Simultaneously the wolves--grand grey and coyote--come sneaking out from
the thicket's edge; at first cautiously, soon with bolder front,
approaching the abandoned bodies.

To the bark of the coyote, the bay of the bigger wolf, and the buzzard's
hoarse croak, a _caracara_ adds its shrill note; the fiend-like chorus
further strengthened by the scream of the white-headed eagle--for all
the world like the filing of a frame saw, and not unlike the wild,
unmeaning laughter of a madman.

Both the predatory birds and the ravening beasts, with instincts in
accord, gather around the quarry killed for them.  There is a grand
feast--a banquet for all; and they have no need to quarrel over it.  But
they do--the birds having to stand back till the beasts have eaten their
fill.

The puma, or panther, takes precedence--the so-called lion of America.
A sorry brute to bear the name belonging to the king of quadrupeds.
Still, on the Llano Estacado, lord of all, save when confronted by the
grizzly bear--then he becomes a cat.

As no grizzly has yet come upon the ground, and only two panthers, the
wolves have it almost their own way, and only the vultures and eagles
have to hold back.  But for the birds there is a side dish on which they
may whet their appetites, beyond reach of the beasts.  To their share
fall the two suspended from the trees; and, driven off from the others,
they attack these with beak and talon, flapping around, settling upon
the branches above, on the shoulders of the corpses, thick as honey-bees
upon a branch, pecking out eyes, tearing at flesh, mutilating man--God's
image--in every conceivable mode.

No; there is one left, peculiar to man himself.  Strange, at this
crisis, he should appear to give exhibition of it.  By pure chance--a
sheer contingency--though not less deserving record.

The beasts and birds while engaged in devouring the dead bodies are
interrupted and scared away from their filthy repast, retreating
suddenly from the ground at sight of their masters--men, who
unexpectedly appear upon it.

These are not the Rangers returning, but a band of Jicarilla Apaches--
young braves out on a roving excursion.  They have come down the creek,
making for the Pecos, and so chanced to stray into the deserted camp.

Surprised at the spectacle there presented to their eyes, they are not
the less delighted.  More than a dozen dead men, with scalps untaken!
They can see there has been a fight, but do not stay to think who have
been the victors.  Their thoughts are turned towards the vanquished,
their eyes resting on heads that still carry their covering of hair.  In
a trice their blades are bare, and it is cut off--the skin along with
it--to the skull of the last lancer!

Neither does Uraga nor his lieutenant escape the scalping-knife.  Before
the savages part from the spot, the crowns of both show crimson, while
the scalps stripped off appear as trophies on the points of two Apache
spears.

Not long do the Indians dally on the ghastly ground.  Soon forsaking it,
they continue on down the creek.  Not in pursuit of the party which has
so opportunely furnished them with spear-pennons and fringes for their
leggings.  The testimony of so many dead men, with the tracks of so many
horses--horses with large hoofs, evidently not ridden by Mexicans, whom
they contemn, but Texans they terribly fear; these evidences make the
Apaches cautious, and, keeping on towards the Pecos, they go not as
pursuers, but men trying to shun the party that has passed before.

In this they are successful.  They never sight the returning Texans, nor
these them.  The Rangers go down the river; the savages up stream.  Of
all Apaches, of all Indians, the Jicarillas are the most contemptible
cowards.  Dastards to the last degree, the young "braves" who mutilated
the slain lancers will return to their tribe to tell of scalps fairly
taken in fight!

And while they are boasting, the wolves, eagles, and vultures will be
back among the dead bodies, strip them of their flesh, and leave nought
but their bones to bleach white; in time to become dust, and mingle with
the earth on which they once moved in all the pride of manhood and
panoply of war!



CHAPTER EIGHTY.

TRANQUIL SCENES.

The last act of our drama is recorded, the last sanguinary scene.  All
red enough, the reader will say, while the keenly susceptible one may
