faster than any of them.  He might have been a swifter dog than the
others, but the hunter did not think it was that.  He appeared rather to
be running harder than they, as if sent forward to _push_ the
hartebeest, while the rest saved their wind.

This proved to be really the case; for the dog, by a desperate effort,
having gained upon the antelope, caused the latter to turn slightly from
its original course; and the pack, perceiving this, changed their
direction at the same time, and held along a diagonal line, as if to
head the game.  By this means they avoided the detour which both the
antelope and their companion had made.

The hartebeest was now running upon a new line; and as before, one of
the hounds was soon seen to head the pack, and press forward at the top
of his speed.  The one that first led, as soon as the antelope turned
from its original course, fell back, rejoined the pack, and was now
lagging among the hindmost!  His "turn" of duty was over.

Again the hartebeest verged from its course.  Again the pack ran
obliquely, and made a second "cut" upon him--again a fresh dog took the
lead, and on swept the chase as before--the wild hounds uttering their
yelping notes as they ran.

Several times was this manoeuvre executed by the cunning dogs--until the
desired result was accomplished, and the antelope was completely
"blown."

Then, as if they felt that it was in their power, and that further
strategy was not needed, the whole pack rushed forward simultaneously,
and closed rapidly upon the game.

The hartebeest made one last despairing effort to escape, but, finding
that speed would no longer avail, the creature wheeled suddenly round,
and placed itself in an attitude of defiance--the foam falling from its
lips, while its red eyes sparkled like coals of fire.

In another moment the dogs were around it.

"What a splendid pack!" exclaimed Von Bloom.  "Oh! that I had such an
one!

"Ha!" he continued, as a new thought struck him, "and why not, just such
an one?--why not?"

Now the train of reflections that passed through the mind of the
field-cornet was as follows:--

That the wild hounds might be tamed, and trained to hunting,--easiest of
all, to the chase of the elephant.  He knew that this could be done, for
boor-hunters had often done it.  True, the dogs must be taken young, but
where were young ones to be obtained?  It is not so easy to capture the
pups of the wild hound.  Until they are able to run well, their mothers
do not permit them to stray far from the caves in which they are
littered; and these are usually crevices among rocks quite inaccessible
to man.  How could he obtain a set of them?  He had already formed such
an intention.  Where could be their breeding-place?

His reflections were interrupted at this point, by very singular
behaviour on the part of the wild hounds, and which gave him a new idea
of their intelligence that quite electrified him.

When the hartebeest stood to bay, and the hounds came up, Von Bloom very
naturally expected to see the latter run in upon their game, and at once
pull it to the ground.  This he knew was their usual habit.  What was
his astonishment at seeing the whole pack standing off to one side, as
if they intended to leave the antelope alone!  Some of them even lay
down to rest themselves, while the others stood with open jaws and
lolling tongues, but without showing any signs that they intended
further to molest the panting quarry!

The field-cornet could observe the situation well, for the antelope was
on his side--that is, towards the cliffs--while the dogs were farther
out upon the plain.  Another circumstance that astonished him was, that
the dogs, after running up and around the hartebeest, had actually drawn
off to their present position!

What could it mean?  Were they afraid of its ugly horns?  Were they
resting themselves before they should make their bloody onslaught?

The hunter kept his gaze intently fixed upon the interesting group.

After a while the antelope, having recovered its wind a little, and
seeing the pack so distant, made a fresh start.

This time it ran in a side direction, apparently with the intention of
gaining a hill that lay in that way, and up the sides of which it no
doubt calculated upon gaining some advantage.  But the creature had
hardly stretched itself, when the hounds struck out after it; and in
five hundred yards running, once more brought it to a stand.  Again the
pack took station at a distance, and the hartebeest stood upon the plain
alone!

Once more it essayed to escape, and started off with all the speed that
was left in its legs--the hounds as before trooping after.

This time the antelope headed in a new direction, making for a point in
the cliffs; and as the chase now passed very near to the nwana-tree,
everybody had a fine view of it.

The hartebeest seemed to be going faster than ever, or, at all events,
the dogs did not now appear to gain upon it; and the field-cornet, as
well as all the young people, were in hopes the poor creature would
escape from its tireless pursuers.

They watched the chase, until they could just see the bright body of the
hartebeest afar off, appearing like a yellow spot upon the face of the
rocks, but the dogs were no longer visible.  Then the yellow spot
suddenly disappeared like the going out of a candle, and they could see
it no more.

No doubt the antelope was pulled down!

A strange suspicion entered the mind of Von Bloom, and, calling upon
them to saddle the quaggas, he, with Hans and Hendrik, rode off towards
the place where the hartebeest had been last seen.

They approached the ground with caution; and under the shelter of some
bushes were enabled to get within two hundred yards of the spot without
being observed.  A singular spectacle rewarded their pains.

Within a dozen yards of the cliff lay the body of the hartebeest, where
it had been "pulled down" by the dogs.  It was already half-eaten, not
by the hounds that had hunted it, but by their puppies of all ages, that
to the number of more than threescore were now standing around the
carcass, tugging away at its flesh and snarling at one another!  Some of
the grown dogs that had taken part in the chase could be seen lying upon
the ground, still panting after their hard run; but most of them had
disappeared, no doubt into the numerous small caves and crevices that
opened along the bottom of the cliffs.

There was no room left to doubt the singular fact--that the wild hounds
had regularly driven the hartebeest up to their breeding-place to feed
their young, and that they had abstained from killing it out upon the
plain to save themselves the labour of dragging it from a distance!

Indeed these animals--unlike the _Felida_--have not the power of
transporting a large mass to any considerable distance; hence the
wonderful instinct which led them to guide the antelope to the very spot
where its flesh was wanted!

That they were in the constant practice of this singular habit was
attested, by the numerous bones and horns of large antelopes of
different kinds, that lay strewed around the place.

Von Bloom had his eye upon the young puppies, and all three made a rush
towards them.  But it was to no purpose.  Cunning as their fathers and
mothers, the little fellows forsook their meal at first sight of the
intruders, and darted off into their caves!

But they were not cunning enough to escape the snares, which were laid
for them every day for a week after; and, before the end of that time,
more than a dozen of them were safely domiciled in a little kennel built
especially for their use, under the shadow of the great nwana-tree.

In less than six months from that time, several of them were in the
field, and trained to the chase of the elephant, which duty they
performed with all the courage and skill that could have been shown by
hounds of the purest breed!



CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

CONCLUSION.

For several years Von Bloom led the life of an elephant-hunter.  For
several years the great nwana-tree was his home, and his only companions
his children and domestics.  But, perhaps, these were not the least
happy years of his existence, since, during all the time both he and his
family had enjoyed the most estimable of earthly blessings,--health.

He had _not_ allowed his children to grow up without instruction.  He
had _not_ permitted them to lapse into the character of mere
"Bush-boys."  He had taught them many things from the book of nature,--
many arts that can be acquired as well on the karoo as in the college.
He had taught them to love God, and to love one another.  He had planted
in their minds the seeds of the virtuous principles,--honour and
morality,--without which all education is worthless.  He had imbued them
with habits of industry and self-reliance, and had initiated them into
many of the accomplishments of civilised life--so that upon their return
to society they might be quite equal to its claims.  Upon the whole,
those years of the exile's life, spent in his wilderness home, formed no
blank in his existence.  He might look back upon them with feelings of
satisfaction and pleasure.

Man, however, is formed for society.  The human heart, properly
organised, seeks communion with the human heart; and the mind,
especially when refined and polished by education, loves the intercourse
of social life, and, when deprived of it, will always yearn to obtain
it.

So was it with the field-cornet.  He desired to return once more within
the pale of civilised society.  He desired once more to revisit the
scenes where he had so long dwelt in peaceful happiness; he desired once
more to establish himself among his friends and acquaintances of former
days, in the picturesque district of the Graaf Reinet.  Indeed, to have
remained any longer in his wilderness home could have served no purpose.
It is true he had grown very much attached to his wild hunter-life, but
it was no longer likely to be profitable.  The elephants had completely
forsaken the neighbourhood of the camp, and not one was to be found
within twenty miles of the spot.  They had become well acquainted with
the report of the long roer, and knew the dangerous character of that
weapon; they had learnt that of all their enemies man was the one to be
especially dreaded and shunned; and they had grown so shy of his
presence, that the hunters frequently passed whole weeks without setting
their eyes upon a single elephant.

But this was no longer an object of solicitude with Von Bloom.  Other
considerations now occupied his mind, and he did not care much if he
should never spoor another of these huge quadrupeds.  To return to the
Graaf Reinet, and settle there, was now the ultimatum of his wishes.

The time had at length arrived when he would be able to carry out that
design; and nothing seemed any longer to stand in the way of its full
and complete accomplishment.

The proscription against him had been long since taken off.  A general
amnesty had been passed by the government, and he had been pardoned
among the rest.

It is true his property was not restored to him; but that mattered
little now.  He had created a new property, as was testified by the vast
_pyramid of ivory_ that stood under the shadow of the great nwana-tree!

Nothing remained but to transport this shining pile to a market, and a
splendid fortune would be the result.

And Von Bloom's ingenuity found the means for bringing it to market.

About this time there was dug another huge _pit-trap_ near the pass in
the cliffs, in which many quaggas were trapped; and then there were
stirring scenes, while these wild creatures were being broken to
harness, and trained to "trek" in a wagon.

They were trained however, after a good deal of trouble--the old wheels,
still in prime condition, serving as the "break;" and then the body of
the wagon was let down from the tree, and once more renewed its
acquaintance with its old companions the wheels; and the cap-tent spread
its protecting shadow over all; and the white and yellow crescents were
stowed; and the quaggas were "inspanned;" and Swartboy, mounting the
"voor-kist," once more cracked his long bamboo whip; and the wheels,
well oiled with elephants' grease, again whirled gaily along!

How surprised were the good people of Graaf Reinet, when, one morning, a
cap-tent wagon, drawn by twelve quaggas, and followed by four riders
mounted upon animals of the same kind, pulled up in the public square of
their little town!  How astonished they were on seeing that this wagon
was "chuck" full of elephants' teeth, all except a little corner
occupied by a beautiful girl with cherry cheeks and fair flaxen hair;
and how joyed were they, in fine, on learning that the owner of both the
ivory and the beautiful girl was no other than their old friend, and
much-esteemed fellow-citizen, the field-cornet Von Bloom!

A warm welcome met the elephant-hunter in the square of Graaf Reinet,
and, what was also of some importance, a ready market for his ivory.

It chanced just at that time that ivory was selling at a very high rate.
Some article--I do not remember what--the principal part of which
required to be constructed of pure ivory, had come into fashion and
general use in European countries, and the consequence was an increased
demand for this valuable commodity.  It was a fortunate circumstance for
the returned hunter, who was at once enabled to dispose of his stock,
not only for ready money, but at such a fine price as to yield him
nearly twice the amount he had calculated on receiving!

He had not brought it all with him, as there was more than would have
loaded any one wagon.  A second load had remained, hidden near the
nwana-tree, and this required a journey to be made for it.

It was made in due time, and the remainder arrived safely at Graaf
Reinet, and was there delivered to the ivory-dealers, who had already
purchased it.

The result was a splendid fortune in ready money.  The field-cornet was
once more a rich man!  For the present we can follow his history no
farther than to say, that the proceeds of his great hunt enabled him to
buy back his old estate, and to stock it in splendid style, with the
best breeds of horses, horned cattle, and sheep; that he rose rapidly in
wealth and worldly esteem; that the government gave him its confidence;
and, having first restored him to his old office of field-cornet, soon
afterwards promoted him to that of "landdrost," or chief magistrate of
the district.

Hans returned to his college studies; while the dashing Hendrik was
enabled to enter the profession for which he was most fit, and the very
one that fitted him, by obtaining a cornetcy in the "Cape Mounted
Rifles."

Little Jan was packed off to school to study grammar and geography;
while the beautiful Truey remained at home to grace the mansion of her
honoured father, and look after his household affairs.

Totty still ruled the kitchen; and, of course, Swartboy was the
important man about the house, and for many a long year after cracked
his great whip, and flourished his jambok among the long-horned oxen of
the wealthy landdrost.

But enough for the present,--enough of adventure for one year.  Let us
hope, boy readers, that before you and I have circled once more around
the sun, we shall make a fresh trip to the land of the boors, and again
encounter the worthy Von Bloom, his Bushman, and--

"Bush-Boys."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Bush Boys, by Captain Mayne Reid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BUSH BOYS ***

***** This file should be named 21237.txt or 21237.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/2/3/21237/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
