to account for the change; but Rosamund was the one to enlighten him.
She just told him that some very mischievous girls had played a trick,
but she mentioned no names. For Lucy seemed really broken-hearted; and
as to Phyllis Flower, she had cried so hard that her eyes were scarcely
visible.

About midnight little Agnes woke in her right mind. She saw Irene, and
lifting a tiny white hand, she stroked her cheek.

"I have had a very bad dream; but I don't seem to remember anything,"
she said.

"Only that you are with me," said Irene; "and you will be with me all my
life--won't you, little darling?"

By slow degrees little Agnes got well, and when she was well enough she
and Irene and Rosamund left the school; and from that day, as far as I
can tell, Irene has been a changed character: thoughtful though
spirited, beautiful, talented, but with much consideration for others,
and the comfort and joy of her mother's heart. But the one she loves
best on earth is the one whom she calls her own little Agnes.

THE END.




Other books by A. L. BURT COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *

Marjorie Dean College Series

BY PAULINE LESTER.

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean High School Series.

Those who have read the Marjorie Dean High School Series will be eager
to read this new series, as Marjorie Dean continues to be the heroine in
these stories.

All Cloth bound. Copyright Titles.

    MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE FRESHMAN
    MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SOPHOMORE
    MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE JUNIOR
    MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SENIOR

       *       *       *       *       *

Marjorie Dean High School Series

BY PAULINE LESTER

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean College Series

These are clean, wholesome stories that will be of great interest to all
girls of high school age.

All Cloth Bound Copyright Titles

    MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN
    MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SOPHOMORE
    MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL JUNIOR
    MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR

       *       *       *       *       *

The Camp Fire Girls Series

By HILDEGARD G. FREY

A Series of Outdoor Stories for Girls 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS IN THE MAINE WOODS;
      or, The Winnebagos go Camping.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT SCHOOL;
      or, The Wohelo Weavers.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT ONOWAY HOUSE;
      or, The Magic Garden.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS GO MOTORING;
      or, Along the Road That Leads the Way.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS' LARKS AND PRANKS;
      or, The House of the Open Door.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS ON ELLEN'S ISLE;
      or, The Trail of the Seven Cedars.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS ON THE OPEN ROAD;
      or, Glorify Work.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS DO THEIR BIT;
      or, Over the Top with the Winnebagos.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS SOLVE A MYSTERY;
      or, The Christmas Adventure at Carver House.

    THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT CAMP KEEWAYDIN;
      or, Down Paddles.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Girl Scouts Series

BY EDITH LAVELL

A new copyright series of Girl Scouts stories by an author of wide
experience in Scouts' craft, as Director of Girl Scouts of Philadelphia.

Clothbound, with Attractive Color Designs.

    THE GIRL SCOUTS AT MISS ALLEN'S SCHOOL
    THE GIRL SCOUTS AT CAMP
    THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN
    THE GIRL SCOUTS' CANOE TRIP
    THE GIRL SCOUTS' RIVALS

       *       *       *       *       *

The Golden Boys Series

BY L. P. WYMAN, PH.D.

Dean of Pennsylvania Military College.

A new series of instructive copyright stories for boys of High School
Age.

Handsome Cloth Binding.

    THE GOLDEN BOYS AND THEIR NEW ELECTRIC CELL
    THE GOLDEN BOYS AT THE FORTRESS
    THE GOLDEN BOYS IN THE MAINE WOODS
    THE GOLDEN BOYS WITH THE LUMBER JACKS
    THE GOLDEN BOYS ON THE RIVER DRIVE

       *       *       *       *       *

The Radio Boys Series

BY GERALD BRECKENRIDGE

A new series of copyright titles for boys of all ages.

Cloth Bound, with Attractive Cover Designs

    THE RADIO BOYS ON THE MEXICAN BORDER
    THE RADIO BOYS ON SECRET SERVICE DUTY
    THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE REVENUE GUARDS
    THE RADIO BOYS' SEARCH FOR THE INCA'S TREASURE
    THE RADIO BOYS RESCUE THE LOST ALASKA EXPEDITION

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boy Troopers Series

BY CLAIR W. HAYES

Author of the Famous "Boy Allies" Series.

The adventures of two boys with the Pennsylvania State Police.

All Copyrighted Titles.

Cloth Bound, with Attractive Cover Designs.

    THE BOY TROOPERS ON THE TRAIL
    THE BOY TROOPERS IN THE NORTHWEST
    THE BOY TROOPERS ON STRIKE DUTY
    THE BOY TROOPERS AMONG THE WILD MOUNTAINEERS

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ranger Boys Series

BY CLAUDE H. LA BELLE

A new series of copyright titles telling of the adventures of three boys
with the Forest Rangers in the state of Maine.

Handsome Cloth Binding.

    THE RANGER BOYS TO THE RESCUE
    THE RANGER BOYS FIND THE HERMIT
    THE RANGER BOYS AND THE BORDER SMUGGLERS
    THE RANGER BOYS OUTWIT THE TIMBER THIEVES
    THE RANGER BOYS AND THEIR REWARD

       *       *       *       *       *

The Jack Lorimer Series

BY WINN STANDISH

For Boys 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles


    CAPTAIN JACK LORIMER; or, The Young Athlete of Millvale High.

    Jack Lorimer is a fine example of the all-around American
    high-school boys. His fondness for clean, honest
    sport of all kinds will strike a chord of sympathy among
    athletic youths.


    JACK LORIMER'S CHAMPIONS; or, Sports on Land and Lake.

    There is a lively story woven in with the athletic achievements,
    which are all right, since the book has been O. K'd
    by Chadwick, the Nestor of American Sporting journalism.


    JACK LORIMER'S HOLIDAYS; or, Millvale High in Camp.

    It would be well not to put this book into a boy's hands
    until the chores are finished, otherwise they might be
    neglected.


    JACK LORIMER'S SUBSTITUTE; or, The Acting Captain of
    the Team.

    On the sporting side, this book takes up football, wrestling,
    and tobogganing. There is a good deal of fun in this book
    and plenty of action.


    JACK LORIMER, FRESHMAN; or, From Millvale High to Exmouth.

    Jack and some friends he makes crowd innumerable happenings
    into an exciting freshman year at one of the leading
    Eastern colleges. The book is typical of the American
    college boy's life, and there is a lively story, interwoven
    with feats on the gridiron, hockey, basketball and other
    clean honest sports for which Jack Lorimer stands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Young Aeroplane Scout Series

(Registered in the United States Patent Office)

BY HORACE PORTER

For Boys 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles

A Series of Remarkable Stories of the Adventures of Two Boy Flyers in
The European War Zone.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM;
      or, Saving The Fortunes of the Trouvilles.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN GERMANY.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN RUSSIA;
      or, Lost on the Frozen Steppes.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN TURKEY;
      or, Bringing the Light to Yusef.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN ENGLAND;
      or, Twin Stars in the London Sky Patrol.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN ITALY;
      or, Flying with the War Eagles of the Alps.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS AT VERDUN;
      or, Driving Armored Meteors Over Flaming Battle Fronts.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN THE BALKANS;
      or, Wearing the Red Badge of Courage Among Warring Legions.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN THE WAR ZONE;
      or, Serving Uncle Sam In the Great Cause of the Allies.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS FIGHTING TO THE FINISH;
      or Striking Hard Over the Sea for the Stars and Stripes.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS AT THE MARNE;
      or, Hurrying the Huns from Allied Battle Planes.

    OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN AT THE VICTORY;
      or, Speedy High Flyers Smashing the Hindenburg Line.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boy Allies

(Registered in the United States Patent Office)

With the Navy BY ENSIGN ROBERT L. DRAKE

For Boys 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles

Frank Chadwick and Jack Templeton, young American lads, meet each other
in an unusual way soon after the declaration of war. Circumstances place
them on board the British cruiser, "The Sylph," and from there on, they
share adventures with the sailors of the Allies. Ensign Robert L. Drake,
the author, is an experienced naval officer, and he describes admirably
the many exciting adventures of the two boys.

    THE BOY ALLIES ON THE NORTH SEA PATROL;
      or, Striking the First Blow at the German Fleet.

    THE BOY ALLIES UNDER TWO FLAGS;
      or, Sweeping the Enemy from the Sea.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH THE FLYING SQUADRON;
      or, The Naval Raiders of the Great War.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH THE TERROR OF THE SEA;
      or, The Last Shot of Submarine D-16.

    THE BOY ALLIES UNDER THE SEA;
      or, The Vanishing Submarine.

    THE BOY ALLIES IN THE BALTIC;
      or, Through Fields of Ice to Aid the Czar.

    THE BOY ALLIES AT JUTLAND;
      or, The Greatest Naval Battle of History.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH UNCLE SAM'S CRUISERS;
      or, Convoying the American Army Across the Atlantic.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH THE SUBMARINE D-32;
      or, The Fall of the Russian Empire.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH THE VICTORIOUS FLEETS;
      or, The Fall of the German Navy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boy Allies

(Registered in the United States Patent Office)

With the Army BY CLAIR W. HAYES

For Boys 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles

In this series we follow the fortunes of two American lads unable to
leave Europe after war is declared. They meet the soldiers of the
Allies, and decide to cast their lot with them. Their experiences and
escapes are many, and furnish plenty of good, healthy action that every
boy loves.

    THE BOY ALLIES AT LIEGE;
      or, Through Lines of Steel.

    THE BOY ALLIES ON THE FIRING LINE;
      or, Twelve Days Battle Along the Marne.

    THE BOY ALLIES WITH THE COSSACKS;
      or, A Wild Dash Over the Carpathians.

    THE BOY ALLIES IN THE TRENCHES;
      or, Midst Shot and Shell Along the Aisne.
