
Lucien had hardly finished his examination of the owl when he was called
upon to witness another incident of a much more exciting nature.  A
hill, as already mentioned, or rather a ridge, rose up from the opposite
shore of the lake by which the camp was pitched.  The declivity of this
hill fronted the lake, and sloped gradually back from the edge of the
water.  Its whole face was smooth and treeless, covered with a layer of
pure snow.  The camp commanded a full view of it up to its very crest.

As Lucien was sitting quietly by the fire a singular sound, or rather
continuation of sounds, fell upon his ear.  It somewhat resembled the
baying of hounds at a distance; and at first he was inclined to believe
that it was Marengo on a view-hunt after the deer.  On listening more
attentively, however, he observed that the sounds came from more than
one animal; and also, that they bore more resemblance to the howling of
wolves than the deep-toned bay of a bloodhound.  This, in fact, it was;
for the next moment a caribou shot up over the crest of the hill, and
was seen stretching at full gallop down the smooth declivity in the
direction of the lake.  Not twenty paces in its rear followed a string
of howling animals, evidently in pursuit of it.  There were a dozen of
them in all, and they were running exactly like hounds upon the "view
holloa."  Lucien saw at a glance they were wolves.  Most of them were
dappled-grey and white, while some were of a pure white colour.  Any one
of them was nearly as large as the caribou itself; for in these parts--
around Great Slave Lake--the wolf grows to his largest size.

The caribou gained upon them as it bounded down the slope of the hill.
It was evidently making for the lake, believing, no doubt, that the
black ice upon its surface was water, and that in that element it would
have the advantage of its pursuers, for the caribou is a splendid
swimmer.  Nearly all deer when hunted take to the water--to throw off
the dogs, or escape from men--and to this habit the reindeer makes no
exception.

Down the hill swept the chase, Lucien having a full view both of
pursuers and pursued.  The deer ran boldly.  It seemed to have gathered
fresh confidence at sight of the lake, while the same object caused its
pursuers a feeling of disappointment.  They knew they were no match for
a caribou in the water, as no doubt many a one had escaped them in that
element.  It is not likely, however, that they made reflections of this
sort.  There was but little time.  From the moment of their appearance
upon the crest of the hill till the chase arrived at the edge of the
lake, was but a few seconds.  On reaching the shore the caribou made no
stop; but bounded forward in the same way as if it had been springing
upon water.  Most likely it expected to hear a plunge; but, instead of
that, its hoofs came down upon the hard ice; and, by the impulse thus
given, the animal shot out with the velocity of a skater.  Strange to
say, it still kept its feet; but, now seemingly overcome by surprise,
and knowing the advantage its pursuers would have over it upon the
slippery ice, it began to plunge and flounder, and once or twice came to
its knees.  The hungry pursuers appeared to recognise their advantage at
once, for their howling opened with a fresh burst, and they quickened
their pace.  Their sharp claws enabled them to gallop over the ice at
top speed; and one large brute that led the pack soon came up with the
deer, sprang upon it, and bit it in the flank.  This brought the deer
upon its haunches, and at once put an end to the chase.  The animal was
hardly down upon the ice, when the foremost wolves coming up
precipitated themselves upon its body, and began to devour it.

It was about the middle of the lake where the caribou had been
overtaken.  At the time it first reached the ice, Lucien had laid hold
of his rifle and run forward in order to meet the animal halfway, and,
if possible, get a shot at it.  Now that the creature was killed, he
continued on with the design of driving off the wolves, and securing the
carcass of the deer for himself.  He kept along the ice until he was
within less than twenty yards of the pack, when, seeing that the fierce
brutes had torn the deer to pieces, and perceiving, moreover, that they
exhibited no fear of himself, he began to think he might be in danger by
advancing any nearer.  Perhaps a shot from his rifle would scatter them,
and without further reflection he raised the piece, and fired.  One of
the wolves kicked over upon the ice, and lay quite dead; but the others,
to Lucien's great surprise, instead of being frightened off, immediately
sprang upon their dead companion, and commenced tearing and devouring
it, just as they had done the deer!

The sight filled Lucien with alarm; which was increased at seeing
several of the wolves--that had been beaten by the others from the
quarry--commence making demonstrations towards himself!  Lucien now
trembled for his safety, and no wonder.  He was near the middle of the
lake upon slippery ice.  To attempt running back to the camp would be
hazardous; the wolves could overtake him before he had got halfway, and
he felt certain that any signs of fear on his part would be the signal
for the fierce brutes to assail him.

For some moments he was irresolute how to act.  He had commenced loading
his gun, but his fingers were numbed with the cold, and it was a good
while before he could get the piece ready for a second fire.  He
succeeded at length.  He did not fire then, but resolved to keep the
charge for a more desperate crisis.  Could he but reach the camp there
were trees near it, and one of these he might climb.  This was his only
hope, in case the wolves attacked him, and he knew it was.  Instead of
turning and running for this point, he began to back for it stealthily
and with caution, keeping his front all the while towards the wolves,
and his eyes fixed upon them.  He had not got many yards, when he
perceived to his horror, that the whole pack were in motion, and _coming
after him_!  It was a terrible sight, and Lucien, seeing that by
retreating he only drew them on, stopped and held his rifle in a
threatening attitude.  The wolves were now within twenty yards of him;
but, instead of moving any longer directly towards him, they broke into
two lines, swept past on opposite sides of him, and then circling round,
met each other in his rear.  _His retreat was cut off_!

He now stood upon the ice with the fierce wolves forming a ring around
him, whose diameter was not the six lengths of his gun, and _every_
moment growing shorter and shorter.  The prospect was appalling.  It
would have caused the stoutest heart to quail, and Lucien's was
terrified.  He shouted at the top of his voice.  He fired his rifle at
the nearest.  The brute fell, but the others showed no symptoms of fear;
they only grew more furious.  Lucien clubbed his gun--the last resort in
such cases--and laid around him with all his might; but he was in danger
of slipping upon the ice, and his efforts were feeble.  Once down he
never would have risen again, for his fierce assailants would have
sprung upon him like tigers.  As it was, he felt but little hope.  He
believed himself lost.  The teeth of the ferocious monsters gleamed
under his eyes.  He was growing weaker and weaker, yet still he battled
on, and swept his gun around him with the energy of despair.  Such a
struggle could not have continued much longer.  Lucien's fate would have
been sealed in a very few minutes more, had not relief arrived in some
shape or other.  But it did come.  A loud shout was heard upon the hill;
and Lucien, glancing suddenly towards it, saw several forms rushing
downward to the lake!  It was the hunting party returned, and in a
moment more they were crossing the ice to his rescue.  Lucien gaining
confidence fought with fresh vigour.  The wolves busy in their attack
had either not heard or were regardless of the new-comers; but the
"crack, crack" of the guns--repeated no less than four times--and then
the nearer reports of pistols, made a speedy impression upon the brutes,
and in a short while half their number were seen tumbling and kicking
upon the ice.  The rest, uttering their hideous howls, took to flight,
and soon disappeared from the valley; and Lucien, half dead with
fatigue, staggered into the arms of his deliverers.

No less than seven of the wolves were killed in the affray--two of which
Lucien had shot himself.  One or two were only wounded, but so badly,
that they could not get away; and these were handed over to the tender
mercies of Marengo, who amused himself for some time after by worrying
them to death.

The hunting party had made a good day of it.  They had fallen in with
the caribou, and had killed three of them.  These they were bringing to
camp, but had dropped them upon the hill, on perceiving the perilous
position of Lucien.  They now went back, and having carried the deer to
their camping-place, were soon engaged in the pleasant occupation of
eating a savoury dinner.  Lucien soon recovered from his fright and
fatigue, and amused his companions by giving an account of the
adventures that had befallen him in their absence.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

END OF THE "VOYAGE."

Our party remained several days at this place, until they had made a
fresh stock of "pemmican" from the flesh of the caribou, several more of
which they succeeded in killing; and then, arranging everything anew,
and taking with them such skins as they wanted, they continued their
journey.

They had two days' hard travelling through a rocky mountainous country,
where they could not find a stick of wood to cook their meals with, and
were exposed to cold more than at any other place.  Both Francois and
Lucien had their faces frost-bitten; but they were cured by Norman, who
prevented them from going near a fire until he had well rubbed the parts
with soft snow.

The rocks through which they passed were in many places covered with the
_tripe de roche (Gyrophora_) of several species; but our voyageurs cared
nothing about it so long as their pemmican lasted, and of that each of
them had nearly as much as he could carry.

In the most dreary part of the mountains they chanced upon a herd of
those curious animals, the musk-oxen, and shot one of them; but the meat
tasted so rank, and smelt so strongly of musk, that the whole of it was
left to the wolves, foxes, and other preying creatures of these parts.

On the third day, after leaving their camp by the lake, a pleasant
prospect opened before them.  It was the valley of the Mackenzie,
stretching to the west, and extending north and south as far as the eye
could reach, covered with forests of pine and poplar, and other large
trees.  Of course the landscape was a winter one, as the river was bound
up in ice, and the trees themselves were half-white with frozen snow;
but after the dreary scenery of the Barren Grounds, even this appeared
warm and summer-like.  There was no longer any danger they should be
without a good fire to cook their dinners, or warm themselves at, and a
wooded country offers a better prospect of game.  The sight, therefore,
of a great forest was cheering; and our travellers, in high spirits,
planted their tent upon the banks of the great Northern river.  They had
still many hundred miles to go before arriving at their destination; but
they determined to continue their journey without much delay, following
the river as a guide.  No more "near cuts" were to be taken in future.
They had learned, from their recent experience, that "the shortest way
across is sometimes the longest way round," and they resolved to profit
by the lesson.  I hope, boy reader, you too will remember it.

After reaching the Mackenzie the voyageurs halted one day, and upon the
next commenced their journey down-stream.  Sometimes they kept upon the
bank, but at times, for a change, they travelled upon the ice of the
river.  There was no danger of its giving way under them, for it was
more than a foot in thickness, and would have supported a loaded waggon
and horses, without even cracking.

They were now drawing near the Arctic circle, and the days grew shorter
and shorter as they advanced.  But this did not much interfere with
their travelling.  The long nights of the Polar regions are not like
those of more Southern latitudes.  They are sometimes so clear, that one
may read the smallest print.  What with the coruscations of the aurora
borealis, and the cheerful gleaming of the Northern constellations, one
may travel without difficulty throughout the livelong night.  I am sure,
my young friend, you have made good use of your globes, and need not be
told that the length of both nights and days, as you approach the pole,
depends upon two things--the latitude of the place, and the season of
the year; and were you to spend a whole year _leaning against the pole
itself_, (!) you would _live but one day and one night_--each of them
six months in length.

But no doubt you know all these things without my telling you of them,
and you are impatient to hear not about that, but whether the young
voyageurs safely reached the end of their journey.  That question I
answer briefly at once--they did.

Some distance below the point where they had struck the Mackenzie, they
fell in with a winter encampment of Dog-rib Indians.  Some of these
people had been to the Fort to trade; and Norman being known to them, he
and his Southern cousins were received with much hospitality.  All their
wants were provided for, as far as it lay in the power of these poor
people to do; but the most valuable thing obtained from the Indians was
a full set of dogs and dog-sledges for the whole party.  These were
furnished by the chief, upon the understanding that he should be paid
for them on his next visit to the Fort.  Although the reindeer of North
America are not trained to the sledge by the Esquimaux and Indians,
several kinds of dogs are; and a single pair of these faithful creatures
will draw a full-grown man at a rate that exceeds almost every other
mode of travelling--steam excepted.  When our voyageurs, therefore,
flung away their snow-shoes, and, wrapped in their skin cloaks, seated
themselves snugly in their dog-sledges, the five hundred miles that
separated them from the Fort were soon reduced to nothing; and one
afternoon, four small sledges, each carrying a "young voyageur," with a
large bloodhound galloping in the rear, were seen driving up to the
stockade fence surrounding the Fort.  Before they had quite reached the
gate, there was a general rush of trappers, traders, voyageurs,
_coureurs-des-bois_, and other _employes_, to reach them; and the next
moment they were lost in the midst of the people who crowded out of the
Fort to welcome them.  This was their hour of happiness and joy.

To me there is an hour of regret, and I hope, boy reader, to you as
well--the hour of our parting with the "Young _Voyageurs_."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Voyageurs, by Mayne Reid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG VOYAGEURS ***

***** This file should be named 23129.txt or 23129.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/2/23129/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
