
Her son, Prince Rakota, was her successor; but his succession was not to
be unopposed.  He had a rival claimant to the throne in his own cousin
Rambosalama, an able, wary, and unscrupulous man, who, on perceiving
that the end was approaching, had laid his plans secretly and
extensively for seizing the reins of government.  Prince Rakota,
however, was so much beloved that all his cousin's plans were revealed
to him by his friends, but the disposition of the prince was too humane
to permit of his adopting the usual savage means to foil his foe.

"All has been told to me," he said to the Secretary.  "My cousin has
gained many to his side--especially of those who hate the Christians.
He has even hired men to kill me!  I know it, because one of the
assassins came last night and warned me.  At the same time he confessed
that he had intended to commit the crime."

"But have you not taken steps to thwart your cousin!"

"I have.  For some time past every allowable measure for our protection
has been taken, but the religion of Jesus, as you know, forbids me to
resort to poison, the chain, or the spear.  My reign shall not begin
with bloodshed if I can help it.  You know that my good friend the
Commander-in-Chief of the troops, Rainiharo's son, is on our side.
Finding that my cousin went about armed, he recently issued an order
that no one should be allowed to carry arms in the palace.  As I myself
bowed to this order, and submitted to be searched, of course Rambosalama
had no excuse for refusing.  Then, as a precaution, we have concealed
from all except sure friends the orders which, from day to day, have
regulated the movements of the troops.  I have met daily in council
those on whom I can depend, and our course of action is all arranged.
Only one point remains unsettled, and it is that which I ask you to
undertake--for your will is resolute."

"Whatever my Prince requires of me shall be done--if it be not against
the laws of my God," said the Secretary.

Rakota looked pleased with the reply.  "I want you," he said, "to stand
in the passage here, till Rambosalama appears.  He is sure to pass,
being now in the death-chamber, to which I return speedily.  His
followers will be in force in the palace-yard--I hear the multitudes
assembling even now.  When he passes this way it will be to give the
signal of revolt.  You will stop him.  If he resists, use force--you are
strong!  You understand?"

The Secretary looked intelligent, and bowed as the Prince rose and left
him.  Then he hastily sought for and found his friend Ebony, with whom
he had struck up a sort of happy-go-lucky friendship.

Meanwhile the multitudes, who had heard early in the morning that the
Queen was dying, had crowded every street that led to the palace.  Some
had even pressed into the courts in their anxiety to know the truth.
Laxity seemed to prevail among the guards, for many people who carried
weapons ill-concealed in their lambas, and whose looks as well as
movements were suspicious, were allowed to enter.  These were the
partisans of Rambosalama.  Indeed it is probable that even among the
guards themselves there were adherents of the Pretender.

But the faithful Commander-in-Chief was on the alert, and had laid his
plans.  He stood in the chamber of death where the mourners were
weeping.  He watched with keen eye the movements of Rambosalama, and
when that Prince left the room for the purpose of giving the signal to
his followers, he slipped quietly out and gave his counter-signal, which
was the waving of a scarf from a window.  Instantly a trumpet sounded,
and more than a thousand trusty soldiers who had been in waiting marched
into the palace courts.

Hearing the trumpet, the Pretender hastened along the passage that led
to the court.  At the end of it a door opened, and the Secretary,
stepping out, confronted him.

"Well met, Rambosalama," he said, taking his arm in a friendly but firm
way, "I have somewhat to say to you."

"Not now, not now!" exclaimed the other, hastily.  "I am wanted outside!
Another time--"

"No time like the present," interrupted the Secretary, tightening his
grasp, "come this way."

Rambosalama taking alarm, tried to wrench himself free, but the
Secretary was strong.  At the same moment a powerful black hand grasped
the nape of his neck.

"Come now, sar, you go 'long quiet an' comf'r'able an' nobody hurt you.
Dis way.  Das a sweet little chamber for de naughty boys."

With a force that there was no resisting Ebony pushed the prince into a
small room with a very small window.  The door was shut, the key turned,
and the danger was past!

Immediately afterwards the Commander-in-Chief appeared on the balcony of
the palace, announced the Queen's death to the multitude, and, amid
demonstrations of wildest joy, alike from soldiers and people,
proclaimed Rakota King of Madagascar, under the title of Radama the
Second.

In the afternoon of the same day the King presented himself to the
people, arrayed in royal robes, with a crown on his head, and surrounded
by his chief nobles.

So overjoyed were the people at the blessed change from the tyranny of a
cruel woman to the sway of a gentle prince, that it was some time before
they could be quieted.  When silence was obtained, the King, in a few
and simple words, assured his subjects that his great desire was, and
his aim would be, to devote himself to their welfare, and that of the
country over which he had been called to reign.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE LAST.

The vigour with which Prince Rakota put down the attempt at usurpation
was followed by characteristic deeds of leniency and kindness.  Instead
of taking the usual method of savage and semi-civilised rulers to crush
rebellion, he merely banished Rambosalama from the capital, and confined
him in a residence of his own in the country; but no fetters were put on
his limbs, and his wealth was not forfeited, nor was he forbidden to
communicate with his friends.

Moreover, before the sun of that day in 1861 had set, the new King
caused it to be proclaimed far and wide that all his subjects might
depend upon receiving equal protection; that every man was free to
worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience; that the
prison-doors should be thrown open to those who had been condemned for
conscience sake, and their fetters knocked off.  He also sent officers
to announce to those who had been banished to the pestilential districts
that the day of deliverance had come.

To many of these last, of course, the good news came too late for this
life.  Disease, and hard labour and cruel fetters, had done their work;
but the deliverance that came to these was grander and more glorious
than the mere removal of earthly chains and pains.

It was a glad day for Madagascar, and the people of the capital were
wild with joy, for condemned ones who had long been given up as lost,
because enslaved or imprisoned for life, were suddenly restored to
family and friends, while others could entertain the hope that those who
had been long banished would speedily return to them.  Many a house in
the city resounded that day with hymns of praise and thanksgiving that
the tyrant Queen was dead, and that the gentle Prince was crowned.

But the change did not bring equal joy to all.  Some there were whose
smitten hearts could not recover from the crushing blows they had
sustained when the news of loved ones having perished in exile had been
brought to them--though even these felt an impulse of pleasure from
Christian sympathy with the joy of their more fortunate friends.

Among these last was poor Reni-Mamba.  She, being very meek and
submissive, had tried hard to join in the prayer and praise; but her
voice was choked when she attempted to speak, and it quavered sadly when
she tried to sing.

"Oh! if it had only pleased God to spare thee, Mamba--thou crumb of my
life!--my dear, my only son!"  She broke out thus one day when the
sympathetic Ra-Ruth sought to comfort her.  "I was beginning to get over
the loss of his father--it was so many years ago that they took him from
me! and as my boy grew up, the likeness to my Andrianivo was so strong
that I used to try to think it was himself; but--now--both--"

"Are with the Lord, which is far better," said Ra-Ruth, tenderly laying
her hand on Reni's arm.

"You are young to give such comfort," returned Reni, with a sad smile.

"It is not I who give it, but the Lord," returned Ra-Ruth.  "And you
forget, mother, that I am old in experience.  When I stood on the edge
of the Rock of Hurling, that awful day, and saw the dear ones tossed
over one by one, I think that many years passed over my head!"

"True--true," returned the other, "I am a selfish old woman--forgetting
others when I think so much of myself.  Come--let us go to the meeting.
You know that the congregation assembles to-day for the first time after
many, many, years--so many!"

"Yes, mother, I know it.  Indeed I came here partly to ask you to go
with me.  And they say that Totosy, the great preacher, is to speak to
us."

Many others besides these two wended their way to the meeting-house that
day.  Among them was a group in which the reader is perhaps interested.
It consisted of Mark Breezy, John Hockins, Ebony Ginger, Samuel
Ravoninohitriniony, Laihova, and Voalavo.

"Well now, this is the queerest go-to-meetin' that I've had to do with
since I was a babby," remarked Hockins, as he looked from side to side
upon the varied crowd of men and women, black, brown, and yellow, rich
and poor, noble and slave, who were joyfully and noisily thronging to
the house of God!

"Das true,--an' look dar!" said Ebony, pointing to a young woman who was
standing as if thunder-struck before a worn-out, feeble, white-haired
man in tattered garments, with a heavy iron collar on his neck.

Recovering from her surprise, the young woman uttered the word "Father"
with a wild shriek, and rushed into the old man's arms.

"Easy to see that he is a banished one returned unexpectedly," observed
Mark, as the young woman, after the first wild embrace, seized the old
man's arm and hurried him towards the meeting-house, while tears of joy
streamed from her eyes.

And this was not the only case they witnessed, for constantly, during
the days that followed the accession of Radama the Second, exiles were
hastening home,--men and women in rags, worn and wasted with want and
suffering--reappearing in the city to the astonishment and joy of
friends who had supposed them long since dead.  Yes, the long-desired
jubilee had come at last, and not only was there great rejoicing over
those lost and found ones, but also over many who, through the power of
sympathy, were brought at that time to the Saviour and repentance.

Referring to that period, one of those returned exiles writes thus:--

  "On Thursday, 29th August 1861, we that were in concealment appeared.
  Then all the people were astonished when they saw us, that we were
  alive and not yet buried or eaten by the dogs.  And there were a great
  many people desiring to see us, for they considered us as dead, and
  this is what astonished them.  On the 9th of September, those that
  were in fetters came to Antananarivo, but they could not walk on
  account of the weight of the heavy fetters and their weak and feeble
  bodies."

It was a strange gathering, and there were many surprises in the church
that day, and some strange music too, besides that of psalms and hymns
and spiritual songs, for, during the service, several exiles who had
just arrived, hearing what was going on, had hastened to the scene of
reunion without waiting to have their fetters filed off, and entered the
house in clanking chains.

The preacher's duty was one of unusual difficulty, for, besides these
peculiar interruptions and the exclamations of surprised friends, the
sympathy of his own heart nearly choked his utterance more than once.
But Totosy was equal to the occasion.  His heart was on fire, his lips
were eloquent, and the occasion was one of a thousand, never to be
forgotten.  Despite difficulties, he held his audience spell-bound while
he discoursed of the "wonderful words of God" and the shower of blessing
which had begun to fall.

Suddenly, during a momentary pause in the discourse, the clanking of a
very heavy chain was heard, and a man was seen to make his way through
the crowd.  Like Saul, head and shoulders above his fellows, gaunt,
worn, and ragged, he had been standing near the door, not listening,
apparently, to the preacher, but intent on scanning the faces of the
congregation.  Discovering at length what he looked for, he forced his
way to the side of Reni-mamba, sank at her feet, and with a profound
sigh--almost a groan--laid his head upon her lap!

Mamba, grown to a giant, seemed to have come back to her.  But it was
not her son.  It was Andrianivo, her long-lost husband!  For one moment
poor Reni seemed terrified and bewildered, then she suddenly grasped the
man's prematurely grey head in both hands and covered the face with
passionate kisses, uttering every now and then a shriek by way of
relieving her feelings.

Great though the preacher's power was in overcoming the difficulties of
his position, Reni-Mamba's meek spirit, when thus roused, was too much
for him.  He was obliged to stop.  At the same moment the gaunt giant
arose, gathered up Reni in his great arms as if she had been a mere
baby, and, without a word, stalked out of the meeting to the music of
his clanking chains.  A Malagasy cheer burst from the sympathetic
people.

"Praise the Lord!  Let us sing!" shouted the wise Totosy, and in a few
seconds the congregation was letting off its surplus steam in tremendous
and jubilant song, to the ineffable joy of Ebony, who must have burst
out in some other way had not this safety-valve been provided.

But there were more surprises in store for that singular meeting.  After
the sermon the preacher announced that two marriages were about to be
solemnised by him in the simplest manner possible.  "My friends," he
said, "one of the bridegrooms is only half a Malagasy, the other half of
him is English.  He objects to ceremony, and his friend, the other man
to be married, objects to everything that _he_ objects to, and agrees to
everything that _he_ agrees to, which is a very satisfactory state of
mind in a friend; so they are to be married together."

Immediately after this speech Ravonino led forward Rafaravavy, and
Laihova advanced with Ra-Ruth, and these two couples were then and there
united in matrimony.  Radama the Second, and Prince Ramonja, who had
been recalled and reinstated with the Secretary, and Soa, and other
courtiers, graced the wedding with their presence.

From this time, Radama the Second--or Rakota, as we still prefer to call
him--began systematically to undo the mischief which his wicked mother
had done.  He began to build a college; he re-opened the schools
throughout the country which had been closed in the previous reign, and
acted on principles of civil and religions liberty and universal free
trade, while the London Missionary Society--which had sent out the first
Protestant Missionaries in 1818-20--were invited to resume their
beneficent labours in the island--an invitation which, of course, they
gladly accepted, and at once despatched the veteran Mr Ellis, and other
missionaries, to the re-opened field.  _See Note 1_.

But all this, and much more historical matter of great interest, we must
leave untouched, in order that we may wind up the record of our heroes'
fortunes, or misfortunes; as the reader pleases to consider them.

The events which we have described occurred in such rapid succession
that our trio--Mark, Hockins, and Ebony--had scarce found breathing-time
to consider what they should do, now that they were free to do as they
pleased.

"Go home, ob course," said Ebony, when the question was mooted.  "Ain't
my black darlin' awaitin' ob me dar?"

"I incline to the same course," said Mark, "for my--well, I won't say
who, is awaiting me there also."

"Unless she's falled in lub wid some one else, tinkin' you was dead,
massa, you know," suggested Ebony.

"Ditto, says I," answered Hockins, when appealed to, "for, to the best
o' my belief, my old ooman is awaitin' for me, too, over there--he
pointed to England with the stem of his pipe--to say nothin' o' three
thumpin' boys an' a gal--also an old gran'-mother an' a maiden aunt,
etceterer--all awaitin' with great patience, I have no manner o' doubt."

"But how's we to git dar?  Das de question; as Hamblit said to his
moder's ghost."

The question was answered sooner than they expected, for while they were
yet speaking, a summons came from the King commanding the immediate
attendance of the Court Physician.  The object was to offer Mark his
appointment permanently, but Mark respectfully, yet firmly, declined the
honour.

"I feared that," said the King, "for I doubt not that you has friends in
your native home which draws you.  Well, you wishes to go.  I say, `Go
with my good-will.'  There is Breetish ship loading at Tamatave now.  If
you and you's friends mus' go, there be your chance, and I will send you
to Tamatave in palanquins.  We all very sorry you go, for you was useful
to us, and you was be kind--to my mother!"

Of course Mark gladly availed himself of the opportunity, thankfully
accepted the king's offer, and went off to inform his comrades and make
preparation.

It was a sad occasion when they met in the house of their old guide
Ravonino, to spend the last evening with him and Rafaravavy, and
Laihova, and Ra-Ruth, Reni-Mamba and her husband, Voalavo, Soa, Totosy,
the Secretary, and other friends, but it was also a time of pleasant
communing about days that seemed so long past, although so recent.  They
also communed of days to come, and especially of that great day of
reunion in the Better Land.  And intensely earnest was the final prayer
of the native pastor Totosy, as he commended his friends to the loving
care of God.

Next day they set sail for the seaport town of Tamatave.

And here we might appropriately terminate our narrative, for the bright
days that had begun to dawn on Madagascar have never since been darkened
by persecution--though they have not been altogether cloudless or free
from the curse of war; for, with its enormous capacities and important
position, the island has long been a morsel, coveted by some of what men
style the "Great Powers."

But we may not close our tale without at least touching on one dark
spot, the contemplation of which cannot fail to grieve the heart of
every sincere Christian.  Rakota, the gentle, humane, courageous Prince,
who had always favoured, and suffered hardship for, the cause of Christ,
who had shielded and saved many of the Christians at the risk of his own
life, and seemed to be--indeed was--a very pillar in the infant church,
Rakota fell into gross sin and ultimately perished by the assassin's
hand.

We have no right to judge him.  Only this we know, that "the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanseth from _all_ sin;" and if his life and death throw
light upon any passage of Scripture, they seem to bring out in strong
relief the words, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

