"Father," said Henry, cutting the rope that bound him, "you are free at
last!"

Gascoyne started, but before he had time to utter the exclamation of
surprise that sprang to his lips, his hand was seized by the muffled
figure that sat at his side.

"Oh!  Gascoyne, forgive us--forgive _me_!" said Mary Stuart in a
trembling voice.  "I did, indeed, know something of what they meant to
do, but I knew nothing of the cruel violence that these bonds--"

"Violence!" cried Dick Price, "I put it to yourself, Mister Gascoyne, if
I didn't treat ye as if ye wos a lamb?"

"Wot a blissin' it is for a man to git his mouth open agin, and let his
breath go free," cried Jo Bumpus, with a deep sigh.  "Come, Corrie, give
us a cheer--hip! hip! hip!--"

The cheer that followed was stirring and wonderfully harmonious, for it
was given in a deep bass, and a shrill treble, with an intermediate
baritone "Ho!" from Jakolu.

"I know it, Mary, I know it;" said Gascoyne, and there was a slight
tremor in his deep voice as he drew his wife towards him, and laid her
head upon his breast.  "You have never done me an evil turn--you have
done me nothing but good--since you were a little child.  Heaven bless
you, Mary!"

"Now, father," said Henry, "I suppose you have no objection to make your
escape?"

"No need to raise that question, lad," said Gascoyne, with a perplexed
smile.  "I am not quite clear as to what my duty is now that I am free
to go back and again give myself up."

"Go back!--free!" exclaimed John Bumpus in a tone of withering sarcasm.
"So, Mister Gascoyne, ye've got sich an oncommon cargo o' conceit in ye
yet, that you actually think ye could go back without so much as `By
your leave!'"

While Jo was speaking he bared to the shoulder an arm that was the
reverse of infantine, and, holding it up, said slowly--

"I've often had a sort o' desire, d'ye see, to try whether this bit of a
limb or the one that's round Mrs Stuart's waist is the strongest.  Now
if _you_ have any desire to settle this question, just try to shove this
boat's head up into the wind--that's all!"

This was said so emphatically by the pugnacious Bumpus that his
companions laughed, and Corrie cheered in admiration.

"You see," observed Henry, "you need not give yourself any concern as to
this point, you have no option in the matter."

"No, not a bit o' poption in it wotiver--though wot that means I ain't
rightly sure," said Dick Price.

"Perhaps I ought to exercise my parental authority over you, Henry,"
said Gascoyne, "and _command_ you to steer back to Sandy Cove."

"But we wouldn't let him, mister pirate," said Dick Price, who, now that
his difficult duties were over, was preparing to solace himself with a
pipe; an example that was immediately followed by Bumpus, who backed his
friend by adding--

"No more we would."

"Nay, then, if Henry joins me," said Gascoyne, "I think that we two will
not have a bad chance against you three."

"Come, that's good! so _I_ count for nothing," exclaimed Corrie.

"Ha! stick up, lad," observed Bumpus.  "The niggers wot you pitched into
at the mouth o' yon cave didn't think that--eh! didn't they not?"

"Well, well, if Corrie sides with you I feel that my wisest course is to
submit.  And now, Henry," said Gascoyne, resuming his wonted gravity of
tone and demeanour, "sit down here and let me know where we are going to
and what you mean to do.  It is natural that I should feel curious on
these points even although I _have_ perfect confidence in you all."

Henry obeyed, and their voices sank into low tones as they mingled in
earnest converse about their future plans.

Thus did Gascoyne, with his family and friends, leave Sandy Cove in the
dead of that dark night, and sail away over the wide waste of the great
Pacific Ocean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reader, our tale is nearly told.  Like a picture, it contains but a
small portion of the career of those who have so long engaged your
attention, and, I would fain hope, your sympathy.  The life of man may
be comprehensively epitomised almost to a point, or expanded out _ad
infinitum_.  He was born, he died, is its lowest term.  Its highest is
not definable.

Innumerable tomes, of encyclopaedic dimensions, could not contain, much
less exhaust, an account of all that was said and done (and all that
might be said about what was said and done) by our _ci-devant_
sandal-wood trader and his friends.  Yet there are main points, amid the
little details of their career, which it would be unpardonable to pass
over in silence.  To these we shall briefly refer before letting the
curtain fall.

There is a distant isle of the sea, a beautiful spot, an oceanic gem,
which has been reclaimed by the Word of God, from those regions that
have been justly styled "the dark places of the earth."  We will not
mention its name; we will not even indicate its whereabout, lest we
should furnish a clue to the unromantic myrmidons of the law, whose
inflexible justice is only equalled by their pertinacity in tracking the
criminal--to his lair!

On this beautiful isle, at the time of our tale, the churches and houses
of Christian men had begun to rise.  The natives had begun to cultivate
the arts of civilisation, and to appreciate, in some degree, the
inestimable blessings of Christianity.  The plough had torn up the
virgin soil, and the anchors of merchant-ships had begun to kiss the
strand.  The crimes peculiar to civilised men had not yet been
developed.  The place had all the romance and freshness of a flourishing
infant colony.

Early one fine morning, a half-decked boat rowed into the harbour of
this isle, and ran alongside the little quay, where the few natives who
chanced to be lounging there were filled with admiration at the sight of
five stalwart men who leaped upon the rocks, an active lad who held the
boat steady, and a handsome middle-aged woman, who was assisted to land
with much care by the tallest of her five companions.

There were a few small bales of merchandise in the boat.  These being
quickly tossed ashore, one of the natives was asked to shew the way to
the nearest store, where they might be placed in safe keeping.

This done; the largest man of the party, who was clad in the rough
garments of a merchant captain, offered his arm to the female, who was
evidently his wife, and went off in search of the chief magistrate of
the settlement, leaving his companions to look after the boat and smoke
their pipes.

The handsome stranger introduced himself to the magistrate as Mr
Stuart; stated that he intended to settle on the island as a general
merchant, having brought a few bales of merchandise with him; that he
had been bred an engineer and a shipwright, and meant also to work at
his old trade, and concluded by asking for advice and general
information in regard to the state of trade on the island.

After having obtained all the information on these subjects that the
magistrate could give, insomuch that that functionary deemed him a
perfect marvel of catechetical wisdom and agreeable address,--the
stalwart stranger proceeded to inquire minutely into the state of
religion and education among the natives and settlers, and finally left
the charmed magistrate rejoicing in the belief that he was a most
intelligent philanthropist, and would be an inestimable acquisition to
the settlement.

A small trading store was soon built.  The stranger was not a rich man.
He began in a humble way, and sought to eke out his subsistence by doing
the ordinary work of a wright.  In this latter occupation he was ably
assisted by his stout son, Henry; for the duties of the store were
attended to chiefly by the lad Corrie, superintended by Mr Stuart.

The mysterious strangers were a source of much gossip and great
speculation, of course, to the good people of Green Isle, (as we shall
style this gem of the Pacific, in order to thwart the myrmidons of the
law!)  They found them so reserved and uncommunicative, however, on the
subject of their personal affairs, that the most curious gossip in the
settlement at last gave up speculating in despair.

In other respects, the new family were noted for kindliness and
urbanity.  Mrs Stuart, especially, became an intimate friend of the
missionary who dwelt there, and one of his hardest-working parishioners.
Mr Stuart also became his friend; but the stern gravity of
countenance, and reserved, though perfectly well-bred and even kindly
manner of the stranger forbade close intimacy.  He was a most regular
attender at church, not only on Sundays but at the weekly
prayer-meetings and occasional festivals, and the missionary noticed
that his Bible looked as if it were a well-thumbed one.

At first the two seamen, whom people soon found out, were named
respectively Jo and Dick, wrought in the wright's workshop, and at all
kinds of miscellaneous jobs; besides making frequent and sometimes long
voyages in their boat to the neighbouring islands.  As time flew by
things seemed to prosper with the merchant.  The keel of a little
schooner was laid.  Father, and son, and seamen (as well as the native
servant, who was called Jako) toiled at this vessel incessantly until
she was finished--then, Henry was placed in command of her, Jo and Dick
were appointed first and second mates, two or three natives completed
the crew, and she went to sea under the somewhat peculiar name of the
_Avenger_.

This seemed to be the first decided advance in the fortunes of the new
family.  Business increased in a wonderful way.  The _Avenger_ returned
again and again to the Green Isle laden with rich and varied commodities
for the successful merchant.  In course of time the old store was taken
down, and a new one built; the _Avenger_ was sold, and a large brig
purchased, the rather pretty name of which--"_Evening Star_"--was
erased, and the mysterious word _Avenger_ put in its place.  Everything,
in short, betokened that Mr Stuart was on the high road to fortune.

But there were some mysteries connected with the merchant which sorely
puzzled the wisest heads in the place, and which would have puzzled
still wiser heads had they been there.  Although it soon became quite
evident to the meanest capacity that Mr Stuart was the richest man on
the island; yet he and his family continued to occupy the poor, shabby,
little, ill-furnished cottage which they had erected with their own
hands when they first landed, and although they sold the finest silks
and brocades to the wives and daughters of the other wealthy settlers,
they themselves wore only the plainest and most sombre fabrics that
consisted with respectability.

People would have called them a family of misers, but for their goodness
of character in other respects, and for the undeniable fact that they
were by far the most liberal contributors to the church and to the
poor--not only in their own island, but in all the other islands around
them.

Another thing that puzzled the mercantile men of the place extremely was
the manner in which Mr Stuart kept his books of business.  They soon
began to take note that he kept two ledgers and two distinct sets of
books--the one set small, the other set very bulky.  Some of the more
audacious among his customers ventured to peep over his shoulder, and
discovered that the small set contained nothing but entries of boats
made, and repairs to shipping executed, and work connected exclusively
with the shipwright department of his business--while the large books
contained entries of those silks, and sugars, and teas, and spices,
etcetera, which turned so much gold into his coffers.

It thus became evident to these men of business that the merchant kept
the two departments quite separate, in order to ascertain the distinct
profits on each.  They were the more amazed at this when they considered
that the shipwright work must necessarily be a mere driblet, altogether
unworthy the attention of one so wealthy.  But that which amazed them
most of all was, that such a man, in such circumstances, could waste his
time in doing with his own hands the work of an ordinary mechanic--thus
(as they concluded) entailing on himself the necessity of devoting much
of the night to his more lucrative concern.

These long-headed men of business little knew the man.  They did not
know that he was _great_ in the highest sense of the term, and that,
among other elements of his greatness, he possessed the power of seizing
the little things--the little opportunities--of life, and turning them
to the best account; that he not only knew what should be done, and how
to do it, but was gifted with that inflexible determination of purpose
to carry out a design, without which knowledge and talent can never
accomplish great things.  The merchant did not, as they supposed, work
late at night.  He measured his time, and measured his work.  In this he
was like many other men in this struggling world; but he _stuck_ to his
time and to his work, in which respect he resembled the great few whose
names stand prominent on the page of history.

In consequence of this, Mr Stuart wrought with success at both
departments of his business, and while in the one he coined thousands,
in the other he earned more than the average wages of a working man.

The _Avenger_ was erratic and uncertain in her voyages.  She evidently
sailed to the principal islands of the South Seas, and did business with
them all.  From one of these voyages, Henry, her captain, returned with
a wife--a dark-haired, dark-eyed, ladylike girl--for whom he built a
small cottage beside his father's, and left her there while he was away
at sea.

It was observed by the clerks in Mr Stuart's counting-room, that their
chief accountant, Mr Corrie, was a great letter writer--that when one
letter was finished, he invariably began another, and kept it by him,
adding sheet after sheet to it until the _Avenger_ returned and carried
it off.  Once Mr Corrie was called hurriedly away while in the act of
addressing one of these epistles.  He left it lying on his desk, and a
small, contemptible, little apprentice allowed his curiosity so far to
get the better of him, that he looked at the address, and informed his
companions that Mr Corrie's correspondent was a certain Miss Alice
Mason!

Of course, Mr Corrie received voluminous replies from this mysterious
Alice; and, if one might judge from his expression on reading these
epistles, (as that contemptible little apprentice _did_ judge,) the
course of _his_ love ran smoother than usual; thus, by its
exceptionality, proving the truth of the rule.

Years passed away.  The merchant's head became grey, but his gigantic
frame was as straight and his step as firm as ever.  His wife, strange
to say, looked younger as she grew older!  It seemed as if she were
recovering from some terrible illness that had made her prematurely old,
and were now renewing her youth.  The business prospered to such an
extent that, by becoming altogether too wonderful, it ceased to be a
matter of wonder altogether to the merchants of the Green Isle.  They
regarded it as semi-miraculous--the most unprecedented case of "luck"
that had ever been heard of in the annals of mercantile history.

But the rich merchant still dwelt in the humble, almost mean, cottage,
and still wrought as an engineer and shipwright with his own hands.

In the little cottage beside his own there were soon seen (and _heard_)
three stout children, two boys and a girl, the former being named
respectively Gascoyne and Henry, the latter, Mary.  It is needless to
say that these were immense favourites with the eccentric merchant.

During all this time there was a firm in Liverpool which received
periodical remittances of money from an unknown source.  The cashier of
that firm, a fat little man, with a face like a dumpling and a nose like
a cherry, lived, as it were, in a state of perpetual amazement in regard
to these remittances.  They came regularly, from apparently nowhere,
were acknowledged to nobody, and amounted, in the course of time, to
many thousands.  This firm had, some years previously, lost a fine
vessel.  She was named the _Brilliant_; had sailed for the South Sea
islands with a rich cargo, and was never more heard of.  The fat cashier
knew the loss sustained by this vessel to a penny.  He had prepared and
calculated all the papers and sent duplicates on board, and as he had a
stake in the venture he never forgot the amount of the loss sustained.

One day the firm received a remittance from the Unknown, with a note to
the following effect at the foot of it:--"This is the last remittance on
account of the _Brilliant_.  The value of the cargo, including compound
interest, and the estimated value of the vessel, have now been repaid to
the owners."

The fat cashier was thunderstruck!  He rushed to his ledger, examined
the account, calculated the interest, summed up the whole, and found it
correct.  He went home to bed and fell sound asleep in amazement; awoke
in amazement; went back to the office in amazement; worked on day after
day in amazement; lived, and eventually died, in a state of unrelieved
amazement in regard to this incomprehensible transaction!

About the same time that this occurred Mr Stuart entered his poor
cottage, and finding his wife there, said--

"Mary, I have sent off the last remittance to-day.  I have made amends
for that evil deed.  It has cost me a long and hard struggle to realise
the thousands of pounds that were requisite; for some of the goods had
got damaged by damp in the cavern of the Isle of Palms, but the profits
of my engineering and shipwright business have increased of late, and I
have managed to square it all off with interest.  And now, Mary, I can
do no more.  If I knew of any others who have suffered at my hands I
would restore what I took tenfold--but I know of none.  It therefore
remains that I should work this business for the good of mankind.  Of
all the thousands that have passed through my hands I have not used one
penny.  You know that I have always kept the business that has grown out
of the labour of my own hands distinct from that which has been reared
on the stolen goods.  I have lived and supported you by it, and now,
through God's blessing, it has increased to such an extent that I think
we may afford to build a somewhat more commodious house and furnish it a
little better."

"As for the mercantile business--it _must_ go on.  It has prospered and
still prospers.  Many mouths are dependent on it for daily bread.  I
will continue to manage it, but every penny of profit shall go in
charity as long as I live.  After that, Henry may do with it as he
pleases.  He has contributed largely to make it what it is, and deserves
to reap where he has sown so diligently.  Do you think I am right in all
this, Mary?"

We need scarcely remark that Mary did think it all right, for she and
Gascoyne had no differences of opinion _now_.

Soon after this, Corrie went off on a long voyage in the _Avenger_.  The
vessel touched at San Francisco, and, while there, some remarkable
scenes took place between Jo Bumpus and a good-looking woman whom he
called Susan.  This female ultimately went on board the _Avenger_, and
sailed in her for Green Isle.

On the way thither they touched at one of the first of the South Sea
islands that they came in sight of, where scenes of the most
unprecedented description took place between Corrie and a bluff old
gentleman named Ole Thorwald, and a sweet, blue-eyed, fair-haired,
maiden named Alice Mason!

Strange to say this fair girl agreed to become a passenger in the
_Avenger_; and, still more strange to say, her father and Ole Thorwald
agreed to accompany her, also an ancient piece of animated door-matting
called Toozle and a black woman named Poopy, whose single observation in
regard to every event in sublunary history was, "Hee! hee!"

On reaching Green Isle, Corrie and Alice were married, and on the same
day Bumpus and Susan were also united.  There was great rejoicing on the
occasion; Ole Thorwald and Dick Price distinguished themselves by
dancing an impromptu and maniacal _pas de deux_ at the double wedding!

Of Captain Montague's future career we know nothing.  He may have been
killed in the wars of his country, or he may have become an admiral in
the British navy, for all we know to the contrary.  One thing only we
are certain of, and that is, that he sailed for England in the pirate
schooner, and seemed by no means to regret the escape of the pirate
captain!
