

                LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

                         OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

                          WOODVILLE STORIES.

         _16mo. Handsomely Illustrated. In sets or separate._

                     *      *      *      *      *

RICH AND HUMBLE; or, the Mission of Bertha Grant. $1.25.

"No author is more welcomed by the young, and no books can be more
safely placed in their hands. His writings, as in this volume of 'Rich
and Humble,' inspire the reader with a lofty purpose. They show the
wrong courses of life only to present, by contrast, the true and right
path, and make it the way which youth will wish to walk in, because of
its being the most pleasant and inviting."--_Mass. Teacher._


IN SCHOOL AND OUT; or, The Conquest of Richard Grant. $1.25.

"Oliver Optic is as well known and as highly appreciated among the
young people of our land as Charles Dickens is among the older folks.
'In School and Out' is equal to anything he has written. It is a story
that will deeply interest boys particularly, and make them,
better."--_Notices of the Press._


WATCH AND WAIT: or, The Young Fugitives. $1.25.

The author has used, to the best advantage, the many exciting incidents
that naturally attend the career of a fugitive slave, and the seeds
that he may sow in youthful hearts will perhaps bear a hundred-fold.


WORK AND WIN; or, Noddy Newman on a Cruise. $1.25.

"A nautical story of adventure and endurance, written to delineate the
upward progress of a boy whose moral attributes were of the lowest
order, in consequence of neglected education, but in whom high
religious principles were afterwards developed."--_Notices of the
Press._


HOPE AND HAVE; or, Fanny Grant among the Indians. $1.25.

"This is a story of Western adventure and of peril among the Indians,
and contains the experience of Fanny Grant, who, from a very naughty
girl, became a very good one, by the influence of a pure and beautiful
example exhibited by an erring child, in the hour of her greatest
wandering from the path of virtue."--_Philadelphia Age._


HASTE AND WASTE; or, The Young Pilot of Lake Champlain. $1.25.

"This is a story of boyish daring and integrity upon Lake Champlain,
and older heads than those of sixteen may read and profit by it."


The stories in the "Woodville" series are hinged together only so far
as the same characters have been retained in each.

Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of
price.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                  LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




                LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

                         OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

                         ARMY AND NAVY STORIES.

                     *      *      *      *      *

THE SOLDIER BOY; or, Tom Somers in the Army. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

"This is a story of the rebellion, narrating the adventures of a
patriotic youth, who left the comforts of home to share the dangers of
the field. He is carried through several battles, and for a while
shared the hospitalities of the rebels as a prisoner. The story is true
to history, giving in the form of personal adventure correct accounts
of many stirring scenes of the war."--_Hartford Courant._


THE SAILOR BOY; or, Jack Somers in the Navy. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

"Jack is the brother of Tom, the Soldier Boy, whose adventures in the
army were so much enjoyed. We have only to repeat that there are few
better stories for boys than these of Mr. Adams'. Always bright and
even sparkling with animation, the story never drags; there are no
stupid tasks or tiresome descriptions; the boys whose characters are
drawn are real boys, impulsive, with superabundant animal life, and the
heroes are manly, generous, healthy creations."--_Hartford Press._


THE YOUNG LIEUTENANT; or, The Adventures of an Army Officer. 16mo.
Illustrated. $1.50.

"The Young Lieutenant" is a sequel to "The Soldier Boy," and carries
the reader through the stormy scenes of the rebellion, creates Thomas
Somers an officer, and as such he performs much difficult work in the
rebellion.


YANKEE MIDDY; or, Adventures of a Naval Officer. 16mo. Illustrated.
$1.50.

"The incidents of the story are those which have occurred on the ocean,
and on the bays, inlets, and rivers of the South, common in the
experience of all our naval officers who have been actively employed
during the war."--_Notices of the Press._


FIGHTING JOE; or, The Fortunes of a Staff Officer. 16mo. Illustrated.
$1.50.

"The description of battles and sieges, of picket and skirmishing, of
camp life and marching, are wrought out with thrilling detail, making
the story truly fascinating; while, in connection with this, useful and
practical information respecting men and places is conveyed, and a
proper spirit of morality and patriotism inculcated."--_Notices of
the Press._


BRAVE OLD SALT; or, Life on the Quarter-Deck. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

A book of adventure, of personal experience, describing a living hero,
and exhibiting the great truth that, by fidelity of conscience,
country, and God, earthly and heavenly blessings are secured.


Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid,
on receipt of price.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                  LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




                LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

                         OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

                          STARRY FLAG SERIES.

       _Each volume handsomely illustrated. In sets or separate._

                     *      *      *      *      *

THE STARRY FLAG; or, the Young Fisherman of Cape Ann. $1.25.

"The early history of Levi Fairfield, the boy hero of this volume, as
it is graphically traced by Oliver Optic, will be apt to hold
boy-readers spell-bound. His manly virtue, his determined character,
his superiority to mean vice, his industry, and his stirring
adventures, will suggest good lessons for imitation."--_Presbyterian._


BREAKING AWAY; or, the Fortunes of a Student. $1.25.

"In this volume Oliver Optic opens the school-room door, and shows the
nature, construction, and workings of the school system; its lights and
shadows; its discipline, and the serious consequences that come from
want of discipline."--_Patriot._


SEEK AND FIND; or, the Adventures of a Smart Boy. $1.25.

Earnest Thornton, the "smart boy" of this story, is a clear headed,
well intentioned, plucky boy, that has a high aim and means right even
where he is wrong, and his adventures will be read with interest.


FREAKS OF FORTUNE; or, Half around the World,--a sequel to "The Starry
Flag." $1.25.

"The adventures of Levi Fairfield, the noble young Captain of the
Starry Flag, excited such an interest among the young folks that the
continuance of his story was called for, with which demand the ever
ready author has complied, with a story equally attractive and
interesting."


MAKE OR BREAK; or, the Rich Man's Daughter. $1.25.

"This is a lively, stirring volume, full of interest and instruction
from one cover to the other. Just the book a smart, wide-awake boy will
enjoy intensely."--_Press._


DOWN THE RIVER; or, Buck Bradford and his Tyrants. $1.25.

"These stories are not only written in a manner well calculated to
enchain the attention of young readers, but teach at the same time such
important lessons of sobriety, industry and cheerfulness, that we
should like to see them in the hands of every boy in the land."--_Galesburg
Free Press._


Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid,
on receipt of price.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                  LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




                LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                       VACATION STORY BOOKS.

        6 volumes. Each volume handsomely illustrated. 80 cents.

WORTH NOT WEALTH.
  COUNTRY LIFE.
    THE CHARM.
      KARL KEIGLER.
        WALTER SEYTON.
          HOLIDAYS AT CHESTNUT HILL.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                      ROSY DIAMOND STORY BOOKS.

        6 volumes. Each volume handsomely illustrated. 80 cents.

THE GREAT ROSY DIAMOND.
  DAISY; or, The Fairy Spectacles.
    VIOLET: A Fairy Story.
      MINNIE; or, The Little Woman.
        THE ANGEL CHILDREN.
          LITTLE BLOSSOM'S REWARD.

These volumes are finely and profusely illustrated from designs by
Hoppin and other eminent artists. They are elegantly bound, and neatly
packed in ornamental boxes. As gifts for holidays and birthdays, where
a uniform value and appearance is desired, they are excellent.

                     *      *      *      *      *

_Mrs. Madeline Leslie's Books._

                        PLAY AND STUDY SERIES.

        4 volumes. Each volume illustrated. Price, $1.50.

PLAY AND STUDY.
  THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
    HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
      JACK, THE CHIMNEY-SWEEP.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                        LITTLE AGNES' LIBRARY.

        4 volumes. Each volume illustrated. Price, $1.50.

LITTLE AGNES.
  TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
    I'LL TRY.
      ART AND ARTLESSNESS.

For family reading and Sabbath School libraries there are no better
books written than these by Mrs. Leslie. With attractive and interesting
stories are mingled wholesome truths and moral lessons. Of all these
books large editions have been printed, and they may be found largely
circulated in Sabbath Schools.


Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid,
on receipt of price.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                  LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




                LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

                         SOPHIE MAY'S BOOKS.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                        LITTLE PRUDY STORIES.

_Six volumes. Illustrated. In Sets or separate. Per volume, 75 cents._

LITTLE PRUDY.
  LITTLE PRUDY'S Sister Susy.
    LITTLE PRUDY'S Captain Horace.
      LITTLE PRUDY'S Cousin Grace.
        LITTLE PRUDY'S Story Book.
          LITTLE PRUDY'S Dotty Dimple.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                       DOTTY DIMPLE STORIES.

By the author of "Little Prudy Stories."

_Six volumes. Illustrated. In Sets or separate. Per volume, 75 cents._

DOTTY DIMPLE at her Grandmother's.
  DOTTY DIMPLE at Home.
    DOTTY DIMPLE out West.
      DOTTY DIMPLE at Play.
        DOTTY DIMPLE at School.
          DOTTY DIMPLE'S Flyaway.

Read the high commendation of the _North American Review_, which
places Sophie May's Books at the

                   Head of Juvenile Literature.

"Genius comes in with 'Little Prudy.' Compared with her, all other
book-children are cold creations of Literature only; she alone is the
real thing. All the quaintness of childhood, its originality, its
tenderness and its teasing,--its infinite, unconscious drollery, the
serious earnestness of its fun, the fun of its seriousness, the natural
religion of its plays, and the delicious oddity of its prayers,--all
these waited for dear Little Prudy to embody them. Sam Weller is not
more piquant; Hans Anderson's nutcrackers and knitting-needles are not
more thoroughly charged with life. There are six little green volumes
in the series, and of course other _dramatis personae_ must figure; but
one eagerly watches for every reappearance of Prudy, as one watches at
the play for Owens or Warren to re-enter upon the stage. Who is our
benefactress in the authorship of these books, the world knows not.
Sophie May must doubtless be a fancy name, by reason of the spelling,
and we have only to be grateful that the author did not inflict on us
the customary alliteration in her pseudonyme. The rare gift of
delineating childhood is hers, and may the line of 'Little Prudy' go
out to the end of the earth.... To those oversaturated with
transatlantic traditions we recommend 'Little Prudy."


Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid,
on receipt of price.

                     *      *      *      *      *

                  LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




The only Original Illustrated Juvenile Magazine published Once a Week.

                      OLIVER OPTIC'S MAGAZINE,

                         OUR BOYS AND GIRLS,

                 EVERY WEEK. EDITED BY OLIVER OPTIC,

Who writes for no other Juvenile Publication, and who contributes

                    Four Serial Stories Every Year,

The cost of which, in book form, would be $5.00,--double the subscription
price of the Magazine. Every number contains part of a new Story by
Oliver Optic, illustrated by designs from the best artists, headed by
Thomas Nast, the great American Artist. Then follow

                          Poems and Stories

By other well-known authors, who know how to write for Young Folks.

                             The Orator,

