[Sidenote: Battle of Waterloo.]

On the 18th of June was performed the last sad act of the great
tragedy which had for twenty years convulsed Europe with blood and
tears. All the combatants on that eventful day understood the nature
of the contest, and the importance of the battle. At Waterloo,
Napoleon staked his last throw in the desperate game he had hazarded,
and lost it; and was ruined, irrevocably and forever.

Little signified his rapid flight, his attempt to defend Paris, or his
readiness to abdicate in favor of his son. The allied powers again, on
the 7th of July, entered Paris, and the Bourbon dynasty was restored.

Napoleon retired to Rochefort, hoping to escape his enemies and reach
America. It was impossible. He then resolved to throw himself upon the
generosity of the English. He was removed to St. Helena, where he no
longer stood a chance to become the scourge of the nations. And there,
on that lonely island, in the middle of the ocean, guarded most
effectually by his enemies, his schemes of conquest ended. He
supported his hopeless captivity with tolerable equanimity, showing no
signs of remorse for the injuries he had inflicted, but meditating
profoundly on the mistakes he had committed, and conjecturing vainly
on the course he might have adopted for the preservation of his power.

How idle were all his conjectures and meditations! His fall was
decreed in the councils of Heaven, and no mortal strength could have
prevented his overthrow. His mission of blood was ended; and his
nation, after its bitter humiliation, was again to enjoy repose. But
he did not live in vain. He lived as a messenger of divine vengeance
to chastise the objects of divine indignation. He lived to show to the
world what a splendid prize human energy could win; and yet to show
how vain, after all, was military glory, and how worthless is the
enjoyment of any victory purchased by the sufferings of mankind. He
lived to point the melancholy moral, that war, for its own sake, is a
delusion, a mockery, and a snare, and that the greater the elevation
to which unlawful ambition can raise a man, the greater will be his
subsequent humiliation; that "pride goeth before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall."

[Sidenote: Reflections on Napoleon's Fall.]

The allied sovereigns of Europe insisted on the restoration of the
works of art which Napoleon had pillaged. "The bronzed horses, brought
from Corinth to Rome, again resumed their old station in the front of
the Church of St. Mark; the Transfiguration was restored to the
Vatican; the Apollo and the Laocoon again adorned St. Peter's; the
Venus was enshrined with new beauty at Florence; and the Descent from
the Cross was replaced in the Cathedral of Antwerp." By the treaty
which restored peace to Europe for a generation, the old dominions of
Austria, Prussia, Russia, Spain, Holland, and Italy were restored, and
the Bourbons again reigned over the ancient provinces of France.
Popular liberty on the continent of Europe was entombed, and the
dreams of revolutionists were unrealized; but suffering proved a
beneficial ordeal, and prepared the nations of Europe to appreciate,
more than ever, the benefits and blessings of peace.

       *       *       *       *       *

     REFERENCES.--The most complete work, on the whole, though
     full of faults, and very heavy and prosaic, is Alison's
     History of the French Revolution. Scott's Life of Napoleon
     was too hastily written, and has many mistakes. No English
     author has done full justice to Napoleon. Thiers's Histories
     are invaluable. Napier's History of the Peninsula War is
     masterly. Wellington's Despatches are indispensable only to
     a student. Botta's History of Italy under Napoleon.
     Dodsley's Annual Register. Labaume's Russian Campaign.
     Southey's Peninsular War. Liborne's Waterloo Campaign.
     Southey's Life of Nelson. Sherer's Life of the Duke of
     Wellington. Gifford's Life of Pitt. Moore's Life of Sir John
     Moore. James's Naval History. Memoirs of the Duchess
     d'Abrantes. Berthier's Histoire de l'Expedition d'Egypte.
     Schlosser's Modern History. The above works are the most
     accessible, but form but a small part of those which have
     appeared concerning the French Revolution and the career of
     Napoleon. For a complete list of original authorities, see
     the preface of Alison, and the references of Thiers.




CHAPTER XXXII.

EUROPE ON THE FALL OF NAPOLEON.


[Sidenote: Complexity of Modern History.]

It would be interesting to trace the history of the civilized world
since the fall of Napoleon; but any attempt to bring within the limits
of a history like this a notice of the great events which have
happened for thirty-five years, would be impossible. And even a notice
as extended as that which has been presented of the events of three
hundred years would be unsatisfactory to all minds. The common reader
is familiar with the transactions of the present generation, and
reflections on them would be sure to excite the prejudices of various
parties and sects. A chronological table of the events which have
transpired since the downfall of Napoleon is all that can be
attempted. The author contemplates a continuation of this History,
which will present more details, collected from original authorities.
The history of the different American States, since the Revolution;
the administration of the various presidents; the late war with Great
Britain; the Seminole and Mexican wars; the important questions
discussed by Congress; the contemporary history of Great Britain under
George IV., William IV., and Victoria; the conquests in India and
China; the agitations of Ireland; the great questions of Reform,
Catholic Emancipation, Education, and Free Trade; the French wars in
Africa; the Turkish war; the independence of the Viceroy of Egypt; the
progress of Russian territorial aggrandizement; the fall of Poland;
the Spanish rebellion; the independence of the South American states;
the Dutch and Belgic war; the two last French revolutions; the great
progress made in arts and sciences, and the various attempts in
different nations to secure liberty;--these, and other great subjects,
can only be properly discussed in a separate work, and even then
cannot be handled by any one, however extraordinary his talents or
attainments, without incurring the imputation of great audacity, which
only the wants of the public can excuse.

In concluding the present History, a very brief notice of the state of
the civilized world at the fall of Napoleon may be, perhaps, required.

[Sidenote: Remarkable Men of Genius.]

England suffered less than any other of the great powers from the
French Revolution. A great burden was, indeed, entailed on future
generations; but the increase of the national debt was not felt so
long as English manufactures were purchased, to a great extent, by the
Continental States. Six hundred million pounds were added to the
national debt; but England, internally, was never more flourishing
than during this long war of a quarter of a century. And not only was
glory shed around the British throne by the victories of Nelson and
Wellington, and the effectual assistance which England rendered to the
continental powers, and without which the liberties of Europe would
have been subverted, but, during the reign of George III., a splendid
constellation of men of genius, in literature and science, illuminated
the world. Dr. Johnson made moral reflections on human life which will
ever instruct mankind; Burke uttered prophetic oracles which even his
age was not prepared to appreciate; and his rivals thundered in the
senate with an eloquence and power not surpassed by the orators of
antiquity; Gibbon wrote a history which such men as Guizot and Milman
pronounced wonderful both for art and learning; Hume, Reid, and
Stewart, carried metaphysical inquiry to its utmost depth; Gray,
Burns, Goldsmith, Coleridge, Southey, and Wordsworth, were not
unworthy successors of Dryden and Pope; Adam Smith called into
existence the science of political economy, and nearly brought it to
perfection in a single lifetime; Reynolds and West adorned the
galleries with pictures which would not have disgraced the land of
artists; while scholars, too numerous to mention, astonished the world
by the extent of their erudition; and divines, in language which
rivalled the eloquence of Chrysostom or Bossuet, declared to an
awakened generation the duties and destinies of man.

France, the rival of England, was not probably permanently injured by
the Revolution; for, if millions of lives were sacrificed, and
millions of property were swept away, still important civil and social
privileges were given to the great mass of the people, and odious
feudal laws and customs were broken forever. All the glory which war
can give, was obtained; and France, for twenty years, was feared and
respected. Popular liberty was not secured; but advances were made
towards it, and great moral truths were impressed upon the nation,--to
be again disregarded, but not to be forgotten. The territorial limits
of France were not permanently enlarged, and the conquests of Napoleon
were restored to the original rulers. The restoration of the former
political system was insisted upon by the Holy Alliance, and the
Bourbon kings, in regaining their throne, again possessed all that
their ancestors had enjoyed but the possession of the hearts of the
people. The allied powers may have restored despotism and legitimacy
for a while; they could not eradicate the great ideas of the
Revolution, and these were destined once more to overturn their
thrones. The reigns of Louis XVIII., Charles X., and Louis Philippe
were but different acts of the long tragedy which was opened by the
convocation of the States General, and which is not probably closed by
the election of Prince Louis Napoleon to the presidency of the French
republic. The _ideas_ which animated La Fayette and Moreau, and which
Robespierre and Napoleon at one time professed, still live, in spite
of all the horrors of the Reign of Terror, and all the streams of
blood which flowed at Leipsic and Waterloo. Notwithstanding the
suicidal doctrines of Socialists and of the various schools of infidel
philosophers, and in view of all the evils which papal despotism, and
democratic license, and military passions have inflicted, and will
continue to inflict, still the immortal principles of liberty are safe
under the protection of that Providence which has hitherto advanced
the nations of Europe from the barbarism and paganism of ancient
Teutonic tribes.

[Sidenote: Condition of Germany.]

Germany suffered the most, and apparently reaped the least, from the
storms which revolutionary discussion had raised. Austria and Prussia
were invaded, pillaged, and humiliated. Their cities were sacked,
their fields were devastated, and the blood of their sons was poured
out like water. But sacrifice and suffering developed extraordinary
virtues and energies, united the various states, and gave nationality
to a great confederation. The struggles of the Germans were honorable
and gigantic, and proved to the world the impossibility of the
conquest of states, however afflicted, when they are resolved to
defend their rights. The career of Napoleon demonstrated the
impossibility of a universal empire in Europe, and least of all, an
empire erected over the prostrated thrones and discomfited armies of
Germany. The Germans learned the necessity and the duty of union, and
proved the strength of their sincere love for their native soil and
their venerable institutions. The Germans, though poor in gold and
silver, showed that they were rich in patriotic ardor, and in all
those glorious sentiments which ennoble a great and progressive
nation. After twenty years' contention, and infinite sacrifices and
humiliations, the different princes of Germany recovered their ancient
territorial possessions, and were seated, more firmly than before on
the thrones which legitimacy had consecrated.

[Sidenote: Condition of Other Powers.]

Absolute monarchy was restored also to Spain; but the imbecile
Bourbons, the tools of priests and courtiers, revived the ancient
principles of absolutism and bigotry, without any of those virtues
which make absolutism respectable or bigotry endurable. But in the
breasts of Spanish peasants the fires of liberty burned, which all the
terrors of priestly rule, and all the evils of priestly corruption,
could not quench. They, thus far, have been unfortunate, but no person
who has studied the elements of the Spanish character, or has faith in
the providence of God, can doubt that the day of deliverance will,
sooner or later, come, unless he has the misfortune to despair of any
permanent triumph of liberty in our degenerate world.

In the northern kingdoms of Europe, no radical change took place; and
Italy, the land of artists, so rich in splendid recollections, so poor
in all those blessings which we are taught to value, returned to the
dominion of Austria, and to the rule of despotic priests. Italy,
disunited, abandoned, and enslaved, has made generous efforts to
secure what is enjoyed in more favored nations, but hitherto in vain.
So slow is the progress of society! so hard are the struggles to which
man is doomed! so long continued are the efforts of any people to
secure important privileges!

Greece made, however, a more successful effort, and the fetters of the
Turkish sultan were shaken off. The Ottoman Porte looked, with its
accustomed indifference, on the struggles of the Christians, and took
no active part in the war until absolutely forced. But it looked with
the indifference of decrepit age, rather than with the philosophical
calmness of mature strength, and exerted all the remaining energies it
possessed to prevent the absorption of the state in the vast and
increasing empire of the czars. Russia, of all the great powers which
embarked in the contest to which we have alluded, arose the strongest
from defeat and disaster. The rapid aggrandizement of Russia
immediately succeeded the fall of Napoleon.

The spiritual empire of the Popes was again restored, and the Jesuits,
with new powers and privileges, were sent into all the nations of the
earth to uphold the absolutism of their great head. Again they have
triumphed when their cause seemed hopeless; nor is it easy to predict
the fall of their empire. So long as the principle of Evil shall
contend with the principle of Good, the popes will probably rejoice
and weep at alternate victories and defeats.

[Sidenote: The United States of America.]

The United States of America were too far removed from the scene of
conflict to be much affected by the fall of thrones. Moreover, it was
against the wise policy of the government to interfere with foreign
quarrels. But the American nation beheld the conflict with any
feelings but those of indifference, and, while its enlightened people
speculated on the chances of war, they still devoted themselves with
ardor to the improvement of their institutions, to agriculture, and
manufacturing interests. Merchants, for a while, made their fortunes
by being the masters of the carrying trade of the world, and the
nation was quietly enriched. The wise administrations of Washington,
Adams, Jefferson, and Madison, much as they conflicted, in some
respects, with each other, resulted in the growth of commerce,
manufactures, agriculture, and the arts; while institutions of
literature and religion took a deep hold of the affections of the
people. The country increased and spread with unparalleled rapidity on
all sides, and the prosperity of America was the envy and the
admiration of the European world. The encroachments of Great Britain,
and difficulties which had never been settled, led to a war between
the two countries, which, though lamented at the time, is now viewed,
by all parties, as resulting in the ultimate advancement of the United
States in power and wealth, as well as in the respect of foreign
nations. Great questions connected with the rapid growth of the
country, unfortunately at different times, have produced acrimonious
feelings between different partisans; but the agitation of these has
not checked the growth of American institutions, or weakened those
sentiments of patriotism and mutual love, which, in all countries and
ages, have constituted the glory and defence of nations. The greatness
of American destinies is now a favorite theme with popular orators.
Nor is it a vain subject of speculation. Our banner of Liberty will
doubtless, at no distant day, wave over all the fortresses which may
be erected on the central mountains of North America, or on the shores
of its far distant oceans; but all national aggrandizement will be in
vain without regard to those sacred principles of law, religion, and
morality, for which, in disaster and sorrow, both Puritan Settler and
Revolutionary Hero contended. The believer in Progress, as affected by
influences independent of man, as coming from the benevolent
Providence which thus far has shielded us, cannot otherwise than hope
for a still loftier national elevation than has been yet attained,
with all the aid of circumstances, and all the energies of heroes.




APPENDIX.




CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE

FROM THE FALL OF NAPOLEON.


     1815.--Battle of Waterloo, (June 18.) Napoleon embarks for
     St. Helena, (August 7.) Final Treaty at Paris between the
     Allied Powers, (November 20.) Inauguration of the King of
     Holland. First Steam Vessels on the Thames.

     1816.--Great Agricultural distress in Great Britain. Brazil
     declared a Kingdom. Consolidation of the Exchequers of
     England and Ireland. Marriage of the Princess Charlotte with
     Prince Leopold.

     1817.--Disorders in Spain. Renewal of the Bill for the
     suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. Inauguration of
     President Monroe. Death of the Princess Charlotte. Death of
     Curran.

     1818.--Entire Withdrawal of Foreign Forces from France.
     Seminole War. Great Discussions in Parliament on the Slave
     Trade. Death of Warren Hastings, of Lord Ellenborough, and
     of Sir Philip Francis.

     1819.--Great depression of Trade and Manufactures in Great
     Britain. Great Reform meetings in Manchester, Leeds, and
     other large Towns, Lord John Russell's Motion for a Reform
     in Parliament. Organized bands of robbers in Spain.
     Settlement of the Pindarrie War in India. Assassination of
     Kotzebue.

     1820.--Death of George III., (January 23.) Lord Brougham's
     Plan of Popular Education. Proceedings against Queen
     Caroline. Rebellion in Spain. Trial of Sir Francis Burdett.
     Election of Sir Humphrey Davy as President of the Royal
     Society. Ministry in France of the Duc de Richelieu. Death
     of Grattan; of the Duke of Kent.

     1821.--Second Inauguration of President Monroe. Revolution
     in Naples and Piedmont. Insurrections in Spain. Independence
     of Colombia, and fall of Spanish Power in Mexico and Peru.
     Disturbances in Ireland. War in the Morea. Formal occupation
     of the Floridas by the United States. Extinction of the
     Mamelukes. Revolt in Wallachia and Moldavia. Death of Queen
     Caroline; of Napoleon.

     1822.--Mr. Canning's Bill for the admission of Catholic
     Peers to the House of Lords. Disturbances in Ireland. Sir
     James Mackintosh's Motion for a reform of Criminal Law. Mr.
     Canning succeeds the Marquis of Londonderry (Lord
     Castlereagh) as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. Lord
     Amherst appointed Governor-General of India. Fall of the
     administration of the Duc de Richelieu. Congress of Vienna.
     War in Greece. Insurrection of the Janizaries. The Persian
     War. Settlement of the Canadian Boundary. Suicide of the
     Marquis of Londonderry.

     1823.--Great Agricultural Distress in Great Britain. Debates
     on Catholic Emancipation, and on the Slave Trade. French
     Invasion of Spain. Captain Franklin's Voyage to the Polar
     Seas. Death of Pius VII.

     1824.--General Prosperity in England. Capture of Ipsara by
     the Turks. Visit of La Fayette to the United States. Leaders
     of the Carbonari suppressed in Italy by the Austrian
     Government. Repeal of duties between Great Britain and
     Ireland. Burmese War, and Capture of Rangoon. Censorship of
     the Press in France. Death of Louis XVIII., (September 16.)

     1825.--Inauguration of President Adams. Independence of
     Brazil acknowledged by Portugal. Coronation of Charles X.
     Siege of Missolonghi. Inundations in the Netherlands. Death
     of the Emperor Alexander, (December 1.)

     1826.--Bolivar chosen President of Peru for Life.
     Independence of Hayti acknowledged by France. Riots in
     Lancashire. Surrender of the fortress of St. Juan d'Ulloa to
     the Mexicans. Great Debates in Parliament on the Slave
     Trade. Death of Ex-President Adams; of Jefferson. Coronation
     of the Emperor Nicholas.

     1827.--Death of the Earl of Liverpool, and dissolution of
     the Ministry. Mr. Canning appointed First Lord of the
     Treasury; dies four months after; succeeded by Lord
     Goderich. National Guard disbanded in France. Defeat of the
     Greek army before Athens. Battle of Navarino. Foundation of
     the University of London. Death of the Duke of York; of La
     Place; of Mitford, the Historian; of Eichhorn; of
     Pestalozzi; of Beethoven; of King Frederic Augustus of
     Saxony.

     1828.--Dissolution of Lord Goderich's Ministry, and new one
     formed under the Duke of Wellington, Mr. Peel and the Earl
     of Aberdeen. Repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts. New
     Corn Law. Riots in Ireland. Mr. O'Connell represents the
     County of Clare. New and Liberal ministry in France. Final
     departure of the French Armies from Spain. War between
     Naples and Tripoli. War between Russia and Turkey.
     Independence of Greece. Death of Ypsilanti.

     1829.--Inauguration of President Jackson. Passage of the
     Catholic Emancipation Bill. New and Ultra-Royalist ministry
     in France, under Polignac. Victories of Count Diebitsch
     against the Turks. Surrender of Adrianople. Civil War in
     Mexico. Don Miguel acknowledged as King of Portugal by
     Spain. Burning of York Cathedral. Treaty between the United
     States and Brazil. Civil War in Chili. Death of Judge
     Washington.

     1830.--Great discussions in Congress on the Tariff. Reform
     Agitations in England. Death of George IV., (June 26.) New
     Whig Ministry under Earl Grey and Lord John Russell. Opening
     of the Liverpool Railroad. Revolution in France, and the
     Duke of Orleans declared King. Capture of Algiers by the
     French. Belgium erected into an independent Kingdom. Riots
     and Insurrections in Germany. Plots of the Carlists in
     Spain. Murder of Joseph White. Death of Pope Leo XII.; of
     the King of Naples; of Sir Thomas Lawrence; of the Grand
     Duke of Baden.

     1831.--Dissolution of the Cabinet at Washington. Great
     discussions on the Reform Bill. Agitations in Ireland.
     Leopold made King of Belgium. Insurrection in Switzerland.
     Revolution in Poland. Treaty between the United States and
     Turkey. Coronation of William IV. Appearance of the Cholera
     in England. Its great ravages on the Continent. Death of
     Bolivar; of Robert Hall; of Mrs. Siddons; of William Roscoe;
     of James Monroe.

     1832.--Veto of President Jackson of the Bill to recharter
     the United States Bank. Discontents in South Carolina, in
     consequence of the Tariff. War with the Indians. Bristol and
     Birmingham Riots. Final passage of the Reform Bill.
     Abolition of the Slave Trade in Brazil. Death of Casimir
     Perier, Prime Minister of France, who is succeeded by
     Marshal Soult. Death of Sir Walter Scott; of Sir James
     Mackintosh; of Spurzheim; of Cuvier; of Goethe; of
     Champollion; of Adam Clarke; of Andrew Bell; of Anna Maria
     Porter; of Charles Carroll of Carrollton.

     1833.--Second Inauguration of Andrew Jackson. Mr. Clay's
     Tariff Bill. President Jackson's war with the United States
     Bank. Recharter of the Bank of England and of the East India
     Company. Fortifications of Paris commenced. Santa Anna
     inaugurated President of Mexico. Bill passed to abolish
     slavery in the British Colonies. Trial of Avery. Death of
     the King of Spain; of Mr. Wilberforce; of Hannah More; of
     Caspar Hauser; of Lord Grenville; of Dr. Schleiermacher.

     1834.--Discussions on the Corn Laws. Destruction of the two
     Houses of Parliament. Change of Ministry in France. Congress
     of Vienna. Donna Maria acknowledged Queen of Portugal.
     Opening of the Boston and Worcester Railroad. Resignation of
     Earl Grey, succeeded by Lord Melbourne, who is again shortly
     succeeded by Sir Robert Peel. Irish Coercion Bill. Death of
     La Fayette; of William Wirt; of Dr. Porter; of General
     Huntingdon; of Coleridge; of Rev. Edward Irving.

     1835.--New Ministry of Viscount Melbourne. French expedition
     to Algiers. Otho made King of Greece. Suppression of the
     Jesuits in Spain. Remarkable eruption of Vesuvius. Revolt in
     Spain. Great fire in New York. Death of the Emperor of
     Austria; of Chief Justice Marshall; of Nathan Dane; of
     McCrie; of William Cobbett.

     1836.--Settlement of the disputes between France and the
     United States. Resignation of M. Thiers, who is succeeded,
     as Prime Minister of France, by Count Mole. Military
     operations against Abd-el-Kader. Massacre of the Carlist
     Prisoners at Barcelona. Isturitz made Prime Minister of
     Spain. Prince Louis Napoleon attempts an insurrection at
     Strasburg. Commutation of Tithes in England. Bill for the
     Registration of Births and Marriages. Passage of the Irish
     Municipal Corporation Bill. Agitations in Canada. War
     between Texas and Mexico. Burning of the Patent Office at
     Washington. Death of Aaron Burr; of the Abbe Sieyes; of Lord
     Stowell; of Godwin.

     1837.--Inauguration of President Van Buren. Death of
     William IV., (June 20.) Insurrection in Canada. Suspension
     of cash payments by the Bank of the United States in
     Philadelphia, and by the banks in New York. Acknowledgment
     of the Independence of Texas. Treaty with the Indians. Great
     failures in New York. Great Protestant Meeting in Dublin.
     Change of Ministry in Spain. Death of Gustavus Adolphus IV.
     of Sweden; of M. de Pradt; of Abiel Holmes; of Dr. Griffin;
     of Charles Botta; of Lovejoy.

     1838.--War with the Seminoles. General Scott takes command
     of the New York Militia on the Frontiers. Affair of the
     Caroline. Lord Durham Governor-General of Canada. Coronation
     of Queen Victoria; of the Emperor Ferdinand. Violence of
     Civil War in Spain. Circassian War. Revolution in Peru and
     Bolivia. Peace between Russia and Turkey. Great Chartist
     meetings in England. Emancipation of the West India Negro
     Apprentices. Death of Lord Eldon; of Talleyrand; of Noah
     Worcester; of Dr. Bowditch; of Zachary Macaulay.

     1839.--Disputes between Maine and New Brunswick. Resignation
     of the Melbourne Ministry, and the failure of Sir Robert
     Peel to construct a new one. Birmingham Riots. Chartist
     Convention. Resignation of Count Mole, who is succeeded, as
     Prime Minister, by Marshal Soult, and Guizot. Capture of the
     fortress of St. Juan d'Ulloa by the French. Treaty of Peace
     between France and Mexico. Affghan War. War between Turkey
     and Mohammed Ali. Invasion of Syria. Death of Lady Hester
     Stanhope; of Governor Hayne; of Dr. Bancroft; of Stephen Van
     Rensselaer; of Zerah Colburn; of Samuel Ward.

     1840.--Marriage of Queen Victoria. Penny Postage in England.
     Affghan War. Difficulties in China respecting the Opium
     Trade. Blockade of Canton. Ministry of M. Thiers. Arrival of
     Napoleon's Remains from St. Helena. Abdication of the King
     of Holland. Continued Civil War in Spain. Burning of the
     Lexington. Ministry of Espartero. Death of Frederic
     William III. of Prussia; of Lord Camden; of Dr. Olinthus
     Gregory; of Blumenbach; of Dr. Follen; of Dr. Kirkland; of
     John Lowell; of Judge Mellen; of Dr. Emmons; of Prof. Davis.

     1841.--Inauguration of President Harrison; his Death;
     succeeded by John Tyler. Trial of McLeod. Repeal of the
     Sub-Treasury. Veto, by the President, of the Bill to
     establish a Bank. Resignation of the Melbourne Ministry,
     succeeded by that of Sir Robert Peel. War in Scinde.
     Espartero sole Regent of Spain. Revolution in Mexico. Treaty
     between Turkey and Egypt. Treaty between the United States
     and Portugal. Death of Chantrey; of Dr. Marsh; of Dr.
     Oliver; of Dr. Ripley; of Blanco White; of William Ladd.

     1842.--Great Debates in Parliament on the Corn Laws. New
     Tariff of Sir Robert Peel. Affghan War. Treaty of Peace
     between England and China. Treaty between England and the
     United States respecting the North-eastern Boundary
     Question. Chartist Petitions. Income Tax. Accident on the
     Paris and Versailles Railroad. Death of the Duke of Orleans;
     of Lord Hill; of Dr. Charming; of Dr. Arnold; of Jeremiah
     Smith.

     1843.--Activity of the Anti Corn Law League. Repeal
     Agitation in Ireland. Monster Meetings. Establishment of the
     Free Presbyterian Church in Scotland. War in Scinde. Sir
     James Graham's Factory Bill. Repudiation of State Debts.
     Death of Southey; of Dr. Ware; of Allston; of Legare; of Dr.
     Richards; of Noah Webster.

     1844.--Corn Law Agitations in Great Britain. Passage of the
     Sugar Duties Bill; of the Dissenters' Chapel Bill. State
     Trials in Ireland. Opening of the Royal Exchange. Sir
     Charles Napier's victories in India. Louis Philippe's visit
     to England. War between France and Morocco. Disturbances on
     the Livingston and Rensselaer Manors. Insurrection in
     Mexico. Death of Secretary Upshur.

     1845.--Installation of President Polk. Treaty between the
     United States and China. Great Fire in New York. Municipal
     disabilities removed from the Jews by Parliament. War in
     Algeria. Abdication of Don Carlos. Termination of the War in
     Scinde. Revolution in Mexico. War in the Punjaub.

     1846--War between the United States and Mexico. Battle of
     Monterey. New Tariff Bill. Passage of the Corn Bill in
     England, and Repeal of Duties. Free Trade policy of Sir
     Robert Peel. Settlement of the Oregon Question. Distress in
     Ireland by the failure of the Potato Crop. Resignation of
     Sir Robert Peel; succeeded by Lord John Russell. Marriage of
     the Queen of Spain; and of her sister, the Infanta, to the
     Due de Montpensier. Escape of Prince Louis Napoleon from
     Ham. Death of Pope Gregory XVI., and elevation of Pius IX.
     Death of Louis Napoleon, Ex-King of Holland.

     1847.--Splendid military successes of Generals Scott and
     Taylor in Mexico. Fall of Mexico. Ravages of the Potato
     Disease. Awful Distress in Ireland. Guizot succeeds Soult as
     President of the Council. Frequent changes of Ministry in
     Spain. Civil War in Switzerland. Grant of a Constitution to
     Prussia. Liberal Measures of Pius IX. Death of the King of
     Denmark; of Dr. Chalmers; of Silas Wright.

     1848.--French Revolution, and Fall of Louis Philippe.
     Abdication of the King of Bavaria. Tumults in Vienna and
     Berlin. Riots in Rome. Chartist demonstrations in London.
     Election of the National Assembly in France. General
     fermentation throughout Europe. Distress of Ireland. Oregon
     Territorial Bill. Free Soil Convention in Buffalo. Death of
     John Quincy Adams. Election of General Taylor for President
     of the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *


PRIME MINISTERS OF ENGLAND SINCE THE ACCESSION OF HENRY VIII.


KING HENRY VIII.

    1509. Bishop Fisher, and Earl of Surrey.

    1513. Cardinal Thomas Wolsey.

    1529. Sir Thomas More, and Cranmer.

    1532. Lord Audley, (Chancellor,) Archbishop Cranmer.

    1538. Lord Cromwell, (Earl of Essex.)

    1540. Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Surrey, and Bishop Gardiner.

    1544. Lord Wriothesley, Earl of Hertford.


KING EDWARD VI.

    The Earl of Hertford, continued.

    1552. John, Duke of Northumberland.


QUEEN MARY.

    1553. Bishop Gardiner.


QUEEN ELIZABETH.

    1558. Sir Nicholas Bacon, and Sir William Cecil, (afterwards
          Lord Burleigh.)

    1564. Earl of Leicester, (a favorite)

    1588. Earl of Essex.

    1601. Lord Buckhurst.


JAMES I.

    Lord Buckhurst, (Earl of Dorset.)

    1608. Earls of Salisbury, Suffolk, and Northampton.

    1612. Sir Robert Carr (Earl of Somerset.)

    1615. Sir George Villiers (Duke of Buckingham.)


CHARLES I.

    Duke of Buckingham.

    1628. Earl of Portland, Archbishop Laud.

    1640. Archbishop Laud, Earl of Strafford, Lord Cottington.

    1640. Earl of Essex.

    1641. Lord Falkland, Lord Digby.

          Civil War, and Oliver Cromwell.


CHARLES II.

    1660. Earl of Clarendon.

    1667. Dukes of Buckingham and Lauderdale.

    1667. Lord Ashley, Lord Arlington, Lord Clifford.

    1673. Lord Arlington, Lord Ashley (Earl of Shaftesbury,) and
          Sir Thomas Osborne.

    1674. Sir Thomas Osborne.

    1677. Earl of Essex, Duke of Ormond, Marquis of Halifax,
          Sir William Temple.

    1682. Duke of York and his friends.


JAMES II.

    1685. Earls of Sunderland and Tyrconnell, Lord Jeffreys.

    1687. Lord Jeffreys, Lord Arundel, Earl of Middleton.


WILLIAM III.

    1688. Lord Somers, Lord Godolphin, Earl of Danby (Duke of Leeds.)

    1695. Earl of Sunderland.

    1697. Charles Montague (Earl of Halifax,) Earl of Pembroke,
          Viscount Lonsdale, Earl of Oxford.


QUEEN ANNE.

    1705. Lord Godolphin, R. Harley, Lord Pembroke, Duke of
          Buckingham, Duke of Marlborough.

    1707. Earl Godolphin, Lord Cowper, Dukes of Marlborough and
          Newcastle.

    1710. R. Harley (Earl of Oxford.)

    1710. Earl of Rochester, Lord Dartmouth, Henry St. John
          (Lord Bolingbroke,) Lord Harcourt.

    1714. Duke of Shrewsbury.


GEORGE I.

    1714. Lord Cowper, Duke of Shrewsbury, Marquis of Wharton,
          Earl of Oxford, Duke of Marlborough, Viscount Townshend.

    1715. Robert Walpole, Esq.

    1717. Earl Stanhope.

    1718. Earl of Sunderland.

    1721. Sir Robert Walpole (Earl of Orford.)


GEORGE II.

    1742. Lord Carteret, Lord Wilmington, Lord Bath, Mr. Sandys, &c.

    1743. Hon. Henry Pelham, Lord Carteret, Earl of Harrington,
          Duke of Newcastle, &c.

    1746. Mr. Pelham, Earl of Chesterfield, Duke of Bedford, &c.

    1754. Duke of Newcastle, Sir Thos. Robinson, Henry Fox, &c.

    1756. Duke of Devonshire, Mr. William Pitt, Earl Temple,
          Hon. H. B. Legge, &c. (Dismissed in April, 1757; restored
          in June the same year.)

    1757. William Pitt, Mr. Legge, Earl Temple, Duke of Newcastle, &c.


GEORGE III.

    1761. Earl of Bute, Earl of Egremont, Duke of Bedford, &c.

    1762. Earl of Bute, Hon. George Grenville, Sir F. Dashwood, &c.

    1763. Hon. George Grenville, Earl of Halifax, Earl of Sandwich, &c.

    1765. Marquis of Rockingham, Duke of Grafton, Earl of Shelburne, &c.

    1766. Duke of Grafton, Hon. Chas. Townshend, Earl of Chatham, &c.

    1767. Duke of Grafton, Lord North, &c.

    1770. Lord North, Lord Halifax, &c.

    1779. Lord North, Lord Dartmouth, Lord Stormont, &c.

    1782. Marquis of Rockingham, Chas. James Fox, &c.

    1782. Earl of Shelburne, William Pitt, &c.
