housework, which was far from taxing, for of course we lived in the
simplest manner. My brothers and I were to do the work out of doors, an
arrangement that suited me very well, though at first, owing to our lack
of experience, our activities were somewhat curtailed. It was too late
in the season for plowing or planting, even if we had possessed anything
with which to plow, and, moreover, our so-called "cleared" land was
thick with sturdy tree-stumps. Even during the second summer plowing was
impossible; we could only plant potatoes and corn, and follow the most
primitive method in doing even this. We took an ax, chopped up the sod,
put the seed under it, and let the seed grow. The seed did grow, too--in
the most gratifying and encouraging manner. Our green corn and potatoes
were the best I have ever eaten. But for the present we lacked these
luxuries.

We had, however, in their place, large quantities of wild
fruit--gooseberries, raspberries, and plums--which Harry and I gathered
on the banks of our creek. Harry also became an expert fisherman. We had
no hooks or lines, but he took wires from our hoop-skirts and made
snares at the ends of poles. My part of this work was to stand on a log
and frighten the fish out of their holes by making horrible sounds,
which I did with impassioned earnestness. When the fish hurried to the
surface of the water to investigate the appalling noises they had heard,
they were easily snared by our small boy, who was very proud of his
ability to contribute in this way to the family table.

During our first winter we lived largely on cornmeal, making a little
journey of twenty miles to the nearest mill to buy it; but even at that
we were better off than our neighbors, for I remember one family in our
region who for an entire winter lived solely on coarse-grained yellow
turnips, gratefully changing their diet to leeks when these came in the
spring.

Such furniture as we had we made ourselves. In addition to my mother's
two chairs and the bunks which took the place of beds, James made a
settle for the living-room, as well as a table and several stools. At
first we had our tree-cutting done for us, but we soon became expert in
this gentle art, and I developed such skill that in later years, after
father came, I used to stand with him and "heart" a log.

On every side, and at every hour of the day, we came up against the
relentless limitations of pioneer life. There was not a team of horses
in our entire region. The team with which my brother had driven us
through the wilderness had been hired at Grand Rapids for that occasion,
and, of course, immediately returned. Our lumber was delivered by
ox-teams, and the absolutely essential purchases we made "outside" (at
the nearest shops, forty miles away) were carried through the forest on
the backs of men. Our mail was delivered once a month by a carrier who
made the journey in alternate stages of horseback riding and canoeing.
But we had health, youth, enthusiasm, good appetites, and the
wherewithal to satisfy them, and at night in our primitive bunks we sank
into abysses of dreamless slumber such as I have never known since.
Indeed, looking back upon them, those first months seem to have been a
long-drawn-out and glorious picnic, interrupted only by occasional hours
of pain or panic, when we were hurt or frightened.

Naturally, our two greatest menaces were wild animals and Indians, but
as the days passed the first of these lost the early terrors with which
we had associated them. We grew indifferent to the sounds that had made
our first night a horror to us all--there was even a certain homeliness
in them--while we regarded with accustomed, almost blase eyes the
various furred creatures of which we caught distant glimpses as they
slunk through the forest. Their experience with other settlers had
taught them caution; it soon became clear that they were as eager to
avoid us as we were to shun them, and by common consent we gave each
other ample elbow-room. But the Indians were all around us, and every
settler had a collection of hair-raising tales to tell of them. It was
generally agreed that they were dangerous only when they were drunk; but
as they were drunk whenever they could get whisky, and as whisky was
constantly given them in exchange for pelts and game, there was a
harrowing doubt in our minds whenever they approached us.

In my first encounter with them I was alone in the woods at sunset with
my small brother Harry. We were hunting a cow James had bought, and our
young eyes were peering eagerly among the trees, on the alert for any
moving object. Suddenly, at a little distance, coming directly toward
us, we saw a party of Indians. There were five of them, all men, walking
in single file, as noiselessly as ghosts, their moccasined feet causing
not even a rustle among the dry leaves that carpeted the woods. All the
horrible stories we had heard of Indian cruelty flashed into our minds,
and for a moment we were dumb with terror. Then I remembered having been
told that the one thing one must not do before them is to show fear.
Harry was carrying a rope with which we had expected to lead home our
reluctant cow, and I seized one end of it and whispered to him that we
would "play horse," pretending he was driving me. We pranced toward the
Indians on feet that felt like lead, and with eyes so glazed by terror
that we could see nothing save a line of moving figures; but as we
passed them they did not give to our little impersonation of care-free
children even the tribute of a side-glance. They were, we realized,
headed straight for our home; and after a few moments we doubled on our
tracks and, keeping at a safe distance from them among the trees, ran
back to warn our mother that they were coming.

As it happened, James was away, and mother had to meet her unwelcome
guests supported only by her young children. She at once prepared a
meal, however, and when they arrived she welcomed them calmly and gave
them the best she had. After they had eaten they began to point at and
demand objects they fancied in the room--my brother's pipe, some
tobacco, a bowl, and such trifles--and my mother, who was afraid to
annoy them by refusal, gave them what they asked. They were quite sober,
and though they left without expressing any appreciation of her
hospitality, they made her a second visit a few months later, bringing a
large quantity of venison and a bag of cranberries as a graceful return.
These Indians were Ottawas; and later we became very friendly with them
and their tribe, even to the degree of attending one of their dances,
which I shall describe later.

Our second encounter with Indians was a less agreeable experience. There
were seven "Marquette warriors" in the next group of callers, and they
were all intoxicated. Moreover, they had brought with them several jugs
of bad whisky--the raw and craze-provoking product supplied them by the
fur-dealers--and it was clear that our cabin was to be the scene of an
orgy. Fortunately, my brother James was at home on this occasion, and as
the evening grew old and the Indians, grouped together around the fire,
became more and more irresponsible, he devised a plan for our safety.
Our attic was finished, and its sole entrance was by a ladder through a
trap-door. At James's whispered command my sister Eleanor slipped up
into the attic, and from the back window let down a rope, to which he
tied all the weapons we had--his gun and several axes. These Eleanor
drew up and concealed in one of the bunks. My brother then directed that
as quietly as possible, and at long intervals, one member of the family
after another was to slip up the ladder and into the attic, going quite
casually, that the Indians might not realize what we were doing. Once
there, with the ladder drawn up after us and the trap-door closed, we
would be reasonably safe, unless our guests decided to burn the cabin.

The evening seemed endless, and was certainly nerve-racking. The Indians
ate everything in the house, and from my seat in a dim corner I watched
them while my sisters waited on them. I can still see the tableau they
made in the firelit room and hear the unfamiliar accents of their speech
as they talked together. Occasionally one of them would pull a hair from
his head, seize his scalping-knife, and cut the hair with it--a most
unpleasant sight! When either of my sisters approached them some of the
Indians would make gestures, as if capturing and scalping her. Through
it all, however, the whisky held their close attention, and it was due
to this that we succeeded in reaching the attic unobserved, James coming
last of all and drawing the ladder after him. Mother and the children
were then put to bed; but through that interminable night James and
Eleanor lay flat upon the floor, watching through the cracks between the
boards the revels of the drunken Indians, which grew wilder with every
hour that crawled toward sunrise. There was no knowing when they would
miss us or how soon their mood might change. At any moment they might
make an attack upon us or set fire to the cabin. By dawn, however, their
whisky was all gone, and they were in so deep a stupor that, one after
the other, the seven fell from their chairs to the floor, where they
sprawled unconscious. When they awoke they left quietly and without
trouble of any kind. They seemed a strangely subdued and chastened band;
probably they were wretchedly ill after their debauch on the adulterated
whisky the traders had given them.

That autumn the Ottawa tribe had a great corn celebration, to which we
and the other settlers were invited. James and my older sisters attended
it, and I went with them, by my own urgent invitation. It seemed to me
that as I was sharing the work and the perils of our new environment, I
might as well share its joys; and I finally succeeded in making my
family see the logic of this position. The central feature of the
festivity was a huge kettle, many feet in circumference, into which the
Indians dropped the most extraordinary variety of food we had ever seen
combined. Deer heads went into it whole, as well as every kind of meat
and vegetable the members of the tribe could procure. We all ate some of
this agreeable mixture, and later, with one another, and even with the
Indians, we danced gaily to the music of a tom-tom and a drum. The
affair was extremely interesting until the whisky entered and did its
unpleasant work. When our hosts began to fall over in the dance and
slumber where they lay, and when the squaws began to show the same ill
effects of their refreshments, we unostentatiously slipped away.

During the winter, life offered us few diversions and many hardships.
Our creek froze over, and the water problem became a serious one, which
we met with increasing difficulty as the temperature steadily fell. We
melted snow and ice, and existed through the frozen months, but with an
amount of discomfort which made us unwilling to repeat at least that
special phase of our experience. In the spring, therefore, I made a
well. Long before this, James had gone, and Harry and I were now the
only out-door members of our working-force. Harry was still too small to
help with the well; but a young man, who had formed the neighborly habit
of riding eighteen miles to call on us, gave me much friendly aid. We
located the well with a switch, and when we had dug as far as we could
reach with our spades, my assistant descended into the hole and threw
the earth up to the edge, from which I in turn removed it. As the well
grew deeper we made a halfway shelf, on which I stood, he throwing the
earth on the shelf, and I shoveling it up from that point. Later, as he
descended still farther into the hole we were making, he shoveled the
earth into buckets and passed them up to me, I passing them on to my
sister, who was now pressed into service. When the excavation was deep
enough we made the wall of slabs of wood, roughly joined together. I
recall that well with calm content. It was not a thing of beauty, but it
was a thoroughly practical well, and it remained the only one we had
during the twelve years the family occupied the cabin.

The second spring after our arrival Harry and I extended our operations
by tapping the sugar-bushes, collecting all the sap, and carrying it
home in pails slung from our yoke-laden shoulders. Together we made one
hundred and fifty pounds of sugar and a barrel of syrup, but here again,
as always, we worked in primitive ways. To get the sap we chopped a gash
in the tree and drove in a spile. Then we dug out a trough to catch the
sap. It was no light task to lift these troughs full of sap and empty
the sap into buckets, but we did it successfully, and afterward built
fires and boiled it down. By this time we had also cleared some of our
ground, and during the spring we were able to plow, dividing the work in
a way that seemed fair to us both. These were strenuous occupations for
a boy of nine and a girl of thirteen, but, though we were not
inordinately good children, we never complained; we found them very
satisfactory substitutes for more normal bucolic joys. Inevitably, we
had our little tragedies. Our cow died, and for an entire winter we went
without milk. Our coffee soon gave out, and as a substitute we made and
used a mixture of browned peas and burnt rye. In the winter we were
always cold, and the water problem, until we had built our well, was
ever with us.

When I was fifteen years old I was offered a situation as
school-teacher. By this time the community was growing around us with
the rapidity characteristic of these Western settlements, and we had
nearer neighbors whose children needed instruction. I passed an
examination before a school-board consisting of three nervous and
self-conscious men whose certificate I still hold, and I at once began
my professional career on the modest salary of two dollars a week and my
board. The school was four miles from my home, so I "boarded round" with
the families of my pupils, staying two weeks in each place, and often
walking from three to six miles a day to and from my little log
school-house in every kind of weather. During the first year I had about
fourteen pupils, of varying ages, sizes, and temperaments, and there
was hardly a book in the schoolroom except those I owned. One little
girl, I remembered, read from an almanac, while a second used a
hymn-book.

In winter the school-house was heated by a wood-stove to which the
teacher had to give close personal attention. I could not depend on my
pupils to make the fires or carry in the fuel; and it was often
necessary to fetch the wood myself, sometimes for long distances through
the forest. Again and again, after miles of walking through winter
storms, I reached the school-house with my clothing wet through, and in
these soaked garments I taught during the day. In "boarding round" I
often found myself in one-room cabins, with bunks at the end and the
sole partition a sheet or a blanket, behind which I slept with one or
two of the children. It was the custom on these occasions for the man of
the house to delicately retire to the barn while we women got to bed,
and to disappear again in the morning while we dressed. In some places
the meals were so badly cooked that I could not eat them, and often the
only food my poor little pupils brought to school for their noonday meal
was a piece of bread or a bit of raw pork.



420

        Hero stories have a special place in the
        literature of childhood, and of all such
        stories none has ever surpassed that of
        Leonidas and his brave Spartans. The account of
        that famous event is given from Miss Yonge's _A
        Book of Golden Deeds_ (1864), which is yet one
        of the best storehouses of hero stories. It is
        published in a variety of editions by different
        publishers, and teachers will find it an
        excellent source for usable material.


THE PASS OF THERMOPYLAE

CHARLOTTE M. YONGE

_B. C. 430_

There was trembling in Greece. "The Great King," as the Greeks called
the chief potentate of the East, whose domains stretched from the Indian
Caucasus to the Aegaeus, from the Caspian to the Red Sea, was marshaling
his forces against the little free states that nestled amid the rocks
and gulfs of the Eastern Mediterranean. Already had his might devoured
the cherished colonies of the Greeks on the eastern shore of the
Archipelago, and every traitor to home institutions found a ready asylum
at that despotic court, and tried to revenge his own wrongs by
whispering incitements to invasion. "All people, nations, and
languages," was the commencement of the decrees of that monarch's court;
and it was scarcely a vain boast, for his satraps ruled over subject
kingdoms, and among his tributary nations he counted the Chaldean, with
his learning and old civilization, the wise and steadfast Jew, the
skillful Ph[oe]nician, the learned Egyptian, the wild freebooting Arab
of the desert, the dark-skinned Ethiopian, and over all these ruled the
keen witted, active native Persian race, the conquerors of all the rest,
and led by a chosen band proudly called the Immortal. His many
capitals--Babylon the great, Susa, Persepolis, and the like--were names
of dreamy splendor to the Greeks, described now and then by Ionians from
Asia Minor who had carried their tribute to the King's own feet, or by
courtier slaves who had escaped with difficulty from being all too
serviceable at the tyrannic court. And the lord of this enormous empire
was about to launch his countless host against the little cluster of
states, the whole of which together would hardly equal one province of
the huge Asiatic realm! Moreover, it was a war not only on the men but
on their gods. The Persians were zealous adorers of the sun and of fire,
they abhorred the idol-worship of the Greeks, and defiled and plundered
every temple that fell in their way. Death and desolation were almost
the best that could be looked for at such hands--slavery and torture
from cruelly barbarous masters would only too surely be the lot of
numbers, should their land fall a prey to the conquerors.

True it was that ten years back the former Great King had sent his best
troops to be signally defeated upon the coast of Attica; but the losses
at Marathon had but stimulated the Persian lust of conquest, and the new
King Xerxes was gathering together such myriads of men as should crush
down the Greeks and overrun their country by mere force of numbers.

The muster place was at Sardis, and there Greek spies had seen the
multitudes assembling and the state and magnificence of the king's
attendants. Envoys had come from him to demand earth and water from each
state in Greece, as emblems that land and sea were his, but each state
was resolved to be free, and only Thessaly, that which lay first in his
path, consented to yield the token of subjugation. A council was held at
the Isthmus of Corinth, and attended by deputies from all the states of
Greece to consider of the best means of defense. The ships of the enemy
would coast round the shores of the Aegean sea, the land army would
cross the Hellespont on a bridge of boats lashed together, and march
southwards into Greece. The only hope of averting the danger lay in
defending such passages as, from the nature of the ground, were so
narrow that only a few persons could fight hand to hand at once, so that
courage would be of more avail than numbers.

The first of these passes was called Tempe, and a body of troops was
sent to guard it; but they found that this was useless and impossible,
and came back again. The next was at Thermopylae. Look in your map of
the Archipelago, or Aegean Sea, as it was then called, for the great
island of Negropont, or by its old name, Eub[oe]a. It looks like a piece
broken off from the coast, and to the north is shaped like the head of a
bird, with the beak running into a gulf, that would fit over it, upon
the main land, and between the island and the coast is an exceedingly
narrow strait. The Persian army would have to march round the edge of
the gulf. They could not cut straight across the country, because the
ridge of mountains called Oeta rose up and barred their way. Indeed, the
woods, rocks, and precipices came down so near the sea-shore that in two
places there was only room for one single wheel track between the steeps
and the impassable morass that formed the border of the gulf on its
south side. These two very narrow places were called the gates of the
pass, and were about a mile apart. There was a little more width left in
the intervening space; but in this there were a number of springs of
warm mineral water, salt and sulphurous, which were used for the sick to
bathe in, and thus the place was called Thermopylae, or the Hot Gates. A
wall had once been built across the westernmost of these narrow places,
when the Thessalians and Phocians, who lived on either side of it, had
been at war with one another; but it had been allowed to go to decay,
since the Phocians had found out that there was a very steep narrow
mountain path along the bed of a torrent, by which it was possible to
cross from one territory to the other without going round this marshy
coast road.

This was, therefore, an excellent place to defend. The Greek ships were
all drawn up on the further side of Eub[oe]a to prevent the Persian
vessels from getting into the strait and landing men beyond the pass,
and a division of the army was sent off to guard the Hot Gates. The
council at the Isthmus did not know of the mountain pathway, and thought
that all would be safe as long as the Persians were kept out of the
coast path.

The troops sent for this purpose were from different cities, and
amounted to about 4,000 who were to keep the pass against two millions.
The leader of them was Leonidas, who had newly become one of the two
kings of Sparta, the city that above all in Greece trained its sons to
be hardy soldiers, dreading death infinitely less than shame. Leonidas
had already made up his mind that the expedition would probably be his
death, perhaps because a prophecy had been given at the Temple at Delphi
that Sparta should be saved by the death of one of her kings of the race
of Hercules. He was allowed by law to take with him 300 men, and these
he chose most carefully, not merely for their strength and courage, but
selecting those who had sons, so that no family might altogether be
destroyed. These Spartans, with their helots or slaves, made up his own
share of the numbers, but all the army was under his generalship. It is
even said that the 300 celebrated their own funeral rites before they
set out lest they should be deprived of them by the enemy, since, as we
have already seen, it was the Greek belief that the spirits of the dead
found no rest till their obsequies had been performed. Such preparations
did not daunt the spirits of Leonidas and his men, and his wife, Gorgo,
was not a woman to be faint-hearted or hold him back. Long before, when
she was a very little girl, a word of hers had saved her father from
listening to a traitorous message from the King of Persia; and every
Spartan lady was bred up to be able to say to those she best loved that
they must come home from battle "with the shield or on it"--either
carrying it victoriously or borne upon it as a corpse.

When Leonidas came to Thermopylae, the Phocians told him of the mountain
path through the chestnut woods of Mount Oeta, and begged to have the
privilege of guarding it on a spot high up on the mountain side,
assuring him that it was very hard to find at the other end, and that
there was every probability that the enemy would never discover it. He
consented, and encamping around the warm springs, caused the broken wall
to be repaired, and made ready to meet the foe.

The Persian army were seen covering the whole country like locusts, and
the hearts of some of the southern Greeks in the pass began to sink.
Their homes in the Peloponnesus were comparatively secure--had they not
better fall back and reserve themselves to defend the Isthmus of
Corinth? But Leonidas, though Sparta was safe below the Isthmus, had no
intention of abandoning his northern allies, and kept the other
Peloponnesians to their posts, only sending messengers for further
help.

Presently a Persian on horseback rode up to reconnoiter the pass. He
could not see over the wall, but in front of it and on the ramparts, he
saw the Spartans, some of them engaged in active sports, and others in
combing their long hair. He rode back to the king, and told him what he
had seen. Now, Xerxes had in his camp an exiled Spartan Prince, named
Demaratus, who had become a traitor to his country, and was serving as
counselor to the enemy. Xerxes sent for him, and asked whether his
countrymen were mad to be thus employed instead of fleeing away; but
Demaratus made answer that a hard fight was no doubt in preparation, and
that it was the custom of the Spartans to array their hair with especial
care when they were about to enter upon any great peril. Xerxes would,
however, not believe that so petty a force could intend to resist him,
and waited four days, probably expecting his fleet to assist him, but as
it did not appear, the attack was made.

The Greeks, stronger men and more heavily armed, were far better able to
fight to advantage than the Persians with their short spears and wicker
shields, and beat them off with great ease. It is said that Xerxes three
times leapt off his throne in despair at the sight of his troops being
driven backwards; and thus for two days it seemed as easy to force a way
through the Spartans as through the rocks themselves. Nay, how could
slavish troops, dragged from home to spread the victories of an
ambitious king, fight like freemen who felt that their strokes were to
defend their homes and children?

But on that evening a wretched man, named Ephialtes, crept into the
Persian camp, and offered, for a great sum of money, to show the
mountain path that would enable the enemy to take the brave defenders in
the rear! A Persian general, named Hydarnes, was sent off at night-fall
with a detachment to secure this passage, and was guided through the
thick forests that clothed the hillside. In the stillness of the air, at
daybreak, the Phocian guards of the path were startled by the crackling
of the chestnut leaves under the tread of many feet. They started up,
but a shower of arrows was discharged on them, and forgetting all save
the present alarm, they fled to a higher part of the mountain, and the
enemy, without waiting to pursue them, began to descend.

As day dawned, morning light showed the watchers of the Grecian camp
below a glittering and shimmering in the torrent bed where the shaggy
forests opened; but it was not the sparkle of water, but the shine of
gilded helmets and the gleaming of silvered spears. Moreover, a
Cimmerian crept over to the wall from the Persian camp with tidings that
the path had been betrayed, that the enemy were climbing it, and would
come down beyond the Eastern Gate. Still, the way was rugged and
circuitous, the Persians would hardly descend before midday, and there
was ample time for the Greeks to escape before they could thus be shut
in by the enemy.

There was a short council held over the morning sacrifice. Megistias,
the seer, on inspecting the entrails of the slain victim, declared, as
well he might, that their appearance boded disaster. Him Leonidas
ordered to retire, but he refused, though he sent home his only son.
There was no disgrace to an ordinary tone of mind in leaving a post that
could not be held, and Leonidas recommended all the allied troops under
his command to march away while yet the way was open. As to himself and
his Spartans, they had made up their minds to die at their post, and
there could be no doubt that the example of such a resolution would do
more to save Greece than their best efforts could ever do if they were
careful to reserve themselves for another occasion.

All the allies consented to retreat, except the eighty men who came from
Mycenae and the 700 Thespians, who declared that they would not desert
Leonidas. There were also 400 Thebans who remained; and thus the whole
number that stayed with Leonidas to confront two million of enemies were
1400 warriors, besides the helots or attendants on the 300 Spartans,
whose number is not known, but there was probably at least one to each.
Leonidas had two kinsmen in the camp, like himself, claiming the blood
of Hercules, and he tried to save them by giving them letters and
messages to Sparta; but one answered that "he had come to fight, not to
carry letters"; and the other, that "his deeds would tell all that
Sparta wished to know." Another Spartan, named Dienices, when told that
the enemy's archers were so numerous that their arrows darkened the sun,
replied, "So much the better, we shall fight in the shade." Two of the
300 had been sent to a neighboring village, suffering severely from a
complaint in the eyes. One of them, called Eurytus, put on his armor,
and commanded his helot to lead him to his place in the ranks; the
other, called Aristodemus, was so overpowered with illness that he
allowed himself to be carried away with the retreating allies. It was
still early in the day when all were gone, and Leonidas gave the word to
his men to take their last meal. "To-night," he said, "we shall sup with
Pluto."

Hitherto, he had stood on the defensive, and had husbanded the lives of
his men; but he now desired to make as great a slaughter as possible, so
as to inspire the enemy with dread of the Grecian name. He therefore
marched out beyond the wall, without waiting to be attacked, and the
battle began. The Persian captains went behind their wretched troops and
scourged them on to the fight with whips! Poor wretches, they were
driven on to be slaughtered, pierced with the Greek spears, hurled into
the sea, or trampled into the mud of the morass; but their inexhaustible
numbers told at length. The spears of the Greeks broke under hard
service, and their swords alone remained; they began to fall, and
Leonidas himself was among the first of the slain. Hotter than ever was
the fight over his corpse, and two Persian princes, brothers of Xerxes,
were there killed; but at length word was brought that Hydarnes was over
the pass, and that the few remaining men were thus enclosed on all
sides. The Spartans and Thespians made their way to a little hillock
within the wall, resolved to let this be the place of their last stand;
but the hearts of the Thebans failed them, and they came towards the
Persians holding out their hands in entreaty for mercy. Quarter was
given to them, but they were all branded with the king's mark as
untrustworthy deserters. The helots probably at this time escaped into
the mountains; while the small desperate band stood side by side on the
hill still fighting to the last, some with swords, others with daggers,
others even with their hands and teeth, till not one living man
remained amongst them when the sun went down. There was only a mound of
slain, bristled over with arrows.

Twenty thousand Persians had died before that handful of men! Xerxes
asked Demaratus if there were many more at Sparta like these, and was
told there were 8,000. It must have been with a somewhat failing heart
that he invited his courtiers from the fleet to see what he had done to
the men who dared to oppose him, and showed them the head and arm of
Leonidas set up upon a cross; but he took care that all his own slain,
except 1,000, should first be put out of sight. The body of the brave
king was buried where he fell, as were those of the other dead. Much
envied were they by the unhappy Aristodemus, who found himself called by
no name but the "Coward," and was shunned by all his fellow-citizens. No
one would give him fire or water, and after a year of misery, he
redeemed his honor by perishing in the forefront of the battle of
Plataea, which was the last blow that drove the Persians ingloriously
from Greece.

The Greeks then united in doing honor to the brave warriors who, had
they been better supported, might have saved the whole country from
invasion. The poet Simonides wrote the inscriptions that were engraved
upon the pillars that were set up in the pass to commemorate this great
action. One was outside the wall, where most of the fighting had been.
It seems to have been in honor of the whole number who had for two days
resisted--

        "Here did four thousand men from Pelops' land
        Against three hundred myriads bravely stand."

In honor of the Spartans was another column--

        "Go, traveler, to Sparta tell
        That here, obeying her, we fell."

On the little hillock of the last resistance was placed the figure of a
stone lion, in memory of Leonidas, so fitly named the lion-like; and
Simonides, at his own expense, erected a pillar to his friend, the seer
Megistias--

        "The great Megistias' tomb you here may view,
        Who slew the Medes, fresh from Spercheius fords;
        Well the wise seer the coming death foreknew,
        Yet scorn'd he to forsake his Spartan lords."

The names of the 300 were likewise engraven on a pillar at Sparta.

Lion, pillars, and inscriptions have all long since passed away, even
the very spot itself has changed; new soil has been formed, and there
are miles of solid ground between Mount Oeta and the gulf, so that the
Hot Gates no longer exist. But more enduring than stone or brass--nay,
than the very battle-field itself--has been the name of Leonidas. Two
thousand three hundred years have sped since he braced himself to perish
for his country's sake in that narrow, marshy coast road, under the brow
of the wooded crags, with the sea by his side. Since that time how many
hearts have glowed, how many arms have been nerved at the remembrance of
the Pass of Thermopylae, and the defeat that was worth so much more than
a victory!




SECTION XII

HOME READING LIST AND GENERAL INDEX

        ". . . Forsooth he cometh unto you with a tale
        which holdeth children from play, and old men
        from the chimney corner; and, pretending no
        more, doth intend the winning of the mind from
        wickedness to virtue even as the child is often
        brought to take most wholesome things by hiding
        them in such others as have a pleasant
        taste. . . ."

                --Sir Philip Sidney, _An Apologie for Poetrie_.




SECTION XII. HOME READING LIST AND GENERAL INDEX

A HOME READING LIST


Children are such omnivorous readers that teachers and parents are
constantly at their wit's end, not only in naming enough books to supply
their demands, but in grouping these books according to the order of
difficulty. Most public libraries can furnish such lists based upon
their experience with children. In fact no modern public library can
carry on its work successfully without an especially prepared librarian
in charge of the books for children. The arrangement of any list by
grades must at best be only approximate, but if done in the light of a
wide experience may be of the greatest practical help to the young
teacher or to the parent. The following list is one issued by the
Chicago Public Library, and is used here through the great kindness of
Miss Adah F. Whitcomb, supervisor of the children's room and director of
the training class. Any well-selected collection for children will
contain a large proportion of these titles, and the list is extended
enough and varied enough to furnish attractive reading material for any
young person. At need it may be supplemented by the more elaborate lists
found in some of the guides mentioned in the General Bibliography (p.
2).


FIRST GRADE

  Banta, N. Moore, and Benson, Alpha B., _Brownie Primer_.

  Blaisdell, Mary Frances, _Mother Goose Children_.

  Brooke, Leonard Leslie, _Johnny Crow's Garden_.

  ----, _Johnny Crow's Party_.

  Buffum, Katharine G., _Mother Goose in Silhouettes_.

  Craik, Georgiana Marion, _So-fat and Mew-mew_.

  Crane, Walter, _Beauty and the Beast Picture Book_.

  ----, _Bluebeard's Picture Book_.

  ----, _Cinderella's Picture Book_.

  ----, _Goody Two Shoes Picture Book_.

  ----, _Mother Hubbard, Her Picture Book_.

  ----, _Red Riding Hood's Picture Book_.

  ----, _Song of Sixpence_.

  ----, _This Little Pig, His Picture Book_.

  ----, _Buckle My Shoe_.

  Fox, Florence Cornelia, _The Indian Primer_.

  Gaynor, Mrs. Jessie Love, and Riley, Alice C. D., _Songs of the
     Child-World_.

  Greenaway, Kate, _Under the Window_.

  Haaren, John Henry, _Rhymes and Fables_.

  Howard, Frederick Ward, _Banbury Cross Stories_.

  Lansing, Marion Florence, _The Child's World Garden_.

  Le Fevre, Felicite, _The Cock, the Mouse, and the Little Red
     Hen_.

  Lucas, Edward Verrall, _Four and Twenty Toilers_.

  Mother Goose, _The Real Mother Goose_ (illus. by Blanche Fisher
     Wright).

  Noyes, Marion, _The Sunshine Primer_.

  Saxby, Lewis, _Life of a Wooden Doll_.

  Seton, Ernest Thompson, _Wild Animal Play for Children_.

  Skinner, A. M., and Lawrence, L. N., _Little Dramas for Primary
     Grades_.

  Smith, Elmer Boyd, _Chicken World_.

  Varney, A. S., _The Robin Reader_.

  Welsh, Charles, (ed.), _Mother Goose Nursery Rhymes_.

  Wiltse, Sara E., _Folklore Stories and Proverbs_.


SECOND GRADE

  Adelborg, Ottilia, _Clean Peter and the Children of Grubbylea_.

  AEsopus, _Fables_ (Dalkeith ed.).

  Bannerman, Mrs. Helen, _Story of Little Black Sambo_.

  Bass, Florence, _Nature Stories for Young Readers: Animal Life_.

  ----, _Nature Stories for Young Readers: Plant Life_.

  Bryce, Catherine Turner, _Stevenson Reader_.

  Burgess, Gelett, _Goops, and How to Be Them_.

  ----, _More Goops, and How Not to Be Them_.

  Caldecott, Randolph, _Come Lasses Picture Book_.

  ----, _Hey Diddle Diddle Picture Book_.

  Coe, Ida, _Story Hour Readers_. Vols. 3, 4.

  Cooke, Flora J., _Nature Myths and Stories for Little Children_.

  Craik, Georgiana Marion, _Bow-wow and Mew-mew_.

  Crane, Walter, _Baby's Own AEsop_.

  Deming, Therese Osterheld, _Little Indian Folk_.

  ----, _Little Red People_.

  Dodge, Mary Mapes, _Rhymes and Jingles_.

  Greenaway, Kate, _Marigold Garden_.

  Haaren, John Henry, _Songs and Stories_.

  Hix, Melvin, _Once-upon-a-Time Stories_.

  Ivimey, John William, _Three Blind Mice_.

  McCullough, Annie Willis, _Little Stories for Little People_.

  Moore, Annie E., _Pennies and Plans_.

  Murray, Clara, _The Child at Play_.

  Poulsson, Emilie, _The Runaway Donkey and Other Rhymes_.

  ----, _Through the Farmyard Gate_.

  Smith, Elmer Boyd, _Farm Book_.

  ----, _Santa Claus Book_.

  ----, _Seashore Book_.

  Smith, Gertrude, _Lovable Tales of Janey and Josey and Joe_.

  ----, _Roggie and Reggie Stories_.

  Tileston, Mary Wilder Foote, _Sugar and Spice and All That's
     Nice_.

  Tolman, Stella Webster Carroll, _Around the World_, Vol. 1.

  Turpin, Edna Henry Lee, _Classic Fables_.

  Weatherly, F. E., _The Book of Gnomes_.


THIRD GRADE

  Aspinwall, Mrs. Alicia, _Short Stories for Short People_.

  Bailey, Carolyn Sherwin, _Boys and Girls of Colonial Days_.

  Brocks, Dorothy, _Red Children_.

  Brooke, Leonard Leslie, _Golden Goose Book_.

  Brown, Abbie Farwell, _Christmas Angel_.

  ----, _Lonesomest Doll_.

  Browning, Robert, _Pied Piper of Hamelin_ (illus. by Hope
     Dunlap).

  Chisholm, Louey, _Nursery Rhymes_.

  Deming, Mrs. Therese Osterheld, _Children of the Wild_.

  ----, _Little Brothers of the West_.

  Dodge, Mrs. Mary Mapes, _New Baby World_.

  Field, Eugene, _Lullaby-land: Songs of Childhood_.

  Foulke, Elizabeth E., _Braided Straws_.

  ----, _Twilight Stories_.

  Francis, Joseph Greene, _Book of Cheerful Cats and Other Animated
     Animals_.

  Gates, Mrs. Josephine Scribner, _Story of Live Dolls_.

  Gerson, Virginia, _Happy Heart Family_.

  Grimm, Jacob L. K., and Wilhelm, K., _Fairy Tales_ (Lucas ed.).

  ----, _Fairy Tales_ (Wiltse ed.).

  Haaren, John Henry, _Fairy Life_.

  Lang, Andrew, _Prince Darling, and Other Stories_.

  Lansing, Marion Florence, _Rhymes and Stories_.

  McMurry, Mrs. Lida Brown, _Classic Stories for the Little Ones_.

  Morley, Margaret Warner, _Seed-Babies_.

  Peary, Mrs. Josephine Diebitsch, _Snow Baby_.

  Perkins, Lucy Fitch, _Dutch Twins_.

  ----, _Japanese Twins_.

  Pierson, Clara Dillingham, _Among the Farmyard People_.

  Pyle, Katharine, _Careless Jane, and Other Tales_.

  Shute, Katherine H., _Land of Song_, Vol. 1.

  Tappan, Eva March, _Dixie Kitten_.

  ----, _Golden Goose_.

  Thorne-Thomsen, Mrs. Gudrun, _East o' the Sun_.

  Trimmer, Mrs. Sarah K., _History of the Robins_.

  Valentine, Mrs. Laura Jewry, _Aunt Louisa's Book of Fairy Tales_.

  Woodward, Alice B., _Peter Pan Picture Book_.


FOURTH GRADE

  Alden, Raymond Macdonald, _Why the Chimes Rang_.

  Andersen, Hans Christian, _Fairy Tales_ (Lucas ed.).

  Barrie, James Matthew, _Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens_.

  Brown, Abbie Farwell, _John of the Woods_.

  Brown, Helen Dawes, _Little Miss Phoebe Gay_.

  Browne, Frances, _Granny's Wonderful Chair, and Its Tales of
     Fairy Times_.

  Campbell, Helen LeRoy, _Story of Konrad, the Swiss Boy_.

  Carryl, Charles Edward, _Davy and the Goblin_.

  Craik, Mrs. Dinah Maria, _Adventures of a Brownie_.

  Crichton, Mrs. F. E., _Peep-in-the-World_.

  Drummond, Henry, _Monkey That Would Not Kill_.

  Faulkner, Georgene, _Italian Fairy Tales_.

  ----, _Russian Fairy Tales_.

  Grimm, Jacob L. K., and Wilhelm K., _Household Fairy Tales_, tr.
     by L. Crane.

  Hopkins, William John, _Sandman: His Farm Stories_.

  Houghton, Mrs. Louise Seymour, _Russian Grandmother's Wonder
     Tales_.

  Ingelow, Jean, _Mopsa the Fairy_.

  Lang, Andrew, _Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp_.

  ----, _Nursery Rhyme Book_.

  ----, _Pretty Goldilocks_.

  ----, _Snow Man_.

  ----, _Snow Queen_.

  Lindsay, Maud, and Poulsson, Emilie, _Joyous Travelers_.

  Lorenzini, Carlo, _Adventures of Pinocchio_.

  Lucas, Edward Verrall, _Book of Verses for Children_.

  Macdonald, George, _Princess and the Goblin_.

  Morley, Margaret Warner, _Donkey John of Toy Valley_.

  O'Shea, Michael Vincent, _Old World Wonder Stories_.

  Paine, Albert Bigelow, _How Mr. Dog Got Even_.

  ----, _How Mr. Rabbit Lost His Tail_.

  Peck, Harry Thurston, _Adventures of Mabel_.

  Pierson, Mrs. Clara Dillingham, _Three Little Millers_.

  Pyle, Katharine, _As the Goose Flies_.

  ----, _Christmas Angel_.

  ----, _Counterpane Fairy_.

  Richards, Mrs. Laura E., _Joyous Story of Toto_.

  ----, _Toto's Merry Winter_.

  Schwartz, Julia Augusta, _Five Little Strangers_.

  Scudder, Horace E., _Book of Fables_.

  ----, _Book of Folk Stories_.

  ----, _Children's Book_.

  Segur, Sophie R. de, _Story of a Donkey_.

  Thorne-Thomsen, Mrs. Gudrun, _Birch and the Star_.

  Walker, Margaret Coulson, _Lady Hollyhock and Her Friends_.

  Welsh, Charles, _Fairy Tales Children Love_.

  Wette, A. H., _Hansel and Gretel_ (illus. in colors).

  White, Eliza Orne, _When Molly Was Six_.

  Williston, Teresa Peirce, _Japanese Fairy Tales_.

  Zwilgmeyer, Dikken, _Johnny Blossom_.


FIFTH GRADE

  Alden, William Livingston, _Cruise of the Canoe Club_.

  ----, _Cruise of the "Ghost."_

  ----, _Moral Pirates_.

  Baldwin, James, _Old Greek Stories_.

  Brown, Abbie Farwell, _In the Days of Giants_.

  Burnett, Frances Hodgson, _Little Lord Fauntleroy_.

  Caldwell, Frank, _Wolf, the Storm Leader_.

  Coburn, Claire Martha, _Our Little Swedish Cousin_.

  Colum, Padraic, _Boy Who Knew What the Birds Said_.

  Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge, _Alice in Wonderland_.

  Duncan, Norman, _Adventures of Billy Topsail_.

  French, Allen, _Story of Rolf and the Viking's Bow_.

  Golding, Vautier, _Story of David Livingstone_.

  Gordy, Wilbur Fisk, _American Leaders and Heroes_.

  Grinnell, George Bird, _Jack among the Indians_.

  Hall, Jennie, _Viking Tales_.

  Jacobs, Joseph, _Celtic Fairy Tales_.

  ----, _English Fairy Tales_.

  Jenks, Albert Ernest, _Childhood of Ji-shib, the Ojibway_.

  Kaler, James Otis, _Mr. Stubbs' Brother_.

  ----, _Toby Tyler_.

  Kipling, Rudyard, _Just-So Stories_.

  Lucas, Edward Verrall, _Book of Verses for Children_.

  Mabie, Hamilton Wright, _Norse Stories_.

  Mighels, Philip Verrill, _Sunnyside Tad_.

  Olcott, Frances Jenkins, _Fairies and Elves_.

  ----, _Arabian Nights_.

  Paine, Albert Bigelow, _Arkansaw Bear_.

  Pendleton, Louis B., _In the Camp of the Creeks_.

  Pyle, Howard, _Garden behind the Moon_.

  ----, _Story of King Arthur and His Knights_.

  ----, _Wonder Clock_.

  Pyle, Katharine, _Nancy Rutledge_.

  Richards, Laura E., _Captain January_.

  Schultz, James Willard, _With the Indians in the Rockies_.

  Seton, Ernest Thompson, _Lives of the Hunted_.

  Spyri, Mrs. Johanna, _Heidi_.

  Stockton, Frank R., _Fanciful Tales_.

  Stoddard, William Osborn, _Little Smoke_.

  Tappan, Eva March, _Robin Hood: His Book_.

  Thackeray, William Makepeace, _Rose and the Ring_.

  Wesselhoeft, Lily F., _Sparrow, the Tramp_.

  Wiggin, Kate Douglas, _Birds' Christmas Carol_.

  Wiggin, Kate Douglas, and Smith, Nora A., _Fairy Ring_.

  Wyss, Johann David, _Swiss Family Robinson_.

  Zollinger, Gulielma, _Widow O'Callaghan's Boys_.


SIXTH GRADE

  Alcott, Louisa M., _Eight Cousins_.

  ----, _Jack and Jill_.

  Baldwin, James, _Story of the Golden Age_.

  ----, _Story of Roland_.

  ----, _Story of Siegfried_.

  Bennett, John, _Barnaby Lee_.

  Bond, Alexander Russell, _Pick, Shovel and Pluck_.

  Bostock, Frank Charles, _Training of Wild Animals_.

  Brooks, Elbridge Streeter, _Master of the Strong Hearts_.

  Brooks, Noah, _Boy Emigrants_ (illus. ed.).

  Browne, Belmore, _Quest of the Golden Valley_.

  Burnett, Mrs. Frances Hodgson, _Little Princess_.

  Crump, Irving, _Boys' Book of Firemen_.

  Daviess, Marie Thompson, _Phyllis_.

  Defoe, Daniel, _Robinson Crusoe_.

  Dix, Beulah Marie, _Merrylips_.

  Dodge, Mrs. Mary Mapes, _Hans Brinker_.

  DuBois, Mary Constance, _Lass of the Silver Sword_.

  Eggleston, George Cary, _Last of the Flatboats_.

  Ford, Sewell. _Horses Nine_.

  French, Allen, _Story of Greltir the Strong_.

  ----, _Junior Cup_.

  Greene, Frances N., and Kirk, Dolly W., _With Spurs of Gold_.

  Greene, Homer, _Blind Brother_.

  Gregor, Elmer Russell, _Red Arrow_.

  Hamp, Sidford Frederick, _Treasure of Mushroom Rock_.

  Hawkes, Clarence, _Shaggycoat: the Biography of a Beaver_.

  Hudson, William Henry, _Little Boy Lost_.

  Inman, Henry, _Ranche on the Oxhide_.

  Irving, Washington, _Rip Van Winkle_.

  Jacobs, Joseph, _Indian Fairy Tales_.

  Johnston, William Allen, _Deeds of Doing and Daring_.

  Kipling, Rudyard, _Jungle Book_.

  Lang, Andrew, _Red True Story Book_.

  Little, Francis, _Camp Jolly_.

  Lothrop, Mrs. Harriet Mulford, _Five Little Peppers_.

  Munroe, Kirk, _Flamingo Feather_.

  Page, Thomas Nelson, _Two Little Confederates_.

  Pyle, Katharine, _Theodora_.

  Rankin, Mrs. Carroll Watson, _Dandelion Cottage_.

  Roberts, Theodore, _Red Feathers_.

  Seaman, Augusta Huiell, _Boarded-up House_.

  Seawell, Molly Elliot, _Little Jarvis_.

  Seton, Ernest Thompson, _Wild Animals I Have Known_.

  Stockton, Frank R., _Bee-Man of Orn_.

  Stoddard, William Osborn, _Red Mustang_.

  Swift, Jonathan, _Gulliver's Travels_.

  Wade, Mrs. Mary Hazelton B., _Wonder Workers_.

  Wallace, Dillon, _Arctic Stowaways_.

  Wesselhoeft, Mrs. Elizabeth Foster, _Jack, the Fire Dog_.


SEVENTH GRADE

  Adams, Joseph Henry, _Harper's Indoor Book for Boys_. _Harper's
     Outdoor Book for Boys._

  Alcott, Louisa M., _Jo's Boys_. _Old-fashioned Girl._ _Under the
    Lilacs._

  Altsheler, Joseph Alexander, _Forest Runners_. _Free Rangers._
     _Young Trailers._

  Barnes, James, _Hero of Erie: Oliver Hazard Perry_. _Yankee Ships
     and Yankee Sailors._

  Browne, Belmore, _White Blanket_.

  Bullen, Frank Thomas, _Cruise of the Cachalot_.

  Burton, Charles Pierce, _The Boys of Bob's Hill_.

  Canavan, Michael Joseph, _Ben Comee: a Tale of Roger's Rangers_.

  Day, Holman Francis, _Eagle Badge_.

  Deland, Ellen Douglas, _Oakleigh_.

  Dix, Beulah Marie, _Little Captive Lad_.

  Dodge, Mrs. Mary Mapes, _Donald and Dorothy_.

  Drysdale, William, _Beach Patrol_. _Cadet Standish of the "St.
     Louis."_ _Fast Mail._ _Young Supercargo._

  Foa, Eugenie, _Boy Life of Napoleon_.

  Garland, Hamlin, _Long Trail_.

  Greene, Homer, _Pickett's Gap_.

  Grey, Zane, _Young Forester_. _Young Pitcher._

  Grinnell, George Bird, _Jack among the Indians_. _Jack in the
     Rockies._ _Jack, the Young Ranchman._

  Hawthorne, Nathaniel, _Grandfather's Chair_.

  Henley, William Ernest, _Lyra Heroica: Book of Verse for Boys_.

  Hill, T., _Fighting a Fire_.

  Hough, Emerson, _Young Alaskans_.

  Hughes, Thomas, _Tom Brown's School Days_.

  Jackson, Mrs. Helen Hunt, _Nellie's Silver Mine_.

  Jacobs, Caroline Emilia, _Joan's Jolly Vacation_. _Joan of Juniper
     Inn._

  Kieffer, Henry Martyn, _Recollections of a Drummer-Boy_.

  Munroe, Kirk, _At War with Pontiac_. _Cab and Caboose._

  Pyle, Howard, _Otto of the Silver Hand_.

  Quirk, Leslie W., _Baby Elton, Quarterback_.

  Roberts, Charles G. D., _Kindred of the Wild_.

  Seton, Ernest Thompson, _Two Little Savages_.

  Stockton, Frank R., _Buccaneers and Pirates of Our Coast_.

  Stoddard, William Osborn, _Red Patriot_. _White Cave._ _Lost
     Gold of the Montezumas._

  Tolman, Albert Walter, _Jim Spurling, Fisherman_.

  Tomlinson, Everett Titsworth, _Search for Andrew Field._ _Three
     Colonial Boys._ _Red Chief._ _Marching against the Iroquois._

  Wiggin, Kate Douglas, _Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm_.

  Zollinger, Gulielma, _Maggie McLanehan_.


EIGHTH GRADE

  Adams, Andy, _Wells Brothers: the Young Cattle Kings_.

  Ashmun, Margaret Eliza, _Isabel Carlton's Year_.

  Barbour, Ralph Henry, _Behind the Line_. _Crimson Sweater._

  Beach, Edward Latimer, _Annapolis First Classman_.

  Bennett, John, _Master Skylark_.

  Catherwood, Mary Hartwell, _Story of Tonty_.

  Cervantes-Saavedra M. de, _Don Quixote_.

  Clemens, Samuel L., _Prince and the Pauper_.

  Coffin, Charles Carleton, _Boys of '76_.

  Cooper, James Fenimore, _Deerslayer_.

  Dana, Richard Henry, _Two Years before the Mast_.

  Doubleday, Russell, _Cattle-Ranch to College_.

  Driggs, Lawrence La Tourette, _Adventures of Arnold Adair,
    American Ace_.

  Duncan, Norman, _Adventures of Billy Topsail_.

  Eggleston, George Cary, _Bale Marked Circle X_.

  French, Harry W., _The Lance of Kanana_.

  Gilbert, A., _More than Conquerors_.

  Gordon, Charles William, _Glengarry School Days_.

  Goss, Warren Lee, _Jed_.

  Hamp, Sidford Frederick, _Dale and Fraser, Sheepmen_.

  Hill, Frederick Trevor, _On the Trail of Grant and Lee_.

  Homer, _Adventures of Odysseus_. (Colum ed.).

  Hughes, Rupert, _Lakerim Athletic Club_.

  Johnston, Charles Haven L., _Famous Scouts_.

  Kipling, Rudyard, _Captains Courageous_.

  London, Jack, _Call of the Wild_.

  Macleod, Mary, _Shakespeare Story Book_.

  Malory, Sir Thomas, _Book of King Arthur and His Noble Knights_.

  Masefield, John, _Martin Hyde_.

  Meigs, Cornelia, _Master Simon's Garden_.

  Moffett, Cleveland, _Careers of Danger and Daring_.

  Montgomery, Lucy Maud, _Anne of Green Gables_.

  Nicolay, Helen, _Boys' Life of Abraham Lincoln_.

  Ollivant, Alfred, _Bob, Son of Battle_.

  Parkman, Mary, _Heroes of To-day_.

  Pendleton, Louis B., _King Tom and the Runaways_.

  Pyle, Howard, _Men of Iron_. _Story of Jack Ballister's Fortunes_.

  Rice, Alice Caldwell H., _Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch_.

  Richards, Laura E., _Florence Nightingale_.

  Richmond, Grace L., _Round the Corner in Gay Street_.

  Roberts, Charles G. D., _Heart of the Ancient Wood_.

  Rolt-Wheeler, Francis William, _Boy with the U. S. Foresters_.

  Schultz, James William, _Quest of the Fish-Dog Skin_.

  Seaman, Augusta Huiell, _Girl Next Door_.

  Singmaster, Elsie, _Emmeline_.

  Tappan, Eva March, _In the Days of Queen Elizabeth_.

  Thompson, Arthur Ripley, _Gold-Seeking on the Dalton Trail_.

  Thompson, James Maurice, _Alice of Old Vincennes_.

  Thurston, Ida Treadwell, _Bishop's Shadow_.

  Trowbridge, John Townsend, _Cudjo's Cave_.

  Verne, Jules, _Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea_.

  Verrill, Alpheus Hyatt, _Marooned in the Forest_.

  Wallace, Dillon, _Wilderness Castaways_.

  Wallace, Lewis, _Ben Hur_.

  Waller, Mary Ella, _Daughter of the Rich_.




INDEX


(A number in blackface type refers to a page on which appears a literary
selection under the title, by the author, or from the book preceding the
number. Book titles are in italics; selection titles and index topics in
roman type; names of authors in capitals and small capitals; and first
lines of nursery rhymes within quotation marks. See Bibliography for
authors and book titles not given in this Index.)

  Abou Ben Adhem, =414=

  "A cat came fiddling out of a barn," =23=

  Accumulative story; _See_ Stories

  ADDISON, J., =294=

  "A diller, a dollar," =23=

  ADLER, F., 53, 263

  Admetus and the Shepherd, =337=

  Adventures of Arthur, =598=

  AESOP, =266-268=, =272=, =273-278=, =264=

  Against Idleness and Mischief, =407=

  _Age of Fable, The_, =339=, =343=, 338

  AIKIN, J., =451=

  ALDEN, R. M., =223=

  Ali Baba, and the Forty Thieves, =579=

  _Alice in Wonderland_, 405

  Allegory, =292=, =294=. _See also_ Fables

  Allen-a-Dale, =628=

  Alnaschar, 279, 579

  _Ancient Legends of Ireland_, 164

  ANDERSEN, H. C., =179-203=, 79, 134, 381, 390;
    appreciation of, 172-173;
    work of, =179=

  _Andersen's Best Fairy Tales_, =179=, =181=

  Androcles, =269=

  Androcles and the Lion, =270=

  Anniversary, An, =34=

  Anxious Leaf, The, =290=

  Apologue, 290, =291=. _See also_ Fable

  Apple of Discord, The, 332

  _Arabian Nights' Entertainment, The_, =579=, 235, 578, 579

  Arab to His Favorite Steed, The, =420=

  Arthur and Sir Accalon, =603=

  Arthur, King, =595-603=, 577, 578, 594

  ASBJOeRNSEN, P., =122-128=;
    work of, 122

  "As I was going to St. Ives," =23=

  "As I was going up Pippen Hill," =23=

  "As I went to Bonner," =23=

  Ass in the Lion's Skin, The, =281=

  "As Tommy Snooks and Bessie Brooks," =23=

  "A swarm of bees in May," =23=

  Autobiography; _See_ Biography

  Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, The, =646=

  A Was an Apple-Pie, =34=


  "Baa, baa, black sheep," =23=

  Babes in the Wood, The, =39=

  Baby Bye, =373=

  BAILEY, C. S., =59=

  BAIN, R. N., =160=

  Ballad, =425=, =436=, =628=, 437, 628

  Ballad of Nathan Hale, The, =425=

  BARBAULD, A. L., =451=

  "Barber, barber, shave a pig," =23=

  Battle between the Fox and the Wolf, The, =591=

  _Bears of Blue River, The_, =500=

  BEAUMONT, MADAME DE, =110=

  Beauty and the Beast, =110=

  BEECHER, H. W., =290=

  _Beowulf_, 577

  Beth Gelert, =436=

  Betty's Ride, A Tale of the Revolution, =496=

  _Beyond the Pasture Bars_, =520=

  _Bible, The_, =288=, =289=

  Bibliography:
    (_a_). General; 2-4;
      Bible as literature for children, 3;
      collections of literature for children, 2;
      dramatization, 3;
      guides in teaching, 2-3;
      historical development, 2;
      interpretations of childhood, 4;
      social and psychological backgrounds, 4;
      story-telling, 3.
    (_b_). Special;
      biography and hero stories, 632;
      fables and symbolic stories, 262;
      fairy stories, modern fantastic tales, 170;
      fairy stories, traditional tales, 52;
      Mother Goose and nursery rhymes, 18;
      myths, 302;
      nature literature, 510;
      poetry, 368;
      realistic stories, 442;
      romance and legend, 576.
    (_c_). Special reading for teachers;
      biography and hero stories, 634;
      modern fairy stories, 173;
      myths, 305;
      nature literature, 512;
      nursery rhymes, 22;
      poetry, 370;
      romance and legend, 578.
    (_d_). Graded lists for children, 12-14, =679-686=

  BIDPAI; history of, 264

  Big Bear, The, =500=

  Biography and hero stories, =635-676=;
    discussion of, 633-634;
    selection of, 633-634;
    value of, 633

  Bird Habits, =549=

  "Birds of a feather flock together," =23=

  BLAKE, W., =400-401=

  "Bless you, bless you, burnie bee," =23=

  Blue Light, The, =134=, 195

  Boats Sail on the Rivers, =394=

  "Bobby Shafto's gone to sea," =24=

  _Book of Golden Deeds, The_, =671=

  _Book of Legends, The_, =620=, 578

  _Book of Nursery Rhymes_ =21=

  _Book of the Dun Cow_, =162=

  Books for children; _See_ Bibliography

  Boots and His Brothers, =125=

  "Bow, wow, wow," =24=

  Boyhood of Washington, The, =642=

  _Boy's Life of Abraham Lincoln, The_, =655=

  Boy's Song, A, =389=

  BRAEKSTAD, H. L., =128=

  Bramble Is Made King, The, =288=

  BRANDES, G., 179, 180, 196, 203

  Breathes There the Man, =424=

  Brier Rose, =142=

  BROOKS, E. S., =635=

  BROWN, T. E., =418=

  BROWNE, F., =210=, =209=

  BROWNING, R., =399=, 398

  Brown Thrush, The, =374=

  BRYANT, S. C., 70

  BRYANT, W. C., =417=, 416

  _Buddhist Birth Stories_, =282=, =283=, 281

  BULFINCH, T., =339=, =343=

  BURGESS, T. W. =515=, 514

  Burial of Poor Cock Robin, The, =44=

  Butterfly's Ball, The, =397=

  "Bye, baby bunting," =24=

  BYRON, LORD, =416=


  Camel and the Pig, The, =281=

  CANBY, H. S., =496=

  Can You, =398=

  CARROLL, L., =405=

  CARY, P., =377=, =378=

  Casabianca, =400=

  Cat and the Mouse, The, =60=

  _Celtic Fairy Tales_, =162=

  CERVANTES-SAAVEDRA, M. DE, =607=, 606

  Change About, =49=

  CHILD, L. M., =375=

  _Children's Book, The_, 642

  Children's Literature; _See_ Literature

  _Child's Guide to Reading, A_, =8=

  Christmas stories, 505

  Cinderella, =102=

  Circus-Day Parade, The, =388=

  City Mouse and the Garden Mouse, The, =268=

  _Classic Myths in English Literature and Art_, 340

  Cock a Doodle Doo, =37=

  Cock and the Fox, The, =284=

  Cock Robin, 42, 44

  Cock, the Cat, and the Young Mouse, The, =285=

  COLE, H., =586=, =591=, 578

  COLERIDGE, S. T., =178=

  COLLINS, WM., =425=

  COLLINS, W. L., =285=

  "Come when you're called," =24=

  Concord Hymn, =424=

  Connla and the Fairy Maiden, =162=

  COOK, E., =402=

  COOLIDGE, S., =377=

  _Cossack Fairy Tales_, =160=

  Country Mouse and the Town Mouse, The, =269=

  Course of Study, 8, 9, 10, 13-16, 512, 577, 633-634

  Courtship of Cock Robin and Jenny Wren, =42=

  Cow, The, =381=

  Cow, The, =392=

  COX, R., 112

  CRAIK, D. M.; _See_ MULOCK

  Croesus and Solon, =299=

  Crossing the Bar, =414=

  "Cross patch," =24=

  Crow and the Pitcher, The, =266=

  "Curly locks! curly locks!" =24=


  Daffodils, =419=

  Dairywoman and the Pot of Milk, The, =278=

  Daisies, =385=

  Dame Wiggins of Lee and Her Seven Wonderful Cats, =45=, 245

  "Dance, little baby, dance up high," =24=

  Darius Green and His Flying Machine, =432=, 336

  DASENT, G. W., =122-125=

  Day Is Done, The, =410=

  DAY, T., =270=, =456=, 270

