rehearsals had been many, the dresses all carefully chosen, the
scenery appropriate-- in short, no pains had been spared to render
this lovely poem of Tennyson's a dramatic success. The absence of
Rosalind Merton had, for a short time, caused a little dismay among
the actors. She had been cast for the part of Melissa:

  "A rosy blonde, and in a college gown
   That clad her like an April daffodilly."

But now it must be taken my some one else.

Little Ada Hardy, who was about Rosalind's height, and had the real
innocence which, alas! poor Rosalind lacked, was sent for in a hurry,
and, carefully drilled by Constance Field and Maggie Oliphant, by the
time the night arrived she was sufficiently prepared to act the
character, slight in itself, which was assigned to her. The other
actors were, of course, fully prepared to take their several parts,
and a number of girls were invested in the

                         "Academic silks, in hue
   The lilac, with a silken hood to each,
   And zoned with gold."

Nothing could have been more picturesque, and there was a buzz of
hearty applause from the many spectators who crowded the galleries and
front seats of the little theater when the curtain rose on the
well-known garden scene, where the Prince, Florian and Cyril saw the
maidens of that first college for women-- that poet's vision, so amply
fulfilled in the happy life at St. Benet's.

                                                       There
  One walk'd, reciting by herself, and one
  In this hand held a volume as to read,
  And smoothed a petted peacock down with that:
  Some to a low song oar'd a shallop by,
  Or under arches of the marble bridge
  Hung, shadow'd from the heat: some hid and sought
  In the orange thickets: others tost a ball
  Above the fountain jets, and back again
  With laughter: others lay about the lawns,
  Of the older sort, and murmur'd that their May
  Was passing: what was learning unto them?
  They wish'd to marry: they could rule a house;
  Men hated learned women. . . ."

The girls walked slowly about among the orange groves and by the
fountain jets. In the distance the chapel bells tolled faint and
sweet. More maidens appeared, and Tennyson's lovely lines were again
represented with such skill, the effect of multitude was so skilfully
managed that the

  "Six hundred maidens, clad in purest white,"

appeared really to fill the gardens,

  "While the great organ almost burst his pipes,
   Groaning for power, and rolling thro' the court
   A long melodious thunder to the sound
   Of solemn psalms, and silver litanies."

The curtain fell, to rise in a few moments amid a burst of applause.
The Princess herself now appeared for the first time on the little
stage. Nothing could have been more admirable than the grouping of
this tableau. All the pride of mien, of race, of indomitable purpose
was visible on the face of the young girl who acted the part of the
Princess Ida.

                                                 "She stood
  Among her maidens, higher by the head,
  Her back against a pillar."

It was impossible, of course, to represent the tame leopards, but the
maidens who gathered round the Princess prevented this want being
apparent, and Maggie Oliphant's attitude and the expression which
filled her bright eyes left nothing to be desired.

"Perfect!" exclaimed the spectators: the interest of every one present
was more than aroused; each individual in the little theater felt,
though no one could exactly tell why, that Maggie was not merely
acting her part, she was living it.

Suddenly she raised her head and looked steadily at the visitors in
the gallery: a wave of rosy red swept over the whitness of her face.
It was evident that she had encountered a glance which disturbed her
composure.

The play proceeded brilliantly, and now the power and originality of
Priscilla's acting divided the attention of the house. Surely there
never was a more impassioned Prince.

Priscilla could sing; her voice was not powerful, but it was low and
rather deeply set. The well-known and familiar song with which the
Prince tried to woo Ida lost little at her hands.

  "O Swallow, Swallow, flying, flying South,
   Fly to her, and fall upon her gilded eaves,
   And tell her, tell her what I tell to thee.
  "O tell her, Swallow, thou that knowest each,
   That bright and fierce and fickle is the South,
   And dark and true and tender is the North.
  "Why lingereth she to clothe her heart with love,
   Delaying as the tender ash delays
   To clothe herself, when all the woods are green?
  "O tell her, brief is life but love is long,
   And brief the sun of summer in the North,
   And brief the moon of beauty in the South.
  "O Swallow, flying from the golden woods,
   Fly to her, and pipe and woo her, and make her mine,
   And tell her, tell her that I follow thee."

The wooing which followed made a curious impression; this impression
was not only produced upon the house, but upon both Prince and
Princess.

Priscilla, too, had encountered Hammond's earnest gaze. That gaze
fired her heart, and she became once again not herself but he; poor,
awkward and gauche little Prissie sank out of sight; she was Hammond
pleading his own cause, she was wooing Maggie for him in the words of
Tennyson's Prince. This fact was the secret of Priscilla's power; she
had felt it more or less whenever she acted the part of the Prince;
but, on this occasion, she communicated the sensations which animated
her own breast to Maggie. Maggie, too, felt that Hammond was speaking
to her through Priscilla's voice.

  "I cannot cease to follow you, as they say
   The seal does music; who desire you more
   Than growing boys their manhood; dying lips,
   With many thousand matters left to do,
   The breath of life; O more than poor men wealth,
   Than sick men health-- yours, yours, not mine-- but half
   Without you; with you, whole; and of those halves
   You worthiest, and howe'er you block and bar
   Your heart with system out from mine, I hold
   That it becomes no man to nurse despair,
   But in the teeth of clench'd antagonisms
   To follow up the worthiest till he die."

In the impassioned reply which followed this address it was noticed
for the first time by the spectators that Maggie scarcely did herself
justice. Her exclamation--

  "I wed with thee! I, bound by precontract
   Your bride, your bondslave!"

was scarcely uttered with the scorn which such a girl would throw into
the words if her heart went with them.

The rest of the play proceeded well, the Prince following up his
advantage until his last words--

  "Accomplish thou my mandhood and thyself;
   Lay thy sweet hands in mine and trust to me,"

brought down the house with ringing applause.

The curtain fell and rose again. The Prince and Princess stood with
hands clasped. The eyes of the conquered Princess looked again at the
people in the gallery, but the eyes she wanted to see did not meet
hers.

An hour later Maggie Oliphant had occasion to go back to the forsaken
green-room to fetch a bracelet she had left there. Priscilla was
standing in the corridor when she passed. Quick as lightning Prissie
disappeared, and, making her way into the library, which was thrown
open for a general reception that evening, sought out Hammond, and,
taking his hand, said abruptly:

"I want you; come with me."

In surprise he followed her into the hall.

"Maggie is in the green-room. Go to her," said Priscilla.

He raised his brows; his eyes seemed to lighten and then grow dark.
They asked Priscilla a thousand questions; his lips refused to ask
one.

Replying to the look in his eyes, Priscilla said again: "It is cruel
of you to leave her alone. Go to her; she is waiting for you-- and oh,
I know that her heart has been waiting for you for a long, long time."

"If I thought that," said Hammond's eyes.

He turned without a word and went down the long corridor which led to
the little theater.
                               _______

Late that evening, after all the bustle and excitement were over and
most of the guests had left, Miss Heath was standing in her own
sitting-room talking to Prissie.

"And you have quite made up your mind, Prissie?"

"Yes," answered Priscilla. "I heard from Aunt Raby to-day; she told me
all about Mr. Hammond's visit, for Mr. Hayes went to see her and told
her everything."

"Well, Prissie," said Miss Heath, "what have you decided? It is a
great chance for you, and there is nothing wrong in it; indeed, for
aught we can tell, this may be the direct guiding of Providence."

"But I don't think it is," said Priscilla in a slow voice. "I have
thought it all over very carefully, and I don't think the chance
offered by dear Maggie would be a good one for me."

"Why not, my dear? Your reasons must be strong when you say this."

"I don't know if they are strong," answered Priscilla, "but they are
at least decided. My father and mother were poor and independent. Aunt
Raby is very poor and also independent. I fancy that were I rich in
comparison, I might cease to be independent. The strong motive power
might go. Something might be taken out of me which I could never get
back, so I----" Her lips trembled.

"Pause a minute, Prissie; remember what Maggie offers, a sufficient
income to support your aunt, to educate your sisters and to enable you
to pursue those studies at St. Benet's for which you have the greatest
talent. Think of the honors that lie before you; think how brilliantly
you may pass your tripos examination with your mind at rest."

"That's not the point," said Priscilla. There was a ring in her voice
which she must have inherited from a long line of rugged, proud but
worthy ancestors. "In a question of this kind, I ought never to
content myself with looking at the brilliant and tempting side.
Forgive me, Miss Heath. I may have done wrong after all; but, right or
wrong, I have made my resolve. I will keep my independence."

"Have you considered your Aunt Raby in this?"

"She has put herself absolutely out of the question by declining all
aid as far as she is concerned. She says such assistance would kill
her in a week. If I can earn money to help her before she dies, she
will accept it from me with thankfulness, but from no one else."

"Then you will give up your Latin and Greek?"

"For the present, I must."

"And you are quite happy?"

"If Maggie and Mr. Hammond will only marry one another, I shall be one
of the happiest girls in the world."

There came a knock at the door. Priscilla opened it.

"Prissie, darling!" said Maggie Oliphant's voice. She flung her arms
round the young girl's neck and kissed her several times.

"It's all right, Priscilla," said Hammond.

Miss Heath made a step or two forward.

"Come and tell Miss Heath," said Prissie. "Miss Heath, here is Maggie!
Here is dear Maggie and here is Mr. Hammond, and it is all right."
Tears of gladness filled Priscilla's eyes. She went up to Hammond,
took one of his hands in both her own and said in a voice of rapture,
"I did help you to-night, didn't I? You know I said I would do
anything in the world for you."

"You have done everything for me, Priscilla," replied Hammond. "I
shall bless you while I live."

Maggie Oliphant's arms were round Miss Heath's neck; her head rested
against her breast. "We have come straight to you," she said; "you
told me that if such an occasion came, you would act as a mother to
me."

"So I can and so I will, dear child. God bless you. You are happy
now."

"Happy!" Maggie's eyes were glistening through the softest rainbow of
tears. Hammond came and took the hand which she had suddenly thrown at
her side.

"We both owe everything to Priscilla," he said.

 CONCLUSION

BEFORE Maggie Oliphant left St. Benet's she brought some of the honor
which had long been expected from her to the dearly loved halls: she
took a first class in her tripos examination. With her mind at rest, a
great deal of the morbidness of her character disappeared, and her
last term at St. Benet's reminded the students who had known her in
Annabel Lee's time of the old, brilliant and happy Maggie. Miss
Oliphant's bad half-hours became rarer and rarer, and Hammond laughed
when she spoke to him of them and said that she could not expect him
to believe in their existence.

Shortly after the conclusion of the summer term Maggie and Hammond
were married, and her little world at St. Benet's had to get on
without the presence which had always exerted the influence of a
strong personality and which had been potent both for good and evil.

By this time, however, a girl whose personal charms were few, whose
poverty was apparent and whose gaucherie was even now often extreme,
was more than filling the place left vacant by Maggie. Extreme
earnestness, the sincerity of a noble purpose, the truthfulness of a
nature which could not stoop to deceit, was spreading an influence on
the side of all that was good and noble. No girl did more honor to
Heath Hall than she who, at one time, was held up to derision and
laughed at as odd, prudish and uninteresting.

Every one prophesied well for Priscilla in the future which lay before
her; her feet were set in the right direction; the aim of her life was
to become-- not learned, but wise; not to build up a reputation, but
to gain character; to put blessedness before happiness-- duty before
inclination.

Women like Priscilla live at the root of the true life of a worthy
nation. Maggie Oliphant had brilliance, beauty, wealth; she had also
strong personal influence and the power of creating love wherever she
went; but, when Priscilla Peel leaves St. Benet's, she will be more
missed than was Maggie.
