and after he had caused all to swear homage and fidelity to him went
and fetched his sister Paribanou, whom he brought with all the pomp and
grandeur imaginable, and made her to be owned Sultaness of the Indies.

As for Prince Ali and Princess Nouronnihar, as they had no hand in the
conspiracy against Prince Ahmed and knew nothing of any, Prince Ahmed
assigned them a considerable province, with its capital, where they
spent the rest of their lives. Afterwards he sent an officer to Prince
Houssain to acquaint him with the change and make him an offer of which
province he liked best; but that Prince thought himself so happy in his
solitude that he bade the officer return the Sultan his brother thanks
for the kindness he designed him, assuring him of his submission; and
that the only favor he desired of him was to give him leave to live
retired in the place he had made choice of for his retreat.(1)


(1) Arabian Nights.




THE HISTORY OF JACK THE GIANT-KILLER


In the reign of the famous King Arthur there lived in Cornwall a lad
named Jack, who was a boy of a bold temper, and took delight in hearing
or reading of conjurers, giants, and fairies; and used to listen eagerly
to the deeds of the knights of King Arthur's Round Table.

In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, off Cornwall, a huge
giant, eighteen feet high and nine feet round; his fierce and savage
looks were the terror of all who beheld him.

He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the top of the mountain, and used to wade
over to the mainland in search of prey; when he would throw half a dozen
oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs round his
waist, and march back to his own abode.

The giant had done this for many years when Jack resolved to destroy
him.

Jack took a horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, his armor, and a dark lantern,
and one winter's evening he went to the mount. There he dug a pit
twenty-two feet deep and twenty broad. He covered the top over so as to
make it look like solid ground. He then blew his horn so loudly that the
giant awoke and came out of his den crying out: "You saucy villain! you
shall pay for this I'll broil you for my breakfast!"

He had just finished, when, taking one step further, he tumbled headlong
into the pit, and Jack struck him a blow on the head with his pickaxe
which killed him. Jack then returned home to cheer his friends with the
news.

Another giant, called Blunderbore, vowed to be revenged on Jack if ever
he should have him in his power. This giant kept an enchanted castle in
the midst of a lonely wood; and some time after the death of Cormoran
Jack was passing through a wood, and being weary, sat down and went to
sleep.

The giant, passing by and seeing Jack, carried him to his castle, where
he locked him up in a large room, the floor of which was covered with
the bodies, skulls and bones of men and women.

Soon after the giant went to fetch his brother who was likewise a giant,
to take a meal off his flesh; and Jack saw with terror through the bars
of his prison the two giants approaching.

Jack, perceiving in one corner of the room a strong cord, took courage,
and making a slip-knot at each end, he threw them over their heads, and
tied it to the window-bars; he then pulled till he had choked them. When
they were black in the face he slid down the rope and stabbed them to
the heart.

Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore,
and went into the castle again. He made a strict search through all
the rooms, and in one of them found three ladies tied up by the hair
of their heads, and almost starved to death. They told him that their
husbands had been killed by the giants, who had then condemned them to
be starved to death because they would not eat the flesh of their own
dead husbands.

"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked
brother; and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains, to
make some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt." He then very
politely gave them the keys of the castle, and went further on his
journey to Wales.

As Jack had but little money, he went on as fast as possible. At length
he came to a handsome house. Jack knocked at the door, when there came
forth a Welsh giant. Jack said he was a traveler who had lost his way,
on which the giant made him welcome, and let him into a room where there
was a good bed to sleep in.

Jack took off his clothes quickly, but though he was weary he could not
go to sleep. Soon after this he heard the giant walking backward and
forward in the next room, and saying to himself:

  "Though here you lodge with me this night,
  You shall not see the morning light;
  My club shall dash your brains out quite."


"Say you so?" thought Jack. "Are these your tricks upon travelers? But
I hope to prove as cunning as you are." Then, getting out of bed, he
groped about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood.
He laid it in his own place in the bed, and then hid himself in a dark
corner of the room.

The giant, about midnight, entered the apartment, and with his bludgeon
struck many blows on the bed, in the very place where Jack had laid the
log; and then he went back to his own room, thinking he had broken all
Jack's bones.

Early in the morning Jack put a bold face upon the matter, and walked
into the giant's room to thank him for his lodging. The giant started
when he saw him, and began to stammer out: "Oh! dear me; is it you? Pray
how did you sleep last night? Did you hear or see anything in the dead
of the night?"

"Nothing to speak of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I believe, gave me
three or four slaps with its tail, and disturbed me a little; but I soon
went to sleep again."

The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a word,
but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their breakfast.
Jack wanted to make the giant believe that he could eat as much as
himself, so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat, and
slip the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to put it into his
mouth.

When breakfast was over he said to the giant: "Now I will show you a
fine trick. I can cure all wounds with a touch; I could cut off my head
in one minute, and the next put it sound again on my shoulders. You
shall see an example." He then took hold of the knife, ripped up the
leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon the floor.

"Ods splutter hur nails!" cried the Welsh giant, who was ashamed to be
outdone by such a little fellow as Jack, "hur can do that hurself";
so he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his own stomach, and in a
moment dropped down dead.

Jack, having hitherto been successful in all his undertakings, resolved
not to be idle in future; he therefore furnished himself with a horse,
a cap of knowledge, a sword of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and an
invisible coat, the better to perform the wonderful enterprises that lay
before him.

He traveled over high hills, and on the third day he came to a large and
spacious forest through which his road lay. Scarcely had he entered the
forest when he beheld a monstrous giant dragging along by the hair
of their heads a handsome knight and his lady. Jack alighted from his
horse, and tying him to an oak tree, put on his invisible coat, under
which he carried his sword of sharpness.

When he came up to the giant he made several strokes at him, but could
not reach his body, but wounded his thighs in several places; and at
length, putting both hands to his sword and aiming with all his might,
he cut off both his legs. Then Jack, setting his foot upon his neck,
plunged his sword into the giant's body, when the monster gave a groan
and expired.

The knight and his lady thanked Jack for their deliverance, and invited
him to their house, to receive a proper reward for his services. "No,"
said Jack, "I cannot be easy till I find out this monster's habitation."
So, taking the knight's directions, he mounted his horse and soon after
came in sight of another giant, who was sitting on a block of timber
waiting for his brother's return.

Jack alighted from his horse, and, putting on his invisible coat,
approached and aimed a blow at the giant's head, but, missing his aim,
he only cut off his nose. On this the giant seized his club and laid
about him most unmercifully.

"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case I'd better dispatch you!" so,
jumping upon the block, he stabbed him in the back, when he dropped down
dead.

Jack then proceeded on his journey, and traveled over hills and dales,
till arriving at the foot of a high mountain he knocked at the door of a
lonely house, when an old man let him in.

When Jack was seated the hermit thus addressed him: "My son, on the top
of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by the giant Galligantus
and a vile magician. I lament the fate of a duke's daughter, whom they
seized as she was walking in her father's garden, and brought hither
transformed into a deer."

Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would
break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep he rose early, put on his
invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt.

When he had climbed to the top of the mountain he saw two fiery
griffins, but he passed between them without the least fear of danger,
for they could not see him because of his invisible coat. On the castle
gate he found a golden trumpet, under which were written these lines:

  "Whoever can this trumpet blow
  Shall cause the giant's overthrow."


As soon as Jack had read this he seized the trumpet and blew a shrill
blast, which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself tremble.

The giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an
end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking with fear. Jack,
with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant, and the magician was
then carried away by a whirlwind; and every knight and beautiful lady
who had been changed into birds and beasts returned to their proper
shapes. The castle vanished away like smoke, and the head of the giant
Galligantus was then sent to King Arthur.

The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage, and
next day they set out for the Court. Jack then went up to the King, and
gave his Majesty an account of all his fierce battles.

Jack's fame had now spread through the whole country, and at the King's
desire the duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all his
kingdom. After this the King gave him a large estate, on which he and
his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and contentment.(1)


(1) Old Chapbook.




THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY


     And many a hunting song they sung,
       And song of game and glee;
     Then tuned to plaintive strains their tongue,
       "Of Scotland's luve and lee."
     To wilder measures next they turn
       "The Black, Black Bull of Norroway!"
     Sudden the tapers cease to burn,
       The minstrels cease to play.

            "The Cout of Keeldar," by J. Leyden.


In Norroway, langsyne, there lived a certain lady, and she had three
dochters. The auldest o' them said to her mither: "Mither, bake me a
bannock, and roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune."
Her mither did sae; and the dochter gaed awa' to an auld witch
washerwife and telled her purpose. The auld wife bade her stay that day,
and gang and look out o' her back door, and see what she could see. She
saw nocht the first day. The second day she did the same, and saw nocht.
On the third day she looked again, and saw a coach-and-six coming along
the road. She ran in and telled the auld wife what she saw. "Aweel,"
quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae they took her into the coach,
and galloped aff.

The second dochter next says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock,
and roast me a collop, fur I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither
did sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld wife, as her sister had dune. On
the third day she looked out o' the back door, and saw a coach-and-four
coming along the road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae
they took her in, and aff they set.

The third dochter says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock, and
roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither did
sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld witch-wife. She bade her look out
o' her back door, and see what she could see. She did sae; and when she
came back said she saw nocht. The second day she did the same, and saw
nocht. The third day she looked again, and on coming back said to the
auld wife she saw nocht but a muckle Black Bull coming roaring alang the
road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." On hearing this she
was next to distracted wi' grief and terror; but she was lifted up and
set on his back, and awa' they went.

Aye they traveled, and on they traveled, till the lady grew faint wi'
hunger. "Eat out o' my right lug," says the Black Bull, "and drink out
o' my left lug, and set by your leavings." Sae she did as he said, and
was wonderfully refreshed. And lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till
they came in sight o' a very big and bonny castle. "Yonder we maun be
this night," quo' the bull; "for my auld brither lives yonder"; and
presently they were at the place. They lifted her aff his back, and took
her in, and sent him away to a park for the night. In the morning,
when they brought the bull hame, they took the lady into a fine shining
parlor, and gave her a beautiful apple, telling her no to break it till
she was in the greatest strait ever mortal was in in the world, and that
wad bring her o't. Again she was lifted on the bull's back, and after
she had ridden far, and farer than I can tell, they came in sight o' a
far bonnier castle, and far farther awa' than the last. Says the bull
till her: "Yonder we maun be the night, for my second brither lives
yonder"; and they were at the place directly. They lifted her down
and took her in, and sent the bull to the field for the night. In the
morning they took the lady into a fine and rich room, and gave her the
finest pear she had ever seen, bidding her no to break it till she was
in the greatest strait ever mortal could be in, and that wad get her out
o't. Again she was lifted and set on his back, and awa' they went. And
lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till they came in sight o' the far
biggest castle, and far farthest aff, they had yet seen. "We maun be
yonder the night," says the bull, "for my young brither lives yonder";
and they were there directly. They lifted her down, took her in, and
sent the bull to the field for the night. In the morning they took her
into a room, the finest of a', and gied her a plum, telling her no to
break it till she was in the greatest strait mortal could be in, and
that wad get her out o't. Presently they brought hame the bull, set the
lady on his back, and awa' they went.

And aye they gaed, and on they rade, till they came to a dark and ugsome
glen, where they stopped, and the lady lighted down. Says the bull to
her: "Here ye maun stay till I gang and fight the deil. Ye maun seat
yoursel' on that stane, and move neither hand nor fit till I come back,
else I'll never find ye again. And if everything round about ye turns
blue I hae beated the deil; but should a' things turn red he'll hae
conquered me." She set hersel' down on the stane, and by-and-by a' round
her turned blue. O'ercome wi' joy, she lifted the ae fit and crossed it
owre the ither, sae glad was she that her companion was victorious. The
bull returned and sought for but never could find her.

Lang she sat, and aye she grat, till she wearied. At last she rase and
gaed awa', she kedna whaur till. On she wandered till she came to a
great hill o' glass, that she tried a' she could to climb, bat wasna
able. Round the bottom o' the hill she gaed, sabbing and seeking a
passage owre, till at last she came to a smith's house; and the smith
promised, if she wad serve him seven years, he wad make her iron shoon,
wherewi' she could climb owre the glassy hill. At seven years' end she
got her iron shoon, clamb the glassy hill, and chanced to come to the
auld washerwife's habitation. There she was telled of a gallant young
knight that had given in some bluidy sarks to wash, and whaever washed
thae sarks was to be his wife. The auld wife had washed till she was
tired, and then she set to her dochter, and baith washed, and they
washed, and they better washed, in hopes of getting the young knight;
but a' they could do they couldna bring out a stain. At length they set
the stranger damosel to wark; and whenever she began the stains came
out pure and clean, but the auld wife made the knight believe it was her
dochter had washed the sarks. So the knight and the eldest dochter were
to be married, and the stranger damosel was distracted at the thought
of it, for she was deeply in love wi' him. So she bethought her of her
apple, and breaking it, found it filled with gold and precious jewelry,
the richest she had ever seen. "All these," she said to the eldest
dochter, "I will give you, on condition that you put off your marriage
for ae day, and allow me to go into his room alone at night." So
the lady consented; but meanwhile the auld wife had prepared a
sleeping-drink, and given it to the knight, wha drank it, and never
wakened till next morning. The lee-lang night ther damosel sabbed and
sang:

  "Seven lang years I served for thee,
  The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
  The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
  And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"


Next day she kentna what to do for grief. She then brak the pear, and
found it filled wi' jewelry far richer than the contents o' the apple.
Wi' thae jewels she bargained for permission to be a second night in
the young knight's chamber; but the auld wife gied him anither
sleeping-drink, and he again sleepit till morning. A' night she kept
sighing and singing as before:

"Seven lang years I served for thee," &c. Still he sleepit, and she
nearly lost hope a'thegither. But that day when he was out at the
hunting, somebody asked him what noise and moaning was yon they heard
all last night in his bedchamber. He said he heardna ony noise. But they
assured him there was sae; and he resolved to keep waking that night
to try what he could hear. That being the third night, and the damosel
being between hope and despair, she brak her plum, and it held far the
richest jewelry of the three. She bargained as before; and the auld
wife, as before, took in the sleeping-drink to the young knight's
chamber; but he telled her he couldna drink it that night without
sweetening. And when she gaed awa' for some honey to sweeten it wi', he
poured out the drink, and sae made the auld wife think he had drunk it.
They a' went to bed again, and the damosel began, as before, singing:

  "Seven lang years I served for thee,
  The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
  The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
  And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"

He heard, and turned to her. And she telled him a' that had befa'en her,
and he telled her a' that had happened to him. And he caused the auld
washerwife and her dochter to be burned. And they were married, and he
and she are living happy till this day, for aught I ken.(1)


(1) Chambers, Popular Traditions of Scotland.




THE RED ETIN


There were ance twa widows that lived on a small bit o' ground, which
they rented from a farmer. Ane of them had twa sons, and the other had
ane; and by-and-by it was time for the wife that had twa sons to send
them away to seeke their fortune. So she told her eldest son ae day to
take a can and bring her water from the well, that she might bake a cake
for him; and however much or however little water he might bring, the
cake would be great or sma' accordingly; and that cake was to be a' that
she could gie him when he went on his travels.

The lad gaed away wi' the can to the well, and filled it wi' water, and
then came away hame again; but the can being broken the maist part of
the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very sma'; yet
sma' as it was, his mother asked if he was willing to take the half of
it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to have the
hale, he would only get it wi' her curse. The young man, thinking he
might hae to travel a far way, and not knowing when or how he might get
other provisions, said he would like to hae the hale cake, com of his
mother's malison what like; so she gave him the hale cake, and her
malison alang wi't. Then he took his brither aside, and gave him a
knife to keep till he should come back, desiring him to look at it every
morning, and as lang as it continued to be clear, then he might be sure
that the owner of it was well; but if it grew dim and rusty, then for
certain some ill had befallen him.

So the young man set out to seek his fortune. And he gaed a' that day,
and a' the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up
to where a shepherd was sitting with a flock o' sheep. And he gaed up
to the shepherd and asked him wha the sheep belanged to; and the man
answered:


     "The Red Etin of Ireland
       Ance lived in Bellygan,
     And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
       The King of fair Scotland.
     He beats her, he binds her,
       He lays her on a band;
     And every day he dings her
       With a bright silver wand
     Like Julian the Roman
     He's one that fears no man.
     It's said there's ane predestinate
       To be his mortal foe;
     But that man is yet unborn
       And lang may it be so."

The young man then went on his journey; and he had not gone far when he
espied an old man with white locks herding a flock of swine; and he gaed
up to him and asked whose swine these were, when the man answered:

     "The Red Etin of Ireland"--
            (Repeat the verses above.)

Then the young man gaed on a bit farther, and came to another very old
man herding goats; and when he asked whose goats they were, the answer
was:

     "The Red Etin of Ireland"--
            (Repeat the verses again.)

This old man also told him to beware of the next beasts that he should
meet, for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.

So the young man went on, and by-and-by he saw a multitude of very
dreadfu' beasts, ilk ane o' them wi' twa heads, and on every head four
horns. And he was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast as he
could; and glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a hillock,
wi' the door standing wide to the wa'. And he gaed into the castle for
shelter, and there he saw an auld wife sitting beside the kitchen fire.
He asked the wife if he might stay there for the night, as he was tired
wi' a lang journey; and the wife said he might, but it was not a good
place for him to be in, as it belanged to the Red Etin, who was a very
terrible beast, wi' three heads, that spared no living man he could get
hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was afraid of the
beasts on the outside of the castle; so he beseeched the old woman to
conceal him as well as she could, and not to tell the Etin that he was
there. He thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in
