It took them many days' hard riding before they reached the country
where the Man-eater lived, and then the horse told Ciccu to stop a group
of old women who were coming chattering through the wood, and offer them
each a shilling if they would collect a number of mosquitos and tie
them up in a bag. When the bag was full Ciccu put it on his shoulder
and stole into the house of the Man-eater (who had gone to look for his
dinner) and let them all out in his bedroom. He himself hid carefully
under the bed and waited. The Man-eater came in late, very tired with
his long walk, and flung himself on the bed, placing his sword with its
shining blade by his side. Scarcely had he lain down than the mosquitos
began to buzz about and bite him, and he rolled from side to side trying
to catch them, which he never could do, though they always seemed to
be close to his nose. He was so busy over the mosquitos that he did
not hear Ciccu steal softly out, or see him catch up the sword. But the
horse heard and stood ready at the door, and as Ciccu came flying down
the stairs and jumped on his back he sped away like the wind, and never
stopped till they arrived at the king's palace.

The king had suffered much pain in his absence, thinking that if the
Man-eater ate Ciccu, it would be all his fault. And he was so overjoyed
to have him safe that he almost forgot the sword which he had sent him
to bring. But the two brothers did not love Ciccu any better because
he had succeeded when they hoped he would have failed, and one day they
spoke to the king. 'It is all very well for Ciccu to have got possession
of the sword, but it would have been far more to your majesty's honour
if he had captured the Man-eater himself.' The king thought upon these
words, and at last he said to Ciccu, 'Ciccu, I shall never rest until
you bring me back the Man-eater himself. You may have any help you like,
but somehow or other you must manage to do it.' Ciccu felt very much
cast, down at these words, and went to the stable to ask advice of his
friend the horse. 'Fear nothing,' said the horse; 'just say you want me
and fifty pieces of gold.' Ciccu did as he was bid, and the two set out
together.

When they reached the country of the Man-eater, Ciccu made all the
church bells toll and a proclamation to be made. 'Ciccu, the servant of
the king, is dead.' The Man-eater soon heard what everyone was saying,
and was glad in his heart, for he thought, 'Well, it is good news that
the thief who stole my sword is dead.' But Ciccu bought an axe and a
saw, and cut down a pine tree in the nearest wood, and began to hew it
into planks.

'What are you doing in my wood?' asked the Maneater, coming up.


'Noble lord,' answered Ciccu, 'I am making a coffin for the body of
Ciccu, who is dead.'

'Don't be in a hurry,' answered the Man-eater, who of course did not
know whom he was talking to, 'and perhaps I can help you;' and they set
to work sawing and fitting, and very soon the coffin was finished.

Then Ciccu scratched his ear thoughtfully, and cried, 'Idiot that I am!
I never took any measures. How am I to know if it is big enough? But now
I come to think of it, Ciccu was about your size. I wonder if you would
be so good as just to put yourself in the coffin, and see if there is
enough room.'

'Oh, delighted!' said the Man-eater, and laid himself at full length in
the coffin. Ciccu clapped on the lid, put a strong cord round it, tied
it fast on his horse, and rode back to the king. And when the king saw
that he really had brought back the Man-eater, he commanded a huge iron
chest to be brought, and locked the coffin up inside.

Just about this time the queen died, and soon after the king thought he
should like to marry again. He sought everywhere, but he could not hear
of any princess that took his fancy. Then the two envious brothers came
to him and said, 'O king! there is but one woman that is worthy of being
your wife, and that is she who is the fairest in the whole world.'

'But where can I find her?' asked the king

'Oh, Ciccu will know, and he will bring her to you.'

Now the king had got so used to depending on Ciccu, that he really
believed he could do everything. So he sent for him and said, 'Ciccu,
unless within eight days you bring me the fairest in the whole world, I
will have you hewn into a thousand pieces.' This mission seemed to Ciccu
a hundred times worse than either of the others, and with tears in his
eyes he took his way to the stables.

'Cheer up,' laughed the horse; 'tell the king you must have some bread
and honey, and a purse of gold, and leave the rest to me.'

Ciccu did as he was bid, and they started at a gallop.

After they had ridden some way, they saw a swarm of bees lying on the
ground, so hungry and weak that they were unable to fly. 'Get down, and
give the poor things some honey,' said the horse, and Ciccu dismounted.
By-and-bye they came to a stream, on the bank of which was a fish,
flapping feebly about in its efforts to reach the water. 'Jump down, and
throw the fish into the water; he will be useful to us,' and Ciccu did
so. Farther along the hillside they saw an eagle whose leg was caught
in a snare. 'Go and free that eagle from the snare; he will be useful to
us; ' and in a moment the eagle was soaring up into the sky.

At length they came to the castle where the fairest in the world lived
with her parents. Then said the horse, 'You must get down and sit upon
that stone, for I must enter the castle alone. Directly you see me come
tearing by with the princess on my back, jump up behind, and hold her
tight, so that she does not escape you. If you fail to do this, we are
both lost.' Ciccu seated himself on the stone, and the horse went on to
the courtyard of the castle, where he began to trot round in a graceful
and elegant manner. Soon a crowd collected first to watch him and then
to pat him, and the king and queen and princess came with the rest.
The eyes of the fairest in the world brightened as she looked, and she
sprang on the horse's saddle, crying, 'Oh, I really must ride him a
little!' But the horse made one bound forward, and the princess was
forced to hold tight by his mane, lest she should fall off. And as they
dashed past the stone where Ciccu was waiting for them, he swung himself
up and held her round the waist. As he put his arms round her waist, the
fairest in the world unwound the veil from her head and cast it to the
ground, and then she drew a ring from her finger and flung it into the
stream. But she said nothing, and they rode on fast, fast.

The king of Ciccu's country was watching for them from the top of a
tower, and when he saw in the distance a cloud of dust, he ran down
to the steps so as to be ready to receive them. Bowing low before the
fairest in the world, he spoke: 'Noble lady, will you do me the honour
to become my wife?'

But she answered, 'That can only be when Ciccu brings me the veil that I
let fall on my way here.'

And the king turned to Ciccu and said, 'Ciccu, if you do not find the
veil at once, you shall lose your head.'

Ciccu, who by this time had hoped for a little peace, felt his heart
sink at this fresh errand, and he went into the stable to complain to
the faithful horse.

'It will be all right,' answered the horse when he had heard his tale;
'just take enough food for the day for both of us, and then get on my
back.'

They rode back all the way they had come till they reached the place
where they had found the eagle caught in the snare; then the horse bade
Ciccu to call three times on the king of the birds, and when he replied,
to beg him to fetch the veil which the fairest in the world had let
fall.

'Wait a moment,' answered a voice that seemed to come from somewhere
very high up indeed. 'An eagle is playing with it just now, but he will
be here with it in an instant;' and a few minutes after there was a
sound of wings, and an eagle came fluttering towards them with the veil
in his beak. And Ciccu saw it was the very same eagle that he had freed
from the snare. So he took the veil and rode back to the king.

Now the king was enchanted to see him so soon, and took the veil from
Ciccu and flung it over the princess, crying, 'Here is the veil you
asked for, so I claim you for my wife.'

'Not so fast,' answered she. 'I can never be your wife till Ciccu puts
on my finger the ring I threw into the stream. Ciccu, who was standing
by expecting something of the sort, bowed his head when he heard her
words, and went straight to the horse.

'Mount at once,' said the horse; 'this time it is very simple,' and he
carried Ciccu to the banks of the little stream. 'Now, call three times
on the emperor of the fishes, and beg him to restore you the ring that
the princess dropped.

Ciccu did as the horse told him, and a voice was heard in answer that
seemed to come from a very long way off.

'What is your will?' it asked; and Ciccu replied that he had been
commanded to bring back the ring that the princess had flung away, as
she rode past.

'A fish is playing with it just now,' replied the voice; 'however, you
shall have it without delay.'

And sure enough, very soon a little fish was seen rising to the surface
with the lost ring in his mouth. And Ciccu knew him to be the fish that
he had saved from death, and he took the ring and rode back with it to
the king.

'That is not enough,' exclaimed the princess when she saw the ring;
'before we can be man and wife, the oven must be heated for three days
and three nights, and Ciccu must jump in.' And the king forgot how Ciccu
had served him, and desired him to do as the princess had said.

This time Ciccu felt that no escape was possible, and he went to the
horse and laid his hand on his neck. 'Now it is indeed good-bye, and
there is no help to be got even from you,' and he told him what fate
awaited him.

But the horse said, 'Oh, never lose heart, but jump on my back, and make
me go till the foam flies in flecks all about me. Then get down, and
scrape off the foam with a knife. This you must rub all over you, and
when you are quite covered, you may suffer yourself to be cast into the
oven, for the fire will not hurt you, nor anything else.' And Ciccu did
exactly as the horse bade him, and went back to the king, and before the
eyes of the fairest in the world he sprang into the oven.

And when the fairest in the world saw what he had done, love entered
into her heart, and she said to the king, 'One thing more: before I can
be your wife, you must jump into the oven as Ciccu has done.'

'Willingly,' replied the king, stooping over the oven. But on the brink
he paused a moment and called to Ciccu, 'Tell me, Ciccu, how did you
manage to prevent the fire burning you?'

Now Ciccu could not forgive his master, whom he had served so
faithfully, for sending him to his death without a thought, so he
answered, 'I rubbed myself over with fat, and I am not even singed.'

When he heard these words, the king, whose head was full of the
princess, never stopped to inquire if they could be true, and smeared
himself over with fat, and sprang into the oven. And in a moment the
fire caught him, and he was burned up.

Then the fairest in the world held out her hand to Ciccu and smiled,
saying, 'Now we will be man and wife.' So Ciccu married the fairest in
the world, and became king of the country.




Don Giovanni De La Fortuna

Sicilianische Mahrchen


There was once a man whose name was Don Giovanni de la Fortuna, and he
lived in a beautiful house that his father had built, and spent a great
deal of money. Indeed, he spent so much that very soon there was none
left, and Don Giovanni, instead of being a rich man with everything
he could wish for, was forced to put on the dress of a pilgrim, and to
wander from place to place begging his bread.

One day he was walking down a broad road when he was stopped by a
handsome man he had never seen before, who, little as Don Giovanni knew
it, was the devil himself.

'Would you like to be rich,' asked the devil, 'and to lead a pleasant
life?'

'Yes, of course I should,' replied the Don.

'Well, here is a purse; take it and say to it, "Dear purse, give me some
money," and you will get as much as you can want But the charm will only
work if you promise to remain three years, three months, and three days
without washing and without combing and without shaving your beard or
changing your clothes. If you do all this faithfully, when the time is
up you shall keep the purse for yourself, and I will let you off any
other conditions.'

Now Don Giovanni was a man who never troubled his head about the future.
He did not once think how very uncomfortable he should be all those
three years, but only that he should be able, by means of the purse,
to have all sorts of things he had been obliged to do without; so he
joyfully put the purse in his pocket and went on his way. He soon began
to ask for money for the mere pleasure of it, and there was always as
much as he needed. For a little while he even forgot to notice how dirty
he was getting, but this did not last long, for his hair became matted
with dirt and hung over his eyes, and his pilgrim's dress was a mass of
horrible rags and tatters.

He was in this state when, one morning, he happened to be passing a fine
palace; and, as the sun was shining bright and warm, he sat down on the
steps and tried to shake off some of the dust which he had picked up on
the road. But in a few minutes a maid saw him, and said to her master,
'I pray you, sir, to drive away that beggar who is sitting on the steps,
or he will fill the whole house with his dirt.'

So the master went out and called from some distance off, for he was
really afraid to go near the man, 'You filthy beggar, leave my house at
once!'

'You need not be so rude,' said Don Giovanni; 'I am not a beggar, and if
I chose I could force you and your wife to leave your house.'

'What is that you can do?' laughed the gentleman.

'Will you sell me your house?' asked Don Giovanni. 'I will buy it from
you on the spot.'

'Oh, the dirty creature is quite mad!' thought the gentleman. 'I shall
just accept his offer for a joke.' And aloud he said: ' All right;
follow me, and we will go to a lawyer and get him to make a contract.'
And Don Giovanni followed him, and an agreement was drawn up by which
the house was to be sold at once, and a large sum of money paid down in
eight days. Then the Don went to an inn, where he hired two rooms, and,
standing in one of them, said to his purse, ' Dear purse, fill this room
with gold;' and when the eight days were up it was so full you could not
have put in another sovereign.

When the owner of the house came to take away his money Don Giovanni
led him into the room and said: 'There, just pocket what you want.' The
gentleman stared with open mouth at the astonishing sight; but he had
given his word to sell the house, so he took his money, as he was told,
and went away with his wife to look for some place to live in. And Don
Giovanni left the inn and dwelt in the beautiful rooms, where his rags
and dirt looked sadly out of place. And every day these got worse and
worse.

By-and-bye the fame of his riches reached the ears of the king, and, as
he himself was always in need of money, he sent for Don Giovanni, as he
wished to borrow a large sum. Don Giovanni readily agreed to lend him
what he wanted, and sent next day a huge waggon laden with sacks of
gold.

'Who can he be?' thought the king to himself. 'Why, he is much richer
than I!'

The king took as much as he had need of; then ordered the rest to be
returned to Don Giovanni, who refused to receive it, saying, 'Tell his
majesty I am much hurt at his proposal. I shall certainly not take
back that handful of gold, and, if he declines to accept it, keep it
yourself.'

The servant departed and delivered the message, and the king wondered
more than ever how anyone could be so rich. At last he spoke to the
queen: 'Dear wife, this man has done me a great service, and has,
besides, behaved like a gentleman in not allowing me to send back the
money. I wish to give him the hand of our eldest daughter.'

The queen was quite pleased at this idea, and again messenger was sent
to Don Giovanni, offering him the hand of the eldest princess.


'His majesty is too good,' he replied. 'I can only humbly accept the
honour.'

The messenger took back this answer, but a second time returned with the
request that Don Giovanni would present them with his picture, so that
they might know what sort of a person to expect. But when it came, and
the princess saw the horrible figure, she screamed out, 'What! marry
this dirty beggar? Never, never!'

'Ah, child,' answered the king, 'how could I ever guess that the rich
Don Giovanni would ever look like that? But I have passed my royal word,
and I cannot break it, so there is no help for you.'

'No, father; you may cut off my head, if you choose, but marry that
horrible beggar--I never will!'

And the queen took her part, and reproached her husband bitterly for
wishing his daughter to marry a creature like that.

Then the youngest daughter spoke: 'Dear father, do not look so sad. As
you have given your word, I will marry Don Giovanni.' The king fell on
her neck, and thanked her and kissed her, but the queen and the elder
girl had nothing for her but laughs and jeers.

So it was settled, and then the king bade one of his lords go to
Don Giovanni and ask him when the wedding day was to be, so that the
princess might make ready.

'Let it be in two months,' answered Don Giovanni, for the time was
nearly up that the devil had fixed, and he wanted a whole month to
himself to wash off the dirt of the past three years.

The very minute that the compact with the devil had come to an end his
beard was shaved, his hair was cut, and his rags were burned, and day
and night he lay in a bath of clear warm water. At length he felt he was
clean again, and he put on splendid clothes, and hired a beautiful ship,
and arrived in state at the king's palace.

The whole of the royal family came down to the ship to receive him, and
the whole way the queen and the elder princess teased the sister about
the dirty husband she was going to have. But when they saw how handsome
he really was their hearts were filled with envy and anger, so that
their eyes were blinded, and they fell over into the sea and were
drowned. And the youngest daughter rejoiced in the good luck that had
come to her, and they had a splendid wedding when the days of mourning
