was a terrible fall, I can tell you! He landed on his head with his leg
in the air, his gun being wedged between two paving-stones.

The nursery-maid and the little boy came down at once to look for him,
but, though they were so near him that they almost trod on him, they did
not notice him. If the Tin-soldier had only called out 'Here I am!' they
must have found him; but he did not think it fitting for him to cry out,
because he had on his uniform.

Soon it began to drizzle; then the drops came faster, and there was a
regular down-pour. When it was over, two little street boys came along.

'Just look!' cried one. 'Here is a Tin-soldier! He shall sail up and
down in a boat!'

So they made a little boat out of newspaper, put the Tin-soldier in it,
and made him sail up and down the gutter; both the boys ran along beside
him, clapping their hands. What great waves there were in the gutter,
and what a swift current! The paper-boat tossed up and down, and in the
middle of the stream it went so quick that the Tin-soldier trembled; but
he remained steadfast, showed no emotion, looked straight in front
of him, shouldering his gun. All at once the boat passed under a long
tunnel that was as dark as his box had been.

'Where can I be coming now?' he wondered. 'Oh, dear! This is the black
imp's fault! Ah, if only the little lady were sitting beside me in the
boat, it might be twice as dark for all I should care!'

Suddenly there came along a great water-rat that lived in the tunnel.

'Have you a passport?' asked the rat. 'Out with your passport!'

But the Tin-soldier was silent, and grasped his gun more firmly.

The boat sped on, and the rat behind it. Ugh! how he showed his teeth,
as he cried to the chips of wood and straw: 'Hold him, hold him! he has
not paid the toll! He has not shown his passport!'

But the current became swifter and stronger. The Tin-soldier could
already see daylight where the tunnel ended; but in his ears there
sounded a roaring enough to frighten any brave man. Only think! at the
end of the tunnel the gutter discharged itself into a great canal; that
would be just as dangerous for him as it would be for us to go down a
waterfall.

Now he was so near to it that he could not hold on any longer. On went
the boat, the poor Tin-soldier keeping himself as stiff as he could: no
one should say of him afterwards that he had flinched. The boat whirled
three, four times round, and became filled to the brim with water: it
began to sink! The Tin-soldier was standing up to his neck in water, and
deeper and deeper sank the boat, and softer and softer grew the paper;
now the water was over his head. He was thinking of the pretty little
Dancer, whose face he should never see again, and there sounded in his
ears, over and over again:

          'Forward, forward, soldier bold!
           Death's before thee, grim and cold!'

The paper came in two, and the soldier fell--but at that moment he was
swallowed by a great fish.

Oh! how dark it was inside, even darker than in the tunnel, and it was
really very close quarters! But there the steadfast little Tin-soldier
lay full length, shouldering his gun.

Up and down swam the fish, then he made the most dreadful contortions,
and became suddenly quite still. Then it was as if a flash of lightning
had passed through him; the daylight streamed in, and a voice exclaimed,
'Why, here is the little Tin-soldier!' The fish had been caught, taken
to market, sold, and brought into the kitchen, where the cook had cut it
open with a great knife. She took up the soldier between her finger and
thumb, and carried him into the room, where everyone wanted to see the
hero who had been found inside a fish; but the Tin-soldier was not at
all proud. They put him on the table, and--no, but what strange things
do happen in this world!--the Tin-soldier was in the same room in which
he had been before! He saw the same children, and the same toys on
the table; and there was the same grand castle with the pretty little
Dancer. She was still standing on one leg with the other high in the
air; she too was steadfast. That touched the Tin-soldier, he was nearly
going to shed tin-tears; but that would not have been fitting for a
soldier. He looked at her, but she said nothing.

All at once one of the little boys took up the Tin-soldier, and threw
him into the stove, giving no reasons; but doubtless the little black
imp in the snuff-box was at the bottom of this too.

There the Tin-soldier lay, and felt a heat that was truly terrible; but
whether he was suffering from actual fire, or from the ardour of his
passion, he did not know. All his colour had disappeared; whether this
had happened on his travels or whether it was the result of trouble, who
can say? He looked at the little lady, she looked at him, and he felt
that he was melting; but he remained steadfast, with his gun at his
shoulder. Suddenly a door opened, the draught caught up the little
Dancer, and off she flew like a sylph to the Tin-soldier in the stove,
burst into flames--and that was the end of her! Then the Tin-soldier
melted down into a little lump, and when next morning the maid was
taking out the ashes, she found him in the shape of a heart. There was
nothing left of the little Dancer but her gilt rose, burnt as black as a
cinder.




BLOCKHEAD-HANS

Far away in the country lay an old manor-house where lived an old squire
who had two sons. They thought themselves so clever, that if they had
known only half of what they did know, it would have been quite enough.
They both wanted to marry the King's daughter, for she had proclaimed
that she would have for her husband the man who knew best how to choose
his words.

Both prepared for the wooing a whole week, which was the longest time
allowed them; but, after all, it was quite long enough, for they both
had preparatory knowledge, and everyone knows how useful that is. One
knew the whole Latin dictionary and also three years' issue of the daily
paper of the town off by heart, so that he could repeat it all backwards
or forwards as you pleased. The other had worked at the laws of
corporation, and knew by heart what every member of the corporation
ought to know, so that he thought he could quite well speak on State
matters and give his opinion. He understood, besides this, how to
embroider braces with roses and other flowers, and scrolls, for he was
very ready with his fingers.

'I shall win the king's daughter!' they both cried.

Their old father gave each of them a fine horse; the one who knew the
dictionary and the daily paper by heart had a black horse, while the
other who was so clever at corporation law had a milk-white one. Then
they oiled the corners of their mouths so that they might be able to
speak more fluently. All the servants stood in the courtyard and saw
them mount their steeds, and here by chance came the third brother; for
the squire had three sons, but nobody counted him with his brothers,
for he was not so learned as they were, and he was generally called
'Blockhead-Hans.'

'Oh, oh!' said Blockhead-Hans. 'Where are you off to? You are in your
Sunday-best clothes!'

'We are going to Court, to woo the Princess! Don't you know what is
known throughout all the country side?' And they told him all about it.

'Hurrah! I'll go to!' cried Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed at
him and rode off.

'Dear father!' cried Blockhead-Hans, 'I must have a horse too. What a
desire for marriage has seized me! If she will have me, she WILL have
me, and if she won't have me, I will have her.'

'Stop that nonsense!' said the old man. 'I will not give you a horse.
YOU can't speak; YOU don't know how to choose your words. Your brothers!
Ah! they are very different lads!'

'Well,' said Blockhead-Hans, 'if I can't have a horse, I will take the
goat which is mine; he can carry me!'

And he did so. He sat astride on the goat, struck his heels into its
side, and went rattling down the high-road like a hurricane.

'Hoppetty hop! what a ride!' Here I come!' shouted Blockhead-Hans,
singing so that the echoes were roused far and near. But his brothers
were riding slowly in front. They were not speaking, but they were
thinking over all the good things they were going to say, for everything
had to be thought out.

'Hullo!' bawled Blockhead-Hans, 'here I am! Just look what I found on
the road!'--and he showed them a dead crow which he had picked up.

'Blockhead!' said his brothers, 'what are you going to do with it?'

'With the crow? I shall give it to the Princess!'

'Do so, certainly!' they said, laughing loudly and riding on.

'Slap! bang! here I am again! Look what I have just found! You don't
find such things every day on the road!' And the brothers turned round
to see what in the world he could have found.

'Blockhead!' said they, 'that is an old wooden shoe without the top! Are
you going to send that, too, to the Princess?'

'Of course I shall!' returned Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed
and rode on a good way.

'Slap! bang! here I am!' cried Blockhead-Hans; 'better and better--it is
really famous!'

'What have you found now?' asked the brothers.

'Oh,' said Blockhead-Hans, 'it is really too good! How pleased the
Princess will be!'

'Why!' said the brothers, 'this is pure mud, straight from the ditch.'

'Of course it is!' said Blockhead-Hans, 'and it is the best kind! Look
how it runs through one's fingers!' and, so saying, he filled his pocket
with the mud.

But the brothers rode on so fast that dust and sparks flew all around,
and they reached the gate of the town a good hour before Blockhead-Hans.
Here came the suitors numbered according to their arrival, and they were
ranged in rows, six in each row, and they were so tightly packed
that they could not move their arms. This was a very good thing, for
otherwise they would have torn each other in pieces, merely because the
one was in front of the other.

All the country people were standing round the King's throne, and were
crowded together in thick masses almost out of the windows to see the
Princess receive the suitors; and as each one came into the room all his
fine phrases went out like a candle!

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess. 'Away! out with him!'

At last she came to the row in which the brother who knew the dictionary
by heart was, but he did not know it any longer; he had quite forgotten
it in the rank and file. And the floor creaked, and the ceiling was all
made of glass mirrors, so that he saw himself standing on his head, and
by each window were standing three reporters and an editor; and each
of them was writing down what was said, to publish it in the paper that
came out and was sold at the street corners for a penny. It was fearful,
and they had made up the fire so hot that it was grilling.

'It is hot in here, isn't it!' said the suitor.

'Of course it is! My father is roasting young chickens to-day!' said the
Princess.

'Ahem!' There he stood like an idiot. He was not prepared for such a
speech; he did not know what to say, although he wanted to say something
witty. 'Ahem!'

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess. 'Take him out!' and out he had
to go.

Now the other brother entered.

'How hot it is!' he said.

'Of course! We are roasting young chickens to-day!' remarked the
Princess.

'How do you--um!' he said, and the reporters wrote down. 'How do
you--um.'

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess. 'Take him out!'

Now Blockhead-Hans came in; he rode his goat right into the hall.

'I say! How roasting hot it is here!' said he.

'Of course! I am roasting young chickens to-day!' said the Princess.

'That's good!' replied Blockhead-Hans; 'then can I roast a crow with
them?'

'With the greatest of pleasure!' said the Princess; 'but have you
anything you can roast them in? for I have neither pot nor saucepan.'

'Oh, rather!' said Blockhead-Hans. 'Here is a cooking implement with tin
rings,' and he drew out the old wooden shoe, and laid the crow in it.

'That is quite a meal!' said the Princess; 'but where shall we get the
soup from?'

'I've got that in my pocket!' said Blockhead-Hans. 'I have so much that
I can quite well throw some away!' and he poured some mud out of his
pocket.

'I like you!' said the Princess. 'You can answer, and you can speak, and
I will marry you; but do you know that every word which we are saying
and have said has been taken down and will be in the paper to-morrow?
By each window do you see there are standing three reporters and an
old editor, and this old editor is the worst, for he doesn't understand
anything!' but she only said this to tease Blockhead-Hans. And the
reporters giggled, and each dropped a blot of ink on the floor.

'Ah! are those the great people?' said Blockhead-Hans. 'Then I will give
the editor the best!' So saying, he turned his pockets inside out, and
threw the mud right in his face.

'That was neatly done!' said the Princess. 'I couldn't have done it; but
I will soon learn how to!'

Blockhead-Hans became King, got a wife and a crown, and sat on the
throne; and this we have still damp from the newspaper of the editor and
the reporters--and they are not to be believed for a moment.




A STORY ABOUT A DARNING-NEEDLE

There was once a Darning-needle who thought herself so fine that she
believed she was an embroidery-needle. 'Take great care to hold me
tight!' said the Darning-needle to the Fingers who were holding her.
'Don't let me fall! If I once fall on the ground I shall never be found
again, I am so fine!'

'It is all right!' said the Fingers, seizing her round the waist.

'Look, I am coming with my train!' said the Darning-needle as she drew a
long thread after her; but there was no knot at the end of the thread.

The Fingers were using the needle on the cook's shoe. The upper leather
was unstitched and had to be sewn together.

'This is common work!' said the Darning-needle. 'I shall never get
through it. I am breaking! I am breaking!' And in fact she did break.
'Didn't I tell you so!' said the Darning-needle. 'I am too fine!'

'Now she is good for nothing!' said the Fingers; but they had to hold
her tight while the cook dropped some sealing-wax on the needle and
stuck it in the front of her dress.

'Now I am a breast-pin!' said the Darning-needle. 'I always knew I
should be promoted. When one is something, one will become something!'
And she laughed to herself; you can never see when a Darning-needle is
laughing. Then she sat up as proudly as if she were in a State coach,
and looked all round her.

'May I be allowed to ask if you are gold?' she said to her neighbour,
the Pin. 'You have a very nice appearance, and a peculiar head; but
it is too small! You must take pains to make it grow, for it is
not everyone who has a head of sealing-wax.' And so saying the
Darning-needle raised herself up so proudly that she fell out of the
dress, right into the sink which the cook was rinsing out.

'Now I am off on my travels!' said the Darning-needle. 'I do hope I
sha'n't get lost!' She did indeed get lost.

'I am too fine for this world!' said she as she lay in the gutter; 'but
I know who I am, and that is always a little satisfaction!'

And the Darning-needle kept her proud bearing and did not lose her
good-temper.

All kinds of things swam over her--shavings, bits of straw, and scraps
of old newspapers.

'Just look how they sail along!' said the Darning-needle. 'They don't
know what is underneath them! Here I am sticking fast! There goes a
shaving thinking of nothing in the world but of itself, a mere chip!
There goes a straw--well, how it does twist and twirl, to be sure! Don't
think so much about yourself, or you will be knocked against a stone.
There floats a bit of newspaper. What is written on it is long ago
forgotten, and yet how proud it is! I am sitting patient and quiet. I
know who I am, and that is enough for me!'

One day something thick lay near her which glittered so brightly that
the Darning-needle thought it must be a diamond. But it was a bit of
bottle-glass, and because it sparkled the Darning-needle spoke to it,
and gave herself out as a breast-pin.

'No doubt you are a diamond?'

'Yes, something of that kind!' And each believed that the other was
something very costly; and they both said how very proud the world must
be of them.

'I have come from a lady's work-box,' said Darning-needle, 'and this
lady was a cook; she had five fingers on each hand; anything so proud as
these fingers I have never seen! And yet they were only there to take me
out of the work-box and to put me back again!'

'Were they of noble birth, then?' asked the bit of bottle-glass.

'Of noble birth!' said the Darning-needle; 'no indeed, but proud! They
were five brothers, all called ''Fingers.'' They held themselves proudly
one against the other, although they were of different sizes. The
outside one, the Thumb, was short and fat; he was outside the rank, and
had only one bend in his back, and could only make one bow; but he said
that if he were cut off from a man that he was no longer any use as
a soldier. Dip-into-everything, the second finger, dipped into sweet
things as well as sour things, pointed to the sun and the moon, and
guided the pen when they wrote. Longman, the third, looked at the others
over his shoulder. Goldband, the fourth, had a gold sash round his
waist; and little Playman did nothing at all, and was the more proud.
There was too much ostentation, and so I came away.'

'And now we are sitting and shining here!' said the bit of bottle-glass.

At that moment more water came into the gutter; it streamed over the
edges and washed the bit of bottle-glass away.

'Ah! now he has been promoted!' said the Darning-needle. 'I remain here;
I am too fine. But that is my pride, which is a sign of respectability!'
And she sat there very proudly, thinking lofty thoughts.

'I really believe I must have been born a sunbeam, I am so fine! It
seems to me as if the sunbeams were always looking under the water for
