stayed. Some were half way up the ladders, some had one foot over the
wall, but wherever they might chance to be there every man remained,
even the emperor and his sorcerer. All day they stayed there like
flies upon the wall, but during the night Virgilius stole softly to
the emperor, and offered him his freedom, as long as he would do him
justice. The emperor, who by this time was thoroughly frightened, said
he would agree to anything Virgilius desired. So Virgilius took off his
spells, and, after feasting the army and bestowing on every man a gift,
bade them return to Rome. And more than that, he built a square tower
for the emperor, and in each corner all that was said in that quarter of
the city might be heard, while if you stood in the centre every whisper
throughout Rome would reach your ears.

Having settled his affairs with the emperor and his enemies, Virgilius
had time to think of other things, and his first act was to fall in
love! The lady's name was Febilla, and her family was noble, and her
face fairer than any in Rome, but she only mocked Virgilius, and was
always playing tricks upon him. To this end, she bade him one day come
to visit her in the tower where she lived, promising to let down a
basket to draw him up as far as the roof. Virgilius was enchanted at
this quite unexpected favour, and stepped with glee into the basket. It
was drawn up very slowly, and by-and-by came altogether to a standstill,
while from above rang the voice of Febilla crying, 'Rogue of a sorcerer,
there shalt thou hang!' And there he hung over the market-place, which
was soon thronged with people, who made fun of him till he was mad with
rage. At last the emperor, hearing of his plight, commanded Febilla to
release him, and Virgilius went home vowing vengeance.

The next morning every fire in Rome went out, and as there were no
matches in those days this was a very serious matter. The emperor,
guessing that this was the work of Virgilius, besought him to break
the spell. Then Virgilius ordered a scaffold to be erected in the
market-place, and Febilla to be brought clothed in a single white
garment. And further, he bade every one to snatch fire from the maiden,
and to suffer no neighbour to kindle it. And when the maiden appeared,
clad in her white smock, flames of fire curled about her, and the Romans
brought some torches, and some straw, and some shavings, and fires were
kindled in Rome again.

For three days she stood there, till every hearth in Rome was alight,
and then she was suffered to go where she would.

But the emperor was wroth at the vengeance of Virgilius, and threw him
into prison, vowing that he should be put to death. And when everything
was ready he was led out to the Viminal Hill, where he was to die.

He went quietly with his guards, but the day was hot, and on reaching
his place of execution he begged for some water. A pail was brought, and
he, crying 'Emperor, all hail! seek for me in Sicily,' jumped headlong
into the pail, and vanished from their sight.

For some time we hear no more of Virgilius, or how he made his peace
with the emperor, but the next event in his history was his being sent
for to the palace to give the emperor advice how to guard Rome from
foes within as well as foes without. Virgilius spent many days in deep
thought, and at length invented a plan which was known to all as the
'Preservation of Rome.'

On the roof of the Capitol, which was the most famous public building
in the city, he set up statues representing the gods worshipped by every
nation subject to Rome, and in the middle stood the god of Rome herself.
Each of the conquered gods held in its hand a bell, and if there was
even a thought of treason in any of the countries its god turned its
back upon the god of Rome and rang its bell furiously, and the senators
came hurrying to see who was rebelling against the majesty of the
empire. Then they made ready their armies, and marched against the foe.

Now there was a country which had long felt bitter jealousy of Rome,
and was anxious for some way of bringing about its destruction. So the
people chose three men who could be trusted, and, loading them with
money, sent them to Rome, bidding them to pretend that they were
diviners of dreams. No sooner had the messengers reached the city than
they stole out at night and buried a pot of gold far down in the earth,
and let down another into the bed of the Tiber, just where a bridge
spans the river.

Next day they went to the senate house, where the laws were made, and,
bowing low, they said, 'Oh, noble lords, last night we dreamed that
beneath the foot of a hill there lies buried a pot of gold. Have we your
leave to dig for it?' And leave having been given, the messengers took
workmen and dug up the gold and made merry with it.

A few days later the diviners again appeared before the senate, and
said, 'Oh, noble lords, grant us leave to seek out another treasure,
which has been revealed to us in a dream as lying under the bridge over
the river.'

And the senators gave leave, and the messengers hired boats and men, and
let down ropes with hooks, and at length drew up the pot of gold, some
of which they gave as presents to the senators.

A week or two passed by, and once more they appeared in the senate
house.

'O, noble lords!' said they, 'last night in a vision we beheld twelve
casks of gold lying under the foundation stone of the Capitol, on which
stands the statue of the Preservation of Rome. Now, seeing that by your
goodness we have been greatly enriched by our former dreams, we wish, in
gratitude, to bestow this third treasure on you for your own profit; so
give us workers, and we will begin to dig without delay.'

And receiving permission they began to dig, and when the messengers had
almost undermined the Capitol they stole away as secretly as they had
come.

And next morning the stone gave way, and the sacred statue fell on its
face and was broken. And the senators knew that their greed had been
their ruin.

From that day things went from bad to worse, and every morning crowds
presented themselves before the emperor, complaining of the robberies,
murders, and other crimes that were committed nightly in the streets.

The emperor, desiring nothing so much as the safety of his subjects,
took counsel with Virgilius how this violence could be put down.

Virgilius thought hard for a long time, and then he spoke:

'Great prince,' said he, 'cause a copper horse and rider to be made, and
stationed in front of the Capitol. Then make a proclamation that at ten
o'clock a bell will toll, and every man is to enter his house, and not
leave it again.'

The emperor did as Virgilius advised, but thieves and murderers laughed
at the horse, and went about their misdeeds as usual.

But at the last stroke of the bell the horse set off at full gallop
through the streets of Rome, and by daylight men counted over two
hundred corpses that it had trodden down. The rest of the thieves--and
there were still many remaining--instead of being frightened into
honesty, as Virgilius had hoped, prepared rope ladders with hooks to
them, and when they heard the sound of the horse's hoofs they stuck
their ladders into the walls, and climbed up above the reach of the
horse and its rider.

Then the emperor commanded two copper dogs to be made that would run
after the horse, and when the thieves, hanging from the walls, mocked
and jeered at Virgilius and the emperor, the dogs leaped high after them
and pulled them to the ground, and bit them to death.

Thus did Virgilius restore peace and order to the city.

Now about this time there came to be noised abroad the fame of the
daughter of the sultan who ruled over the province of Babylon, and
indeed she was said to be the most beautiful princess in the world.

Virgilius, like the rest, listened to the stories that were told of her,
and fell so violently in love with all he heard that he built a bridge
in the air, which stretched all the way between Rome and Babylon.
He then passed over it to visit the princess, who, though somewhat
surprised to see him, gave him welcome, and after some conversation
became in her turn anxious to see the distant country where this
stranger lived, and he promised that he would carry her there himself,
without wetting the soles of his feet.

The princess spent some days in the palace of Virgilius, looking at
wonders of which she had never dreamed, though she declined to accept
the presents he longed to heap on her. The hours passed as if they were
minutes, till the princess said that she could be no longer absent from
her father. Then Virgilius conducted her himself over the airy bridge,
and laid her gently down on her own bed, where she was found next
morning by her father.

She told him all that had happened to her, and he pretended to be very
much interested, and begged that the next time Virgilius came he might
be introduced to him.

Soon after, the sultan received a message from his daughter that the
stranger was there, and he commanded that a feast should be made ready,
and, sending for the princess delivered into her hands a cup, which he
said she was to present to Virgilius herself, in order to do him honour.

When they were all seated at the feast the princess rose and presented
the cup to Virgilius, who directly he had drunk fell into a deep sleep.

Then the sultan ordered his guards to bind him, and left him there till
the following day.

Directly the sultan was up he summoned his lords and nobles into his
great hall, and commanded that the cords which bound Virgilius should be
taken off, and the prisoner brought before him. The moment he appeared
the sultan's passion broke forth, and he accused his captive of the
crime of conveying the princess into distant lands without his leave.

Virgilius replied that if he had taken her away he had also brought her
back, when he might have kept her, and that if they would set him free
to return to his own land he would come hither no more.

'Not so!' cried the sultan, 'but a shameful death you shall die!' And
the princess fell on her knees, and begged she might die with him.

'You are out in your reckoning, Sir Sultan!' said Virgilius, whose
patience was at an end, and he cast a spell over the sultan and his
lords, so that they believed that the great river of Babylon was flowing
through the hall, and that they must swim for their lives. So, leaving
them to plunge and leap like frogs and fishes, Virgilius took the
princess in his arms, and carried her over the airy bridge back to Rome.

Now Virgilius did not think that either his palace, or even Rome itself,
was good enough to contain such a pearl as the princess, so he built her
a city whose foundations stood upon eggs, buried far away down in the
depths of the sea. And in the city was a square tower, and on the roof
of the tower was a rod of iron, and across the rod he laid a bottle, and
on the bottle he placed an egg, and from the egg there hung chained an
apple, which hangs there to this day. And when the egg shakes the city
quakes, and when the egg shall be broken the city shall be destroyed.
And the city Virgilius filled full of wonders, such as never were seen
before, and he called its name Naples.

(Adapted from 'Virgilius the Sorcerer.')




MOGARZEA AND HIS SON

There was once a little boy, whose father and mother, when they were
dying, left him to the care of a guardian. But the guardian whom they
chose turned out to be a wicked man, and spent all the money, so the boy
determined to go away and strike out a path for himself.

So one day he set off, and walked and walked through woods and meadows
till when evening came he was very tired, and did not know where to
sleep. He climbed a hill and looked about him to see if there was no
light shining from a window. At first all seemed dark, but at length he
noticed a tiny spark far, far off, and, plucking up his spirits, he at
once went in search of it.

The night was nearly half over before he reached the spark, which turned
out to be a big fire, and by the fire a man was sleeping who was so
tall he might have been a giant. The boy hesitated for a moment what he
should do; then he crept close up to the man, and lay down by his legs.

When the man awoke in the morning he was much surprised to find the boy
nestling up close to him.

'Dear me! where do you come from?' said he.

'I am your son, born in the night,' replied the boy.

'If that is true,' said the man, 'you shall take care of my sheep, and I
will give you food. But take care you never cross the border of my land,
or you will repent it.' Then he pointed out where the border of his land
lay, and bade the boy begin his work at once.

The young shepherd led his flock out to the richest meadows and stayed
with them till evening, when he brought them back, and helped the man to
milk them. When this was done, they both sat down to supper, and while
they were eating the boy asked the big man: 'What is your name, father?'

'Mogarzea,' answered he.

'I wonder you are not tired of living by yourself in this lonely place.'

'There is no reason you should wonder! Don't you know that there was
never a bear yet who danced of his own free will?'

'Yes, that is true,' replied the boy. 'But why is it you are always so
sad? Tell me your history, father.'

'What is the use of my telling you things that would only make you sad
too?'

'Oh, never mind that! I should like to hear. Are you not my father, and
am I not your son?'

'Well, if you really want to know my story, this is it: As I told you,
my name is Mogarzea, and my father is an emperor. I was on my way to the
Sweet Milk Lake, which lies not far from here, to marry one of the three
fairies who have made the lake their home. But on the road three wicked
elves fell on me, and robbed me of my soul, so that ever since I have
stayed in this spot watching my sheep without wishing for anything
different, without having felt one moment's joy, or ever once being able
to laugh. And the horrible elves are so ill-natured that if anyone sets
one foot on their land he is instantly punished. That is why I warn you
to be careful, lest you should share my fate.'

'All right, I will take great care. Do let me go, father,' said the boy,
as they stretched themselves out to sleep.

At sunrise the boy got up and led his sheep out to feed, and for
some reason he did not feel tempted to cross into the grassy meadows
belonging to the elves, but let his flock pick up what pasture they
could on Mogarzea's dry ground.

On the third day he was sitting under the shadow of a tree, playing
on his flute--and there was nobody in the world who could play a flute
better--when one of his sheep strayed across the fence into the flowery
fields of the elves, and another and another followed it. But the boy
was so absorbed in his flute that he noticed nothing till half the flock
were on the other side.

He jumped up, still playing on his flute, and went after the sheep,
meaning to drive them back to their own side of the border, when
suddenly he saw before him three beautiful maidens who stopped in front
of him, and began to dance. The boy understood what he must do, and
played with all his might, but the maidens danced on till evening.

'Now let me go,' he cried at last, 'for poor Mogarzea must be dying of
hunger. I will come and play for you to-morrow.'

'Well, you may go!' they said, 'but remember that even if you break your
promise you will not escape us.'

So they both agreed that the next day he should come straight there with
the sheep, and play to them till the sun went down. This being settled,
they each returned home.

Mogarzea was surprised to find that his sheep gave so much more milk
than usual, but as the boy declared he had never crossed the border the
big man did not trouble his head further, and ate his supper heartily.

With the earliest gleams of light, the boy was off with his sheep to the
elfin meadow, and at the first notes of his flute the maidens appeared
before him and danced and danced and danced till evening came. Then the
boy let the flute slip through his fingers, and trod on it, as if by
accident.

If you had heard the noise he made, and how he wrung his hands and wept
and cried that he had lost his only companion, you would have been sorry
for him. The hearts of the elves were quite melted, and they did all
they could to comfort him.

'I shall never find another flute like that, moaned he. 'I have never
heard one whose tone was as sweet as mine! It was cut from the centre of
a seven-year-old cherry tree!'

'There is a cherry tree in our garden that is exactly seven years old,'
said they. 'Come with us, and you shall make yourself another flute.'

So they all went to the cherry tree, and when they were standing round
it the youth explained that if he tried to cut it down with an axe he
might very likely split open the heart of the tree, which was needed for
the flute. In order to prevent this, he would make a little cut in the
bark, just large enough for them to put their fingers in, and with this
help he could manage to tear the tree in two, so that the heart should
run no risk of damage. The elves did as he told them without a thought;
then he quickly drew out the axe, which had been sticking into the
cleft, and behold! all their fingers were imprisoned tight in the tree.

It was in vain that they shrieked with pain and tried to free
themselves. They could do nothing, and the young man remained cold as
marble to all their entreaties.

Then he demanded of them Mogarzea's soul.

'Oh, well, if you must have it, it is in a bottle on the window sill,'
said they, hoping that they might obtain their freedom at once. But they
were mistaken.

'You have made so many men suffer,' answered he sternly, 'that it is but
just you should suffer yourselves, but to-morrow I will let you go.' And
he turned towards home, taking his sheep and the soul of Mogarzea with
him.

Mogarzea was waiting at the door, and as the boy drew near he began
scolding him for being so late. But at the first word of explanation the
man became beside himself with joy, and he sprang so high into the air
that the false soul which the elves had given him flew out of his mouth,
and his own, which had been shut tightly into the flask of water, took
its place.

When his excitement had somewhat calmed down, he cried to the boy,
'Whether you are really my son matters nothing to me; tell me, how can I
repay you for what you have done for me?'

'By showing me where the Milk Lake is, and how I can get one of the
three fairies who lives there to wife, and by letting me remain your son
for ever.'

The night was passed by Mogarzea and his son in songs and feasting, for
both were too happy to sleep, and when day dawned they set out together
to free the elves from the tree. When they reached the place of their
imprisonment, Mogarzea took the cherry tree and all the elves with it on
his back, and carried them off to his father's kingdom, where everyone
rejoiced to see him home again. But all he did was to point to the boy
who had saved him, and had followed him with his flock.

For three days the boy stayed in the palace, receiving the thanks and
praises of the whole court. Then he said to Mogarzea:

'The time has come for me to go hence, but tell me, I pray you, how to
find the Sweet Milk Lake, and I will return, and will bring my wife back
