word.

After a profound silence of some minutes' duration, the Raven again
rose.

"What will my brothers do? The flying fires will burn down our
village, and there is no retreat. The guns that shoot without
loading carry very far. We are as water before them. We are in the
hands of the white chief, and our bones will feed the crows. What
will my brothers do?"

There was still a profound silence, and then he continued: "The
Raven is a great chief, and he will tell them what to do. The Raven
has stood by the side of the little White Bird, and the great white
chief will listen to his voice. He will say, Let there be peace
between us. The men who would have harmed the Little White Bird are
dead; there is no more cause of quarrel. Let us bury the hatchet.
Take horses and cattle for your journey, and forgive us if we have
done wrong. If the white men were on the plains, the Raven would
say, Let my young men charge; but they hold the pass, and the guns
that shoot without loading are too strong. Have I spoken well?"

There was a low murmur of applause. The feeling that the position
of the white men was impregnable was general; and they all felt
convinced that those terrible enemies would devise some unknown
scheme which would end in the total annihilation of the tribe.

The Raven's proposition was therefore unanimously assented to.

The Raven then laid aside his arms, and attended by six of the
principal chiefs, carrying green boughs in token of amity, advanced
toward the mouth of the gorge. Mr. Hardy, with five of the whites,
and with Perez to interpret, advanced to meet him.

When the two groups met the Raven commenced gravely, in the Indian
language: "The white chief of the flying fire is mighty, and the
Great Spirit has blinded his children. They carried off the little
White Bird, but they did not harm her. Bad men would have harmed
her, but the Raven stood by her side. The great white chief has taken
back his little White Bird, and he has killed the men whom
the Great Spirit blinded. Why should there be any more war? The
Indians are brave; they have cattle, and sheep, and water. They can
live out of reach of the white chief's guns, and can fight if the
white chief comes out against them. The white chief is strong, and
he can defend the pass, but he cannot venture out to attack. They
are equal. There is no cause of quarrel any longer. Let us bury the
hatchet. The white chief's young men can take horses--for the
Indians have many--to take them back to their homes. They can take
cattle to eat. Let there be peace."

This address of the Raven was a very politic one. He already knew
that Mr. Hardy was willing to grant terms, but he wished to show
the other chiefs that he supported the honor of the tribe by
boasting of their power and resources, and by making the peace as
upon equal terms.

When the Gaucho had translated their proposal, Mr. Hardy spoke,
using the phraseology which would be most intelligible to the
Indians.

"The Raven is a great chief; he has spoken wisely. The little White
Bird has sung in the white chief's ear that the Raven stood by her
side when bad Indians would have hurt her. The bad Indians are
dead. The Great Spirit frowned upon them. The white chief has no
quarrel with the Raven and his friends. Let there be peace."

A general expression of satisfaction pervaded both parties when it
was known that peace was arranged; and one of each side hurrying
back with the news, the rest went into the village, where, sitting
down before the principal hut, the pipe of peace was solemnly
smoked.

The two parties then mingled amicably, mutually pleased at the
termination to the hostilities; and no one would have guessed that
a few hours before they had met in deadly strife. The Raven
courteously invited the whites to stop for a night at the village;
but the invitation was declined, as all were very anxious to return
home.

Some Indians were dispatched by the Raven, who had now naturally
assumed the position of chief of the tribe, to catch horses to take
the place of those which had broken down upon the journey. The
offer of cattle was declined, as they were confident that they
should be able to procure game. They took, however, as large a
supply of fresh meat as their horses could carry.

Mr. Hardy saw that the Raven wished to avoid any private
conversation with him. He therefore drew the boys aside, and made a
proposal to them, to which they cordially agreed.

As the horses were brought up, and the whole tribe assembled, he
advanced toward the Raven with one of the boys' carbines in his
hand.

"The Raven is a great chief," he said. "He has a great heart, and
stood by the side of the little White Bird. But he has not a good
rifle. The white chief gives him a rifle which will shoot many
times. Let him promise that he will never use it in fight against
the white men."

This gift the Raven received with great pleasure, and readily gave
the required promise, adding, on behalf of his tribe, that the
hatchet which was buried should never again be dug up against the
whites. An extra chamber and all the spare ammunition was given to
him, and a further supply promised when he chose to send for it;
instructions were also given to him in the use of the weapon, then
a solemn farewell was exchanged, and the party of whites turned
their faces toward home.




CHAPTER XVIII.

AND LAST.


With this memorable conflict, and the lesson taught to the Indians,
that even in the heart of their own country they could not consider
themselves secure from retaliations and from the vengeance of the
white settlers, the Indian troubles of the Hardys were over.
Occasionally, indeed, raids were made upon the outlying
settlements, and the young Hardys were summoned to beat off their
savage foes. Upon the estate of Mount Pleasant, however, hostile
foot was not again placed. Occasionally the Raven, with two or
three of his braves, would pay a visit for a day or two, and depart
with presents of blankets, and such things as his tribe needed.
Upon the first of these visits Hubert questioned him respecting the
bird whose remarkable feather had been the means of saving Ethel's
life. At his next visit the chief brought two very perfect skins of
the bird. It turned out, to Hubert's great delight, to be a new
species; and one of them is now, with many other hitherto 'unknown
birds which had fallen to his gun, in the British Museum, with the
specific names of Hardiensis, in compliment to their discoverer.
The Raven's tribe honorably performed their agreement with Mr.
Hardy, and never joined in any subsequent attacks upon the whites.
Being much weakened by the loss of so many of their fighting men,
they would probably have been exterminated by hostile tribes; but
Mr. Hardy subsequently furnished them with a supply of military
muskets, which he had bought chiefly for the purpose, together with
ammunition, and they were then able to oppose a resolute front to
their enemies, and to support themselves by hunting. The Raven is
now one of the most powerful and respected chiefs upon the plains
of the pampas.

The return of the expedition, after the rescue of Ethel and the
chastisement of the Indians in the heart of their own country,
caused quite a sensation throughout the Republic. Of Mrs. Hardy's
and Maud's joy we need not speak, but the adventure was considered
a matter of congratulation and joy throughout the whole district.
It was felt that a signal blow had been struck to the Indians, and
that for a long time life and property would be secure. There was,
in consequence, quite a rush to the neighborhood and land was taken
up and occupied in all directions.

It was well for Mrs. Hardy and the girls that they were to sail by
the next mail for England. The effect of those terrible four days
upon Ethel, and of that week of anxiety upon her mother and sister,
had so shaken them that the change, even if it had not been
previously determined upon, would have been imperatively necessary.
It is not too much to say that Mrs. Hardy and Maud had suffered
even more than Ethel. She at least had known and seen her danger,
and was sustained, except during that morning when she was fastened
to the stake, with a strong hope and belief of rescue. Those left
behind could do nothing but picture up scenes of horror, and pass
their time in alternately praying and weeping. They were all sadly
shaken and nervous during the short time that remained for them at
Mount Pleasant; but the sea voyage and the fresh breezes soon
brought health and color into their cheeks, and none of them ever
after felt any bad effects from that terrible week.

And now our story is drawing to a close. The stormy period of the
Mount Pleasant settlement was over. The hard work, the difficulties
and dangers of the life of a new settler on the extreme edge of
civilization, had been passed, and nothing remained but to continue
to devote attention and energy to the estate, and to reap the
fruits of the labor.

For two years after the departure of his wife and daughters Mr.
Hardy remained at his post. It was now nearly six years since he
had left England, and he longed to return to it. He felt that he
could do so without any uneasiness as to the future. Rosario was,
according to his anticipation, rising into a large and important
town; the country was fairly settled for leagues beyond the estate;
land was rapidly rising in value; and there was now no fear
whatever of Indian attacks. His flocks and herds had multiplied
greatly, and were doubling every two years. The income obtained by
the sale of cattle fatted on the alfalfa, and upon the sale of wool
and other farm produce, was considerable. The dairy alone brought
in a large yearly amount. Charley was now twenty-two, Hubert a year
younger; both were as capable of managing the estate as he was
himself.

He one day, therefore, unfolded his plans to them. "As you know,
boys, I am going to England shortly; and although I shall perhaps
now and then come over here, I shall make England my permanent
home. You boys will therefore jointly manage the estate. The income
this year will reach six thousand dollars, and would be much more
did we not keep the greater portion of our animals to increase our
stock. I have now twelve thousand five hundred dollars in the bank.
After the busy life I have led here, I could not remain inactive.
My present intention is to take a large farm upon a long lease with
the option of purchase. My object will be to obtain a lease upon
large acreage and poor land, but improvable with irrigation or
drainage and an outlay of capital. I shall risk no more than twelve
thousand five hundred dollars in this, and also the income I draw
from here for the next two years. The profits will increase each
year. I shall therefore in two years have sunk twenty-five thousand
dollars in the farm--a portion being devoted to building a suitable
house. You will, of course, during the two years spend whatever
money you may require; but, in fact, it is impossible for you to
spend much money here. At the end of two years I propose that first
you, Charley, as the elder, shall come home to England for a year,
and then that Hubert shall take his turn. You will then stay a year
here together, and again have each a year in England, and so on
regularly. From the end of this two years I shall draw half the
income of this estate, and you will take the other half between
you, to invest or use as you may think fit. At the end of six years
I calculate that the estate will be stocked with as many cattle and
sheep as it can support. Fifteen thousand cattle, say, and thirty
thousand sheep. You will then sell all your annual increase, and
the profits will be greater every year. At the end of ten years
from this time, if, as I think probable, you will have had enough
of this life, we will sell the estate. By that time it will be the
center of a populous district, the land will be greatly increased
in value, and will be equal to any in the country--so much so,
indeed, that it will probably be out of the question to find a
purchaser for the whole. We could therefore break it up to suit
purchasers, dividing it into lots of one, two, three, or four
square miles, or a square league, and dividing the stock in
proportion. The house would, of course, go with the arable land and
a mile or two of pasture beyond it. My share of the yearly income I
shall devote to buying my estate. Say the price is fifty thousand
dollars. This I shall, with my income from here and my income from
the estate itself, probably be able to make in ten years. The
estate, with the twenty-five thousand dollars I propose to risk in
drainage, etc., ought then to be worth one hundred thousand
dollars. The value of this estate of fifty thousand acres, with the
flocks and herds, ought to be at least double that amount; so that
at the end of ten years I shall be a rich man. You, with care, can
certainly save twenty-five thousand dollars each in the ten years,
and will receive another fifty thousand dollars each as your share
of the estate. You will consequently, boys, at the age of
thirty-one and thirty-two, be able to settle down in England in
very comfortable circumstances. Your sisters will of course be
provided for out of my share. Do you approve of my plans?"

The boys warmly expressed their satisfaction at the plan, and their
gratitude to their father for his intentions.

And so things were carried out.

Six months after Mr. Hardy's arrival in England, the boys heard of
Maud's marriage to Mr. Cooper, now, by the death of his father, a
wealthy country gentleman. Charley, during his first visit to
England, also married--an example which Hubert followed the next
year.

The two now took it by turn to manage the estate--the one in
England always passing a considerable portion of his time at Mr.
Hardy's, and spending the rest in traveling.

Ethel was married the year after Hubert to a rising barrister in
London.

Everything prospered at Mount Pleasant, and at the sale it was
broken up into lots and fetched rather a larger sum than Mr. Hardy
had calculated.

Mr. Hardy's own plan had been fully carried out, but by the end of
the ten years he began to wish for a quiet town life. He therefore
made an arrangement with Charley, whereby the latter, who had
obtained some money with his wife, has taken his place as master of
the estate, and has settled down into the life of a country
gentleman, which exactly suits him.

Hubert lives in London. His income is sufficient for his wants, he
has become a member of a number of scientific societies, and his
collection of the fauna of the pampas of America is considered to
be unequaled.

The girls are very happy with the men of their choice; and Mr. and
Mrs. Hardy have always some of their children or grandchildren
staying with them, and often amuse the young ones with tales of how
their fathers or mothers fought the Indians on the pampas of South
America.




THE END.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Pampas, by G. A. Henty

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE PAMPAS ***

***** This file should be named 6472.txt or 6472.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/4/7/6472/

Produced by Robert Prince, Juliet Sutherland, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
