iron circlets clasped his waist. He led by the hand a lady of wonderful
beauty, dressed in white, with a girdle of silver and a crown of pearls,
but her face was pale and sad as death itself.

The prince knew her in an instant, and moved eagerly forward; but the
wizard gave him no time to speak, and said:

'I know why you are here. Very good; you may have her if for three
nights following you can prevent her making her escape. If you fail in
this, you and your servants will all be turned into stone, like those
who have come before you.' And offering the princess a chair, he left
the hall.

The prince could not take his eyes from the princess, she was so lovely!
He began to talk to her, but she neither answered nor smiled, and sat as
if she were made of marble. He seated himself by her, and determined
not to close his eyes that night, for fear she should escape him. And in
order that she should be doubly guarded, Long stretched himself like a
strap all round the room, Broad took his stand by the door and puffed
himself out, so that not even a mouse could slip by, and Quickeye leant
against a pillar which stood in the middle of the floor and supported
the roof. But in half a second they were all sound asleep, and they
slept sound the whole night long.

In the morning, at the first peep of dawn, the prince awoke with a
start. But the princess was gone. He aroused his servants and implored
them to tell him what he must do.

'Calm yourself, my lord,' said Quickeye. 'I have found her already. A
hundred miles from here there is a forest. In the middle of the forest,
an old oak, and on the top of the oak, an acorn. This acorn is the
princess. If Long will take me on his shoulders, we shall soon bring
her back.' And sure enough, in less time than it takes to walk round a
cottage, they had returned from the forest, and Long presented the acorn
to the prince.

'Now, your excellency, throw it on the ground.'

The prince obeyed, and was enchanted to see the princess appear at his
side. But when the sun peeped for the first time over the mountains,
the door burst open as before, and the wizard entered with a loud laugh.
Suddenly he caught sight of the princess; his face darkened, he uttered
a low growl, and one of the iron circlets gave way with a crash. He
seized the young girl by the hand and bore her away with him.

All that day the prince wandered about the castle, studying the curious
treasures it contained, but everything looked as if life had suddenly
come to a standstill. In one place he saw a prince who had been turned
into stone in the act of brandishing a sword round which his two hands
were clasped. In another, the same doom had fallen upon a knight in the
act of running away. In a third, a serving man was standing eternally
trying to convey a piece of beef to his mouth, and all around them were
others, still preserving for evermore the attitudes they were in when
the wizard had commanded 'From henceforth be turned into marble.' In the
castle, and round the castle all was dismal and desolate. Trees there
were, but without leaves; fields there were, but no grass grew on them.
There was one river, but it never flowed and no fish lived in it. No
flowers blossomed, and no birds sang.

Three times during the day food appeared, as if by magic, for the prince
and his servants. And it was not until supper was ended that the wizard
appeared, as on the previous evening, and delivered the princess into
the care of the prince.

All four determined that this time they would keep awake at any cost.
But it was no use. Off they went as they had done before, and when the
prince awoke the next morning the room was again empty.

With a pang of shame, he rushed to find Quickeye. 'Awake! Awake!
Quickeye! Do you know what has become of the princess?'

Quickeye rubbed his eyes and answered: 'Yes, I see her. Two hundred
miles from here there is a mountain. In this mountain is a rock. In the
rock, a precious stone. This stone is the princess. Long shall take me
there, and we will be back before you can turn round.'

So Long took him on his shoulders and they set out. At every stride they
covered twenty miles, and as they drew near Quickeye fixed his burning
eyes on the mountain; in an instant it split into a thousand pieces,
and in one of these sparkled the precious stone. They picked it up and
brought it to the prince, who flung it hastily down, and as the stone
touched the floor the princess stood before him. When the wizard came,
his eyes shot forth flames of fury. Cric-crac was heard, and another of
his iron bands broke and fell. He seized the princess by the hand and
led her off, growling louder than ever.

All that day things went on exactly as they had done the day before.
After supper the wizard brought back the princess, and looking him
straight in the eyes he said, 'We shall see which of us two will gain
the prize after all!'

That night they struggled their very hardest to keep awake, and even
walked about instead of sitting down. But it was quite useless. One
after another they had to give in, and for the third time the princess
slipped through their fingers.

When morning came, it was as usual the prince who awoke the first, and
as usual, the princess being gone, he rushed to Quickeye.

'Get up, get up, Quickeye, and tell me where is the princess?'

Quickeye looked about for some time without answering. 'Oh, my lord, she
is far, very far. Three hundred miles away there lies a black sea. In
the middle of this sea there is a little shell, and in the middle of the
shell is fixed a gold ring. That gold ring is the princess. But do not
vex your soul; we will get her. Only to-day, Long must take Broad with
him. He will be wanted badly.'

So Long took Quickeye on one shoulder, and Broad on the other, and they
set out. At each stride they left thirty miles behind them. When they
reached the black sea, Quickeye showed them the spot where they must
seek the shell. But though Long stretched down his hand as far as it
would go, he could not find the shell, for it lay at the bottom of the
sea.

'Wait a moment, comrades, it will be all right. I will help you,' said
Broad.

Then he swelled himself out so that you would have thought the world
could hardly have held him, and stooping down he drank. He drank so much
at every mouthful, that only a minute or so passed before the water had
sunk enough for Long to put his hand to the bottom. He soon found the
shell, and pulled the ring out. But time had been lost, and Long had a
double burden to carry. The dawn was breaking fast before they got back
to the castle, where the prince was waiting for them in an agony of
fear.

Soon the first rays of the sun were seen peeping over the tops of the
mountains. The door burst open, and finding the prince standing alone
the wizard broke into peals of wicked laughter. But as he laughed a loud
crash was heard, the window fell into a thousand pieces, a gold ring
glittered in the air, and the princess stood before the enchanter. For
Quickeye, who was watching from afar, had told Long of the terrible
danger now threatening the prince, and Long, summoning all his strength
for one gigantic effort, had thrown the ring right through the window.

The wizard shrieked and howled with rage, till the whole castle trembled
to its foundations. Then a crash was heard, the third band split in two,
and a crow flew out of the window.

Then the princess at length broke the enchanted silence, and
blushing like a rose, gave the prince her thanks for her unlooked-for
deliverance.

But it was not only the princess who was restored to life by the flight
of the wicked black crow. The marble figures became men once more, and
took up their occupations just as they had left them off. The horses
neighed in the stables, the flowers blossomed in the garden, the birds
flew in the air, the fish darted in the water. Everywhere you looked,
all was life, all was joy!

And the knights who had been turned into stone came in a body to offer
their homage to the prince who had set them free.

'Do not thank me,' he said, 'for I have done nothing. Without my
faithful servants, Long, Broad, and Quickeye, I should even have been as
one of you.'

With these words he bade them farewell, and departed with the princess
and his faithful companions for the kingdom of his father.

The old king, who had long since given up all hope, wept for joy at the
sight of his son, and insisted that the wedding should take place as
soon as possible.

All the knights who had been enchanted in the Iron Castle were invited
to the ceremony, and after it had taken place, Long, Broad, and Quickeye
took leave of the young couple, saying that they were going to look for
more work.

The prince offered them all their hearts could desire if they would only
remain with him, but they replied that an idle life would not please
them, and that they could never be happy unless they were busy, so they
went away to seek their fortunes, and for all I know are seeking still.

[Contes populaires. Traduits par Louis Leger. Paris: Leroux, editeur.]




Prunella


There was once upon a time a woman who had an only daughter. When the
child was about seven years old she used to pass every day, on her way
to school, an orchard where there was a wild plum tree, with delicious
ripe plums hanging from the branches. Each morning the child would pick
one, and put it into her pocket to eat at school. For this reason she
was called Prunella. Now, the orchard belonged to a witch. One day the
witch noticed the child gathering a plum, as she passed along the road.
Prunella did it quite innocently, not knowing that she was doing wrong
in taking the fruit that hung close to the roadside. But the witch was
furious, and next day hid herself behind the hedge, and when Prunella
came past, and put out her hand to pluck the fruit, she jumped out and
seized her by the arm.

'Ah! you little thief!' she exclaimed. 'I have caught you at last. Now
you will have to pay for your misdeeds.'

The poor child, half dead with fright, implored the old woman to
forgive her, assuring her that she did not know she had done wrong,
and promising never to do it again. But the witch had no pity, and she
dragged Prunella into her house, where she kept her till the time should
come when she could have her revenge.

As the years passed Prunella grew up into a very beautiful girl. Now her
beauty and goodness, instead of softening the witch's heart, aroused her
hatred and jealousy.

One day she called Prunella to her, and said: 'Take this basket, go to
the well, and bring it back to me filled with water. If you don't I will
kill you.'

The girl took the basket, went and let it down into the well again
and again. But her work was lost labour. Each time, as she drew up the
basket, the water streamed out of it. At last, in despair, she gave
it up, and leaning against the well she began to cry bitterly, when
suddenly she heard a voice at her side saying 'Prunella, why are you
crying?'

Turning round she beheld a handsome youth, who looked kindly at her, as
if he were sorry for her trouble.

'Who are you,' she asked, 'and how do you know my name?'

'I am the son of the witch,' he replied, 'and my name is Bensiabel. I
know that she is determined that you shall die, but I promise you that
she shall not carry out her wicked plan. Will you give me a kiss, if I
fill your basket?'

'No,' said Prunella, 'I will not give you a kiss, because you are the
son of a witch.'

'Very well,' replied the youth sadly. 'Give me your basket and I will
fill it for you.' And he dipped it into the well, and the water stayed
in it. Then the girl returned to the house, carrying the basket filled
with water. When the witch saw it, she became white with rage, and
exclaimed 'Bensiabel must have helped you.' And Prunella looked down,
and said nothing.

'Well, we shall see who will win in the end,' said the witch, in a great
rage.

The following day she called the girl to her and said: 'Take this sack
of wheat. I am going out for a little; by the time I return I shall
expect you to have made it into bread. If you have not done it I will
kill you.' Having said this she left the room, closing and locking the
door behind her.

Poor Prunella did not know what to do. It was impossible for her to
grind the wheat, prepare the dough, and bake the bread, all in the short
time that the witch would be away. At first she set to work bravely, but
when she saw how hopeless her task was, she threw herself on a chair,
and began to weep bitterly. She was roused from her despair by hearing
Bensiabel's voice at her side saying: 'Prunella, Prunella, do not weep
like that. If you will give me a kiss I will make the bread, and you
will be saved.'

'I will not kiss the son of a witch,' replied Prunella.

But Bensiabel took the wheat from her, and ground it, and made the
dough, and when the witch returned the bread was ready baked in the
oven.

Turning to the girl, with fury in her voice, she said: 'Bensiabel must
have been here and helped you;' and Prunella looked down, and said
nothing.

'We shall see who will win in the end,' said the witch, and her eyes
blazed with anger.

Next day she called the girl to her and said: 'Go to my sister, who
lives across the mountains. She will give you a casket, which you must
bring back to me.' This she said knowing that her sister, who was a
still more cruel and wicked witch than herself, would never allow the
girl to return, but would imprison her and starve her to death. But
Prunella did not suspect anything, and set out quite cheerfully. On the
way she met Bensiabel.

'Where are you going, Prunella?' he asked.

'I am going to the sister of my mistress, from whom I am to fetch a
casket.'

'Oh poor, poor girl!' said Bensiabel. 'You are being sent straight to
your death. Give me a kiss, and I will save you.'

But again Prunella answered as before, 'I will not kiss the son of a
witch.'

'Nevertheless, I will save your life,' said Bensiabel, 'for I love you
better than myself. Take this flagon of oil, this loaf of bread, this
piece of rope, and this broom. When you reach the witch's house, oil the
hinges of the door with the contents of the flagon, and throw the loaf
of bread to the great fierce mastiff, who will come to meet you. When
you have passed the dog, you will see in the courtyard a miserable woman
trying in vain to let down a bucket into the well with her plaited hair.
You must give her the rope. In the kitchen you will find a still more
miserable woman trying to clean the hearth with her tongue; to her you
must give the broom. You will see the casket on the top of a cupboard,
take it as quickly as you can, and leave the house without a moment's
delay. If you do all this exactly as I have told you, you will not be
killed.'

So Prunella, having listened carefully to his instructions, did just
what he had told her. She reached the house, oiled the hinges of the
door, threw the loaf to the dog, gave the poor woman at the well the
rope, and the woman in the kitchen the broom, caught up the casket from
the top of the cupboard, and fled with it out of the house. But the
witch heard her as she ran away, and rushing to the window called out to
the woman in the kitchen: 'Kill that thief, I tell you!'

But the woman replied: 'I will not kill her, for she has given me a
broom, whereas you forced me to clean the hearth with my tongue.'

Then the witch called out in fury to the woman at the well: 'Take the
girl, I tell you, and fling her into the water, and drown her!'

But the woman answered: 'No, I will not drown her, for she gave me this
rope, whereas you forced me to use my hair to let down the bucket to
draw water.'

Then the witch shouted to the dog to seize the girl and hold her fast;
but the dog answered: 'No, I will not seize her, for she gave me a loaf
of bread, whereas you let me starve with hunger.'

The witch was so angry that she nearly choked, as she called out: 'Door,
bang upon her, and keep her a prisoner.'

But the door answered: 'I won't, for she has oiled my hinges, so that
they move quite easily, whereas you left them all rough and rusty.'

And so Prunella escaped, and, with the casket under her arm, reached the
house of her mistress, who, as you may believe, was as angry as she was
surprised to see the girl standing before her, looking more beautiful
than ever. Her eyes flashed, as in furious tones she asked her, 'Did you
meet Bensiabel?'

But Prunella looked down, and said nothing.

'We shall see,' said the witch, 'who will win in the end. Listen, there
are three cocks in the hen-house; one is yellow, one black, and the
third is white. If one of them crows during the night you must tell me
which one it is. Woe to you if you make a mistake. I will gobble you up
in one mouthful.'

Now Bensiabel was in the room next to the one where Prunella slept. At
midnight she awoke hearing a cock crow.

'Which one was that?' shouted the witch.

Then, trembling, Prunella knocked on the wall and whispered: 'Bensiabel,
Bensiabel, tell me, which cock crowed?'

'Will you give me a kiss if I tell you?' he whispered back through the
wall.

But she answered 'No.'

Then he whispered back to her: 'Nevertheless, I will tell you. It was
the yellow cock that crowed.'

The witch, who had noticed the delay in Prunella's answer, approached
her door calling angrily: 'Answer at once, or I will kill you.'

So Prunella answered: 'It was the yellow cock that crowed.'

And the witch stamped her foot and gnashed her teeth.

Soon after another cock crowed. 'Tell me now which one it is,' called
