the child's tears were all delight.

"And you are the Susie about whom Mammie Moseley used to fret? Oh, it
seems _too_ good, too wonderful!" said Cecile at last.

"Yes, Cecile, I left Mammie Moseley too; I did everything that was
heartless and bad. Oh, but I have been unhappy. Surrounded by mercies
as I have been, there has been such a weight, so heavy, so dreadful,
ever on my heart."

Cecile did not reply to this. She was looking hard at the Lovedy she
had come so many miles to seek--for whom she had encountered so many
dangers. It seemed hard to realize that her search was accomplished,
her goal won, her prize at her feet.

"Yes, Lovedy, your mother was right, you are very beautiful," she said
slowly.

"Oh, Cecile! tell me about my mother," said Lovedy then. "All these
years I have never dared speak of my mother. But that has not prevented
my starving for her, something as poor Joe must have starved for his.
Tell me all you can about my mother---more than Alphonse told
downstairs tonight."

So Cecile told the old story. Over and over again she dwelt upon that
deathbed scene, upon that poor mother's piteous longing for her child,
and Lovedy listened and wept as if her heart would break.

At last this tale, so sad, so bitter for the woman who was now a mother
herself, came to an end, and then Lovedy, wiping her eyes, spoke:

"Cecile, I must tell you a little about myself. You know the day my
mother married your father, I ran away. I had loved my mother most
passionately; but I was jealous. I was exacting. I was proud. I could
not bear that my mother should put anyone in my place. I ran away. I
went to my Aunt Fanny. She was a vain and silly woman. She praised me
for running away. She said I had spirit. She took me to Paris.

"For the first week I got on pretty well. The new life helped to divert
my thoughts, and I tried to believe I could do well without my mother.
But then the knowledge that I had done wrong, joined to a desperate
mother-hunger, I can call it by no other word, took possession of me. I
got to hate my aunt, who led a gay life. At last I could bear it no
longer. I ran away.

"I had just enough money in my pocket to take me to London; I had not
one penny more. But I felt easy enough; I thought, I will go to our old
home, and make it up with mother, and then it will be all right. So I
spent my last, my very last shilling in a cab fare, and I gave the
driver the old address.

"As I got near the house, I began to wish I had not come. I was such an
odd mixture; all made up of love and that terrible pride. However, my
pride was to get a shock I little expected.

"Strangers were in the old rooms; strangers who knew nothing whatever
about my mother. I found that I had so set my heart against this
marriage, that I had not even cared to inquire the name of the man my
mother had married; so I had no clew to give anyone, no one could help
me. I was only a child then, and I wandered away without one farthing,
absolutely alone in the great world of London.

"It drove me nearly wild to remember that my mother was really in the
very same London, and I could not find her, and when I had got as far
as a great bridge---I knew it was a bridge, for I saw the water running
under it---I could bear my feelings no longer, and I just cried out
like any little baby for my Mammie.

"It was then, Cecile, that Mrs. Moseley found me. Oh! how good she was
to me! She took me home and she gave me love, and my poor starved heart
was a little satisfied.

"Perhaps she and her husband could have helped me to find my mother.
But again that demon pride got over me. I would not tell them my tale.
I would acknowledge to no one that my mother had put another in my
place; so all the time that I was really starving for one kiss from my
own mother, I made believe that I did not care.

"I used to go out every day and look for her as well as I could by
myself, but of course I never got the slightest clew to where she
lived; and I doubt then, that even if I had known, so contrary was I,
that I would have gone to her.

"Well, one day, who should come up to me, quite unexpectedly, but Aunt
Fanny again. Oh! she was a bad, cruel woman, and she had a strange
power over me. She talked very gently, and not a bit crossly, and she
soon came around a poor, weak young thing like me; she praised my
pretty face, and she roused my vanity and my pride, and at last she so
worked on me, that she got me to do a mean and shameful thing--I was to
go back to Paris with her, without ever even bidding the Moseleys
good-by.

"Well, Cecile, I did go---I hate myself when I think of it, but I did
go back to Paris that very night with Aunt Fanny. I soon found out what
she was up to, she wanted to make money by me. She took me to a
stage-manager, and he said he would prepare me for the stage--I had a
voice, as well as a face and figure, he said. And he prophesied that I
should be a great success. Then I began the most dreadful life. I heard
horrible things, bad things.

"Perhaps the thought of all the triumphs that were before me might have
reconciled me to my fate, but I had always in my heart the knowledge
that I had done wrong: however, Aunt Fanny ruled me with a tight hand,
and I had no chance of running away. I was so unhappy that I wrote to
the Moseleys begging them to forgive and help me, but I think now Aunt
Fanny must have stopped the letters, for I never got any answer.

"Well, Cecile, she died rather suddenly, and the manager said I was his
property, and I must come and live in his house.

"I could not stand that. I just made up my mind; I ran away again. It
was night, and I wandered alone in the Paris streets. I had two francs
in my pocket. God only knows what my fate would have been, but _He_
took care of me. As I was walking down a long boulevard I heard a woman
say aloud and very bitterly:

"'God above help me; shall I ever see my child again?'

"She spoke in French, but I understood French very well then. Her words
arrested me; I turned to look at her.

"'Oh, my dear! you are too young to be out alone at night like this,"
she said.

"Oh! but she had the kindest heart. Cecile, that woman was Mme. Malet;
she had come up to Paris to look for her lost Alphonse; she took me
home with her to the South; and a year after, I married my dear, my
good Jean. Cecile, I have the best husband, I have the sweetest child;
but I have never been quite happy--often I have been miserable; I could
not tell about my mother, even to my Jean. He often asked me, but I
always said:

"'I hate England; ask me nothing about England if you love me.'"

"But you will tell him to-night; you will tell him all to-night?" asked
Cecile.

"Yes, dear little one, I am going to him; there shall never be a secret
between us again; and now God reward, God bless thee, dear little
sister."




CHAPTER XXX.

THE END CROWNS ALL.


Summer! summer, not in the lovely country, but in the scorching East
End. Such heated air! such scorching pavements! Oh! how the poor were
suffering! How pale the little children looked, as too tired, and
perhaps too weak to play, they crept about the baking streets.
Benevolent people did all they could for these poor babies.
Hard-working East End clergymen got subscriptions on foot, and planned
days in the country, and, where it was possible, sent some away for
longer periods. But try as they would, the lives of the children had to
be spent with their parents in this region, which truly seems to know
the two extremes, both the winter's cold and the summer's heat. It was
the first week in August, and the Moseleys' little room, still as neat
as possible, felt very hot and close. It was in vain to open their
dormer windows. The air outside seemed hotter than that within. The
pair were having some bread and butter and cold tea, but both looked
flushed and tired. They had, in truth, just returned from a long
pleasure excursion under their good clergyman, Mr. Danvers, into the
country. Mrs. Moseley had entire charge of about twenty children, her
husband of as many more; so no wonder they looked fagged. But no amount
of either heat or fatigue could take the loving sparkle out of Mammie
Moseley's eyes, and she was now expatiating on the delights of the
little ones in the grass and flowers.

"There was one dear little toddle, John," she said; "she seemed fairly
to lose her head with delight; to see that child rolling over in the
grass and clutching at the daisies would do any heart good. Eh! but
they all did have a blessed day. The sin and shame of it is to bring
them back to their stifling homes to-night."

"I tell you what, wife," said John Moseley, "the sight of the country
fairly made a kitten of yerself. I haven't seen yer so young and so
sprightly since we lost our bit of a Charlie. And I ha' made up my
mind, and this is wot I'll do: We has two or three pounds put by, and
I'll spend enough of it to give thee a real holiday, old girl. You
shall go into Kent for a fortnight. There!"

"No, no, John, nothink of the kind; I'm as strong and hearty as
possible. I feels the 'eat, no doubt; but Lor'! I ha' strength to bear
it. No, John, my man, ef we can spare a couple o' pounds, let's give it
to Mr. Danvers' fund for the poor little orphans and other children as
he wants to send into the country for three weeks each."

"But that'll do thee no good," expostulated John Moseley, in a
discontented voice.

"Oh! yes, but it will, John, dear; and ef you don't like to do it for
me, you do it for Charlie. Whenever I exercises a bit of self-denial, I
thinks: well, I'll do it for the dear dead lamb. I thinks o' him in the
arms of Jesus, and nothink seems too hard to give up for the sake of
the blessed One as takes such care of my darling."

"I guess as that's why you're so good to 'strays,'" said John Moseley.
"Eh! but, Moll, wot 'as come o' yer word, as you'd take no more notice
o' them, since them two little orphans runned away last winter?"

"There's no manner o' use in twitting at me, John. A stray child allers
reminds me so desp'rate hard o' Charlie, and then I'm jest done for.
'Twill be so to the end. Hany stray 'ud do wot it liked wid Mammie
Moseley. But eh! I do wonder wot has come to my poor little orphans,
them and Susie! I lies awake at night often and often and thinks it all
hover. How they all vanished from us seems past belief."

"Well, there seems a power o' 'strays' coming hup the stairs now," said
John Moseley, "to judge by the noise as they makes. Sakes alive! wife,
they're coming hup yere. Maybe 'tis Mr. Danvers and his good lady. They
said they might call round. Jest set the table tidy."

But before Mrs. Moseley could do anything of the kind, the rope which
lifted the boards was pulled by a hand which knew its tricks well, and
the next instant bounded into the room a shabby-looking dog with a
knowing face. He sprang upon John Moseley with a bark of delight;
licked Mammie Moseley's hands; then, seeing the cat in her accustomed
corner, he ran and lay down by her side. The moment Toby saw the cat it
occurred to him that a life of ease was returning to him, and he was
not slow to avail himself of it. But there was no time to notice Toby,
nor to think of Toby, for instantly he was followed by Maurice and
Cecile and, immediately after them, a dark-eyed boy, and then a great
big man, and last, but not least, a fair-haired and beautiful young
woman.

It was at this young woman Mammie Moseley stared even more intently
than at Cecile. But the young woman, taking Cecile's hand, came over
and knelt on the ground, and, raising eyes brimful of tears, said:

"Mammie, mammie, I am Susie! and Cecile has brought me back to you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Over the confusion that ensued--the perfect Babel of voices--the
endless exclamation--the laughter and the tears--it might be best to
draw a veil.

Suffice it to say, that this story of a brave endeavor, of a long
pilgrimage, of a constant purpose, is nearly ended. Lovedy and her
party spent a few days in London, and then they went down into Kent and
found good faithful Jane Parsons, now happily married to the very
night-guard who had befriended Cecile and Maurice when they were sent
flying from Aunt Lydia to London. Even Aunt Lydia, as her mother's
sister, did repentant Lovedy find out; and, seeing her now reduced to
absolute poverty, she helped her as best she could. Nothing could make
Lydia Purcell really grateful; but even she was a little softened by
Lovedy's beauty and bewitching ways. She even kissed Cecile when she
bade her good-by, and Cecile, in consequence, could think of her
without fear in her distant home.

Yes, Cecile's ultimate destination was France. In that pretty farmhouse
on the borders of the Landes, she and Maurice grew up as happy and
blessed as children could be. No longer orphans--for had they not a
mother in old Mme. Malet, a sister in Lovedy, while Joe must always
remain as the dearest of dear brothers? Were you to ask Cecile, she
would tell you she had just one dream still unfulfilled. She hopes some
day to welcome Mammie Moseley to her happy home in France. The last
thing that good woman said to the child, as she clung with arms tightly
folded round her neck, was this:

"The Guide Jesus was most wonderful kind to you, Cecile, my lamb! He
took you safely a fearsome and perilous journey. You'll let Him guide
you still all the rest of the way?"

"All the rest of the way," answered Cecile in a low and solemn voice.
"Oh, Mammie Moseley I could not live without Him."

Just two things more ... Anton is dead. Miss Smith has ever remained a
faithful friend to Cecile; and Cecile writes to her once a year.






[Transcriber's Note: A word was illegible in our print copy. We have
made an educated guess as to what the word should be and indicated its
location in the text with an asterisk (*).]









End of Project Gutenberg's The Children's Pilgrimage, by L. T. Meade

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN'S PILGRIMAGE ***

***** This file should be named 6899.txt or 6899.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/8/9/6899/

Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Charles Franks and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by
Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


