and said to him, 'Provost, I want you to sign these permits for two
friends of mine who are wanting to go up to London.'

"'Who are they?' said he.

"'They are just two drover bodies,' I said. He looked at me hard.

"'One question, Andrew. I know how you feel just at present. You are a
loyal man like myself, but we all feel the same. I will sign your permit
for any save one. Give me your word that neither of these men is Charles
Stuart. I care not who they may be beside, but as a loyal subject of King
George I cannot aid his arch enemy to escape.'

"'I give you my word, provost,' I said. 'One is--'

"'I don't want to know who they are,' he interrupted. 'I had rather not
know. It is enough for me that you give me your word that neither of them
is Charles Stuart,' and he took the pen and signed the permit. 'Between
ourselves,' he went on, 'I shall be glad to hear that the misguided young
man is safe across the water, but as Provost of Glasgow I could lend him
no help to go.'

"'They say he has got safe away already,' I said.

"'I think not, Andrew; the coast has been too closely watched for that.
The young man is hiding somewhere among the isles, among the Clanranalds
or Macdonalds. I fear they will have him yet. I dread every day to get
the news; but I hope beyond all things, that if they do lay hands on him
it will be through the treachery of no Scot.'

"'I hope not, provost,' I said. 'They haven't got over throwing it in our
teeth that we sold King Charles to Cromwell.' So we just shook hands and
said goodbye, and here is the permit."

They spent a long evening talking over the past.

"I wonder if I shall ever see you again, Ronald!" Mrs. Anderson said,
with tears in her eyes, as they rose to say goodbye.

"You need nor fear about that, Janet, woman," her husband said. "Ronald
and Malcolm aye fall on their legs, and we shall see them back again like
two bad pennies. Besides," he went on more seriously, "there will be an
end of these savage doings in the north before long. Loyal men in
Scotland are crying out everywhere against them, and the feeling in
England will be just as strong when the truth is known there, and you
will see that before long there will be a general pardon granted to all
except the leaders. Fortunately Ronald and Malcolm are not likely to be
in the list of exceptions, and before a year is up they will be able to
come back if they will without fear of being tapped on the shoulder by a
king's officer."

"I shall come back again if I can, you may be sure," Ronald said. "Of
course I do not know yet what my father and mother's plans may be; but
for myself I shall always look upon Scotland as my home, and come back to
it as soon as I have an opportunity."

"You do not intend to stay in the French army?"

"Certainly not. After the treatment my father has received I have no
inclination to serve France. The chief reason why Scotchmen have entered
her service has been that they were driven from home, and that they
looked to France for aid to place the Stuarts on the throne again. Now
that the time has come, France has done nothing to aid, and has seen the
Stuart cause go down without striking a blow to assist it. I consider
that cause is lost for ever, and shall never again draw my sword against
the House of Hanover. Nor have I had any reason for loving France. After
living in a free country like Scotland, who could wish to live in a
country where one man's will is all powerful--where the people are
still no better than serfs--where the nobles treat the law as made only
for them--where, as in my father's case, a man may not even marry
according to his own will without incurring the risk of a life's
imprisonment? No, I have had enough of France; and if ever I get the
opportunity I shall return to Scotland to live."

The next morning early Ronald and Malcolm embarked on board a ship. Their
permits were closely scrutinized before the vessel started, and a
thorough search was made before she was allowed to sail. When the
officers were satisfied that no fugitives were concealed on board they
returned to shore, and the vessel started on her voyage for London.



CHAPTER XX: Happy Days.


On arriving in London, after ten days' voyage, Ronald and Malcolm
obtained garments of the ordinary cut. The one attired himself as an
English gentleman, the other in a garb suitable to a confidential
attendant or steward, and after a stay of two or three days they made
their way by coach down to Southampton.

Here they remained for a week, and then effected a bargain with the
captain of a fishing lugger to set them on shore in France. As the two
countries were at war this could only be done by landing them at night at
some quiet spot on the French coast. The lugger cruised about a couple of
days, and then, choosing a quiet night when there was a mist on the
water, she ran in as closely as she dared, then the boat was lowered, and
Malcolm and Ronald were rowed to shore and landed a few miles south of
Boulogne.

When it was light they made their way to a village; here but few
questions were asked them, for many refugees from Scotland and England
were crossing to France. As they had been well provided with funds by
Andrew they posted to Paris, and on arriving there put up at the inn
where they had stopped on the occasion of their first visit.

"We must be careful," Malcolm said, "how we stir out until we know how
things stand. The first thing to do is to find out whether the regiment
is still in Paris."

This they were not long in doing, as their host was able to inform them
at once that it had left the capital several months before, and on
comparing dates they found that its departure had followed within a day
or two that of their own flight from Paris.

"It was no doubt meant as a punishment," Ronald said, "on Colonel Hume
for acting as my second in that affair with the duke. I hope that no
further ill befell him."

His mind was set easy on this score by the news that Colonel Hume had
accompanied his regiment. On asking after Marshal Saxe they learned that
he was away on the frontier, where he had been carrying on the war with
great success, Antwerp, Mons, Namur, and Charleroi all having been
captured.

The king was in person with the army. This being the case Ronald saw that
it was of no use remaining in Paris, as he was without friend or
protector there, and he dared not rejoin his regiment until he learned
whether the king's anger was as hot as ever. He therefore started at once
with Malcolm and travelled down to La Grenouille.

It was a joyful meeting between him and his parents, who were in the
greatest anxiety respecting him, for although he had written several
times, communication was uncertain owing to the war, the only chance of
sending letters being by such French vessels as arrived at Scottish ports
after running the gauntlet with English cruisers. Some of these had been
captured on the way back, and only two of Ronald's letters had arrived
safely. The last of these had been written a few days after the battle of
Falkirk, and Ronald had then stated that he no longer had any hope of the
final success of the expedition. They had received the news of the defeat
at Culloden, and had since passed nearly three months of painful
suspense, relieved only by the arrival of Ronald himself. He found his
mother looking well and happy; his father had somewhat recovered from his
rheumatism, and looked a younger man by some years than when he saw him
last.

"He will recover fast now," the countess said; "but he has worried about
you night and day, Ronald. I hope that you will stay with us for a time.
We have seen so little of you yet."

Ronald learned that a few days after his flight an officer had appeared
at the chateau with the royal order for his arrest, and it was from him
that his parents had first learned the news of his duel with the Duke of
Chateaurouge and its result.

"I could hardly believe my ears, Ronald," his father said; "to think that
my son, scarce a man yet, should have killed in fair fight one of the
first duellists in France. It seemed almost incredible. Malcolm told me
that you were a first rate swordsman, but this seemed extraordinary
indeed. The officer remained here for three days, and then, convinced
that you had not made in this direction, left us. A day or two afterwards
we received the letter you wrote us from Nantes, saying that you were
starting for Scotland with the prince. I grumbled sorely over my
rheumatism, I can tell you, which prevented my drawing my sword once more
for the Stuarts; but it was no use my thinking of it."

"No, indeed," the countess said; "and I can tell you, Ronald, that had he
been ever so well I should not have let him go. After being separated
from one's husband for sixteen years one is not going to let him run off
to figure as a knight errant at his pleasure."

"Your friend Colonel Hume wrote to us," the colonel said with a smile at
his wife's word, "giving us details of the duel, and speaking of your
conduct in the highest terms. He said that at present the king was
furious; but that he hoped in time he would get over it. Colonel Hume had
seen Marshal Saxe, who had promised on the first opportunity to speak to
the king, and to open his eyes to the character of his late favourite,
and to tell him of the attempts which the duke had made to prevent the
royal orders for our release being carried out, and to remove you by
assassination. Two months ago he wrote again to us from Antwerp, which
had just fallen, saying that Marshal Saxe had bid him tell us that the
king was in a much more favourable disposition, and that he had taken the
opportunity when his majesty was in a good humour to tell him the whole
circumstances of your journey with the orders for our release, and that
in consequence the king had made other inquiries respecting the late
duke, and had acknowledged that he had been greatly deceived as to his
character. At the same time, as your name had been by the king's order
removed from the list of officers of the Scottish Dragoons immediately
after the duel, he recommended that should you return to France you
should not put yourself in the king's way or appear at all in public for
the present.

"'The marshal,' Colonel Hume wrote, 'has made your affair a personal
matter, and he, as is his habit in war, will persevere until he succeeds.
His reputation and influence are higher than ever, and are daily rising;
be assured that when the campaign is over, and he reaps all the honours
to which he is entitled, he will push your claim as before.'"

In the first week in October the suspense from which they had suffered as
to the fate of Prince Charles was relieved by the news that on the 29th
of September he had safely landed at the little port of Roscoff near
Morlaix. He made his way to Paris, and Ronald, accompanied by Malcolm,
took horse at once and rode there to pay his respects to the prince, and
congratulate him on his escape. The prince received him with great warmth
and cordiality, and from his own lips Ronald learned the story of his
adventures.

He had, eight days after Culloden, embarked for the cluster of islets to
which the common name of Long Island is applied. After wandering from
place to place and suffering greatly from hunger, he gained South Uist,
where his wants were relieved by Clanranald. The English, suspecting or
learning that he was there, landed two thousand men on the island, and
commenced an active search for him. He must have been detected had not
Flora Macdonald--stepdaughter of a captain in a militia regiment which
formed part of the troops who had landed--upon being appealed to by
Lady Clanranald, nobly undertaken to save him.

She obtained from her stepfather a passport to proceed to Skye with a
manservant and a maid. Charles was dressed in female clothes, and passed
as Betty Bourk, while a faithful Highlander, Neil M'Eachan, acted as her
servant. They started at night in an open boat, and disembarked in Skye.
Skye was ever a hostile country, as its chief, Sir Alexander Macdonald,
who had at first wavered, was now a warm supporter of the Hanoverians,
and was with the Duke of Cumberland. Nevertheless Flora appealed to his
wife, Lady Margaret, a daughter of the Earl of Eglinton, and informed her
that her attendant was Prince Charles in disguise. Lady Margaret nobly
responded to her appeal. Her own house was full of militia officers, and
she intrusted Charles to the charge of Macdonald of Kingsburgh, her
husband's kinsman and factor, who took the party to his house.

The next day Charles took leave of Flora Macdonald with warm expressions
of gratitude, and passed over to the Isle of Rasay, in the disguise of a
male servant. Thence he made his way to the mainland, where on landing he
was compelled to lie in concealment for two days cooped up within a line
of sentries. After many dangers he took refuge in a mountain cave
inhabited by seven robbers, who treated him with the greatest kindness,
and supplied his wants for the three weeks he remained with them. After
many other adventures he joined his faithful adherents Cluny and Locheil,
who were in hiding in a retreat on the side of Mount Benalder, and here
he lived in comparative comfort until he heard that two French vessels
under the direction of Colonel Warren of Dillon's regiment had anchored
in Lochnanuagh.

Travelling by night he made his way to that place, and embarked on the
20th of September, attended by Locheil, Colonel Roy Stuart, and about a
hundred other fugitives who had learned of the arrival of the French
vessels. It was almost precisely the spot at which he had disembarked
fourteen months before. A fog concealed the vessel as she passed through
the British fleet lying to intercept her, and they reached Roscoff after
a nine days' voyage.

Such was the tale which Prince Charles told to Ronald. He had after
Culloden entirely recovered his high spirits, and had borne all his
fatigues and hardships with the greatest cheerfulness and good humour,
making light of hunger, fatigue, and danger. Ronald only remained two
days in Paris, and then returned home.

In October the campaign of Flanders ended with the complete defeat of
Prince Charles of Lorraine at Rancaux, and Marshal Saxe returned to
Paris, where he was received with enthusiasm by the population. The royal
residence of Chambord was granted him for life, and he was proclaimed
marshal general of the king's armies. A fortnight later Colonel Leslie
received a letter from him, saying that he had received his majesty's
command that he with the countess and his son should present themselves
in Paris, and that he was happy to say that the king's disposition was
most favourable. They set off at once. On their arrival there they called
upon Marshal Saxe, who greeted the colonel as an old friend, and refused
to listen to the warm expression of gratitude of Leslie and the countess.

"Say nothing about it, madam," he exclaimed. "Your son won my heart, and
I was only too glad to be of service to him and my old comrade here. What
is the use of a man winning victories if he cannot lend a helping hand to
his friends!"

The next day they went down to Versailles, where Marshal Saxe presented
them to the king in a private audience. Louis received them graciously.

"I fear, countess, that you and your husband have been treated with some
harshness; but our royal ear was deceived by one in whom we had
confidence. Your husband and yourself were wrong in marrying without the
consent and against the will of your father, and such marriages cannot be
permitted; but at the request of Marshal Saxe, who has done so much for
France that I cannot refuse anything he asks, I have now consented to
pardon and overlook the past, and have ordered my chancellor to prepare
an order reinstating you in all the possessions and estates of the
countess, your mother. I hope that I shall often see you together with
your husband and son, both of whom have done good service as soldiers of
France, at my court; and now that I see you," he said with a gracious
smile, "I cannot but feel how great a loss our court has suffered by your
long absence from it."

Upon leaving the king's private chamber and entering the great audience
hall Colonel Hume came up and grasped the hand of his old friend, and was
introduced by him to his wife; while many of the courtiers, who were
either connections or friends of the family of the countess, also
gathered round them, for the news that she was restored to royal favour
had spread quickly. The countess knew how small was the real value of
such advances, but she felt that it was best for her husband and son's
sake to receive them amicably. For a few weeks they remained in Paris,
taking part in the brilliant fetes which celebrated the success of the
French arms, and they then retired to the handsome chateau which was now
the property of the countess.

Here they lived quietly for two years, making occasional visits to Paris.
At the end of that time Ronald received a letter from Andrew Anderson, to
whom he had written several times since his return to France. He told him
that he had just heard that Glenlyon and the rest of the property which
had been confiscated after the rising of 1715 was for sale. It had been
bestowed upon a neighbouring chief, who had been active in the Hanoverian
cause. He was now dead without leaving issue, and his wife, an English
lady, was anxious to dispose of the property and return to England.

"I do not know whether your father is disposed to buy back his estates,"
Andrew wrote, "but I hear that a general amnesty will very shortly be
issued to all who took part in the insurrection, saving only certain
notorious persons. The public are sick of bloodshed. There have been
upwards of eighty trials and executions, besides the hundreds who were
slaughtered in the Highlands. Besides this, thousands have been
transported. But public opinion is now so strong, and persons of all
shades of politics are so disgusted with the brutal ferocity which has
been shown, that it is certain government will ere long be compelled to
pass an act of amnesty. In the meantime, if it should be your father's
wish to purchase the property, I can buy it in my name. The priced asked
is very low. The income arising from it is stated to be about four
hundred a year, and four thousand pounds will be accepted for it. I
understand that as the late owner took no part in the insurrection, and
joined the Duke of Cumberland when he came north, the property is in good
condition and the clansmen have escaped the harrying which befell all
those who sided with Charles Stuart."

Ronald at once laid the letter before his father, who, after reading it
through, passed it, without a word, to the countess.

"You would like to return to Scotland?" she asked quietly, when she read
it. "Do not hesitate to tell me, dear, if you would. It is no matter to
me whether we live there or here, so long as I have you and Ronald with
me."

Colonel Leslie was silent.

"For Ronald's sake," she went on, "perhaps it would be better so. You are
both of opinion that the cause of the Stuarts is lost for ever, and he is
determined that he will never again take part in any rising. He does not
care again to enter the French army, nor, indeed, is there any reason why
Scotchmen should do so, now that they no longer look for the aid of the
King of France to set the Stuarts on the English throne. I myself have no
ties here. My fifteen years of seclusion have separated me altogether
from my family, and although they are willing enough to be civil now, I
cannot forget that all those years they did nothing towards procuring our
liberty. The king has so far given way that he has restored me my
mother's estates, but it was only because he could not refuse Marshal
Saxe, and he does not like French lands to be held by strangers;
therefore I feel sure, that were I to ask his permission to sell my
estates and to retire with you to Scotland he would at once grant my
request."

"No, Amelie, it would not be fair to accept your generous offer."

"But it would be no sacrifice," she urged. "I have little reason to love
France, and I can assure you I should be just as happy in your country as
in my own."

"But it would be exile," the colonel said.

"No more exile than you and Ronald are suffering here. Besides, I suppose
we should get as many comforts in Scotland as here in France. Of course
our estates here will fetch a sum many times larger than that which would
purchase Glenlyon, and we need not live all our time among the mountains
you tell me of, but can go sometimes to Edinburgh or even to London. Even
if you did not wish it, I should say it would be far better to do so for
Ronald's sake. You have lived so long in France that you may have become
a Frenchman; but it is not so with Ronald."

It was not until two or three days later that the discussion came to an
end and the countess had her way. Colonel Leslie had resisted stoutly,
but his heart beat at the thought of returning to the home of his youth
and ending his days among the clansmen who had followed him and his
fathers before him. Ronald had taken no part whatever in the debate, but
his mother read in his eyes the delight which the thought of returning to
Scotland occasioned him. As soon as this was settled they went to Paris,
