uncertainness he heard a low voice among the bushes. It said, 'Hist!
Oswald here!' and it was the voice of Alice.

So he went back to the others among the shrubs and they all crowded
round their leader full of importable news.

'She's not in the house; she's HERE,' Alice said in a low whisper that
seemed nearly all S's. 'Close by--she went by just this minute with a
gentleman.'

'And they're sitting on a seat under a tree on a little lawn, and she's
got her head on his shoulder, and he's holding her hand. I never saw
anyone look so silly in all my born,' Dicky said.

'It's sickening,' Denny said, trying to look very manly with his legs
wide apart.

'I don't know,' Oswald whispered. 'I suppose it wasn't Albert's uncle?'

'Not much,' Dicky briefly replied.

'Then don't you see it's all right. If she's going on like that with
this fellow she'll want to marry him, and Albert's uncle is safe. And
we've really done an unselfish action without having to suffer for it
afterwards.'

With a stealthy movement Oswald rubbed his hands as he spoke in real
joyfulness. We decided that we had better bunk unnoticed. But we had
reckoned without Martha. She had strolled off limping to look about her
a bit in the shrubbery. 'Where's Martha?' Dora suddenly said.

'She went that way,' pointingly remarked H. O.

'Then fetch her back, you young duffer! What did you let her go for?'
Oswald said. 'And look sharp. Don't make a row.'

He went. A minute later we heard a hoarse squeak from Martha--the one
she always gives when suddenly collared from behind--and a little squeal
in a lady-like voice, and a man say 'Hallo!' and then we knew that H. O.
had once more rushed in where angels might have thought twice about it.
We hurried to the fatal spot, but it was too late. We were just in time
to hear H. O. say--

'I'm sorry if she frightened you. But we've been looking for you. Are
you Albert's uncle's long-lost grandmother?'

'NO,' said our lady unhesitatingly.

It seemed vain to add seven more agitated actors to the scene now going
on. We stood still. The man was standing up. He was a clergyman, and I
found out afterwards he was the nicest we ever knew except our own Mr
Briston at Lewisham, who is now a canon or a dean, or something grand
that no one ever sees. At present I did not like him. He said, 'No, this
lady is nobody's grandmother. May I ask in return how long it is since
you escaped from the lunatic asylum, my poor child, and whence your
keeper is?'

H. O. took no notice of this at all, except to say, 'I think you are
very rude, and not at all funny, if you think you are.'

The lady said, 'My dear, I remember you now perfectly. How are all the
others, and are you pilgrims again to-day?'

H. O. does not always answer questions. He turned to the man and said--

'Are you going to marry the lady?'

'Margaret,' said the clergyman, 'I never thought it would come to this:
he asks me my intentions.'

'If you ARE,' said H. O., 'it's all right, because if you do Albert's
uncle can't--at least, not till you're dead. And we don't want him to.'

'Flattering, upon my word,' said the clergyman, putting on a deep frown.
'Shall I call him out, Margaret, for his poor opinion of you, or shall I
send for the police?'

Alice now saw that H. O., though firm, was getting muddled and rather
scared. She broke cover and sprang into the middle of the scene.

'Don't let him rag H. O. any more,' she said, 'it's all our faults. You
see, Albert's uncle was so anxious to find you, we thought perhaps you
were his long-lost heiress sister or his old nurse who alone knew the
secret of his birth, or something, and we asked him, and he said you
were his long-lost grandmother he had known in India. And we thought
that must be a mistake and that really you were his long-lost
sweetheart. And we tried to do a really unselfish act and find you for
him. Because we don't want him to be married at all.'

'It isn't because we don't like YOU,' Oswald cut in, now emerging from
the bushes, 'and if he must marry, we'd sooner it was you than anyone.
Really we would.'

'A generous concession, Margaret,' the strange clergyman uttered, 'most
generous, but the plot thickens. It's almost pea-soup-like now. One or
two points clamour for explanation. Who are these visitors of yours? Why
this Red Indian method of paying morning calls? Why the lurking attitude
of the rest of the tribe which I now discern among the undergrowth?
Won't you ask the rest of the tribe to come out and join the glad
throng?'

Then I liked him better. I always like people who know the same songs we
do, and books and tunes and things.

The others came out. The lady looked very uncomfy, and partly as if she
was going to cry. But she couldn't help laughing too, as more and more
of us came out.

'And who,' the clergyman went on, 'who in fortune's name is Albert? And
who is his uncle? And what have they or you to do in this galere--I mean
garden?'

We all felt rather silly, and I don't think I ever felt more than then
what an awful lot there were of us.

'Three years' absence in Calcutta or elsewhere may explain my ignorance
of these details, but still--'

'I think we'd better go,' said Dora. 'I'm sorry if we've done anything
rude or wrong. We didn't mean to. Good-bye. I hope you'll be happy with
the gentleman, I'm sure.'

'I HOPE so too,' said Noel, and I know he was thinking how much nicer
Albert's uncle was. We turned to go. The lady had been very silent
compared with what she was when she pretended to show us Canterbury. But
now she seemed to shake off some dreamy silliness, and caught hold of
Dora by the shoulder.

'No, dear, no,' she said, 'it's all right, and you must have some
tea--we'll have it on the lawn. John, don't tease them any more.
Albert's uncle is the gentleman I told you about. And, my dear children,
this is my brother that I haven't seen for three years.'

'Then he's a long-lost too,' said H. O.

The lady said 'Not now' and smiled at him.

And the rest of us were dumb with confounding emotions. Oswald was
particularly dumb. He might have known it was her brother, because in
rotten grown-up books if a girl kisses a man in a shrubbery that is
not the man you think she's in love with; it always turns out to be
a brother, though generally the disgrace of the family and not a
respectable chaplain from Calcutta.

The lady now turned to her reverend and surprising brother and said,
'John, go and tell them we'll have tea on the lawn.'

When he was gone she stood quite still a minute. Then she said, 'I'm
going to tell you something, but I want to put you on your honour not
to talk about it to other people. You see it isn't everyone I would tell
about it. He, Albert's uncle, I mean, has told me a lot about you, and I
know I can trust you.'

We said 'Yes', Oswald with a brooding sentiment of knowing all too well
what was coming next.

The lady then said, 'Though I am not Albert's uncle's grandmother I
did know him in India once, and we were going to be married, but we had
a--a--misunderstanding.'

'Quarrel?' Row?' said Noel and H. O. at once.

'Well, yes, a quarrel, and he went away. He was in the Navy then. And
then... well, we were both sorry, but well, anyway, when his ship came
back we'd gone to Constantinople, then to England, and he couldn't find
us. And he says he's been looking for me ever since.'

'Not you for him?' said Noel.

'Well, perhaps,' said the lady.

And the girls said 'Ah!' with deep interest. The lady went on more
quickly, 'And then I found you, and then he found me, and now I must
break it to you. Try to bear up.'

She stopped. The branches cracked, and Albert's uncle was in our midst.
He took off his hat. 'Excuse my tearing my hair,' he said to the lady,
'but has the pack really hunted you down?'

'It's all right,' she said, and when she looked at him she got miles
prettier quite suddenly. 'I was just breaking to them...'

'Don't take that proud privilege from me,' he said. 'Kiddies, allow
me to present you to the future Mrs Albert's uncle, or shall we say
Albert's new aunt?'

                         *    *    *
There was a good deal of explaining done before tea--about how we got
there, I mean, and why. But after the first bitterness of disappointment
we felt not nearly so sorry as we had expected to. For Albert's uncle's
lady was very jolly to us, and her brother was awfully decent, and
showed us a lot of first-class native curiosities and things, unpacking
them on purpose; skins of beasts, and beads, and brass things, and
shells from different savage lands besides India. And the lady told the
girls that she hoped they would like her as much as she liked them, and
if they wanted a new aunt she would do her best to give satisfaction in
the new situation. And Alice thought of the Murdstone aunt belonging to
Daisy and Denny, and how awful it would have been if Albert's uncle
had married HER. And she decided, she told me afterwards, that we might
think ourselves jolly lucky it was no worse.

Then the lady led Oswald aside, pretending to show him the parrot which
he had explored thoroughly before, and told him she was not like some
people in books. When she was married she would never try to separate
her husband from his bachelor friends, she only wanted them to be her
friends as well.

Then there was tea, and thus all ended in amicableness, and the reverend
and friendly drove us home in a wagonette. But for Martha we shouldn't
have had tea, or explanations, or lift or anything. So we honoured her,
and did not mind her being so heavy and walking up and down constantly
on our laps as we drove home.


And that is all the story of the long-lost grandmother and Albert's
uncle. I am afraid it is rather dull, but it was very important (to
him), so I felt it ought to be narrated. Stories about lovers and
getting married are generally slow. I like a love-story where the hero
parts with the girl at the garden-gate in the gloaming and goes off and
has adventures, and you don't see her any more till he comes home to
marry her at the end of the book. And I suppose people have to marry.
Albert's uncle is awfully old--more than thirty, and the lady is
advanced in years--twenty-six next Christmas. They are to be married
then. The girls are to be bridesmaids in white frocks with fur. This
quite consoles them. If Oswald repines sometimes, he hides it. What's
the use? We all have to meet our fell destiny, and Albert's uncle is not
extirpated from this awful law.

Now the finding of the long-lost was the very last thing we did for the
sake of its being a noble act, so that is the end of the Wouldbegoods,
and there are no more chapters after this. But Oswald hates books that
finish up without telling you the things you might want to know about
the people in the book. So here goes.

We went home to the beautiful Blackheath house. It seemed very stately
and mansion-like after the Moat House, and everyone was most frightfully
pleased to see us.

Mrs Pettigrew CRIED when we went away. I never was so astonished in my
life. She made each of the girls a fat red pincushion like a heart,
and each of us boys had a knife bought out of the housekeeping (I mean
housekeeper's own) money.

Bill Simpkins is happy as sub-under-gardener to Albert's uncle's lady's
mother. They do keep three gardeners--I knew they did. And our tramp
still earns enough to sleep well on from our dear old Pig-man.

Our last three days were entirely filled up with visits of farewell
sympathy to all our many friends who were so sorry to lose us. We
promised to come and see them next year. I hope we shall.

Denny and Daisy went back to live with their father at Forest Hill. I
don't think they'll ever be again the victims of the Murdstone aunt--who
is really a great-aunt and about twice as much in the autumn of her days
as our new Albert's-uncle aunt. I think they plucked up spirit enough
to tell their father they didn't like her--which they'd never thought of
doing before. Our own robber says their holidays in the country did
them both a great deal of good. And he says us Bastables have certainly
taught Daisy and Denny the rudiments of the art of making home happy. I
believe they have thought of several quite new naughty things entirely
on their own--and done them too--since they came back from the Moat
House.

I wish you didn't grow up so quickly. Oswald can see that ere long he
will be too old for the kind of games we can all play, and he feels
grown-upness creeping inordiously upon him. But enough of this.

And now, gentle reader, farewell. If anything in these chronicles of the
Wouldbegoods should make you try to be good yourself, the author will
be very glad, of course. But take my advice and don't make a society for
trying in. It is much easier without.

And do try to forget that Oswald has another name besides Bastable. The
one beginning with C., I mean. Perhaps you have not noticed what it was.
If so, don't look back for it. It is a name no manly boy would like to
be called by--if he spoke the truth. Oswald is said to be a very manly
boy, and he despises that name, and will never give it to his own son
when he has one. Not if a rich relative offered to leave him an immense
fortune if he did. Oswald would still be firm. He would, on the honour
of the House of Bastable.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wouldbegoods, by E. Nesbit

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOULDBEGOODS ***

***** This file should be named 794.txt or 794.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/9/794/

Produced by Jo Churcher

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
