
The grandmother had never said such a thing to him before, although he
had always been in the habit of hanging around the door; for he was
never in haste to go home, and stood always for a while before he could
make up his mind to enter. He obeyed at once, however, and went into
the house.




CHAPTER V.

A SAD HOUSE, BUT THE LAKE GETS A NAME.


Rico did not find his cousin in the sitting-room; so he went to the
kitchen, and opened the door. There she stood; but before he could
enter, she raised her finger, saying, "Sch! sch! Do not open and shut
the doors, and make a noise, as if there were four of you. Go into the
other room, and keep still. Your father is lying in the bedroom up
there. They brought him home in a wagon: he is sick."

Rico went into the room, seated himself on a bench, and did not stir.

He sat there for at least a half-hour. Presently he heard the cousin
moving about in the kitchen. Then he thought that he would go up very
softly, and peep into the bedroom. Perhaps his father would like
something to eat: it was long past the meal-time.

He slipped behind the stove, mounted the little steps, and went very
softly into the bedroom. After a while he returned, went at once into
the kitchen, approached quite close to his cousin, and said softly,--

"Cousin, come up."

The woman was about to strike him angrily, when she happened to glance
at his face. He was perfectly colorless,--cheeks and lips as white as
a sheet, and his eyes looked so black that the cousin was almost
afraid of him.

"What is the matter with you?" she asked hastily, and followed him
almost involuntarily.

He mounted the little steps softly, and entered the chamber. His father
lay on the bed with staring, wide-open eyes,--he was dead.

"Oh, my God!" screamed the cousin, and ran crying out of the door that
opened upon the passage on the other side of the room, went down the
staircase, and across into the opposite house, where she called out to
tell the neighbor and the grandmother the sad news; and thence she ran
on to the teacher and to the mayor.

One after another they came, and entered the quiet room until it was
full of people; for the news spread from one to another of what had
taken place. And in the midst of all the tumult, and of all the clamor
of the crowd of neighbors, Rico stood by the bedside speechless,
motionless, and gazed at his father. All through the week the house
was filled with people who wished to look at the man, and hear from
the cousin how it had all happened; so that the lad heard it repeated
over and over, that his father had been at work down in St. Gall on
the railroad.

He had received a deep wound on the head when they were blasting a rock;
and, as he could not work any longer, he wished to go home to take care
of himself until the wound was healed. But the long journey--sometimes
on foot, sometimes in an open wagon--was too much for him; and when he
had reached his home on Sunday, towards evening, he had lain down on
the bed never to rise again. Without any one knowing it, he had passed
away; for he was already stiff when Rico had found him. On the following
Sunday the burial took place. Rico was the only mourner to follow the
coffin. Several kind neighbors joined in, and thus the little procession
went on to Sils. In the church, Rico heard the pastor when he read out,
"The deceased was called Henrico Trevillo, and was a native of Peschiera
on the Lake of Garda."

These words brought the feeling to Rico that he had heard something that
he knew perfectly well before, and yet could not recollect. He had
always seen a picture of the lake before his eyes when he had sung,--

  "One evening
  In Peschiera,"

with his father, but he had never known the reason. He repeated the name
softly to himself, while one old song after another arose in his memory.

As he came back from the burial all alone, he saw the grandmother
seated on the log of wood, and Stineli by her side. She beckoned him to
come over to them. She gave the lad a bit of cake and another to
Stineli, and said now they might go off together for a walk. Rico ought
not to be alone.

So the children rambled off together, hand in hand. The grandmother
remained seated on her log, sadly gazing after the black-haired lad
until they had wandered slowly up the hillside and passed out of sight.
Then she said softly to herself,--

  "Whate'er He does, or lets be done,
  Is always for the best."




CHAPTER VI.

RICO'S MOTHER.


Along the road from Sils came the teacher leaning on his staff. He had
assisted at the burial. He coughed and cleared his throat; and as he
drew near to the grandmother and bade her "good evening," he seated
himself by her side. "If you have no objection, I will sit here with you
for a few moments, neighbor," said he; "for I feel very badly in my
throat and chest. But what can we expect when we are almost seventy
years old, and have witnessed such a funeral as this one to-day? He was
not thirty-five years of age, and as strong as a tree."

"It always sets me thinking," said the grandmother, "when I, an old
woman of seventy-five years, am left, and here and there a young person
is called away,--a useful one, too."

"Yet the old folks are good for something. Who else can set an
example to the youth?" remarked the teacher. "But what is your
opinion, neighbor: what will become of the little fellow over yonder,
do you think?"

"Yes, what will become of him?" repeated the old woman. "I also ask
myself that question; and if my only reliance were upon human help, I
should not know of an answer. But there is a heavenly Father who looks
after the forsaken children. He will provide something for the lad."

"Will you not tell me, neighbor, how it happened that the Italian
married the daughter of your friend who lived over there opposite? One
never knows how these people may turn out."

"It happened as such things always happen, neighbor. You know how my old
friend Anne-Dete had lost all her children, and her husband also, and
lived alone in the cottage over yonder with Marie-Seppli, who was a
merry little girl. About eleven or twelve years ago Trevillo made his
appearance here. He had work in the Maloja, and came down here with the
other boys; and he and Marie-Seppli had scarcely become acquainted
before they were resolved to have each other.

"And it must be said, in justice to Trevillo, that he was not only a
handsome fellow who was agreeable to everybody, but also an industrious
and well-conducted man, with whom Anne-Dete (the mother) was well
pleased. Naturally she wished that they should stay in the house and
live with her, and Trevillo would gladly have done so. He was fond of
his wife's mother, and he always did as Marie-Seppli wished him to. He
had taken her, however, towards the Maloja in his walks, and they had
together looked down the road where you can see how far it goes winding
down the mountain; and he had told her how every thing was down there
where he was born. So Marie-Seppli got it into her head that she must go
there, and no matter how much her mother worried and fretted, and said
that they could not live there, she still was bent upon going; and
Trevillo himself said that as to living there she need not fear, for he
had a nice little property and a house; but, for his part, he would like
to see a little of the world. But the bride prevailed, and after the
wedding she was all for starting directly down the mountain.

"She wrote to her mother occasionally that it was very nice where they
lived, and that Trevillo was the best of husbands.

"About five or six years later, who should walk into the room where
Anne-Dete was sitting but Trevillo, leading a little boy by the hand. He
said, 'There, mother, this is the only thing I have left of
Marie-Seppli. She lies buried down yonder with her other little
children. This one was her first, and her favorite.'

"This is what my old friend told me. Then he threw himself down on the
bench where he had first seen his wife, saying that he should like to
make his home there with her and the boy, if she had no objection, for
down below it was not possible for him to continue to live. This was joy
and sorrow at the same time for Anne-Dete.

"Little Rico was then about four years old,--a quiet, thoughtful boy,
never noisy or mischievous, and the very apple of her eye; but she died
in the course of a year, and Trevillo was advised to take a cousin of
hers to keep house for him and his boy."

"So, so!" said the teacher when the old woman was silent, having
finished her story. "I had not understood all this thoroughly before.
Perhaps some of Trevillo's relations will come forward, in good time,
and they can be asked to do something for the child."

"Relations!" said the grandmother with a sigh. "That cousin is a
relation, and little enough of comfort he gets from her in the course of
the year."

The schoolmaster rose with difficulty from his seat. "I am going
down-hill, neighbor," he said, shaking his head. "I cannot imagine where
my strength has gone to."

The old woman encouraged him, and said he was still a young man in
comparison with her. But, in truth, it did surprise her to see how
slowly and painfully he walked as he left her.




CHAPTER VII.

A PRECIOUS LEGACY, AND A PRECIOUS PRAYER.


Many beautiful Sundays followed; and, whenever it was possible, the
grandmother so arranged it that Stineli got, now and then, a spare
moment; but the work in the house increased daily. Rico passed many
hours standing on the threshold of his cottage looking longingly across
the way, in the hope of seeing Stineli come out.

Towards September, when people often sat before their houses in order to
enjoy, to the utmost, the last warm evenings of the season, the
schoolmaster placed himself before his door, but he looked very thin and
coughed continually; and at last, one morning when he tried to rise, his
strength deserted him completely, and he fell back upon his pillow.

There he lay very still, and busy with all sorts of thoughts; and he
wondered what would come to pass when he died. He had no children, and
his wife had been dead for a long time, and there was only in old
maid-servant to live with him and take care of the house. He was
principally occupied in thinking of what would become of all the things
that belonged to him when he should be gone; and, as his fiddle hung
directly opposite to him on the wall, he said to himself, "I must leave
that behind me too."

Then he remembered the day when Rico stood before him and played on the
instrument, and he felt as if he had rather let the boy have the fiddle
than to let it go to a distant cousin who did not understand the use of
it at all. And he thought that, if it were to go very cheap, perhaps
Rico could buy it. Presently he bethought himself that if he could not
use the violin, neither would he have any use for money. For all that,
he could not bring himself to let the instrument, for which he had paid
down six hard gulden, go for nothing.

So he pondered and pondered how he could manage to obtain something in
exchange; but at last it was quite clear to him that there, where he was
fast going, he could not take his violin with him, neither could he take
any thing that he might get for it, for all must remain behind.

While he was lying there the fever became greater and greater, and he
lay, towards evening and all night long, fighting with all sorts of
strange thoughts, and old, long-forgotten events rose before his mind
and perplexed him; so that at last, towards morning, he lay on his bed
utterly exhausted, and with only one thought or wish,--viz., to be able
to do one kind deed, one good action, and that quickly, before it was
too late. He knocked against the wall with his stick until the old
maid-servant heard him and came in to him; and then he sent her over to
the grandmother, to ask her to come to him as quickly as possible.

She did come almost immediately; and before she had fairly time to ask
him how he found himself, he said,--

"Will you be so good as to take down the fiddle that hangs there on the
wall, and give it to the little orphan boy? I wish to make him a present
of it, and he must be very careful of it."

Naturally the good woman was very much surprised, and could not
refrain from exclaiming repeatedly, "What will Rico do with it? What
will Rico say to this?" Presently she noticed, however, that the
schoolmaster seemed a little restless, as if he were in a hurry to
have the thing done.

So she left him, and hastened as quickly as possible across the fields
with the gift under her arm; for she was also impatient to know how Rico
would take this rare piece of good fortune.

He was standing in the doorway of his cottage. At a motion from the
grandmother, he ran towards her.

"Here, Rico," she said, and handed him the violin. "The schoolmaster
sends this to you: it is yours."

The boy stood as if he were in a dream, but it was true. The grandmother
was really standing there, holding the fiddle out to him.

Trembling with pleasure and excitement, he took his present at last, put
it on his arm, and gazed at it in a silly sort of way, as if he thought
it might vanish presently, as quickly as it had come, if he did not keep
his eyes on it.

"You must be very careful of it," said the old woman, delivering her
message faithfully. She was much inclined to laugh, however; for it did
not seem to her that the warning was at all necessary. "And, Rico, think
about the teacher, and do not forget what he has done for you: he is
very ill."

The grandmother went into the house with these words; and the boy
hastened up into his own bedroom, where he was always alone.

There he sat and fiddled, and played on and on, and forgot all about
eating or drinking, or how the time sped on. At last, when it was almost
dark, he came to himself, and went down-stairs. The cousin came out from
the kitchen, saying, "You can have something to eat to-morrow morning.
You have behaved so to-day that you won't get any thing more."

The boy did not feel hungry, although he had not eaten since the early
morning, and went quite unconsciously across into the opposite house,
and entered the kitchen. He was looking for the grandmother.

Stineli was standing by the hearth, arranging the fire. When she caught
sight of Rico, she shouted aloud for joy; for the ground had almost
burned beneath her feet, she had been so impatient all day--ever since
her grandmother had told her the great news--to get away, and express
her delight to Rico; but she had not dared to leave the house for an
instant. Now she was fairly beside herself, and called out, again and
again, "You have got it now! You have got it now!"

Hearing the noise, the grandmother came out of the sitting-room; and
Rico hastened towards her, saying, "May I go to thank the teacher, if
he is sick?"

After thinking a while,--for she remembered how very ill the
schoolmaster looked in the morning when she saw him,--the good woman
said, "Wait a few moments, Rico, I will go with you;" and stepped into
her room to put on a clean apron. Then they went over to the
schoolhouse. The grandmother entered first. Rico followed, his fiddle
under his arm. He had not once laid it down since it had come into his
possession.

The teacher lay on his bed, looking very feeble indeed. The lad stepped
to the bedside and looked down at his fiddle and could scarcely speak,
but his eyes sparkled so brightly that the good man had no difficulty in
understanding him: he cast a pleased look towards the boy, and nodded at
him. Then he beckoned the grandmother to draw near. Rico moved a little
to one side, and the teacher said with a weak voice, "Grandmother, I
should be very glad if you would say 'Our Father' for me, I feel so very
much troubled."

Just at this moment the prayer-bell sounded. The grandmother folded her
hands and repeated the Lord's Prayer, and Rico also folded his hands.
Every thing was quiet in the room. After a while the grandmother bent
over and closed the old teacher's eyes, for he had passed away. Then she
took Rico by the hand, and went softly home with him.




CHAPTER VIII.

ON THE LAKE OF SILS.


Stineli did not recover herself during the entire week, her joy was so
great; but it seemed as if that week were ten days longer than any
other, for Sunday seemed never to come.

At last it did come, and a golden sun shone over the harvest fields, and
she and Rico went up under the fir-trees, where the sparkling lake lay
spread out at their feet; and the girl's heart was so overflowing with
happiness, that she had to dance about and shout aloud before she seated
herself on the moss, on the very edge of the slope. There she could see
every thing round about,--the sunny heights and the lake, and, stretched
over all, the blue heavens.

Suddenly she called out, "Come now, Rico; we will sing,--sing for
ever so long."

So the lad seated himself by Stineli's side, and placed his fiddle in
position,--for he had, of course, brought that too,--and began to play,
and the children sang,--

  "Little lambkins, come down
  From the bright, sunny height,"

until they had sung all the verses; but Stineli had not had half enough.

"We will sing more," she said, and went on,--

