half-dozen of pretty girls, all drawn by a single horse, and driven by a
single gentleman.  Luckless wight, doomed, through a whole summer day,
to be the butt of mirth and mischief among the frolicsome maidens!  Bolt
upright in a sulky rides a thin, sour-visaged man, who, as he pays his
toll, hands the toll-gatherer a printed card to stick upon the wall.  The
vinegar-faced traveller proves to be a manufacturer of pickles.  Now
paces slowly from timber to timber a horseman clad in black, with a
meditative brow, as of one who, whithersoever his steed might bear him,
would still journey through a mist of brooding thought.  He is a country
preacher, going to labor at a protracted meeting.  The next object
passing townward is a butcher's cart, canopied with its arch of
snow-white cotton.  Behind comes a "sauceman," driving a wagon full of new
potatoes, green ears of corn, beets, carrots, turnips, and summer-squashes;
and next, two wrinkled, withered, witch-looking old gossips, in
an antediluvian chaise, drawn by a horse of former generations, and going
to peddle out a lot of huckleberries.  See there, a man trundling a
wheelbarrow-load of lobsters.  And now a milk-cart rattles briskly
onward, covered with green canvas, and conveying the contributions of a
whole herd of cows, in large tin canisters.  But let all these pay their
toll and pass.  Here comes a spectacle that causes the old toll-gatherer
to smile benignantly, as if the travellers brought sunshine with them and
lavished its gladsome influence all along the road.

It is a harouche of the newest style, the varnished panels of which
reflect the whole moving panorama of the landscape, and show a picture,
likewise, of our friend, with his visage broadened, so that his
meditative smile is transformed to grotesque merriment.  Within, sits a
youth, fresh as the summer morn, and beside him a young lady in white,
with white gloves upon her slender bands, and a white veil flowing down
over her face.  But methinks her blushing cheek burns through the snowy
veil.  Another white-robed virgin sits in front.  And who are these, on
whom, and on all that appertains to them, the dust of earth seems never
to have settled?  Two lovers, whom the priest has blessed, this blessed
morn, and sent them forth, with one of the bridemaids, on the matrimonial
tour.  Take my blessing too, ye happy ones!  May the sky not frown upon
you, nor clouds bedew you with their chill and sullen rain!  May the hot
sun kindle no fever in your hearts!  May your whole life's pilgrimage be
as blissful as this first day's journey, and its close be gladdened with
even brighter anticipations than those which hallow your bridal night!

They pass; and ere the reflection of their joy has faded from his face,
another spectacle throws a melancholy shadow over the spirit of the
observing man.  In a close carriage sits a fragile figure, muffled
carefully, and shrinking even from the mild breath of summer.  She leans
against a manly form, and his arm infolds her, as if to guard his
treasure from some enemy.  Let but a few weeks pass, and when he shall
strive to embrace that loved one, he will press only desolation to his
heart!

And now has morning gathered up her dewy pearls, and fled away.  The sun
rolls blazing through the sky, and cannot find a cloud to cool his face
with.  The horses toil sluggishly along the bridge, and heave their
glistening sides in short quick pantings, when the reins are tightened at
the toll-house.  Glisten, too, the faces of the travellers.  Their
garments are thickly bestrewn with dust; their whiskers and hair look
hoary; their throats are choked with the dusty atmosphere which they have
left behind them.  No air is stirring on the road.  Nature dares draw no
breath, lest she should inhale a stifling cloud of dust.  "A hot, and
dusty day!" cry the poor pilgrims, as they wipe their begrimed foreheads,
and woo the doubtful breeze which the river bears along with it.  "Awful
hot!  Dreadful dusty!" answers the sympathetic toll-gatherer.  They start
