solemn gloom.  Or I might compare them to cherubs, haunting that holy
place.

About a quarter of an hour before the second ringing of the bell,
individuals of the congregation begin to appear.  The earliest is
invariably an old woman in black, whose bent frame and rounded shoulders
are evidently laden with some heavy affliction, which she is eager to
rest upon the altar.  Would that the Sabbath came twice as often, for the
sake of that sorrowful old soul!  There is an elderly man, also, who
arrives in good season, and leans against the corner of the tower, just
within the line of its shadow, looking downward with a darksome brow.  I
sometimes fancy that the old woman is the happier of the two.  After
these, others drop in singly, and by twos and threes, either disappearing
through the doorway or taking their stand in its vicinity.  At last, and
always with an unexpected sensation, the bell turns in the steeple
overhead, and throws out an irregular clangor, jarring the tower to its
foundation.  As if there were magic in the sound, the sidewalks of the
street, both up and down along, are immediately thronged with two long
lines of people, all converging hitherward, and streaming into the
church.  Perhaps the far-off roar of a coach draws nearer,--a deeper
thunder by its contrast with the surrounding stillness,--until it sets
down the wealthy worshippers at the portal, among their humblest
brethren.  Beyond that entrance, in theory at least, there are no
distinctions of earthly rank; nor indeed, by the goodly apparel which
is flaunting in the sun, would there seem to be such, on the hither side.
Those pretty girls!  Why will they disturb my pious meditations!  Of all
days in the week, they should strive to look least fascinating on the
Sabbath, instead of heightening their mortal loveliness, as if to rival
the blessed angels, and keep our thoughts from heaven.  Were I the
minister himself, I must needs look.  One girl is white muslin from the
waist upwards, and black silk downwards to her slippers; a second blushes
from topknot to shoe-tie, one universal scarlet; another shines of a
pervading yellow, as if she had made a garment of the sunshine.  The
greater part, however, have adopted a milder cheerfulness of hue.  Their
veils, especially when the wind raises them, give a lightness to the
general effect, and make them appear like airy phantoms, as they flit up
the steps, and vanish into the sombre doorway.  Nearly all--though it is
very strange that I should know it--wear white stockings, white as snow,
and neat slippers, laced crosswise with black ribbon, pretty high above
the ankles.  A white stocking is infinitely more effective than a black
one.

Here comes the clergyman, slow and solemn, in severe simplicity,
needing no black silk gown to denote his office.  His aspect claims
my reverence, but cannot win my love.  Were I to picture Saint Peter,
keeping fast the gate of heaven, and frowning, more stern than pitiful,
on the wretched applicants, that face should be my study.  By middle age,
or sooner, the creed has generally wrought upon the heart, or been
a-tempered by it.  As the minister passes into the church, the bell holds
its iron tongue, and all the low murmur of the congregation dies away.
The gray sexton looks up and down the street, and then at my
window-curtain, where, through the small peephole, I half fancy that he
has caught my  eye.  Now, every loiterer has gone in, and the street
lies asleep in the quiet sun, while a feeling of loneliness comes over
me, and brings also an uneasy sense of neglected privileges and duties.
O, I ought to have gone  to church!  The hustle of the rising
congregation reaches  my ears.  They are standing up to pray.  Could I
bring my heart into unison with those who are praying in yonder church,
and lift it heavenward, with a fervor of supplication, but no distinct
request, would not that be the safest kind of prayer?  "Lord, look down
upon me in mercy!"  With that sentiment gushing from my soul, might I
not leave all the rest to Him?

