would have prized his Rosebud above the richest diamond.  The lovers
parted, and have seldom met again. Both may have visited the same
mansions, but not at the same time; for one was bidden to the festal
hall, and the other to the sick-chamber; he was the guest of Pleasure
and Prosperity, and she of Anguish.  Rose, after their separation, was
long secluded within the dwelling of Mr. Toothaker, whom she married
with the revengeful hope of breaking her false lover's heart.  She
went to her bridegroom's arms with bitterer tears, they say, than
young girls ought to shed at the threshold of the bridal chamber.
Yet, though her husband's head was getting gray, and his heart had
been chilled with an autumnal frost, Rose soon began to love him, and
wondered at her own conjugal affection.  He was all she had to love;
there were no children.

In a year or two, poor Mr. Toothaker was visited with a wearisome
infirmity which settled in his joints, and made him weaker than a
child.  He crept forth about his business, and came home at dinner-time
and eventide, not with the manly tread that gladdens a wife's
heart, but slowly, feebly, jotting down each dull footstep with a
melancholy dub of his staff.  We must pardon his pretty wife, if she
sometimes blushed to own him.  Her visitors, when they heard him
coming, looked for the appearance of some old, old man; but he dragged
his nerveless limbs into the parlor,--and there was Mr. Toothaker!
The disease increasing, he never went into the sunshine, save with a
staff in his right hand and his left on his wife's shoulder, bearing
heavily downward, like a dead man's hand.  Thus, a slender woman,
still looking maiden-like, she supported his tall, broad-chested frame
along the pathway of their little garden, and plucked the roses for
her gray-haired husband, and spoke soothingly, as to an infant.  His
mind was palsied with his body; its utmost energy was peevishness.  In
a few months more, she helped him up the staircase, with a pause at
every step, and a longer one upon the landingplace, and a heavy glance
behind, as he crossed the threshold of his chamber.  He knew, poor
man, that the precincts of those four walls would thenceforth be his
world,--his world, his home, his tomb,--at once a dwelling and a
burial-place, till he were borne to a darker and a narrower one.  But
Rose was with him in the tomb.  He leaned upon her, in his daily
passage from the bed to the chair by the fireside, and back again from
the weary chair to the joyless bed,--his bed and hers,--their
marriage-bed; till even this short journey ceased, and his head lay
all day upon the pillow, and hers all night beside it.  How long poor
Mr. Toothaker was kept in misery!  Death seemed to draw near the door,
and often to lift the latch, and sometimes to thrust his ugly skull
into the chamber, nodding to Rose, and pointing at her husband, but
still delayed to enter.  "This bedridden wretch cannot escape me!"
quoth Death.  "I will go forth, and run a race with the swift, and
fight a battle with the strong, and come back for Toothaker at my
leisure!"  O, when the deliverer came so near in the dull anguish of
her worn-out sympathies, did she never long to cry, "Death, come in!"

But, no!  We have no right to ascribe such a wish to our friend Rose.
She never failed in a wife's duty to her poor sick husband.  She
murmured not, though a glimpse of the sunny sky was as strange to her
as him, nor answered peevishly, though his complaining accents roused
her from her sweetest dream, only to share his wretchedness.  He knew
her faith, yet nourished a cankered jealousy; and when the slow
disease had chilled all his heart, save one lukewarm spot, which
Death's frozen fingers were searching for, his last words were, "What
would my Rose have done for her first love, if she has been so true
and kind to a sick old man like me!"   And then his poor soul crept
away, and left the body lifeless, though hardly more so than for years
before, and Rose a widow, though in truth it was the wedding-night
that widowed her.  She felt glad, it must be owned, when Mr. Toothaker
was buried, because his corpse had retained such a likeness to the man
half alive, that she hearkened for the sad murmur of his voice,
bidding her shift his pillow.  But all through the next winter, though
