the dense wreaths sweep between, as if demons were flinging snowdrifts
at each other, in mid-air.  Look next into the street, where we have
seen an amusing parallel to the combat of those fancied demons in the
upper regions.  It is a snow-battle of school-boys.  What a pretty
satire on war and military glory might be written, in the form of a
child's story, by describing the snowball-fights of two rival schools,
the alternate defeats and victories of each, and the final triumph of
one party, or perhaps of neither!  What pitched battles, worthy to be
chanted in Homeric strains!  What storming of fortresses, built all of
massive snowblocks!  What feats of individual prowess, and embodied
onsets of martial enthusiasm!  And when some well-contested and
decisive victory had put a period to the war, both armies should unite
to build a lofty monument of snow upon the battle-field, and crown it
with the victor's statue, hewn of the same frozen marble.  In a few
days or weeks thereafter, the passer-by would observe a shapeless
mound upon the level common; and, unmindful of the famous victory,
would ask,  "How came it there?  Who reared it?  And what means it?"
The shattered pedestal of many a battle monument has provoked these
questions, when none could answer.

Turn we again to the fireside, and sit musing there, lending our ears
to the wind, till perhaps it shall seem like an articulate voice, and
dictate wild and airy matter for the pen.  Would it might inspire me
to sketch out the personification of a New England winter!  And that
idea, if I can seize the snow-wreathed figures that flit before my
fancy, shall be the theme of the next page.

How does Winter herald his approach?  By the shrieking blast of latter
autumn, which is Nature's cry of lamentation, as the destroyer rushes
among the shivering groves where she has lingered, and scatters the
sear leaves upon the tempest.  When that cry is heard, the people wrap
themselves in cloaks, and shake their heads disconsolately, saying,
"Winter is at hand!" Then the axe of the woodcutter echoes sharp and
diligently in the forest; then the coal-merchants rejoice, because
each shriek of Nature in her agony adds something to the price of coal
per ton; then the peat-smoke spreads its aromatic fragrance through
the atmosphere.  A few days more; and at eventide, the children look
out of the window, and dimly perceive the flaunting of a snowy mantle
in the air.  It is stern Winter's vesture.  They crowd around the
hearth, and cling to their mother's gown, or press between their
father's knees, affrighted by the hollow roaring voice, that bellows
a-down the wide flue of the chimney.  It is the voice of Winter; and
when parents and children bear it, they shudder and exclaim, "Winter
is come!  Cold Winter has begun his reign already!"  Now, throughout
New England, each hearth becomes an altar, sending up the smoke of a
continued sacrifice to the immitigable deity who tyrannizes over
forest, country side, and town.  Wrapped in his white mantle, his
staff a huge icicle, his beard and hair a wind-tossed snow-drift, he
travels over the land, in the midst of the northern blast; and woe to
the homeless wanderer whom he finds upon his path!  There he lies
stark and stiff, a human shape of ice, on the spot where Winter
overtook him.  On strides the tyrant over the rushing rivers and broad
lakes, which turn to rock beneath his footsteps.  His dreary empire is
established; all around stretches the desolation of the Pole.  Yet not
ungrateful be his New England children,--for Winter is our sire,
though a stern and rough one,--not ungrateful even for the severities,
which have nourished our unyielding strength of character.  And let us
thank him, too, for the sleigh-rides, cheered by the music of merry
bells; for the crackling and rustling hearth, when the ruddy firelight
