The ice continued to drift, and now and then pieces broke off.  On the
16th the dreaded event occurred--the floe parted--the castaway party on
one side, and the house, etcetera, on the other.  But by means of the
boats the stores were recovered, and then a fresh floe was occupied,
whereon snow-huts were erected, Esquimaux fashion.

Time passed.  October went and November came; food was scarce, and the
exploring party were "allowanced."  But two seals, less cautious than
their companions, were at length captured--nearly all the dogs had
already been eaten, and fresh food was absolutely necessary.  The seals
caught were scientifically killed, the blood was drunk, and "the eyes,"
says Captain Tyson, "given to the youngest child."  (The animal, being
cut up, is divided into portions which are distributed by lot to the
various candidates for the delicate morsels, of which the brain is
considered the daintiest.)

We need scarcely detail the daily round and common tasks of the drifting
party on the ice.  In January Davis Strait was reached, and a ray of
sunlight cheered them on the 19th, so the progress southward had been
considerable.  The German seamen did not behave well and caused
considerable anxiety, but there was no long disturbance.

At the beginning of the month of March the ice reached Cumberland Gulf,
and on the 11th of that month it broke up with direful noises, leaving
the whole party on a small piece, which being fortunately very thick
continued its journey southward very gently.  Seals were now captured in
abundance.  One of the Esquimaux also shot a bear.  Then the floe was
quitted, and the pack ice reached.  After that things became worse.  A
gale arose and blew away their tent and bedding, and unless they had all
clung to the boat it would have been lost also.  They saved it, but
remained without shelter, half-frozen and in danger of starvation.  At
the end of April three steamers successively appeared, but although the
castaways did all they could to attract attention they were not
perceived until on the 30th another "steam sealer," the _Tigress_, of
Newfoundland, appeared and rescued them from their perilous position.
They were all landed at Saint John's on the 12th of May.

Meanwhile, as the _Polaris_ had not appeared, the _Tigress_ was
commissioned by Captain Green, U.S.N., to seek her.  She steamed up to
Littleton Island, where an encampment of Esquimaux was discovered.  The
men were wearing clothing obtained from the _Polaris_, but after search
and inquiry no after trace of the crew could be obtained, so Captain
Green returned to Saint John's.  They reached New York afterwards, and
heard that Buddington and his crew had been picked up by a whaler some
months before.

The ill-fated _Polaris_ had been abandoned in latitude 78 degrees 23
minutes North, and 73 degrees 21 minutes West.  She had been rendered
almost useless by the ice, and the Esquimaux were presented with the
hull; but she foundered.  The crew encamped during the winter, and in
the summer they sailed down to Cape York, where they met the ice.  But
in Melville Bay a steamer was seen embedded in the ice.  This vessel was
the _Ravenscraig_, of Dundee, whose Captain, Allen, received them very
kindly.  He subsequently put some of them on a vessel bound for Dundee,
whither they then proceeded, and came home from Liverpool to New York;
the others came back a few weeks later.  Thus ended the unfortunate
_Polaris_ expedition, which, but for the untimely death of Captain F.
Hall, might have accomplished its object--the discovery of the North
Pole.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

CAPTAIN SIR GEORGE S. NARES' VOYAGE WITH THE "ALERT" AND "DISCOVERY"--
1875-6.

The _Alert_ and _Discovery_--Heavy weather--Arrival in Greenland--Winter
on the ice--Amusements and employments--Sledging work--The return home--
Reception--Conclusion.

In 1875 the British Government commissioned the _Alert_ and the
_Discovery_, under the command respectively of Captains Nares and
Stephenson, to explore the Arctic regions of the Pole.  This expedition
was fitted out in the most complete manner, and had the advantage of the
advice and assistance of the most experienced Arctic travellers.
Commander Markham, who was attached to the _Alert_, had crossed the
Arctic circle before, as had Captain Nares, and all that could be done
was done to make the voyage a success.

Sir George Nares had already seen considerable Arctic and sea service.
His scientific voyage in the _Challenger_, too, had given him an
unlimited fund of experience, in addition to his previous geographical
attainments.  Captain H. Stephenson also had proved his mettle in many
parts of the world, and under these commanders were many trustworthy and
experienced officers.  The expedition quitted Portsmouth amid
enthusiastic cheers on the 29th of May, 1875, and made their way across
the Atlantic.  Here they met with most violent storms, which tried both
ships and ships' companies, as well as the _Valorous_ store ship, which
parted company in the ocean.  The first ice was seen on the 27th of
June, and the _Valorous_ was picked up again all well.

Skirting the Greenland coast amid the ice, the vessels encountered heavy
weather, and at length anchored in Godhaven Harbour, in the Isle of
Disco.  Here supplies and sledge dogs were embarked, and on the 15th of
July the _Alert_ towed the _Discovery_ out of harbour, and proceeded
northwards.  They reached Upernavik and left it.  Soon afterwards the
_Alert_ grounded, but cleared at high water.  Cape York was gained in
seventy hours, an extremely rapid passage.  The _Alert_ passed on by the
Crimson Cliffs and Cape Digges, which have been so often mentioned, and
reached the Cary Islands on the 27th of July.  Depots were formed here
and records placed with letters, as also on Sutherland and Littleton
Islands.  The advance into Smith's Sound was by no means easy, and
several times the ships had to return to the latitude of Kane's winter
quarters.

About this time the _Alert_ was nearly crushed by an iceberg, but got
clear, and the crew made the mountain tow the vessel by grappling it.
By very slow degrees, pushing and driving through the "pack," the
vessels at last reached Cape Constitution, to which Doctor Kane had
penetrated, but which he did not pass.  Going still northwards the ships
cleared Kennedy Channel and reached Hall's Basin, in the north-east side
of which were the winter quarters of the unfortunate _Polaris_.  Robeson
Channel had now to be cleared.

All this time the officers and men who could be spared from duty were
not idle.  Parties went hunting and sketching.  Many scientific
observations were made by dredging.  Photographs were taken also.  The
Musk ox gave the hunters some sport, and Doctor Moss records that all
the animals met with, though presumably they had never seen man before,
were afraid of the party, thus contradicting the popular notion that
animals which have never seen man are not afraid of him.

At this stage of the journey excellent winter quarters were found for
the _Discovery_.  The retreat of the ships had been secured.  Orders
were for the _Discovery_ to remain in or about the eighty-second
parallel.  Such a situation was now found.  The _Discovery_ therefore
remained just north of Lady Franklin Strait, on the opposite side of
Hall's Basin, to that on which the _Polaris_ wintered.

On the 26th of August the _Alert_ proceeded alone into Robeson Channel,
but got into difficulties with the ice, which bore down on the ship in
tremendous masses.  But fortunately she found shelter, and escaped
destruction.  Any further progress appeared impossible, so preparations
were made for forming the winter quarters near at hand.  As September
had come the sledges were got ready, and Commander Markham set out with
stores to establish a depot for the spring exploring parties farther
north.  The party returned in three weeks frost-bitten and exhausted,
but they had accomplished their mission.  Lieutenant Aldrich had also
come back, but reported nothing but ice.

Attempts were made to communicate with the _Discovery_, but the state of
the ice and snow prevented any such adventure, though Captain Stephenson
was only sixty miles distant.  Winter now set in, and the _Alert_ was
banked in snow.  Candles and stoves and snow kept the inhabitants warm,
and snow-houses were erected for scientific and storage purposes.  The
prospect afforded a view of limitless snow, and then darkness set in and
limited the view to a few yards, except when the oft-recurring moon gave
her welcome light.  Doctor Moss, in his journal, gives a spirited
description of the daily routine, which we condense.  The cold was
intense--the greatest ever experienced (73 degrees).

The toilet is rapidly performed, a tub is a weekly luxury.  The men have
breakfasted, and the rattling of cups and saucers warns the officers
curried-sardine day has come round again!  Cocoa is ready and hot rolls.
Then the men have lime-juice and hot water for health's sake.
Afterwards all hands parade on deck for inspection and prayers.  Then
work begins.  Water is procured from ice, tools mended, etcetera.  The
crew dine at one o'clock, the officers at 2:30.  The latter go for a
walk or rehearse theatricals.  Going out, the air smells like green
walnuts, says Doctor Moss.  The walk, unless there is a moon, is taken
up and down a beaten track, in the dark, half a mile long.  The dinner
gong sounds, all come in (brushing off the snow first).  Then dinner,
and when the cloth is off the white cat seats herself on the table.
After dinner reading or writing, then school for the men; and music,
chess or whist concluding the evening.

The _Alert_ had no sun for a hundred and forty-two days, and the
darkness was nearly as deep at noonday as an ordinary moonless night in
England.  On the 2nd of March the sun shone brightly, and the sledging
was arranged for.  The theatrical season had ended on the 24th of
February.  Many favourite farces were played, and the burlesque written
by the chaplain met with great success.

A sledge party left to find the _Discovery_, but returned exhausted, and
Petersen was nearly lost.  He afterwards died, poor fellow, and was
buried by his comrades on Cairn Hill, on the 14th of May.  We have not
space to follow all the sledging expeditions.  We must condense the
information and the interest.  For two months and a half this, the most
monotonous of all travelling, was continued.  The labour was most severe
and incessant, the distance made only a mile or two a day.  Scurvy began
its ravages, and the northern expedition had been nearly overcome, when
Lieutenant Parr returned to the ship for assistance.  Summer had arrived
by this time.  Immediate help was dispatched, but it was no easy task to
find the men.  Four of the party were alive, one had died.  The sick man
had been dragged on the sledge thirty-nine days, and they had buried him
after all in a solitary spot in the far north--"a paddle and a batten"
made a rude cross, and the sketch shows it most effectively in Doctor
Moss's book.  Five only of the seventeen of the party came back in
working condition, and they were nearly exhausted.

The question now arose whether the _Alert_ should remain, advance, or
retreat.  It was impossible to advance more than a few miles--the crew
was suffering--and retirement was the most sensible act.  So the vessel
rejoined the _Discovery_, some of whose men had not returned, and great
anxiety was manifested concerning them.  At length the party appeared,
after an absence of one hundred and thirty days.

From Discovery Bay they struggled south in company, racing against
winter.  On the 9th of September Cape Isabella (Smith's Sound) came in
sight.  Here letters were found which had been left by the _Pandora_.
These were a cause of great joy, and when Disco was reached, and some
coal procured, the explorers felt almost at home.  On the 2nd of October
the ships sailed for England.  The _Alert_ anchored at Valentia on the
27th of October, and the _Discovery_ in Bantry Bay on the 29th.

A great deal had been accomplished by this expedition.  The _Alert_ had
explored the west coast for two hundred and twenty miles, the
_Discovery_ had surveyed the Greenland coast, and Captain Stephenson
placed a tablet over the grave of the brave Captain Hall of the
_Polaris_, with a suitable inscription.  The _Alert_ men had attained
the highest latitude ever reached, viz, 82 degrees 27 minutes North.
The idea of the open Polar Sea then received its "quietus," for nothing
but ice is there.

The Queen commanded the Admiralty to thank Captain Nares and the
officers and men under his command, and Captain Nares was knighted.
Some little dissatisfaction was expressed, but the effects of the work
so ably done quickly extinguished any hostile feeling.

In concluding these Notable (Polar) Voyages we regret we cannot find
space to relate the adventures of the plucky _Pandora_ (afterwards the
_Jeannette_), the _Eira_ expedition, and others of less importance which
have been undertaken since 1875.  The _Alert_ has lately been presented
to the United States Government for their Arctic expedition, of which we
shall soon hear something.

There are many chapters yet to be written concerning maritime discovery,
but those we have selected appear to us to embody the greatest interest
for our readers, for public curiosity and assistance has been lately so
often directed to the Arctic which are slowly yielding their secrets to
the enterprise of modern scientific and naval explorers.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notable Voyagers, by 
W.H.G. Kingston and Henry Frith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTABLE VOYAGERS ***

***** This file should be named 23494.txt or 23494.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/9/23494/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
