before he came, he had actually acquired a good deal more knowledge
which might be of some value.

Ford was almost the only passenger in the car he had selected. Trains
going towards the city were apt to be thinly peopled at that time of
day; but the empty cars had to be taken along all the same, for the
benefit of the crowds who would be coming out later in the afternoon and
in the evening. The railway-company would have made more money with full
loads both ways, but it was well they did not have a full load on that
precise train.

Ford had turned over the seat in front of him, and stretched himself out
with his feet on it. It was almost like lying down, for a boy of his
length; and it was the very best position he could possibly have taken
if he had known what was coming.

Known what was coming?

Yes: there was a pig coming.

That was all; but it was quite enough, considering what that pig was
about to do. He was going where he chose, just then; and not only had he
chosen to walk upon the railroad-track, but he had also made up his mind
not to turn out for that locomotive and its train of cars.

He saw it, of course, for he was looking straight at it; and the
engineer saw him, but it would have been well for the pig if he had been
discovered a few seconds earlier.

"What a whistle!" exclaimed Ford Foster at that moment. "It sounds more
like the squeal of an iron pig than any thing else. I"--

But at that instant there came to him a great jolt and a shock; and Ford
found himself tumbled all in a heap, on the seat where his feet had
been. Then came bounce after bounce, and the sound of breaking glass,
and then a crash.

"Off the track," shouted Ford, as he sprang to his feet. "I wouldn't
have missed it for any thing. I do hope, though, there hasn't anybody
been killed."

In the tremendous excitement of the moment he could hardly have told how
he got out of that car; but it did not seem ten seconds before he was
standing beside the engineer and conductor of the train, looking at the
battered engine, as it lay upon its side in a deep ditch. The
baggage-car, just behind it, was broken all to pieces, but the
passenger-cars did not seem to have suffered very much; and nobody was
badly hurt, as the engineer and fireman had jumped off in time.

There had been very little left of the pig; but the conductor and the
rest seemed much disposed to say unkind things about him, and about his
owner, and about all the other pigs they could think of.

"This train'll never get in on time," said Ford to the conductor, a
little later. "How'll I get to the city?"

The railway man was not in the best of humors; and he answered, a little
groutily, "Well, young man, I don't suppose the city could get along
without you over night. The junction with the main road is only two
miles ahead, and if you're a good walker you may catch a train there."

Some of the other passengers, none of whom were much more than "badly
shaken up," or down, had made the same discovery; and in a few minutes
more there was a long, straggling procession of uncomfortable people,
marching by the side of the railway-track, in the hot sun. They were
nearly all of them making unkind remarks about pigs, and the faculty
they had of not getting out of the way.

The conductor was right, however; and nearly all of them managed to walk
the two miles to the junction in time to go in on the other train.

Ford Foster was among the first to arrive, and he was likely to reach
home in season, in spite of the pig and his outrageous conduct.

As for his danger, he had hardly thought of that; and he again and again
declared to himself that he would not have missed so important an
adventure for any thing he could think of. It almost sounded once or
twice as if he took to himself no small amount of personal credit, not
to say glory, for having been in so remarkable an accident, and come out
of it so well.

Ford's return, when he should make it, was to take him to a great,
pompous, stylish, crowded "up-town boarding-house," in one of the
fashionable streets of the great city. There was no wonder at all that
wise people should wish to get out of such a place in such hot weather.
Still it was the sort of home Ford Foster had been acquainted with all
his life; and it was partly owing to that, that he had become so
prematurely "knowing."

He knew too much, in fact, and was only too well aware of it. He had
filled his head with an unlimited stock of boarding-house information,
as well as with a firm persuasion that there was little more to be
had,--unless, indeed, it might be scraps of such outside knowledge as he
had now been picking up over on Long Island.

In one of the large "parlor-chambers" of the boarding-house, at about
eight o'clock that evening, a middle-aged gentleman and lady, with a
fair, sweet-faced girl of about nineteen, were sitting near an open
window, very much as if they were waiting for somebody. Such a kind,
motherly lady! She was one of those whom no one can help liking, after
seeing her smile once, or hearing her speak.

Ford Foster himself could not have put in words what he thought about
his mother. And yet he had no difficulty whatever in expressing his
respect for his father, or his unbounded admiration for his pretty
sister Annie.

"O husband!" exclaimed Mrs. Foster, "are you sure none of them were
injured?"

"So the telegraphic report said; not a bone broken of anybody, but the
pig that got in the way."

"How I wish he would come!" groaned Annie. "Have you any idea, father,
how Ford could get to the city?"

"Not clearly, my dear," said her father; "but you can trust Ford not to
miss any opportunity. He's just the boy to look out for himself in an
emergency."

Ford Foster's father took very strongly after the son in whose presence
of mind and ability he expressed so much confidence. He had just such a
square, active, bustling sort of body, several sizes larger; with just
such keen, penetrating, greenish-gray eyes. Anybody would have picked
him out at a glance for a lawyer, and a good one.

That was exactly what he was; and, if anybody had become acquainted with
either son or father, there would have been no difficulty afterward in
identifying the other.

It required a good deal more than the telegraphic report of the
accident, or even her husband's assurances, to relieve the motherly
anxiety of good Mrs. Foster, or even to drive away the shadows from the
face of Annie.

No doubt, if Ford himself had known the state of affairs in his family
circle, they would have been relieved earlier; for, even while they were
talking about him, he had reached the end of his adventures, and was
already in the house. It had not so much as occurred to him that his
mother would hear of the disaster to the pig and the railway-train until
he himself should tell her; and so he had made sure of his supper down
stairs before reporting his arrival. He might not have done it perhaps;
but he had entered the house by the lower way, through the area door,
and that of the dining-room had stood temptingly open, with some very
eatable things spread out upon the table.

That had been too much for Ford, after his car-ride, and his smash-up,
and his long walk.

Now, at last, up he came, three stairs at a time, brimful of new and
wonderful experiences, to be more than a little astonished by the manner
and enthusiasm of his welcome.

"Why, mother," he exclaimed, when he got a chance for a word, "you and
Annie couldn't have said much more if I'd been the pig himself!"

"The pig!" said Annie.

"Yes, the pig that stopped us. He and the engine won't go home to their
families to-night."

"Don't make fun of it, Ford," said his mother gently. "It's too serious
a matter."

Just then his father broke in, almost impatiently, with,--

"Well, Ford, my boy, have you done your errand? or shall I have to see
about it myself? You've been gone two days."

"Thirty-seven hours and a half, father," replied Ford, taking out his
watch. "I've kept an exact account of my expenses. We've saved the cost
of advertising."

"And spent it on railroading," said his father, with a laugh.

"But, Ford," asked Annie, "did you find a house?--a good one?"

"Yes," added Mrs. Foster: "now I'm sure you're safe, I do want to hear
about the house."

"It's all right, mother," said Ford confidently. "The very house you
told me to hunt for. Neither too large nor too small. I've only seen the
outside of it, but every thing about it is in apple-pie order."

There were plenty of questions to answer now, but

Ford was every way equal to the occasion. Some of his answers might have
made Mrs. Kinzer herself open her eyes, for the material for them had
been obtained from her own neighbors.

Ford's report, in fact, compelled his father to look at him with an
expression of face which very plainly meant,--

"That's my boy. He resembles me. I was just like him, at his age. He'll
be just like me, at mine."

There was excellent reason, beyond question, to approve of the manner in
which the young gentleman had performed his errand in the country; and
Mr. Foster promptly decided to go over in a day or two, and see what
sort of an arrangement could be made with Mrs. Kinzer.





CHAPTER V.

NEW NEIGHBORS, AND GETTING SETTLED.


The week which followed the wedding-day was an important one.

The improvements on the Morris house were pushed along in a way that
astonished everybody. Every day that passed, and with every dollar's
worth of work that was done, the good points of the long-neglected old
mansion came out stronger and stronger.

The plans of Mrs. Kinzer had been a good while in getting ready, and she
knew exactly what was best to be done at every hole and corner.

Within a few days after Ford's trip of investigation, he and his father
came over from the city; and Mr. Foster speedily came to a perfect
understanding with Dabney's mother.

"A very business-like, common-sense sort of a woman," the lawyer
remarked to his son. "But what a great, dangling, overgrown piece of a
boy that is! Still, he seems intelligent, and you may find him good
company."

"No doubt of it," said Ford. "I may be useful to him too. He looks as if
he could learn if he only had a fair chance."

"I should say so," responded Mr. Foster. "We must not expect too much of
fellows brought up away out here, as he has been."

Ford gravely assented, and they went back to report their success to
Mrs. Foster and Annie.

There was a great surprise in store, consequently, for the people of the
village. Early in the following week it was rumored from house to
house,--

"The Kinzers are all a-movin' over to Ham Morris's."

And then, before the public mind had become sufficiently settled to
inquire into the matter, the rumor changed itself into a piece of
positive news:--

"The widder Kinzer's moved over into Ham's house, bag and baggage."

So it was; although the carpenters and painters and glaziers were still
at work, and the piles of Kinzer furniture had to be stored around as
best could be. Some part of them had even to be locked up over night in
one of the barns.

The Kinzers, for generations, had been a trifle weak about furniture;
and that was one of the reasons why there had been so little room for
human beings in their house. The little parlor, indeed, had been filled
until it put one in mind of a small furniture-store, with not room
enough to show the stock on hand; and some of the other parts of the
house required knowledge and care to walk about in them. It was bad for
a small house, truly, but not so much so when the same articles were
given a fair chance to spread themselves.

It was a treat to Dab to watch while the new carpets were put down, and
see how much more at home and comfortable all that furniture looked,
after it was moved into its new quarters. He remarked to Keziah,--

"It won't be of any use for anybody to try to sit on that sofa and play
the piano. They'll have to get up and come over."

Mrs. Kinzer took good care that the house she left should speak well of
her to the eyes of Mrs. Foster, when that lady came to superintend the
arrival of her own household goods.

The character of these, by the way, at once convinced the village
gossips that "lawyer Foster must be a good deal forehanded in money
matters." And so he was, even more so than his furniture indicated.

Ford had a wonderful deal to do with the settlement of his family in
their new home; and it was not until nearly the close of the week that
he found time for more than an occasional glance over the north fence,
although he and Dab had several times exchanged a word or two when they
met each other on the road.

"Take the two farms together," his father had said to him, "and they
make a really fine estate. I learn, too, that the Kinzers have other
property. Your young acquaintance is likely to have a very good start in
the world."

Ford had found out very nearly as much as that on his own account; but
he had long since learned the uselessness of trying to teach his father
any thing, however well he might succeed with ordinary people, and so he
said nothing.

"Dabney," said Mrs. Kinzer, that Friday evening, "you've been a great
help all the week. Suppose you take the ponies to-morrow morning, and
ask young Foster out for a drive."

"Mother," exclaimed Samantha, "I shall want the ponies myself. I've some
calls to make, and some shopping. Dabney will have to drive."

"No, Sam," said Dabney: "if you go out with the ponies to-morrow, you'll
have my old clothes to drive you. I'll go and speak to them about it."

"What do you mean?" asked Samantha.

"I mean, with Dick Lee in them."

"That would be just as well," said Mrs. Kinzer. "The ponies are gentle
enough, and Dick drives well. He'll be glad enough to go."

"Dick Lee, indeed!" began Samantha.

"A fine boy," interrupted Dab. "And he's beginning to dress well. His
