so Hannibal could do nothing and could not attack me."

"Is Hannibal still living then?" asked Ritz serenely.

"Oh, Ritz, how indescribably ignorant you are!" Edi remarked
compassionately. "He died more than a thousand years ago. But big Churi,
the leader of the Middle Lotters, our enemies, is Hannibal. But you see,
I just remember something: Churi is not a real Hannibal, for he was a
great and noble general, and Churi cannot represent him; but do you know
what, we can take the strange boy Erick, for Hannibal!--he looks quite
different from Churi,--shall we?"

"That is all the same to me since we cannot be in the fight," remarked
Ritz.

"That is true, we dare not, I had quite forgotten that," lamented Edi.
"If I only knew what we could do to be in this fight and yet not do
anything that is forbidden."

"Don't you know an example in the world's history?" asked Ritz, to whom
his brother presented so often, in cases of need, examples out of this
rich fountain.

"No. If we only lived like the old Greeks," Edi answered with a deep
sigh. "When they wanted to know anything of which no one knew the
answer, they quickly drove to Delphi to the oracle and asked advice.
Then there was an answer at once and they knew what was to be done. But
now there are no more oracles, not even in Greece. Isn't that too bad?"

"Yes, that is too bad," said Ritz rather sleepily, "but I am sure you
will think of another example."

Edi began at once to think, but however much he thought, and groped in
his memory and upheaved what he had stored away in his brain, he could
not find in the whole history of the world one single case where some
one had carried out something that the father had forbidden, and yet
stood afterwards with honor before him. For that was what Edi was trying
to find; and he was sitting straight up in his bed in the dark, and in
spite of all his endeavors he could find no way out. And when he now
heard the deep breathing of the sweetly sleeping Ritz, he became too
discouraged to try any more. He lay down on his pillow and was soon
dreaming about the uniform of Fabius Cunctator.

Soon after this Marianne too lay down on her couch, but for a long time
sleep would not come. The singing of the lady downstairs had made her
very, very sad; this voice had never before touched her so deeply as it
had done this evening, and she still heard the sound of weeping and
rejoicing in confusion. So Marianne heard the old clock on the wall
strike eleven, then twelve, and yet she could not go to sleep. Now it
seemed to her as if she heard a gentle knocking below in the house. Who
could want anything of her so late in the night? She must be mistaken,
she said to herself. But no, she now heard it quite plainly, somebody
was knocking somewhere. She quickly dressed herself and hastened down to
the kitchen. She opened the front door--no one was there. But the
knocking came again and now Marianne thought that it came from the
sleeping room of her boarders. Softly she opened the door of the room.
Within the pale lady sat on her bed, but she was much paler than usual,
so that Marianne stepped quickly into the room, and much frightened, she
exclaimed: "Dear me! What is the matter? Oh how bad you do look!"

"Yes, I feel very ill, my good Marianne," the lady answered with her
friendly voice. "I am so sorry that I frightened you so in the middle of
the night; but I had no rest, I was obliged to call you. I have a few
things to tell you and it might have been too late."

"Dear, dear! what do you mean?" lamented Marianne. "I will get the
doctor at once from Lower Wood,--he is the nearest."

"No, Marianne, I thank you, I know my condition," said the sick woman
soothingly, "it is a cramp in my heart, which often comes and this time
more terribly than usual, and so, my good Marianne, I wanted to tell you
that if I am no longer here tomorrow, will you give this," (and she gave
a small paper to Marianne), "to him who has to prepare for my last
resting-place. It is the only thing that I leave, and which I have saved
for a long time, so that I need not be buried in a pauper's grave. That
must not be, for my father's sake," she added, very softly.

"Dear, dear Lord!" Marianne lamented, "grant that it may not be that! Do
think of the dear little boy! Dear Mrs. Dorn, do not take it amiss, I
have never before asked anything at all, but if you leave nothing, what
have I to do with the dear boy? Has he no relatives? Has he no father?"

The mother looked at the sleeping Erick, who, with his golden curls
encircling his rosy face, lay there so peacefully and so carefree. She
put her hand on his forehead--for his narrow bed stood quite close to
hers--and said softly: "On earth you have no father any more, my child,
but above in heaven there lives a Father who will not forsake you. I
have given you long since to Him. I know He will care for you and
protect you, so I can go quietly and joyfully. Yes, my good Marianne,"
she turned again to the latter, "I have done a great wrong; I have hurt
deeply the best of fathers through disobedience and selfishness. For
that I have suffered much; but in my suffering it was permitted me to
learn how great the love and compassion of our Father in heaven is for
His children, and since then a song of deepest gratitude sounds ever and
ever in my heart:

    "'I lay in heaviest fetters,
     Thou com'st and set'st me free;
     I stood in shame and sorrow,
     Thou callest me to Thee;
     And lift'st me up to honor
     And giv'st me heavenly joys
     Which cannot be diminished
     By earthly scorn and noise.'"

The sick woman had folded her hands while she spoke, and in her eyes
there was a wonderful light; but now she sank back on her pillows,
exhausted and pale. Marianne stood there quietly and now and then had to
wipe her eyes.

"But now I must run to the doctor,--it is high time," she said,
frightened. "Mrs. Dorn, can I give you anything?"

"No, I thank you," the sick woman answered softly. "I thank you for
everything, my good Marianne."

The latter now hastily left the house and ran as fast as she could
through the silent night toward Lower Wood. From time to time she had to
stop to get her breath. Then she looked up to the bright star-covered
sky and prayed: "Dear God, help us all." She had great difficulty in
awakening the doctor in Lower Wood at two o'clock in the night; but at
last he heard her knocking and followed her soon after on the road to
her house. When they entered together the room of the sick woman, the
light had burned down and threw a faint light on the quiet, pale face.
The mother had stretched out her arm upon the bed of her child. The boy
had encircled her slender, white hand with both his plump hands, and
held it firmly. The doctor approached and looked closer at the sleeper;
he bent over her for some moments.

"Marianne," he said, "loosen the hand out of the little boy's. The woman
is sleeping her eternal sleep, she will nevermore awaken on this earth.
She must have died suddenly from heart failure, while you were away to
fetch me."

The doctor left the quiet house at once, and Marianne did as he had told
her. She folded the hands of the departed one on her breast, then she
sat down on Erick's bed, looking now at the serious face of the dead
mother, now at the care-free sleeping boy, and wept quietly, until the
rays of the morning sun fell into the quiet room and roused Marianne to
the consciousness that a new, sad day had begun--a day on which Erick
had to be told that he never again on this earth could take hold of the
loving hand of his mother.



CHAPTER V

Disturbance in School and Home


Never before had the schoolmaster of Upper Wood had such hard work with
his schoolchildren as on the morning after this night. Of course there
were times that some were more restless and more dense than usual; but
there were usually a good many with whom he could work successfully. But
today it seemed as though a crowd of excited spirits had taken
possession of the children. All the boys cast uncanny, warlike glances
at each other, even suppressed threatenings were thrust hither and
thither, and when the teacher turned his back such threatening gestures
were made to those who faced him, that they, one and all, rolled their
eyes with wrath and gave the most ridiculous answers. They all were so
eager for the battle, that they could no longer distinguish between
friend and foe, and each shook his clenched fist at the other.

Sally and Kaetheli, those model scholars, kept putting their heads
together and whispered continuously like the ripple of a brook. Yes,
indeed, Kaetheli was so brim full of news that she even kept on
whispering to Sally while the latter had to answer questions in
arithmetic and of course got into the most inexplicable confusion. Even
Edi, the very best scholar, forgot his studies and was staring sadly
before him. For just now had come before his mind's eye, during the
rest-period, the great bravery of his troops who, from want of a real
enemy, had put each other in a sorry shape. And he was not allowed to
lead these courageous soldiers against the boasting Churi, and to show
this fellow how a great general does his work! The teacher was just
standing before him and called on him, continuing in the geography
lesson: "Edi, will you tell me the most important productions of Upper
Italy?"

Italy! At the sound of that name, the whole war operation stood before
Edi's eyes, for he had studied the minutest details of that region where
the Romans had met their enemies, and Churi, as Hannibal, stood
triumphant before him. Edi, heaving a deep sigh, answered nothing for
the present.

"Edi," the master said when no answer came, "I cannot understand what
sadness can be found in our topic, nor what can burden your mind, but
one thing I can see, that today you all are like a herd of thoughtless
sheep with whom nothing can be done. Kaetheli, you magpie, can you stop
a moment and listen to what I am saying? You all are going home. I have
had enough, and everyone--do you understand?--everyone takes home some
home-work for punishment. As you go out, come to my desk, one after the
other, and each will receive his special task."

So it was done, and at once the whole crowd rushed with joyous hearts
into the open. For the home-work did not at all suppress the joy that
school had closed a whole half-hour early. Outside on the playground,
the groups who had common interests at once crowded together. The
largest throng pressed around Edi, to listen with much shouting and
noise to his battle plans.

At once after leaving the schoolroom Kaetheli took Sally by the hand and
said: "I will go with you for a while, then I can finish telling you
what Marianne told Mother this morning." With this Kaetheli continued
her story, which she had begun in school, and told Sally everything that
had happened last night in Marianne's cottage. Sally listened very
quietly and never said a word. When they arrived at the garden, Kaetheli
had just finished her sad tale; she stood still for a moment and was
surprised that Sally did not say anything; then she said, "Good-bye!"
and ran away.

At the noon meal Ritz related faithfully all that had happened in
school: for now, since Sally and even Edi had received home-tasks, he
found that to be more remarkable than sorrowful. Edi seemed somewhat
dejected. When now the small, golden, roasted apples were placed on the
table, Ritz stopped his report and applied himself thoroughly to the
work of eating them. When he had cleared his plate, which was done very
quickly, he looked slyly at the plates of his brother and sister, for he
knew that the second supply of the things on the table came only after
all three had finished their first. When he looked at Sally, his eyes
stayed on her, and after he had watched her attentively for some time,
he said: "Sally, you keep on swallowing as much as you can, but you see,
nothing can go down, because you have put nothing into your mouth, and
your plate stays filled."

Now Sally could not restrain her tears longer, for she had with great
difficulty swallowed them, and had been very quiet. Now she burst out
into loud sobbing and said through her tears: "Poor Erick, too, cannot
eat today. Now he has neither father nor mother and is all alone in the
world."

Sally's weeping grew louder and louder, for she could not stop, since
she had restrained herself so long. Ritz looked, surprised and startled,
from one to the other; he did not quite understand whether he was to
blame for this. The mother rose, took Sally by the hand, and led her out
of the room.

This incident caused a great disturbance at the midday meal. The father
was annoyed and sat without saying a word. The aunt, with great
animation, tried to point out to him with this proof, how excitable
children become when they do not go to bed in good time. Edi, too, sat
quite ill-humoredly before his plate, as if he had to swallow sorrel
instead of little golden apples; for he felt much troubled that his
father had heard of his inattention in the school. Ritz had expected a
kind of admonishing speech from him, because the outburst had taken
place right after he had spoken to Sally. Since it did not come and no
one seemed to trouble about him, he settled himself firmly in his seat
and ate everything that was on Sally's and his mother's plates.

When the father went out in the garden soon after, the mother followed
him and led him to the small bench under the apple tree. Seated there
she told him what Sally, continuously interrupted by loud sobbing, had
told her: what had happened during the past night in Marianne's cottage.
And she now asked her husband whether he did not think that some
enquiries ought to be made about these strangers, and whether one ought
not to do something for the little boy who, as it seemed, was standing
all alone in the world. But the pastor was not of her opinion, and said
that these people had turned to Lower Wood for school and church,
therefore he could not interfere at present. His colleague in Lower Wood
would no doubt take everything in hand and see what could be done with
the boy. He was sure that the pastor in Lower Wood would find some
relations of the boy, and he perhaps knew already more about the
strangers, than was suspected. The woman, no doubt, had confided in his
colleague about herself, since she would have had to do that as she had
sent her boy to Lower Wood to school, and perhaps also to Sunday school.
One could not possibly give in to Sally in all her manifold emotions and
pay attention to them. The child had too vivid an imagination and was
yet too young to have the gift of discrimination, and if one should give
in to her fancies one soon would fill the house with Leopoldys and other
creatures, who soon would be turned out of the house or, at least, be
pushed aside by the same Sally, as soon as she saw that the good people
were not as she had imagined them.

"I have to take Sally's part somewhat, dear husband," said the mother.
"You are right, she feels very strongly, and she shows these feelings to
everyone whom she meets; but I do not find that wrong, for, wherever she
meets with a response, there she remains faithful to her feelings, and
she loves her friends warmly and constantly. With what devotion has she
adhered to Kaetheli from babyhood! And I much prefer that she go through
life with her warm heart, and expect to find a friend in every human
being, than that she should pass people indifferently, and have no
conception of friendship, although she may meet with many a
disappointment and many a condemnation through this trait."

"Both will be her share, in plenty," said the father. "In this direction
we therefore will do our share in saving her from these things as much
as she can be saved."

So the mother saw that the best that could be done was to pacify Sally
and to explain to her that nothing could be done at present but
something would be done later from another source.

When it became known that the strange woman had died, there was a great
deal of talk, especially among the Middle Lotters, in whose midst the
woman had lived, but had never been seen--a fact which had always caused
suspicion. Since no one knew anything about her past life, then everyone
had the more to say about who she might have been. At any rate, nothing
very good, in that they all agreed, else she would have been friendly
with them and would not have kept herself so apart. When now no
relations appeared and she had to be buried without any mourners, then a
number of stories began to circulate which became more and more
mysterious. For the official of the community had said that, no doubt,
she had been an exile, and the Justice of Peace had added that then she
must have committed very great political crimes. 'Lizebeth was not loath
to bring these stories to the pastor and his wife, for she had never
been able to overcome the thought of the velvet pants. The pastor's
wife shook her head incredulously and forbade 'Lizebeth to carry the
stories further. The pastor said: "There must have been something
crooked, but the woman is now buried, and we will say nothing more about
it."

Marianne alone stood opposed to all and told them to their faces that it
was an injustice and wickedness to talk as they did; none of them had
known the woman, else they would know that there was nothing bad about
her, but that she had been an angel of goodness, gentleness and kindly
deeds. And although the lady had appeared as aristocratic as a princess,
she had been more friendly with humble folk, such as Marianne, than many
a Middle Lotter who ran about in torn stockings. But if Marianne was
asked if she had known the woman well, who she was, and why not a single
relative enquired after her, although the notice of her death was put
into all the papers; then she too could give no explanation, since she
did not know anything.

A few wicked people then said: "No doubt Marianne will have had her
profit from it." But she had not, and never had looked for it. The woman
had paid the low rent in advance for the month, which had just ended; it
had been the month of August. When now, immediately after the funeral of
the poor woman, the officials came and looked to see what the
inheritance of the little boy would be, then it was found that there was
nothing but the piano and the black silk skirt. The officials decided to
give the latter to Marianne, since she had rendered her the last
services and put her in her last bed.

The dress had once been very beautiful, for the material was heavy and
costly, but it was much worn, and yet Marianne thought: "It is too
handsome for me. I will not wear it but it is a dear remembrance," for
she had only seen the dear woman in that one dress. While they were
still talking over what should be done with the piano, the landlord of
the Krone in Lower Wood drove up with an empty wagon and took the piano,
the beds, the table and the two easy chairs, for everything had been
hired from him; but he had been paid in advance up to this time.

So nothing was left for the little boy but the velvet suit that he wore.
Now they began to talk about what was to be done with the boy, and some
propositions were made as to how he could be cared for. At this point
Marianne stepped forth and said that she would keep the little boy until
she was leaving. In three weeks she was going to move down to Oakwood to
her cousin's, for her house was as good as sold. The officials were
greatly pleased with this offer; many things could turn up in three
weeks, and for the time being the little waif was cared for. So they
parted from one another satisfied with their work.



CHAPTER VI

A Lost Hymn


The next morning, when the mother lay still and pale on her bed, Erick
woke up; Marianne, who had watched for his wakening, came to his couch
and said:

"Dear Erick, your mother has gone, last night, to heaven, and now she
feels very happy, and looks down on you and watches to see whether you
stay good and honest so that sometime you may come to her."

First he had answered quite quietly: "Yes, I know, Mother has told me
that it would come so." But when he went to his mother and looked at her
for a long, long time and she did not open her eyes, then he sat down on
a footstool and cried quietly. As long as his mother lay there he could
not be made to leave her, and when she was carried out, then he sat down
in the spot where she always had sat, and did not go away the whole day.
But he was quite still, and although he wept, he did it so quietly that
no sound could be heard.

The day after the officials had been there and Marianne had taken Erick
from the empty room upstairs to her little home, she thought that it
would be best if he were to go to school and again come in contact with
other children, so that he might become happy again and make a little
noise with them; for this quiet weeping seemed sadder to Marianne than
if he had sobbed aloud. So she told him on that morning, that it would
be best for him if he were to go to school. In an instant Erick obeyed,
took out his books, packed them in his bag and started on his way to
school. So it went on from day to day, and gradually it seemed to
Marianne that Erick grew more and more as he used to be; but the sunny,
joyous face which he used to have had not yet returned, and something
like shyness had come to him, which never before had been noticed in
him. It seemed as if a safe, strong wall, which formerly had protected
him, had fallen down, and as though he looked for the first time on
things and people which surrounded him and which were strange to him.
The safe wall had been the great love of his mother, which had encircled
him everywhere.

Two weeks had passed since Erick had again gone to school. When lessons
were over, he had never waited until the scholars of the Middle Lot had
gathered to make a noisy journey home, but he had run away at once and
had walked the long way alone. When he came home, he found his piece of
bread and his cup of milk ready on the table if Marianne was not there
to give it to him. When she was there, she often said: "Go out a little
to play with the children, Erick, it will be good for you and you will
have time afterwards to do your lessons." Erick had always gone out, as
far as the hedge before the house, and had stopped and watched how here
and there the children were running about and playing all kinds of
games; but he had never joined them.

So also today, he stood there and looked with surprised eyes across at
the freshly mown meadow, where a crowd of Middle Lot children were
playing with much noise "Catch me if you can." Big Churi was running
after Kaetheli and as she knew what heavy blows from those big fists
would fall upon her back if she should be caught, she rushed over the
field toward the hedge and into Marianne's little garden, almost
throwing down Erick on her way. At this instant the quick-running Churi
would have caught Kaetheli; but quick as a deer, Erick rushed forth,
opened his arms wide and so stopped Churi until Kaetheli had shot around
the cottage, fleet as an arrow, and again to her goal on the meadow,
where she could get her breath without fear of being caught.

Churi grumbled: "Another time you leave me alone, or--" With this he
shook his fist at Erick and then ran away, for he hoped to catch
Kaetheli before she should reach her goal. When the latter had rested a
little she came running back again, for she indeed had felt Erick's
chivalrous service and she was very grateful to him. She therefore could
not see him standing so alone, but ran up to him and said cheeringly:
"Come and play with us, you must not always stand so alone, that is
lonesome."
