still retained an intense longing to roam at large among their rocky
fastnesses and gallop out upon the wide prairies.

Meanwhile he dutifully tended his mother's cattle and sheep, and
contented himself with an occasional deer-hunt in the neighbouring
forests. He devoted himself also to the training of his dog Crusoe--an
operation which at first cost him many a deep sigh.

Every one has heard of the sagacity and almost reasoning capabilities
of the Newfoundland dog. Indeed, some have even gone the length of
saying that what is called instinct in these animals is neither more
nor less than reason. And in truth many of the noble, heroic, and
sagacious deeds that have actually been performed by Newfoundland dogs
incline us almost to believe that, like man, they are gifted with
reasoning powers.

But every one does not know the trouble and patience that is required
in order to get a juvenile dog to understand what its master means
when he is endeavouring to instruct it.

Crusoe's first lesson was an interesting but not a very successful
one. We may remark here that Dick Varley had presented Fan to his
mother to be her watch-dog, resolving to devote all his powers to the
training of the pup. We may also remark, in reference to Crusoe's
appearance (and we did not remark it sooner, chiefly because up to
this period in his eventful history he was little better than a ball
of fat and hair), that his coat was mingled jet-black and pure white,
and remarkably glossy, curly, and thick.

A week after the shooting-match Crusoe's education began. Having fed
him for that period with his own hand, in order to gain his affection,
Dick took him out one sunny forenoon to the margin of the lake to give
him his first lesson.

And here again we must pause to remark that, although a dog's heart is
generally gained in the first instance through his mouth, yet, after
it is thoroughly gained, his affection is noble and disinterested. He
can scarcely be driven from his master's side by blows; and even when
thus harshly repelled, is always ready, on the shortest notice and
with the slightest encouragement, to make it up again.

Well; Dick Varley began by calling out, "Crusoe! Crusoe! come here,
pup."

Of course Crusoe knew his name by this time, for it had been so often
used as a prelude to his meals that he naturally expected a feed
whenever he heard it. This portal to his brain had already been open
for some days; but all the other doors were fast locked, and it
required a great deal of careful picking to open them.

"Now, Crusoe, come here."

Crusoe bounded clumsily to his master's side, cocked his ears, and
wagged his tail,--so far his education was perfect. We say he bounded
_clumsily_, for it must be remembered that he was still a very young
pup, with soft, flabby muscles.

"Now, I'm goin' to begin yer edication, pup; think o' that."

Whether Crusoe thought of that or not we cannot say, but he looked
up in his master's face as he spoke, cocked his ears very high, and
turned his head slowly to one side, until it could not turn any
farther in that direction; then he turned it as much to the other
side; whereat his master burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter,
and Crusoe immediately began barking vociferously.

"Come, come," said Dick, suddenly checking his mirth, "we mustn't
play, pup, we must work."

Drawing a leathern mitten from his belt, the youth held it to Crusoe's
nose, and then threw it a yard away, at the same time exclaiming in a
loud, distinct tone, "Fetch it."

Crusoe entered at once into the spirit of this part of his training;
he dashed gleefully at the mitten, and proceeded to worry it with
intense gratification. As for "Fetch it," he neither understood the
words nor cared a straw about them.

Dick Varley rose immediately, and rescuing the mitten, resumed his
seat on a rock.

"Come here, Crusoe," he repeated.

"Oh! certainly, by all means," said Crusoe--no! he didn't exactly
_say_ it, but really he _looked_ these words so evidently that we
think it right to let them stand as they are written. If he could have
finished the sentence, he would certainly have said, "Go on with that
game over again, old boy; it's quite to my taste--the jolliest thing
in life, I assure you!" At least, if we may not positively assert that
he would have said that, no one else can absolutely affirm that he
wouldn't.

Well, Dick Varley did do it over again, and Crusoe worried the mitten
over again, utterly regardless of "Fetch it."

Then they did it again, and again, and again, but without the
slightest apparent advancement in the path of canine knowledge; and
then they went home.

During all this trying operation Dick Varley never once betrayed the
slightest feeling of irritability or impatience. He did not expect
success at first; he was not therefore disappointed at failure.

Next day he had him out again--and the next--and the next--and the
next again, with the like unfavourable result. In short, it seemed at
last as if Crusoe's mind had been deeply imbued with the idea that he
had been born expressly for the purpose of worrying that mitten, and
he meant to fulfil his destiny to the letter.

Young Varley had taken several small pieces of meat in his pocket each
day, with the intention of rewarding Crusoe when he should at length
be prevailed on to fetch the mitten; but as Crusoe was not aware of
the treat that awaited him, of course the mitten never was "fetched."

At last Dick Varley saw that this system would never do, so he changed
his tactics, and the next morning gave Crusoe no breakfast, but took
him out at the usual hour to go through his lesson. This new course of
conduct seemed to perplex Crusoe not a little, for on his way down to
the beach he paused frequently and looked back at the cottage,
and then expressively up at his master's face. But the master was
inexorable; he went on, and Crusoe followed, for _true_ love had
now taken possession of the pup's young heart, and he preferred his
master's company to food.

Varley now began by letting the learner smell a piece of meat, which
he eagerly sought to devour, but was prevented, to his immense
disgust. Then the mitten was thrown as heretofore, and Crusoe made a
few steps towards it, but being in no mood for play he turned back.

"Fetch it," said the teacher.

"I won't," replied the learner mutely, by means of that expressive
sign--_not doing it_.

Hereupon Dick Varley rose, took up the mitten, and put it into the
pup's mouth. Then, retiring a couple of yards, he held out the piece
of meat and said, "Fetch it."

Crusoe instantly spat out the glove and bounded towards the meat--once
more to be disappointed.

This was done a second time, and Crusoe came forward _with the mitten
in his mouth_. It seemed as if it had been done accidentally, for he
dropped it before coming quite up. If so, it was a fortunate accident,
for it served as the tiny fulcrum on which to place the point of that
mighty lever which was destined ere long to raise him to the pinnacle
of canine erudition. Dick Varley immediately lavished upon him the
tenderest caresses and gave him a lump of meat. But he quickly tried
it again lest he should lose the lesson. The dog evidently felt that
if he did not fetch that mitten he should have no meat or caresses. In
order, however, to make sure that there was no mistake, Dick laid the
mitten down beside the pup, instead of putting it into his mouth, and,
retiring a few paces, cried, "Fetch it."


Crusoe looked uncertain for a moment, then he picked up the mitten and
laid it at his master's feet. The lesson was learned at last! Dick
Varley tumbled all the meat out of his pocket on the ground, and,
while Crusoe made a hearty breakfast, he sat down on a rock and
whistled with glee at having fairly picked the lock, and opened
_another_ door into one of the many chambers of his dog's intellect.



CHAPTER IV.


_Our hero enlarged upon--Grumps_.


Two years passed away. The Mustang Valley settlement advanced
prosperously, despite one or two attacks made upon it by the savages,
who were, however, firmly repelled. Dick Varley had now become a man,
and his pup Crusoe had become a full-grown dog. The "silver rifle," as
Dick's weapon had come to be named, was well known among the hunters
and the Redskins of the border-lands, and in Dick's hands its bullets
were as deadly as its owner's eye was quick and true.

Crusoe's education, too, had been completed. Faithfully and patiently
had his young master trained his mind, until he fitted him to be
a meet companion in the hunt. To "carry" and "fetch" were now but
trifling portions of the dog's accomplishments. He could dive a fathom
deep in the lake and bring up any article that might have been dropped
or thrown in. His swimming powers were marvellous, and so powerful
were his muscles that he seemed to spurn the water while passing
through it, with his broad chest high out of the curling wave, at a
speed that neither man nor beast could keep up with for a moment. His
intellect now was sharp and quick as a needle; he never required a
second bidding. When Dick went out hunting, he used frequently to drop
a mitten or a powder-horn unknown to the dog, and after walking miles
away from it, would stop short and look down into the mild, gentle
face of his companion.

"Crusoe," he said, in the same quiet tones with which he would have
addressed a human friend, "I've dropped my mitten; go fetch it, pup."
Dick continued to call it "pup" from habit.

One glance of intelligence passed from Crusoe's eye, and in a moment
he was away at full gallop, nor did he rest until the lost article was
lying at his master's feet. Dick was loath to try how far back on his
track Crusoe would run if desired. He had often gone back five and six
miles at a stretch; but his powers did not stop here. He could carry
articles back to the spot from which they had been taken and leave
them there. He could head the game that his master was pursuing and
turn it back; and he would guard any object he was desired to "watch"
with unflinching constancy. But it would occupy too much space and
time to enumerate all Crusoe's qualities and powers. His biography
will unfold them.

In personal appearance he was majestic, having grown to an immense
size even for a Newfoundland. Had his visage been at all wolfish in
character, his aspect would have been terrible. But he possessed in an
eminent degree that mild, humble expression of face peculiar to his
race. When roused or excited, and especially when bounding through the
forest with the chase in view, he was absolutely magnificent. At other
times his gait was slow, and he seemed to prefer a quiet walk with
Dick Varley to anything else under the sun. But when Dick was inclined
to be boisterous, Crusoe's tail and ears rose at a moment's notice,
and he was ready for anything. Moreover, he obeyed commands instantly
and implicitly. In this respect he put to shame most of the boys of
the settlement, who were by no means famed for their habits of prompt
obedience.

Crusoe's eye was constantly watching the face of his master. When Dick
said "Go" he went, when he said "Come" he came. If he had been in the
midst of an excited bound at the throat of a stag, and Dick had called
out, "Down, Crusoe," he would have sunk to the earth like a stone. No
doubt it took many months of training to bring the dog to this state
of perfection, but Dick accomplished it by patience, perseverance, and
_love_.

Besides all this, Crusoe could speak! He spoke by means of the dog's
dumb alphabet in a way that defies description. He conversed, so to
speak, with his extremities--his head and his tail. But his eyes, his
soft brown eyes, were the chief medium of communication. If ever the
language of the eyes was carried to perfection, it was exhibited in
the person of Crusoe. But, indeed, it would be difficult to say
which part of his expressive face expressed most--the cocked ears of
expectation, the drooped ears of sorrow; the bright, full eye of
joy, the half-closed eye of contentment, and the frowning eye of
indignation accompanied with a slight, a very slight pucker of the
nose and a gleam of dazzling ivory--ha! no enemy ever saw this last
piece of canine language without a full appreciation of what it meant.
Then as to the tail--the modulations of meaning in the varied wag
of that expressive member--oh! it's useless to attempt description.
Mortal man cannot conceive of the delicate shades of sentiment
expressible by a dog's tail, unless he has studied the subject--the
wag, the waggle, the cock, the droop, the slope, the wriggle! Away
with description--it is impotent and valueless here!

As we have said, Crusoe was meek and mild. He had been bitten, on the
sly, by half the ill-natured curs in the settlement, and had only
shown his teeth in return. He had no enmities--though several
enemies--and he had a thousand friends, particularly among the ranks
of the weak and the persecuted, whom he always protected and avenged
when opportunity offered. A single instance of this kind will serve to
show his character.

One day Dick and Crusoe were sitting on a rock beside the lake--the
same identical rock near which, when a pup, the latter had received
his first lesson. They were conversing as usual, for Dick had elicited
such a fund of intelligence from the dog's mind, and had injected such
wealth of wisdom into it, that he felt convinced it understood every
word he said.

"This is capital weather, Crusoe; ain't it, pup?"

Crusoe made a motion with his head which was quite as significant as a
nod.

"Ha! my pup, I wish that you and I might go and have a slap at the
grizzly bars, and a look at the Rocky Mountains. Wouldn't it be nuts,
pup?"

Crusoe looked dubious.

"What, you don't agree with me! Now tell me, pup, wouldn't ye like to
grip a bar?"

Still Crusoe looked dubious, but made a gentle motion with his tail,
as though he would have said, "I've seen neither Rocky Mountains nor
grizzly bars, and know nothin' about 'em, but I'm open to conviction."

"You're a brave pup," rejoined Dick, stroking the dog's huge head
affectionately. "I wouldn't give you for ten times your weight in
golden dollars--if there be sich things."

Crusoe made no reply whatever to this. He regarded it as a truism
unworthy of notice; he evidently felt that a comparison between love
and dollars was preposterous.

At this point in the conversation a little dog with a lame leg hobbled
to the edge of the rocks in front of the spot where Dick was seated,
and looked down into the water, which was deep there. Whether it did
so for the purpose of admiring its very plain visage in the liquid
mirror, or finding out what was going on among the fish, we cannot
say, as it never told us; but at that moment a big, clumsy,
savage-looking dog rushed out from the neighbouring thicket and began
to worry it.

"Punish him, Crusoe," said Dick quickly.

Crusoe made one bound that a lion might have been proud of, and
seizing the aggressor by the back, lifted him off his legs and held
him, howling, in the air--at the same time casting a look towards his
master for further instructions.

"Pitch him in," said Dick, making a sign with his hand.

Crusoe turned and quietly dropped the dog into the lake. Having
regarded his struggles there for a few moments with grave severity of
countenance, he walked slowly back and sat down beside his master.

The little dog made good its retreat as fast as three legs would carry
it; and the surly dog, having swum ashore, retired sulkily, with his
tail very much between his legs.

Little wonder, then, that Crusoe was beloved by great and small among
the well-disposed of the canine tribe of the Mustang Valley.

But Crusoe was not a mere machine. When not actively engaged in Dick
Varley's service, he busied himself with private little matters of his
own. He undertook modest little excursions into the woods or along the
margin of the lake, sometimes alone, but more frequently with a little
friend whose whole heart and being seemed to be swallowed up in
admiration of his big companion. Whether Crusoe botanized or
geologized on these excursions we will not venture to say. Assuredly
he seemed as though he did both, for he poked his nose into every bush
and tuft of moss, and turned over the stones, and dug holes in the
ground--and, in short, if he did not understand these sciences, he
behaved very much as if he did. Certainly he knew as much about them
as many of the human species do.

