      "Cut us another slice:
     I wish you were not quite so deaf--
      I've had to ask you twice!"

     "It seems a shame," the Walrus said,
      "To play them such a trick,
     After we've brought them out so far,
      And made them trot so quick!"
     The Carpenter said nothing but
      "The butter's spread too thick!"

     "I weep for you," the Walrus said.
      "I deeply sympathize."
     With sobs and tears he sorted out
      Those of the largest size.
     Holding his pocket handkerchief
      Before his streaming eyes.

     "O Oysters," said the Carpenter.
      "You've had a pleasant run!
     Shall we be trotting home again?"
      But answer came there none--
     And that was scarcely odd, because
      They'd eaten every one.'

'I like the Walrus best,' said Alice: 'because you see he was a LITTLE
sorry for the poor oysters.'

'He ate more than the Carpenter, though,' said Tweedledee. 'You see he
held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn't count how
many he took: contrariwise.'

'That was mean!' Alice said indignantly. 'Then I like the Carpenter
best--if he didn't eat so many as the Walrus.'

'But he ate as many as he could get,' said Tweedledum.

This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, 'Well! They were BOTH
very unpleasant characters--' Here she checked herself in some alarm,
at hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large
steam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely
to be a wild beast. 'Are there any lions or tigers about here?' she
asked timidly.

'It's only the Red King snoring,' said Tweedledee.

'Come and look at him!' the brothers cried, and they each took one of
Alice's hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.

'Isn't he a LOVELY sight?' said Tweedledum.

Alice couldn't say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-cap on,
with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy heap,
and snoring loud--'fit to snore his head off!' as Tweedledum remarked.

'I'm afraid he'll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,' said Alice,
who was a very thoughtful little girl.

'He's dreaming now,' said Tweedledee: 'and what do you think he's
dreaming about?'

Alice said 'Nobody can guess that.'

'Why, about YOU!' Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands triumphantly.
'And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose you'd be?'

'Where I am now, of course,' said Alice.

'Not you!' Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. 'You'd be nowhere. Why,
you're only a sort of thing in his dream!'

'If that there King was to wake,' added Tweedledum, 'you'd go
out--bang!--just like a candle!'

'I shouldn't!' Alice exclaimed indignantly. 'Besides, if I'M only a sort
of thing in his dream, what are YOU, I should like to know?'

'Ditto' said Tweedledum.

'Ditto, ditto' cried Tweedledee.

He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn't help saying, 'Hush! You'll
be waking him, I'm afraid, if you make so much noise.'

'Well, it no use YOUR talking about waking him,' said Tweedledum, 'when
you're only one of the things in his dream. You know very well you're
not real.'

'I AM real!' said Alice and began to cry.

'You won't make yourself a bit realler by crying,' Tweedledee remarked:
'there's nothing to cry about.'

'If I wasn't real,' Alice said--half-laughing through her tears, it all
seemed so ridiculous--'I shouldn't be able to cry.'

'I hope you don't suppose those are real tears?' Tweedledum interrupted
in a tone of great contempt.

'I know they're talking nonsense,' Alice thought to herself: 'and it's
foolish to cry about it.' So she brushed away her tears, and went on as
cheerfully as she could. 'At any rate I'd better be getting out of the
wood, for really it's coming on very dark. Do you think it's going to
rain?'

Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and
looked up into it. 'No, I don't think it is,' he said: 'at least--not
under HERE. Nohow.'

'But it may rain OUTSIDE?'

'It may--if it chooses,' said Tweedledee: 'we've no objection.
Contrariwise.'

'Selfish things!' thought Alice, and she was just going to say
'Good-night' and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the
umbrella and seized her by the wrist.

'Do you see THAT?' he said, in a voice choking with passion, and
his eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a
trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.

'It's only a rattle,' Alice said, after a careful examination of the
little white thing. 'Not a rattleSNAKE, you know,' she added hastily,
thinking that he was frightened: 'only an old rattle--quite old and
broken.'

'I knew it was!' cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and
tear his hair. 'It's spoilt, of course!' Here he looked at Tweedledee,
who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under
the umbrella.

Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, 'You
needn't be so angry about an old rattle.'

'But it isn't old!' Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever. 'It's
new, I tell you--I bought it yesterday--my nice new RATTLE!' and his
voice rose to a perfect scream.

All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,
with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it
quite took off Alice's attention from the angry brother. But he couldn't
quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the
umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and shutting
his mouth and his large eyes--'looking more like a fish than anything
else,' Alice thought.

'Of course you agree to have a battle?' Tweedledum said in a calmer
tone.

'I suppose so,' the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the
umbrella: 'only SHE must help us to dress up, you know.'

So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returned
in a minute with their arms full of things--such as bolsters, blankets,
hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. 'I hope you're
a good hand at pinning and tying strings?' Tweedledum remarked. 'Every
one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.'

Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about anything
in all her life--the way those two bustled about--and the quantity of
things they put on--and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and
fastening buttons--'Really they'll be more like bundles of old clothes
than anything else, by the time they're ready!' she said to herself, as
she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, 'to keep his head
from being cut off,' as he said.

'You know,' he added very gravely, 'it's one of the most serious things
that can possibly happen to one in a battle--to get one's head cut off.'

Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear
of hurting his feelings.

'Do I look very pale?' said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet
tied on. (He CALLED it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more
like a saucepan.)

'Well--yes--a LITTLE,' Alice replied gently.

'I'm very brave generally,' he went on in a low voice: 'only to-day I
happen to have a headache.'

'And I'VE got a toothache!' said Tweedledee, who had overheard the
remark. 'I'm far worse off than you!'

'Then you'd better not fight to-day,' said Alice, thinking it a good
opportunity to make peace.

'We MUST have a bit of a fight, but I don't care about going on long,'
said Tweedledum. 'What's the time now?'

Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said 'Half-past four.'

'Let's fight till six, and then have dinner,' said Tweedledum.

'Very well,' the other said, rather sadly: 'and SHE can watch us--only
you'd better not come VERY close,' he added: 'I generally hit everything
I can see--when I get really excited.'

'And _I_ hit everything within reach,' cried Tweedledum, 'whether I can
see it or not!'

Alice laughed. 'You must hit the TREES pretty often, I should think,'
she said.

Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. 'I don't suppose,'
he said, 'there'll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by
the time we've finished!'

'And all about a rattle!' said Alice, still hoping to make them a LITTLE
ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.

'I shouldn't have minded it so much,' said Tweedledum, 'if it hadn't
been a new one.'

'I wish the monstrous crow would come!' thought Alice.

'There's only one sword, you know,' Tweedledum said to his brother:
'but you can have the umbrella--it's quite as sharp. Only we must begin
quick. It's getting as dark as it can.'

'And darker,' said Tweedledee.

It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a
thunderstorm coming on. 'What a thick black cloud that is!' she said.
'And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it's got wings!'

'It's the crow!' Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and
the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.

Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.
'It can never get at me HERE,' she thought: 'it's far too large to
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn't flap its wings
so--it makes quite a hurricane in the wood--here's somebody's shawl
being blown away!'




CHAPTER V. Wool and Water

She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in
another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,
with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very
civilly went to meet her with the shawl.

'I'm very glad I happened to be in the way,' Alice said, as she helped
her to put on her shawl again.

The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of way,
and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded like
'bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,' and Alice felt that if there was
to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she began
rather timidly: 'Am I addressing the White Queen?'

'Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,' The Queen said. 'It isn't MY
notion of the thing, at all.'

Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very
beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, 'If your
Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I'll do it as well as
I can.'

'But I don't want it done at all!' groaned the poor Queen. 'I've been
a-dressing myself for the last two hours.'

It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had got
some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. 'Every
single thing's crooked,' Alice thought to herself, 'and she's all over
pins!--may I put your shawl straight for you?' she added aloud.

'I don't know what's the matter with it!' the Queen said, in a
melancholy voice. 'It's out of temper, I think. I've pinned it here, and
I've pinned it there, but there's no pleasing it!'

'It CAN'T go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,' Alice
said, as she gently put it right for her; 'and, dear me, what a state
your hair is in!'

'The brush has got entangled in it!' the Queen said with a sigh. 'And I
lost the comb yesterday.'

Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair
into order. 'Come, you look rather better now!' she said, after altering
most of the pins. 'But really you should have a lady's maid!'

'I'm sure I'll take you with pleasure!' the Queen said. 'Twopence a
week, and jam every other day.'

Alice couldn't help laughing, as she said, 'I don't want you to hire
ME--and I don't care for jam.'

'It's very good jam,' said the Queen.

'Well, I don't want any TO-DAY, at any rate.'

'You couldn't have it if you DID want it,' the Queen said. 'The rule is,
jam to-morrow and jam yesterday--but never jam to-day.'

'It MUST come sometimes to "jam to-day,"' Alice objected.

'No, it can't,' said the Queen. 'It's jam every OTHER day: to-day isn't
any OTHER day, you know.'

'I don't understand you,' said Alice. 'It's dreadfully confusing!'

'That's the effect of living backwards,' the Queen said kindly: 'it
always makes one a little giddy at first--'

'Living backwards!' Alice repeated in great astonishment. 'I never heard
of such a thing!'

'--but there's one great advantage in it, that one's memory works both
ways.'

'I'm sure MINE only works one way,' Alice remarked. 'I can't remember
things before they happen.'

'It's a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,' the Queen
remarked.

'What sort of things do YOU remember best?' Alice ventured to ask.

'Oh, things that happened the week after next,' the Queen replied in a
careless tone. 'For instance, now,' she went on, sticking a large piece
of plaster [band-aid] on her finger as she spoke, 'there's the King's
Messenger. He's in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn't
even begin till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of
all.'

'Suppose he never commits the crime?' said Alice.

'That would be all the better, wouldn't it?' the Queen said, as she
bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.

Alice felt there was no denying THAT. 'Of course it would be all
the better,' she said: 'but it wouldn't be all the better his being
punished.'

'You're wrong THERE, at any rate,' said the Queen: 'were YOU ever
punished?'

'Only for faults,' said Alice.

'And you were all the better for it, I know!' the Queen said
triumphantly.

'Yes, but then I HAD done the things I was punished for,' said Alice:
'that makes all the difference.'

'But if you HADN'T done them,' the Queen said, 'that would have been
better still; better, and better, and better!' Her voice went higher
with each 'better,' till it got quite to a squeak at last.

Alice was just beginning to say 'There's a mistake somewhere--,' when
the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence
unfinished. 'Oh, oh, oh!' shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as
if she wanted to shake it off. 'My finger's bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!'

Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, that
Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.

'What IS the matter?' she said, as soon as there was a chance of making
herself heard. 'Have you pricked your finger?'

'I haven't pricked it YET,' the Queen said, 'but I soon shall--oh, oh,
oh!'

'When do you expect to do it?' Alice asked, feeling very much inclined
to laugh.

'When I fasten my shawl again,' the poor Queen groaned out: 'the brooch
will come undone directly. Oh, oh!' As she said the words the brooch
flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it
again.

'Take care!' cried Alice. 'You're holding it all crooked!' And she
caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the
Queen had pricked her finger.

'That accounts for the bleeding, you see,' she said to Alice with a
smile. 'Now you understand the way things happen here.'

'But why don't you scream now?' Alice asked, holding her hands ready to
put over her ears again.

'Why, I've done all the screaming already,' said the Queen. 'What would
be the good of having it all over again?'

By this time it was getting light. 'The crow must have flown away, I
think,' said Alice: 'I'm so glad it's gone. I thought it was the night
coming on.'

'I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!' the Queen said. 'Only I never
can remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and
being glad whenever you like!'

'Only it is so VERY lonely here!' Alice said in a melancholy voice; and
at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling down her
cheeks.

'Oh, don't go on like that!' cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands in
despair. 'Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long way
you've come to-day. Consider what o'clock it is. Consider anything, only
don't cry!'

Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.
'Can YOU keep from crying by considering things?' she asked.

'That's the way it's done,' the Queen said with great decision: 'nobody
can do two things at once, you know. Let's consider your age to begin
with--how old are you?'

'I'm seven and a half exactly.'

'You needn't say "exactually,"' the Queen remarked: 'I can believe
it without that. Now I'll give YOU something to believe. I'm just one
hundred and one, five months and a day.'

'I can't believe THAT!' said Alice.

'Can't you?' the Queen said in a pitying tone. 'Try again: draw a long
breath, and shut your eyes.'

Alice laughed. 'There's no use trying,' she said: 'one CAN'T believe
impossible things.'

'I daresay you haven't had much practice,' said the Queen. 'When I was
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I've
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes
