


CHAPTER IX.

HINDOO TEMPLES--CARS--PROCESSION OF IDOLS.


My dear Children--I will proceed to give you a description of the Hindoo
temples. These are very numerous. One is to be found in almost every
village. They are to be found, also, in out-of-the-way places, distant
from villages, in woods, on the banks and in the middle of rivers; but,
above all, on mountains and steep rocks.

This latter practice, of building temples on mountains, is very ancient.
The Israelites were accustomed to choose a mountain when they offered up
their sacrifices to the Lord. Solomon, before the building of the
temple, chose Mount Gibeon on which to offer his burnt-offerings; and
when the ten tribes separated themselves, in the reign of Jeroboam, they
built their altars on the mountain of Samaria. This practice may have
come from the circumstance, that Noah offered to God a great sacrifice
of thanks on one of the highest mountains of Armenia. Probably Mount
Ararat continued long to be remembered, by him and his descendants, as
the scene of their deliverance.

Besides the temples of the idols, there are various objects of worship,
made of earth and stone. Some of the idols are carved. Some consist
merely of the rough stone. These are to be seen on the high-roads, at
the entrance into villages, and, above all, under lofty trees. Some of
these are covered; but generally they are exposed in the open air.

You will read in Genesis, 28th chap, and 18th verse, that Jacob, after
his dream, rose up early in the morning and took the stone that he had
put for his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the
top of it. Whether it has happened from this circumstance or not, that
the heathen universally pour oil over their idols, I cannot tell. All I
know is, that they do it. No idol can become an object of worship until
a Brahmin has said his muntrums, or prayers, for the purpose of bringing
down the god to live, as it is said be does, in the image, and until he
has drenched it with oil and liquid butter.

The idols, in the great temples, are clothed with rich garments, and
adorned with jewels, which are enriched with precious stones of immense
value. Sacrifices are constantly made to these idols, consisting of
boiled rice, flowers, fruits, etc., but, above all, of lamps, of which
many thousands are sometimes seen burning. They feed them with butter,
in preference to oil.

The priests of the temples offer up sacrifices twice every day, morning
and evening. They begin the ceremony by washing their idol. The water
which is used is brought from a river or tank. Every morning a
procession, with music, passes before our door, with this water.

Every priest who offers up sacrifices, must have several lighted lamps
with a bell, which he holds in his left hand. With his right hand he
makes an offering to the idol, adorns it with flowers, and rubs its
forehead and various parts of its body with sandal-wood and holy ashes.
While all this is going on, he is alone in the temple, the door of which
is closed. The unholy multitude remain without, silently waiting till
he has done. What he does, they cannot know, only hearing the sound of
the bell. When he has done, he comes out and distributes among the
people a part of the things which have been offered to the idol. These
are considered as holy. If they consist of rice and fruit, they are
immediately eaten; if of flowers, the men put them in their turbans, and
the girls entwine them in their hair.

Next to the priests, the most important persons about the temples are
the dancing girls. These are persons of the vilest character. They
perform their religious duties in the temple twice a day. They also
assist at the public ceremonies, and dance. At the same time they sing
the most abominable and filthy songs. Of these wicked creatures,
however, I must not tell you any thing further.

The next order of persons employed in the temples, are players on
musical instruments. Every temple of note has a band of these musicians
who, as well as the dancers, are obliged to attend the temple twice a
day. They are also obliged to assist at all the public festivals. Their
band generally consists of wind, instruments, resembling clarionets and
hautboys, to which they add cymbals and drums. They have a bass,
produced by blowing into a kind of tube, widened below, and which gives
an uninterrupted sound. Part of the musicians sing hymns in honor of
their gods.

The expenses of the temples are borne by the voluntary offerings of the
people, consisting of money, jewels, cattle, provisions, and other
articles. In order to induce them to make such offerings, the Brahmins
use all kinds of deception. Sometimes they will put their idols in
irons, chaining their hands and feet. They exhibit them in this sad
condition, declaring that they have been brought into it by creditors
from whom their gods had to borrow money, in times of trouble, to supply
their wants. They declare that their creditors refuse to set the gods at
liberty, until the money with the interest is paid. The people, seeing
the deplorable condition into which they have been brought, come forward
and pay off the debt; when the chains are taken off, and the god is set
at liberty.

Another way in which the Brahmins sometimes deceive the people, is as
follows. They say that the god is afflicted with some dreadful disease,
brought on by the distress which he has had, because the people do not
worship him as much as they should. In such cases, the idol is sometimes
placed at the door of the temple where they rub his forehead and temples
with various kinds of medicine. They also set before him all sorts of
medicines, pretending in this way to do all they can to cure him. But as
all their efforts prove to be vain, and the disease becomes worse, the
Brahmins send out persons to tell the sad news. The people, believing
the report, hasten to bring in their gifts and offerings. The god, on
beholding such proofs of their attachment to him, feels himself cured of
his disease, and immediately returns to his throne within the temple.

The Brahmins use another kind of deception, in order to procure
offerings for the temples. They declare that their gods are angry with
certain individuals who have offended them, and that they have sent some
evil spirit or devil to take possession of their bodies and torment
them. Accordingly, persons appear wandering about in different parts of
the country, showing, by their dreadful convulsions, their writhings
and twistings, every symptom of being possessed with the devil. The
people who see them are filled with dismay, fall down before them, and
offer gifts and sacrifices, for fear of being injured by them. Whatever
they ask is granted. The people give them to eat and drink abundantly;
and when they leave a place, accompany them with instruments of music,
till they arrive at some other place, where the same deception is
practised.

There are various other ways in which the Brahmins deceive the people;
but I have told you enough.

At every large temple, there is at least yearly one grand procession.
The idol is brought out from its inclosure, and placed in a great car or
chariot, prepared for this express purpose. This stands upon four wheels
of great strength, not made like ours, of spokes with a rim, but of
three or four pieces of thick, solid timber, rounded and fitted to each
other. The car is sometimes forty or fifty feet high, having upon it
carved images of a most abominable nature. I must not tell you any thing
about them. The car, when finished, presents somewhat the shape of a
pyramid.

[Illustration]

On the day of the procession, it is adorned with painted cloth, garlands
of flowers, green shrubbery, and precious stuffs. The idol is placed in
the centre, loaded with jewels, etc., to attract the attention of the
people. Having fastened ropes to this enormous car, eight or nine
hundred or a thousand people catch hold of the ropes and slowly drag it
along, accompanied with the awful roaring of their voices. At certain
periods they stop; when the immense crowds, collected from all parts of
the country, set up one universal shout, or rather yell. This, with the
sound of their instruments and numerous drums, produces much uproar and
confusion. Sometimes the weighty car comes to a stand, from the dampness
of the ground or from the narrowness of the streets, when the tumult and
noise are redoubled.

[Illustration]

Perhaps you know that on some occasions, when the cars are drawn, people
throw themselves under the wheels, and are crushed to death. This occurs
at the drawing of the car of Juggernaut, as you may learn if you will
read my Sermon to Children, on the Condition of the Heathen. Here is a
picture of Juggernaut, and on the last page you may see a picture of his
car, and two men crushed to death under the wheels. Not long since, five
persons were thus crushed to death. Many dreadful accidents also take
place at the drawing of these cars. A few years ago several persons in
this city had their limbs amputated, in consequence of injuries
received.

[Illustration]

When I was in America, I showed to many of the dear children an idol
called Pulliar, which was _formerly_ worshipped by Raamu, one of our
native helpers, when he was a heathen. I gave a particular description,
of the I manner in which he daily worshiped it, in the sermon above
mentioned Here is a picture, which will give you some idea of this god.

You will see that it is partly in the shape of a man, and partly in the
shape of a beast. You, my dear children, would put no confidence in such
vain idols; but this people do, as you may know from what I am now going
to tell you.

Some months ago, a woman was brought to me with a cancer in her breast.
It had made sad ravages. On the morning after her arrival I took it out.
Before she was brought to me, her brother went to the temple of the
goddess Meenaache, to ascertain what was her will respecting his
bringing her to me, or taking her to a native doctor. In order to
ascertain it, he had recourse to the following expedient. He prepared
several bundles of red and white flowers--the red to represent the red
or Tamil man, the white to represent the white man. These flowers were
carefully inclosed in leaves, so as to prevent their color being seen,
and then laid down on the ground, at the entrance of the temple. After
this, he called a little child to him, and then proceeded to entreat
Meenaache that, if it were her will that he should bring the sick woman
to me, she would direct the child to take up one of the parcels
containing the white flowers. It so happened that the child took up one
of these parcels. Of course, he brought her to me. Had it taken up a
parcel containing the red flowers, she would have been taken to a native
doctor. May we not hope that, not Meenaache, but Jehovah directed him
to bring her to me, that she might hear of a very different being from
her goddess, even of Jesus. Of him she has fully heard.




CHAPTER X.

FESTIVALS OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--The Hindoos have many festivals. These are all
occasions of joy and gladness. On such days, the people quit their usual
employments. Friends and relations unite in family parties, and give
entertainments according to their means. Innocent pastimes and
amusements of various kinds are resorted too to add to their happiness.

There are eighteen principal festivals yearly, and no month passes
without one or more of them.

One of the most solemn of these ceremonies is held in the month of
September, and appears to be principally in honor of Parvathe, the wife
of Siva. At this time every laborer and every artisan offers sacrifices
and prayers to his tools. The laborer brings his plough, hoe, and other
farming utensils. He piles them together, and offers a sacrifice to
them, consisting of flowers, fruit, rice, and other articles. After
this, he prostrates himself before them at full length, and then returns
them to their places.

The mason offers the same adoration and sacrifice to his trowel, rule,
and other instruments The carpenter adores his hatchet, adze, and plane.
The barber collects his razors together and worships them with similar
rites.

The writing-master sacrifices to the iron pen or style, with which he
writes upon the palm-leaf the tailor to his needles, the weaver to his
loom, the butcher to his cleaver.

The women, on this day, collect into a heap their baskets, rice-mill,
rice-pounder, and other household utensils, and, after having offered
sacrifices to them, fall down in adoration before them. Every person, in
short, in this solemnity sanctifies and adores the instrument or tool by
which he gains a living. The tools are considered as so many gods, to
whom they present their prayers that they will continue to furnish them
still with the means of getting a livelihood.

This least is concluded by making an idol to represent Parvathe. It is
made of the paste of grain, and being placed under a sort of canopy, is
carried through the streets with great pomp, and receives the worship of
the people.

Another festival of great celebrity is observed in October. At this
time, each person, for himself, makes offerings of boiled rice and other
food, to such of their relations as have died, that they may have a good
meal on that day. They afterwards offer sacrifices of burning lamps, of
fruit, and of flowers, and also new articles of dress, that their
ancestors may be freshly clothed.

At this festival, soldiers offer sacrifices to their weapons, in order
to obtain success in war. On such occasions, a ram is offered in
sacrifice to their armor.

In November, a festival is observed, which is called the feast of lamps.
At this season, the Hindoos light lamps, and place them around the doors
of their houses. This festival was established to commemorate the
deliverance of the earth from a giant, who had been a great scourge to
the people. He was slain by Vrishnoo, after a dreadful battle. In many
places, on this day, a sacrifice is offered to the _dunghill_ which is
afterwards to enrich the ground. In the villages, each one has his own
heap, to which he makes his offering of burning lamps, fruit, flowers,
etc.

The most celebrated of all the festivals, is that which is held in the
end of December. It is called the feast of Pongul, and is a season of
rejoicing for two reasons: the first is, because the month of December,
every day of which is unlucky, is about to end; and the other is,
because it is to be followed by a month, every day of which is
fortunate. For the purpose of preventing the evil effects of this month,
the women every morning scour a place about two feet square before the
door of the house, upon which they draw white lines, with flour. Upon
these they place several little balls of cow-dung, sticking in each a
flower. Each day these little balls, with their flowers, are preserved,
and on the last day of the month, they are thrown into tanks or
waste-places.

The first day of this festival is called the Pongul of rejoicing. Near
relatives are invited to a feast, which passes off with mirth and
gladness.

The second day is called the Pongul of the sun, and is set apart to
worship that luminary. Married women, after bathing themselves, proceed
to boil rice with milk, in the open air. When the milk begins to
simmer, they make a loud cry, "Pongul, O Pongul." The vessel is then
taken from the fire, and set before an idol. Part of this rice is
offered to the image, and, after standing there for some time, it is
given to the cows. The remainder is given to the people. This is the
great day for visiting among friends. The salutation begins by the
question, "Has the milk boiled?" To which the answer is, "It has
boiled." From this, the festival takes the name of pongul, which
signifies to boil.

The third day is called the _Pongul of cows._ In a great vessel, filled
with water, they put saffron and other things. These being well mixed,
they go around the cows and oxen belonging to the house several times,
sprinkling them with water. After this, the men prostrate themselves
before them four times. The cows are then dressed, their horns being
painted with various colors. Garlands of flowers are also put round
their necks, and over their backs. To these are added strings of
cocoa-nuts and other kinds of fruit, which, however, are soon shaken
off, when they are in motion, and are picked up by children and others,
who greedily eat what they gather, as something sacred. After being
driven through the streets, they are suffered, during the day, to feed
wherever they please, without a keeper. I have, however, told you
enough. Are you ready to exclaim, Is it possible that a people can be
guilty of such utter folly? But you, my dear children, would be guilty
of just such folly, if you had not the Bible. Should not the gratitude,
then, which you owe to your heavenly Father, for your distinguished
mercies, constrain you to do all that you can to send this blessed book
to this dark land?




CHAPTER XI.

THE WORSHIP OF THE SERPENT.


My dear Children--If you have never heard much about the Hindoos, you
will be astonished to learn how numerous are the objects of their
worship. They worship many living creatures, such as the ape, the tiger,
the elephant the horse, the ox, the stag, the sheep, the hog, the dog,
the cat, the rat, the peacock, the eagle, the cock, the hawk, the
serpent, the chameleon, the lizard, the tortoise, fishes, and even
insects. Of these, some receive much more worship than others, such as
the cow, the ox, and the serpent Cobra Capella. I will speak at present
only of the worship of the serpent.

Of all the dangerous creatures found in India, there are none that
occasion so many deaths as serpents. The people are very much exposed to
their bite, especially at night, when they are walking. They tread upon
them, and, as they generally do not wear shoes, the snakes turn their
heads, and strike their fangs into those parts of the feet which are
nearest to the place where the pressure is made upon their bodies.
Sometimes the bite is followed with instant death. The Cobra Capella is
one of the most common snakes, and one of the most poisonous. It is
said, that it has a thousand heads, one of which holds up the earth. It
has a peculiar mark on its back, just behind the head. This mark very
much resembles a pair of spectacles, without the handles. If you should
go near it, it would raise the fore part of its body about six inches,
widen out its neck, so as to be about double its common width, and
prepare to strike you. The reason why the Hindoos offer sacrifices and
adoration to it above all the other serpents is, because it is so
frequently met with, and is so much dreaded.

In order to induce the people to worship this dangerous enemy, the
Hindoos have filled their books with tales concerning it. Figures of it
are often to be seen in the temples, and on other buildings. They seek
out their holes, which are generally to be found in the hillocks of
earth which are thrown up by the white ants; and when they find one,
they go from time to time and offer milk, plantains, and other good
things to it.

[Illustration]

The Hindoos, as I before observed, have eighteen annual festivals. One
of these festivals is held for the purpose of worshipping this serpent.
Temples in many places are erected to it, of which there is one of great
celebrity in Mysore. When the festival occurs at this temple, great
crowds of people come together to offer sacrifices to this creeping god.
Many serpents besides the Cobra Capella live within it, in holes made
especially for them. All of these are kept and well fed by the Brahmins
with milk, butter, and plantains. By such means they become very
numerous, and may be seen swarming from every crevice in the temple. To
injure or to kill one would be considered a great crime.

Many of the natives call the Cobra Capella nulla paampu, that is, good
snake. They are afraid to call it a bad snake, lest it should injure
them. The following is the prayer which is offered before the image of
this snake. O, divine Cobra, preserve and sustain us. O, Sheoh, partake
of these offerings, and be gracious unto us.

Can you think of any thing, my dear children more dishonoring to a holy
God, than such worship? And what have you ever done to prevent it? Have
you, every morning and evening, prayed that the Gospel might be sent to
this people? Did you ever give any money to send it to them? Did you
ever think whether it may not be your duty, by and by, to come to them,
to tell them of this Gospel?




CHAPTER XII.

THE RIVER GANGES.


My dear Children--If you will look at the map of Asia, and find the
country of Hindostan, you will see running through it a very celebrated
river--the river Ganges. It is called the Ganges, after the goddess
Gunga. The Hindoos say that the goddess Gungu--who was produced from the
sweat of Vrishnoo's foot, which Brumha caught and preserved in his
alms-dish--came down from heaven, and divided herself into one hundred
streams, which are the mouths of the river Ganges. All classes and
castes worship her. The sight, the name, or the touch of the river
Ganges is said to take away all sin. To die on the edge of the river, or
to die partly buried in the stream, drinking its waters, while their
bodies are besmeared with mud, is supposed to render them very holy. On
this account, when it is expected that a person will die, he is hurried
down to the river, whether willing or unwilling. Sometimes the wood
which the people bring to burn their bodies after death, is piled up
before their eyes. O, how inhuman is this. After it is supposed that
they are dead, and they are placed on the pile of wood, if they should
revive and attempt to rise, it is thought that they are possessed with
the devil, and they are beaten down with a hatchet or bamboo.

Were you standing on the banks of the Ganges you might, perhaps, in one
place see two or three young men carrying a sick female to the river. If
