Officers and men seemed animated with one spirit, and that was a
determination to win the day, or at least never to surrender to the
enemy.

The captains commanded on their quarterdecks; the boatswains in the
forecastle; the gunners attended to the magazines, and the carpenters
with their plug-shots, put themselves in readiness with high-wrought
energy, nor were the seamen and marines a whit behind hand in entering
on their several duties. The guns, the tackle, the round, grape, and
canister-shot, the powder-boys, the captains of guns, with their
priming-boxes, and the officers with their drawn swords, cut an imposing
appearance; and the cock-pit would have made a rudy face turn pale.

The wounded are all taken down into the cock-pit. It will hardly bear
thinking about. But in the cockpit were laid out ready for use, wine,
water, and surgeon's instruments, with napkins, basins, sponges, and
bandages.

The combined fleets of France and Spain, at Trafalgar, under
Villenueve, the French admiral, a brave and skilful man, were in the
form of a crescent, and the two British lines ran down upon them
parallel to each other. As soon as the British van was within gunshot
the enemy opened their fire. The Royal Sovereign soon rounded to under
the stern of the Santa Anna, and Admiral Nelson's ship, the Victory,
laid herself on board the Redoubtable. From that moment the roaring of
guns, the crash against the sides of the ships, clouds of smoke,
splintered yards, and falling masts, were the order of the day.

The death warrant of the navy of France was signed and sealed by the
fight of Trafalgar. In the heat of the action, a ball, fired from the
mizzen-top of the Redoubtable, struck Admiral Nelson on the left
shoulder, when he instantly fell. "They have done for me, at last,
Hardy," said he, to his captain.

Though mortally wounded, he gave some necessary direction concerning the
ship, and when carried below inquired earnestly how the battle went on.
When he knew that the victory had been gained--for twenty ships in all
struck to the British admiral--he expressed himself satisfied. "Now I am
satisfied," said he; "thank God, I have done my duty!" Many times he
repeated this expression, and "Thank God I have done my duty;" and "Kiss
me, Hardy," were among the last words that were uttered by his lips.
Thus, with a heart full of patriotism, died the bravest commander, the
most vigilant seaman, and the most ardent friend of his country, that
every led on a British fleet to victory.

[Illustration: DEATH OF NELSON.]

Even amid the exultation of victory, a grateful country mourned his
loss. A bountiful provision was made for his family; a public funeral
was awarded to his remains, and monuments in the principal cities of his
native land were erected to his memory. A sorrowing nation lamented over
his bier, and Britania, indeed, felt that old England's defender was
numbered with the dead.

[Illustration: BALBOA DISCOVERING THE PACIFIC OCEAN.]




DISCOVERY OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN.


Vasco Nunes de Balboa, a Spaniard, as you see by his name, was born in
1475. He was one of the adventurers who pursued the path which Columbus
had pointed out. He led a party of Spaniards, who going out from Darien
founded a colony in the neighboring regions. Some gold being found the
Spaniards got into a violent quarrel.

[Illustration: THE INDIAN CHIEF DISGUSTED AT THE SPANIARDS.]

One of the Indian chiefs being present, was so disgusted at this, that
he struck the scales with which they were weighing it so hard with his
fist, that the gold was scattered all about.

"Why," said he, "do you quarrel for such a trifle? If you really value
gold so highly, as to leave your own homes, and come and seize the lands
and dwellings of others for the sake of it, I can tell you of a land
where you may find it in plenty. Beyond those lofty mountains," said he,
pointing to the south-west, "lies a mighty sea, which people sail on
with vessels almost as big as yours. All the streams that flow from the
other side of these mountains abound in gold, and all the utensils of
the people are made of gold."

This was enough for Balboa. He inquired of the Indian the best way of
getting across the mountains, to find this land of gold. The Indian
kindly told him every thing he knew, but at the same time warned him not
to go over there, for the Indians were many and were fierce, and would
eat human flesh. But Balboa was not to be discouraged. He collected a
band of one hundred and ninety bold and hardy men, armed with swords,
targets, and cross-bows, and some blood-hounds, (for, strange to tell,
the Spaniards had trained fierce dogs to hunt the Indians, and even the
mild Bilboa was not ashamed to use them,) and so he set out on his
expedition to the west.

Embarking with his men, September 1st, 1513, at the village of Darien,
in a brigantine and nine large canoes, he sailed along the coast to the
north-west, to Coyba, where the young Indian chief lived, and where the
Isthmus of Darien is narrowest. He had taken a few friendly Indians with
him, as guides; and the young chief furnished him with a few more on his
arrival. Then leaving half his own men at Coyba, to guard the brigantine
and canoes, he began his march for the mountains, and through the
terrible wilderness.

It was the 6th of September. The heat was excessive, and the journey
toilsome and difficult. They had to climb rocky precipices, struggle
through close and tangled forests, and cross marshes, which the great
rains had rendered almost impassable. September 8th, they passed an
Indian village at the foot of the mountains, but the inhabitants did not
molest them; on the contrary they fled into the forests.

Here some of the men became exhausted, from the great heat and
travelling in the marshes. These were sent back, by slow marches, in the
care of guides, to Coyba. On the 20th of September they again set
forward.

The wilderness was so craggy, and the forest trees and underwood so
matted together, that in four days they only advanced about thirty
miles, and they now began to suffer from hunger. They also met with many
rapid foaming streams, to cross some of which they had to stop and build
rafts.

Now it was that they met with a numerous tribe of Indians, who, armed
with bows and arrows, and clubs of palm wood, almost as hard as iron,
gave them battle. But the Spaniards, although comparatively few in
numbers, with their fire-arms and bloodhounds and the aid of the
friendly Indians who were with them, soon put them to flight, and took
possession of their village. Balboa's men robbed the village of all its
gold and silver, and of every thing valuable in it; and even he himself,
whose heart the love of gold had begun already to harden, shared with
his men the plunder.

It was a dear bought victory, however; for though the Indians had lost
six hundred of their number in the contest, they could easily recruit
their forces. But Balboa, whose band was now reduced, by sickness and
the contest, from ninety-five men to sixty-seven, had no means of adding
to their strength, but was forced to proceed with what forces he had.

Early the next morning after the battle, they set out on their journey
up the mountain. About ten o'clock they came out of the tangled forest,
and reached an open space, where they enjoyed the cool breezes of the
mountains. They now began to take a little courage. Their joy was
heightened still more, when they heard one of the Indian guides exclaim,
"The sea! the sea!"

Balboa commanded his men to stop; and resolving to be the first European
who should behold this new sea, he forbade his men to stir from their
places till he called them. Then ascending to the summit of the height,
which the Indian had mounted, he beheld the sea glittering in the
morning sun.

Calling now upon his little troop to ascend the height, and view the
noble prospect along with him, "behold," said he, "the rich reward of
our toil. This is a sight upon which no Spaniard's eye ever before
rested." And in their great joy the leader and his men embraced each
other.

Balboa then took possession of the sea and coast, and the surrounding
country, in the name of the King of Spain; and having cut down a tree,
and made it into the form of a cross--for they were Catholics--he set it
up on the very spot where he first beheld the grand Pacific Ocean. He
also made a high mound, by heaping up large stones, upon which he carved
the king's name. This was on September 26th, 1513.

Not content with seeing the ocean, Balboa determined to visit it.
Arriving, after much toil, at one of the bays on the coast, he called it
St. Michael's Bay. Coming to a beach a mile or two long, "If this is a
sea," said he, "it will soon be covered with water; let us wait and see
if there be a tide." So he seated himself under a tree, and the water
soon began to flow. He tasted it and found it salt; and then waded up to
his knees in it, and took possession of it in the name of his king.

[Illustration: DEATH OF BALBOA.]

Balboa's heart was now so lifted up by success, and his whole nature so
changed, that he was ready to fight and destroy every Indian tribe that
opposed his progress. But he had not always the best of it. On one
occasion he was lost, with one or two followers, and having been seized
by some natives, carried immediately before their cazique, or chief. He
was seated on a raised seat, covered with a panther's skin, and bore a
single feather of the vulture upon his head. Beside him stood his
slaves, to fan him, and screen his head from the sun, and around him
warriors, with the sculls of their enemies fixed upon their spears:
which made the whole scene very horrible.

Balboa humbled himself before the chief; and taking off his coat,
profusely decorated, offered it as a peace offering. The cazique would
not accept it, but said, "You are poor and desolate--I am rich and
powerful. I will not hurt you, though you are my enemy." He then ordered
him safe conduct through the forests; and Balboa regained his own
people, the Spaniards, in safety. This escape softened Balboa's heart,
and he never afterwards treated the Indians with the same severity.

After many victories, and many other singular escapes, he returned back
to Coyba. But the sufferings of his men, in returning, were extreme, for
want both of water and provisions. The streams were most of them dried
up, and provisions could not be found. Gold they indeed had, almost as
much as they could carry, and the Indians kept bringing them more; but
this they could not eat or drink, and it would not buy what was not to
be bought.

He arrived at Darien after about two months' absence, having lost nearly
all his men, by war and sickness. His discovery made a great noise, and
procured him much honor, but he did not live to enjoy it.

A new governor was appointed in his place, who, having a mortal hatred
to Balboa, threw him into prison, and, after a mock trial, had him
beheaded, in 1517, in his 48th year.

[Illustration: ADMIRAL KEPPEL.]




ADMIRAL KEPPEL AND THE DEY OF ALGIERS.


When Admiral Keppel was sent to the Dey of Algiers, to demand
restitution of two ships which the pirates had taken, he sailed with his
squadron into the Bay of Algiers, and cast anchor in front of the Dey's
palace. He then landed, and, attended only by his captain and barge's
crew, demanded an immediate audience of the Dey. This being granted, he
claimed full satisfaction for the injuries done to the subjects of his
Britannic Majesty. Surprised and enraged at the boldness of the
admiral's remonstrance, the Dey exclaimed, "that he wondered at the
English King's insolence in sending him a foolish, beardless boy." A
well-timed reply from the admiral made the Dey forget the laws of all
nations in respect to ambassadors, and he ordered his mutes to attend
with the bow-string, at the same time telling the admiral he should pay
for his audacity with his life. Unmoved by this menace, the admiral took
the Dey to the window facing the bay, and showed him the English fleet
riding at anchor, and told him that if he dared put him to death there
were men enough in that fleet to make him a glorious funeral-pile. The
Dey was wise enough to take the hint. The admiral obtained ample
restitution, and came off in safety.

[Illustration: LOSS OF THE CATARAQUE.]




LOSS OF THE CATARAQUE.


The Cataraque, Captain C.W. Findlay, sailed from Liverpool, on the 20th
of April, 1849, with three hundred and sixty emigrants, and a crew
including two doctors, (brothers,) of forty-six souls. The emigrants
were principally from Bedfordshire, Staffordshire, Yorkshire, and
Northamptonshire. About one hundred and twenty of the passengers were
married, with families, and in all seventy-three children.

On the 3d of August, at seven o'clock in the evening, the ship was hove
to, and continued lying to until three A.M. of the 4th. At half past
four, being quite dark, and raining hard, blowing a fearful gale, the
ship struck on a reef, situated on the west coast of King's Island, at
the entrance of Bass's Straights.

Immediately after the ship struck, she was sounded, and it was
ascertained that there was four feet of water in the hold. An awful
scene of confusion and misery ensued. All the passengers attempted to
rush upon deck, and many succeeded in doing so, until the heaving of the
vessel knocked down the ladders, when the shrieks from below, calling on
those on deck to assist them were terrific. The crew were on deck the
moment the ship struck, and were instantly employed in handing up the
passengers. Up to the time the vessel began breaking up, the crew
succeeded in getting upwards of three hundred passengers on deck. But a
terrible fate awaited the greater part of them.

The day dawned. The stern of the vessel was found to be washed in, and
numerous dead bodies were found floating round the ship; some clinging
to the rocks which they had grasped in despair. About two hundred of the
passengers and crew held on to the vessel, although the raging sea was
breaking over her, and every wave washed some of them to a watery grave.
In this manner, kindred were separated, while those who remained could
only expect the same fate to reach them. Things continued in this
condition until four in the afternoon, when the vessel parted amidships,
at the fore part of the main rigging, and immediately between seventy
and a hundred persons were thrown into the waves. Thus the insatiable
ocean swallowed its prey piece-meal. About five, the wreck parted by the
fore-rigging, and so many persons were thrown into the sea, that only
seventy were left on the forecastle, they being lashed to the wreck.
Even these were gradually diminished in number, some giving out from
exhaustion, and others anticipating fate, by drowning themselves.

When day dawned, on the following morning, only about thirty persons
were left alive, and these were almost exhausted. The sea was making a
clean breach into the forecastle, the deck of which was rapidly breaking
up. Parents and children, husbands and wives, were seen floating around
the vessel, many in an embrace, which even the ocean's power could not
sunder. The few who remained alive could only look up to heaven for a
hope of safety. Soon after daylight, the vessel totally disappeared, and
out of four hundred and twenty-three persons who had been on board the
vessel, only nine were saved by being washed on shore, and these were
nearly exhausted.

[Illustration: LOSS OF THE FRANCIS SPAIGHT.]




LOSS OF THE FRANCIS SPAIGHT.


On the morning of the 7th of January, 1848, the barque Francis Spaight,
lying in Table Bay, at the Cape of Good Hope, parted her anchor, and in
attempting to beat out, grounded, broadside on the beach. The gale at
the time she struck was furious, and the surf tremendous, making a clean
breach over the vessel, carrying away the bulwark, long boat, main
hatch, and part of the deck, with one of the crew.

The shore was thronged with the inhabitants of Cape Town, anxious for
the fate of the vessel. An attempt was made to send a rope from the land
to the wreck, but the rope broke. Rockets were fired with lines
attached, and one was thrown across the foremast stay, where none of the
men could reach it, on account of the fearful rolling of the sea. After
some extraordinary delay, a whale boat was brought from the town, and
manned by six daring fellows, who dashed through the surf, and were soon
alongside the vessel.

All except the carpenter, fifteen in number, got into the boat, and
pushed off. At this moment a terrific sea upset the boat, and twenty-one
persons were struggling in the surf for life. The people on the beach
were horror-stricken; and men on horseback were seen plunging into the
sea, risking their lives to save their fellow-creatures; but eighteen
sunk to rise no more. The masts of the vessel fell with a tremendous
crash, but the carpenter still clung to the wreck. At length a
surf-boat, towed by a smaller one, proceeded towards the wreck. One of
these boats was capsized, and two lives lost. But the carpenter was
rescued. This man, (James Robertson,) and John McLeod, seaman, were all
of the crew that reached the shore. The inhabitants of Cape Town were
all anxiety in regard to the fate of the vessel; and those daring heroes
who sacrificed themselves for the sake of their fellow men were worthy
of a monument as lofty as those erected to the bravest warriors.

The place where the Francis Spaight went ashore had been, a short time
previous, the scene of a far more terrible disaster. This was the wreck
of the ship Waterloo, by which two hundred persons were lost, in spite
of the most extraordinary and heroic exertions on the part of the
inhabitants of Cape Town.

The bay is very much exposed to storms, and its shores are particulary
dangerous, on account of their shelving character. The Francis Spaight
had just put into the bay for the purpose of obtaining a supply of
provisions, and it was intended that she should sail the next day. But
the Ruler of the elements intended it otherwise. Her cargo was nearly a
total loss.




LOSS OF THE GOLDEN RULE.


The ship Golden Rule, Captain Austin, sailed from Wiscasset, with a
cargo of timber, September, 8, 1807.

On the 29th, she experienced a severe gale from the south-east; and at
eight o'clock, A.M., they discovered that she had sprung a leak, and
had four feet of water in her hold; at nine it had increased to eight
feet, notwithstanding they had two pumps going, and were throwing her
deck load overboard, which they were enabled to do very slowly, from the
sea driving the planks about the deck, and wounding the crew.

About ten o'clock, the water had risen to twelve feet, and the gale had
also evidently increased; the crew and all on board were quite
exhausted; and on going into the cabin they found she was welling fast.
The main and mizzen masts were now cut away, to prevent her upsetting,
and she was quite clear of her deck load. At eleven o'clock she was full
up to her main deck, and all her bulk heads were knocked away.

It now occurred to some of the crew, to endeavor to save some bread; and
Mr. Boyd, the first mate, with great resolution, went into the cabin and
gave out some bread, and two bottles of rum; but so rapidly did she
fill, from the timber of her cargo shifting, that he was forced to break
through the sky-light to save himself. Their small stock of provisions
was now put into the binnacle, as a secure place. It had been there but
a few minutes, when a tremendous sea struck them, and carried away the
binnacle.

They had now little hope left--the wheel was broken, and they proceeded
to secure themselves as well as they could, some in the fore-top, and
the rest were lashing themselves to the taffrail; before they could
accomplish the latter plan, another sea, if possible, more heavy than
the former, hurried them all from their places, and washed two of the
men overboard; they were seen swimming for the ship, a short time, when
a wave hurried them from the sight of their lamenting comrades.

They now endeavored to keep the ship before the wind, which they were
partially enabled to do through the night. The next day another man died
from cold and hunger.

The deck was now blown up, and her side stove in, all hands had given
themselves up, when, on the 30th at noon, they were roused by the cry
of "a sail!" and they had the satisfaction to see her bear down for
them. She was the brig George, of Portland; and Captain Wildridge sent
his long-boat to take them from the wreck.




DANGERS OF WHALING SHIPS AMONG ICE BERGS.


The masses of ice by which the ocean is traversed assume a vast variety
of shapes, but may be comprehended in two general classes. The first
consists of sheets of ice, analogous to those which annually cover the
the lakes and rivers of northern lands. They present a surface which is
generally level, but here and there diversified by projections, called
_hummocks_, which arise from the ice having been thrown up by some
pressure or force to which it has been subject. Sheets of ice, which are
so large that their whole extent of surface cannot be seen from the
masthead of a vessel, are called _fields_. They have sometimes an area
of more than a hundred square miles, and rise above the level of the sea
from two to eight feet. When a piece of ice, though of a considerable
size, can be distinguished in its extent, it is termed a _floe_. A
number of sheets, large or small, joining each other, and stretching out
in any particular direction, constitute a _stream_. Captain Cook found a
stream extending across Behring's Straits, connecting eastern Asia with
the western extremity of North America. Owing to the vast extent of some
fields of ice, they would undoubtedly be conducted to a lower latitude
in the Atlantic before their dissolution, under the influence of a
warmer climate, but for the intervention of other causes. It frequently
happens that two masses are propelled against each other, and are both
