have first to learn from a good carver, because making only little animals
or boxes would not amount to anything or bring in any money, and he would
only be wasting his time.

However, down in the village of Frutigen there was a very skillful,
well-known wood-carver, who made wonderful large works which went far into
the world, even to America. He carved whole groups of animals on high
rocks, chamois and eagles and whole mountains with the herdsman and the
cows. Elsbeth could talk with this carver. If Toni studied with him he
could help him to sell the finished work, for he had ways open for it.

Elsbeth left the pastor with gratitude and new hope in her heart. In front
of the house Toni was waiting in great suspense. She had to tell him at
once everything the pastor had said, and when she finally related about
the wood-carver in Frutigen Toni suddenly stood still and said:

"Then come, Mother, let us go to the place at once."

However, his mother had not thought it over--she made many objections, but
Toni begged so earnestly, that she finally said:

"We must go home first and have something to eat, for it is very far
away; but we can do that quickly and then start off again right away."

So they hurried back to the house, took a little bread and milk and
started on their way again. They had several hours to travel, but Toni was
so busy with his plans and thoughts for the future, the time flew like a
dream and he looked up in great surprise, when his mother said:

"See, there is the church tower of Frutigen!"

They were soon standing in front of the wood-carver's house, and learned
from the children before the door, that their father was at home.

Inside in the large, wainscotted room, sat the wood-carver with his wife
at the table, looking at a large book of beautiful colored pictures of
animals which he would be able to make good use of in his handicraft. When
the two arrived he welcomed them and invited them to come and be seated on
the wooden bench, where he and his wife were sitting and which ran along
the wall around the entire room. Elsbeth accepted the invitation and
immediately began to tell the wood-carver why she had come and what she
so much desired of him.

Meanwhile Toni stood as if rooted to the floor and stared motionless at a
single spot. In front of him next the wall was a glass case, in which
could be seen two high rocks, carved out of wood. On one was standing a
chamois with her little ones. They had such dainty, slender legs, and
their fine heads sat so naturally on their necks that it seemed as if they
were all alive and not at all made of wood. On the other rock stood a
hunter, his gun hanging by his side, and his hat, with even a feather in
it, sat on his head, all so finely carved, that one would think it must be
a real hat and a real little feather, and yet all was of wood.

Next the hunter stood his dog, and it seemed as if he would even wag his
tail. Toni was like one enchanted and hardly breathed.

When his mother finished speaking, the wood-carver said it seemed to him
as if she thought the affair would half go of itself, but it was not so.

If a thing was to be done right, it cost much time and patience to learn.
He was not averse to taking the boy, for it seemed to him that he had a
desire to learn; but she would have to pay for his board for a couple of
months in Frutigen, besides paying for his instruction, which would be as
much as his board, and she herself must know whether she could spend so
much on the boy. On the other hand he would promise that the boy would be
taught right, and she could see there in the glass case, what he could
learn to do.

At first Elsbeth was so disappointed and dismayed she was unable to speak
a word. Now she knew that it would be absolutely impossible for her to
fulfill her boy's greatest wish. The necessary expense of board and
instruction was beyond anything that she could manage, so much so that it
was quite out of the question. It was all over with Toni's plans.

She rose and thanked the wood-carver for his willingness to take the boy,
but she would have to decline his offer. Then she beckoned to Toni, whose
eyes were still so fastened to the glass case that he paid no attention.
She took him by the hand and led him quietly out of the door.

Outside Toni said, drawing a deep breath:

"Did you see what was in the case? Mother, did you see it?"

"Yes, yes, I saw it, Toni," replied his mother with a sigh, "but did you
hear what the wood-carver said?"

Toni had heard nothing; all his mind had been directed to one point.

"No, I didn't hear anything; when can I go?" he asked longingly.

"Oh, it is not possible, Toni, but don't take it so to heart! See, I can't
do it, although I would like to so much," declared his mother; "but
everything would come to more than I earn in a year, and you know how hard
I have to work to manage to make the two ends meet."

It was a hard blow for Toni. All his hopes for many years lay destroyed
before him; but he knew how his mother worked, how little good she
herself had, and how she always tried to give him a little pleasure when
she could. He said not a word and silently swallowed his rising tears, but
he was very much grieved that all his hopes were over, since for the first
time he had seen what wonderful things could be made out of a piece of
wood.




CHAPTER THIRD

UP IN THE MOUNTAINS


The next morning, the farmer on the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth, to
come up to see him towards evening, as he had something to talk with her
about. At the right time she laid aside her hoe, tied on a clean apron,
and said:

"Finish the hoeing, Toni; then you can milk the goat and give her some
fresh straw, so she will have a better bed. Then I will be back again."

She went up to the Matten farm. The farmer was standing in the open
barn-door gazing with satisfaction at his beautiful cows, wandering in a
long procession to the well. Elsbeth stepped up to him.

"Well, I am glad you have come," he said, holding out his hand to her. "I
have been thinking about you on account of the boy's welfare. He is now at
an age to do some light work and help you a little, at least to take care
of himself."

"I have already been thinking about that," replied Elsbeth, "and wanted to
ask you, if you could give him a little light work in the fields?"

"That is fortunate," continued the farmer. "I have a little job for him,
healthy and not very hard, that is to say not hard at all. He can go up to
the small mountain with the cows. The herdsman with his boys is on the big
mountain and a man is also there to come every morning and evening for the
milking, so the boy will not be entirely alone and will have nothing to do
but watch the cows so that none wander off, that they don't hook each
other or do anything out of the way. While he sits there on the mountain
he is master and can have all the milk he wants. A king couldn't have
anything better."

Elsbeth was a little frightened by the offer. If Toni had been more with
the farm men, and had been with cows, or if he had naturally a different
disposition, wilder and more roving and commanding-but as he was so quiet
and shy, and besides without any knowledge of such things, to be for the
first time all alone for several months, away from home, up on the
mountains, watching a herd of cows, this seemed to her too hard for Toni.
What would the poor boy, who was not particularly strong, do if anything
happened to him or to the herd? She expressed all her thoughts to the
farmer, but it made no difference; he thought it would be good for the boy
to get out for once, and up on the mountain he would be much stronger than
at home, and nothing could happen to him, for he would be given a horn and
if anything went wrong he could blow lustily, and immediately the farm man
would come from the other mountain; in a half hour he would be there.

Elsbeth finally thought the farmer understood it much better than she, and
so it was decided that the next week, when the cows went up to the
mountain pasture, Toni should go with them.

"He shall have a good bit of money and a new suit of clothes when he comes
down. That will be a help for the winter," said the farmer finally.

Elsbeth thanked him as she said good-by, and turned homeward.

