Hottentot; and he could not feel as charitably towards him as a
Christian should towards his erring, weak brother.

Setting his pole by the door, he entered the room where Hardhand was
abusing his mother.




CHAPTER IV.

IN WHICH BOBBY GETS OUT OF ONE SCRAPE, AND INTO ANOTHER.

Bobby was so indignant at the conduct of Mr. Hardhand, that he entirely
forgot the adventure of the morning; and he did not even think of the
gold he had in his pocket.  He loved his mother; he knew how hard she
had worked for him and his brother and sisters; that she had burned the
"midnight oil" at her clamps; and it made him feel very bad to near her
abused as Mr. Hardhand was abusing her.  It was not her fault that she
had not the money to pay him.  She had been obliged to spend a large
portion of her time over the sick beds of her children, so that she
could not earn so much money as usual; while the family expenses were
necessarily much greater.

Bobby knew also that Mr. Hardhand was aware of all the circumstances of
his mother's position, and the more he considered the case the more
brutal and inhuman was his course.

As our hero entered the family room with the basket of fish on his arm,
the little crusty old man fixed the glance of his evil eye upon him.

"There is that boy, marm, idling away his time by the river, and eating
you out of house and home," said the wretch.  "Why don't you set him to
work, and make him earn something?"

"Bobby is a very good boy," meekly responded the widow Bright.

"Humph! I should think he was.  A great lazy lubber like him, living on
his mother!" and Mr. Hardhand looked contemptuously at Bobby.

"I am not a lazy lubber," interposed the insulted boy with spirit.

"Yes, you are.  Why don't you go to work?"

"I do work."

"No, you don't; you waste your time paddling in the river."

"I don't."

"You had better teach this boy manners too, marm," said the creditor,
who, like all men of small souls, was willing to take advantage of the
power which the widow's indebtedness gave him.  "He is saucy."

"I should like to know who taught you manners, Mr. Hardhand," replied
Bobby, whose indignation was rapidly getting the better of his
discretion.

"What!" growled Mr. Hardhand, aghast at this unwonted boldness.

"I heard what you said before I came in; and no decent man would go to
the house of a poor woman to insult her."

"Humph!  Mighty fine," snarled the little old man, his gray eyes
twinkling with malice.

"Don't Bobby; don't be saucy to the gentleman," interposed his mother.

"Saucy, marm?  You ought to horsewhip him for it.  If you don't, I
will."

"No, you won't!" replied Bobby, shaking his head significantly.  "I can
take care of myself."

"Did any one ever hear such impudence!" gasped Mr. Hardhand.

"Don't, Bobby, don't," pleaded the anxious mother.

"I should like to know what right you have to come here and abuse my
mother," continued Bobby, who could not restrain his anger.

"Your mother owes me money, and she don't pay it, you young scoundrel!"
answered Mr. Hardhand, foaming with rage.

"That is no reason why you should insult her.  You can call _me_ what
you please, but you shall not insult my mother while I'm round."

"Your mother is a miserable woman, and--"

"Say that again, and though you are an old man, I'll hit you for it.
I'm big enough to protect my mother, and I'll do it."

Bobby doubled up his fists and edged up to Mr. Hardhand, fully
determined to execute his threat if he repeated the offensive
expression, or any other of a similar import.  He was roused to the
highest pitch of anger, and felt as though he had just as lief die as
live in defence of his mother's good name.

I am not sure that I could excuse Bobby's violence under any other
circumstances.  He loved his mother--as the novelists would say, he
idolized her; and Mr. Hardhand had certainly applied some very
offensive epithets to her--epithets which no good son could calmly bear
applied to a mother.  Besides, Bobby, though his heart was a large one,
and was in the right place, had never been educated into those nice
distinctions of moral right and wrong which control the judgment of
wise and learned men.  He had an idea that violence, resistance with
blows, was allowable in certain extreme cases; and he could conceive of
no greater provocation than an insult to his mother.

"Be calm, Bobby; you are in a passion," said Mrs. Bright.

"I am surprised, marm," began Mr. Hardhand, who prudently refrained
from repeating the offensive language--and I have no doubt he was
surprised; for he looked both astonished and alarmed.  "This boy has a
most ungovernable temper."

"Don't you worry about my temper, Mr. Hardhand; I'll take care of
myself.  All I want of you is not to insult my mother.  You may say
what you like to me; but don't you call her hard names."

Mr. Hardhand, like all mean, little men, was a coward; and he was
effectually intimidated by the bold and manly conduct of the boy.  He
changed his tone and manner at once.

"You have no money for me, marm?" said he, edging towards the door.

"No, sir; I am sorry to say that I have been able to save only five
dollars since I paid you last; but I hope--"

"Never mind, marm, never mind; I shall not trouble myself to come here
again, where I am liable to be kicked by this ill-bred cub.  No, marm,
I shall not come again.  Let the law take its course."

"O, mercy!  See what you have brought upon us, Bobby," exclaimed Mrs.
Bright, bursting into tears.

"Yes, marm, let the law take its course."

"O Bobby!  Stop a moment, Mr. Hardhand; do stop a moment."

"Not a moment, marm.  We'll see;" and Mr. Hardhand placed his hand upon
the latch string.

Bobby felt very uneasy, and very unhappy at that moment.  His passion
had subsided, and he realized that he had done a great deal of mischief
by his impetuous conduct.

Then the remembrance of his morning, adventure on the bridge came like
a flash of sunshine to his mind, and he eagerly drew from his pocket
the handkerchief in which he had deposited the precious gold,--doubly
precious now, because it would enable him to retrieve the error into
which he had fallen, and do something towards relieving his mother's
embarrassment.  With a trembling hand he untied the knot which secured
the money.

"Here, mother, here is thirty-five dollars;" and he placed it in her
hand.

"Why, Bobby!" exclaimed Mrs. Bright.

"Pay him, mother, pay him, and I will tell you all about it by and by."

"Thirty-five dollars! and all in gold!  Where did you get it, Bobby?"

"Never mind it now, mother."

Mr. Hardhand's covetous soul had already grasped the glittering gold;
and removing his hand from the latch string, he approached the widow.

"I shall be able to pay you forty dollars now," said Mrs. Bright,
taking the five dollars she had saved from her pocket.

"Yes, marm."

Mr. Hardhand took the money, and seating himself at the table, indorsed
the amount on the back of the note.

"You owe me sixty more," said he, maliciously, as he returned the note
to his pocket book.  "It must be paid immediately."

"You must not be hard with me now, when I have paid more than you
demanded."

"I don't wish to come here again.  That boy's impudence has put me all
out of conceit with you and your family," replied Mr. Hardhand,
assuming the most benevolent look he could command.  "There was a time
when I was very willing to help you.  I have waited a great while for
my pay for this house; a great deal longer than I would have waited for
anybody else."

"Your interest has always been paid punctually," suggested the widow,
modestly.

"That's true; but very few people would have waited as long as I have
for the principal.  I wanted to help you--"

"By gracious!" exclaimed Bobby, interrupting him.

"Don't be saucy, my son, don't," said Mrs. Bright, fearing a repetition
of the former scene.

"_He_ wanted to help us!" ejaculated Bobby.

It was a very absurd and hypocritical expression on the part of Mr.
Hardhand; for he never wanted to help any one but himself; and during
the whole period of his relations with the poor widow, he had
oppressed, insulted, and abused her to the extent of his capacity, or
at least as far as his interest would permit.

He was a malicious and revengeful man.  He did not consider the great
provocation he had given Bobby for his violent conduct, but determined
to be revenged, if it could be accomplished without losing any part of
the sixty dollars still due him.  He was a wicked man at heart, and
would not scruple to turn the widow and her family out of house and
home.

Mrs. Bright knew this, and Bobby knew it too; and they felt very uneasy
about it.  The wretch still had the power to injure them, and he would
use it without compunction.

"Yes, young man, I wanted to help you, and you see what I get for
it--contempt and insults!  You will hear from me again in a day or two.
Perhaps you will change your tune, you young reprobate!"

"Perhaps I shall," replied Bobby, without much discretion.

"And you too, marm; you uphold him in his treatment of me.  You have
not done your duty to him.  You have been remiss, marm!" continued Mr.
Hardhand, growing bolder again, as he felt the power he wielded.

"That will do, sir; you can go!" said Bobby, springing from his chair,
and approaching Mr. Hardhand.  "Go, and do your worst!"

"Humph! you stump me--do you?"

"I would rather see my mother kicked out of the house than insulted by
such a dried-up old curmudgeon as you are.  Go along!"

"Now, don't, Bobby," pleaded his mother.

"I am going; and if the money is not paid by twelve o'clock to-morrow,
the law shall lake its course;" and Mr. Hardhand rushed out of the
house, slamming the door violently after him.

"O Bobby, what have you done?" exclaimed Mrs. Bright, when the
hard-hearted creditor had departed.

"I could not help it, mother; don't cry.  I cannot bear to hear you
insulted and abused; and I thought when I heard him do it a year ago,
that I couldn't stand it again.  It is too bad."

"But he will turn us out of the house; and what shall we do then?"

"Don't cry, mother; it will come round all right.  I have friends who
are rich and powerful, and who will help us."

"You don't know what you say, Bobby.  Sixty dollars is a great deal of
money, and if we should sell all we have, it would scarcely bring that."

"Leave it all to me, mother; I feel as though I could do something now.
I am old enough to make money."

"What can you do?"

"Now or never!" replied Bobby, whose mind had wandered from the scene
to the busy world, where fortunes are made and lost every day.  "Now or
never!" muttered he again.

"But Bobby, you have not told me where you got all that gold."

"Dinner is ready, I see, and I will tell you while we eat."

Bobby had been a fishing, and to be hungry is a part of the fisherman's
luck; so he seated himself at the table, and gave his mother a full
account of all that had occurred at the bridge.

The fond mother trembled when she realized the peril her son had
incurred for the sake of the young lady; but her maternal heart swelled
with admiration in view of the generous deed, and she thanked God that
she was the mother of such a son.  She felt more confidence in him then
than she had ever felt before, and she realized that he would be the
stay and the staff of her declining years.

Bobby finished his dinner, and seated himself on the front door step.
His mind was absorbed, by a new and brilliant idea; and for half an
hour he kept up a most tremendous thinking.

"Now or never!" said he, as he rose and walked down the road towards
Riverdale Centre.




CHAPTER V.

IN WHICH BOBBY GIVES HIS NOTE FOR SIXTY DOLLARS.

A great idea was born in Bobby's brain.  His mother's weakness and the
insecurity of her position were more apparent to him than they had ever
been before.  She was in the power of her creditor, who might turn her
out of the little black house, sell the place at auction, and thus,
perhaps, deprive her of the whole or a large part of his father's and
her own hard earnings.

But this was not the peculiar hardship of her situation, as her devoted
son understood it.  It was not the hard work alone which she was called
upon to perform, not the coarseness of the fare upon which they lived,
not the danger even of being turned out of doors, that distressed
Bobby; it was that a wretch like Mr. Hardhand could insult and trample
upon his mother.  He had just heard him use language to her that made
his blood boil with indignation, and he did not, on cool, sober, second
thought, regret that he had taken such a decided stand against it.

He cared not for himself.  He could live on a crust of bread and a cup
of water from the spring; he could sleep in a barn; he could wear
coarse and even ragged clothes; but he could not submit to have his
mother insulted, and by such a mean and contemptible person as Mr.
Hardhand.

Yet what could he do?  He was but a boy, and the great world would look
with contempt upon his puny form.  But he felt that he was not
