
Pretty soon Shadow the Weasel joined Reddy Fox in the hollow log, and
they whispered and chuckled while they waited. They knew that Blacky
the Crow was safely hidden in the top of a tall pine, where he could
see all that went on, and that Sammy Jay was flying about over the
Green Meadows and through the Green Forest, pretending that he was
attending wholly to his own business, but really watching all the
preparations for Peter Rabbit's party. At the foot of a tree, in the
top of which Prickly Porky the Porcupine was eating his breakfast, sat
old Mr. Toad, nodding sleepily. Sammy Jay saw him there but, smart as
Sammy is, he didn't once suspect innocent-looking old Mr. Toad. You
see, he didn't know that old Mr. Toad had overheard all of his plans.




IX

MR. TOAD AND PRICKLY PORKY PUT THEIR HEADS TOGETHER


Slowly Prickly Porky the Porcupine climbed down from the top of the
tall poplar tree where he had been getting his breakfast of tender
young bark. He grunted as he worked his way down, for he had with him
a bundle of bark to take over to Peter Rabbit's surprise party. When
he reached the ground, Prickly Porky shook himself until he rattled
the thousand little spears hidden in his long coat.

"Tee-hee-hee!"

"Who dares to laugh at me?" demanded Pricky Porky, shaking himself
until all the little spears rattled again, and some of them began to
peep out of his long coat.

"No one is laughing at you," replied a voice right behind him.

Prickly Porky turned around. There sat old Mr. Toad. His big mouth was
stretched wide open, and he was laughing all to himself. Something was
tickling old Mr. Toad mightily.

Prickly Porky scowled, and a few more little spears peeped out of his
long coat. You know no one likes to be laughed at, and it certainly
did look as if old Mr. Toad was laughing at him.

Mr. Toad stopped laughing and hopped a step nearer. "It's a joke,"
said he, and slowly winked one eye.

"I don't see any joke," said Prickly Porky, and his voice was very
fretful.

Mr. Toad hopped a step nearer. "Are you going to Peter Rabbit's
party?"

"Of course I am. What a foolish question," replied Prickly Porky.

"To be sure, a very foolish question, a very foolish question,
indeed," assented Mr. Toad. "Do you know that Sammy Jay and Blacky the
Crow and Reddy Fox and Shadow the Weasel, who have not been invited,
are planning to break up the party and then gobble up all the good
things to eat?" he continued.

Prickly Porky laid down his bundle of tender young bark and stared at
old Mr. Toad, "How do you know?" he demanded.

Old Mr. Toad chuckled deep down in his throat. "I was underneath a
piece of bark on which Sammy Jay was sitting when the plan was made.
Of course he didn't know I was there, and of course I didn't tell
him."

"Of course not," interrupted Prickly Porky, beginning to grin.

"Of course not," continued Mr. Toad, grinning, too. Then he told
Prickly Porky all about the plan he had overheard, how Reddy Fox and
Shadow the Weasel and Blacky the Crow were to hide near Unc' Billy
Possum's hollow tree, and how Sammy Jay was to frighten away everybody
else by pretending that Bowser the Hound was coming.

"Have you told Peter Rabbit?" asked Prickly Porky.

"Not yet, but I'm going to, by and by," replied old Mr. Toad. "But
first, I want you to help me fool Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow and
Reddy Fox and Shadow the Weasel. Will you?"

"Of course I will if I can, but how can I?" answered Prickly Porky
promptly.

Old Mr. Toad hopped up, and stretching up on tiptoe, whispered in one
of Prickly Porky's ears. Prickly Porky began to smile. Then he began
to chuckle. Finally he laughed until he had to hold his sides.

"Will you do it?" asked Mr. Toad.

Prickly Porky reached for his bundle of tender young bark. "Of course
I will," said he, still chuckling. "Come on, Mr. Toad, it's time we
were going."




X

THE RUNAWAY CABBAGE


Reddy Fox, hiding with Shadow the Weasel in a hollow log near Unc'
Billy Possum's home, nudged Shadow with his elbow.

"I hear some one coming," he whispered.

Shadow peeped out. "It's old Mr. Toad and Prickly Porky," he whispered
back.

Something that sounded very much like a growl sounded way down deep in
the throat of Reddy Fox, for Reddy has no love for Prickly Porky.

"And there comes Jimmy Skunk, with a big-goose egg under each arm!"
continued Shadow, smacking his lips. Reddy Fox wriggled up where he
could peep out, too.

"My goodness! What's that coming down the Lone Little Path?" whispered
Reddy.

Shadow looked. Then he began to laugh, and Reddy began to laugh, too.
But it was laughter that made no sound, for Reddy and Shadow didn't
want any one to know that they were hiding there. It was a funny sight
they were peeping out at. It certainly was a funny sight. Down the
Lone Little Path came Peter Rabbit and his cousin, Juniper the Hare,
rolling a huge cabbage.

Right at the top of a little hill the cabbage got away from them. Down
it started, rolling and bounding along, with Peter Rabbit and Jumper
the Hare frantically trying to catch it. Just ahead was Johnny Chuck
with a big bundle of sweet clover, which he was bringing to Peter
Rabbit's party. He didn't see the big cabbage coming. It knocked his
feet from under him, and down he went with a thump, flat on his back.
Right on top of him fell Jumper the Hare, who was close behind the
runaway cabbage and had no time to turn aside. Over the two of them
fell Peter Rabbit. Such a mix-up!

And the big cabbage kept right on running away. Jimmy Skunk, who never
hurries, heard the noise behind him and turned to see what it all
meant. But he didn't have time to more than blink his eyes before the
runaway cabbage hit him full in the stomach. Down went Jimmy Skunk
with a grunt. One big egg flew over against a tree and broke. Jimmy
landed on the other, and this broke, too.

Such a sight as Jimmy Skunk was! Egg dripped from every part of his
handsome black and white coat. It was in his eyes and all over his
face and dripped from his whiskers. Shadow the Weasel and Reddy Fox,
hiding in the hollow log, laughed until the tears rolled down their
cheeks, though down in the heart of Shadow was bitter disappointment,
for he had planned to steal those very eggs.

Just a little way beyond Jimmy Skunk the runaway cabbage brought up
with a thump against a stump on which sat Striped Chipmunk, with the
pockets in his cheeks filled full of yellow corn. The sudden bump of
the big cabbage made Striped Chipmunk lose his balance, and off he
tumbled, right down on to old Mr. Toad, who had just sat down behind
the stump for a few minutes of rest. It knocked all the wind out of
Mr. Toad, and of course Striped Chipmunk spilled all his corn.

Prickly Porky the Porcupine heard the noise. He looked up to see a
strange thing bounding down the Lone Little Path. Prickly Porky
didn't wait to see what it was. He did just what he always does when
he thinks there may be danger; he rolled himself up with his face
hidden in his waistcoat, and when he did that, the thousand little
spears hidden in his coat stood out until he looked like a giant
chestnut burr.

The runaway cabbage bounced off the stump and hit Prickly Porky. Then
it stopped. Where it had touched Prickly Porky, the sharp little
spears had stuck into it, so that when Peter Rabbit and Jumper the
Hare hurried up, there lay the runaway cabbage, looking for all the
world like a great green pincushion.




XI

REDDY FOX GOES HUNGRY


Like a great green pincushion lay the runaway cabbage of Peter Rabbit
and Jumper the Hare. Every one thought it was the very best joke ever.
Jimmy Skunk had gone off to take a bath and get two more eggs for
Peter Rabbit's party. Reddy Fox and Shadow the Weasel, peeping out
from the hollow log where they were hiding, could see Jimmy on his way
back with a big goose egg under each arm. Shadow smacked his lips. He
meant to have those eggs himself.

Pretty soon all the little forest and meadow people whom Peter Rabbit
had invited were gathered around the foot of Unc' Billy Possum's
hollow tree, and each had brought something good to eat. My, such a
feast as was spread out there! Now they were waiting for Unc' Billy
Possum, who had gone to meet his family, coming up from "Ol'
Virginny."

Over in the top of a tall pine tree Blacky the Crow was hiding and
chuckling to himself as he watched. Reddy Fox was getting impatient.
He was hungry. He had had no breakfast, and as he lay hiding in the
hollow log, he could peep out and see all the good things, and he
could smell them, too. It seemed as if his stomach would just give him
no peace at all. He wished that Sammy Jay would bring the false
message that Bowser the Hound was coming, so as to frighten all the
rest away.

"I'm nearly starved!" whispered Reddy Fox. "I hope Sammy Jay will
hurry up."

Just then they noticed that Peter Rabbit was very busy. He hopped from
guest to guest and whispered in the ear of each.

"Now I wonder what Peter Rabbit is whispering about," said Reddy.

Suddenly the light at the end of the hollow log disappeared. There was
a queer rattling sound that sent shivers up and down Reddy's backbone.
Prickly Porky the Porcupine had sat down with his back against the end
of the hollow log, and the queer rattling sound was made by the
thousand little spears in his long coat. Reddy Fox and Shadow the
Weasel were in a prison. You see there was no other opening to the
hollow log.

"Never mind," whispered Shadow the Weasel, "he'll go away when Sammy
Jay shouts that Bowser the Hound is coming."

Blacky the Crow, hidden in the top of the tall pine, was also
wondering what Peter was whispering. His sharp eyes watched Peter, and
every time that Peter whispered in the ear of one of the little meadow
