departure," said Aunt Ninette, with emphasis.

"But indeed no more respectable, no quieter spot can be found in all
Tannenburg than this. You cannot hope to be more comfortable anywhere
else; either you or the gentleman," asserted the good widow as soon as she
had recovered from her surprise.

"How can you say so, Mrs. Kurd, after hearing that intolerable uproar last
evening? noises far surpassing anything that I described to you in my
letters as 'absolutely to be avoided.'"

"Oh, my dear lady, that was only the children! You know they were having a
family festival, and they were of course unusually lively."

"Indeed! if this is your method of celebrating family festivals in these
parts, first a tempest of shouts and cries and then a fire with all its
accompanying noise and hubbub, I can only say that such a neighborhood
seems to me not only undesirable for an invalid, but positively
dangerous."

"I do not think you can call the fire a part of the celebration," said
Mrs. Kurd gently. "It was an accident, and it was very quickly
extinguished, you must admit. A more orderly and well regulated family is
nowhere to be found, and I cannot understand how the lady and gentleman
can seriously think of leaving. I can assure you that no other such spot
is to be found in all Tannenburg! If the gentleman needs quiet he will do
well to walk into the wood, where it is healthful and quiet too."

After talking awhile, Mrs. Ehrenreich became more composed, and seated
herself at the breakfast table, where Mr. Titus and Dora also took their
places.

At the other house, breakfast had long been finished. The father had gone
about his business, and the mother was occupied with her household
affairs. Rolf was off to his early recitations in Latin, with the pastor
of a neighboring parish. Paula was taking her music-lesson of the
governess, and Wili and Lili took this opportunity to look over their
lessons once more. Little Hunne sat in the corner with his newly-acquired
nut-cracker before him, gravely studying its grotesque face.

Presently 'big Jule' came in, whip in hand, all booted and spurred from
his morning ride.

"Who will pull off my riding boots?" he asked, throwing himself into a
chair, stretching out his legs, and gazing admiringly at his new spurs.
Wili and Lili sprang quickly from their seats, delighted at the chance of
doing something that was not a lesson, and each seized a foot and began to
pull with such force that before Jule knew what they were about he found
himself slipping from his chair. In the next second he had grasped the
side of his chair with the result that that also was pulled along the
floor. He called out hastily "Stop! Stop!" while little Hunne, who saw the
situation from his corner, now flew to his elder brother's assistance,
hung on to the chair from behind, planting his little feet firmly on the
ground, and throwing his weight backward as well as he knew how. His
efforts were insufficient, however, and he was dragged along the floor as
if he were on a coast. Wili and Lili were determined to finish their
undertaking, and kept on pulling and pulling.

    "Stop! Stop! Wiling and Liling
     You terrible twinning"

cried Jule, while little Hunne added his voice to swell the tumult.

At this the mother made her appearance upon the scene, and the uproar was
stilled at once. Jule swung himself panting back into his chair, and Hunne
slowly regained his equilibrium.

"My dear Jule, why do you make the children behave so badly? You ought to
know better at your age," said his mother reprovingly.

"Certainly, mother, certainly, in future I will do better, but if you
will look at it from another side, I am doing something, in affording the
twins an opportunity to be of use, instead of carrying on their usual
mischievous pranks."

"Jule, Jule, that does not look like doing better," said his mother
warningly. "Lili, go down stairs and practise your exercises until Miss
Hanenwinkel has finished Paula's music lesson. Wili, go on with your
studying, and the best thing you can do, Jule, to help me, is to amuse the
little one until I am at leisure."

The "big Jule" was ready to help to restore order after his bit of fun,
and Lili ran down stairs to the piano as she was bidden. She found herself
too much excited after the exertion of playing boot-jack for her brother,
and her exercises did not run smoothly, so she took up one of her
"pieces" to work off her superfluous energy upon, and began to play with
great emphasis,

    "Live your life merrily,
      While the lamp glows,
    Ere it can fade and die,
      Gather the rose."

Uncle Titus and his wife were just finishing their breakfast in a
neighboring house when the affair of the boots began. Uncle Titus hastened
to his room, closing the windows and fastening them against the noise. His
wife summoned their hostess rather peremptorily, and asked her "just to
listen to that" for herself. It did not seem to make much impression upon
Mrs. Kurd however, who only said smilingly,

"Oh, how merry the dear children are, to be sure," and when Aunt Ninette
went on to explain that such disturbances were the very worst thing for
her poor invalid, the hostess only again recommended the walk in the woods
for quiet and fresh air! The noise in the next house would not last long,
she said, the young gentleman would soon return to college, and it would
be much more quiet then. As she spoke, the sound of Lili's merry music
came across through the open window on the morning breeze.

"And that too, is that the work of the young gentleman, who will soon
return to college?" asked Mrs. Ehrenreich excitedly. "It is unendurable;
continually some new noise or tumult or uproar. What do you say to this
last, Mrs. Kurd?"

"I never have thought of it as noise," said the good woman simply, "the
dear child is making such progress with her music, it is a pleasure to
hear her."

"And Dora, where can Dora be? Is she bewitched too? It is time for her to
begin her sewing; where can she be? Dora! Dora! Have you gone into the
garden again?"

Aunt Ninette's voice was querulous and excited. To be sure, Dora had crept
down again to peer through her opening in the hedge, and she was now
listening as if enchanted, to Lili's gay music. She came back at once at
the sound of her aunt's voice, and took her appointed place at the window
where she was to sit and sew all day.

"Well, we cannot stay here, that is certain," said Mrs. Ehrenreich as she
left the room.

The tears started to Dora's eyes at these words. She did so long to remain
here, where she could hear and partly see now and then, the merry healthy
life of these children in the beautiful garden beyond the hedge. It was
her only knowledge of true child-life. As she sewed, she was planning and
puzzling her brain with plans for prolonging their stay, but could think
of nothing that seemed likely to be of use.

It was now eleven o'clock. Rolf came scampering home from his recitations,
and catching sight of his mother through the open door of the kitchen, he
ran to her, calling out before he reached the threshold, "Mamma, mamma,
now guess. My first--"

"My dear Rolf" interrupted his mother, "I beg of you to find some one else
to guess. I have not time now, truly. Go find Paula, she has just gone
into the sitting-room."

Rolf obeyed.

"Paula," he called out, "My first--"

"No, Rolf, please, not just now, I am looking for my blank-book to write
my French translation in. There is Miss Hanenwinkel, she is good at
guessing, ask her."

"Miss Hanenwinkel," cried poor Rolf, pouncing upon her, "My first--"

"Not a moment, not a second, Rolf," said the governess hastily. "There is
Mr. Julius over there in the corner, letting the little one crack nuts
for him. He is not busy; I am. Good-bye, I'll see you again."

Miss Hanenwinkel had been in England, and had taken a great fancy to this
form of expression much in vogue there, and she constantly used it as a
form of farewell, whether it was apropos or not. Thus she would say to the
persistent scissors-grinder, who came to the door,

"Have you come back so soon? Do go where you are wanted if there is any
such place. Good-bye. I'll see you again," and shut the door with a slam.

Or to the traveling agent who brought his wares to show, if asked to
dismiss him, she would say,

"We want nothing; you know very well. Don't come here again. Good-bye.
I'll see you again," and shut the door in his face. This was a
peculiarity of Miss Hanenwinkel.

Julius was quietly seated in a corner of the sitting-room, while Hunne
stood before him watching with grave attention his nut-cracker's desperate
grimaces as he gave him nut after nut to crack in his powerful jaws. Hunne
carefully divided each kernel, giving one half to Jule, while he popped
the other into his own little mouth.

Rolf approached them, repeating his question, "Will you guess, Jule? You
are not busy."

    "My first in France, applaudingly
        The people to the actors cry:
     With steady aim full in the eye,
        To hit my second you must try;
     My whole's a prince of prowess high,
        Who fought the fight for Germany."

"That is Bismarck, of course," said the quick-witted lad.

"O, O, how quickly you guessed it," said Rolf, quite taken aback.

"Now it is my turn; pay attention. You must try hard for this now. I have
just made it up." And Jule declaimed with emphasis:

    "My first transforms the night,
        And puts its peace to flight.
     My second should you now become,
        You scarce will move, for fife or drum.
     My whole hath power to soothe you all,
        Be your delight in church, or camp, or ball."

"That is hard," said Rolf, who was rather a slow thinker. "Wait a moment,
Jule, I shall get it soon." So Rolf sat down on an ottoman to think it
over at his ease.

The big Jule and the little Hunne in the mean time pursued their
occupation without interruption. As an extra proof of his skill, Julius
practised with the shells at hitting different objects in the room, to his
little brother's delight and admiration.

"I have it," cried Rolf at last, much delighted. "It is Cat-nip!"

"O, O, what a guess! what are you thinking of? It is something very
different, entirely different. It is music. Mew--sick--music, don't you
see?"

"Oh, yes," said Rolf rather abashed. "Now wait Jule, here's another. What
is this?"

    "My first sings by the water side,
     My next is Heidelberg's great pride,
     My whole was a blind poet, who
     In England lived and suffered too."

"Shakspere," said Julius, whose pride it was to answer instantly.

"Wrong," cried Rolf, delighted. "How could a _shake_ sing by the water
side, Jule?"

"Oh, I supposed you meant a shake in somebody's voice, as he was riding or
driving along," said Jule, to justify himself. "Now what are you laughing
at?"

"Because you have made such a wrong guess. It is some one 'very different,
entirely different,' Jule. It is Milton, the blind poet Milton. Now try
another because you failed in this. My first"--

"No, no, I must beg for a rest. It is too much brain work for vacation. I
am going now to see how Castor is after my ride this morning." And Julius
dashed off to the stable.

"Oh, what a shame!" cried Rolf, "what a pity! Now there is no one to
guess, and I made four splendid charades on my way home. It is too bad
that you are not old enough to guess, Hunne."

"But I can guess; I am old enough," said the little fellow rather vexed.

"Well, then try this one, try hard. Stop playing with the nuts and I will
crack some more for you bye and bye. Now listen:

    "My first conceals from light of day
     The wanderer on his final way;
     My second sizzling in the pan,
     Makes hungrier still the hungry man;
     My whole, bedecked in trappings gay,
     Goes ambling on the livelong day."

"A nutcracker," said Hunne without hesitation. Julius was his beau-ideal
of all that was best, and he thought that if he imitated Jule, and
answered quickly the first thing that came into his head, that was
guessing.

But Rolf was angry.

"How can you be so stupid, Hunne? Just think about it a little, can a nut
cover some one on his last way?"

"Why, it can cover--well--the shell covers it."

"Nonsense! and a nutcracker can not go ambling all day, can it, you stupid
child."

"Now see, mine can," said the little boy, who did not like to be called
stupid, and he tied his handkerchief round the neck of the long suffering
nutcracker and dragged it after him up and down the room, lifting it up
now and then at regular intervals.

"Oh well, yes, you think you're right; and I can't explain it because you
don't understand anything about it. Just try to think a little; can you
hear a cracker sizzling as its cooks, and will it make you hungry to hear
it?"

"If I throw a cracker into the fire, won't it burn?" said the child,
planting himself before Rolf and holding his nutcracker saucily before his
eyes.

"Oh, there is no use talking to you," said Rolf, and was just about
leaving the room, but this was not so easily done, for now Hunne was
bitten with the mania for riddle-making himself.

"Stop, Rolf," he cried and grasped his brother by the jacket to hold him.
"My first is not good to drink but to eat--"

"Oh dear, well, that must be 'nutcracker' again," and Rolf ran off,
wrenching himself from his tormentor's hands. But the boy followed him,
crying, "Wrong, wrong! you are wrong. Try again, try again!"

Moreover, Wili and Lili came scampering in from the other side, crying
out,

"Rolf, Rolf, a riddle! guess! try!" and Lili held up a strip of paper and
rattled it before Rolfs eyes, repeating, "Guess, guess, Rolf."

So the riddle-maker was now caught in his own meshes.

"Well, at least leave me room to guess in," cried he, striking about him
with his arms to make room.

"You can't guess anything," cried little Hunne contemptuously, "I am going
to Jule--he knows."

Rolf took the little slip of yellowish paper that Lili was waving back and
forth, and looked at it in surprise. In a childish hand-writing that he
had never seen before, were written the following words,

    "Come lay your hand
     Joined thus we
     Each the other
     That our union
     But behold the
     That our future
     We will cut our
     Half for you and
     But we still will
     That our halves
     And with us
     Our friendship."

"It is probably a rebus," said Rolf thoughtfully. "I shall guess it after
a little while. Just let me stay alone long enough to think it out."

There was not much time left for this however, for the dinner-bell sounded
and all the family assembled in the large hall for the mid-day meal.

"What nice thing has my little Hunne done to-day?" asked the father, when
they were at last all busy over their plates.

"I made a splendid riddle, Papa, but Rolf never tries to guess my riddles,
and I couldn't find Jule, and the rest would not listen to me at all."

"Yes, Papa," interrupted Rolf! "and I too have made three or four splendid
ones, but no one has time to guess them, and those who have time enough
are so stupid that there is no use in trying to get any answer from them.
When Jule has guessed one he thinks he has done enough, and I can make at
least six in a day."

"Yes, yes, Papa"--it was now Wili's and Lili's turn--"and we have found
such a hard riddle, so hard that even Rolf couldn't guess it. It is really
a rebus."

"If you will wait long enough I can get it, I am sure," said Rolf.

"We seem to have a riddle in every comer," said their father. "I believe
we have a riddle-fever, and one catches it from another. We really need a
regular guesser in the house, to do nothing but guess riddles."

"I wish I could find such a person," said Rolf, sighing, for to be forever
making riddles for somebody who would listen with interest and guess with
intelligence, seemed to him the most desirable thing in the world.

When dinner was over, the family went merrily into the garden under the
apple-tree, and seated themselves in a circle. The mother and Miss
Hanenwinkel and the girls were armed with sewing and knitting work. Little
Hunne also had a queer-looking bit of stuff in his hand upon which he was
trying to work with some red worsted. He said he wanted to embroider a
horse-blanket for Jule. Jule had brought a book at his mother's request,
to read aloud to them.

Rolf sat a little way off under the ash-tree, and studied his Latin
lesson. Wili sat by his side, meaning to study his little piece, but first
he looked at the birds in the branches, and then at the laborers in the
field, and then at the red apples upon the tree, for Wili loved visible
things, and it was only with the greatest difficulty, and generally with
Lili's assistance, that he could get the invisible into his little head.
Consequently, his afternoon study usually turned to a continuous
observation of the surrounding landscape.

Jule also seemed inclined to pass his time in looking about him instead
of reading aloud, for he did not open his book, but allowed his eyes to
wander in all directions, particularly towards his sister.

"Paula," he said at last, "the expression of your countenance to-day is as
if you were a wandering collection of vexations."

"Oh, do read to us, Jule; then we shall have something more agreeable than
these similes which nobody can understand the meaning of."

"It would be nicer if you would read, Jule," added her mother, "but I must
say too, Paula, that you have been for the last few days so short and
snappish that I should really like to know what is amiss with you. You
seem out of sorts with every one about you."

"But mamma, with whom can I have any real companionship? I have not a
single friend in all Tannenburg. I have nobody in all the world with whom
I can be intimate."

The mother suggested that Paula might be a little more friendly with her
sister Lili, and also with Miss Hanenwinkel. But Paula declared, that Lili
was much too young, and the governess much too old. The latter was really
only twenty, but to Paula she seemed very old indeed. For girls to be
intimate, she declared they must be of the same age, so that they could
thoroughly understand each other's feelings, and they must be always
together. Without such a friend Paula said there was no real pleasure in
life, for a girl needed some one to whom she could confide her secrets,
and who would tell her own in return.

"Yes, Paula is at the romantic age," said her brother. "I am sure that for
a long time she has peeped into every field flower to see if it would not
suddenly unfurl a hidden banner, and turn into a Joan of Arc. Every little
mole that she sees in the fields, she half suspects may wear a seal-ring
on his little finger, and be a Gustavus Vasa in disguise, searching amid
the mole-hills for his lost kingdom."

"Do not be so teasing, Jule," said his mother reprovingly. "There is
certainly something very delightful in such an intimacy as Paula
describes. I had such an experience myself, and the memory of that happy
