and he stood up, knowing that Tayoga and Willet were returning, and he
was glad of it.

"My friends are here," he said.

The Chevalier de St. Luc, with his customary politeness, rose to his
feet and Dubois rose with him. The Ojibway remained sitting, a huge
piece of deer meat in his hand. Tayoga and Willet appeared through the
bushes, and whatever surprise they may have felt they concealed it well.
The faces of both were a blank.

"Guests have come since your departure," said Robert, with the formal
politeness of the time. "These gentlemen are the Chevalier Raymond Louis
de St. Luc, from Quebec, Monsieur Armand Dubois, from the same place, I
presume, and Tandakora, a mighty Ojibway chief, who, it seems, has
wandered far from his own country, on what errand I know not. Chevalier
my friends of whom I spoke, Mr. David Willet, the great hunter, and
Tayoga of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the League of
the Hodenosaunee, my brother of the forest and a great chief."

He spoke purposely with sonority, and also with a tinge of satire,
particularly when he alluded to the presence of Tandakora at such a
great distance from his tribe. But St. Luc, of course, though noticing
it, ignored it in manner. He extended his hand promptly to the great
hunter who grasped it in his mighty palm and shook it.

"I have heard of you, Mr. Willet," he said. "Our brave Canadians are
expert in the forest and the chase, and the good Dubois here is one of
the best, but I know that none of them can excel you."

Robert, watching him, could not say that he spoke without sincerity,
and Willet took the words as they were uttered.

"I've had a long time for learning," he said modestly, "and I suppose
experience teaches the dullest of us."

Robert saw that the Ojibway had now risen and that he and the Onondaga
were regarding each other with a gaze so intent and fierce, so compact
of hatred that he was startled and his great pulses began to beat hard.
But it was only for an instant or two that the two warriors looked thus
into hostile eyes. Then both sat down and their faces became blank and
expressionless.

The gaze of St. Luc roved to the Onondaga and rested longest upon him.
Robert saw the blue eyes sparkle, and he knew that the mind of the
chevalier was arrested by some important thought. He could almost
surmise what it was, but for the present he preferred to keep silent and
watch, because his curiosity was great and natural, and he wondered what
St. Luc would say next.

The Onondaga and the hunter sat down on a fallen tree trunk and
inspected the others with a quiet but observant gaze. Each in his own
way had the best of manners. Tayoga, as became a forest chief, was
dignified, saying little, while Willet cut more slices from the deer
meat and offered them to the guests. But it was the Onondaga and not St.
Luc who now spoke first.

"The son of Onontio wanders far," he said. "It is a march of many days
from here to Quebec."

"It is, Tayoga," replied St. Luc gravely, "but the dominions of the
King of France, whom Onontio serves, also extend far."

It was a significant speech, and Robert glanced at Tayoga, but the eyes
of the young chief were veiled. If he resented the French claim to the
lands over which the Hodenosaunee hunted it was in silence. St. Luc
paused, as if for an answer, but none coming he continued:

"Shadows gather over the great nations beyond the seas. The French king
and the English king begin to look upon each other with hostile eyes."

Tayoga was silent.

"But Onontio, who stands in the French king's place at Quebec, is the
friend of the Hodenosaunee. The French and the great Six Nations are
friends."

"There was Frontenac," said Tayoga quietly.

"It was long ago."

"He came among us when the Six Nations were the Five, burned our houses
and slew our warriors! Our old men have told how they heard it from
their fathers. We did not have guns then, and our bows and arrows were
not a match for the muskets of the French. But we have muskets and
rifles now, plenty of them, the best that are made."

Tayoga's eyes were still veiled, and his face was without expression,
but his words were full of meaning. Robert glanced at St. Luc, who could
not fail to understand. The chevalier was still smooth and smiling.

"Frontenac was a great man," he said, "but he has been gathered long
since to his fathers. Great men themselves make mistakes. There was bad
blood between Onontio and the Hodenosaunee, but if the blood is bad must
it remain bad forever? The evil was gone before you and I were born,
Tayoga, and now the blood flows pure and clean in the veins of both the
French and the Hodenosaunee."

"The Hodenosaunee and Corlear have no quarrel."

"Nor have the Hodenosaunee and Onontio. Behold how the English spread
over the land, cut down the forests and drive away all the game! But the
children of Onontio hunt with the Indians, marry with their women, leave
the forests untouched, and the great hunting grounds swarm with game as
before. While Onontio abides at Quebec the lands of the Hodenosaunee are
safe."

"There was Frontenac," repeated Tayoga.

St. Luc frowned at the insistence of the Onondaga upon an old wound, but
the cloud passed swiftly. In an instant the blue eyes were smiling once
more.

"The memory of Frontenac shall not come between us," he said. "The heart
of Onontio beats for the Hodenosaunee, and he has sent me to say so to
the valiant League. I bring you a belt, a great belt of peace."

Dubois handed him a large knapsack and he took from it a beautiful belt
of pure white wampum, uncommon in size, a full five feet in length, five
inches wide, and covered with many thousands of beads, woven in symbolic
figures. He held it up and the eyes of the Onondaga glistened.

"It is a great belt, a belt of peace," continued St. Luc. "There is
none nobler, and Onontio would send no other kind. I give it to you,
Tayoga."

The young warrior drew back and his hands remained at his sides.

"I am Tayoga, of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the
great League of the Hodenosaunee," he said, "but I am not yet a chief.
My years are too few. It is a great matter of which you speak, St. Luc,
and it must be laid before the fifty sachems of the allied tribes in the
Long House. The belt may be offered to them. I cannot take it."

The flitting cloud passed again over the face of St. Luc, but he did not
allow any change to show in his manner. He returned the splendid belt to
Dubois, who folded it carefully and put it back in the great knapsack.

"Doubtless you are right, Tayoga," he said. "I shall go to the Long
House with the belt, but meantime we thank you for the courtesy of
yourself and your friends. You have given us food when we were hungry,
and a Frenchman does not forget."

"The Onondagas keep the council fire in their valley, and the sachems
will gather there," said Tayoga.

"Where they will receive the belt of peace that I shall offer them,"
said St. Luc.

The Onondaga was silent. St. Luc, who had centered his attention upon
Tayoga, now turned it to Robert.

"Mr. Lennox," he said, "we dwell in a world of alarms, and I am French
and you are English, or rather American, but I wish that you and I could
remain friends."

The frankness and obvious sincerity of his tone surprised Robert. He
knew now that he liked the man. He felt that there was steel in his
composition, and that upon occasion, and in the service to which he
belonged, he could be hard and merciless, but the spirit seemed bright
and gallant.

"I know nothing that will keep us from being friends," replied the lad,
although he knew well what the Frenchman meant.

"Nor do I," said St. Luc. "It was merely a casual reference to the
changes that affect us all. I shall come to Albany some day, Mr. Lennox.
It is an interesting town, though perhaps somewhat staid and sober."

"If you come," said Robert sincerely, "I hope I shall be there, and it
would please me to have you as a guest."

St. Luc gave him a sharp, examining look.

"I believe you mean it," he said. "It's possible that you and I are
going to see much of each other. One can never tell what meetings time
will bring about. And now having accepted your hospitality and thanking
you for it, we must go."

He rose. Dubois, who had not spoken at all, threw over his shoulder the
heavy knapsack, and the Ojibway also stood up, gigantic and sinister.

"We go to the Vale of Onondaga," said St. Luc, turning his attention
back to Tayoga, "and as you advised I shall lay the peace belt before
the fifty sachems of the Hodenosaunee, assembled in council in the Long
House."

"Go to the southwest," said Tayoga, "and you will find the great trail
that leads from the Hudson to the mighty lakes of the west. The warriors
of the Hodenosaunee have trod it for generations, and it is open to the
son of Onontio."

The young Indian's face was a mask, but his words and their tone alike
were polite and dignified. St. Luc bowed, and then bowed to the others
in turn.

"At Albany some day," he said to young Lennox, and his smile was very
winning.

"At Albany some day," repeated Robert, and he hoped the prophecy would
come true.

Then St. Luc turned away, followed by the Canadian, with the Indian in
the rear. None of the three looked back and the last Robert saw of them
was a fugitive gleam of the chevalier's white uniform through the green
leaves of the forest. Then the mighty wilderness swallowed them up, as a
pebble is lost in a lake. Robert looked awhile in the direction in which
they had gone, still seeing them in fancy.

"How much does their presence here signify?" he asked thoughtfully.

"They would have the Hodenosaunee to forget Frontenac," replied Tayoga.

"And will the Six Nations forget him?"

"The fifty sachems in council alone can tell."

Robert saw that the young Onondaga would not commit himself, even to
him, and he did not ask anything more, but the hunter spoke plainly.

"We must wake up those fat Indian commissioners at Albany," he said.
"Those Dutchmen think more of cheating the tribes than they do of the
good of either white man or red man, but I can tell you, Robert, and you
too, Tayoga, that I'm worried about that Frenchman coming down here
among the Six Nations. He's as sharp as a razor, and as quick as
lightning. I could see that, and there's mischief brewing. He's not
going to the Onondaga Valley for nothing."

"Tandakora, the Ojibway, goes with a heavy foot," said the Onondaga.

"What do you mean, Tayoga?" asked Willet.

"He comes of a savage tribe, which is hostile to the Hodenosaunee and
all white men. He has seen three scalps which still grow on the heads of
their owners."

"Which means that he might not keep on following St. Luc. Well, we'll be
on our guard and now I don't see any reason why we should stay here
longer."

"Nor I," said Robert, and, Tayoga agreeing with them, they returned the
canoe to the stream, paddling back into the lake, and continuing their
course until they came to its end. There they carried the canoe across a
portage and launched it on a second lake as beautiful as the first. None
of the three spoke much now, their minds being filled with thoughts of
St. Luc and his companions.

They were yet on the water when the day began to wane. The green forest
on the high western shore was touched with flame from the setting sun.
Then the surface of the lake blazed with red light, and in the east the
gray of twilight came.

"It will be night in half an hour," said Robert, "and I think we'd
better make a landing, and camp."

"Here's a cove on the right," said Willet. "We'll take the canoe up
among the trees, and wrap ourselves in our blankets. It's a good thing
we have them, as the darkness is going to bring a chill with it."

They found good shelter among the trees and bushes, a small hollow
protected by great trees and undergrowth, into which they carried the
canoe.

"Since it's not raining this is as good as a house for us," said Willet.

"I think it's better," said Robert. "The odor of spruce and hemlock is
so wonderful I wouldn't like to have it shut away from me by walls."

The Onondaga drew in deep inhalations of the pure, healing air, and as
his black eyes gleamed he walked to the edge of the little hollow and
looked out in the dusk over the vast tangled wilderness of mountain and
lake, forest and river. The twilight was still infused with the red from
the setting sun, and in the glow the whole world was luminous and
glorified. Now the eyes of Tayoga, which had flashed but lately, gave
back the glow in a steady flame.

"Hawenneyu, the Divine Being whom all the red people worship, made many
great lands," he said, "but he spent his work and love upon that which
lies between the Hudson and the vast lakes of the west. Then he rested
and looking upon what he had done he was satisfied because he knew it to
be the best in all the world, created by him."

"How do you know it to be the best, Tayoga?" asked Willet. "You haven't
seen all the countries. You haven't been across the sea."

"Because none other can be so good," replied the Iroquois with simple
faith. "When Hawenneyu, in your language the Great Spirit, found the
land that he had made so good he did not know then to whom to give it,
but in the greatness of his wisdom he left it to those who were most
fitted to come and take it. And in time came the tribes which Tododaho,
helped by Hayowentha, often called by the English Hiawatha, formed into
the great League of the Hodenosaunee, and because they were brave and
far-seeing and abided by the laws of Tododaho and Hayowentha, they took
the land which they have kept ever since, and which they will keep
forever."

"I like your good, strong beliefs, Tayoga," said the hunter heartily.
"The country does belong to the Iroquois, and if it was left to me to
decide about it they'd keep it till the crack of doom. Now you boys roll
in your blankets. I'll take the first watch, and when it's over I'll
call one of you."

But Tayoga waited a little until the last glow of the sun died in the
west, looking intently where the great orb had shone. Into his religion
a reverence for the sun, Giver of Light and Warmth, entered, and not
until the last faint radiance from it was gone did he turn away.

Then he took from the canoe and unfolded _eyose_, his blanket, which was
made of fine blue broadcloth, thick and warm but light, six feet long
and four feet wide. It was embroidered around the edges with another
cloth in darker blue, and the body of it bore many warlike or hunting
designs worked skillfully in thread. If the weather were cold Tayoga
would drape the blanket about his body much like a Roman toga, and if he
lay in the forest at night he would sleep in it. Now he raked dead
leaves together, spread the blanket on them, lay on one half of it and
used the other half as a cover.

Robert imitated him, but his blanket was not so fine as Tayoga's,
although he found it soft and warm enough. Willet sat on a log higher
up, his rifle across his knees and gazed humorously at them.

"You two lads look pretty snug down there," he said, "and after all
you're only lads. Tayoga may have a head plumb full of the wisdom of the
wilderness, and Robert may have a head stuffed with different kinds of
knowledge, but you're young, mighty young, anyhow. An' now, as I'm
watching over you, I'll give a prize to the one that goes to sleep
first."

In three minutes deep regular breathing showed that both had gone to the
land of slumber, and Willet could not decide which had led the way. The
darkness increased so much that their figures looked dim in the hollow,
but he glanced at them occasionally. The big man had many friends, but
young Lennox and Tayoga were almost like sons to him, and he was glad to
be with them now. He felt that danger lurked in the northern wilderness,
and three were better than two.




CHAPTER III

THE TOMAHAWK


Willet awakened Robert about two o'clock in the morning--it was
characteristic of him to take more than his share of the work--and the
youth stood up, with his rifle in the hollow of his arm, ready at once.

"Tayoga did more yesterday than either of us," said the hunter, "and so
we'll let him sleep."

But the Onondago had awakened, though he did not move. Forest discipline
was perfect among them, and, knowing that it was Robert's time to watch,
he wasted no time in vain talk about it. His eyes closed again and he
returned to sleep as the white lad walked up the bank, while the hunter
was soon in the dreams that Tarenyawagon, who makes them, sent to him.

Robert on the bank, although he expected no danger, was alert. He had
