
       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON VII.


craft, _ship; a boat of any kind_.

mew'ing, _crying, like a cat_.

a dopt'ed, _received as one's own_.

ad mir'er, _one who likes another_.

voy'age, _journey by water_.

dain'ty, _nice in form or taste_.

a loft', _on high; in the air_.

wind'ward, _the point from which the wind blows_.

star'board, _the right-hand side of a ship_.

bruised, _injured, hurt_.


       *       *       *       *       *




OUR SAILOR CAT.


She was a sailor cat, indeed, and it was a sailor who first brought her
on board.

Our steamer was lying at her pier in the North River, at New York,
taking in cargo.

One of our men, who had been ashore, came back with a little
gray-and-white kitten in his arms. She was very poor and thin, and her
little furry coat was sadly soiled with dirt and grease.

But she had not lost all her fun, for she was making play with her tiny
fore-paws at the ends of the sailor's red beard, to honest Jack's great
delight.

"Where did you pick that up, Jack?" asked the third officer.

"Well, your honor," said Jack Harmon, touching his cap with a grin,
"seems to me she must have left her ship and gone to look for another,
for I found her tramping along the pier there, and mewing as if she was
calling out for somebody to show her the road.

"So I thought that, as we have many rats aboard the old craft, she would
be able to pick up a good living there; and I called to her, and she
came at once, and here she is."

Here she was, sure enough; and as Jack ended his story, she chimed in
with a plaintive little "Me-ow," which said, as plainly as ever any cat
spoke yet, "I'm very cold and hungry, and I do wish somebody would take
me below and give me some food!"

She had not long to wait. Half an hour later she was the best-fed cat in
that part of New York City, and that night she lay snugly curled up with
a good warm blanket over her.

Of course, the first thing to do with an adopted cat is to give it a
name, and Jack Harmon, who was a bit of a wag in his way, and a great
admirer of the monster elephant which was just then making such a stir
in New York, called his new pet "Jumbo."

Jumbo soon became the pet of the whole crew, and of the passengers, too,
when they came on board, a few days later, for the voyage back to
England.

Before we were half-way across the ocean, the bits of meat or cake, and
bits of white bread soaked in milk, which were being constantly given
her by one and another, had made her look as round as an apple.

The ladies were never tired of stroking her soft fur and admiring her
dainty white paws, which were now as spotless as snow. The children
romped all day with this new playmate, who seemed to enjoy the sport
quite as much as themselves.

But Jumbo was not content with mere play. She seemed to think herself
bound to do something to "work her passage." Whenever any of the crew
went aloft to take in sail, Jumbo would always climb up, too, as if to
help them.

Jack Harmon was still her favorite, and whenever it came his turn to
stand at the bow and keep watch, there was Jumbo going backward and
forward.

On the eighth night of the voyage, the stars looked dim and
watery, and a low bank of clouds began to rise to windward of us, just
between sea and sky.

The old sailors shook their heads and looked grave, as if they expected
an unusual storm. Suddenly the wind began to blow strongly upon the
starboard quarter, stirring up a cross-sea which tossed the great ship
like a toy.

Nearly all the passengers had gone below, and the few who remained on
deck buttoned their water-proof coats, and held tightly on by any thing
they could seize.

Jack Harmon had shut up his cat below, but poor puss escaped somehow,
for all at once a shrill cry was heard, and there was Jumbo clinging to
a rail, with a great mountain of a wave coming right down upon her.

Several men sprang toward the spot, but Jack was foremost, and he had
just reached his little pet when down came the great wave upon them
both.

Instantly the whole after-deck was one roaring, foaming waterfall, the
flying spray of which blinded one for a moment. But when it cleared,
there stood our brave Jack--dripping, bruised, and bleeding from a cut
on the head.

But his little favorite was safe in his arms, and as he came back with
her, such a cheer went up from all who were on deck, as the old ship had
not heard for many a day.

"Let's send round the hat for him," said one of the passengers.

And the hat was sent around, so successfully that Jack got enough money
to give his poor old mother a happy Christmas, and still have something
left over for himself and Jumbo, who was his mother's pet ever after.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Should this lesson be read with the same tone
of voice as Lessons V. and VI.?

In the first paragraph, do not say _pier rin_ for _pier in; dir' tand_
for _dirt and_.

Point out two other places in the lesson where mistakes similar to those
just given might occur.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark the sounds of letters in
the following words: _cargo, officer, blanket, passengers, instantly,
bleeding_.

_Work her passage_ means to pay her fare by making herself useful.

Make out an _analysis_ in six parts for this lesson, and use it in
telling the story in your own words.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON VIII.


loi'ter ing, _going slowly, lingering_.

pro tect'or, _one who keeps another from harm_.

throng'ing, _gathering in large numbers_.

wrecked, _dashed to pieces_.

thatched, _covered with straw or twigs_.

bronzed, _brown, darked-colored_.

bleach'ing, _whitening_.

van'ished, _gone out of sight; departed suddenly_.

rapt'ure, _great joy; delight_.


       *       *       *       *       *




RESCUED.


  "Little lad, slow wandering across the sands so yellow,
  Leading safe a lassie small--O tell me, little fellow,
  Whither go you, loitering in the summer weather,
  Chattering like sweet-voiced birds on a bough together?"

  "I am Robert, if you please, and this is Rose, my sister,
  Youngest of us all"--he bent his curly head and kissed her,
  "Every day we come and wait here till the sun is setting,
  Watching for our father's ship, for mother dear is fretting.

  "Long ago he sailed away, out of sight and hearing,
  Straight across the bay he went, into sunset steering.
  Every day we look for him, and hope for his returning,
  Every night my mother keeps the candle for him burning.

  "Summer goes, and winter comes, and spring returns but never
  Father's step comes to the gate. O, is he gone forever?
  The great, grand ship that bore him off, think you some tempest wrecked her?"
  Tears shone in little Rose's eyes, upturned to her protector.

  Eagerly the bonny boy went on: "O, sir, look yonder!
  In the offing see the sails that east and westward wander;
  Every hour they come and go, the misty distance thronging.
  While we watch and see them fade, with sorrow and with longing."

  "Little Robert, little Rose!" The stranger's eyes were glistening
  At his bronzed and bearded face, upgazed the children, listening;
  He knelt upon the yellow sand, and clasped them to his bosom,
  Robert brave, and little  Rose, as bright as any blossom.

  "Father, father! Is it you?" The still air rings with rapture;
  All the vanished joy of years the waiting ones recapture!
  Finds he welcome wild and sweet, the low-thatched cottage reaching,
  But the ship that into sunset steered, upon the rocks lies bleaching.

[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Read the conversational parts of this poem
like conversation in prose.

Point out the _emphatic words_ in the first line of the last stanza.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--_Into sunset steering_, means sailing westward.

_The misty distance thronging_, means gathering together in the
distance.

_The still air rings with rapture_, means that the air becomes full of
joyful shouts.

_All the vanished joy of years the waiting ones recapture_, means that
the children regain the happiness lost during their father's absence.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON IX.


impos'ing, _grand looking; of great size_.

glar'ing, _fierce looking_.

lim'its, _space_.

e nor'mous, _very large; huge_.

start'led, _suddenly alarmed; surprised_.

au'dible, _that may be heard_.

maj'esty, _greatness; nobility_.

increas'ing, _growing larger_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE LION.


There is, in the appearance of the lion, something both noble and
imposing. Nature has given him wonderful strength and beauty.

His body, when full grown, is only about seven feet long and less than
four feet high; but his large and shapely head, with its powerful jaws,
his glaring eye, and long, flowing mane, give him an air of majesty that
shows him worthy of the name--"King of Beasts."

Yet we are told that a lion will not willingly attack man, unless first
attacked himself or driven by hunger to forget his habits.

On meeting man suddenly, he will turn, retreat slowly for a short
distance, and then run away.

The lion belongs to the cat family, and his teeth and claws are similar
in form and action to those of the house cat.

His food is the flesh of animals; and so great is his appetite, that it
must require several thousand other animals to supply one lion with food
during his life-time.

His strength is so enormous that he can crush the skull of an ox with a
single blow of his powerful paw, and then grasp it in his jaws and bound
away.

Unless driven by hunger to bolder measures, he will hide in the bushes,
or in the tall reeds along the banks of rivers, and spring suddenly upon
the unlucky animal that chances to come near him.

Many lions have been captured, and their habits and appearance carefully
studied. Although there is a difference in color--some being of a
yellowish brown, others of a deep red, and a few silvery gray--the
general form and appearance of all lions is the same.

The mane is of a dark brown, or of a dusky color, and the tail nearly
three feet long, with a bunch of hair at the tip.

The lioness, or female lion, is smaller in every way than the male and
has no mane.

It is in the night-time that the lion goes out from his den to seek for
food, and his color is so dark and his movements so silent, that his
presence is not known even at the distance of a few yards.

These dangerous beasts are no longer found in Europe, although they
lived there in numbers many hundred years ago. It is only in the deserts
and rocky hills of Asia and Africa that they are met with.

Those who have visited a menagerie, and have seen a lion within the
limits of a narrow iron cage, can form no idea of the majesty of the
brute when roaming about freely on his native soil.

The voice of the lion is loud and strong. It is likely to strike terror
to the bravest heart.

"It consists," says a well-known writer, "at times of a low, deep
moaning, repeated five or six times, and ending in scarcely audible
sighs; at other times, the forest is startled with loud, deep-toned,
solemn roars, increasing in loudness to the third or fourth, and then
dying away in sounds like distant thunder."


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--This lesson should be read a little more
slowly than conversation. When we wish to describe any thing, we must
give time for those who listen to us to get the meaning of what we say.

Do not run the words together when reading. (See Directions for Reading,
page 42.)[03]

Example.--"There is, in the appearance of the lion, something both
noble and imposing."


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark sounds of letters in the
following words: _meeting, require, Europe, idea, terror, measures,
unlucky, narrow, bolder_.

_Air of majesty_ means the noble appearance supposed to belong to
kings.


[03] See Lesson VII.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON X.


ar ti fi' cial, _not real; made by human skill_.

ex er'tion, _great effort; attempt_.

destroyed', _killed; put an end to_.

cleansed, _cleaned; freed from dirt_.

sit u a'tion, _position_.

fa'mous, _much talked of; well known_.

fre'quent ly, _often_.

in'ci dent, _adventure; event_.

nar rat'ed, _told_.

hurled, _thrown with force_.

stu'por, _sleepy feeling_.


       *       *       *       *       *




ADVENTURE WITH A LION.


The dangers of lion-hunting may be understood from the following
incident, narrated by Livingstone, the famous African traveler:

"The villagers among whom I was staying were much troubled by lions,
which leaped into their cattle-pens and destroyed their cows.

"As I knew well that, if one of a number of lions is killed, the others
frequently take the hint and leave that part of the country, I gave the
villagers advice to that end, and, to encourage them, offered to lead
the hunt.

"The lions were found hiding among the rocks on a hill covered with
trees, and about a quarter of a mile in length. The men circled the
hill, and slowly edged in closer and closer, so that the lions might be
