that was reposing on the hooks over his bed in his father's house. "I'd
make you cry for something," he said to himself, looking at the largest
of the panthers.

The animals lingered, glaring at the boys and the fire with great red
eyes, and presently Henry, doing as he had done on a former occasion,
picked up a blazing torch and, shouting, rushed at them.

The panthers sprang headlong through the undergrowth, in their eagerness
to get away from the terrible flaming vision that was darting down upon
them. Their flight was so quick that they disappeared in an instant and
Henry knew they would not venture near the site of the fire again in a
long time. He turned back and found Paul surprised and alarmed standing
erect and rubbing his eyes.

"Why--why--what's the matter?" cried Paul.

"Oh, it's nothing," replied Henry.

Then he told about the panthers. Paul did not know as much as Henry
concerning panthers and the affair got on his nerves. The lonely and
vast grandeur of the wilderness did not have the attraction for him that
it had for his comrade, and he wished again for the strong log walls and
comfortable roofs of Wareville. But Henry reassured him. The testimony
of the hunters about the timidity of wild beasts was unanimous and he
need have no fears. So Paul went to sleep again, but Henry lingered as
before.

He threw fresh fuel on the fire. Then he lay down again and gradually
weary nature became the master of him. The woods grew dim, and faded
away, the fire vanished and he was in slumberland.

When Henry awoke it was because some one was tugging at his shoulder. He
knew now that the Indian warriors had come across the Ohio, and had
seized him, and he sprang up ready to make a fierce resistance.

"Don't fight, Henry! It's me--Paul!" cried a boyish voice, and Henry
letting his muscles relax rubbed the sleep out of his eyes. It was Paul
sure enough standing beside him, and the sun again was high up in the
heavens. The fire was still burning, though it had died down somewhat.

"Oh, my breakfast!" cried Henry as he felt a sudden pang.

"Come, let's see if we're going to have any," said Paul, and off they
went to their snares. The first had not been touched, nor had the
second. The bait was gone from the third, and the loop sprung, but there
was nothing in it. The hearts of the boys sank and they thought again of
wild plums and blackberries which were but a light diet. But when they
came to the fourth snare their triumph was complete. A fat rabbit,
caught in the loop, was hanging by the neck, beside the bush.

"It's lucky the forest is so full of game that some of it falls into our
trap," said Henry.

They cooked the rabbit, and again they were so hungry that they ate it
all. Then they improvised new fishing tackle and both boys began to
fish. They knew that they must devote their whole time to this problem
of food, and they decided, for the present, not to leave the creek. They
were afraid to renew the search for Wareville, lest they wander deeper
into the wilderness, and moreover lose the way to the creek which seemed
to be the surest source of food. So they would stay a while where they
were, and keep their fire burning high as a signal to searchers.

Either the fish had learned that the curiously shaped thing with the
tempting bait upon it was dangerous, or they had gone to visit friends
in distant parts of the creek, for, at least two hours passed, without
either boy getting a bite. When the fish did lay hold it was usually to
slip again from the rude hook, and it was at least another hour before
they caught a fish. It was Paul who achieved the feat, and it repaid him
for being asleep when the panthers came, a matter that had lain upon his
mind somewhat.

They persisted in this work until Henry also made a catch and then they
gathered more plums and berries. They dug up, too, the root of the
Indian turnip, an herb that burnt the mouth like fire, but which Henry
said they could use, after soaking it a long time in water. Then they
discussed the matter of the fish trap which they thought they could make
in a day's work. This would relieve them of much toil, but they deferred
its beginning until the morrow, and used the rest of the day in making
two more snares for rabbits.

Paul now suggested that they accumulate as much food as possible, cook
it and putting it on their backs follow the creek to its mouth. He had
no doubt that it emptied into the river that flowed by Wareville and
then by following the stream, if his surmise was right, they could reach
home again. It was a plausible theory and Henry agreed with him.
Meanwhile they built their fire high again and lay down for another
night's rest in the woods. The next day they devoted to the fish trap
which was successfully completed, and put in the river, and then they
took their places on the turf for the third night beside the camp fire.

The day, like its predecessor, had been close and hot. All traces of the
great rain were gone. Forest and earth were again as dry as tinder. They
refreshed themselves with a swim in the creek just before lying down to
sleep, but they were soon panting with the heat. It seemed to hang in
heavy clouds, and the forest shut out any fresh air that might be moving
high up.

Despite the great heat the boys had built the fire as high as usual,
because they knew that the search for them would never cease so long as
there was a hope of success, and they thought that the signal should not
be lacking. But now they moved away from it and into the shadow of the
woods.

"If only the wind would blow!" said Henry.

"And I'd be willing to stand a rain like the one in which we got lost,"
said Paul.

But neither rain nor wind came, and after a while they fell asleep.
Henry was awakened at an unknown hour of the night by a roaring in his
ears, and at first he believed that Paul was about to have his storm.
Then he was dazzled by a great rush of light in his eyes, and he sprang
to his feet in sudden alarm.

"Up, Paul!" he cried, grasping his comrade by the shoulder. "The woods
are on fire!"

Paul was on his feet in an instant, and the two were just in time.
Sparks flew in their faces and the flames twisting into pyramids and
columns leaped from tree to tree with a sound like thunder as they came.
Boughs, burnt through, fell to the ground with a crash. The sparks rose
in millions.

The boys had slept in their clothes or rather what was left of them,
and, grasping each other's hands, they ran at full speed toward the
creek, with the great fire roaring and rushing after them. Henry looked
back once but the sight terrified him and the sparks scorched his face.
He knew that the conflagration had been set by their own bonfire, fanned
by a rising wind as they slept, but it was no time to lament. The rush
and sweep of the flames, feeding upon the dry forest and gathering
strength as they came, was terrific. It was indeed like the thunder of a
storm in the ears of the frightened boys, and they fairly skimmed over
the ground in the effort to escape the red pursuer. They could feel its
hot breath on their necks, while the smoke and the sparks flew over
their heads. They dashed into the creek, and each dived down under the
water which felt so cool and refreshing.

"Let's stay here," said Paul, who enjoyed the present.

"We can't think of such a thing," replied Henry. "This creek won't stop
that fire half a minute!"

A fire in a sun-dried Western forest is a terrible thing. It rushes on
at a gallop, roaring and crackling like the battle-front of an army, and
destroying everything that lies before it. It leaves but blackened
stumps and charred logs behind, and it stops only when there is no
longer food for it to devour.

The boys sprang out of the creek and ran up the hill. Henry paused a
moment at its crest, and looked back again. The aspect of the fire was
more frightful than ever. The flames leaped higher than the tops of the
tallest trees, and thrust out long red twining arms, like coiling
serpents. Beneath was the solid red bank of the conflagration, preceded
by showers of ashes and smoke and sparks. The roar increased and was
like that of many great guns in battle.

"Paul!" exclaimed Henry seizing his comrade's hand again. "We've got to
run, as we've never run before! It's for our lives now!"

It was in good truth for their lives, and bending low their heads, the
two boys, hand in hand, raced through the forest, with the ruthless
pursuer thundering after them. Henry as he ran, glanced back once more
and saw that the fire was gaining upon them. The serpents of flame were
coming nearer and nearer and the sparks flew over their heads in greater
showers. Paul was panting, and being the younger and smaller of the two
his strength was now failing. Henry felt his comrade dragging upon his
hand. If he freed himself from Paul's grasp he could run faster, but he
remembered his silent resolve to take Paul back to his people. Even were
it not for those others at Wareville he could never desert his friend at
such a moment. So he pulled on Paul's hand to hasten his speed, and
together the boys went on.

The two noticed presently that they were not alone in their flight, a
circumstance that had escaped them in the first hurry and confusion.
Deer and rabbits, too, flew before the hurricane of fire. The deer were
in a panic of terror, and a great stag ran for a few moments beside the
boys, not noticing them, or, in his fear of greater evil, having no fear
of human beings who were involved in the same danger. Three or four
buffaloes, too, presently joined the frightened herd of game, one, a
great bull running with head down and blowing steam from his nostrils.

Paul suddenly sank to his knees and gasped:

"I can't go on! Let me stay here and you save yourself, Henry!"

Henry looked back at the great fiery wall that swept over the ground,
roaring like a storm. It was very near now and the smoke almost blinded
him. A boy with a spirit less stanch than his might well have fled in a
panic, leaving his companion to his death. But the nearer the danger
came the more resolute Henry grew. He saw, too, that he must sting Paul
into renewed action.

"Get up!" he exclaimed, and he jerked the fainting boy to his feet.
Then, snatching a stick, he struck Paul several smart blows on his back.
Paul cried out with the sudden pain, and, stimulated by it into physical
action, began to run with renewed speed.

"That's right, Paul!" cried Henry, dropping his stick and seizing his
comrade again by the hand. "One more big try and we'll get away! Just
over this hill here it's open ground, and the fire will have to stop!"

It was a guess, only made to encourage Paul, and Henry had small hope
that it would come true, but when they reached the brow of the hill both
uttered a shout of delight. There was no forest for perhaps a quarter of
a mile beyond, and down the center of the open glittered a silver streak
that meant running water.

Henry was so joyous that he cried out again.

"See, Paul! See!" he exclaimed. "Here's safety! Now we'll run!"

How they did run! The sight gave them new strength. They shot out of
that terrible forest and across the short dry grass, burnt brown by late
summer days, running for life toward the flowing water. They did not
stop to notice the size of the stream, but plunged at once into its
current.

Henry sank with a mighty splash, and went down, down, it seemed to him,
a mile. Then his feet touched a hard, rocky bottom, and he shot back to
the surface, spluttering and blowing the water out of eyes, mouth and
nostrils. A brown head was bobbing beside him. He seized it by the hair,
pulled it up, and disclosed the features of Paul, his comrade. Paul,
too, began to splutter and at the same time to try to swim.

Splash!

A heavy body struck the water beside them with a thud too great for that
of a man. It was the stag leaping also for safety and he began to swim
about, looking at the boys with great pathetic eyes, as if he would ask
them what he ought to do next for his life. Apparently his fear of
mankind had passed for the moment. They were bound together by the
community of danger.

Splash! Splash! Splash!

The water resounded like the beating of a bass drum. Three more deer, a
buffalo, and any number of smaller game sprang into the stream, and
remained there swimming or wading.

"Here, Paul! Here's a bar that we can stand on," said Henry who had
found a footing. At the same time he grasped Paul by the wrist, and drew
him to the bar. There they stood in the water to their necks, and
watched the great fire as it divided at the little prairie, and swept
around them, passing to left and right. It was a grim sight. All the
heavens seemed ablaze, and the clouds of smoke were suffocating. Even
there in the river the heat was most oppressive, and at times the faces
of the boys were almost scorched. Then they would thrust their heads
under the water, and keep them there as long as they could hold their
breath, coming up again greatly refreshed. The wild game clustered near
in common terror.

"It's a lucky thing for us the river and prairie are here," said Henry.
"Another half mile and we'd have been ashes."

Paul was giving thanks under his breath, and watching the fire with
awe-stricken eyes. It swept past them and rushed on, in a great red
cloud, that ate all in its path and gave forth much noise.

It was now on the far side of the prairie, and soon began to grow
smaller in the distance. Yet so great was the wall of fire that it was
long in sight, dying at last in a red band under the horizon. Even then
all the skies were still filled with drifting smoke and ashes.

The boys looked back at the path over which they had come, and although
the joy of escape was still upon them it was with real grief that they
beheld the stricken forest, lately so grand a sight. It was now but a
desolate and blackened ruin. Here and there charred trunks stood like
the chimneys of burned houses, and others lay upon the ground like
fallen and smoking rafters. Scattered about were great beds of living
coals, where the brush had been thickest, and smoke rose in columns from
the burned grass and hot earth. It was all like some great temple
destroyed by fire; and such it was, the grandest of all temples, the
natural temple of the forest.

"We kindled that fire," said Paul.

"I guess we did," responded Henry, "but we didn't know our spark would
grow into so great a blaze."

They swam to the bank and walked toward the remains of the forest. But
the ground was still hot to their feet, and the smoke troubled them.
Near the edge of the wood they found a deer still alive and with a
broken leg, tripped in its panic-stricken flight or struck by a fallen
tree. Henry approached cautiously and slew him with his clasp knife. He
felt strong pity as the fallen animal looked at him with great mournful
eyes, but they were two hungry boys, and they must have a food supply if
they would live in the woods.

They cleaned and dressed the deer and found that the carcass was as much
as they could carry. But with great toil they lifted it over the hot
ground, and then across another little prairie, until they came to woods
only partially burned. There they hung the body to the bough of a tree,
out of the reach of beasts of prey.

Then they took thought for the future. Barring the deer which would last
some time they would now have to begin all over again, but they resolved
to spend the rest of the present day, there under the shade of the
trees. They were too much exhausted with exertion and excitement to
undertake any new risk just yet.

Paul was afflicted with a great longing for home that afternoon. The
fire and their narrow escape were still on his nerves. His muscular
fiber was not so enduring as that of Henry, and the wilderness did not
make so keen an appeal to him. Their hardships were beginning to weigh
upon him and he thought all the time of Wareville, and the comfortable
little log houses and the certain and easy supplies of food. Henry knew
what was on his comrade's mind but he did not upbraid him for weakness
of spirit. He, too, had memories of Wareville, and he pitied the grief
of their people who must now be mourning them as lost forever. But he
had been thinking long and hard and he had a plan. Finally he announced
to Paul that they would build a raft.

"I believe this is the same river that runs by Wareville," he said. "I
never heard Ross or Shif'less Sol or any of the men speak of another
river, near enough for us to have reached it, since we've been wandering
around. So it must be the same. Now either we are above Wareville or we
are below it. We've got to guess at that and take the risk of it. We can
roll a lot of the logs and timber into the river, tie 'em together, and
float with the stream until we come to Wareville."

"But if we never come to it?" asked Paul.

"Then all we have to do is to get off the raft and follow the river back
up the bank. Then we are sure to reach home."

This was so plausible that Paul was full of enthusiasm and they decided
that they would set to work on the raft early in the morning.




CHAPTER IV

THE HAUNTED FOREST


As the two boys sat before their camp fire that night, after making
their plan, they were far from feeling gloomy. Another revulsion had
come. Safe, for the moment, after their recent run for life, it seemed
to them that they were safe for all time. They were rested, they had
eaten good food in plenty, and the fire was long since but a dim red
blur on the horizon. Ashes, picked up by wandering puffs of wind, still
floated here and there among the burned tree trunks, and now and then a
shower of sparks burst forth, as a bough into which the flames had eaten
deep, broke and fell to the ground; but fear had gone from the lads,
and, in its place, came a deep content. They were used to the forest,
and in the company of each other they felt neither loneliness nor
despair.

"It's good here," said Paul who was a reader and a philosopher. "I guess
a fellow's life looks best to him just after he's thought he was going
to lose it, but didn't."

"I think that's true," said Henry, glancing toward the far horizon,
where the red blur still showed under the twilight. "But that was just a
little too close for fun."

But his satisfaction was even deeper than Paul's. The wilderness and its
ways made a stronger appeal to him. Paul, without Henry, would have felt
loneliness and fear, but Henry alone, would have faced the night
undaunted. Already the great forest was putting upon him its magic
spell.

"Have you eaten enough, Paul?" he asked.

"I should like to eat more, but I'm afraid I can't find a place for it,"
replied Paul ruefully.

Henry laughed. He felt himself more than ever Paul's protector and
regarded all his weaknesses with kindly tolerance. There the two lay
awhile, stretched out on the soft, warm earth, watching the twilight
deepen into night. Henry was listening to the voice of the wilderness,
which spoke to him in such pleasant tones. He heard a faint sighing,
like some one lightly plucking the strings of a guitar, and he knew that
it was the wandering breeze among the burned boughs; he heard now and
then a distant thud, and he knew that it was the fall of a tree, into
whose trunk the flames had bit deeply; as he lay with his ear to the
earth he heard more than once a furtive footfall as light as air, and he
knew that some wild animal was passing. But he had no fear, the fire was
a ring of steel about them.

Paul heard few of these sounds, or if hearing them he paid no heed. The
wilderness was not talking to him. He was merely in the woods and he was
very glad indeed to have his strong and faithful comrade beside him.

The twilight slipped away and the night came, thick and dark. The red
blur lingered, but the faintest line of pink under the dark horizon, and
the scorched tree trunks that curved like columns in a circle around
them became misty and unreal. Despite himself Paul began to feel a
little fear. He was a brave boy, but this was the wilderness, the
wilderness in the dark, peopled by wild animals and perhaps by wilder
men, and they were lost in it. He moved a little closer to his comrade.
But Henry, into whose mind no such thoughts had come, rose presently,
and heaped more wood on the fire. He was merely taking an ordinary
precaution, and this little task finished, he spoke to Paul in a vein of
humor, purposely making his words sound very big.

"Mr. Cotter," he said, "it seems to me that two worthy gentlemen like
ourselves who have had a day of hard toil should retire for the night,
and seek the rest that we deserve."

"What you say is certainly true, Mr. Ware," responded Paul who had a
lively fancy, "and I am glad to see that we have happened upon an inn,
