saw, as we rode hither, that you are already excellently mounted.
Still, Victor, that is his name, shall be at your disposal. A
second horse is always useful, for shot and arrows no more spare a
horse than his rider."

The stables were large and well ordered for, during the past two
months, there had been large additions made by the countess, in
view of the expected troubles.

"This is my charger. I call him Rollo. He was bred on the estate
and, when I am upon him, I feel that the king is not better
mounted."

"He is a splendid animal, indeed," Philip said, as Rollo tossed his
head, and whinnied with pleasure at his master's approach.

"He can do anything but talk," Francois said, as he patted him. "He
will lie down when I tell him, will come to my whistle and, with
the reins lying loose on his neck, will obey my voice as readily as
he would my hand.

"This is my second horse, Pluto. He is the equal of Rollo in
strength and speed, but not so docile and obedient, and he has a
temper of his own."

"He looks it," Philip agreed. "I should keep well out of reach of
his heels and jaws."

"He is quiet enough when I am on his back," Francois laughed; "but
I own that he is the terror of the stable boys.

"This is Victor. He is not quite as handsome as Rollo, but he has
speed and courage and good manners."

"He is a beautiful creature," Philip said enthusiastically. "I was
very well satisfied with my purchase, but he will not show to
advantage by the side of Victor."

"Ah, I see they have put him in the next stall," Francois said.

"He is a fine animal, too," he went on, after examining the horse
closely. "He comes from Gascony, I should say. He has signs of
Spanish blood."

"Yes, from Gascony or Navarre. I was very fortunate in getting
him," and he related how the animal had been left at La Rochelle.

"You got him for less than half his value, Philip. What are you
going to call him?"

"I shall call him Robin. That was the name of my favourite horse,
at home.

"I see you have got some stout animals in the other stalls, though
of course they are of a very different quality to your own."

"Yes; many of them are new purchases. We have taken on thirty
men-at-arms; stout fellows, old soldiers all, whom my mother will
send into the field if we come to blows. Besides these there will
be some twenty of our tenants. We could have raised the whole
number among them, had we chosen; for if we called up the full
strength of the estate, and put all bound to service in the field
in war time, we could turn out fully three hundred; but of these
well-nigh a third are Catholics, and could not in any way be relied
on, nor would it be just to call upon them to fight against their
co-religionists. Again, it would not do to call out all our
Huguenot tenants; for this would leave their wives and families and
homes and property, to say nothing of the chateau, at the mercy of
the Catholics while they were away. I do not think that our
Catholic tenants would interfere with them, still less with the
chateau; for our family have ever been good masters, and my mother
is loved by men of both parties. Still, bands might come from other
districts, or from the towns, to pillage or slay were the estate
left without fighting men. Therefore, we have taken these
men-at-arms into our service, with twenty of our own tenants, all
young men belonging to large families; while the rest will remain
behind, as a guard for the estate and chateau; and as in all they
could muster some two hundred and fifty strong, and would be joined
by the other Huguenots of the district, they would not likely be
molested, unless one of the Catholic armies happened to come in
this direction.

"Directly I start with the troop, the younger sons of the tenants
will be called in to form a garrison here. We have five-and-thirty
names down, and there are twenty men capable of bearing arms among
the household, many of whom have seen service. Jacques Parold, our
seneschal, has been a valiant soldier in his time, and would make
the best of them; and my mother would assuredly keep our flag
flying till the last.

"I shall go away in comfort for, unless the Guises march this way,
there is little fear of trouble in our absence. We are fortunate in
this province. The parties are pretty evenly divided, and have a
mutual respect for each other. In districts where we are greatly
outnumbered, it is hard for fighting men to march away with the
possibility that, on their return, they will find their families
murdered and their homes levelled.

"Now we will take a turn round the grounds. Their beauty has been
sadly destroyed. You see, before the troubles seven years ago broke
out, there was a view from the windows on this side of the house
over the park and shrubberies; but at that time my father thought
it necessary to provide against sudden attacks, and therefore,
before he went away to the war, he had this wall with its flanking
towers erected. All the tenants came in and helped, and it was
built in five weeks time. It has, as you see, made the place safe
from a sudden attack, for on the other three sides the old defences
remain unaltered. It was on this side, only, that my grandfather
had the house modernized, believing that the days of civil war were
at an end.

"You see, this new wall forms a large quadrangle. We call it the
countess's garden, and my mother has done her best, by planting it
with shrubs and fast-growing trees, to make up for the loss of the
view she formerly had from the windows.

"Along one side you see there are storehouses, which are screened
from view by that bank of turf. They are all full, now, of grain.
There is a gate, as you see, opposite. In case of trouble cattle
will be driven in there, and the garden turned into a stockyard, so
that there is no fear of our being starved out."

"Fifty-five men are a small garrison for so large a place,
Francois."

"Yes, but that is only against a sudden surprise. In case of alarm,
the Protestant tenants would all come in with their wives and
families, and the best of their horses and cattle, and then there
will be force enough to defend the place against anything short of
a siege by an army. You see there is a moat runs all round. It is
full now on three sides, and there is a little stream runs down
from behind, which would fill the fourth side in a few hours.

"Tomorrow we will take a ride through the park, which lies beyond
that wall."

Entering the house, they passed through several stately apartments,
and then entered a large hall completely hung with arms and armour.

[Illustration: Philip and Francois in the armoury.]

"This is the grand hall, and you see it serves also the purpose of
a salle d'armes. Here we have arms and armour for a hundred men,
for although all the tenants are bound, by the terms of their
holding, to appear when called upon fully armed and accoutred, each
with so many men according to the size of his farm, there may well
be deficiencies; especially as, until the religious troubles began,
it was a great number of years since they had been called upon to
take the field. For the last eight years, however, they have been
trained and drilled; fifty at a time coming up, once a week. That
began two years before the last war, as my father always held that
it was absurd to take a number of men, wholly unaccustomed to the
use of arms, into the field. Agincourt taught that lesson to our
nobles, though it has been forgotten by most of them.

"We have two officers accustomed to drill and marshal men, and
these act as teachers here in the hall. The footmen practise with
pike and sword. They are exercised with arquebus and crossbow in
the park, and the mounted men are taught to manoeuvre and charge,
so that, in case of need, we can show a good face against any body
of troops of equal numbers. It is here I practise with my maitre
d'armes, and with Montpace and Bourdon, our two officers.

"Ah! Here is Charles, my maitre d'armes.

"Charles, this is my cousin Philip, who will also be a pupil of
yours while he remains here.

"What do you say, Philip? Will we try a bout with blunted swords
just now?"

"With pleasure," Philip said.

The art of fencing had not, at that time, reached the perfection it
afterwards attained. The swords used were long and straight, and
sharpened at both edges; and were used as much for cutting as
thrusting. In single combat on foot, long daggers were generally
held in the left hand, and were used for the purpose both of
guarding and of striking at close quarters.

They put on thick quilted doublets, and light helmets with visors.

"Do you use a dagger, Philip?"

"No, I have never seen one used in England. We are taught to guard
with our swords, as well as to strike with them."

"Monsieur has learned from English teachers?" the maitre d'armes
asked.

"I have had English teachers as well as French," Philip said. "We
all learn the use of the sword in England; but my uncle, Monsieur
Vaillant, has taken great pains in having me taught also by such
French professors of arms as lived in Canterbury, or happened to
pass through it; but I own that I prefer the English style of
fighting. We generally stand upright to our work, equally poised on
the two feet for advance or retreat; while you lean with the body
far forward and the arm outstretched, which seems to me to cripple
the movements."

"Yes, but it puts the body out of harm's way," Francois said.

"It is the arm's business to guard the body, Francois, and it is
impossible to strike a downright blow when leaning so far forward."

"We strike but little, nowadays, in single combat," the maitre
d'armes said. "The point is more effective."

"That is doubtless so, Maitre Charles," Philip agreed; "but I have
not learned fencing for the sake of fighting duels, but to be able
to take my part on a field of battle. The Spaniards are said to be
masters of the straight sword, and yet they have been roughly used
in the western seas by our sailors; who, methinks, always use the
edge."

The two now took up their position facing each other. Their
attitude was strikingly different. Francois stood on bent knees,
leaning far forward; while Philip stood erect, with his knees but
slightly bent, ready to spring either forwards or backwards, with
his arm but half extended. For a time both fought cautiously.
Francois had been well taught, having had the benefit, whenever he
was in Paris, of the best masters there. He was extremely active
and, as they warmed to their work, Philip had difficulty in
standing his ground against his impetuous rushes. Some minutes
passed without either of them succeeding in touching the other. At
length the maitre d'armes called upon them to lower their swords.

"That is enough," he said. "You are equally matched.

"I congratulate you, Monsieur Philip. You have been well taught;
and indeed, there are not many youths of his age who could hold
their own with my pupil.

"Take off your helmets. Enough has been done for one day."

"Peste, Philip!" Francois said, as he removed his helmet. "I was
not wrong when I said that, from your figure, I was sure that you
had learned fencing. Maitre Charles interfered on my behalf, and to
save me the mortification of defeat. I had nearly shot my bolt, and
you had scarcely begun.

"I own myself a convert. Your attitude is better than ours--that
is, when the hand is skilful enough to defend the body. The fatigue
of holding the arm extended, as I do, is much greater than it is as
you stand; and in the long run you must get the better of anyone
who is not sufficiently skilful to slay you before his arm becomes
fatigued.

"What do you think, Maitre Charles? My cousin is two years younger
than I am, and yet his wrist and arm are stronger than mine, as I
could feel every time he put aside my attacks."

"Is that so?" the maitre d'armes said, in surprise. "I had taken
him for your senior. He will be a famous man-at-arms, when he
attains his full age. His defence is wonderfully strong and,
although I do not admit that he is superior to you with the point,
he would be a formidable opponent to any of our best swordsmen in a
melee. If, as he says, he is more accustomed to use the edge than
the point, I will myself try him tomorrow, if he will permit me. I
have always understood that the English are more used to strike
than to thrust, and although in the duel the edge has little chance
against the point, I own that it is altogether different in a melee
on horseback; especially as the point cannot penetrate armour,
while a stout blow, well delivered with a strong arm, can break it
in.

"Are you skilled in the exercises of the ring, Monsieur Philip?"

"Not at all. I have had no practise, whatever, in them. Except in
some of the great houses, the tourney has gone quite out of fashion
in England; and though I can ride a horse across country, I know
nothing whatever of knightly exercises. My father is but a small
proprietor and, up to the time I left England, I have been but a
schoolboy."

"If all your schoolboys understand the use of their arms as you
do," Maitre Charles said courteously, "it is no wonder that the
English are terrible fighters."

"I do not say that," Philip said, smiling. "I have had the
advantage of the best teaching, both English and French, to be had
at Canterbury; and it would be a shame for me, indeed, if I had not
learnt to defend myself."

A servant now entered, and said that the countess desired their
presence, and they at once went to the apartment where the sisters
were talking.

"What do you think, mother?" Francois said. "This cousin of mine,
whom I had intended to patronize, turns out to be already a better
swordsman than I am."

"Not better, madame," Philip said hastily. "We were a fair match,
neither having touched the other."

"Philip is too modest, mother," Francois laughed. "Maitre Charles
stopped us in time to save me from defeat. Why, he has a wrist like
iron, this cousin of mine."

"We have done our best to have him well taught," Madame Vaillant
said. "There were some good swordsmen among our Huguenot friends,
and he has also had the best English teachers we could get for him.
My husband always wished, particularly, that if he ever came over
to visit our friends here, he should not be deficient in such
matters."

"I feel a little crestfallen," the countess said. "I have been
rather proud of Francois' skill as a swordsman, and I own that it
is a little mortifying to find that Philip, who is two years
younger, is already his match. Still, I am glad that it is so; for
if they ride together into battle, I should wish that Philip should
do honour to our race.

"Now, Philip, I have been hearing all about your mother's life, as
well as that of your uncle and aunt. Now let us hear about your
own, which must needs differ widely from that to which Francois has
been accustomed. Your aunt says that your English schools differ
altogether from ours. With us our sons are generally brought up at
home, and are instructed by the chaplain, in Huguenot families; or
by the priest in Catholic families; or else they go to religious
seminaries, where they are taught what is necessary of books and
Latin, being under strict supervision, and learning all other
matters such as the use of arms after leaving school, or when at
home with their families."

Philip gave an account of his school life, and its rough games and
sports.

"But is it possible, Philip," the countess said in tones of horror,
"that you used to wrestle and to fight? Fight with your arms and
fists against rough boys, the sons of all sorts of common people?"

"Certainly I did, aunt, and it did me a great deal of good, and no
harm so far as I know. All these rough sports strengthen the frame
and give quickness and vigour, just the same as exercises with the
sword do. I should never have been so tall and strong as I am now
if, instead of going to an English school, I had been either, as
you say, educated at home by a chaplain, or sent to be taught and
looked after by priests. My mother did not like it at first, but
she came to see that it was good for me. Besides, there is not the
same difference between classes in England as there is in France.
There is more independence in the lower and middle classes, and
less haughtiness and pride in the upper, and I think that it is
better so."

"It is the English custom, Emilie," her sister said; "and I can
assure you that my husband and I have got very English, in some
things. We do not love our country less, but we see that, in many
respects, the English ways are better than ours; and we admire the
independence of the people, every man respecting himself, though
giving honour, but not lavishly, to those higher placed."

The countess shrugged her shoulders.

"We will not argue, Marie. At any rate, whatever the process, it
has succeeded well with Philip."

The days passed quietly at the chateau. Before breakfast Philip
spent an hour on horseback, learning to manage his horse by the
pressure of knee or hand. This was the more easy, as both his
horses had been thoroughly trained in the menage, and under the
instruction of Captain Montpace, who had been Francois' teacher, he
made rapid progress.

"It is much easier to teach the man than the horse," his instructor
said, "although a horse learns readily enough, when its rider is a
master of the art; but with horse and rider alike ignorant, it is a
long business to get them to work together as if they were one,
which is what should be. As both your horses know their work, they
obey your motions, however slight; and you will soon be able to
pass muster on their backs. But it would take months of patient
teaching for you so to acquire the art of horsemanship as to be
able to train an animal, yourself."

After the lesson was over, Francois and Philip would tilt at rings
and go through other exercises in the courtyard. Breakfast over,
they went hawking or hunting. Of the former sport Philip was
entirely ignorant, and was surprised to learn how highly a
knowledge of it was prized in France, and how necessary it was
considered as part of the education of a gentleman. Upon the other
hand, his shooting with the bow and arrow astonished Francois; for
the bow had never been a French weapon, and the crossbow was fast
giving way to the arquebus; but few gentlemen troubled themselves
to learn the use of either one or the other. The pistol, however,
was becoming a recognized portion of the outfit of a cavalier in
the field and, following Francois' advice, Philip practised with
one steadily, until he became a fair shot.

"They are cowardly weapons," Francois said, "but for all that they
are useful in battle. When you are surrounded by three or four
pikemen, thrusting at you, it is a good thing to be able to
disembarrass yourself of one or two of them. Besides, these German
horsemen, of whom the Guises employ so many, all carry firearms;
and the contest would be too uneven if we were armed only with the
sword; though for my part I wish that all the governments of Europe
would agree to do away with firearms of every description. They
place the meanest footman upon the level of the bravest knight, and
in the end will, it seems to me, reduce armies to the level of
machines."

In the afternoons there were generally gatherings of Huguenot
gentry, who came to discuss the situation, to exchange news, or to
listen to the last rumours from Paris. No good had arisen from the
Conference of Bayonne, and one by one the privileges of the
Huguenots were being diminished.

The uprising of the Protestants of Holland was watched with the
greatest interest by the Huguenots of France. It was known that
several of the most influential Huguenot nobles had met, at Valery
and at Chatillon, to discuss with the Prince of Conde and Admiral
Coligny the question of again taking up arms in defence of their
liberties. It was rumoured that the opinion of the majority was
that the Huguenot standard should be again unfurled, and that this
time there should be no laying down of their arms until freedom of
worship was guaranteed to all; but that the admiral had used all
his powers to persuade them that the time had not yet come, and
that it was better to bear trials and persecutions, for a time, in
order that the world might see they had not appealed to arms until
driven to it by the failure of all other hope of redress of their
grievances.

The elder men among the visitors at the chateau were of the
admiral's opinion. The younger chafed at the delay. The position
had indeed become intolerable. Protestant worship was absolutely
forbidden, except in a few specified buildings near some of the
large towns; and all Protestants, save those dwelling in these
localities, were forced to meet secretly, and at the risk of their
lives, for the purpose of worship. Those caught transgressing the
law were thrown into prison, subjected to crushing fines, and even
punished with torture and death.

"Better a thousand times to die with swords in our hands, in the
open field, than thus tamely to see our brethren ill-treated and
persecuted!" was the cry of the young men; and Philip, who from
daily hearing tales of persecution and cruelty had become more and
more zealous in the Huguenot cause, fully shared their feeling.

In the presence of the elders, however, the more ardent spirits
were silent. At all times grave and sober in manner and word, the
knowledge that a desperate struggle could not long be deferred, and
the ever-increasing encroachments of the Catholics, added to the
gravity of their demeanour. Sometimes those present broke up into
groups, talking in an undertone. Sometimes the gathering took the
form of a general council. Occasionally some fugitive minister, or
a noble from some district where the persecution was particularly
fierce, would be present; and their narratives would be listened to
with stern faces by the elders, and with passionate indignation by
the younger men.

In spite of the decrees, the countess still retained her chaplain
and, before the meetings broke up, prayers were offered by him for
their persecuted brethren, and for a speedy deliverance of those of
the reformed religion from the cruel disabilities under which they
laboured.

Services were held night and morning in the chateau. These were
attended not only by all the residents, but by many of the farmers
and their families. The countess had already received several
warnings from the Catholic authorities of the province; but to
these she paid no attention, and there were no forces available to
enforce the decree in her case, as it would require nothing short
of an army to overcome the opposition that might be expected,
joined as she would be by the other Huguenot gentry of the
district.



Chapter 4: An Experiment.


Marie Vaillant, after remaining six weeks at the chateau, returned
to England; and Philip, with a party of twelve men, escorted her to
La Rochelle. Her visit was cut short somewhat, at the end, by the
imminence of the outbreak of hostilities, in which case she might
have found a difficulty in traversing the country. Moreover, La
Rochelle would probably be besieged, soon after the war began; for
being both an important town and port, the Catholics would be
anxious to obtain possession of it, and so cut off the Huguenots
from escape to England, besides rendering it difficult for
Elizabeth to send a force to their assistance.

"It has been a pleasant time," the countess said, on the morning of
her departure; "and your presence has taken me back five-and-twenty
years, Marie. I hope that when these troubles are past you will
again come over, and spend a happier time with me. I was going to
say that I will look well after Philip, but that I cannot do. He
has cast his lot in with us, and must share our perils. I am
greatly pleased with him, and I am glad that Francois will have him
as a companion in arms. Francois is somewhat impulsive, and liable
to be carried away by his ardour; and Philip, although the younger,
is, it seems to me, the more thoughtful of the two. He is one I
feel I can have confidence in. He is grave, yet merry; light
hearted in a way, and yet, I think, prudent and cautious. It seems
strange, but I shall part with Francois with the more comfort, in
the thought that he has Philip with him.

"Don't come back more English than you are now, Marie; for truly
you seem to me to have fallen in love with the ways of these
islanders."

"I will try not to, Emilie; but I should not like the customs, did
it not seem to me that they are better than my own. In England
Protestants and Catholics live side by side in friendship, and
there is no persecution of anyone for his religion; the Catholics
who have suffered during the present reign have done so, not
because they are Catholics, but because they plotted against the
queen. Would that in France men would agree to worship, each in his
own way, without rancour or animosity."

"Tell Lucie that I am very sorry she did not come over with you and
Philip, and that it is only because you tell me how occupied she is
that I am not furiously angry with her.

"Tell her, too," she went on earnestly, "that I feel she is one of
us; still a Huguenot, a Frenchwoman, and one of our race, or she
would never have allowed her only son to come over, to risk his
life in our cause. I consider her a heroine, Marie. It is all very
well for me, whose religion is endangered, whose friends are in
peril, whose people are persecuted, to throw myself into the strife
and to send Francois into the battle; but with her, working there
with an invalid husband, and her heart, as it must be, wrapped up
in her boy, it is splendid to let him come out here, to fight side
by side with us for the faith. Whose idea was it first?"

"My husband's. Gaspard regards Philip almost in the light of a son.
He is a rich man now, as I told you, and Philip will become his
heir. Though he has no desire that he should settle in France, he
wished him to take his place in our family here, to show himself
worthy of his race, to become a brave soldier, to win credit and
honour, and to take his place perhaps, some day, in the front rank
of the gentry of Kent."

"They were worldly motives, Marie, and our ministers would denounce
them as sinful; but I cannot do so. I am a Huguenot, but I am a
countess of France, a member of one noble family and married into
another; and though, I believe, as staunch a Huguenot, and as ready
to lay down my life for our religion as any man or woman in France,
yet I cannot give up all the traditions of my rank, and hold that
fame and honour and reputation and courage are mere snares. But
such were not Lucie's feelings in letting him go, I will be bound;
nor yours."

"Mine partly," Marie said. "I am the wife now of a trader, though
one honoured in his class; but have still a little of your
feelings, Emilie, and remember that the blood of the De Moulins
runs in Philip's veins, and hope that he will do credit to it. I
don't think that Lucie has any such feelings. She is wrapt up in
duty--first her duty to God, secondly her duty to her crippled
husband, whom she adores; and I think she regarded the desire of
Philip to come out to fight in the Huguenot ranks as a call that
she ought not to oppose. I know she was heartbroken at parting with
him, and yet she never showed it.

"Lucie is a noble character. Everyone who knows her loves her. I
believe the very farm labourers would give their lives for her, and
