antimacassars rumpled by a young Jackanapes; or the boy himself, for
being brought up by an old maid.

Oddly enough, she would probably have pitied neither, had Jackanapes
been a girl. (One is so apt to think that what works smoothest works
to the highest ends, having no patience for the results of friction.)
That Father in GOD, who bade the young men to be pure, and the maidens
brave, greatly disturbed a member of his congregation, who thought
that the great preacher had made a slip of the tongue.

"That the girls should have purity, and the boys courage, is what you
would say, good Father?"

"Nature has done that," was the reply; "I meant what I said."

In good sooth, a young maid is all the better for learning some
robuster virtues than maidenliness and not to move the antimacassars.
And the robuster virtues require some fresh air and freedom. As, on
the other hand, Jackanapes (who had a boy's full share of the little
beast and the young monkey in his natural composition) was none the
worse, at his tender years, for learning some maidenliness--so far as
maidenliness means decency, pity, unselfishness and pretty behavior.

And it is due to him to say that he was an obedient boy, and a boy
whose word could be depended on, long before his grandfather the
General came to live at the Green.

He was obedient; that is he did what his great aunt told him. But--oh
dear! oh dear!--the pranks he played, which it had never entered into
her head to forbid!

It was when he had just been put into skeletons (frocks never suited
him) that he became very friendly with Master Tony Johnson, a younger
brother of the young gentleman who sat in the puddle on purpose. Tony
was not enterprising, and Jackanapes led him by the nose. One summer's
evening they were out late, and Miss Jessamine was becoming anxious,
when Jackanapes presented himself with a ghastly face all besmirched
with tears. He was unusually subdued.

"I'm afraid," he sobbed; "if you please, I'm very much afraid that
Tony Johnson's dying in the churchyard."

Miss Jessamine was just beginning to be distracted, when she smelt
Jackanapes.

"You naughty, naughty boys! Do you mean to tell me that you've been
smoking?"

"Not pipes," urged Jackanapes; "upon my honor, Aunty, not pipes. Only
segars like Mr. Johnson's! and only made of brown paper with a very,
very little tobacco from the shop inside them."

Whereupon, Miss Jessamine sent a servant to the churchyard, who found
Tony Johnson lying on a tomb-stone, very sick, and having ceased to
entertain any hopes of his own recovery.

If it could be possible that any "unpleasantness" could arise between
two such amiable neighbors as Miss Jessamine and Mrs. Johnson--and if
the still more incredible paradox can be that ladies may differ over a
point on which they are agreed--that point was the admitted fact that
Tony Johnson was "delicate," and the difference lay chiefly in this:
Mrs. Johnson said that Tony was delicate--meaning that he was more
finely strung, more sensitive, a properer subject for pampering and
petting than Jackanapes, and that, consequently, Jackanapes was to
blame for leading Tony into scrapes which resulted in his being
chilled, frightened, or (most frequently) sick. But when Miss
Jessamine said that Tony Johnson was delicate, she meant that he was
more puling, less manly, and less healthily brought up than
Jackanapes, who, when they got into mischief together, was certainly
not to blame because his friend could not get wet, sit a kicking
donkey, ride in the giddy-go-round, bear the noise of a cracker, or
smoke brown paper with impunity, as he could.

Not that there was ever the slightest quarrel between the ladies. It
never even came near it, except the day after Tony had been so very
sick with riding Bucephalus in the giddy-go-round. Mrs. Johnson had
explained to Miss Jessamine that the reason Tony was so easily upset,
was the unusual sensitiveness (as a doctor had explained it to her) of
the nervous centres in her family--"Fiddlestick!" So Mrs. Johnson
understood Miss Jessamine to say, but it appeared that she only said
"Treaclestick!" which is quite another thing, and of which Tony was
undoubtedly fond.

[Illustration]

It was at the fair that Tony was made ill by riding on Bucephalus.
Once a year the Goose Green became the scene of a carnival. First of
all, carts and caravans were rumbling up all along, day and night.
Jackanapes could hear them as he lay in bed, and could hardly sleep
for speculating what booths and whirligigs he should find fairly
established, when he and his dog Spitfire went out after breakfast. As
a matter of fact, he seldom had to wait long for news of the Fair. The
Postman knew the window out of which Jackanapes' yellow head would
come, and was ready with his report.

"Royal Theayter, Master Jackanapes, in the old place, but be careful
o' them seats, sir; they're rickettier than ever. Two sweets and a
ginger-beer under the oak tree, and the Flying Boats is just a-coming
along the road."

No doubt it was partly because he had already suffered severely in the
Flying Boats, that Tony collapsed so quickly in the giddy-go-round. He
only mounted Bucephalus (who was spotted, and had no tail) because
Jackanapes urged him, and held out the ingenious hope that the
round-and-round feeling would very likely cure the up-and-down
sensation. It did not, however, and Tony tumbled off during the first
revolution.

Jackanapes was not absolutely free from qualms, but having once
mounted the Black Prince he stuck to him as a horseman should. During
the first round he waved his hat, and observed with some concern that
the Black Prince had lost an ear since last Fair; at the second, he
looked a little pale but sat upright, though somewhat unnecessarily
rigid; at the third round he shut his eyes. During the fourth his hat
fell off, and he clasped his horse's neck. By the fifth he had laid
his yellow head against the Black Prince's mane, and so clung anyhow
till the hobby-horses stopped, when the proprietor assisted him to
alight, and he sat down rather suddenly and said he had enjoyed it
very much.

The Grey Goose always ran away at the first approach of the caravans,
and never came back to the Green till there was nothing left of the
Fair but footmarks and oyster-shells. Running away was her pet
principle; the only system, she maintained, by which you can live long
and easily, and lose nothing. If you run away when you see danger, you
can come back when all is safe. Run quickly, return slowly, hold your
head high, and gabble as loud as you can, and you'll preserve the
respect of the Goose Green to a peaceful old age. Why should you
struggle and get hurt, if you can lower your head and swerve, and not
lose a feather? Why in the world should any one spoil the pleasure of
life, or risk his skin, if he can help it?

    "'What's the use'
    Said the Goose."

Before answering which one might have to consider what world--which
life--whether his skin were a goose-skin; but the Grey Goose's head
would never have held all that.

Grass soon grows over footprints, and the village children took the
oyster-shells to trim their gardens with; but the year after Tony rode
Bucephalus there lingered another relic of Fairtime, in which
Jackanapes was deeply interested. "The Green" proper was originally
only part of a straggling common, which in its turn merged into some
wilder waste land where gipsies sometimes squatted if the authorities
would allow them, especially after the annual Fair. And it was after
the Fair that Jackanapes, out rambling by himself, was knocked over by
the Gipsy's son riding the Gipsy's red-haired pony at break-neck pace
across the common.

Jackanapes got up and shook himself, none the worse, except for being
heels over head in love with the red-haired pony. What a rate he went
at! How he spurned the ground with his nimble feet! How his red coat
shone in the sunshine! And what bright eyes peeped out of his dark
forelock as it was blown by the wind!

The Gipsy boy had had a fright, and he was willing enough to reward
Jackanapes for not having been hurt, by consenting to let him have a
ride.

"Do you mean to kill the little fine gentleman, and swing us all on
the gibbet, you rascal?" screamed the Gipsy-mother, who came up just
as Jackanapes and the pony set off.

"He would get on," replied her son. "It'll not kill him. He'll fall on
his yellow head, and it's as tough as a cocoanut."

But Jackanapes did not fall. He stuck to the red-haired pony as he had
stuck to the hobbyhorse; but oh, how different the delight of this
wild gallop with flesh and blood! Just as his legs were beginning to
feel as if he did not feel them, the Gipsy boy cried "Lollo!" Round
went the pony so unceremoniously, that, with as little ceremony,
Jackanapes clung to his neck, and he did not properly recover himself
before Lollo stopped with a jerk at the place where they had started.

"Is his name Lollo?" asked Jackanapes, his hand lingering in the wiry
mane.

"Yes."

"What does Lollo mean?"
