As the enemy were now swarming on the hills, the party began to
fall back to Reshun, which was two miles distant. They had an open
plain to cross and a spur, a thousand feet high, to climb. During
this part of the retreat an officer and several men were wounded
but, on reaching the crest, the party halted and opened a steady
fire upon the enemy; whom they thus managed to keep at a distance
till they reached Reshun, which they did without further loss.

The force here were occupying a sangar they had formed, but so
heavy a fire was opened, from the surrounding hills, that it was
found impossible to hold the position. They therefore retired to
some houses, where firewood and other supplies were found. The only
drawback to this place was that it was more than a hundred yards
from the river, and there was consequently great danger of their
being cut off from the water.

As soon as they reached the houses they began to fortify them. The
roofs were flat and, by piling stones along the edges, they
converted them into sangars. The walls were loopholed, the
entrances blocked up, and passages of communication opened between
the houses. A party of Kashmir volunteers then went down to the
other sangar and brought the wounded in, under a heavy fire.

At sunset the enemy's fire ceased, as it was the month of Ramzam,
during which Mahomedans have to fast all day between sunrise and
sunset. As night came on the little party took their places on the
roofs, and remained there till daylight. By this time all were
greatly exhausted for, during their terrible experiences of the
previous day, they had had no food and little water.

When day dawned half the men were withdrawn from their posts, and a
meal was cooked from the flour that had been found in the houses. A
small ration of meat was also served out. During the day the enemy
kept up a continuous fire but, as they showed no intention of
attacking, the men were allowed to sleep by turns.

After dark Lieutenant Fowler and some volunteers started for the
river, to bring in water. They made two trips, and filled up all
the storage vessels at the disposal of the garrison. The night
passed quietly but, just before dawn, the enemy charged down
through the surrounding houses. Lieutenant Edwards and his party at
once opened fire, at about twenty yards' range. Tom-toms were
beaten furiously, to encourage the assailants; but the tribesmen
could not pluck up courage to make a charge and, at nine o'clock,
they all retired. During the attack four of the sepoys were killed,
and six wounded.

Next night another effort was made to obtain water. Two sangars
were stormed, and most of their occupants killed. The way to the
water was now opened but, at this moment, heavy firing broke out at
the fort; and Lieutenant Fowler, who was in command, recalled his
men and returned to assist the garrison.

On the following day a white flag was hoisted, and an emissary from
Sher Afzul said that all fighting had ceased. An armistice was
accordingly arranged. All this, however, was but a snare for, a few
days later, when the two British officers went out to witness a
polo match, they were seized, bound with ropes, and carried off. At
the same moment a fierce attack was made on a party of sepoys who
had also come out. These fought stoutly, but were overpowered, most
of them being killed.

The garrison of the post, however, under the command of Lieutenant
Gurdon, continued to hold the little fort; and refused all
invitation to come out to parley, after the treachery that had been
shown to their comrades. The two officers were taken to Chitral,
where they were received with kindness by Amir Khan.

The news of this disaster was carried to Peshawar by a native
Mussulman officer, who had been liberated, where it created great
excitement. As all communication with Chitral had ceased, the
assistant British agent at Gilgit called up the Pioneers; who
marched into Gilgit, four hundred strong, on the 20th of March. On
the 21st news was received of the cutting up of Ross's party, and
it was naturally supposed that that of Edwards was also destroyed.

Colonel Kelly of the Pioneers now commanded the troops, and all
civil powers; and Major Borradale commanded the Pioneers. The
available force consisted of the four hundred Pioneers, and the
Guides. Lieutenant Stewart joined them with two guns of the Kashmir
battery.

Two hundred Pioneers and the Guides started on the 23rd. The
gazetteer states that it never rains in Gilgit, but it rained when
the detachment started, and continued to pour for two days. The men
had marched without tents. Colonel Kelly, the doctor, Leward, and a
staff officer followed in the afternoon, and overtook the main body
that evening.

The troops had made up little tents with their waterproof sheets.
Colonel Kelly had a small tent, and the other officers turned in to
a cow shed. The force was so small that the Pioneers asked the
others to mess with them, each man providing himself with his own
knife, fork, and spoon, and the pots being all collected for the
cooking.

The next march was long and, in some places, severe. They were well
received by the natives, whose chiefs always came out to greet them
and, on the third day, reached Gupis, where a fort had been built
by the Kashmir troops. At this point the horses and mules were all
left behind, as the passes were said to be impassable for animals;
and native coolies were hired to carry the baggage.

Lisle had enjoyed the march, and the strange life that he was
leading. He was now quite at home with his company and, by the time
they reached Gupis, had become a general favourite. At the end of
the day, when a meal had been cooked and eaten, he would join in
their songs round the fire and, as he had picked up several he had
heard them sing, and had a fair voice, he was often called upon for
a contribution. His vivacity and good spirits surprised the sepoys
who, as a whole, were grave men, though they bore their hardships
uncomplainingly. He had soon got over the feeling of discomfort of
going about with naked legs, and was as glad as the soldiers,
themselves, to lay aside his uniform and get into native attire.

The sepoys had now regular rations of meat. It was always mutton,
as beef was unobtainable; but it was much relished by the men, who
cut it up into slices and broiled it over a fire.

Not for one moment did Lisle regret the step he had taken. Young
and active, he thoroughly enjoyed the life; and looked forward
eagerly to the time when they should meet the enemy, for no doubt
whatever was now felt that they would meet with a desperate
resistance on their march to Chitral. Fears were entertained,
however, that when they got there, they would find that the
garrison had been overpowered; for it was certain that against this
force the chief attack of the enemy would be directed. The
overthrow of Ross and his party showed that the enemy were sturdy
fighters; and they were known to be armed with breech-loading
rifles, of as good a quality as those carried by the troops.

In the open field all felt that, however numerous the tribesmen
might be, they would stand no chance whatever; but the passes
afforded them immense advantage, and rendered drill and discipline
of little avail.



Chapter 3: The First Fight.


And yet, though he kept up a cheerful appearance, Lisle's heart was
often very heavy. The sight of the British officers continually
recalled his father to his memory. But a short time back he had
been with him, and now he was gone for ever. At times it seemed
almost impossible that it could be so. He had been his constant
companion when off duty; had devoted much time to helping him
forward in his studies; had never, so far as he could remember,
spoken a harsh word to him.

It seemed like a dream, those last hours he had passed by his
father's bedside. Many times he lay awake in the night, his face
wet with tears. But with reveille he would be up, laughing and
joking with the soldiers, and raising a smile even on the face of
the gravest.

It had taken him but a very short time to make himself at home in
the regiment. The men sometimes looked at him with surprise, he was
so different from themselves. They bore their hardships well, but
it was with stern faces and grim determination; while this young
soldier made a joke of them.

Sometimes he was questioned closely, but he always turned the
questions off with a laugh. He had learned the place where his
supposed cousin came from and, while sticking to this, he said that
a good fairy must have presided over his birth; information that
was much more gravely received than given, for the natives have
their superstitions, and believe, as firmly as the inhabitants of
these British islands did, two or three hundred years ago, in the
existence of supernatural beings, good and bad.

"If you have been blessed by a fairy," one of the elder men
suggested, "doubtless you will go through this campaign without
harm. They are very powerful, some of these good people, and can
bestow long life as well as other gifts."

"I don't know whether she will do that. She certainly gave me high
spirits. I used to believe that what my mother said happened to
her, the night after I was born, was not true, but only a dream.
She solemnly declared that it was not, but I have always been
famous for good spirits; and she may have been right, after all."

There was nothing Lisle liked better than being on night picket
duty. Other men shirked it, but to him there was something
delightful to stand there almost alone, rifle in hand, watching the
expanse of snow for a moving figure. There was a charm in the dead
silence. He liked to think quietly of the past and, somehow, he
could do so far better, while engaged on this duty, than when lying
awake in his little tent. The expanse and stillness calmed him, and
agreed far more with his mood than the camp.

His sight was keen, even when his thoughts were farthest away and,
three times, he sent a bullet through a lurking Pathan who was
crawling up towards him, astonishing his comrades by the accuracy
of his aim.

"I suppose," he said, when congratulated upon the third occasion on
which he had laid one of the enemy low, "that the good fairy must
have given me a quick eye, as well as good spirits."

"It is indeed extraordinary that you, a young recruit, should not
only make out a man whom none of us saw; but that you should, each
time, fetch him down at a distance of three or four hundred yards."

"I used to practice with my father's rifle," he said. "He was very
fond of shikari, and I often went out with him. It needs a keener
sight to put a bullet between the eyes of a tiger, than to hit a
lurking Pathan."

So noted did he become for the accuracy of his aim that one of the
native officers asked him, privately, if he would like to be always
put on night duty.

"I should like it every other night," he said. "By resting every
alternate night, and by snatching a couple of hours' sleep before
going on duty, when we arrive at the end of a day's march in good
time, I can manage very well."

"I will arrange that for you," the officer said. "Certainly, no one
would grudge you the duty."

One night, when there had been but little opposition during the
day, Lisle was posted on a hill where the picket consisted of ten
men; five of whom were on the crest, while the other five lay down
in the snow. The day had been a hard one, and Lisle was less
watchful than usual. It seemed to him that he had not closed his
eyes for a minute, as he leant on his rifle; but it must have been
much longer, for he suddenly started with a feeling that something
was wrong, and saw a number of dark figures advancing along the
crest towards him. He at once fired a shot, and fell back upon the
next sentry. Dropping behind rocks, they answered the fire which
the enemy had already opened upon them.

The whole picket quickly gathered and, for a time, checked the
advance of the enemy; but these were too numerous to be kept at a
distance, and parties of them pressed forward on each flank.

"We must retire till we can find better shelter," the sub-officer
in command said. "We shall soon have reinforcements up from the
camp, when it is seen that we are seriously engaged. Fall back,
men, steadily. Take advantage of every bit of cover, but keep as
well together as possible, without risk."

Firing steadily, they made their way down the hill, and finally
took up a position among a clump of rocks. Two had been shot dead,
and two others were wounded; and it was because these could not be
left behind that the stand was made. The two wounded men, though
partially disabled and unable to crawl, could still use their
rifles; and the little party kept up so hot a fire that, though the
enemy were massed from twenty to thirty yards away, they could not
be brought to unite in a general attack; not even by the shouts and
yells of their comrades behind, and a furious beating of tom-toms.

Illustration: Lisle gives the alarm.

The defenders were all lying down, each of them having chosen a
position where he could see through a crevice between the rocks.
Lisle was lying next to the sergeant. Presently the latter gave an
exclamation, fired his rifle, and shifted his position behind the
rock.

"Mutteh Ghar," he said, "I have seen you bring down three of the
skulking ruffians. Do you see those two there close together, about
forty yards away? There is a man behind them who has just carried
off two of my fingers.

"Keep your eye on those rocks. Just above where they touch each
other there is an opening, through which you can see the snow
behind. That is where he fired from. Oblige me by putting a ball in
his head, when he raises it."

A couple of minutes passed. Lisle was lying with his rifle on the
spot. Presently the opening was obscured, and he fired at once.

"Thank you!" the sergeant said. "You got him, sure enough. The head
did not disappear to one side or to the other, but went straight
back. I fancy that you must have hit him between the eyes."

Presently the enemy's fire became still more furious and, several
times, some of them rose and ran two paces forward, but only to
fall prone under the defenders' fire.

"I expect they see help coming up," Lisle said, "and are making a
last effort to wipe us out before they arrive.

"I think they will try a rush," he continued, in a louder voice;
"see that your magazines are filled up, lads, and don't waste a
shot if they come at us."

A minute later there was a shrill and prolonged cry and, at once,
twenty dark figures burst from their shelter and rushed forward.
The defenders also sprang to their feet, and their rifles flashed
out with a stream of fire. But the vacancies thus caused in the
enemy's ranks were immediately filled.

"Now with your bayonets," the sergeant shouted. "Keep in a close
body, and do you two wounded men cover us with a constant fire."

Then, with a cheer, the six men and the sergeant rushed forward.
Much as the Afridis feared the bayonet, confident in their strength
they withstood the charge. They had, fortunately, emptied their
rifles before rushing forward but, drawing their knives, they
fought fiercely. These, however, were no match for the bayonets
and, consequently, they suffered heavily.

Three of the Pioneers received severe gashes. The group were
brought to a standstill, and they stood in a little circle while
the attack continued. One sepoy was stabbed to the heart by a
fanatic, who rushed at his bayonet and, pushing himself along, fell
dead as he struck his fatal blow.

Things were looking very bad. Scarce one had escaped without a
wound, and the sergeant had dropped, bleeding profusely; when, to
their delight, a volley burst from within fifty yards of them and,
in an instant, their assailants turned and bolted.

After the sergeant had dropped, Lisle had somehow taken his place,
cheering the men on and lending his aid to those most severely
pressed. Once or twice he managed, after despatching an assailant,
to slip a couple of cartridges into his rifle, and so added to the
execution. Indeed, it was in no small account due to his exertions,
after the sergeant fell, that the resistance was maintained.

A minute later, the active little Ghoorkhas rushed forward; and
those who first arrived passed the little knot of defenders with a
cheer, and set off in pursuit of the enemy. Presently, however, one
of their officers came up.

"You have had a stiff fight, lads," he said, "and by the look of
the ground round about, you must have defended yourselves
gallantly; for there are a dozen dead bodies lying near you, and I
can see many more, a little way up the hill. What have been your
losses?"

The sergeant raised himself on his elbow.

"We had two killed, as we came down," he said, "and two others
wounded. I believe one has fallen here, and I think most of us are
wounded with knife thrusts."

"Well, you have done splendidly, sergeant. I will detach men to
help to carry you and the wounded men down to the camp. The others
can accompany them. We shall take up the work, now; but I am afraid
we sha'n't have any fighting, though we may shoot down a few as
they make off. I fancy, however, that the lesson you have given the
beggars has taken all fight out of them."

When half down the hill, they met a party of the Pioneers coming
out. The Ghoorkhas at once handed the wounded over to them, and
started up the hill again. The sergeant had fainted from loss of
blood, and no questions were asked till the injured men were all
placed in little hospital tents, and their wounds attended to. Two
of them had bullet wounds, and three had received knife wounds on
the shoulder or arm. Only Lisle and one other escaped unhurt. As
soon as the wounds had been attended to all, except the sergeant,
and two more seriously wounded than the others, were sent off to
their tents.

One of these was Lisle's tent fellow. He said:

"Mutteh Ghar, I don't know what to say to you. You seem but a lad,
and a light-hearted one; but you have proved yourself the best of
us all. I was lying next to you, and I will swear that you brought
down eight of them with your rifle, before they charged. Even while
I was fighting I always heard your voice, like a trumpet; and after
the sergeant had fallen you seemed to take command, as if it was
your right. You saved my life when you bayoneted two of the three
who were grappling with me, and you seemed to be everywhere."

"I did what little I could," Lisle said. "I certainly did not
intend to take the command, when the sergeant fell; but somehow I
could not help shouting and, as our circle had closed in so, I
slipped out of my place and fought wherever the pressure was
greatest."

"There is no doubt," the soldier said seriously, "that your
mother's statement was a true one, and that a fairy did promise her
to look after you. Out of the eleven of us, only one besides
yourself has escaped without a wound; and yet none of us exposed
himself more than you did. I shall not forget that I owe my life to
you. We must find some other name for you. You can't be called 'the
boy' any longer."

In the morning, one of the colonel's orderlies was told to fetch
Lisle.

"The colonel wishes to see you, Mutteh Ghar."

Lisle put on his uniform with some uneasiness. He was conscious
that, in the excitement of the fight of the night before, he had
frequently shouted in English; and he feared that the sergeant had
reported this. However, he marched to the spot where the colonel
and a group of officers were standing, and then stood at attention.

"Mutteh Ghar," the colonel said, "the sergeant this morning made
his report; and he states that, though all his men behaved
admirably, you distinguished yourself in a singular manner. He says
that before the final attack began you had killed eight or ten of
the Pathans, that you were fighting beside him when he was wounded,
and that you then seemed to take the command. Although lying on the
ground, he was able to see what was going on; and he says that but
for your cheers, and for the manner in which you went to the
assistance of men hard pressed, he is convinced that the whole
detachment would have been killed before the Ghoorkhas arrived."

"I had no idea of assuming the command, sir; but my tongue always
runs fast, and I dare say I did shout, almost unconsciously. I
think the sergeant has made more of my doings than I deserved."

"I don't think it likely. It is no small thing for so young a
soldier to so distinguish himself. The sergeant will not be able to
resume his duties for some time, and I therefore appoint you a
corporal; and shall put your name in orders, today, for very
distinguished service. How long is it since you joined the
regiment?"

"A short time before we marched."

"Well, you have done honour to the corps and, in the name of myself
and my officers, I thank you."

Lisle saluted, and returned to the lines.

"The colonel has made me a corporal," he answered, as the others
gathered round and questioned him.

A cheer burst from them, for his tent companion, and the other men
who had returned, had all spoken in the highest terms of his
conduct. Lisle was quite confused by the heartiness of their
reception.

"He is a wonderfully young fellow," the colonel said, as he left
them. "The sergeant said that he was young, but really he looks
little more than a boy. Curiously, his face reminds me of someone,
though I cannot say whom; and yet, if he only joined a short time
before we marched, it is not likely that I should have noticed him
before."

"It was the same thing with me, colonel," the major said. "I have
noticed him several times on the march and, while the rest of the
regiment were plodding on in silence, he always seemed the centre
of a merry group. I have often said, to myself, I wished we had a
few more men in the regiment who could take the hardships they had
to undergo as lightly and as merrily as he does. His face has also
struck me as being somehow familiar.

"I was speaking to the sergeant about him, and he said that he was
the most popular man in his company, and a general favourite. His
temperament is altogether different from that of the majority of
our soldiers, which is earnest and quiet."

Two or three of the other officers also spoke of noticing the
cheerful influence he seemed to have on the men.

