"Wally's right," said D'Arcy.  "It'll be a close shave to carry our men.
You see, kids," added he condescendingly, "it's just this way.  The
Moderns are going to try to carry the clubs to-day, and if they do, the
whole of us aren't going to stand it, and there'll be such a jolly row
in Fellsgarth as--well, wait till you _see_."

This sounded very awful.  Fisher minor would have liked to know what
sort of clubs were to be carried, but did not like to ask.  Ashby,
however, more honest, demanded further particulars.

"I don't know what you mean," said he.

"Don't suppose you do.  Whose fault is that?  All you've got to do is to
yell for our side and vote for our men."

That seemed simple enough, if D'Arcy would _only_ vouchsafe to tell them
when to begin.

"Come along," said the latter.  "We've half an hour yet to canvass.  You
know Wally's and my study?"

"Yes."

"All right; now you," pointing to Ashby, "you hang outside that door.
That's the Modern minors' class.  Collar one of them as they come out,
or two if you can; and fetch 'em up to my room.  You," pointing to
Fisher minor, "go and prowl about the kids' gymnasium and fetch any one
with a blue ribbon on his hat, as many as you can bag.  I'm going to see
if I can find some of 'em near the tuck-shop.  Kick twice on my door and
say `Balbus,' so that I shall know it's you.  Go on; off you go.  Don't
muff it, whatever you do, or it'll be your fault if Fellsgarth goes to
pot."

Ashby, whose uncle was an M.P., had had some little experience in
general elections, but he never remembered canvassing of this kind
before.  However, D'Arcy had an authoritative air about him, and as the
School was evidently in peril, and there was no suspicion of practical
joking in the present case, he marched off sturdily to the Modern
minors' class-room, and sheltering himself conveniently behind the door,
waited the turn of events.

He had not to wait long.  He could hear the master announcing the lesson
for preparation, and the general shuffle which precedes the dismissal of
a class.  Then his heart beat a little faster as he distinguished
footsteps and heard the unsuspecting enemy approaching his way.

Now Ashby, although a new boy, was _man_ enough to calculate one or two
things.  One was that his best chance was either to attack the head or
the tail of the procession; and secondly, that as the head boys in a
form are usually those nearest the front, and conversely, the lowest are
usually nearest to the door, the smallest boys would probably be the
first to come out.  For all of which reasons he decided to make his
swoop at once, and if possible abscond with his booty before the main
body arrived on the scene.

The event justified his shrewdness.  The moment the door opened, two
small Moderns scampered out clean into the arms of the expectant
kidnapper, who before they had time so much as to inquire who he was or
what he wanted, had a grip on the coat-collar of each, and was racing
them as hard as their short legs could carry them across the grass.

"Let go, you cad!" squeaked one, presently.  "What we you doing!"

"It's only fun," said Ashby, encouragingly; "come along."

The other prisoner was more practical.  He tried to bite his captor's
hand, and when he failed in that, he tried to kick.  But though he
succeeded better in this, the pace was kept up and the grip on his
collar, if anything, tightened.  Whereupon he attempted to sit down.
But that, though it retarded the progress, was still insufficient to
arrest it.  The pace dropped to a quick walk, and in due time, greatly
to Ashby's relief, the portal of Wakefield's was reached.

Here, of course, all was safe.  If any of the few boys hanging about had
been inclined to concern themselves in the affair, the colour of the
ribbon on the victims' hats was quite sufficient reason for allowing the
law to take its course; and Ashby, who began to grow very tired of his
burden (which insisted on sitting down on either side all the way
upstairs), arrived at length at Messrs. D'Arcy and Wally's door without
challenge.

He had no need to knock, or say "Balbus," as the room was empty.  The
other canvassers had evidently not yet returned.

With a sigh of relief he deposited his loads on the carpet and locked
the door.

"Let us go, you cad!" yelled the prisoners.  "What do you want bringing
us here into this place for?"

"Fun," said Ashby.  "You'll know presently."

"If you don't let us out, we'll yell till a master comes."

"Will you?--we're used to yelling here.  Yell away; it'll do you good."

To the credit of the two "voters" they did their best, and made such a
hideous uproar that Ashby began to grow uneasy, and was immensely
relieved when presently he heard outside a sound as of coals being
carelessly carried up the staircase.  Some one was evidently coming up
with a good load.

Ashby was prudent enough not to open the door till an irregular double
kick and a breathless cry of "Balbus, look sharp," apprised him that
another of the electioneering agents had returned.  He then cautiously
opened the door, and in tumbled D'Arcy, gasping, yet triumphant, under
the weight of three fractious youngsters.

"Bully for us," said he, surveying the harvest.  "Five for our side.
Jolly well done of you, kid--you're a stunner.  Two of mine are new
kids--they came easy enough; but the other's a regular badger."

The badger in question seemed determined to maintain his reputation, for
he flew upon his captor, calling upon his fellow-prisoners to do the
same.  All but the new boys obeyed, and the two "canvassers" were very
hard put to it for a while, and might have fared yet worse, had not
D'Arcy astutely hung out a flag of truce.  "Look here," said he; "I
never knew such idiots as you Modern kids are.  Here I've done my best
to be friends and invited you to a spread in my room; and now you won't
even let me go to the cupboard and get out the black currant jam and
cake."

"You're telling crams; that's not why you brought us here.  You're a
howling--"

"Yes, really," said D'Arcy, in quite a friendly tone, "Cry _pax_ for one
minute, and if I don't hand out the things you may go; honour bright.
I've a good mind to kick you out without giving you anything."

The caged animals sullenly fell back and eyed the cupboard which D'Arcy
leisurely opened.  A row of half a dozen pots on a top shelf, a segment
of a plum-cake, and something that looked very like honey in the comb,
met their greedy eyes.

"There you are," said D'Arcy.  "What did I tell you!  They belong to
Wally; he'll be here directly.  You'll be all right--all except _you_,"
said he, singling out his principal assailant.  "You don't know how to
behave, like these other kids.  I shall advise Wally not to waste any of
his stuff on you."

"I didn't know it was a feast," said the youth, much softened.  "I
thought you were only humbugging; really I did."

"I've a good mind to do what you think.  You'd better mind your eye, I
can tell you--I wish Wally would come.  There's five o'clock striking--
I'll go and look for him.  Ashby, you see if he's in the library; you
kids, stay here, and lock the door, and don't let anybody in but Wally.
Do you hear?  If you do, you'll get it pretty hot for being out of your
house.  And look here, if Wally doesn't come by half-past, you can help
yourselves."

"Thanks awfully," said the party.

"Mind! honour bright you don't touch a thing till the clock strikes the
half.  When you've done, stay here till one of us comes to fetch you,
and we'll see you safe out.  Don't go without, as our chaps are awfully
down on Moderns this term, and you'll get flayed alive.  If they've seen
you come in, they'll try to get at you, be sure; so lock yourselves in,
whatever you do, and don't make the room in too great a mess.  Come
along, Ashby; let's look for Wally."

"Cut hard," said he, as soon as they stood outside, and had heard the
lock within duly turned.  "We've only just time to get over; that's five
votes lost to their side!  Real good business!  I wonder where the other
new kid is?  He was bound to make a mess of it.  That's why I sent him
to the gymnasium; it's closed to-day."

"Hooray for the Cock-House!" shouted Ashby, as, side by side with his
now admiring patron, he entered the School Hall, where the ceremony of
club elections was just beginning.

At the door they encountered Wheatfield.

"Such games!" whispered D'Arcy, clapping him joyously on the back.
"We've got five Modern kids boxed up in our room, waiting for the clock
to strike the half-hour before they have a tuck in at our empty jam-
pots."

"Ha, ha!" said Wheatfield; "splendid joke!" and vanished.

D'Arcy's countenance suddenly turned pale as he gripped his companion by
the arm.

"What's the matter?" inquired Ashby, alarmed for his friend's health.
"What's up?"

"It's all up!  We're regularly done.  My, that _is_ a go!"

"Whatever do you mean?"

"Why, you blockhead, didn't you see that was the wrong Wheatfield--not
Wally, but the Modern one!  And now he's gone to let those chaps out,
and we're clean done for!"

"Whew! what is to be done?" groaned Ashby, almost as pale as his friend.



CHAPTER FOUR.

A CLOSE ELECTION.

Ever since certain well-meaning governors, two years ago, had succeeded
in forcing upon Fellsgarth the adoption of a Modern side, the School had
been rent by factions whose quarrels sometimes bordered on civil war.
When people squabble about the management of a school outside, the boys
are pretty sure to quarrel and take sides against one another inside.

The old set, consisting mostly of the Classical boys, felt very sore on
the question.  It was a case of sentiment, not argument.  If boys, said
they, wanted to learn science and modern languages, let them; but don't
let them come fooling around at Fellsgarth and spoiling the reputation
of a good old classical school.  There were plenty of schools where
fellows could be brought up in a new-fangled way.  Let them go to one of
these, and leave Fellsgarth in peace to her dead authors.

The boys who used such arguments, it is fair to say, were not always the
most profound classical scholars.  Most of them, like D'Arcy and Wally
Wheatfield, had a painful acquaintance with the masterpieces of old-
world literature in the way of impositions, but there their interest
frequently ended.  The upper Classical boys, however, though not so
noisily hostile, had their own strong opinions about the new departure;
and when it was discovered that the new Modern side had not only
alienated one or two of their old comrades, but, so far from being
apologetic, were disposed to claim equal rights with, and in certain
cases superior privileges to, the old boys, the relations became
strained all round.

As it happened, the Modern set consisted of a number of moderate
athletes who could not be wholly ignored in the School sports, and had
no intention of being ignored.  And to add to their crimes they numbered
among them a good number of rich boys, who boasted in public of their
wealth with a freedom which was particularly aggravating to the
Classical seniors, who were for the most part boys to whose parents
money was an important consideration.

As has been said, the rivalry had been growing acute all last term, and
but for Yorke's determined indifference, it might long ago have come to
a rupture.  Now, every one felt that at any moment the peace might be
broken, and civil war break out between the two sides at Fellsgarth.

The School clubs offered a rare opportunity for an exhibition of party
feeling, for they were the common ground on which every one was bound to
meet every one else on _level_ terms.

By an old rule, every member of the House clubs was a member of the
School clubs and had the privilege of electing the committee and
officers for the year.  It was this business which brought together the
crowd that flocked into the Hall to-day; and it was in view of this
critical event that Mr D'Arcy had carefully shut up five voters of the
other side in his study until the election should be over.

"Whatever's to be done?" asked Ashby, with blank countenance.

"Nobody but a born idiot would begin to ask riddles just now!" retorted
D'Arcy surlily.  "Shut up; that's what's to be done."

"I expect it will be all right," persisted the dogged Ashby, venturing
on a further remark.  "They won't let him in, if he's not Wally; or if
they do, they'll go for him."

"I hope they will.  Anyhow we've done our best.  Stick near the door.
We may be able to bundle a few of 'em out before the voting comes on.
Look out, Yorke's speaking.  Yell as hard as you can."

Whereupon Ashby lay his head back and yelled until D'Arcy kicked him and
told him it was time to shut up.

Yorke was moving a resolution that the captains, vice-captains,
secretaries, and treasurers of each house should form the School sports
committee, whose business it would be to arrange matches, keep the
ground, make rules, and generally organise the athletics of Fellsgarth.
He hoped every one would agree to this.

Clapperton, the Modern captain, and head of Forder's house, rose to
second the motion.

"Howl away!" said D'Arcy, nudging his _protege_.  Whereupon Ashby held
on to a desk and howled till the windows shook.

"That'll do," shouted D'Arcy in his ear after a moment or two, and
Ashby, thankful for the relief, shut off steam and awaited his next
orders.

Clapperton was a big, smirking fellow, rather loudly dressed, with a
persuasive voice and what was intended to be a condescending manner.
Some fellows could never make out why Clapperton did not go down in
Fellsgarth.  He tried to be civil, he was lavish with his pocket-money,
and always disclaimed any desire to quarrel with anybody.  And yet no
one oared for him, while of course the out-and-out champions of the
rival side hated him.  He seconded with pleasure the motion of "his
friend Yorke,"--("Cheek!" exclaimed D'Arcy, _sotto voce_; "what business
has he to call our captain his friend!") This was the old rule of
Fellsgarth, and a very good rule.  It meant hard work, but he was always
glad to do what he could for the old School.  (It always riled the
Classics to hear a Modern talking about "the old School," and their
backs went up at this.)  He had been on this committee two years now,
and had had the pleasure in a humble way of helping the clubs through
one or two of their financial difficulties, and he should be glad to
serve again.  He seconded the motion.

It was a trial to one or two who had listened to see that the names were
being put to the vote by Yorke _en bloc_, without giving them the chance
of voting against anybody.  Never mind, their chance for that would
come!

The next business was the election of captain of the clubs; and of
course Yorke was chosen by acclamation.  No one dared oppose him.  Even
"his friend Clapperton," who had the pleasure of proposing him, was sure
every one would be as glad as he would to see "his fellow-captain" (oh,
how the Classics squirmed and ground their teeth at the expression!) at
the head of the clubs.

The pent-up feelings of D'Arcy and those of his way of thinking found
some relief in the demonstration which accompanied the carrying of this
resolution.  It was too good a chance to be lost, and for three minutes
by the clock the Classics stood on their feet and cheered their
champion, glaring defiantly as they did so at the Moderns, who having
held up their hands and cheered a little, relapsed into silence and left
the noise in the hands of the other side.

Then followed the election of vice-captain, which of course had to go to
Clapperton.  This time the Moderns had their demonstration amid the
silence of the Classics, who thought they had never in their lives seen
fellows make such asses of themselves.

It was twenty minutes past the hour, and D'Arcy and Ashby were both
getting uncomfortable and impatient.  What did these Modern idiots want
to waste the time of everybody by standing there and bellowing!  It was
scandalous.

"Shut up--go on to the next vote," they cried, but in vain.  The Moderns
were going to have their full share, if not a little more, of the row,
and to stop them before their time was hopeless.

"Disgusting exhibition, isn't it?" said D'Arcy; "never mind.  Hullo, I
say, there's some one at the door.  It's those chaps!"

No, it was only Fisher minor, who, having waited meekly all this time
outside the deserted gymnasium, now ventured, like a degenerate
Casabianca, to desert his post and come and see what was going forward
in the Hall.

As he tried to enter, a Modern boy, seeing by his ribbon that he was on
the wrong side, put his foot against the door and tried to turn him
back.  But his little plot dismally failed.  For D'Arcy and Ashby,
shocked and horrified witnesses of this scandalous act of corruption,
came to the rescue with a hubbub which even made itself heard above the
shouting.

"Let him in!--howling cheat!--he's trying to shut out one of our side!
Ya-boo!  That's the way you elect your men, is it!  Come in, Fisher
minor.  Let him in, do you hear?  All right; come on, you fellows, and
kick this Modern chap out for a wretched sneak--(that'll be seven off
their side, counting Wheatfield; and one more to us--bully!)  Yah,
cheats! turn 'em out!"

Amid such cries of virtuous indignation, Fisher minor was hauled in, and
his obstructor, by the same _coup de main_, excluded.  Fisher minor
might have had his head turned by this triumphal entry, had he not
recognised in the ejected Modern boy the gentleman to whom he had lent
his half-crown on the previous evening.  Any reminder of yesterday's
misfortunes was depressing to him, and his joy at finding himself on the
right side of the door now was decidedly damped by the knowledge that
his half-crown was on the wrong.  However, there was no time for
explanations, as the shouting had ceased, and an evidently important
event was about to take place.  This was the appointment of treasurer,
for whom each of the rival sides had a candidate; that of the Classics
being Fisher major, and that of the Moderns Brinkman of Forder's house,
a particular enemy of the other side, and reputed to be rich and no
gentlemen.

Both candidates were briefly proposed and seconded by boys of their own
side, and both having declared their intention of going to the vote, a
show of hands was demanded.

The excitement of our young friends at the end of the Hall while this
tedious operation was in progress may well be imagined.  The captain had
sternly ordained silence during the voting; so that all they could do
was to hold up their hands to the very top of their reach, and keep a
wild look-out that they were being counted, and that none of the enemy
was in any way, moral or physical, circumventing them.  As for Fisher
minor, he simply trembled with excitement as he cast his eyes round and
calculated his brother's chances.  He could not comprehend how any one
could dare not to vote for Fisher major; and absorbed in that wonder he
continued to hold up his hand long after the two tellers had agreed
their figure, and the captain had ordered "hands down."

"Fisher major, one hundred and twenty-seven votes; now, hands up for
Brinkman."

"Whew!" said D'Arcy, fanning himself with his handkerchief; "it'll be a
