stiff and unmoveable.  To all outward appearance there was no sign of
softening in the fixed face.

Mrs Saxon's heart sank heavily.  Rowena's lack of response to her
appeal was a bitter disappointment; but she realised that it was useless
to prolong the interview.  A few moments longer she waited, hoping
against hope for a word in reply, then stifling a sigh, she rose from
her seat.

"Well--I must go back to father.  Look after the fire, darling, if you
are going to stay here.  It is getting low, and you must not catch
cold."

She bent as she passed to kiss the unresponsive lips, and walked from
the room carrying a heavy heart in her breast.  "If she had only spoken!
If she had even looked up and smiled!"  Such was the wounded mother
cry; and all the time Rowena's heart was speeding unspoken messages
after her as she went.

"Mother!  I'm sorry.  You are so sweet, and I am a wretch!  I _will_
try!  I'll try my best!"

Alas! the ears of sense could not catch the message, and so the
opportunity passed, and left both hearts aching and oppressed.



CHAPTER SIX.

"What's `rejuiced'?" queried Maud, squeezing herself into the central
place on the big fender, as her brothers and sisters sat roasting
chestnuts by the schoolroom fire one wet afternoon a few days later, and
the question being received by a blank stare of bewilderment she
repeated the word with intensified emphasis.  "_Re-juiced_!  _We're_
rejuiced!  I heard Mary say so in the schoolroom.  She said to nurse
that she didn't know if the missis would be wanting to keep on two
housemaids now she was re-juiced!  Does it mean _poor_?"

"You have no business to listen to servants' conversation; but if you
do, pray spare us the repetition!" said Rowena in her most grown-up
manner.  Maud reflected that ever since mother had spoken of the new
arrangement about lessons, Ro had talked exactly like a governess, and
been just as snappy as snappy.  She bounced on her seat, and wagged her
head in the obstinate manner which she adopted upon provocation.

"I don't listen, but I have ears, and if people speak I am obliged to
hear.  Mary came into the room to dust.  Nurse was darning the
tablecloth.  It's all gone into holes where Gurth spilt the chemical
acid.  It's the one with the little shamrocks for a pattern.  So Nurse
said: `Drat those boys!' and licked the cotton with her tongue, and--"

Hereward and Gurth exchanged glances of resigned boredom, but Dreda
drummed her heels on the floor, and called aloud with startling
emphasis:

"Go on!  Go on!  Who wants to hear about tablecloth patterns, and
licking threads?  Keep to your point, if you have a point to stick to!
If Rowena's is going to give you lessons, she'd better begin by teaching
you not to be such a bore.  You go prosing on and on--"

"I don't.  I'm not.  Bore yourself!  'Twas most intrusting!" insisted
Maud, stolidly.  "They were sort of talking about us all, in a sort of
way as if I couldn't understand, and I understood all the time, and they
said we were rejuiced, and I asked you a simple question what it meant.
When you're perlite to other people, other people should be perlite to
you in return."

"All right, Maud, keep calm, keep calm!  You reduce a thing by taking
something from it.  We are reduced because something--a great deal--has
been taken away from our income, and what remains is not enough to go
round.  I expect the second housemaid will be sent packing, and you will
have to make the beds."

Maud squealed with dismay, then with a gleam of shrewdness nodded her
head, and prophesied sagely:

"It would be worse for you than me if I did!  I'd make them full of
crumples.  I'd get hold of the ends of the clothes, and _Hop_ them down
all together like Mary does when it's her Sunday out, and she's in a
hurry.  _Then_ you'd be in a rage when you got in and your toes stuck
out!"

"I'll make the beds!" announced Dreda, graciously.  "I think all girls
ought to learn to be domestic, and there's a real art in making beds.
I've often thought how much better I could do it than any servant we
have had.  It's the trained intellect, I suppose.  (I do _hate_ you,
Rowena, when you sneer like that!)  F'rinstance--I like my blankets just
up to my chin, and if I tell Mary ten times a day, it's always the
same--she doubles them down till you are all hunkley round the neck.
Then that leaves less to tuck in at the bottom, and if you have a
nightmare and kick, there you are with your feet sticking out in the
cold, and have to get up and tuck them in, when you want to sleep!  And
I can't endure creases.  I like the under sheet stretched as tight as
tight.  Everyone likes a bed made in a special way, and it _ought_ to be
done.  Think of the time one spends in bed!  A third of one's life.
It's a shame not to be comfortable.  I should be an expert in bed-
making.  I'd keep a book to remind me of everyone's special fancies--"

"And lose it the second day!  Play all the experiments you like, but
leave my room alone.  I want no expert.  The ordinary common or garden
housemaid is good enough for me," said Hereward, cruelly.

Dreda reflected sadly that a prophet was not a prophet in her own
country, but she was too much fired with the new idea to relinquish it
without a trial.  Besides, hidden in her heart lay the reviving thought:
"If I could prove that I could be of use in the house, perhaps they'd
let me stay!  I know quite enough lessons as it is!"

The first two nights after hearing of the changed arrangements for her
own education Dreda had cried herself to sleep, and had even succeeded--
with a little difficulty--in squeezing out a few tears as she dressed in
the morning, or what was the use of breaking your heart if no one were
the wiser, or pitied you for your pathetic looks?  By the third morning,
however, her facile nature had adapted itself to the inevitable.  She
was tired of being in the dumps, and reflected that with a little
diplomacy she would be able to "manage" the school governesses as
cleverly as she had done the Spider before them, while the Currant Buns
looked meek, poor-spirited creatures, who would like nothing better than
to be ruled.  "_I'll_ teach them!" prophesied Dreda darkly, and the word
was used in no educational sense.

The future was thus swallowed at a gulp; but all the same Dreda thought
it worth while to interview her mother on the subject of her domestic
ambitions, and was much disappointed to have her generous offer kindly
but firmly refused.

"There is no necessity, dear.  Thank you very much, all the same," Mrs
Saxon said, smilingly.  "We are no longer able to keep up two houses,
but we can afford all the help that is needed for one.  The two
housemaids can keep the bedrooms in order very easily in this fresh
clean air."

Etheldreda put her head on one side and lengthened her upper lip, after
a fashion she affected when she wished to be impressive.

"_Still_," she insisted, obstinately, "when a family is reduced in
circumstances I think it _most_ important that the girls should learn to
be domestic.  I have always understood that in reduced circumstances it
was necessary for the mistress to overlook _everything_, and how can you
learn to do that if you never begin?  It seems to me that one can never
begin too young, and if we _could_ do with only one housemaid, it is our
duty to do so."

Mrs Saxon laughed.  She always did laugh when Dreda waxed impressive,
which was one of that young woman's trials in life.

"Darling Dreda!" she cried, affectionately.  "You shall be as domestic
as ever you please--the more domestic the better; but there is a time
for everything, and this is your time for study.  You must wait until
your education is finished, before you take up home duties.  We are not
going to sacrifice your interests for the sake of a servant's wages.
Work hard, and do your best, dear.  One thing at a time, and that done
well--"

But Dreda refused to be convinced.

"_My_ theory," she announced, firmly, "my theory is that it is stupid to
waste time learning things which you will never need!  As we are
`rejuiced' (the expression had stuck, until the very pronunciation was
unconsciously reproduced), and I can't go to Madame Clerc's and be
finished properly, I should consider that it would be wiser to stop as I
am.  I am very well grounded.  We can't afford to go into society now,
so I shall probably marry a man in a humble position, and it's foolish
to educate me above my rank!"

"Oh, Dreda, Dreda!  Oh!  I haven't laughed for weeks.  You mustn't be
vexed with me for laughing, dear--it's _so_ refreshing!"  And Mrs Saxon
wiped her eyes and chuckled irresistibly, the while her young daughter
regarded her more in pity than in anger.

"I can't see what I have said that is so amusing.  I was speaking _most_
seriously.  I'm fifteen.  It's my own future that is at stake.  Really,
mother!"

"I'm sorry, dear, and I don't mean to be unsympathetic.  I know you are
in earnest, but for the next few years you must consent to be guided by
what father and I believe to be best.  Whatever may be before you, it is
necessary that you have a good education, so put your heart into your
work, and get on as quickly as possible."

Dreda sucked her upper lip in eloquent disgust.

"Parents are so _trying_!" she told herself, mentally.  "They never seem
to think it possible that you know better yourself.  I shall be quite
different with my daughters.  What a pity it is that you can never
manage to be your own mother!"



CHAPTER SEVEN.

During the next three weeks the Saxons settled slowly into the routine
of life as it would in future be spent at the Manor.  To begin with, the
house itself was greatly improved in appearance by the addition of extra
furniture and draperies sent down from the lavishly equipped house in
town.  The cold austerity of the entrance-hall was turned into something
positively approaching cheerfulness by the presence of crimson
portieres, a huge tapestry screen shutting off the staircase, and, best
of all, by a brass brazier which, piled high with blazing coals,
diffused both light and heat, and seemed to speak a cheery welcome to
each new-comer.  The Bechstein grand piano was not only a gain from a
musical point of view, but made a decided improvement in the sparsely
furnished drawing-room, while a few good pictures and ornaments gave a
homelike air which had hitherto been conspicuous by its absence.

Rowena regarded these improvements with the numb unconcern which a
prisoner might manifest over an unimportant alteration in his cell; but
Dreda, as usual, was afire with enthusiasm, and spent a radiantly happy
day playing the part of a charwoman, in apron and rolled-up sleeves.
She washed all the ornaments, exulting in the inky colour of the water
after the operation, and insisting that each member of the household
should ascend to regain the same.

"Isn't it beautifully dirty?" she cried in triumph.  "I scrubbed them
with the nail brush.  You should have seen the dust come out of the
chinks!  I simply dote upon seeing the water turn black.  It's no fun
washing things unless they are _really_ dirty!"

When the additions were viewed as a whole, however, Dreda was not so
content.  She even frowned with displeasure at sight of the luxury in
the hall.

"It's not consistent!" she pronounced, judicially.  "We are _rejuiced_,
and it doesn't look rejuiced!  People in the neighbourhood coming to
call will think we are richer instead of poorer.  You will have to
explain, mother.  It wouldn't be honest if you didn't."

Mrs Saxon's smile was a somewhat painful effort.

"I imagine there will be little need of explanation, Dreda.  News flies
fast in a country place, and our neighbours probably know our affairs as
well as we know them ourselves."

"And are gossiping about us behind our backs, and longing to call and
see how we bear it!" continued Rowena, with that new edge of bitterness
in her voice, which sounded so sadly in her mother's ears.  It needed a
hard struggle with herself before Mrs Saxon could command herself to
reply gently:

"Curiosity is natural, perhaps, but I don't think we need fear anything
unfriendly.  If there should be any exhibition of the sort, it's a
comfort to feel that I can depend upon my grown-up daughter to set an
example of dignity and self-restraint.  My nature is like Dreda's, so
much more impulsive, that you will be a great strength to me, dear."

Oh, that soft answer that turneth away wrath, how omnipotent it is!  The
sneer was wiped off Rowena's face as by a sponge, her blue eyes
glistened, and she stooped her tall young head to press an impetuous
kiss upon her mother's cheek.  For the rest of the day she was her old,
sweet loving self, and the mother was rewarded a thousandfold for the
effort which it had cost her to repress a hasty retort, and replace it
by a word of tenderness and appreciation.

At the end of a fortnight the three boys returned to school, placidly
resigned to a change of circumstances which left their own lives
untouched; and no sooner had they departed than the Spider in her turn
began to pack her boxes, in preparation for her own exit.  For the past
ten years she had been regarded as a member of the family, spending the
greater number of her holidays with her pupils, and being included in
all the household festivities and rejoicings.  It was inevitable that
her absence would cause a blank, and the young people experienced sundry
pangs of conscience as they recalled the want of appreciation with which
they had received their efforts on their behalf.  How they had teased
and lazed, and plotted and schemed, to escape the tasks which she had so
laboriously enforced!  How they had laughed behind her back, imitating
her little mannerisms, and exhorting each other after her invariable
formulae: "Impertinence, my love, is _not_ wit!"

"A young lady should be composed and dignified in demeanour."

"Concentration, my dear, concentration!  That is what you require."
Poor, dear, good Spider; her methods were somewhat behind the times; but
she was the kindest, most faithful of souls.  Everyone was thankful to
know that owing to the recent receipt of a legacy she was able to retire
comfortably from active work, and to look forward to a peaceful
contented home in the family of a beloved niece.  Neither was it a very
serious parting, since nothing was so certain as that so true a friend
must return again and again to the scene of her labours; to see Hereward
in his first uniform; to attend Rowena's marriage; Dreda's coming out;
and inspect the progress of her youngest pupils.  A few tears were shed
when the hour of parting actually arrived, but there was no bitterness
in them on either side, nor were they of any long duration.

And now for Etheldreda's turn!  When the morning dawned on which she was
to depart for school, she felt it fitting that her toilette should
express the melancholy of her mood.  Dreda had a great idea of fitness,
and a costume composed of an old shepherd plaid skirt, a grey flannel
blouse and a black tie seemed admirably symbolic of what she herself
described as "the mourning of her soul."  When it was donned, however,
the result was found to be so extremely unbecoming that resolution
wavered, and collapsed.  After all, the most important matter was to
impress her new companions, and there was no denying that that could be
done most effectively in blue--in just such a blue as was at that moment
hanging in the wardrobe ready for use.  With light-like speed Dreda shed
her dun-coloured garments on to the floor, and in a trice was arrayed in
her prettiest, most becoming costume.

This time the reflection was so pleasing that it was quite an effort to
pull down her chin, and drop her eyelids, with the air of melancholy
resignation which she was determined at all costs to preserve during
breakfast.  Mrs Saxon's face brightened at sight of the pretty blue
dress, but neither she nor any other member of the family mentioned the
fatal word "school."  Rather did each one try to give a cheerful turn to
the conversation, and to lead it towards a discussion of those topics in
which the heroine of the day was the most interested.  "Sops!" murmured
Dreda dramatically to herself.  "Sops!"  She struggled hard to restrain
her longing for a second helping of bacon; but her courage gave out at
the thought of the motor drive across the cold open country.

"I must strengthen myself with plenty of nourishment," she decided, as
she handed over her plate, and accepted the offer of a third cup of
coffee.  Like all pleasant things, however, the meal came to an end at
last, and then the great event of the day could no longer be ignored.
Maud caught the glance exchanged between her parents, and felt herself
freed from her promise of silence.

"_Now_!" she exclaimed, with a gusty sigh of relief.  "Now for the Buns!
_Now_ you'll see which knows most, them or you.  Them, I should think,
'cause they're clever, and you forget.  Miss Bruce said your head was
like a sieve.  Do you remember the day she said it?  She had on her jet
chain, and jingled with the beads.  You'll have to remember not to
forget, or you'll be the bottom of the class.  Fancy three Currant Buns
on top!"

She stopped short, with her characteristic throaty little laugh, and
Dreda glared at her with flashing eyes.  It was really extraordinary
that anyone so stupid as Maud should so often succeed in hitting upon
just the most aggravating thing to say under the circumstances.  Three
Currant Buns on top indeed!  Life would only be endurable if she herself
could seize the leading place, and hold it relentlessly to the end.  She
would not condescend to reply, and Maud was hurriedly nudged, and poked,
and "shoved" into silence by Rowena, who was in an unusually sympathetic
mood, realising how she herself would have felt had fate cast her own
scholastic lot with that of the Misses Webster.

"Never mind her," she whispered, consolingly, as she followed Dreda
upstairs to put on hat and jacket before her departure.  "It's not worth
while troubling yourself about Maud's remarks.  It's impossible to think
that any of those girls will get the better of _you_!  It's hateful, of
course; but perhaps it may not be quite so hateful as we think--"

"Oh, I don't mind.  I'm resigned!  One can only be as miserable as one
can.  Perhaps I'll have an accident some day, riding over those rough
roads, and then it will all be finished.  I don't mind how soon my life
is over!" declared Dreda, harpooning her hat viciously with a pin of
murderous length, ornamented at the head by a life-size imitation of a
tomato.  "But while I _do_ live, I tell you one thing, Rowena, I'll--
I'll _hold my own_!"

"I'm sure of that," assented Rowena, with conviction.  "Look here,
Dreda, would you like me to drive over with you as well as mother?  I
could, you know; and it might break the ice!"

