"Very well, you may go to Mr. Murdock, and see what he can find for you
to do."

Mr. Rockwell sat down to read his letters, and Dick went as directed to
the head clerk.

"Mr. Rockwell sent me to you, Mr. Murdock," he said. "He says you will
find something for me to do."

"Oh, yes, we'll keep you busy," said the head clerk, with a manner very
different from that of the book-keeper. "At present, however, your
duties will be of rather a miscellaneous character. We shall want you
partly for an entry clerk, and partly to run to the post-office, bank,
and so forth."

"All right, sir," said Dick. "I'm ready to do anything that is required
of me. I want to make myself useful."

"That's the right way to feel, my young friend. Some boys are so
big-feeling and put on so many airs, that you'd think they were partners
in the business, instead of beginning at the lowest round of the ladder.
A while ago Mr. Gilbert brought round a cousin of his, about your age,
that he wanted to get in here; but the young gentleman was altogether
too lofty to suit me, so we didn't take him."

"Was the boy's name Roswell Crawford?"

"Yes; do you know him?"

"Not much. He thinks I'm too far beneath him for him to associate with,
but he was kind enough to walk up Nassau Street with me this morning,
just to encourage me a little."

"That was kind in him, certainly," said the head clerk, smiling. "Unless
I am very much mistaken, you will be able to get along without his
patronage."

"I hope so," said Dick.

The rest of the day Dick was kept busy in various ways. He took hold
with a will, and showed himself so efficient that he made a favorable
impression upon every one in the establishment, except the book-keeper.
For some reason or other Mr. Gilbert did not like Dick, and was
determined to oust him from his situation if an opportunity should
offer.




CHAPTER IV.

LIFE AT THE BOARDING-HOUSE.


Dick found his new quarters in Bleecker Street very comfortable. His
room was kept in neat order, which was more than could be said of his
former home in Mott Street. There once a fortnight was thought
sufficient to change the sheets, while both boys were expected to use
the same towel, and make that last a week. Indeed, Mrs. Mooney would
have considered the boys "mighty particular" if they had objected to
such an arrangement. Mrs. Browning, fortunately, was very different, and
Dick found nothing to complain of either in his chamber or in the board
which was furnished.

Dick had felt rather awkward on his first appearance at the table, but
he was beginning to feel more at his ease. It was rather remarkable,
considering his past life, how readily he adapted himself to an
experience so different. He left the store at five o'clock, and got to
his boarding-house in time to get ready for dinner. Dick had now got to
be quite particular about his appearance. He washed his face and hands
thoroughly, and brushed his hair carefully, before appearing at the
table.

Miss Peyton, the lively young lady who has already been mentioned in the
first chapter, sat near the boys, and evidently was quite prepossessed
in their favor. Both had bright and attractive faces, though Dick would
undoubtedly be considered the handsomest. He had a fresh color which
spoke of good health, and was well-formed and strong. Henry Fosdick was
more delicate in appearance; his face was thinner, and rather pale. It
was clear that he was not as well able to fight his way through life as
Dick. But there was something pleasant and attractive in his quiet
sedateness, as well as in the frank honesty and humor that could be read
in the glance of our friend Dick.

"Won't you and your friend stop a little while and sing?" asked Miss
Peyton, addressing Henry Fosdick on the evening of the second day of
Dick's business career.

Fosdick hesitated.

"My friend has an engagement this evening," he said.

"I suppose I may not ask where," said she.

"I am invited to spend the evening with some friends on Madison Avenue,"
said Dick.

"Indeed?" said Miss Peyton, surprised. "I wasn't aware you had such
fashionable friends, or I couldn't have expected to retain you."

"All my friends are not as fashionable," said Dick, wondering what the
young lady would say if she could see his late fellow-lodgers at Mrs.
Mooney's, on Mott Street.

"If I can't hope to keep you this evening, you must promise to stay
awhile to-morrow evening. I hope to have the pleasure of hearing you
sing, Mr. Hunter."

"When I give a concert," said Dick, "I'll be sure to let you in
gratooitous."

"Thank you," said Miss Peyton. "I shall remind you of it. I hope that
time will come very soon."

"Just as soon as I can engage the Academy of Music on reasonable terms."

"You'd better try first in the parlor here. We'll take up a
contribution, to pay you for your exertions."

"Thank you," said Dick. "You're very kind, as the man said to the judge
when he asked him when it would be perfectly agreeable for him to be
hung."

Miss Peyton laughed at this remark, and Dick went upstairs to get ready
for his visit to Madison Avenue.

Our hero felt a little bashful about this visit. He was afraid that he
would do or say something that was improper, or that something would
slip out which would betray his vagabond life of the streets.

"I wish you was going with me, Fosdick," he said.

"You'll get along well enough alone, Dick. Don't be afraid."

"You see I aint used to society, Fosdick."

"Nor I either."

"But it seems to come natural to you. I'm always makin' some blunder."

"You'll get over that in time, Dick. It's because you have so much fun
in you. I am more sober. Miss Peyton seems very much amused by your odd
remarks."

"I have to talk so; I can't think of anything else to say."

"There's one thing, Dick, we mustn't give up at any rate."

"What's that?"

"Studying. We don't either of us know as much as we ought to."

"That's so."

"You can see how much good studying has done for you so far. If it
hadn't been for that, you wouldn't have been able to go into Mr.
Rockwell's employment."

"That's true enough, Fosdick. I'm afraid I don't know enough now."

"You know enough to get along very well for the present, but you want to
rise."

"You're right. When I get to be old and infirm I don't want to be an
errand-boy."

"Nor I either. So, Dick, I think we had better make up our minds to
study an hour or an hour and a half every evening. Of course, you can't
begin this evening, but there are very few when you can't find the
time."

"I'll send a circ'lar to my numerous friends on Fifth Avenue and
Madison, tellin' 'em how much I'm obliged for their kind invitations,
but the claims of literatoor and science can't be neglected."

"Do you know, Dick, I think it might be well for us to begin French?"

"I wonder what Johnny Nolan would say if I should inquire after his
health in the polly-voo language?"

"It wouldn't be the first time you have astonished him."

"Well, Fosdick, I'm in for it if you think it's best. Now tell me what
necktie I shall wear?"

Dick displayed two. One was bright red with large figures, which he had
bought soon after he began to board in Mott Street. The other was a
plain black.

"You'd better wear the black one, Dick," said Fosdick, whose taste was
simpler and better than his friend's.

"It seems to me it don't look handsome enough," said Dick, whose taste
had not yet been formed, and was influenced by the Bowery style of
dress.

"It's more modest, and that is all the better."

"All right. I suppose you know best. Before I get ready I must give a
new shine to my boots. I'm going to make them shine so you can see your
face in them."

"Better let me do that for you, Dick. I can do it while you're dressing,
and that will save time."

"No, Fosdick, I was longer in the business than you, and none of the
boys could beat me on shines."

"I don't know but you're right, Dick. I freely yield the palm to you in
that."

Dick stripped off his coat and vest and went to work with a will. He had
never worked so hard for one of his old customers.

"I'm goin' to give it a twenty-five cent shine," he said.

Just then a knock was heard at the chamber-door.

"Come in!" said Dick, pausing a moment in his labors.

Mr. Clifton, a fellow-boarder, entered with a cigar in his mouth.

"Holloa," said he, "what's up? Going to the theatre, Hunter?"

"No," said Dick. "I'm goin' out to spend the evening with some friends
up in Madison Avenue."

"So I heard you say at the table, but I thought you were joking."

"No," said Dick; "it's a fact."

"Seems to me you handle the brush pretty skilfully," remarked Mr.
Clifton. "I should almost think you had served a regular apprenticeship
at it."

"So I have," answered Dick. "Didn't you ever see me when I blacked boots
on Chatham Square?"

"Good joke!" said the young man, who was far from supposing that Dick
was in earnest. "Oh, yes, of course I've seen you often! Did you make
money at it?"

"I retired on a fortun'," said Dick, "and now I've invested my capital
in mercantile pursuits. There," and he took up one boot, and showed it
to his visitor, "did you ever see a better shine than that?"

"No, I didn't, that's a fact," said Clifton, admiringly. "You beat the
young rascal I employ all hollow. I say, Hunter, if you ever go into the
'shine' business again, I'll be a regular customer of yours."

"He little thinks I've blacked his boots before now," thought Dick.

"All right," said he, aloud. "When a commercial crisis comes, and I fail
in business, I think I'll remember your encouragin' offer, and remind
you of it."

"Have a cigar either of you?" asked Clifton, drawing out a case. "Excuse
my not offering it before."

"No, thank you," said Fosdick.

"Don't smoke, eh? Won't you have one, Hunter?"

"No, thank you. Fosdick is my guardian, and he don't allow it."

"So you're a good boy. Well, I wish you a pleasant evening," and Clifton
sauntered out to find some other companion.

"He wouldn't believe I'd been a boot-black," said Dick, "even after I
told him. I knew he wouldn't, or I wouldn't have said so. Is my hair
parted straight?"

"Yes, it's all right."

"How's my cravat?"

"It'll do. You're getting to be quite a dandy, Dick."

"I want to look respectable; got it right that time. When I visit Turkey
I want to look as the turkeys do. Won't you go with me,--as far as the
door, I mean?"

"Yes, if you're going to walk."

"I'd rather. I feel kind of nervous, and perhaps I'll walk it off."

The two boys got their caps, and walked up Broadway on the west side.
The lights were already lit, and the shop windows made a brilliant
display. At intervals places of amusement opened wide their hospitable
portals, and large placards presented tempting invitations to enter.

They reached Union Square, and, traversing it, again walked up Broadway
to Madison Park. At the upper end of this park commences the beautiful
avenue which bears the same name. Only about half a dozen blocks now
required to be passed, when the boys found themselves opposite a
residence with a very imposing front.

"This is the place," said Dick. "I wish you were going in with me."

"I hope you will have a pleasant time, Dick. Good-by till I see you
again."

Dick felt a little nervous, but he summoned up all his courage, and,
ascending the broad marble steps, rang the bell.




CHAPTER V.

DICK RECEIVES TWO VALUABLE PRESENTS.


At the end of the last chapter we left Dick standing on the steps of Mr.
Rockwell's residence in Madison Avenue. He had rung the bell and was
waiting to have his summons answered. To say that Dick expected to enjoy
his visit would not be strictly true. He knew very well that his street
education had not qualified him to appear to advantage in fashionable
society, and he wished that Fosdick were with him to lend him
countenance.

While under the influence of these feelings the door was thrown open,
and a servant looked at him inquiringly.

"Is Mr. Rockwell at home?" asked Dick.

"Yes. Would you like to see him?"

"He asked me to call this evening."

"What! Are you the boy that saved Master Johnny from drowning?" asked
the servant, her face brightening up, for Johnny was a great favorite in
the house.

"I jumped into the water after him," said Dick, modestly.

"I heard Mr. Rockwell say he was expecting you to-night. Come right in.
Mistress is very anxious to see you."

Placed a little at his ease by this cordial reception, Dick followed the
servant upstairs to a pleasant sitting-room on the second floor. Mr. and
Mrs. Rockwell were seated at a centre-table reading the evening papers,
while Johnny and his sister Grace were constructing a Tower of Babel
with some blocks upon the carpet before the fire.

Dick entered, and stood just within the door, with his cap in his hand,
feeling a little embarrassed.

"I am glad to see you, Richard," said Mr. Rockwell, rising from his
seat, and advancing to our hero with a pleasant smile. "Mrs. Rockwell
has been anxious to see you. My dear, this is the brave boy who saved
our little Johnny."

Mrs. Rockwell, a tall, graceful lady, with a smile that quite captivated
Dick, offered her hand, and said, earnestly, "My brave boy, I have been
wishing to see you. I shudder to think that, but for your prompt
courage, I should now be mourning the loss of my dear little Johnny.
Accept a mother's thanks for a favor so great that she can never hope to
repay it."

Now this acknowledgment was very pleasant to Dick, but it was also very
embarrassing. It is difficult to receive praise gracefully. So our hero,
