age officered the army by day and guarded it by night.  Jack and Harry
and Job and Jenny occupied the cribs, Dolly the cradle.  Each of these
creatures had been transfixed by sleep in the very midst of some
desperate enterprise during the earlier watches of that night, and all
had fallen down in more or less _degage_ and reckless attitudes.  Here a
fat fist, doubled; there a fatter leg, protruded; elsewhere a spread
eagle was represented, with the bedclothes in a heap on its stomach; or
a complex knot was displayed, made up of legs, sheets, blankets, and
arms.  Subsequently the tall but faithful guardian had gone round,
disentangled the knot, reduced the spread eagle, and straightened them
all out.  They now lay, stiff and motionless as mummies, roseate as the
morn, deceptively innocent, with eyes tight shut and mouths wide open--
save in the case of Dolly, whose natural appetite could only be appeased
by the nightly sucking of two of her own fingers.

In the attics three domestics slumbered in peace.  Still higher, a
belated cat reposed in the lee of a chimney-stack.

It was a restful scene, which none but a heartless monster could have
ventured to disturb.  Even Brassey and the Slogger had no intention of
disturbing it--on the contrary, it was their earnest hope that they
might accomplish their designs on the doctor's plate with as little
disturbance as possible.  Their motto was a paraphrase, "Get the plate--
quietly, if you can, but get the plate!"

In the midst of the universal stillness, when no sound was heard save
the sighing of the night-wind or the solemn creaking of an unsuccessful
smoke-curer, there came a voice of alarm down the tube--

"John, do you hear burglars?"

"Oh, dear! no, mum, I don't."

"I'm convinced I hear them at the back of the house!" tubed Mrs
McTougall.

"Indeed it ain't, mum," tubed John in reply.  "It's on'y that little dog
as comed this morning and ain't got used to its noo 'ome yet.  It's
a-whinin', mum; that's wot it is."

"Oh! do get up, John, and put a light beside him; perhaps he's afraid of
the dark."

"Very well, mum," said John, obedient but savage.

He arose, upset the poker and pistol with a hideous clatter, which was
luckily too remote to smite horror into the heart of Mrs McTougall, and
groped his way into the servants' hall.  Lighting a paraffin lamp, he
went to the scullery, using very unfair and harsh language towards my
innocent dog.

"Pompey, you brute!"--the footman had already learned his name--"hold
your noise.  There!"

He set the lamp on the head of the beer cask and returned to bed.

It is believed that poor perplexed Dumps viewed the midnight apparition
with silent surprise, and wagged his tail, being friendly; then gazed at
the lamp after the apparition had retired, until obliged to give the
subject up, like a difficult conundrum, and finally went to sleep--
perchance to dream--of dogs, or me!

It was while Dumps was thus engaged that Brassey and the Slogger walked
up to the front of the house and surveyed it in silence for a few
minutes.  They also took particular observations of both ends of the
street.

"All serene," said Brassey; "now, you go round to the back and use your
key quietly.  Give 'im the bit o' meat quick.  He won't give tongue
arter 'e smells it, and one or two barks won't alarm the 'ouse.  So, get
along, Slogger.  W'en you've got him snug, with a rope round 'is neck
an' 'is head in the flannel bag, just caterwaul an' I'll come round.
Bless the cats! they're a great help to gentlemen in our procession."

Thus admonished, the Slogger chuckled and melted into the darkness,
while Brassey mingled himself with the shadow of a pillar.

The key--lost by the care-taker and found by the burglar--fitted into
the empty lock even more perfectly than that which Mrs McTougall had
conveyed to her mantelpiece some hours before.  It was well oiled too,
and went round in the wards of the lock without giving a chirp, so that
the bolt flew back with one solitary shot.  The report, however, was
loud.  It caused Dumps to return from Dogland and raise his head with a
decided growl.

Nobody heard the growl except the Slogger, who stood perfectly still for
nearly a minute, with his hand on the door-handle.  Then he opened the
door slowly and softly--so slowly and softly that an alarm-bell attached
to it did not ring.

A sharp bow! wow! wow! however, greeted him as he entered, but he was
prompt.  A small piece of meat fell directly under the nose of Dumps, as
he stood bristling in front of his box; and, let me add, when Dumps
bristled it was a sight to behold!

"Good dog--good do-o-og," said the Slogger, in his softest and most
insinuating tone.

Dumps reduced his bark to a growl.

The footman heard both bark and growl, but, attributing them to the
influence of cats, turned on his other side and listened--not for
burglars, innocent man, but for the tube.

It was silent!  Evidently "tired nature" was, in Mrs McTougall's case,
lulled by the "sweet restorer."  Forthwith John betook himself again to
the land of Nod.

"Have another bit?" said the Slogger in quite a friendly way, after the
first bit had been devoured.

My too trusting favourite wagged his tail and innocently accepted the
bribe.

It was good cat's meat.  Dumps liked it.  The enormous supper with which
he had lain down was by that time nearly assimilated, and appetite had
begun to revive.  Going down on his knee the young burglar held out a
third morsel of temptation in his hand.  Dumps meekly advanced and took
the meat.  It was a sad illustration of the ease with which even a dog
descends from bad to worse.

While he was engaged with it the Slogger gently patted his head.

Suddenly Dumps found his muzzle grasped and held tight in a powerful
hand.  He tried to bark and yell, but could produce nothing better than
a scarcely audible whine.  His sides were at the same instant grasped by
a pair of powerful knees, while a rope was twisted round his neck, and
the process of strangulation began.

But strangulation was not the Slogger's intention.  He had been
carefully warned not to kill.

"Mind, now, you don't screw 'im up too tight," Brassey had said, when
giving the boy his instructions before starting.  "Dogs is vurth munny.
Just 'old 'im tight and quiet till you get the flannel bag on 'is head,
and then stand by till I've sacked the swag."

Accordingly, having effected the bagging of the dog's head, the young
burglar went to the door, holding Dumps tight in his arms, and uttered a
pretty loud and life-like caterwaul.  Brassey heard it, emerged from the
shade of his pillar, and was soon beside his comrade.

When Dumps smelt and heard the new-comer, he redoubled his efforts to
free his head and yell, but the Slogger was too much for him.

Few words were wasted on this occasion.  The couple understood their
work.  Brassey took up the lamp.

"Wery considerate of 'em to 'ave a light all ready for us," he muttered,
as he lowered the flame a little, and glided into the kitchen, leaving
the Slogger on guard in the scullery.  Here he found a variety of gins
and snares carefully placed for him--and such as he--by strict orders of
Mrs McTougall.  Besides a swing-bell on the window shutter--similar to
that which had done so little service on the scullery door--there was a
coal-scuttle with the kitchen tongs balanced against it and a tin
slop-pail in company with the kitchen shovel, and a watering-pan,
which--the poker being already engaged to John--was balanced on its own
rose and handle, all ready to fail with a touch.  These outworks being
echelloned along the floor rendered it impossible for an intruder to
cross the kitchen in the dark without overturning one or more of them.
Thanks to the lamp, Brassey steered his way carefully and with a grim
smile.

At John Waters's door he paused and listened.  John's nose revealed his
condition.

Gliding up the stairs on shoeless feet the burglar entered the
dining-room, picked the locks of the sideboard with marvellous celerity,
unfolded a canvas bag, and placed therein whatever valuables he could
lay hands on.  Proceeding next to the drawing-room floor, he began to
examine and appropriate the articles of _vertu_ that appeared to him
most valuable.

Not being a perfect judge of such matters, Mr Brassey was naturally
puzzled with some of them.  One in particular caused him to regard it
with frowning attention for nearly a minute before he came to the
conclusion that it was "vurth munny."  He placed the lamp on the small
table near the window, from which he had lifted the ornament in
question, and sat down on a crimson chair with gilded legs to examine it
more critically.

Meanwhile the Slogger, left in the dark with the still fitfully
struggling Dumps, employed his leisure in running over some of the
salient events of his past career, and in trying to ascertain, by the
very faint light that came from a distant street-lamp, what was the
nature of his immediate surroundings.  His nose told him that the cask
at his elbow was beer.  His exploring right hand told him that the tap
was in it.  His native intelligence suggested a tumbler on the head of
the cask, and the exploring hand proved the idea to be correct.

"Brassey was wery 'ard on me to-night," he thought.  "I'd like to have a
swig."

But Dumps was sadly in the way.  To remove his left hand even for an
instant from the dog's muzzle was not to be thought of.  In this dilemma
he resolved to tie up the said muzzle, and the legs also, even at the
risk of causing death.  It would not take more than a minute to draw a
tumblerful, and any dog worth a straw could hold his wind for a minute.
He would try.  He did try, and was yet in the act of drawing the beer
when my doggie burst his bonds by a frantic effort to be free.  Probably
the hairy nature of his little body had rendered a firm bond impossible.
At all events, he suddenly found his legs loose.  Another effort, more
frantic than before, set free the muzzle, and then there arose on the
still night air a yell so shrill, so loud, so indescribably horrible,
that its conception must be left entirely to the reader's imagination.

At the same instant Dumps scurried into the kitchen.  The scuttle and
tongs went down, the slop-pail and shovel followed suit, also the
watering-pan, into which latter Dumps went head foremost as it fell, and
from its interior another yell issued with such resonant power that the
first yell was a mere chirp by contrast.  The Slogger fled from the
scene like an evil spirit, while John Waters sprang up and grasped the
pistol and poker.

The effect on Brassey in the drawing-room cannot be conceived, much less
described.  He shot, as it were, out of the crimson-gilded chair and
overturned the lamp, which burst on the floor.  Being half full of
paraffin oil it instantly set fire to the gauze window-curtains.  The
burglar made straight for the stairs.  John Waters, observing the light,
dashed up the same, and the two met face to face on the landing,
breathing hate and glaring defiance!



CHAPTER SIX.

RELATES A STIRRING INNOCENT.

Now it was at this critical moment that I chanced to come upon the
scene.

I had just ascertained from the brass plate on the door that Dr
McTougall dwelt there, and was thinking what an ugly unromantic name
that was for a pretty girl as I descended the steps, when Dumps's first
yell broke upon my astonished ears.  I recognised the voice at once,
though I must confess that the second yell from the interior of the
watering-pan perplexed me not a little, but the hideous clatter with
which it was associated, and the sudden bursting out of flames in the
drawing-room, drove all thoughts of Dumps instantly away.

My first impulse was to rush to the nearest fire-station; but a wild
shouting in the lobby of the house arrested me.  I rang the bell
violently.  At the same moment I heard the report of a pistol, and a
savage curse, as a bullet came crashing through the door and went close
past my head.  Then I heard a blow, followed by a groan.  This was
succeeded by female shrieks overhead, and the violent undoing of the
bolts, locks, and chains of the front door.

Thought is quick.  Burglary flashed into my mind!  A villainous-looking
fellow leaped out as the door flew open.  I recognised him instantly as
the man who had sold Dumps to me.  I put my foot in front of him.  He
went over it with a wild pitch, and descended the steps on his nose!

I was about to leap on him when a policeman came tearing round the
corner, just in time to receive the stunned Brassey with open arms, as
he rose and staggered forward.

"Just so.  Don't give way too much to your feelings!  I'll take care of
you, my poor unfortunate fellow," said the policeman, as a brother in
blue came to his assistance.

Already one of those ubiquitous creatures, a street-boy, had flown to
the fire-station on the wings of hope and joy, and an engine came
careering round the corner as I turned to rush up the stairs, which were
already filled with smoke.

I dashed in the first door I came to.  A lady, partially clothed, stood
there pale as death, and motionless.

"Quick, madam! descend! the house is on fire!"  I gasped in sharp
sentences as I seized her.  "Where is your--your (she looked young)
_sister_?"  I cried, as she resisted my efforts to lead her out.

"I've no sister!" she shrieked.

"Your daughter, then!  Quick, direct me!"

"Oh! my darling!" she cried, wringing her hands.

"Where?"  I shouted in desperation, for the smoke was thickening.

"Up-stairs," she screamed, and rushed out, intending evidently to go up.

I caught her round the waist and forced her down the stairs, thrust her
into the arms of an ascending fireman, and then ran up again, taking
three steps at a time.  The cry of a child attracted me.  I made for a
door opposite, and burst it open.  The scene that presented itself was
striking.  Out of four cribs and a cradle arose five cones of
bed-clothes, with a pretty little curly head surmounting each cone, and
ten eyes blazing with amazement.  A tall nurse stood erect in the middle
of the floor with outstretched arms, glaring.

Instantly I grasped a cone in each arm and bore it from the room.
Blinded with smoke, I ran like a thunderbolt into the arms of a gigantic
fireman.

"Take it easy, sir.  You'll do far more work if you keep cool.  Straight
on to front room!  Fire-escape's there by this time."

I understood, and darted into a front room, through the window of which
the head of the fire-escape entered at the same moment, sending glass in
splinters all over us.  It was immediately drawn back a little, enabling
me to throw up the window-sash and thrust the two children into the arms
of another fireman, whose head suddenly emerged from the smoke that rose
from the windows below.  I could see that the fire was roaring out into
the street, and lighting up hundreds of faces below, while the steady
clank of engines told that the brigade was busily at work fighting the
flames.  But I had no time to look or think.  Indeed, I felt as if I had
no power of volition properly my own, but that I acted under the strong
impulse of another spirit within me.

Darting back towards the nursery I met the first fireman dragging with
his right hand the tall nurse, who seemed unreasonably to struggle
against him, while in his left arm he carried two of the children, and
the baby by its night-dress in his teeth.

I saw at a glance that he had emptied the nursery, and turned to search
for another door.  During the whole of this scene--which passed in a few
minutes--a feeling of desperate anxiety possessed me as to the fate of
the young lady to whom I had given up my doggie.  I felt persuaded she
slept on the same floor with the children, and groped about the passage
in search of another door.  By this time the smoke was so dense that I
was all but suffocated.  A minute or two more and it would be too late.
I could not see.  Suddenly I felt a door and kicked it open.  The black
smoke entered with me, but it was still clear enough inside for me to
perceive the form of a girl lying on the floor.  It was she!

"Miss McTougall!"  I shouted, endeavouring to rouse her; but she had
fainted.  Not a moment now to lose.  A lurid tongue of flame came up the
staircase.  I rolled a blanket round the girl--head and all.  She was
very light.  In the excitement of the moment I raised her as if she had
been a child, and darted back towards the passage, but the few moments I
had lost almost cost us our lives.  I knew that to breathe the dense
smoke would be certain suffocation, and went through it holding my
breath like a diver.  I felt as if the hot flames were playing round my
head, and smelt the singeing of my own hair.  Another moment and I had
reached the window, where the grim but welcome head of the escape still
rested.  With a desperate bound I went head first into the shoot, taking
my precious bundle along with me.

A fireman chanced to be going down the shoot at the time, carefully
piloting one of the maids who had been rescued from the attics, and
checking his speed with outspread legs.  Against him I canonned with
tremendous force, and sent him and his charge in a heap to the bottom.

This was fortunate, for the pace at which I must have otherwise come
down would have probably broken my neck.  As it was, I felt so stunned
that I nearly lost consciousness.  Still I retained my senses
sufficiently to observe a stout elderly little man in full evening
dress, with his coat slit up behind to his neck, his face
half-blackened, and his shaggy hair flying wildly in all directions--
chiefly upwards.  Amid wild cheering from the crowd I confusedly heard
the conversation that followed.

"They're all accounted for now, sir," said a policeman, who supported
me.

The elderly gentleman had leaped forward with an exclamation of earnest
thankfulness, and unrolled the blanket.

"Not hurt!  No, thank God.  Lift her carefully now.  To the same
house.--And who are you?" he added, turning and looking full at me as I
leaned in a dazed condition on the fireman's shoulder.  I heard the
question and saw the speaker, but could not reply.

"This is the gen'leman as saved two o' the child'n an' the young lady,"
said the tall fireman, whom I recognised as the one into whose bosom I
had plunged on the upper floor.

"Ay, an' he's the gen'leman," said another fireman, "who shoved your
missus, sir, into my arms, w'en she was bent on runnin' up-stairs."

"Is this so?" said the little gentleman, stepping forward and grasping
my hand.

Still I could not speak.  I felt as if the whole affair were a dream,
and looked on and listened with a vacant smile.

Just at that moment a long, melancholy wail rose above the roaring of
the fire and clanking of the engines.

The cry restored me at once.

"Dumps! my doggie!"  I exclaimed; and, bursting through the crowd,
rushed towards the now furiously-burning house, but strong hands
restrained me.

"What dog is it?" asked the elderly gentleman.  A man, drenched,
blackened, and bloodstained, whom I had not before observed, here said--

"A noo dog, sir, Dumps by name, come to us this wery day.  We putt 'im
in the scullery for the night."

Again I made a desperate effort to return to the burning house, but was
restrained as before.

"All right, sir," whispered a fireman in a confidential tone, "I know
the scullery.  The fire ain't got down there yet.  Your dog can only
have bin damaged by water as yet.  I'll save 'im sir, never fear."

He went off with a quiet little nod that did much to comfort me.
Meanwhile the elderly gentleman sought to induce me to leave the place
and obtain refreshment in the house of a friendly neighbour, who had
taken in his family.

"You need rest, my dear sir," he said; "come, I must take you in hand.
You have rendered me a service which I can never repay.  What?
Obstinate!  Do you know that I am a doctor, sir, and must be obeyed?"

I smiled, but refused to move until the fate of Dumps was ascertained.

Presently the fireman returned with my doggie in his arms.

Poor Dumps!  He was a pitiable sight.  Tons of hot water had been
pouring on his devoted head, and his shaggy, shapeless coat was so
plastered to his long, little body, that he looked more like a drowned
weazel than a terrier.  He was trembling violently, and whined
piteously, as they gave him to me; nevertheless, he attempted to wag his
tail and lick my hands.  In both attempts he failed.  His tail was too
wet to wag--but it wriggled.

"He'd have saved himself, sir," said the man who brought him, "only
there was a rope round his neck, which had caught on a coal-scuttle and
held him.  He's not hurt, sir, though he do seem as if some one had bin
tryin' to choke him."

"My poor doggie!" said I, fondling him.

"He won't want washin' for some time to come," observed one of the
bystanders.

There was a laugh at this.

"Come; now the dog is safe you have no reason for refusing to go with
me," said the elderly gentleman, who, I now understood, was the master
of the burning house.

As we walked away he asked my name and profession, and I thought he
smiled with peculiar satisfaction when I said I was a student of
medicine.

"Oh, indeed!" he said; "well--we shall see.  But here we are.  This is
the house of my good friend Dobson.  City man--capital fellow, like all
City men--ahem!  He has put his house at my disposal at this very trying
period of my existence."

"But are you sure, Dr McTougall, that _all_ the household is saved?"  I
asked, becoming more thoroughly awake to the tremendous reality of the
scene through which I had just passed.

"Sure! my good fellow, d'you think I'd be talking thus quietly to you if
I were _not_ sure?  Yes, thanks to you and the firemen, under God,
there's not a hair of their heads injured."

"Are you--I beg pardon--are you quite sure?  Have you seen Miss
McTougall since she--"

"Miss McTougall!" exclaimed the doctor, with a laugh.  "D'you mean my
little Jenny by that dignified title?"

"Well, of course, I did not know her name, and she is not _very_ large;
but I brought her down the shoot with such violence that--"

An explosion of laughter from the doctor stopped me as I entered a large
library, the powerful lights of which at first dazzled me.

"Here, Dobson, let me introduce you to the man who has saved my whole
family, and who has mistaken Miss Blythe for my Jenny!--Why, sir," he
continued, turning to me, "the bundle you brought down so
unceremoniously is only my governess.  Ah!  I'd give twenty thousand
pounds down on the spot if she were only my daughter.  My Jenny will be
a lucky woman if she grows up to be like her."

"I congratulate you, Mr Mellon," said the City man, shaking me warmly
by the hand.

"You have acted with admirable promptitude--which is most important at a
fire--and they tell me that the header you took into the escape, with
Miss Blythe in your arms, was the finest acrobatic feat that has been
seen off the stage."

"I say, Dobson, where have you stowed my wife and the children?  I want
to introduce him to them."

"In the dining-room," returned the City man.  "You see, I thought it
would be more agreeable that they should be all together until their
nerves are calmed, so I had mattresses, blankets, etcetera, brought
down.  Being a bachelor, as you know, I could do nothing more than place
the wardrobes of my domestics at the disposal of the ladies.  The things
are not, indeed, a very good fit, but--this way, Mr Mellon."

The City man, who was tall and handsome, ushered his guests into what he
styled his hospital, and there, ranged in a row along the wall, were
five shakedowns, with a child on each.  Seldom have I beheld a finer
sight than the sparkling lustre of their ten still glaring eyes!  Two
pleasant young domestics were engaged in feeding the smaller ones with
jam and pudding.  We arrange the words advisedly, because the jam was,
out of all proportion, too much for the pudding.  The elder children
were feeding themselves with the same materials, and in the same
relative proportions.  Mrs McTougall, in a blue cotton gown with white
spots, which belonged to the housemaid, reclined on a sofa; she was
deadly pale, and the expression of horror was not quite removed from her
countenance.

Beside her, administering restoratives, sat Miss Blythe, in a chintz
dress belonging to the cook, which was ridiculously too large for her.
She was dishevelled and flushed, and looked so pleasantly anxious about
Mrs McTougall that I almost forgave her having robbed me of my doggie.
