various huge creatures that were lying so near him.

It says much for Tom's powers of wood-craft that he managed to advance
as near as he did to these animals without disturbing them.  Few hunters
could have done it; but it must be remembered that our hero, like all
other heroes, was a man of unusual and astonishing parts!

While he hesitated for a few moments, undecided whether to fire at the
crocodiles or the hippopotami, one of the latter suddenly uttered a
prolonged snort or snore, and opened a mouth of such awful dimensions
that Tom's head and shoulders would have easily found room in it.  As he
gazed into the dark red throat he felt that the wild fictions of
untravelled men fell far short of the facts of actual life, in regard to
grandeur and horribility, and it struck him that if the front half of a
hippopotamus were sewed to the rear half of a crocodile there would be
produced a monster incomparably more grand and horrible than the
fiercest dragon St. George ever slew!  While these ideas were passing
quickly through his excited brain, the boat, which he had totally
forgotten, came quietly round the bend of the river above him.  But the
sharp-eared and quick-eyed denizens of the wilderness were on the alert;
it had scarcely shown its prow round the point of land, and the
hippopotamus had not quite completed its lazy yawn, when the entire
winged host rose with a rushing noise so thunderous, yet so soft and
peculiar, that words cannot convey the idea of the sight and sound.  At
the same time, many grunts and snorts and heavy plunges told that sundry
amphibious creatures had been disturbed, and were seeking safety in the
clear stream.

Tom hesitated no longer.  He aimed at the yawning hippopotamus and
fired, hitting it on the skull, but at such an angle that the ball
glanced off.  If there was noise before, the riot and confusion now was
indescribable!  Water-fowl that had not moved at the first alarm now
sprang in myriads from reeds and sedges, and darkened the very air.  The
two alligators just under Tom's nose spun their tails in the air with a
whirl of awful energy that seemed quite incompatible with their sluggish
nature, and rushed into the river.  The hippopotami dived with a splash
that covered the water around them with foam, and sent a wave of
considerable size to the shore.  The sudden burst of excitement, noise,
splutter, and confusion was not less impressive than the previous calm
had been, but Tom had not leisure to contemplate it, being himself
involved in the whirl.  Four shots from the boat told him that his
companions were also engaged.  One of the crocodiles re-appeared
suddenly as if to have another look at Tom, who discharged his second
barrel at it, sent a ball into its brain, and turned it over dead.  He
reloaded in great haste, and was in the act of capping when he heard a
loud shout in the direction of the boat, and looking up, observed that
Wilkins was standing in the bow gesticulating violently.  He listened
for a moment, but could not make out what he said.

"Hallo!" he cried, "shout louder; I don't hear you."

Again Wilkins shouted at the top of his voice, and waved his arms more
frantically than before.  Tom could not make out the words.  He judged,
however, that no man would put himself to such violent physical exertion
without good reason, so he turned and looked cautiously around him.
Presently he heard a crashing sound in the bushes, and a few moments
afterwards observed three buffaloes tearing along the path in which he
stood.  It was these that Wilkins had seen from the boat when he
attempted in vain to warn his friend.  Tom jumped behind a bush, and as
they passed tried to fire, but the foliage was so dense that he failed
to get a good aim.  Reserving his fire, therefore, he dashed after them
at full speed.  After running some distance the buffaloes stood still,
and the nearest bull turned round and looked at Tom, who instantly sent
a two ounce ball crashing into his shoulder.  This turned them, and they
all three made off at once, but the wounded one fell behind.  Tom
therefore stopped to reload, feeling pretty sure of him.  Starting off
in pursuit, he gained on the wounded animal at every stride, and was
about to fire again, when his limbs were for a moment paralysed, and his
heart was made almost to stand still at the sight of three full-grown
lions which sprang at the unfortunate brute from a neighbouring thicket.
They had no doubt gone there to rest for the day, but the sight of a
lame and bleeding buffalo was a temptation too strong for them.  The
lions did not leap upon him, but, seizing him with their teeth and
claws, stood on their hind legs and tried to tear him down with terrible
ferocity.

Our hero, who, as we have said, was for a few moments bereft of the
power of action, could do nothing but stand and gaze in amazement.  All
the dreams of his youth and manhood were as nothing to this!  The poor
buffalo fought nobly, but it had no chance against such odds, and would
certainly have been torn to pieces and devoured had not Tom recovered
his self-possession in a few minutes.  Creeping up to within thirty
yards he fired at one of the lions with such good aim that it fell dead
almost on the spot, having time only to turn and seize a bush savagely
with its teeth ere it died.  The second barrel was discharged, but not
with the same effect.  Another of the lions was wounded, and sprang into
the bushes with an angry roar.  The third merely lifted his head, looked
at Tom for a moment as if with indignant surprise, and then went on
tearing at the carcass as hard as ever.

With a feeling of thankfulness that this particular king of the forest
had treated him so contemptuously, Tom slunk behind a tree and recharged
his gun, after which he advanced cautiously and sent a ball crashing
through the lion's shoulder.  It _ought_ to have killed him, he thought,
but it did not, for he made off as fast as possible, just as Wilkins and
Mafuta arrived, panting, on the scene of action.

"What a magnificent fellow!" exclaimed Wilkins going up to the dead
lion.  "Bravissimo, Tom, you've done it at last."

"Done _it_!" cried Tom, as he loaded hastily, "why, I've all but done
_three_.  Follow up the trail, man, as fast as you can.  I'll overtake
you in no time!"

Wilkins did not wait for more, but dashed into the thicket after Mafuta,
who had preceded him.

Tom was quickly on their heels, and they had not gone far when one of
the wounded lions was found lying on the ground quite dead.  The other
was not overtaken, but, as Wilkins said, two lions, a buffalo, and a
hippopotamus, which latter he had shot from the boat, was not a bad
beginning!

That night they encamped under the shelter of a spreading tree, and as
they reclined at full length between two fires, which were kindled to
keep off the wild beasts, enjoying a pipe after having feasted
luxuriously on hippopotamus steaks and marrow bones, Tom Brown remarked:
"Well, my dream has been realised at last, and, upon my word, I have not
been disappointed."



CHAPTER FIVE.

MORE ABOUT LIONS!

As we have now introduced our readers to the lion, we think it but right
to say something about his aspect and character, as given by some of our
best authorities.

Dr Livingstone, that greatest of African travellers, seems to be of
opinion that untravelled men are prone to overrate the lion, both as to
his appearance and courage.  From him we learn that when a lion is met
with in the day-time--a circumstance by no means uncommon in Africa--the
traveller will be disappointed with the appearance of the animal which
they had been accustomed to hear styled "noble" and "majestic"; that it
is somewhat larger than the largest-sized dog, partakes very strongly of
the canine features, and does not much resemble our usual drawings of
lions, which he condemns as bearing too strong a resemblance to "old
women's faces in nightcaps."  The Doctor also talks slightingly of its
roar, and says that having made particular inquiry as to the opinions of
European travellers who have heard the roar of the lion and that of the
ostrich, he found they invariably admitted that they could not detect
any difference between the two when the animals were at a distance.

Now, really, although we are bound to admit that the Doctor's opinion is
of great weight, we cannot, without a humble protest, allow ourselves to
be thus ruthlessly stripped of all our romantic notions in regard to the
"king of beasts"!  We suspect that the Doctor, disgusted with the
"twaddle" that has undoubtedly been talked in all ages about the
"magnanimity" of the "noble" lion and his "terrific aspect," has been
led unintentionally to underrate him.  In this land we have
opportunities of seeing and hearing the lion in his captive state; and
we think that most readers will sympathise with us when we say that even
in a cage he has at least a very grand and noble _aspect_; and that,
when about to be fed, his intermittent growls and small roars, so to
speak, have something very awful and impressive, which nothing like the
bellowing of a bull can at all equal.  To say that the roar of the
ostrich is equal to that of the lion is no argument at all; it does not
degrade the latter, it merely exalts the former.  And further, in regard
to aspect, the illustrations in Dr Livingstone's own most interesting
work go far to prove that the lion is magnificent in appearance.

Thus much we dare venture to say, because on these points we, with all
men, are in a position to form a judgment for ourselves.  We, however,
readily believe the great traveller when he tells us that nothing he
ever heard of the lion led him to ascribe to it a noble _character_, and
that it possesses none of the nobility of the Newfoundland or St.
Bernard Dogs.  The courage of the lion, although not greater than that
of most large and powerful animals, is, without doubt, quite sufficient!
But he fortunately possesses a wholesome dread of man, else would he
certainly long ere now have become king of Africa as well as of beasts.
When encountered in the day-time, he usually stands a second or two
gazing, then turns slowly round and walks leisurely away for a dozen
paces or so, looking over his shoulder as he goes.  Soon he begins to
trot, and, when he thinks himself out of sight, bounds off like a
greyhound.  As a rule, there is not the smallest danger of a lion
attacking man by day, if he be not molested, except when he happens to
have a wife and young family with him.  Then, indeed, his bravery will
induce him to face almost any danger.  If a man happens to pass to
windward of a lion and lioness with cubs, both parents will rush at him,
but instances of this kind ere of rare occurrence.

It would seem that light of any kind has a tendency to scare away lions.
Bright moonlight is a safeguard against them, as well as daylight.  So
well is this understood, that on moonlight nights it is not thought
necessary to tie up the oxen, which are left loose by the wagons, while
on dark rainy nights it is deemed absolutely necessary to tether them,
because if a lion chanced to be in the vicinity, he would be almost sure
to attack, and perhaps kill, an ox, notwithstanding the vigilance of
guards and the light of the camp-fires.  He always approaches
stealthily, like the cat, except when wounded; but anything having the
appearance of a trap will induce him to refrain from making the last
fatal spring.  This is a peculiarity of the whole feline species.  It
has been found in India that when a hunter pickets a goat on a plain as
a bait, a tiger has whipped it off so quickly by a stroke of his paw
that it was impossible to take aim.  To obviate this difficulty a small
pit is dug, in the bottom of which the goat is picketed, with a small
stone tied in its ear to make it cry the whole night.  When the
suspicious tiger sees the appearance of a trap he walks round and round
the pit, thus giving the hunter in ambush a fair shot.

When a hungry lion is watching for prey, the sight of any animal will
make him commence stalking it.  On one occasion a man was very busy
stalking a rhinoceros, when, happening to glance behind him, he found to
his consternation that a lion was _stalking him_! he escaped by
springing up a tree.

The strength of the lion is tremendous, owing to the immense mass of
muscle around its jaws, shoulders, and forearms.  What one hears,
however, of his sometimes seizing an ox or a horse in his mouth and
running away with it, as a cat does with a mouse, and even leaping
hedges, etcetera, is nonsense.  Dr Livingstone says that most of the
feats of strength he has seen performed by lions consisted, not in
carrying, but dragging or trailing the carcass along the ground.

He usually seizes his prey by the flank near the hind leg, or by the
throat below the jaw.  He has his particular likings and tit-bits, and
is very expert in carving out the parts of an animal that please him
best.  An eland may be sometimes disembowelled by a lion so completely
that he scarcely seems cut up at all, and the bowels and fatty parts of
the interior form a full meal for the lion, however large or hungry he
may be.  His pert little follower the jackal usually goes after him,
sniffing about and waiting for a share, and is sometimes punished for
his impudent familiarity with a stroke of the lion's paw, which of
course kills him.

Lions are never seen in herds, but sometimes six or eight--probably one
family--are seen hunting together.  Much has been said and written about
the courage of the lion, and his ability to attack and kill any other
animal.  His powers in this respect have been overrated.  It is
questionable if a single lion ever attacks a full-grown buffalo.  When
he assails a calf, the cow will rush upon him, and one toss from her
horns is sufficient to kill him.  The amount of roaring usually heard at
night, when a buffalo is killed, seems to indicate that more than one
lion has been engaged in the fight.  They never attack any elephants,
except the calves.  "Every living thing," writes Livingstone, "retires
before the lordly elephant, yet a full-grown one would be an easier prey
to the lion than a rhinoceros.  The lion rushes off at the mere sight of
this latter beast!"

When a lion grows too old to hunt game, he frequently retires to spend
the decline of life in the suburbs of a native village, where he is well
content to live by killing goats.  A woman or a child happening to go
out at night sometimes falls a prey also.  Being unable, of course, to
alter this style of life, when once he is reduced to it, he becomes
habitually what is styled a "man-eater," and from this circumstance has
arisen the idea that when a lion has once tasted human flesh he prefers
it to any other.  In reality a "man-eater" is an old fellow who cannot
manage to get anything else to eat, and who might perhaps be more
appropriately styled a woman and child eater!  When extreme old age
comes upon him in the remote deserts, far from human habitations, he is
constrained to appease the cravings of hunger with mice!  The African
lion is of a tawny colour, like that of some mastiffs.  The mane in the
male is large, and gives the idea of great power.  In some the ends of
the hair are black, and these go by the name of black-maned lions, but,
as a whole, all of them look of a tawny yellow colour.

Having said thus much about his general character and appearance, we
shall resume the thread of our story, and show how the lions behaved to
Tom Brown and his friends the very night after the event narrated in the
last chapter.

The hunters had got back to the wagons, and were about to turn in for
the night, in order to recruit for the work of the following day, when
the sky became overcast, and gave every indication of a coming storm.  A
buffalo bull had been shot by Pearson an hour before the arrival of our
hero and his companions, and the Caffres were busily engaged on his
carcass.  A fire had been lighted, the animal cut up, and part of him
roasted, and the natives alternately ate a lump of roasted flesh and an
equal quantity of the inside raw!  When the sky began to darken,
however, they desisted for a time, and set about making preparations for
the coming storm.

It burst upon them ere long with awful fury and grandeur, the elements
warring with incredible vehemence.  Rain fell in such floods that it was
scarcely possible to keep the fires burning, and the night was so pitchy
dark that the hand could scarcely be seen when held close to the eyes.
To add to the horror of the scene, crashing peals of thunder appeared to
rend the sky, and these were preceded by flashes of lightning so vivid
that each left the travellers with the impression of being stone-blind.

After an hour or two the storm passed by, leaving them drenched to the
skin.  However, the fires were stirred up, and things made as
comfortable as circumstances would admit of.

Just a little before daybreak they were all wakened by the bellowing of
the oxen and the barking of dogs.

"Something there," muttered Hicks, leaping up and seizing his gun.

The major, Tom Brown, Wilkins, Pearson, and the others were immediately
on their feet and wide awake.  There was just light enough to
distinguish objects dimly when close at hand; but the surrounding woods
resembled a wall of impenetrable darkness.  Close to the wagon in which
our hero lay the natives had erected a temporary hut of grass, about six
feet high.  On the top of this he saw a dark form, which, by the sound
of his voice, he recognised to be that of a native named Jumbo, who was
more noted for good nature and drollery than for courage.  He was
shouting lustily for a percussion-cap.  Tom sprang on the top of the hut
