the boy.

"Perhaps they keeps 'em in a box where you can't see 'em," suggested
Tiny, who was very unwilling to relinquish her hope.

"Pigs might fly, and they will when they sells books at Fellness,"
remarked Dick.

"Where does Harry Hayes get his from?" suddenly asked the girl; and at
the same moment she espied a speck on the horizon, which she decided was
a fisherman's boat. "He's coming, Dick, dad's coming," she exclaimed.
"Make haste--make haste and fill up the baskets;" and she tore away at
the seaweed, piling it into the baskets as fast as her small hands would
permit. "Now we'll carry one down," she said, taking hold of the handle.
"Catch hold, Dick;" for she wanted to be at the edge of the sands by the
time the boat touched the shore.

But Dick was in no such hurry to meet his father. "There's plenty of
time," he said, leisurely untying a knot in a piece of string.

"No there isn't, Dick; don't you know I'm going to Fellness in the
boat."

"But you're afraid," said the boy; "ain't father tried to coax you lots
o' times to go out with him, and yer never would? You'll just get to the
edge, and when yer sees it rock a bit yer'll run away."

"No, I won't, Dick, this time," said the little girl. But as she spoke a
shiver of fear and dread ran through her frame at the thought of the
swaying boat.

Dick saw it, and laughed. "Didn't I tell yer you was afraid," he said,
in a mocking tone; "what's the good of going down there, when you're
frightened?"

"But I want a book, Dick; I must learn to read, and find out what we
want to know. Oh, do make haste!" she added, as she saw the boat
approaching the shore.

Dick was still laughing, but he helped her carry the basket, though he
teased her as they went along about being frightened. They got across
the sands with their samphire, just as Coomber and Bob were springing
ashore.

"Oh, daddy, take me with yer to Fellness," called Tiny, shutting her
eyes as she spoke that she might not see the treacherous waves and the
swaying boat.

"Halloo, halloo! What now, deary?" exclaimed Coomber. And it was
wonderful to see the change in his hard face as he lifted the little
girl in his arms and kissed her.

"She says she'll go," said Dick, "but I don't believe she means it."

"Yes I do. You'll take me, daddy, won't yer--'cos I've picked a lot of
samphire--all that, and another basketful up there? Go and fetch it,
Bob, and daddy can put it in the boat. And I'm going, too."

"So you shall, deary, so you shall," said the old fisherman, in a
pleased tone, for he had often tried to coax her out with him on the
sea; but the memory of that awful night on the bar sands still clung to
her, and the sight of the boat, swayed about at the mercy of the waves,
filled her with a nameless terror.

"There won't be a storm, will there?" asked Tiny, with a shiver of fear,
as the fisherman carefully lifted her in and placed her beside the
basket of samphire.

"My deary, if I thought the wind 'ud be even a bit fresh to-night, I
wouldn't take yer," said the fisherman, in an earnest tone.

He had never been so tender with one of his own children--unless it was
to the little girl lying in the churchyard--as he was to this little
waif of the sea; and now, as he pushed off from the shore, he was
careful to keep the old boat as steady as possible, and sat watching her
little frightened face as he plied his oars. He kept as close to the
beach, too, as he well could, just skirting the sand-banks, so that she
should have the comfort of seeing the land all the way along.

After a few minutes Tiny grew less frightened, and ventured to ask a
question about where they were going.

"Oh, I'll take yer to see Dame Peters while Bob unloads the boat," said
Coomber, nodding at her in an approving manner.

"And shall I see the shops?" asked Tiny; for she did not believe what
Dick had told her.

"Shops, shops!" repeated the fisherman, resting on his oars for a minute
to stare at the little girl. "Well, there's a shop," he said, slowly;
"but I don't see what you can want there."

"Do they sell books?" asked Tiny, eagerly.

For answer the fisherman burst into a loud laugh. "What does a little
'un like you know about books?" he said. "But I know of something they
do sell, as 'll suit you a deal better; they sell sweets, and almond
rock, as well as 'bacca and bread, and you shall have some, my deary."

The fisherman expected a joyous outburst in anticipation of these
unwonted dainties, but the little girl said slowly--

"Don't they sell books, too, daddy? I'd rather have a book than almond
rock," she added.

"Why, what do you want with a book, a little 'un like you?" said
Coomber, impatiently.

"We both wants it, Dick and me; we wants to find out whether God loves
boys as well as gals."

The fisherman looked at her serious little face for a minute, and then
burst into a laugh again. "Well, you are a rum 'un as ever I came
across. Did you hear that, Bob?" he asked, appealing to his elder son,
who was steering. Bob turned his sulky face round.

"What's she saying now?" he asked.

"What was, it little 'un--whether God loved boys and gals, wasn't it?"
asked the fisherman, who was highly amused at the question.

"He don't love none of us, I can tell her that," said Bob, sharply. "He
forgot us long ago, if ever He knowed anything about us."

"There, what d'ye think o' that, little 'un?" said the fisherman,
pulling away at the oars.

Tiny looked perplexed for a minute or two, but at length she said: "I
think God knows all about the Point, 'cos He loves me, and He listens
when I say my prayers. But s'pose I tell him," she suddenly added, as
though the thought had just occurred to her; "I can ask Him to bless you
and mammy, and Dick and Bob. But I should like to get a book," she said,
in conclusion.

"Oh, the sweets 'll do as well," said the fisherman, who saw little use
in books. He might have humoured Tiny in what he looked upon as a most
extraordinary whim, but he never remembered seeing such a thing as a
book in Fellness all the years he had known the place. People might have
books, some of them, at least, but they were not of much use to
fisher-folks, and he rather despised them.

The sun had gone down before they landed; but the moon was rising; and
so, between daylight and moonlight, they would be able to get back
without any difficulty, when the fish and samphire were disposed of.

"Now, Bob, get her unloaded, while I take the little 'un up to see Dame
Peters," said Coomber, as he lifted Tiny out of the boat.

She was looking round eagerly in search of the houses and shops, for in
spite of what she had been told, she could not divest herself of the
idea that Fellness was a grand, glorious place, where everything could
be bought if people only had fish and seaweed enough; and surely two big
baskets of samphire were sufficient to buy a book.

But to her disappointment she saw only a few lounging fishermen and
children--like herself and Dick--instead of the crowds of people she had
expected; and as for shops--well, she could see a row of stone cottages
at a distance. There might be a dozen, perhaps, and a few sheds and
outbuildings, but the rest of the landscape was flat and unoccupied as
their own Point; and at the sight Tiny hid her face in the fisherman's
neck and burst into tears.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

TINY'S TREASURE.


"Well, now, if you can make her out, it's more than I can," said
Coomber, pausing in the doorway of Dame Peters' cottage, after he had
seated Tiny by the old woman's fire.

"Oh, leave her here for half an hour; she'll be all right by the time
you come back; there's no 'counting for children, and she may feel
frightened a bit, for all she ain't cried till she got ashore."

"It's just that that beats me," said the fisherman; "she's as lively as
you please in the boat, but as soon as she gets out, down she pops her
head, and begins to pipe her eye."

"Well, there, you go and look after Perkins and the fish, and I'll see
to her," said Dame Peters, a little impatiently; for she had some
potatoes cooking for her husband's supper, and she knew they needed
attention. After looking to these, she turned to Tiny, who had dried her
tears by this time, and sat watching the old woman. "D'ye like to see
pictures, deary?" she asked; and at the same time she opened the top
drawer of an old-fashioned chest of drawers, and brought out a print,
which she laid on the table, and lifted Tiny, chair and all, close up to
look at it.

Pictures were not to be seen in every cottage a few years ago, as they
may be now. The _Band of Hope Review_ and _British Workman_ had not been
heard of in Fellness at the time of which we write, and so Dame Peters
was very choice of her picture, although she knew nothing about the
reading at the back of it.

Tiny brightened up wonderfully when her eyes fell upon this treasure;
but after looking at it for some minutes, while Dame Peters turned out
the potatoes, she ventured to lift it up and look at the other side, and
she exclaimed joyfully: "Oh, it's a book! There's reading on it!"

"What, what!" exclaimed the old woman, turning from the fireplace to see
what had happened. "What is it, child?"

"See, see, there's reading--G O D! What does that spell?" asked Tiny,
looking up in the old woman's face, her finger still resting on the word
she had picked out.

"Bless the child, how should I know? S'pose it is some sort of reading,
as you say; but I never learned a letter in my life."

"And I've a'most forgot," said Tiny, sadly; and then her finger roved
over the printed page, and she found that she could remember most of the
letters now she saw them again; but how to put them together was the
difficulty. She had forgotten how to do this entirely. G O D spelt a
word familiar enough to her at one time, but which of all the words she
used now those letters were intended to signify, she could not remember.
Again and again her finger returned to the well-remembered letters, but
beyond this her memory failed her; and she sat, with puckered brow and
steadfast eyes, still looking at the printed page instead of the
picture, when Coomber came back.

"Oh, daddy, daddy, look here!" exclaimed Tiny; "here's a book with
reading!"

"She's just sat and looked at them letters, as she calls 'em, ever since
you've been gone," said Dame Peters, in a half-offended tone; for her
picture was not valued as much as it ought to be, she thought.

"Oh, she's a rum 'un," said Coomber. "Well, now, are you ready, little
'un?" he asked.

Tiny looked up wistfully in the old woman's face. "Couldn't I take this
home, and show it to Dick?" she asked, timidly, laying her hand on the
print.

"Take my picture home!" exclaimed the old woman.

Coomber turned the paper over, and looked at it contemptuously. "Peters
got this when he went to Grimsby, I s'pose?" he said.

"Yes, he did."

"Well now, couldn't you let her have it, and let Peters bring you
another?" said the fisherman, who was anxious that his darling should be
gratified if possible.

But the old woman was little more than a child herself over this
picture, and was unwilling to part with it at first. At last she agreed
to sell it to Tiny for a basket of samphire, for this seaweed made a
kind of pickle among the fisher-folk, and was of some marketable value,
too, for it did not grow everywhere along the coast, although round
Bermuda Point it flourished in great luxuriance.

Tiny was only too glad to obtain such a treasure on such easy terms,
although she was paying about five times the value of it; and when it
had been folded up and carefully stowed away in Coomber's pocket, she
was quite ready to go to the boat, although Dame Peters pressed them to
stay and have some of the hot potatoes for supper.

Tiny seemed brimful of joy that night; and when she was seated in the
boat, and they were rowing over the placid water, she so far forgot her
fears as to begin singing. Something in the surroundings had recalled to
her mind the time when she used to sing nearly every night her mother's
favourite hymn. It all came back to her as freshly as though she had
sung it only last week; and her sweet young voice rang out bold and
clear--

    "Star of Peace to wanderers weary,
      Bright the beams that smile on me;
    Cheer the pilot's vision dreary,
      Far, far at sea."

She paused there, not feeling quite sure of the next verse; but Coomber
said quickly--

"Go on, deary, go on; don't you know the next bit?"

"I'll try," said Tiny; and again the voice rang out in its childish
treble--

    "Star of Hope, gleam on the billow,
      Bless the soul that sighs for Thee;
    Bless the sailor's lonely pillow,
      Far, far at sea."

"Who told you that, deary?" asked the fisherman, eagerly, when she
paused again.

"My mother used to sing it every night. She used to say it was meant for
daddy. And she told me I must always sing it, too, only somehow I've
