was Stickler, "business does bring about much of the disaster that often
appertains to wedded life, but mischief is sometimes done by other
means, such, for instance, as accidents, robberies, murders--"

"Oh!  Mr Stickler," suddenly interrupted a stout, smiling lady, named
Larrabel, who usually did the audience part of Mrs Twitter's little tea
parties, "how _can_ you suggest such ideas, especially when Mr Twitter
is unusually late?"

Mr Stickler protested that he had no intention of alarming the company
by disagreeable suggestions, that he had spoken of accident, robbery,
and murder in the abstract.

"There, you've said it all over again," interrupted Mrs Larrabel, with
an unwonted frown.

"But then," continued Stickler, regardless of the interruption, "a
broken leg, or a rifled pocket and stunned person, or a cut windpipe,
may be applicable to the argument in hand without being applied to Mr
Twitter."

"Surely," said Mrs Loper, who deemed the reply unanswerable.

In this edifying strain the conversation flowed on until the evening
grew late and the party began to grow alarmed.

"I do hope nothing has happened to him," said Mrs Loper, with a
solemnised face.

"I think not.  I have seen him come home much later than this--though
not often," said the hostess, the only one of the party who seemed quite
at ease, and who led the conversation back again into shallower
channels.

As the night advanced, however, the alarm became deeper, and it was even
suggested by Mrs Loper that Crackaby should proceed to Twitter's
office--a distance of three miles--to inquire whether and when he had
left; while the smiling Mrs Larrabel proposed to send information to
the headquarters of the police in Scotland Yard, because the police knew
everything, and could find out anything.

"You have no idea, my dear," she said, "how clever they are at Scotland
Yard.  Would you believe it, I left my umbrellar the other day in a cab,
and I didn't know the number of the cab, for numbers won't remain in my
head, nor the look of the cabman, for I never look at cabmen, they are
so rude sometimes.  I didn't even remember the place where I got into
the cab, for I can't remember places when I've to go to so many, so I
gave up my umbrellar for lost and was going away, when a policeman
stepped up to me and asked in a very civil tone if I had lost anything.
He was so polite and pleasant that I told him of my loss, though I knew
it would do me no good, as he had not seen the cab or the cabman.

"`I think, madam,' he said, `that if you go down to Scotland Yard
to-morrow morning, you may probably find it there.'

"`Young man,' said I, `do you take me for a fool!'

"`No, madam, I don't,' he replied.

"`Or do you take my umbrellar for a fool,' said I, `that it should walk
down to Scotland Yard of its own accord and wait there till I called for
it?'

"`Certainly not, madam,' he answered with such a pleasant smile that I
half forgave him.

"`Nevertheless if you happen to be in the neighbourhood of Scotland Yard
to-morrow,' he added, `it might be as well to call in and inquire.'

"`Thank you,' said I, with a stiff bow as I left him.  On the way home,
however, I thought there might be something in it, so I did go down to
Scotland Yard next day, where I was received with as much civility as if
I had been a lady of quality, and was taken to a room as full of
umbrellas as an egg's full of meat--almost.

"`You'd know the umbrellar if you saw it, madam,' said the polite
constable who escorted me.

"`Know it, sir!' said I, `yes, I should think I would.  Seven and
sixpence it cost me--new, and I've only had it a week--brown silk with a
plain handle--why, there it is!'  And there it was sure enough, and he
gave it to me at once, only requiring me to write my name in a book,
which I did with great difficulty because of my gloves, and being so
nervous.  Now, how did the young policeman that spoke to me the day
before know that my umbrellar would go there, and how did it get there?
They say the days of miracles are over, but I don't think so, for that
was a miracle if ever there was one."

"The days of miracles are indeed over, ma'am," said the black sheep,
"but then that is no reason why things which are in themselves
commonplace should not appear miraculous to the uninstructed mind.  When
I inform you that our laws compel cabmen under heavy penalties to convey
left umbrellas and parcels to the police-office, the miracle may not
seem quite so surprising."

Most people dislike to have their miracles unmasked.  Mrs Larrabel
turned from the black sheep to her hostess without replying, and
repeated her suggestion about making inquiries at Scotland Yard--thus
delicately showing that although, possibly, convinced, she was by no
means converted.

They were interrupted at this point by a hurried knock at the street
door.

"There he is at last," exclaimed every one.

"It is his knock, certainly," said Mrs Twitter, with a perplexed look,
"but rather peculiar--not so firm as usual--there it is again!
Impatient!  I never knew my Sam impatient before in all our wedded life.
You'd better open the door, dear," she said, turning to the eldest
Twitter, he being the only one of the six who was privileged to sit up
late, "Mary seems to have fallen asleep."

Before the eldest Twitter could obey, the maligned Mary was heard to
open the door and utter an exclamation of surprise, and her master's
step was heard to ascend the stair rather unsteadily.

The guests looked at each other anxiously.  It might be that to some
minds--certainly to that of the black sheep--visions of violated
blue-ribbonism occurred.  As certainly these visions did _not_ occur to
Mrs Twitter.  She would sooner have doubted her clergyman than her
husband.  Trustfulness formed a prominent part of her character, and her
confidence in her Sam was unbounded.

Even when her husband came against the drawing-room door with an awkward
bang--the passage being dark--opened it with a fling, and stood before
the guests with a flushed countenance, blazing eyes, a peculiar
deprecatory smile, and a dirty ragged bundle in his arms, she did not
doubt him.

"Forgive me, my dear," he said, gazing at his wife in a manner that
might well have justified the black sheep's thought, "screwed," "I--I--
business kept me in the office very late, and then--" He cast an
imbecile glance at the bundle.

"What _ever_ have you got there, Sam?" asked his wondering wife.

"Goodness me! it moves!" exclaimed Mrs Loper.

"Live poultry!" thought the black sheep, and visions of police cells and
penal servitude floated before his depraved mental vision.

"Yes, Mrs Loper, it moves.  It is alive--though not very much alive, I
fear.  My dear, I've found--found a baby--picked it up in the street.
Not a soul there but me.  Would have perished or been trodden on if I
had not taken it up.  See here!"

He untied the dirty bundle as he spoke, and uncovered the round little
pinched face with the great solemn eyes, which gazed, still wonderingly,
at the assembled company.

It is due to the assembled company to add that it returned the gaze with
compound interest.



CHAPTER FIVE.

TREATS STILL FURTHER OF RICHES, POVERTY, BABIES, AND POLICE.

When Mr and Mrs Twitter had dismissed the few friends that night, they
sat down at their own fireside, with no one near them but the little
foundling, which lay in the youngest Twitter's disused cradle, gazing at
them with its usual solemnity, for it did not seem to require sleep.
They opened up their minds to each other thus:--

"Now, Samuel," said Mrs Twitter, "the question is, what are you going
to do with it?"

"Well, Mariar," returned her spouse, with an assumption of profound
gravity, "I suppose we must send it to the workhouse."

"You know quite well, Sam, that you don't mean that," said Mrs Twitter,
"the dear little forsaken mite!  Just look at its solemn eyes.  It has
been clearly cast upon us, Sam, and it seems to me that we are bound to
look after it."

"What! with six of our own, Mariar?"

"Yes, Sam.  Isn't there a song which says something about luck in odd
numbers?"

"And with only 500 pounds a year?" objected Mr Twitter.

"_Only_ five hundred.  How can you speak so?  We are _rich_ with five
hundred.  Can we not educate our little ones?"

"Yes, my dear."

"And entertain our friends?"

"Yes, my love,--with crumpets and tea."

"Don't forget muffins and bloater paste, and German sausage and
occasional legs of mutton, you ungrateful man!"

"I don't forget 'em, Mariar.  My recollection of 'em is powerful; I may
even say vivid."

"Well," continued the lady, "haven't you been able to lend small sums on
several occasions to friends--"

"Yes, my dear,--and they are _still_ loans," murmured the husband.

"And don't we give a little--I sometimes think too little--regularly to
the poor, and to the church, and haven't we got a nest-egg laid by in
the Post-office savings-bank?"

"All true, Mariar, and all _your_ doing.  But for your thrifty ways, and
economical tendencies, and rare financial abilities, I should have been
bankrupt long ere now."

Mr Twitter was nothing more than just in this statement of his wife's
character.  She was one of those happily constituted women who make the
best and the most of everything, and who, while by no means turning her
eyes away from the dark sides of things, nevertheless gave people the
impression that she saw only their bright sides.  Her economy would have
degenerated into nearness if it had not been commensurate with her
liberality, for while, on the one hand, she was ever anxious, almost
eager, to give to the needy and suffering every penny that she could
spare, she was, on the other hand, strictly economical in trifles.
Indeed Mrs Twitter's vocabulary did not contain the word trifle.  One
of her favourite texts of Scripture, which was always in her mind, and
which she had illuminated in gold and hung on her bedroom walls with
many other words of God, was, "Gather up the fragments, that nothing be
lost."  Acting on this principle with all her heart, she gathered up the
fragments of time, so that she had always a good deal of that commodity
to spare, and was never in a hurry.  She gathered up bits of twine and
made neat little rings of them, which she deposited in a basket--a
pretty large basket--which in time became such a repository of wealth in
that respect that the six Twitters never failed to find the exact size
and quality of cordage wanted by them--and, indeed, even after the
eldest, Sammy, came to the years of discretion, if he had suddenly
required a cable suited to restrain a first-rate iron-clad, his mind
would, in the first blush of the thing, have reverted to mother's
basket!  If friends wrote short notes to Mrs Twitter--which they often
did, for the sympathetic find plenty of correspondents--the blank leaves
were always torn off and consigned to a scrap-paper box, and the pile
grew big enough at last to have set up a small stationer in business.
And so with everything that came under her influence at home or abroad.
She emphatically did what she could to prevent waste, and became a
living fulfilment of the well-known proverb, for as she wasted not she
wanted not.

But to return from this digression--

"Well, then," said Mrs Twitter, "don't go and find fault, Samuel," (she
used the name in full when anxious to be impressive), "with what
Providence has given us, by putting the word `only' to it, for we are
_rich_ with five hundred a year."

Mr Twitter freely admitted that he was wrong, and said he would be more
careful in future of the use to which he put the word "only."

"But," said he, "we haven't a hole or corner in the house to put the
poor thing in.  To be sure, there's the coal-cellar and the scuttle
might be rigged up as a cradle, but--"

He paused, and looked at his wife.  The deceiver did not mean all this
to be taken as a real objection.  He was himself anxious to retain the
infant, and only made this show of opposition to enlist Maria more
certainly on his side.

"Not a corner!" she exclaimed, "why, is there not the whole parlour?  Do
you suppose that a baby requires a four-post bed, and a wash-hand-stand,
and a five-foot mirror?  Couldn't we lift the poor darling in and out in
half a minute?  Besides, there is our own room.  I feel as if there was
an uncomfortable want of some sort ever since _our_ baby was
transplanted to the nursery.  So we will establish the old bassinet and
put the mite there."

"And what shall we call it, Maria?"

"Call it--why, call it--call it--Mite--no name could be more
appropriate."

"But, my love, Mite, if a name at all, is a man's--that is, it sounds
like a masculine name."

"Call it Mita, then."

And so it was named, and thus that poor little waif came to be adopted
by that "rich" family.

It seems to be our mission, at this time, to introduce our readers to
various homes--the homes of England, so to speak!  But let not our
readers become impatient, while we lead the way to one more home, and
open the door with our secret latch-key.

This home is in some respects peculiar.  It is not a poor one, for it is
comfortable and clean.  Neither is it a rich one, for there are few
ornaments, and no luxuries about it.  Over the fire stoops a comely
young woman, as well as one can judge, at least, from the rather faint
light that enters through a small window facing a brick wall.  The wall
is only five feet from the window, and some previous occupant of the
rooms had painted on it a rough landscape, with three very green trees
and a very blue lake, and a swan in the middle thereof, sitting on an
inverted swan which was meant to be his reflection, but somehow seemed
rather more real than himself.  The picture is better, perhaps, than the
bricks were, yet it is not enlivening.  The only other objects in the
room worth mentioning are, a particularly small book-shelf in a corner;
a cuckoo-clock on the mantel-shelf, an engraved portrait of Queen
Victoria on the wall opposite in a gilt frame, and a portrait of Sir
Robert Peel in a frame of rosewood beside it.

On a little table in the centre of the room are the remains of a repast.
Under the table is a very small child, probably four years of age.
Near the window is another small, but older child--a boy of about six or
seven.  He is engaged in fitting on his little head a great black cloth
helmet with a bronze badge, and a peak behind as well as before.

Having nearly extinguished himself with the helmet, the small boy seizes
a very large truncheon, and makes a desperate effort to flourish it.

Close to the comely woman stands a very tall, very handsome, and very
powerful man, who is putting in the uppermost buttons of a
police-constable's uniform.

Behold, reader, the _tableau vivant_ to which we would call your
attention!

"Where d'you go on duty to-day, Giles," asked the comely young woman,
raising her face to that of her husband.

"Oxford Circus," replied the policeman.  "It is the first time I've been
put on fixed-point duty.  That's the reason I'm able to breakfast with
you and the children, Molly, instead of being off at half-past five in
the morning as usual.  I shall be on for a month."

"I'm glad of it, Giles, for it gives the children a chance of seeing
something of you.  I wish you'd let me look at that cut on your
shoulder.  Do!"

"No, no, Molly," returned the man, as he pushed his wife playfully away
from him.  "Hands off!  You know the punishment for assaulting the
police is heavy!  Now then, Monty," (to the boy), "give up my helmet and
truncheon.  I must be off."

"Not yet, daddy," cried Monty, "I's a pleeceman of the A Division,
Number 2, 'ats me, an' I'm goin' to catch a t'ief.  I 'mell 'im."

"You smell him, do you?  Where is he, d'you think?"

"Oh!  I know," replied the small policeman--here he came close up to his
father, and, getting on tiptoe, said in a very audible whisper, "he's
under de table, but don' tell 'im I know.  His name's Joe!"

"All right, I'll keep quiet, Monty, but look alive and nab him quick,
for I must be off."

Thus urged the small policeman went on tiptoe to the table, made a
sudden dive under it, and collared his little brother.

The arrest, however, being far more prompt than had been expected, the
"t'ief" refused to be captured.  A struggle ensued, in the course of
which the helmet rolled off, a corner of the tablecloth was pulled down,
and the earthenware teapot fell with a crash to the floor.

"It's my duty, I fear," said Giles, "to take you both into custody and
lock you up in a cell for breaking the teapot as well as the peace, but
I'll be merciful and let you off this time, Monty, if you lend your
mother a hand to pick up the pieces."

Monty agreed to accept this compromise.  The helmet and truncheon were
put to their proper uses, and the merciful police-constable went out "on
duty."



CHAPTER SIX.

WEALTH PAYS A VISIT TO POVERTY.

It was an interesting sight to watch police-constable Number 666 as he
went through the performance of his arduous duties that day at the
Regent Circus in Oxford Street.
