home.

"What is the matter with your hands, uncle?" asked Will, observing that
both were bandaged.

"They tried the thumbscrews on me," said Spence with a pitiful smile,
glancing at his injured members.  "They wanted to force me to sign the
Bond, which I declined to do--first, because it required me to perform
impossibilities; and, second, because it was such as no Government in
the world has a right to exact or freeman to sign.  They were going to
put the boot on me at first, but the officer in command ordered them to
try the thumbscrews.  This was lucky, for a man may get along with
damaged thumbs, but it would have been hard to travel with crippled
legs!  I held out though, until the pain became so great that I couldn't
help giving a tremendous yell.  This seemed to touch the officer with
pity, for he ordered his men to let me be.  Soon afterwards your mother
and I managed to give them the slip, and we came on here."

"But why came you here, uncle?" asked Will.

"Because I don't want to be taken to Edinburgh and hanged.  Besides,
after hearing of your temporary settlement with Black, I thought the
safest place for your mother would be beside yourself."

When Wallace explained the cause of his own journey, and the condition
of the district around Black's farm, the plans of David Spence had to be
altered.  He resolved, after consideration and prayer, to take to the
mountains and remain in hiding, while Mrs. Wallace should go to
Edinburgh, as already planned, and live with Mrs. Black.

"But it will never do to take her along with yourself, Will," said
Spence.  "She cannot walk a step farther.  We must try to get her a
horse, and let her journey along with some o' the armed bands that
attended the conventicle at Skeoch Hill.  They will be sure to be
returning this way in a day or two."

"You are right," said the minister who has already been introduced, and
who overheard the concluding remark as he came forward.  "The armed men
will be passing this way in a day or two, and we will take good care of
your mother, young sir, while she remains with us."

"Just so," rejoined Spence.  "I'll see to that; so, nephew, you and your
comrade Quentin may continue your journey with easy minds.  You'll need
all your caution to avoid being taken up and convicted, for the tyrants
are in such a state of mind just now that if a man only _looks_
independent they suspect him, and there is but a short road between
suspicion and the gallows now."

"Humph! we'll be as innocent-lookin' an' submissive as bairns," remarked
Quentin Dick, with a grim smile on his lips and a frown on his brow that
were the reverse of childlike.

Convinced that Spence's arrangement for his mother's safety was the best
in the circumstances, Wallace left her, though somewhat reluctantly, in
the care of the outlawed Covenanters, and resumed his journey with the
shepherd after a few hours' rest.

Proceeding with great caution, they succeeded in avoiding the soldiers
who scoured the country until, towards evening, while crossing a rising
ground they were met suddenly by two troopers.  A thicket and bend in
the road had, up to that moment, concealed them from view.  Level
grass-fields bordered the road on either side, so that successful flight
was impossible.

"Wull ye fecht?" asked Quentin, in a quick subdued voice.

"Of course I will," returned Wallace.

"Ca' canny at first, then.  Be humble an' _awfu'_ meek, till I say
`_Noo_!'"

The troopers were upon them almost as soon as this was uttered.

"Ho! my fine fellows," exclaimed one of them, riding up to Quentin with
drawn sword, "fanatics, I'll be bound.  Where from and where away now?"

"We come, honoured sir, frae Irongray, an' we're gaun to Ed'nbury t' buy
cattle," answered Quentin with downcast eyes.

"Indeed, oho! then you must needs have the cash wherewith to buy the
cattle.  Where is it?"

"In ma pooch," said the shepherd with a deprecating glance at his
pocket.

"Hand it over, then, my good fellow.  Fanatics are not allowed to have
money or to purchase cattle nowadays."

"But, honoured sir, we're no fannyteeks.  We're honest shepherds."

The lamb-like expression of Quentin Dick's face as he said this was such
that Wallace had considerable difficulty in restraining an outburst of
laughter, despite their critical position.  He maintained his gravity,
however, and firmly grasped his staff, which, like that of his
companion, was a blackthorn modelled somewhat on the pattern of the club
of Hercules.

"Here, Melville," said the first trooper, "hold my horse while I ease
this `honest shepherd' of his purse."

Sheathing his sword, he drew a pistol from its holster, and, handing the
reins to his companion, dismounted.

"NOO!" exclaimed Quentin, bringing his staff down on the trooper's iron
headpiece with a terrific thwack.  Like a flash of lightning the club of
Wallace rang and split upon that of the other horseman, who fell
headlong to the ground.

Strong arms have seldom occasion to repeat a well-delivered blow.  While
the soldiers lay prone upon the road their startled horses galloped back
the way they had come.

"That's unfort'nit," said Quentin.  "Thae twa look like an
advance-gaird, an' if so, the main body'll no be lang o' gallopin' up to
see what's the maitter.  It behoves us to rin!"

The only port of refuge that appeared to them as they looked quickly
round was a clump of trees on a ridge out of which rose the spire of a
church.

"The kirk's but a puir sanctuary nooadays," remarked the shepherd, as he
set off across the fields at a quick run, "but it's oor only chance."

They had not quite gained the ridge referred to when the danger that
Quentin feared overtook them.  A small company of dragoons was seen
galloping along the road.

"We may gain the wood before they see us," suggested Will Wallace.

"If it _was_ a wud I wadna care for the sodgers," replied his comrade,
"but it's only a bit plantation.  We'll jist mak' for the manse an' hide
if we can i' the coal-hole or some place."

As he spoke a shout from the troopers told that they had been seen, and
several of them leaving the road dashed across the field in pursuit.

Now, it chanced that at that quiet evening hour the young curate of the
district, the Reverend Frank Selby, was enjoying a game of quoits with a
neighbouring curate, the Reverend George Lawless, on a piece of ground
at the rear of the manse.  The Reverend Frank was a genial Lowlander of
the muscular type.  The Reverend George was a renegade Highland-man of
the cadaverous order.  The first was a harum-scarum young pastor with a
be-as-jolly-as-you-can spirit, and had accepted his office at the
recommendation of a relative in power.  The second was a mean-spirited
wolf in sheep's clothing, who, like his compatriot Archbishop Sharp, had
sold his kirk and country as well as his soul for what he deemed some
personal advantage.  As may well be supposed, neither of those curates
was a shining light in the ministry.

"Missed again!  I find it as hard to beat you, Lawless, as I do to get
my parishioners to come to church," exclaimed the Reverend Frank with a
good-humoured laugh as his quoit struck the ground and, having been
badly thrown, rolled away.

"That's because you treat your quoits carelessly, as you treat your
parishioners," returned the Reverend George, as he made a magnificent
throw and ringed the tee.

"Bravo! that's splendid!" exclaimed Selby.

"Not bad," returned Lawless.  "You see, you want more decision with the
throw--as with the congregation.  If you will persist in refusing to
report delinquents and have them heavily fined or intercommuned, you
must expect an empty church.  Mine is fairly full just now, and I have
weeded out most of the incorrigibles."

"I will never increase my congregation by such means, and I have no wish
to weed out the incorrigibles," rejoined Selby, becoming grave as he
made another and a better throw.

At that moment our fugitive shepherds, dashing round the corner of the
manse, almost plunged into the arms of the Reverend Frank Selby.  They
pulled up, panting and uncertain how to act.

"You seem in haste, friends," said the curate, with an urbane smile.

"Oot o' the fryin'-pan into the fire!" growled Quentin, grasping his
staff and setting his teeth.

"If you will condescend to explain the frying-pan I may perhaps relieve
you from the fire," said Selby with emphasis.

Wallace observed the tone and grasped at the forlorn hope.

"The dragoons are after us, sir," he said eagerly; "unless you can hide
us we are lost!"

"If you are honest men," interrupted the Reverend George Lawless, with
extreme severity of tone and look, "you have no occasion to hide--"

"Bub we're _not_ honest men," interrupted Quentin in a spirit of almost
hilarious desperation, "we're fannyteeks,--rebels,--Covenanters,--born
eediots--"

"Then," observed Lawless, with increasing austerity, "you richly
deserve--"

"George!" said the Reverend Frank sharply, "you are in my parish just
now, and I expect you to respect my wishes.  Throw your plaids, sticks,
and bonnets behind that bush, my lads--well out of sight--so.  Now, cast
your coats, and join us in our game."

The fugitives understood and swiftly obeyed him.  While they were
hastily stripping off their coats Selby took his brother curate aside,
and, looking him sternly in the face, said--"Now, George Lawless, if you
by word or look interfere with my plans, I will give you cause to repent
it to the latest day of your life."

If any one had seen the countenance of the Reverend George at that
moment he would have observed that it became suddenly clothed with an
air of meekness that was by no means attractive.

At the time we write of, any curate might, with the assistance of the
soldiers, fine whom he pleased, and as much as he pleased, or he might,
by reporting a parishioner an absentee from public worship, consign him
or her to prison, or even to the gallows.  But though all the curates
were in an utterly false position they were not all equally depraved.
Selby was one who felt more or less of shame at the contemptible part he
was expected to play.

When the troopers came thundering round the corner of the manse a few
minutes later, Quentin Dick, in his shirt sleeves, was in the act of
making a beautiful throw, and Will Wallace was watching him with
interest.  Even the Reverend George seemed absorbed in the game, for he
felt that the eyes of the Reverend Frank were upon him.

"Excuse me, gentlemen," said the officer in command of the soldiers,
"did you see two shepherds run past here?"

"No," answered the Reverend Frank with a candid smile, "I saw no
shepherds run past here."

"Strange!" returned the officer, "they seemed to enter your shrubbery
and to disappear near the house."

"Did you see the path that diverges to the left and takes down to the
thicket in the hollow?" asked Selby.

"Yes, I did, but they seemed to have passed that when we lost sight of
them."

"Let me advise you to try it now," said Selby.

"I will," replied the officer, wheeling his horse round and galloping
off, followed by his men.

"Now, friends, I have relieved you from the fire, as I promised," said
the Reverend Frank, turning to the shepherds; "see that you don't get
into the frying-pan again.  Whether you deserve hanging or not is best
known to yourselves.  To say truth, you don't look like it, but, judging
from appearance, I should think that in these times you're not unlikely
to get it.  On with your coats and plaids and be off as fast as you
can--over the ridge yonder.  In less than half-an-hour you'll be in
Denman's Dean, where a regiment of cavalry would fail to catch you."

"We shall never forget you--"

"There, there," interrupted the Reverend Frank, "be off.  The troopers
will soon return.  I've seen more than enough of hanging, quartering,
and shooting to convince me that Presbytery is not to be rooted out, nor
Prelacy established, by such means.  Be off, I say!"

Thus urged, the fugitives were not slow to avail themselves of the
opportunity, and soon were safe in Denman's Dean.

"Now, Lawless," said the Reverend Frank in a cheerful tone, "my
conscience, which has been depressed of late, feels easier this evening.
Let us go in to supper; and _remember_ that no one knows about this
incident except you--and I.  So, there's no chance of its going
further."

"The two rebels know it," suggested Lawless.

"No, they don't!" replied the other airily.  "They have quite forgotten
it by this time, and even if it should recur to memory their own
interest and gratitude would seal their lips--so we're quite safe, you
and I; quite safe--come along."

Our travellers met with no further interruption until they reached
Edinburgh.  It was afternoon when they arrived, and, entering by the
road that skirts the western base of the Castle rock, proceeded towards
the Grassmarket.

Pushing through the crowd gathered in that celebrated locality, Quentin
and Wallace ascended the steep street named Candlemaker Row, which led
and still leads to the high ground that has since been connected with
the High Street by George the Fourth Bridge.  About half-way up the
ascent they came to a semicircular projection which encroached somewhat
on the footway.  It contained a stair which led to the interior of one
of the houses.  Here was the residence of Mrs. Black, the mother of our
friend Andrew.  The good woman was at home, busily engaged with her
knitting needles, when her visitors entered.

A glance sufficed to show Wallace whence Andrew Black derived his grave,
quiet, self-possessed character, as well as his powerful frame and
courteous demeanour.

She received Quentin Dick, to whom she was well known, with a mixture of
goodwill and quiet dignity.

"I've brought a freend o' Mr. Black's to bide wi' ye for a wee while, if
ye can take him in," said Quentin, introducing his young companion as
"Wull Wallace."

"I'm prood to receive an' welcome ony freend o' my boy Andry," returned
the good woman, with a slight gesture that would have become a duchess.

"Ay, an' yer son wants ye to receive Wallace's mither as weel.  She'll
likely be here in a day or twa.  She's been sair persecooted of late,
puir body, for she's a staunch upholder o' the Covenants."

There have been several Covenants in Scotland, the most important
historically being the National Covenant of 1638, and the Solemn League
and Covenant of 1643.  It was to these that Quentin referred, and to
these that he and the great majority of the Scottish people clung with
intense, almost superstitious veneration; and well they might, for these
Covenants--which some enthusiasts had signed with their blood--contained
nearly all the principles which lend stability and dignity to a people--
such as a determination to loyally stand by and "defend the King," and
"the liberties and laws of the kingdom," to have before the eyes "the
glory of God, the advancement of the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, the honour and happiness of the King and his posterity, as
well as the safety and peace of the people; to preserve the rights and
privileges of Parliament, so that arbitrary and unlimited power should
never be suffered to fall into the hands of rulers, and to vindicate and
maintain the liberties of the subjects in all these things which concern
their consciences, persons, and estates."  In short, it was a testimony
for constitutional government in opposition to absolutism.

Such were the principles for which Mrs. Black contended with a
resolution equal, if not superior, to that of her stalwart son; so that
it was in a tone of earnest decision that she assured her visitors that
nothing would gratify her more than to receive a woman who had suffered
persecution for the sake o' the Master an' the Covenants.  She then
ushered Wallace and Quentin Dick into her little parlour--a humble but
neatly kept apartment, the back window of which--a hole not much more
than two feet square--commanded a view of the tombstones and monuments
of Greyfriars' Churchyard.

CHAPTER SIX.

TELLS OF OVERWHELMING REVERSES.

Mrs. Black was a woman of sedate character and considerable knowledge
for her station in life--especially in regard to Scripture.  Like her
son she was naturally grave and thoughtful, with a strong tendency to
analyse, and to inquire into the nature and causes of things.  Unlike
Andrew, however, all her principles and her creed were fixed and well
defined--at least in her own mind, for she held it to be the bounden
duty of every Christian to be ready at all times to give a "reason" for
the hope that is in him, as well as for every opinion that he holds.
Her natural kindness was somewhat concealed by slight austerity of
manner.

She was seated, one evening, plying her ever active needle, at the same
small window which overlooked the churchyard.  The declining sun was
throwing dark shadows across the graves.  A ray of it gleamed on a
corner of the particular tombstone which, being built against her house,
slightly encroached upon her window.  No one was with the old woman save
a large cat, to whom she was in the habit of addressing occasional
remarks of a miscellaneous nature, as if to relieve the tedium of
solitude with the fiction of intercourse.

"Ay, pussie," she said, "ye may weel wash yer face an' purr, for there's
nae fear o' _you_ bein' dragged before Airchbishop Sherp to hae yer
thoombs screwed, or yer legs squeezed in the--"

She stopped abruptly, for heavy footsteps were heard on the spiral
stair, and next moment Will Wallace entered.

"Well, Mrs. Black," he said, sitting down in front of her, "it's all
settled with Bruce.  I'm engaged to work at his forge, and have already
begun business."

"So I see, an' ye look business-like," answered the old woman, with a
very slight smile, and a significant glance at our hero's costume.

A considerable change had indeed taken place in the personal appearance
of Will Wallace since his arrival in Edinburgh, for in place of the
shepherd's garb, with which he had started from the "bonnie hills of
Galloway," he wore the leathern apron and other habiliments of a
blacksmith.  Moreover his hair had been allowed to grow in luxuriant
natural curls about his head, and as the sun had bronzed him during his
residence with Black, and a young beard and moustache had begun to
assert themselves in premature vigour, his whole aspect was that of a
grand heroic edition of his former self.

"Yes, the moment I told your friend," said Wallace, "that you had sent
me to him, and that I was one of those who had good reason to conceal
myself from observation, he gave me a hearty shake of the hand and
accepted my offer of service; all the more that, having already some
knowledge of his craft, I did not require teaching.  So he gave me an
apron and set me to work at once.  I came straight from the forge just
as I left off work to see what you would think of my disguise."

"Ye'll do, ye'll do," returned Mrs. Black, with a nod of approval.  "Yer
face an' hands need mair washin' than my pussie gies her nose!  But
wheesht!  I hear a fit on the stair.  It'll be Quentin Dick.  I sent him
oot for a red herrin' or twa for supper."

As she spoke, Quentin entered with a brown paper parcel, the contents of
which were made patent by means of scent without the aid of sight.

The shepherd seemed a little disconcerted at sight of a stranger, for,
as Wallace stood up, the light did not fall on his face; but a second
glance sufficed to enlighten him.

"No' that bad," he said, surveying the metamorphosed shepherd, "but I
doot yer auld friends the dragoons wad sune see through 't--considerin'
yer size an' the soond o' yer voice."

So saying he proceeded to place the red herrings on a gridiron, as if he
were the recognised cook of the establishment.

Presently Bruce himself--Mrs. Black's friend the blacksmith--made his
appearance, and the four were soon seated round a supper of oat-cakes,
mashed potatoes, milk, and herring.  For some time they discussed the
probability of Wallace being recognised by spies as one who had attended
the conventicle at Irongray, or by dragoons as a deserter; then, as
appetite was appeased, they diverged to the lamentable state of the
country, and the high-handed doings of the Privy Council.

"The Airchbishop cam' to the toon this mornin'," remarked Mrs. Black,
"so there'll be plenty o' torterin' gaun on."

"I fear you're right," said Bruce, who, having sojourned a considerable
time in England, had lost much of his northern language and accent.
"That horrible instrument, the _boot_, was brought this very morning to
my smiddy for repair.  They had been so hard on some poor wretch, I
suppose, that they broke part of it, but I put a flaw into its heart
that will force them to be either less cruel or to come to me again for
repairs!"

"H'm! if ye try thae pranks ower often they'll find it oot," said
Quentin.  "Sherp is weel named, and if he suspects what ye've done,
ye'll get a taste of the buit yersel'."

The hatred with which by far the greater part of the people of Scotland
regarded Archbishop Sharp of Saint Andrews is scarcely a matter of
wonder when the man's character and career is considered.  Originally a
Presbyterian, and Minister of Crail, he was sent to Court by his
brethren and countrymen as their advocate and agent, and maintained
there at their expense for the express purpose of watching over the
interests of their church.  Sharp not only betrayed his trust but went
over to what might well at that time be described as "the enemy," and
secretly undermined the cause which he was bound in honour to support.
Finally he threw off all disguise, and was rewarded by being made
Archbishop of Saint Andrews and Primate of Scotland!  This was bad
enough, but the new Prelate, not satisfied with the gratification of his
ambition, became, after the manner of apostates, a bitter persecutor of
the friends he had betrayed.  Charles the Second, who was indolent,
incapable and entirely given over to self-indulgence, handed over the
affairs of Scotland to an unprincipled cabal of laymen and churchmen,
who may be fittingly described as drunken libertines.  By these men--of
whom Middleton, Lauderdale, and Sharp were the chief--all the laws
passed in favour of Presbytery were rescinded; new tyrannical laws such
as we have elsewhere referred to were enacted and ruthlessly enforced;
Prelacy was established; the Presbyterian Church was laid in ruins, and
all who dared to question the righteousness of these transactions were
pronounced rebels and treated as such.  There was no impartial tribunal
to which the people could appeal.  The King, who held Presbyterianism to
be unfit for a gentleman, cared for none of these things, and even if he
had it would have mattered little, for those about him took good care
that he should not be approached or enlightened as to the true state of
affairs in Scotland.

Sharp himself devised and drafted a new edict empowering any officer or
sergeant to kill on the spot any armed man whom he found returning from
or going to a conventicle, and he was on the point of going to London to
have this edict confirmed when his murderous career was suddenly
terminated.

In the days of James the Sixth and Charles the First, the bishops,
although forced on the Scottish Church and invested with certain
privileges, were subject to the jurisdiction of the General Assembly,
but soon after Charles the Second mounted the throne ecclesiastical
government was vested entirely in their hands, and all the ministers who
refused to recognise their usurped authority were expelled.

It was in 1662 that the celebrated Act was passed by Middleton and his
colleagues in Glasgow College.  It provided that all ministers must
either submit to the bishops or remove themselves and families out of
their manses, churches, and parishes within a month.  It was known as
the "Drunken Act of Glasgow," owing to the condition of the legislators.
Four hundred brave and true men left their earthly all at that time,
rather than violate conscience and forsake God.  Their example
ultimately saved the nation from despotism.

The Archbishop of Saint Andrews was chief in arrogance and cruelty among
his brethren.  He afterwards obtained permission to establish a High
Commission Court in Scotland--in other words, an Inquisition--for
summarily executing all laws, acts, and orders in favour of Episcopacy
and against recusants, clergy and laity.  It was under this authority
that all the evil deeds hitherto described were done, and of this
Commission Sharp was constant president.

It may be well to remark here that the Prelacy which was so detested by
the people of Scotland was not English Episcopacy, but Scotch Prelacy.
It was, in truth, little better at that time than Popery disguised--a
sort of confused religio-political Popery, of which system the King was
self-constituted Pope, while his unprincipled minions of the council
were cardinals.

No wonder, then, that at the mere mention of Sharp's name Mrs. Black
shook her head sorrowfully, Bruce the blacksmith frowned darkly, and
Quentin Dick not only frowned but snorted vehemently, and smote the
table with such violence that the startled pussie fled from the scene in
dismay.

"Save us a'!  Quentin," said Mrs. Black, "ye'll surely be hanged or shot
if ye dinna learn to subdue yer wrath."

"Subdue my wrath, wumman!" exclaimed the shepherd, grinding his teeth;
"if ye had seen the half o' what I've seen ye wad--but ye ken 'maist
naething aboot it!  Gie me some mair tatties an' mulk, it'll quiet me
maybe."

In order that the reader may know something of one of the things about
which Mrs. Black, as well as Quentin Dick himself, was happily ignorant
at that time, we must change the scene once more to the neighbourhood of
Andrew Black's cottage.

It was early in the day, and the farmer was walking along the road that
led to Cluden Ford, bent on paying a visit to Dumfries, when he was
overtaken by a troop of about twenty horsemen.  They had ridden out of
