before the hall door of the rambling old house was eagerly and nervously
opened, and a funny little quartette issued forth.  Dickory did not often
get the air, and she enjoyed herself very much, sitting well up in
Peter's arms, and wrapped up, head and all, in an old tartan shawl.
Flossy, holding the bag, walked by her brother's side, and Snip-snap
behaved in his usual erratic fashion, now running before, now lingering
behind, now stopping to exchange a greeting with a fellow-dog, or to
sniff with watering jaws and wistful eyes at a butcher's shop, but always
returning faithfully to his charge, and always raising an inquiring face
to see if Dickory was quite comfortable.  She was thoroughly so, and when
she crowed, and laughed, and chuckled, Flossy wondered they had never
thought of taking her out before.  The sun was shining and the day was
bright and warm, with the promise of spring in it, and the two children
were highly delighted with their scheme, and not a bit afraid of the
result.  The only thing which had at all alarmed them was the fear that
Mrs Franklin or Martha might find out their little plan before they had
time to carry it into effect.

Having succeeded in getting quite away with the baby, they considered
their difficulties at an end.  Peter was old enough to know that a
crooked halfpenny did not mean much, considered as a provision for three
human beings and a dog; but he was still sufficiently young to have
perfect confidence in the capabilities of sixpence for meeting the
demands of the hour.  As they walked along, Flossy, Dickory, and Snip-
snap were all very happy, and Peter too was happy, although his arms
ached sadly.  But, alas! the paths of the poor little adventurers were
not to be without thorns.

The time was April, and an April shower first damped the ardour of the
travellers--the poor baby's shawl was wet through, and she began to cry
pitifully with hunger and want of sleep.

'She must want her milk,' said Peter; 'there, Dickory, there's a darling,
now go to sleep like the dear baby you are.'

'You know, Peter, she won't go to sleep without her milk,' said Flossy.
'I'll run across to that milk-shop and buy some.  How much milk shall I
get, Peter?'

'A ha'p'orth,' said Peter; 'you get a ha'p'orth, Flossy, and we'll sit
down on the step of this empty house and feed the baby, and eat up our
crusts ourselves.'

A bottle to hold the milk was to be found in Flossy's bag, and
accordingly in a short time Dickory had a meal; not quite what she was
accustomed to, but sufficient to soothe her off into a slumber in which
she forgot the discomfort of her damp clothes and all her other baby
tribulations.

'Flossy,' said Peter, 'we have gone a long way from home now, and baby is
asleep and resting nicely on my knee; my arm won't ache a bit when she
wakes, and I'll be able to carry her a splendid long way.  We'll have to
think of making up our plans, Floss--we'll have to find some place where
we can all sleep comfortably to-night.'

'Well, we've got sixpence,' said Flossy, 'that's lots and lots of money;
but the night is a long way off, Peter, and I'm so hungry.  I've eaten up
all the crusts that you and Snip-snap left for me, but I'm still as
hungry as possible.  Mightn't I spend a halfpenny or so of our sixpence
in getting a good dinner for you and me and Snip-snap?'

Peter put his hand to his brow, and began to reflect.

'I don't think so, Floss,' he said, 'for I'm afraid you don't understand
marketing--it's best for me to go, for I'm quite old, and I know the way
mother talks to the baker's man and the milkman when they come to the
door.  I must be sharp with them, Floss; that's what I must be, and I
don't think you could be; so you had better hold the baby while I fetch
our dinner.  Oh dear, what a good thing it is I have got sixpence!'

The baby, being very sound asleep, was transferred to Flossy's arms
without waking, Snip-snap was left in charge of the two, and Peter, who
knew very little more of London and London life than his little sister,
started off manfully to the eating-house round the corner.  He had gone
away with a bright face, but he returned in a very short time with one
singularly depressed.

'Here's a bit of stale bread for each of us,' he said, 'and I had to give
two halfpennies for that.  I did see such a nice piece of beef and of
pudding, and I ordered some for you and me and Snip-snap, but the woman
said all that much would cost three sixpences, so then I had to say I
wouldn't have it; and I took the stale bread, and she was very cross.  O
Floss, I hope I'm right about sixpence; I hope it will buy a bed for
baby, and milk and food for us all, for I'm thinking we had much better
none of us go back to-night.'

'Of course, we won't go back,' said Flossie.  'The stale bread's
'licious, and I'm so hungry.  O Peter, do look!  Dickory is stretching
herself, and rubbing her little fat hands into her eyes; and I know she's
going to wake, and I'm afraid she'll cry.'

'Give her to me,' said Peter, with the air of a practised nurse.  'I'll
hold her, and you can feed me while I'm doing so, Flossy.'

But notwithstanding all Peter's efforts, notwithstanding his singing, and
even shouting, for the baby's benefit, notwithstanding the admiring
cheers of a little street mob that collected round him, the baby cried,
not a loud cry, but a weak, broken-hearted wail.  The fact was, the
indifferent milk Flossy had fed her with had made her ill, and her little
frame was already sadly chilled by the damp shawl which she wore about
her.  Poor Dickory scarcely ever got any air or exercise, and in
consequence was very susceptible to cold.

'She is sneezing,' said Flossy.  'Oh the poor, poor darling!  Peter, I
think we'd better see about our night's lodging soon; it doesn't agree
with Dickory to keep her out so long.'

'We'll go at once,' said Peter, rising to his feet.  'There's another
black cloud coming up, and there'll be a shower again before long.  We'll
get a nice room for us four, and then we'll be as happy as possible.'

Accordingly the little party again moved forward, and whenever Peter or
Flossy saw a card up in a window they stopped and rang the house-bell,
and inquired for lodgings for themselves and their baby.  Of course, they
were repulsed in all kinds of ways--some people merely laughing, and
shutting the door in their faces; some scolding them, and calling them
tiresome, impertinent little brats; and some even threatening to tell the
police about them; but no one ever hinted at the possibility of taking
them in.  Presently they left the more respectable streets, and wandered
into very poor quarters.  Here, doubtless, they could have found
accommodation were they able to pay for it, but everybody laughed at
Peter's pennies, and no one dreamt of offering them a shelter.  Then the
rain which had threatened came down, and baby was again wet through, and
now she looked ill, as well as fretful, and refused some fresh milk which
Flossy bought for her.  She was not the least like the bright little
Dickory who used to laugh and show her dimples in the old attic-nursery
at home.

'Look here,' said Peter, 'what are we to do?  'T will be night soon, and
we haven't found no hiding-place for Dickory, and no one will take us
in.'

'Baby is not at all well, either,' said Flossy; 'her head is quite hot,
like fire, when I touch it.'

'What are we to do?' asked Peter.  'We can't get home, but it seems to
me, Floss, that this is worse for poor Dickory than the workhouse.'
