Certainly its perusal filled the minds of most of the boys with an
intense longing to go to sea but, as there is always a demand for
apprentices for the Yarmouth and Lowestoft smacks, the guardians
did not disapprove of this bent being given to their wishes--indeed,
as no premium had to be paid, with apprentices to smack owners,
while in most trades a premium is required, a preference was given
to the sea by the guardians.

When William Gale reached the age of fifteen, and was brought
before the board to choose the trade to which he would be
apprenticed, he at once said that he would go to sea. There were
applications from several smack masters for apprentices; and he,
with the five other boys brought up with him, were all of one
opinion in the matter.

"Mind, lads," the chairman said, "the life of an apprentice on
board a North Sea smack is a hard one. You will get a great many
more kicks than half pence. It will be no use grumbling, when you
have once made your choice. It is a rough, hard life--none rougher,
or harder. When you have served your time, it will be open to you
either to continue as smacksmen, or to ship as seamen in sea-going
ships.

"Sailors who hail from the eastern fishing ports are always
regarded as amongst the best of our seamen. Still, it is a rough
life, and a dangerous one. The hardest life, on shore, is easy in
comparison. There is time to change your minds, before you sign;
when you have done so, it will be too late. Are you all
determined?"

None of them wavered. Their signatures were attached to the
indentures, and they were told that the porter would take them to
Yarmouth, on the following day. William Gale obtained leave to
spend his last evening at the porter's lodge, and there he talked
very seriously, with Mrs. Dickson, over his future prospects.

"I know," he said, "from Dana's book, that the life is a very rough
one, but that will not matter. A sailor, when he has been four
years at sea, can pass his examination as a mate; and I mean to
work hard, and pass as soon as I can. I don't care how much I am
knocked about, that's nothing; there's a good chance of getting on,
in the end."

"You will meet a great many bad boys, Bill; don't you let them lead
you into their ways."

"Don't be afraid of that," he answered, "I won't do anything I
should be ashamed of, afterwards. You have taught me better."

"I suppose the guardians gave you a Bible, today; they always do,
when boys goes out."

Will nodded.

"Be sure you read it often, my boy. You read that, and stick to it,
and you won't go far wrong. You know what the parson said, last
Sunday:

"'No one is strong in himself, but God gives strength.'"

"I remember," Will said. "I made up my mind, then, that I'd bear it
in mind, and act upon it when I could. I think the thought of God,
and the thought that I may meet my parents--and they must not be
ashamed of me--will help me to be honest, and firm."

"I hope, Bill, you will come, sometimes, and see me, when you are
ashore."

"I shall be sure to do that, when I can," he answered. "But of
course, I shall have no money, at first; and it may be a long time
before I can pay my railway fare here; but you may be sure I will
come. Whoever may be my real mother, you are the only mother I ever
knew, and no mother could have been kinder. When I grow to be a
man, and go to sea in big ships, I will bring you all sorts of
pretty things from abroad and, if ever you should want it, you may
be sure that my wages will be quite as much yours as if I had been,
really, your son!"

Sam Dickson gave a snort. It was very good of the boy, but he
considered it his duty to snub him, in order to counteract what he
considered to be the pernicious counsels and treatment of his wife.

"Fine talk," he said, "fine talk. We shall see."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Sam Dickson," his wife said,
wrathfully. "The boy means what he says, and I believe him. If
anything was to happen to you, and that boy was growed up, I
believe he would come forward to lend me a helping hand, just as he
says, as if he were my son. The gals is good gals, but gals in
service have plenty to do with their wages--what with dress, and
one thing or another. We must never look for much help from them
but, if Bill is doing well, and I ever come to want, I believe as
his heart would be good to help, a bit."

"Well," the porter said, dryly, "there's time enough to see about
it, yet. I ain't dead, you ain't a pauper, and he ain't a man, not
by a long way."

"Well, you needn't go to be short tempered over it, Sam. The boy
says as he'll be as good as a son to me, if the time ever comes as
how I may want it. There is no call for you to fly out, as if he'd
said as he'd poison me, if he'd the chance.

"Anyhow, you'll write to me regular, won't you, Bill?"

"That I will," the boy said. "Every time I gets back to port, I'll
write; and you'll write sometimes, won't you? And tell me how you
are, and how every one is, schoolmaster and all. They have all been
very kind to me, and I have nothing to say against any of them."

The next morning William Gale laid aside, for ever, his workhouse
dress; and put on a suit of rough blue cloth, fitted for his future
work. Then, bidding adieu to all his friends, he--with his five
fellow apprentices--started by rail, under charge of Sam Dickson,
for Yarmouth.

The journey itself was, to them, a most exciting event. They had,
in all their remembrance, never been a mile from the workhouse; and
the swift motion of the train, the changing scenery, the villages
and stations, were a source of immense interest. As they neared
Yarmouth their excitement increased, for now they were nearing the
sea; of which they had read so much, but could form so little idea.
They were disappointed, however, inasmuch as no glimpse was
obtained of it, as they crossed the flat country leading to the
town but, failing the sea, Yarmouth itself--the town which was
henceforth to be their headquarters--was in the highest degree
interesting.

Presently the train reached the station, and then Sam Dickson--who
had made many annual journeys to Yarmouth, on the same errand--at
once started off with them to the smack owners who had written to
the workhouse. These lived at Gorleston, a large village on the
south side of the river. Walking down from the station, the boys
caught a glimpse of the river, and were delighted at the sight of
the long line of smacks, and coasters, lying by the wharves
opposite.

Presently they left the road, and made their way down to the river
side. Their guardian had great difficulty in getting them along, so
interested were they in the smacks lying alongside. Presently they
stopped at a large wooden building, over which was the name of
"James Eastrey."

"Here we are," Sam Dickson said. "Now, stop quietly outside. I will
call three of you up, when I have spoken to Mr. Eastrey."

Presently the porter re-appeared at the door, and called three of
the boys in. William Gale was one of the number, James Eastrey
being the name of the owner to whom he had signed his indentures.

A smell of tar pervaded the whole place. Nets, sails, and cordage
were piled in great heaps in the store; iron bolts and buckets,
iron heads for trawls, and ship's stores of all kinds.

Mr. Eastrey came out from a little wooden office.

"So," he said, "you are the three lads who are going to be my
apprentices. Well, boys, it is a rough life but, if you take the
ups and downs as they come, it is not a bad one. I always tell my
captains to be kind to the boys but, when they are at sea, they do
not always act as I wish them. When you are on shore, between the
voyages, I give you eight shillings a week, to keep yourselves; or
I put you in the Smack Boys' Home, and pay for you there. The last
is the best place for you, but some boys prefer to go their own
way.

"I suppose you are all anxious to go to sea--boys always are, for
the first time. One of my boats is going out, tomorrow.

"You," he said, pointing to William Gale, "shall go in her. What is
your name?"

"William Gale, sir."

"Very well, William Gale, then you shall be off first. The others
will only have a day or two to wait.

"I can only send one new hand in each smack. The others will go to
the Home, till the smacks are ready. I will send a man with them,
at once. They can have a day to run about the town. I shall find
plenty of work for them, afterwards.

"You, Gale, will stop on the smack. I will take you on board, in
half an hour, when I have finished my letter."

The three lads said goodbye to their comrades and to Sam Dickson. A
sailor was called up, and took two off to the Smack Boys' Home; and
Will Gale sat down on a coil of rope, to wait till his employer was
ready to take him down to the craft to which he was, henceforth, to
belong.



Chapter 3: Life On A Smack.


"Now come along, Gale," Mr. Eastrey said, at last, "the Kitty is
close by."

Following his master, the lad went out from the store and along the
wharf and, presently, stepped upon a smack on which several men,
and a boy, were at work.

"Harvey," Mr. Eastrey said, "I have brought you a new lad. He will
sail with you, tomorrow. I have a very good account of him, and I
think you will find him quick, and ready."

"So as he's not up to tricks, I shall do very well with him, I
don't doubt," the skipper said; "but boys are an awful trouble, the
first voyage or two. However, I will do my best for him.

"Are you ready to begin work at once, young 'un? What is your
name?"

"William Gale, and I am quite ready."

"Very well, Bill, chuck off your jacket, then, and pass those bags
along from the wharf."

The boy was soon hard at work. He was a little disappointed at
finding that the skipper was, in dress and manner, in no way
superior to the rest of the crew. The Kitty was a yawl of
forty-five tons, deep in the water and broad in the beam. Her deck
was dirty and, at present, in disorder; and she did not come up to
the perfection of neatness and cleanliness which William Gale had
read of, in the pages of his favorite author. However--as he told
himself--there must, of course, be a good deal of difference
between a man of war, where the crew have little to do but to keep
things neat and bright, and a fishing smack.

The work upon which he was, at present, engaged was the
transferring of the provisions for the voyage from the quay to the
hold. These consisted principally of barrels of salt meat, and bags
of biscuits; but there were a large tin of tea, a keg of sugar, a
small barrel of molasses--or treacle--two or three sacks of
potatoes, pepper and salt. Then there was a barrel of oil for the
lamps, coils of spare rope of different sizes, and a number of
articles of whose use William Gale had not the most remote idea.

After two hours' work, the skipper looked at his watch.

"Time to knock off work," he said, "and we've got pretty near
everything on board. Now, be sure you are all here by six in the
morning. Tide will begin to run out at eight, and I don't want to
lose any of it.

"Bill, you are to come home with me, for the night."

It was but a hundred yards to the sailor's cottage, which stood on
the edge of the sharp rise, a short distance back from the river.

"Here, wife," he said as he entered, "I've got a new apprentice,
and I expect he's pretty hungry; I am, I can tell you, and I hope
tea's ready. His name's Bill, and he's going to stop here,
tonight."

"Tea is quite ready, John, and there's plenty of mackerel. I
thought you would not be getting them again, for a spell.

"Do you like fish?" she asked the boy.

"I don't know, ma'am--I never tasted them."

"Bless me!" the woman cried, in astonishment; "never tasted fish!
To think, now!"

"I've been brought up in a workhouse," William said, coloring a
little as he spoke, for he knew the prejudice against the House.

"Ah!" she said, "we have had a good many of that sort; and I can't
say as I likes 'em, for the most part. But you haven't got the look
about you. You don't seem that sort."

"I hope I shall turn out none the worse for it," the boy said; "at
any rate, I'll do my best."

"And none can't do more," the good woman said, briskly. "I like
your looks, Bill, and you've a nice way of talking. Well, we shall
see."

In a few minutes tea was upon the table, and Will sat down with the
skipper, his wife, and two daughters--girls of ten and twelve. The
lad enjoyed his meal immensely, and did full justice to the fish.

"You will have plenty of them, before you eat your next tea on
shore. We pretty nigh live on them, when we are on the fishing
grounds."

"The same kind of fish as this?"

"No, mackerel are caught in small boats, with a different sort of
gear, altogether. We get them, sometimes, in the trawl--not shoals
of 'em, but single fish, which we call horse mackerel."

After tea, the skipper lit his pipe; and his wife, after clearing
up, took some knitting, and sat down and began to question the new
apprentice.

"It's lucky, for you, you found such a good friend," she said, when
he had finished his story. "That's how it is you are so different
from other boys who have been apprenticed from the House. I should
never have thought you had come from there.

"And she gave you good advice as to how you should go on, I'll be
bound."

"Yes, ma'am," Will said, "and I hope I shall act up to it."

"I hope so, Bill; but you'll find it hard work to keep yourself as
you should do, among them boys. They are an awful lot, them smack
boys."

"Not worse nor other boys," her husband said.

"Not worse than might be looked for, John, but they are most of 'em
pretty bad. The language they use make my blood run cold, often.
They seems to take a delight in it. The hands are bad enough, but
the boys are dreadful.

"I suppose you don't swear, Will. They look too sharp after you, in
the House; but if you take my advice, boy, don't you ever get into
the way of bad language. If you once begin, it will grow on you.
There ain't no use in it, and it's awful to hear it."

"I will try not to do so," Will said firmly. "Mother--I always call
her mother--told me how bad it was, and I said I'd try."

"That's right, Will, you stick to that, and make up your mind to
keep from liquor, and you'll do."

"What's the use of talking that way?" the skipper said. "The boy's
